



THE
UNWRITTEN LAW
IN ALBANIA




THE
UNWRITTEN LAW
IN ALBANIA
BY THE LATE
MARGARET HASLUCK
EDITED BY
J. H. HUTTON
CAMBRIDGE
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS
1954


PUBLISHED BY
THE SYNDICS OF THE CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
London Office; Bentley House, N.w. i
American Branch: New York
Agents for Canada, India, and Pakistan: Macmillan
Printed in Great Britain at the University Press. Cambridge
{Brooke Crutchley, University Printer)


CONTENTS
Preface by Mrs J. E. Alder son P a § e vii
Introduction by J. H. Hutton xi
Chapter I The Geographical Framework i
II The Unwritten Law in Outline 9
111 The Albanian House 16
IV The Albanian Household 25
V The Master of the House 34
VI The Separation of Brothers 5 1
VII The Law of the Dog 73
VIII Roads 83
IX Boundaries 95
X Pasturage no
XI Bajraktars 115
XII Elders 130
XIII The Administration of Justice 139
XIV General Assemblies 148
XV Assemblies and their Work 154
XVI The Oath. I. Oath-taker and Compurgators 164
XVII The Oath. 11. The Oath-taking 175
XVIII The Oath. HI. Verdict and Penalties 188
XIX Witness ( Kepucar ) 196
XX Theft as a Crime 202


XXI Murder within the Family page 210
XXII Blood Feud. I. Family Vengeance and Collec-
tive Vengeance 219
XXIII Blood Feud. 11. Course of the Feud 228
XXIV Blood Feud. 111. Expiator and Expiation 235
XXV Blood Feud. IV. Peace-making 256
Appendix: Laws Passed at General Assemblies, translated
from the original Albanian 261
Index 275
Map at end


PREFACE
Margaret Hasluck was the daughter of a Scottish farmer, John
Hardie. She was born in 1885 and spent her early years in Moray-
shire. From Elgin Academy she went to Aberdeen University,
where she graduated in 1907 with first class Honours in Classics.
Continuing her classical studies in Cambridge, she took a first class
in both parts of the Tripos. She then went to the British School at
Athens where her future husband, Mr F. W. Hasluck, was Assistant
Director. They were married in 1912 and continued to work in
Athens till the condition of Mr Hasluck’s health compelled them
to go to Switzerland in 1916. Mr Hasluck died in 1920, and his
wife returned to England to prepare his book on The Monasteries
of Mount Athos. When this work was completed, Mrs Hasluck,
who had become greatly interested in the folklore of the Balkan
countries, decided to devote herself to the study of this subject,
and, with the help of a Wilson Travelling Fellowship, she returned
to the Middle East. After extensive wanderings, she decided to
settle in Albania. She remained in that country for thirteen years,
building herself a house at Elbasan, and travelling constantly,
especially in the mountainous region of the north where she lived
with the people and got to know them intimately.
With the threat of the Italian invasion of Albania in 1939, she
left that country for Athens, where she worked for some time in
the British Embassy. When that city was being heavily bombed
she was taken to Alexandria and thence to Cairo. In Cairo she
was given the task of briefing the men who were to be infiltrated
into Albania by air and sea, in the manners and ways of life of the
Albanian people. She was, of course, well qualified for this work
by her long and intimate knowledge of the country and of the
language. Unfortunately, she became seriously ill in Cairo, and
was found to be suffering from leucaemia. In the hope of some
improvement she went to live in Cyprus, but, driven to realize that
she had not long to live, she came back to England determined to
finish the book which she had been planning for many years and
for which she had collected a mass of material. After some inde-
cision as to a suitable place to live she went to Dublin, and during
the short time left to her she worked there with great courage and


persistence on her book. She died in 1948 with her task far from
completed.
Mrs Hasluck appointed the writer of this preface as her literary
executor, not because of any knowledge of Albania or of folklore,
but as an old friend who would do everything possible to get the
book ready for publication. Had she completed it herself or
entrusted it to some authority on her subject, the book would
undoubtedly have been free of some of its faults. When the
material came into my hands, only four of the chapters had been
completed and much of the remaining material was in a chaotic
condition. But Mrs Hasluck had sketched out the plan of the
book with the proposed chapter headings, and the preliminary
inquiries I made as to her standing as an authority and her know-
ledge of Albania and its language were very encouraging. Also the
Leverhulme Research Fellowships Trust, from which Mrs Hasluck
had received grants for her work, undertook to give me a grant
towards my personal expenses and to make it possible to employ
a sub-editor at a later stage of the work.
I am indebted to a great many people, both English and Albanian,
who helped me at the early stages of the work with information
and ideas. I cannot mention all of these by name, but I heard from
several of the officers who were briefed by Mrs Hasluck for their
work in Albania. I discussed with Professor Jopson of St John’s
College, Cambridge, Mrs Hasluck’s knowledge of the Albanian
language, and was assured by him that it was good and that her
Albanian-English Reader , published in 1932, was a reliable and
useful book. But at the early stages of my task I owed a very
special debt of gratitude to Lord Haden Guest, who was then
Secretary of the Leverhulme Research Fellowships, and to
Miss Branney, the present secretary. Without their interest and
encouragement I do not think I could have found the necessary
confidence to persevere in what has proved to be a difficult and
prolonged task.
One source of great difficulty was the spelling of geographical
names, and it was natural to turn to the Royal Geographical
Society for help. I am glad to have the opportunity of expressing
my very sincere gratitude to Mr Aurousseau, Secretary of
the Permanent Committee on Geographical Names, who gave
much time and thought to this matter and whose advice was
invaluable.


Brigadier Davies, who was head of the Military Mission with
the partisans in Albania, and who had been briefed by Mrs Hasluck,
read a great part of her book in manuscript, and was much
interested in the chapters about the domestic life of the people in
the mountains whom he had got to know well. He was busy at the
time with his own book, Illyrian Venture, which, alas, did not
appear until after his death.
My expressions of gratitude would be incomplete without a very
warm tribute to the invaluable assistance given to me by my sub-
editor, Miss Margot Holloway, M.B.E. She worked with me
constantly for many months, and not only did she type the
manuscript, prepare an index, and read the proofs, but I owe more
than I can say to her constructive criticism and suggestions.
Finally, I must express my appreciation of Professor Hutton’s
help at the final stages of the work. It was a great relief to me to
have the manuscript read by an anthropologist with his specialized
knowledge, and Professor Hutton has also been good enough to
read the proofs.
J. E. ALDERSON
June 1953




INTRODUCTION
There is a singular absence of ethnographical material in English
which deals with either the Balkan tribes in general or the
Albanians in particular. In fact, apart from handbooks compiled
during the Hitler war and still inaccessible to the general public,
almost all that the student of Albanian life and custom can consult
is the work, admirable indeed but of a single author, the late
Miss Durham— High Albania (1909), and Some Tribal Origins,
Laws , and Customs of the Balkans (1928), and two other works
more nearly concerned with politics. In languages other than
English there are the valuable Albanesische Studien of J. G. von
Hahn (Jena, 1854), the same author’s Griechische und albanesische
Mdrchen published in Leipzig ten years later, the Contes Albanais
of Auguste Dozon (Paris, 1881), and possibly passages in Strabo
and other ancient authors with regard to the Illyrians from whom
the Albanians in the main derive. More recently the Reale
Accademia d’ltalia has published an Italian version of Gjegov’s
Code of Lek Dukagjini (Rome, 1941) and a number of other studies
on Albania have been published in Italian as a result of the Italian
interest in and occupation of that country under Mussolini’s
regime.
This volume of Mrs Hasluck’s therefore constitutes a very
important contribution to ethnography in English. Principally, it
is true, it is concerned with the customary law of the Albanian
highlands. But, as a means of understanding the fundamental
logical basis of that code and how it works in practice, the author
has been under the necessity of explaining the manner of Albanian
life in considerable detail, and of illustrating it from time to time
by the details of specific cases which illustrate the working of the
unwritten law. We are thus given a great deal of information as to
the composition of the Albanian family, and its mode of life, the
general set up of the village and tribal life, and the nature and
working of tribal assemblies. We are shown the methods of
dealing with crimes against property or person, the conventions
that govern, for instance, trespass, travel, and the feeding of
flocks, or the guarding of houses by watch-dogs. We have detailed
accounts of the administration of oaths, and of the imposition of


penalties; and finally the conventions which govern the blood-feud.
For the blood-feud has occupied from time immemorial, and no
doubt still occupies, a very important place in Albanian life, pro-
viding the ultimate sanction in all cases in which personal honour
is concerned, and on points of personal honour the Albanian is
particularly sensitive; and the blood-feud is regulated by a number
of very well understood even if unwritten rules and principles.
It is interesting to compare Albanian customary law with that
of other headhunters, for the Albanians (see p. 230 below and Miss
Durham, Tribal Origins, etc., pp. 172 ff.) till recently at any rate
were headhunters. The belief underlying headhunting generally is
that life is a material substance residing par excellence in the head,
and that the abstraction of an enemy’s head enables the life-
substance in it to be carried off to the head-taker’s home to
replenish the stock there and increase the fertility of its inhabitants,
its crops, and its livestock. Incidentally a surplus of life-substance
is necessary to beget children, and hence comes the importance
of head-taking as a preliminary to marriage. The tuft left on the
head by Albanians (p. 230), as by many Indian tribes and castes,
by Chinese, American Indians and others, was probably left
originally to shelter life-substance regarded as residing, as in the
case of Samson, in the hair. Some Naga tribesmen of Assam give
the same account of the purpose of this uncut tuft as do Mrs
Hasluck’s Albanians, that it is kept to carry away the head by.
But this explanation has no doubt arisen from the fact that it is so
used in practice. Among the Assam headhunters the vendetta is
a communal or a village affair rather than a family one, and there is
no taboo on taking the heads of women in pursuance of it, but
quite the contrary. In this respect the Albanian practice is more
suggestive of that of the Pathans of the North-West Frontier of
India. Otherwise the unwritten law of Albania has much similarity
with that of south-east Asia and Oceania. The communal destruc-
tion of an offender’s house at which all members of the community
must assist, for instance, is widely distributed from Assam to New
Zealand; the banishment of a murderer for life or for a term of
years according to the circumstances of the homicide, the associa-
tion of compurgators with an accused person in the taking of an
oath, the assessment of blood-money, are used in the Assam hills
much as in the Albanian mountains, and probably in many other
primitive areas also. But Albanian customary law is of particular


interest in that we now have it reported in detail when at a stage
half way from the purely customary stage to that of enactment and
a written law.
Sir Henry Maine in his Ancient Law traces the development of
jurisprudence from a stage at which ‘it is certain that... no sort
of legislature, nor even a distinct author of law, is contemplated
or conceived of. Law has scarcely reached the footing of custom;
it is rather a habit.,.. The only authoritative statement of right and
wrong is a judicial sentence after the facts, not one presupposing
a law which has been violated.’ This is the stage of culture reflected
in the Homeric poems, or seen in Iceland as described in the sagas,
in which is found no sovereign ruler, nor any legislative command,
nor any definite sanction, but justice is effected by the pro-
nouncements — declares, or ‘dooms’ —of individual chieftains.
Maine regarded this stage of law as changing with a decline in the
kingly office to one in which an aristocracy, or at least an oligarchy,
whether secular or religious, became the repository of all juridical
knowledge. The ‘ accurate preservation of the customs of the race
or tribe... was... insured by confiding them to the recollection of
a limited portion of the community’. Except for such customary
law, entrusted thus to a privileged order, ‘ there is ’ said Maine ‘ no
such thing as unwritten law in the world’. English case law, of
course, is as much written law as codified and enacted law, though
the method of writing it down is different. Customary law may of
course continue to exist as a body of unwritten law alongside
a body of divergent enacted law, a condition familiar enough in
India under British rule. Maine goes on to point out that ‘when
primitive law has once been embodied in a code, there is an end
to what may be called its spontaneous development’. A new era
begins with the codes, in which modifications are to be attributed
to a conscious desire for alteration.
It is unnecessary here to discuss the precise extent to which
Maine’s theory of the nature and origin of primitive law can still be
regarded as valid. At best it is incomplete for he takes little or no
account of taboo on which early codes such as those of Ham-
murabi or of Moses were based, and the taboos which preceded
early codes of law seem to have been in the main rather social or
communal in origin than arising from the individual pronounce-
ments of chieftains or deemsters. Maine however was no doubt
right enough in pointing out that when primitive law has been


embodied in a code there is an end to its spontaneous development.
But to reach this stage the code must be an enacted code, written
and recorded, and this the pronouncements of the Albanian law-
givers failed to achieve. On the contrary their codes seem to have
remained in the verbal custody of the village or tribal elders and
subject to modification or reinterpretation from time to time by
assemblies of clans or villages. It is at this stage that we have
Mrs Hasluck’s account of Albanian customary law —law primitive
enough in many ways to be compared with the customary law of
tribes much less civilized than the Albanians; but it reached the
point, and that some five hundred years ago, of becoming codified
verbally by the efforts of individual law-givers, Skanderbeg in
particular and the famous Lek Dukagjini, without having reached
the stage of enactment. This was principally due to the fact that
there was no one able to enforce sanctions over the Albanian com-
munity as a whole; individual Albanian chieftains had not the
power, and Turkish rule interfered but little outside the towns.
It was no doubt this absence of any such sanctions as those
provided by an enacted law and enforced by a settled government,
or merely even by the continuity in administration of a single
ruling family, which was the primary cause of the firm establish-
ment of the vendetta as the real sanction for all Albanian law and
custom. At the same time, however, economic conditions have
probably contributed to this result, for in a richer country the
administration of justice might have been made profitable to any
ruler strong enough to provide it. Thus Albanian customary law
not only reflects an economic stage through which most nations
have passed before the establishment of enacted codes, but also
a condition, by no means unique but very far from universal, in
which poor and isolated communities have resorted to the vendetta
for the sanction of their law, and that in spite of any influence that
Christianity or Islam might have had to prevent it. The etiquette
of the vendetta itself is likewise a customary code not dissimilar to
taboo in nature and origins; and without any more definite sanction,
or naturally any sort of legislative enactment, regular and almost
technical forms of procedure have come into existence in what
virtually are regularly constituted courts. In this the Icelandic
practices, as described in the sagas of Njal and Kormak, for
instance, afford a near parallel to those of Albania, and Mrs
Hasluck’s account of Albanian custom will prove of importance not


merely to ethnologists and social anthropologists but also to those
concerned with the early history of jurisprudence.
Apart from that the contents of this volume are likely to be of
no little interest to the general reader as giving an account of the
unfamiliar way of life of a people of very distinct and individual
culture, who have throughout history taken pride and pleasure in
their separateness. For the Albanians, direct descendants of the
ancient Illyrians, still retain something of their ancient form of
Aryan speech very distinct from that of other branches of the
family; they still retain an ancient tribal system; and they still
have that passionate love of independence which caused many of
them to forsake their native mountains and form settlements in
Greece, Calabria, and Sicily when their country was occupied by
the Turks after the death of their leader Skanderbeg (George
Castriota) in 1467. As a result of the Turkish conquest several of
the Albanian tribes changed from Christianity to Islam, and there
are now many Muslim Albanians as well as both Greek Orthodox
and Roman Catholic Christians. The Mirdite, who constitute the
biggest tribe, were perhaps at one time Orthodox, and are now
staunch Catholics. But their profession of faith seems to have
affected but little the adherence of the Albanians to their ancient
customs.
J. H. HUTTON
New Radnor
June 1953


CHAPTER I
THE GEOGRAPHICAL FRAMEWORK
A book on the Unwritten Law of the Albanian mountains must
needs begin with a short survey of Albanian geography. Without
some knowledge of the fantastic physical features which have
moulded the way of life of the mountaineers, it is difficult to
understand that way of life and the Unwritten Law by which it
has for many centuries been regulated.
The material used in this book was gathered in the northern half
of the kingdom over which King Zog ruled until the Italians
invaded Albania in 1939 and sent him into exile. This area, which
includes all the country north of the River Shkumbi, stretches from
the Adriatic Sea on the west to the Yugoslav frontier on the east.
It consists of a narrow plain along the Adriatic coast and, inland,
a vast complex of mountains. The coastal plain, from 5 to 25 miles
in breadth, rises so gradually from the water’s edge that when it
ends it is not much more than 100 feet above sea-level. Low hills
cut across it, dividing it into four compartments as separate as
rooms in a house. The Plain of Zadrime ( Fush'e e Zadrimes) in the
north, between the towns of Shkoder (Scutari) and Lesh (Alessio),
is 15 miles long by 3-6 miles broad. The next section, measuring
18 by 5 miles, extends from Lesh to Cape Rodoni (Kep i Rodonit ),
and the third centres in Durres (Durazzo). The Myzeqe plains
(Fusha te Myzeqes ), which constitute the fourth ‘compartment’
between the Rivers Shkumbi and Devoll, are 37 miles long, over
25 miles wide in parts, and less than 6 miles wide in others.
The mountains are less easy to describe. Between the latitudes
of Lesh and Durres three great ranges run parallel to each other
from north to south. The most westerly rises perpendicularly from
the coastal plain, the most easterly forms the boundary between
Albania and Yugoslavia, and the middle one separates the plateau
of Mat from the plateau of Diber. North of this central region, in
north Albania proper, and to the south, in the district of Martanesh,
no pattern can be discerned. The whole is a jumble of lofty ranges
that strike off from each other at every conceivable angle. Those in
north Albania throw up a multitude of peaks from their jagged
1 HAM


crests; numerous valleys lie between them, each surprisingly
narrow and steep-sided, some 3000 feet deep, all watered by a
winter, if not by a perennial, stream, and many branching off right
and left into side-valleys. In the district of Martanesh the ranges
are rounded in outline, the summits are spreading instead of steep
and sharp, large tracts of ground are comparatively unbroken, and
in place of the countless valleys and streamlets of the north there
are only a few deep ravines, each with a river on its floor.
These geographical characteristics have influenced the tribal
cleft which still survives in the population. The main valleys in the
north, such as Shale, Shkrel or Orosh, are each capable of supporting
a small unit such as a tribe, but seldom more. Appropriately, then,
each is inhabited by a single tribe, which jealously prevents strangers
from settling in its territory. The broad spaces farther south, such
as the plateaux of Mat and Diber, or the heights of Martanesh and
adjacent Qermenike, can carry a much larger population, in which
no one tribe could hope to maintain its racial integrity or its political
supremacy. Consequently, they are non-tribal and peopled partly
by indigenous families, partly, at least in the case of Mat and Diber,
by immigrants, all of whom came in small numbers and many
within recent memory. To quote only one example of each type,
the Kadije family of Lis in eastern Mat is indigenous, and its
neighbours at Burgajet, the Zogolli family, are immigrants.
More than the forms of social grouping have been affected by the
physical features of the country. The number and height of the
mountains have made stock-raising as important as agriculture to
Albanians. Both parts of the range that rises sheer as a wall and
green with forests from the coastal plain are over 3000 feet high,
that of Kruje to the north being 3280-3940 feet and that of Dajt,
which forms so beautiful a feature of the scenery round Tirana
(Tirane), 5290 feet—nearly 900 feet more than Ben Nevis and
1720 feet more than Snowdon. The parallel range which bounds
the plateau of Mat on the east runs southwards from Mt Nezhde
in Lure to Mt Deje and on to Mt Allaman at a height that is in few
places below 5000 feet and is often above 6000 feet. The frontier
range is still higher, composed as it is of Mt Gjalice (8150 feet) and
Mt Korab (9070 feet), the former in Lume, the latter in Diber. The
topmost summits of the Martanesh area, Mt Kaptine and Mt Lope,
are respectively 6145 and 6630 feet in height; the surrounding
ranges average 5000 feet. As seen from Shkoder, the welter of


northern mountains begins modestly with ranges 2000-2600 feet
above sea-level, surpasses 7000 feet in several peaks of Lower
Shale, and culminates in the Accursed Alps (Bjeshket e Nemuna ),
where the close-set summits of Radohine (8690 feet), Jezerce
(8790 feet), Rosh (8270 feet) and Kolate (8370 feet) wall off Yugo-
slavia from Upper Shale in spectacular fashion. East of Shale, the
monster Peak of the Irons (Maje e Hekurave, 8530 feet) divides the
tribe of Mertur from the open plateau of Krasniqe. The passes
across the mountains are often lofty and arduous. To take an
extreme example, the only way from Shale to Boge, its western
neighbour, is by the Sheep Track Pass, to the northern frontier by
the Peje Pass, and to Nikaj on the east by the Ndermajne Pass,
which are respectively 5900, 5600 and again 5600 feet above sea-
level and take a day to traverse. It is self-evident that the tribesmen
of Shale have never seen much of their neighbours. Elsewhere
geographical conditions are less formidable, yet generally severe
enough to limit intercourse between communities.
It is clear that agriculture and permanent habitations must stop
far below the summits of many mountains, and that on the highest
slopes there can be only summer grazing. Throughout the area as
a whole, however, there is so much summer and winter grazing
that many Albanians live entirely by pastoralism and many others
combine it with their agriculture. In this connexion it is essential
to remember the part played by the immense forests. These spread
over the grim mountains as well as the plains, saving Albania from
the desiccated look of Dalmatia and Greece, and making its
scenery agreeable to the eye at all seasons. The forest trees are of
many kinds, with a large proportion of evergreens. Since they
grow at different levels according to their kinds, three zones,
named the shrub, oak and beech, or pine zones after their pre-
dominating tree, have been distinguished. 1
Shrubs grow all over the plains near the coast and up to a height
of 600 feet in exposed regions like Shkoder and Durres and
1600 feet in sheltered spots like the gullies on Mt Dajt. They
include tree heather, hornbeam, arbutus, wild olives, broom and
the terrible Christ’s Thorn {Spina Cristi), which, withered or green,
tears the flesh so savagely with its spikes that it is popularly said all
over the Near East to have been used for the Crown of Thorns.
There is rough winter grazing among the shrubs, especially for
1-2
1 See Gashi, Shqipnija, pp. 51-60.


goats and cattle, and some agriculture in clearings, but the zone
derives its chief riches from the many acres of fertile alluvial soil
that adjoin the rivers.
Oaks, tall or dwarf, begin sporadically among the shrubs and
continue as thick forests up to a height of 2900 feet near Shkoder
and 3300 feet in warmer districts. Among them grow ash, aspen,
chestnut, cornel, elm, hawthorn, hazel, hornbeam and limes. The
majority of the 1140 villages in north Albania are found in this zone,
for it best provides for Albanian needs. Though the soil is dry on
the whole, it contains a sufficiency of springs. On the plateaux and
gentler slopes there is enough arable land for subsistence farming,
all that is possible among these rugged mountains. The copses and
woods furnish winter grazing for small flocks and herds; an
adjoining mountain furnishes the requisite summer feed. The
copses and woods also provide fuel for the log-fires that in Albanian
phraseology are ‘the poor man’s wealth’. Leaves lopped from the
oak trees in autumn supply winter fodder which livestock eat with
almost as much relish as they do hay, a scarcer commodity. It is
this supplement to the grazing in the copses and woods which
makes mixed farming possible in this zone; without it many
animals could not get through the winter, and their number would
have to be reduced. If it is sometimes hot in the forest in summer,
the heat is never unbearable, and in winter the cold is never
excessive. In general the zone is healthy. A little wheat is grown,
but —as everywhere in Albania, the Myzeqe plain excepted—the
staple crop is maize. The grain provides food, and the livestock
luxuries and government dues as well.
In the next zone beeches grow singly, in small clumps, or in
mighty forests such as those between Qermenike and Martanesh
where one may walk for seven hours in the daytime and never
catch a glimpse of the sun. Still without roads to carry modern
woodcutters and their tools to them, such forests are in the virgin
state, the trees self-sown, the strong killing the weak, and the
survivors growing bigger and bigger until they succumb in extreme
old age to some winter blast, when they lie and rot where they fall.
When communications are developed, this waste will stop and
these forests become a very valuable asset. No grass grows in them
or under isolated beeches, of course, but there are usually grass
meadows in the clearings, some of which are enormous. Well
watered from the same sources as the beeches and fat with humus


from decaying beech leaves, these meadows make magnificent
grazing in summer.
Where the underlying rock is serpentine, the forests in this zone
are of pitch pine, not beech. Following the rock formation the
pines may continue above the beech limit as on Mt Munelle in
Mirdite, Mt Nezhde, and the Peak of the Irons in Shale. Or they
may grow as low as the oak zone, adding to its amenities with their
timber and pastures. In certain districts they cover whole mountain
sides, while beeches fill the intervening, moister valleys; for beeches
like a damp soil, and pines a dryish. Whether among the trees or
in the clearings, these forests are a paradise for animals. They have
other values, too. Their lower reaches are accessible enough for the
peasants to cut their timber, load it on ponies, or slide it down the
mountain side to their villages, there to be used for building or
other simple purposes. Pine slivers are the only form of lighting in
many village houses, and they also bring in a little money, finding
a ready sale in towns as kindling for fires.
The pine and beech zone is mostly too high for winter use. Near
the coast its tree-limit is 5200-5600 feet above sea-level. Farther
inland, where one range shelters another and the soil is damper, it
may be 6000 feet, as on Mt Bukanik in Shpat or Mts Munelle and
Nezhde. On Mt Gjalice it is 7000 feet. Between the tree-limit and
the summits of higher mountains there is nothing but rock, scree
and treeless pastures.
This pine zone is as necessary to Albanian economy as the oak
zone. On much of the treeless ground above it the grass is so
coarse that sheep will not eat it at all, and horses nibble it only at
the beginning of the summer season and then with distaste. The
grass of the pine and beech zone is sweet and palatable even to
dainty sheep throughout the summer. On the agricultural side the
zone serves as a great catchment area, not only for the huge,
unharnessed rivers that traverse north Albania, but also for the
myriads of invaluable little streams that flow down to the agricul-
tural districts in the oak zone. Without these streams there could
be little irrigation; without irrigation there could be little agricul-
ture. Maize must have water, and there is never enough rain in
summer to supply it.
In the two areas of summer pasturage, the beech and pine zone
and the treeless slopes above it, many thousands of cattle, horses,
goats, and especially sheep, graze from May to October. Their


number is limited only by the amount of winter grazing available,
which small owners find, and have always found, in the oak zone.
In Turkish times, when Albania and Macedonia were both Turkish
provinces and had no customs barriers between them as they have
now, large owners sought it on the roomy plain of Salonica. Since
Albanian emancipation in 1912 they have been confined to the
more meagre pastures on the seaward side of the coastal plain at
home, a restriction which has entailed a considerable cutting down
of their flocks and herds. Nevertheless, in 1936-7 taxes were paid
on 1,424,965 sheep, 773,969 goats, 144,763 cattle and 44,318 horses
in the whole of Albania; 1 there are no separate figures for
its northern half. Many more animals ran about the houses,
unregistered and free of tax. For Albanians the importance of
sheep lies, it should be noted, not only in their wool and meat
as in England, but in their milk and the butter and cheese made
from it.
If only the coastal plain were more spacious, it would be
a perfect complement to the mountains for pastoralism on the
grand scale. In the portion south of Lesh the rivers Drin, Mat and
Ishm, entering the sea at points less than 6 miles apart, have
created what is virtually one vast delta of mud and swamp, lush
undergrowth, and trees that have come too quickly to maturity.
Farther south, swamps of the same type cover much of the Plain
of Durres, and a great lagoon extends to the very outskirts of
the town. Two more lagoons and a series of swamps mark the
estuaries of the rivers Shkumbi and Seman on the coast of Myzeqe.
More marshes and the lagoon of Kakarriq outline the course of the
River Buene in the north.
On the coast the average yearly rainfall is 39-47 inches, against
57 at Shkoder, 67 at Kruje and 72 at Puke, an inland place 39 miles
east of Shkoder. Albania is one of the wettest countries in Europe
because so many of its ranges run from north to south and are high
enough to intercept the rain-laden clouds that drift in from the
west. The first rains fall in October when it is still hot on the
coastal plain. The moisture and the heat combine to produce a
luxuriant crop of new grass by the time that the sheep come down
from the mountains.
This grass is found, not only in the hay meadows and swamps,
but also, owing to the violence of the winter rains, on all the arable
1 Gashi, Shqipnija, p. 117.


land. A high proportion of the year’s rainfall falls in November and
March: 1
NOVEMBER MARCH
Durres 215 mm. (8-46 in.) 100 mm. (3*94 in.)
Shkoder 209 mm. (8-23 in.) 162 mm. (6-38 in.)
Kruje 337 mm. (13-27 in.) 157 mm. (6-i8 in.)
Puke 260 mm. (10-24 i n -) 202 mm - (7’95 in -)
When a storm breaks over the mountains, every river and rivulet
in the storm-swept area rises rapidly because the surface soil is
seldom deep enough to retain much of the falling rain. In furious
spate the rivers rush steeply towards the sea and, as they near the
coast, spread far beyond their banks, engulfing many acres of
arable land, and enlarging the marshes and lagoons so that they
engulf many more. Because of this flooding, wheat cannot be sown
near the coast. If sown in autumn, the November floods would
wash it away, and after the March floods the ground does not
dry in time for a spring sowing. Maize is, consequently, the
only crop that can be raised. While awaiting its planting in late
May, the fields lie fallow and grass-grown. The March floods are
also responsible for the striking size and number of the hay
meadows; much land never dries enough to grow even maize and
must be left permanently under grass.
Climatically, too, the coastal plain dovetails into the high
pastures. Whereas the mountains are deep in snow all winter, the
temperature at the coast never falls quite to freezing-point. In
January, the coldest month, the average recorded for Durres and
Valona (Vlone) is respectively 47 and 48 degrees, with 40 and
degrees at inland Shkoder and Tirana (Tirane). Rain falls
frequently and heavily, but unless a sudden rise in a river catches
sheep unawares and sweeps them out to sea, neither animals nor
shepherds come to much harm. By the end of May, when the
rains cease, everything changes, and life near the swamps becomes
intolerable for man and beast. Day temperatures rise swiftly
towards their summer maximum of 86 degrees and the nights are
hot, so that every movement is a burden. The dense vegetation of
the swamps exudes odours as foetid as those in a tropical forest.
Swarms of malaria-carrying mosquitoes emerge from the stagnant
pools to attack man; swarms of gadflies, more savage than any
1 Gashi, Shqipnija, p. 49.


known inland, attack beast; when thirst, a rarity in winter, drives
an animal to forget its instinctive caution and to drink from
a swamp, as likely as not a crop of leeches fastens on its tongue.
So, as soon as they have sown their maize, the shepherds and their
families and flocks desert the hot coast for the healthful pastures of
the mountains.


CHAPTER II
THE UNWRITTEN LAW IN OUTLINE
To ensure for all, irrespective of their individual material wealth,
a fair share of the essential grazing, arable land and irrigation, there
has grown up a corpus of Unwritten Law. This was evolved at some
unknown date by the mountaineers, as part of the legal framework
which they had devised for every aspect of their life. They evolved
all their laws —social, administrative, or pastoral—unaided. For
many centuries before the Turks arrived in the fifteenth century,
the country was split up into a number of principalities, none of
which was strong enough for long to subject a neighbour to its rule.
Though the Turks remained for four and a half centuries, they
could never exert more than a nominal authority outside the chief
towns. If they sent a punitive column into the interior, the people
living in the mountains took evasive action, retreating to some peak
until the inevitable departure of the intruders; their wealth was so
small that they could carry or drive off most of it to their refuge,
and so lost little from the raid. If the Turks sent tax or police
officials, they fired on them at the first defile as a warning to return
to their offices in town. There were no roads along which forces
strong enough to be effective could march, in order to reduce them
to real submission. The Turkish government, unable to enforce its
will, accepted the situation and left the mountaineers to govern
themselves, as they had presumably done under their native
princes and chiefs. The first all-weather road to be built in North
Albania was constructed in 1916 by the Austro-Hungarian armies
during their temporary occupation; it ran from Shkoder to Durres,
with a branch to Tirana.
Every type of unwritten law has been constantly recast, added to,
and restated down the centuries by a body of experts drawn from
the rank of rulers. This rank exists because the mountaineers came
to realize that an entity which is divided against itself cannot stand.
Consequently, in every social unit —in house and village as in tribe
or group of villages—the principle of subordination to a supreme
head was accepted. In a household the headship is hereditary, with
an important qualification. As the mountaineers are aware that


a first-bom may be inefficient, the mantle of a dead or dying head
falls on the son who in the opinion of all the adult males in the
household is the best fitted to keep it together, irrespective of
whether he is the eldest or not, 1 This combination of birth and
unanimity of choice gives these heads the strength of inevitability,
so that they can be neither envied nor rebelled and intrigued
against, but must be recognized and implicitly obeyed by their
subordinates —a most important factor in keeping the peace.
Before the Turks left in 1912, the headship of a northern village
or tribe descended in the same family, always to the head it had
chosen for itself. Since 1912 successive Albanian governments
have slightly modified this system. In non-tribal areas like Mat,
Martanesh and Shpat there has been less need for a change; as far
back as we can go, the head of the average village or group of
villages has been elected by the community for his personal
qualities in the same way as the head of a house. A few villages of
Mat, however, had long been ruled by the landlords {begs or beys)
who owned them; after 1912 the power of these landlords, the
Zogu family excepted, was curtailed by the central government like
that of the bajraktars of the north.
In the old days the laws were administered as well as enacted or
revised by the ruling rank, who were collectively known as elders.
The system was elaborate, with public trials over which elders
presided, and at which evidence was taken from witnesses on oath
as well as from the plaintiff and the accused, and a jury might be
asked to render a verdict. Fines were the usual penalty for petty
misdemeanours, and temporary banishment, permanent expulsion
or death for serious offences; a modified form of imprisonment
also existed. Offences against the cohesion of the social fabric, as
understood by the mountaineers, were reckoned more serious than
crimes against an individual. Thus parricide was graver than
fratricide; the first struck a blow at parental authority, an essential
part of the social structure, but since one brother had no right to
rule another except in special cases, fratricide was little worse than
an ordinary murder and hardly a public concern. 2 The murder of
a neighbour or the theft of his property seldom entered the serious
category until the criminal became an habitual offender. Then the
community, regarding the man as a social menace from whom none
of its members was safe, took whatever action the law laid down for
1 See Chapter V. 2 See Chapter V, p. 38.


his case. Since 1912 most of this administrative and penal legisla-
tion has been superseded of set purpose by European methods
and laws, whereas the social content of the old mountain code has
been left comparatively undisturbed, free to come into line with
the ways of the West in its own time.
The community sense was fostered by every art the mountaineers
knew. Each member of a household was encouraged to regard
everything in it and everything its other members said and did as
his own. The humblest man was encouraged to regard his village
or group of villages as his personal property. If home, village or
group of villages prospered, he rejoiced as if he had himself been
advanced. If they were insulted or injured, he burned to avenge
a personal affront. If they were disgraced by misconduct on the
part of another member, he felt his own honour to be smirched.
The patriotism so bred was narrow, perhaps, but it was genuine,
free from egregious self-seeking, and by its emphasis on the need
to keep the community’s honour untarnished, a good deterrent
from crime.
This close relationship between individual and community was
also a curb on dictatorship. The ruling rank had always to respect
the individual’s property in the community’s laws. They could not
make any change in an existing law unless they obtained the consent
of a General Assembly of their village or tribe. They could impose,
but (except in the tribes which maintained fine-collectors) they
could not collect fines; social pressure was necessary for that. In
a very common punishment, social ostracism, they might play no
more than a subordinate part. They could not pass heavy sentences
like banishment or death unless a General Assembly demanded
them, and if it did, they could not resist its will. In short, the
elders voiced, but did not dictate, popular sentiment.
They were no privileged oligarchy either. They might sit in the
seat of honour or get the lamb’s head and eye at a banquet, but
they had no official residences, horses or guards of honour
provided for them at public expense. They lived in houses that
were often meaner than those of their subordinates; they ate the
same food and toiled in the same way in their fields and among their
flocks. In fact, the self-government of the Albanian mountaineers
went far towards being true democracy in the Anglo-American
sense of that much-abused word. In its primitive way it was really
government of the People, by the People, for the People. It had


its defects, of course; sometimes a judge took a bribe or a man bore
false witness in spite of the deterrents devised against such mal-
practices. Yet the legal system worked well on the whole, was often
speedier and always cheaper than any European counterpart, and
left few crimes unsolved. What chiefly precluded modern Albanian
governments from adopting the unwritten laws, however, was their
diversity. This was mainly due to the isolation in which the geo-
graphy of their country compels the mountaineers to live, and the fact
that they do not settle permanently at altitudes more than 3000 feet
above sea-level, but live on the lower slopes of the mountains
enclosing their settlement and in summer graze the upper slopes
as far as the mountain crests, where a carefully demarcated
boundary indicates the end of their property.
Communications were as dangerous as they were difficult. As
a result the principle of delegating one man to represent a big
geographical unit was not established until modern times. It was
regularly practised in small units, where the delegate had to travel
only a short distance, and that through known, if not friendly,
country. It was enough that one man should represent his house
at a General Meeting of his village or tribe, but it was unthinkable
to the mountaineers to hold General Meetings at which laws for
the whole area might be passed as in an English Parliament. At
best two adjoining communities might meet to settle a dispute
about their common boundary or a road or forest, and after much
argument make laws about the matter that were binding on both.
More usually, a village or tribe drew up or revised rules for its own
governance without any regard to what others, ten, twenty or fifty
miles away, were doing. The outlines of a law might approximate
in different groups, especially if there had been some ancestral
connexion between them, but the details of the law were as varied
as the minds that shaped them in the various communities.
The isolation in which it lived bred a fierce individualism in each
community. This prevented it from submitting to the laws of
another, except in an emergency. Then it might call in an elder
from outside to decide a case and afterwards consider his ruling law.
Such an elder had to be specially renowned for wisdom and sound
judgement, and with one known exception his influence never ran
far beyond the distance he could ride in safety and comfort from
his own community.
That exception was Lek Dukagjini, an ancient law-giver of such


eminence that what he said is still as sacred as Holy Writ to the
mountaineers of Mirdite and all the tribes to the north, including
those unjustly incorporated in Yugoslavia in 1912-13. According to
tradition it was he who framed the laws by which the mountaineers
still live. More probably, like Solon of Athens, he revised and
codified existing laws, though apparently without setting them
down on paper. Numerous items in his code resemble those known
among the Romans and other ancient peoples, and in the versions
we have there are many signs of evolution from earlier forms. The
code is said to be best preserved in Mirdite, where its items were
collected about 1913 by the eminent Franciscan scholar, Father
Shtjefen Gjefov, though his book was not published until 1933.
A few years previously he had been murdered by Yugoslavs, as is
related in a brother Franciscan’s preface to the book. 1
Little is known of Lek’s personality. He must have been a man
of standing as well as genius and fine character to have imposed his
will on the rude mountaineers of his time, so he may well have
belonged to the princely medieval family of north Albania which
took its name from Dukagjin, a district lying between the Great
Mountains {Mal'esi e Madhe) of the far north and the river Drin,
and inhabited by twelve tribes of which Shale is the chief. Tradi-
tion represents him as an older contemporary of Skanderbeg, the
national hero of modern Albania, who, born in 1403, died in 1467
after resisting the Turkish invaders of his country as gallantly and
as unavailingly as William Wallace of Scotland resisted the English.
The Mirdite tribes are also reported to have been living near
Mt Bishtrik in north-east Albania when they learned Lek’s code.
As they moved to their present fastness under Turkish pressure in
the fifteenth century, 2 we are fairly safe in maintaining that Lek’s
legislation has survived at least five centuries of oral transmission,
a high tribute to its quality and to his personality.
Traditions gathered in areas as far apart in every sense as
Moslem Lume in east Albania and Catholic Shale and Shkrel in
the north say that Lek’s main stronghold was the now ruined fort
of Drisht near Shkoder. He had another in Has in east Albania
which commanded the ford crossing the Drin at Spas, five hours
below Kukes; it is perched above the water on the last of a line of
1 An Italian translation of Lek Dukagjini’s canon was published in Rome in
1941 by the Reale Accademia d’ltalia.
2 M. E. Durham, Some Tribal Origins , etc., p. 30.


denuded peaks linked by perilous natural bridges. The track,
once paved in parts, which leads eastwards from Drisht to Shale
is still called ‘Lek’s road’, and there is a ‘Lek’s rock’ in several
districts, notably Shale, Berishe and Surroj. He fought on against
the Turks for at the least twelve years after Skanderbeg died,
and surrendered only when the Turks promised to respect the
unwritten laws of the mountains. He then fled to Hungary,
where he died.
These traditions are as persistent as they are widespread; those
given here tally reasonably well with what Miss Durham heard
among the Catholics thirty years earlier. The detail about Lek’s
conditional surrender is curious, recalling the similar terms given
to the Greeks of Constantinople by the Turks in 1453. But there
can be no proving or disproving the traditions, unless evidence is
eventually found in the Vatican archives; the records in Albanian
churches have been burned again and again, together with the
buildings. It seems likely, however, that popular memory has
confused Lek the law-giver with a warrior of later date. 1
To mountaineers everywhere Lek the law-giver’s code is known
as his kanun, for which reason Father Gjegov’s book is entitled
Kanuni i Lek Dukagjinit (‘The Code of Lek Dukagjini’). The
editor rightly derives the word from the Greek kclvcLv (‘rule’), but
does not give its interesting pedigree. It came, not directly from
Greek, for north Albania has never been under Greek influence,
but through Turkish and Arabic. In the words of Professor
H. A. R. Gibb, ‘the Greek word was very early incorporated into
Arabic as qanun, pi. qawanln. The Islamic jurists adopted it
to designate an administrative regulation, as distinct from the
Revealed Law {Shari’a), and many centuries later the Ottoman
Sultans adopted it as the designation of their legislative rescripts.
The point of retaining this term was that it suggested no inter-
ference with, or modification of, the Revealed Law.’ To Turkish
officials stationed in Albania after its conquest, Lek’s code was
naturally a kanun. Aloof though the Albanian mountaineers held
themselves from these officials, they learned a number of their
technical terms, as will appear from other examples in this book.
They made kanun so much their own that they still say something
is illegal in pure Albanian {ligja nuk e ep, lit. ‘the law does not give
it’) or in mixed Turkish and Albanian {kanuni nuk e ep). But,
1 Perhaps Lek Dukagjini 111, 1459-79.


curiously, they never call Lek’s code anything but kanun, and so
the Catholics amongst them are the only Christians in Europe who
have a Canon Law that is not ecclesiastical.
Lek’s power, says a tradition referred to in Father Gje9ov’s book,
extended as far south as the town of Lesh, which he made his
capital. Overcoming every difficulty of geography and human
obstructiveness, he used to convoke the mountain chiefs to
parliament there and after discussion promulgated his laws. No
less a personage than Skanderbeg was among the deputies. On
p. i2i of Father Gjeyov’s book there is a lively description of the
argument between the two Alexanders—both Lek and Skander
are Albanian forms of Alexander—which ended in their both
proclaiming the important doctrine that all men are equal in the
sight of the law.
Skanderbeg, if primarily a warrior, was also a law-giver, and it
is his code which still guides the mountaineers of Diber, Mat and
Kruje, the three districts with which he was chiefly associated. His
family took its patronymic Kastrioti from the hill-fort of Kastriot in
Diber; it was at Kruje that his stout resistance to the Turks made
the Pope of the day hail him as the Champion of Christendom. His
jurisdiction extended no farther, suggesting that without his
military exploits his fame as a law-giver would have faded. In
areas farther south where the mountaineers still obey unwritten
laws, as in Martanesh and Shpat, no law-giver is remembered
a generation or two after his death. The northern limit of Skan-
derbeg’s jurisdiction was fixed by Lek with characteristic wisdom,
according to a tradition prevalent in Milot. Once when Skanderbeg
was at Diber and Lek at Shkoder, the former suggested that they
should come and meet each other, the point at which they met to
be the boundary line between their spheres of influence. When Lek
agreed, Skanderbeg set off at sunrise, the canonical time for
beginning a journey. But Lek set off four hours earlier and so met
his rival at the Kulle Pashaj (‘Pasha’s Tower’) in Mat, which
remains to this day the boundary between the two kanuns. In
general Lek was too clever for Skanderbeg. Once, says another
tradition from Milot, Lek, who had a he-goat while Skanderbeg
had a steer, suggested that they should swop animals. When this
had been done, Lek was heard to mutter: ‘He-goat this year,
he-goat next year; steer this year, ox next year.’


CHAPTER III
THE ALBANIAN HOUSE
At its simplest an Albanian peasant’s house was very simple
indeed —no more than a small, square room with walls of undressed
stones from the nearest stream; a man so poor had no money or
time to spend on transporting better materials from a distance.
The stones were bedded in mud and bound together every three
feet or so by horizontal beams; in their turn the ‘belts’ were
strengthened, particularly at the corners, by cross-timbers. The
roof was a steep framework of timber covered with stone slabs but
never with thatch or boards, for the house would stand no chance
if an enemy flung a blazing firebrand on these. The doorway was
low, but the wooden door, emblematic of the insecurity that lasted
until Turkish rule ended, was strong enough not to be easily
broken down from outside. In most cases there was not even a hole
in the wall for window, and there was never a chimney—a ring of
stones in the middle kept the log-fire in its place, and the smoke
found its own way out between the rafters unhampered by a ceiling.
A kitchen-crook, a most important article, was suspended over the
fire from a tie-beam. The floor was of beaten earth. In sum,
the house was the most rudimentary type of stone and timber
architecture.
The furnishings were in keeping. They consisted of a three-
legged stool or two, a box or pile of bedding but no bedsteads,
a rough shelf with a frying-pan and a few platters and pots, a big
metal jug for boiling water, an earthenware pot for holding drinking
water, a round dining-table on stumpy supports about ten inches
high, a flour-bin, a pan for mixing bread, perhaps a pan for baking
it, and nothing for washing —the nearest stream served for that.
A metal tray with coffee cups inverted to keep them clean and
a tiny pot with a long handle for making Turkish coffee rested by
the hearth, a few satchels of home-dressed wool and a distaff hung
on the wall, and a hen stared at the company from her nest under
the eaves. The only ornaments were yellow maize-cobs, rosy
pomegranates, and strings of onions or garlic, all hanging from the
tie-beams. At meal times a cat took up a vantage point under the


dining-table, to filch what it could. It was never caressed or
deliberately fed; the whole Balkans believed that either indulgence
would stop it from catching mice.
A man and his wife, with one or two small children, might live
in this house. Of a kind hardly paralleled in the Balkans, except in
the poorer parts of southern Greece, it was not common in Albania
as a permanent dwelling. As soon as its master could scrape
together the necessary money, he added a sitting-room. As he
provided all the labour himself and needed to hire only one
professional, a stone-mason who, like all his brethren in the
Balkans, was also a carpenter, ten pounds sterling were enough.
The sitting-room might be built on top of the kitchen {sht'epi or
shpi, lit. ‘ house ’, from Lat. hospitium) or against one of its walls. It
had a wooden floor, a chimney at one end, a window or two,
a niche in the wall beside the hearth for the utensils for making
coffee, and a few wooden pegs near the door on which to hang up
rifles; it might also have a ceiling. It generally had a separate
entrance, for sitting-rooms were men’s apartments and Catholic,
Moslem, and Orthodox Albanians all segregated their young
women. The Catholics and Orthodox attributed this custom to
plain jealousy, and the Moslems, less convincingly, to a desire to
obey their Prophet’s order. In the evening and when not at work
outside during the daytime, the master of the house with his men
guests reclined, ate and smoked in the sitting-room, while his wife
and children remained in the draughty kitchen. But the men were
less comfortable than might have been expected. Since Albanian
chimneys seldom drew, acrid fumes from the wood fire filled the
room and almost made them weep unmanly tears. But not quite,
for if they succumbed, they would be derided as ‘poor sticks’ who
‘would never see to shoot’.
Guests, in the form of family friends or strangers ‘sent by God’,
often came for a night. Because there were no inns in the Albanian
countryside except on the long-distance tracks used by pack-horses,
it was the rule that a benighted stranger might claim supper and
shelter till the morning from any house he saw. The hospitality
was never refused or charged for, but travellers of standing were
expected to give a sum proportionate not to the hospitality offered
but to their supposed wealth.
As soon as the children in a two-roomed house grew up, its
master must build again. His daughters went forth to live in their
2 HAM


husbands’ homes, but his sons brought their brides to his house
and each couple required a separate bedroom. If he were very
poor, he might be unable to provide anything better than a lean-to
in the farmyard, but the average man built a proper house round
the nucleus of sitting-room and kitchen. In the first of the two
types to which this house might conform, a number of rooms were
grouped together sideways, sometimes on one floor only, usually
on two, but rarely on more. In the second type one room was built
on top of another, as in a tower, for two, three or even four
storeys. This type was always known as a kulle (lit. ‘tower’),
a description also often given to a two- or three-storeyed cluster,
although, more usually, any clustered house was called shtepi, the
name of the original kitchen. Access to the upper floor in the
clustered type was usually by an inner, fixed staircase, and in
a tower by an inner ladder that could be pulled up if an enemy
penetrated to the ground floor; a trapdoor hung over both stair-
case and ladder, ready to be closed in an instant, if necessary. The
two types of house were found side by side. The clustered one was
preferred because its rooms were easier of access, but a family with
many enemies or little land fell back on a tower as it was more
defensible and took up less space. Whereas a clustered house stood
in a farmyard surrounded by a fence of withered thorn or, more
frequently, a stone and timber wall of the same construction as
that of the house, a tower had generally no farmyard. All its
appurtenances —livestock, farm implements, hay or other fodder —
were gathered under its own roof, on the ground floor, as being
more secure. In a one-storeyed cluster livestock, farm implements,
and probably dairy and kitchen as well, were housed in sheds in the
yard to save space in the house. In a two-storeyed cluster they were
more often accommodated on the ground floor as in a tower, but
for convenience rather than security, which was guaranteed by the
farmyard wall. Since the sitting-room in such a house was often
over the cow-house, it contained an ingenious labour-saving device
for use after supper. As soon as the table had been removed, the
host swept the crumbs towards a small, unobtrusive hole in the
floor in front of the hearth, removed its lid, and with a last flick of
his broom dropped the crumbs on the animals below. In a tower
the kitchen was over the cow-shed and under the bedrooms, and
these in turn were under the men’s sitting-room.
In a tower or a two-storeyed cluster there might, for security


reasons, be no openings in the ground-floor walls except the door-
way, but square holes were left in those of the upper floor for
windows. Except in rich houses these ‘ windows ’ were not glazed.
At night they were closed in rich as in poor houses by propping
stone slabs against them or sliding wooden panels across them.
Those in a one-storeyed cluster were usually too high for the curious
outside to peep through or the hostile to shoot through. Nikolle
Gjete Coka of Breg i Matit, putting his trust in the exemplary
peace which King Zog’s government had established throughout
Albania, neglected this ancient precaution and was shot in 1938
by some Mirdites who thrust their rifles through the window of the
room in which he sat at supper. At the top of a tower there were
usually loop-holes, splayed to give a wider field of fire and low
enough to let a man kneel as he shot. When these were found in
a clustered house, as they often were, it was naturally on a vulnerable
side, where they might also be reinforced by turrets in the wall of
the farmyard. In the kitchen, where the women and children must
spend the day and evening, the hearth continued in the middle
because more people could sit round it in that position.
In planning his house the Albanian householder sought chiefly
shelter from the elements and his enemies, and took no thought for
beauty. When villages are picturesque, as many are, it is always for
such extraneous reasons as their site, the line of their roofs against
a lightly clouded sky, and the greenery surrounding them, rather
than for the architecture of their individual houses. A tower, it is
true, may have machicoulis over its door or under an upper window,
and these give it distinction; its elevation and its usual situation on
a knoll may also be attractive. The best examples, some of them
over two hundred years old, may be seen in Lure. But few
clustered houses are more than an assemblage of featureless boxes.
In the bigger houses the furnishings altered little from those of
the simplest type already described. Mattresses and pillows were
probably added to the bedding, and the floor of the sitting-room,
instead of being left bare, was covered with mats made from reeds
grown in the swamps near the coast. In the cold north and north-
east there was usually a layer of earth under the mats; it made an
admirable shield against winter blasts. Chairs remained rarities
and stools were still confined to the kitchen with its chilly earthen
floor. Workers being more plentiful, enough animals to make butter
could be kept; the churn was made by hollowing out a section of
2-2


tree-trunk. A similar section, split lengthways and hollowed out,
made two wash-tubs for laundry work. Toilet appliances, a basin
and ewer bought in the bazaar, and paraffin lamps from the same
source, completed the list of additions.
The above outline omits many small variations in Albanian
houses and furniture as irrelevant to the main subject of this book.
Mention must be made, however, of certain houses which differed
widely from the average type. The first were found among the
Highlanders (Alb. Malesore, ‘mountaineers’), the semi-nomads
who wintered on the soggy plains at the mouth of the river Mat.
These houses had walls of planking or wattle and daub, with roofs
of tiles or strips of wood. They rested on vertical sections of tree
trunks about two feet high which had been laid at close intervals
on the ground but had not been driven into it like piles. In this way
they kept snug and dry even during the winter floods. All over
Albania granaries were raised some distance from the ground in
order to keep out the rats, but so far as is known, there were no
houses on stilts except at the mouth of the Mat.
A number of Highland houses also contained a child’s play-pen
which might be as little as twenty-five inches long, wide and high.
A shallow porringer projected from one of the top bars, chipped
from the same piece of wood as the bar itself. In this pen Highland
children spent all their winter days from the time they could
crawl until they were three years old. They had no toys, but
practised walking round the pen, sometimes stopping to eat a little
bread and milk from the porringer with the diminutive home-made,
wooden spoon which was tied to the bar, or merely gazing
broodingly at the fire. The mothers meanwhile cooked, spun or
gossiped, each secure in the knowledge that her child was on the
dry floor of the kitchen and not sitting outside in the quagmire of
mud that reached up to the very doorstep. The Highlanders said
they invented both the houses and the play-pen themselves, but it
is possible that they were at least advised by the Austro-Hungarian
troops who were stationed in the neighbourhood for part of the
war of 1914-18.
In Shpat, near Elbasan, huts were built for many bridegrooms.
In the higher villages trunks of young trees about as tall as a man’s
waist were planted in a rectangle of the size desired, their boughs,
while still green and flexible, were laced in and out of these
uprights, and cross-pieces of timber were nailed to the uprights


to keep the structure rigid. When a light roof thatched with straw
or more boughs had been nailed on and the inner walls had been
plastered with mud, the hut was ready for occupation. Quickly
built and costing only the price of the nails, it was often larger and
more comfortable than the sitting-room in the adjacent house.
A folk-tradition says it was long the handsomest dwelling to which
any country Albanian aspired. At lower altitudes in Shpat the
huts were flimsier as befitted the milder climate. They were
usually made of reeds plastered with cow-dung, which was
sufficient to keep out the wind.
Three houses of more splendid type, each containing about
forty souls, exist at Diber—Hysni Dema’s at Homesh, Murat
Kaloshi’s at Kander, and Cen Elezi’s at Sllove. The owners were
rich and most hospitable Moslem notables. As some of the older
generation were schooled in Constantinople, they complemented
their culture and their position by building establishments of
Turkish inspiration, with separate blocks of buildings for the men’s
apartments (Tk. selamlik), stables, granaries, storehouses, kitchens
and women’s apartments (Tk. haremlik). These are all enclosed
within a high stone wall with defensive turrets at every weak point,
especially near the one and only gateway. The women’s apartments
are really only a series of bedrooms, one for each married man and
his wife and children, and the women, for want of a common
sitting-room, sit normally in the kitchen like their poorer sisters.
Softer mattresses, richer floor-rugs, and fireplaces in the bedrooms
indicate the family’s wealth, but European beds, tables and chairs
are still barred, partly to avoid rousing envy in more backward
neighbours. Cen Elezi’s sitting-room was a magnificent oblong,
warmed by a log-fire in a huge chimney at the far end from the
door and softly lit on both its long sides by a row of short windows
at the top of the tall walls; enemies outside had as usual to be
prevented from shooting through the outer windows, and the men
inside must not be able to look through the inner ones at the
women’s apartments. In this room a hundred travellers supped
and slept every night, going their separate ways at dawn; a chef,
working in a kitchen of his own and slaughtering a couple of sheep
or an ox per night, provided the unvarying menu of soup, boiled
meat, bread and rice pilaff. In their retired kitchen the women
catered for themselves and the children, when there was no over-
flow from the chef’s.


A man’s house, simple or elaborate, was his own, and he could
do what he would with it up to a point. But he held it on conditions
laid down by the Unwritten Law. This law defined a house as ‘ any
hut or building of one, two, or more storeys that has a hearth and
emits smoke’, and insisted that poor house and rich house are alike
inviolable. A stranger might not enter either without first hailing
the master by name. If very discreet, he would call out from some
distance; if bolder or on friendly terms with the family, he might
lawfully enter the yard first. If no one answered his call, he must
wait there or go away. On no account might he push the door open;
that would make him a housebreaker. In the old days it would
have cost him the usual penalties for theft, a fine of five hundred
grosh (‘piastres’) for housebreaking, plus the obligation to send the
family two of every article found missing after his visit, and even
more recently it caused strife that might end in shooting. It was
of no use for him to plead that he knew the master was from home;
he knew also that somebody must have been left in the master’s
place.
The law allowed a man to erect a new house anywhere on his
own ground, subject to the all-important provision that it did no
harm to his neighbour’s house and ground. In this connexion the
term ‘house’ comprised, not only the dwelling, but also the farm-
yard wall or fence, and everything that this enclosed. It followed
that a new house must be kept at least the width of its eaves from
the neighbour’s boundary to make sure that the rain dripping from
them should not damage his property. The method most commonly
adopted to ensure this was to leave space enough for a man to pass
on foot between the new house and the neighbour’s boundary. If
a man wanted plenty of elbow-room, however, he might build his
house as much as two pashe (‘fathoms’) from the boundary. As
his visitors were as free as members of his family to use the empty
space, a sizeable road was soon trodden out. Sometimes, too, a man
who looked into the future left room for a road that was still non-
existent but might one day be wanted by the community, in which
contingency his house would otherwise have had to be pulled
down and rebuilt elsewhere.
There were also a number of minor rules to be remembered in
building. According to the law in Fulqet, if several men had
contiguous land, they must build their houses as near as possible
to the point at which their land met. Otherwise their several dogs


would not recognize them and when A came to till his field, B’s dog
would treat him as an intruder and bite him, and he would have
no legal claim to compensation for the injury. It is not known if
this law obtained elsewhere, but the common sense on which it is
based makes it probable that it did. Again, in the Moslem villages
near enough to Elbasan to conform to the rigidity with which
Moslem townsmen secluded their women, it was not permitted to
make windows in a wall overlooking a neighbour’s farmyard; the
latter’s womenfolk must be free to move about their yard unwatched.
This ban on windows—which was Moslem, not Albanian—hardly
extended to remoter Moslem villages, as women there enjoyed
almost as much liberty as did their Christian ancestresses.
A man’s ownership of his house and land was so absolute that he
and his might emigrate temporarily or for good without losing
their title to either house or land. Even if the family absented
itself for a hundred years, no one might squat on its property. If
the emigrant, before leaving, sold his land ‘ together with all that is
on it’, and one leaving for goodusually did so, the piece constituting
the site of the house remained his in spite of the terms of sale, and
so long as one stone stood on another, no one might use the site.
In Mirdite, however, a fixed term was set to this law; if the
emigrant did not return within ten years, his house might be
occupied by whosoever wanted it.
Every dwelling that emitted smoke might have one or more of the
following accessories—yard, vegetable garden, field, road, boundary
and, in suitable latitudes, vineyard. Of these the boundary and
road were the most indispensable. 1 Every owner of a dwelling that
emitted smoke had a right to graze his animals on the summer and
winter pasturage owned by his village and to cut firewood and
timber for his own use in the public coppices and forests. If he
cared to build a bothy for his shepherds on a summer pasture or
to break in ground for a field or vegetable garden on a common
near his village, he was welcome to do so. He must first secure the
consent of the elders of the village, who generally put the common
weal before individual convenience. Their permission given, no
one could stop his tilling the ground, nor turn him out. Theoretically
every dwelling that emitted smoke should also have a portion of
irrigation water, but the right to sell water often made this
provision a dead letter.
1 See Chapters VIII and IX.


Obviously the crude and comfortless character of the Albanian
house indicated a low standard of living and dire poverty in the
ordinary sense of the word. But the Albanian had his compensa-
tions. He was secure in what he had, and unless he lived in an
over-populated area like Diber, he had the essentials. In alluvial
areas like Myzeqe and in a few villages in the district of Mat there
were big estates worked by share-croppers, but with these few
exceptions the Albanian owned his house and land and need not
think of rent or eviction. Since forests and commons belonged to
his village or tribe and their products were free to him and his
fellows, he need think only of the trouble involved in fetching his
firewood and grazing his sheep. With luck he might have surplus
animals to sell in a market town for money that would pay for his
taxes, for clothing, for imported goods like coffee and sugar, and,
costliest of all, for brides. With subsistence as his only possible
aim, he need not work every day and so enjoyed a good deal of
leisure. In short, although his comforts and amenities were few,
so also were his worries.


CHAPTER IV
THE ALBANIAN HOUSEHOLD
Society in the Albanian mountains was patrilineal, and took so
little account of women that whereas the names of ancestors in the
male line might be known for as many as twenty generations, those
in the female line were forgotten after two or three. In the words
of the Unwritten Law ‘a man has blood, and a woman kin’,
i.e. a man has a pedigree, and a woman her own relatives, and
‘a woman is anybody’s daughter’, i.e. comes from anywhere and
has no pedigree.
As usual in patrilineal societies, all property and rights were
vested in the men. So when a man married, his house belonged to
him exclusively and not at all to his wife, neither priest nor law
having bound him to endow her with his worldly goods. The
Unwritten Law states further that ‘a wife is a sack for carrying’
things, i.e. she was in her husband’s house to bear his children. It
was also understood, however, that she must take an active part in
the work of both the farm and the house. In consequence, the wife
in a household containing only a married pair and their small
children led a life of almost unrelieved hardship, all the relaxations
and leisure going to the husband. Since the Unwritten Law forbade
her to have any dealings with the outside world until she was old,
she stayed at home to work while her husband went to market to
shop and sell, visited government offices to discuss the payment —
or non-payment —of his taxes, and arranged the future marriages
of his children. Whether it was a kerchief, a daughter-in-law, or
nothing at all that he bought for her, he never consulted her wishes
and she might not murmur openly at his choice. Nor might she
remonstrate with him if he idled when at home; any such criticism
would only make him beat her. The Unwritten Law said that the
husband was the head of the wife and might punish her for
indiscipline as well as misconduct. There was plenty of secret
grumbling of course. Thus a pretty young woman in Mat was
heard to complain that her husband spent all the money he could
find on coffee and cigarettes for himself and left her, after five years
of marriage, ‘without a rag to her back’. ‘And it’s for him I toil


and moil the whole blessed day’, she ended, sadly rather than
bitterly.
Toil and moil she did. The daily duties of every peasant woman
in her position included fetching firewood from the forest and
water from the river or spring, besides cooking, washing and baking
for the household. At certain seasons she must also do farm work,
so long as she retained a measure of youth. Her husband did heavy
work like ploughing, scything hay, or cutting oak leaves for
winter fodder. But she must carry the manure from the stable to
the fields in spring, help her husband to sow and earth up the
maize and, while he stayed indoors, reap it. She must carry home
the hay and fodder and feed them to the animals. If grain was
trodden out by horses or oxen, her husband drove them; if
threshed with flails, she wielded them. If there was no miller, she
conveyed the grist to the mill, ground it, and brought back the
flour. Only if there were a miller did these tasks devolve on her
husband, and then it was only in order to keep her virtue above
suspicion. In poor families she was herself the beast of burden,
and when young was expected to carry up to seventy pounds. In
richer families she had a horse or donkey to do the actual carrying,
unless her home was under snow in winter. Then she must brave
the snow that confined the animal to its stable and bring in supplies
of firewood and water, fodder and flour. Paucity of workers
prevented her husband from having more than a couple of milch-
goats or ewes, and these were tethered; it was she who tethered,
watered and milked them. It was she, too, who turned their milk
into curds ( kos ) or butter and cheese, arduous tasks in summer when
milk sours easily. She also saw to the poultry and in her spare time
knitted or span.
Fortunately for the women, there was almost no peasant house-
hold in which a young husband and wife were the only workers.
The eldest child, boy or girl, began at seven or eight years of age
to herd the goats as they roamed in search of food and saw to them
morning and evening. This gave the mother some relief and
provided the family with more food and, by the sale of the goats
themselves or the kids, more money. When very small, the girl
must spin or knit as she herded; when in her teens, she must sew
her trousseau; but no extra tasks were expected of boy herds. Since,
too, a man’s mother and sisters never lost their legal right to share
his home, a family might include the husband’s mother and even


his unmarried sister or his widowed, childless sister. In that event,
while the younger women worked outside, his mother, if physically
fit, remained at home to cook, sweep and bake, besides attending
to the dairy and poultry. She also saw that any children who were
big enough to walk but too small to follow their mother to the
fields, did not fall into the fire or otherwise come to grief. She
further entertained any men visitors who might come when her son
was absent. She did not, however, wash her clothes or her
husband’s, should he be still alive, for even at the height of the busy
season outside that was one of her daughter-in-law’s duties. When
she was no longer strong enough for her various tasks, she was sent
out, complete with distaff, to herd the goats or plough-oxen and
another woman succeeded her as housekeeper.
If the married pair had a separate bedroom, it was private
property, as inviolable as a separate house would be, and no one
other than the man and his wife and children might enter uninvited.
Unless she was his wife, even the housekeeper was under the ban.
It followed that when a wife worked outside, she must care herself
for her bedroom, sweeping it, spreading the bedding at night, and
picking this up again in the morning. She must also tend her
children, and wash and mend their clothes, her husband’s and her
own, besides those of her mother-in-law. If she had a tiny baby,
she carried it in its cradle on her back to the fields, left it in a shady
place while she worked, and carried it home again in the evening.
If the house was too small to have a sitting-room, the husband
ate in the kitchen. He never lingered over the meal, and in most
districts ate alone unless his mother, privileged by having brought
him into the world, wished to join him. A man who ate with his
wife or sat much in her company courted public ridicule as
unmanly and ‘no class’. If there was a sitting-room, the husband
probably took his midday meal in the kitchen and his evening meal
in the sitting-room. Before supper he might invite his sons or even
his daughters, if these were small, to share the comfort of the
sitting-room for a little.
Peasant households with only one man in them were rare, since
for economic reasons it was customary for several brothers or even
several first cousins to live together until their children were of an
age to marry. Then sheer pressure of population compelled the
household to split up into smaller units, each with a house of its own. 1
1 See Chapter VI.


When the men in a household were numerous, three or more
might be shepherds, one tending the sheep, another the goats, and
a third the oxen; several might be farmers who ploughed and hoed
and irrigated; yet others might be housemen, one keeping the house
supplied with firewood, a second going to the bazaar, and a third
grinding grain at the local mill for the household’s bread. Each
thus contributed his quota to the family wealth, and obviously the
more numerous the quotas, the greater the general comfort.
A well-to-do household which had only a few men might make up
the number of hands available by engaging servants. ‘(Rota’s
tableful’ is now proverbial in Qermenike because eighteen men—
ten relatives and eight hirelings—used to sit down nightly to
supper in Sali Qota’s house in the village of Fenars in that district.
If, however, a household were poor as well as small, it could not
risk having to pay servants in a bad year, and must restrict its
activities —for example, by keeping only sheep or goats but not
both. Since sheep eat grass and goats leaves, they must have
separate herds.
Even in the richest of these multiple households the women
lived much as they did in small, poor ones. A housekeeper, who
was generally elderly, cooked and baked for the whole family,
swept the kitchen, the men’s sitting-room, and her own bedroom
if she had one apart from the kitchen, but did not enter any room
belonging to a married man, even if he was her son. The young
wives worked out of doors when required and at all times looked
after their children, husband and bedroom. They were often exempt
from fetching firewood and water and were reasonably fed and
dressed, but otherwise fared no better than their poorer sisters. By
and large, even in these relatively more leisured homes, women
worked much harder than men. The latter excused their compara-
tive idleness by saying that in Turkish times, when blood feuds
raged, it had been death for most men to show their faces outside
in the daytime, and if the family was not to die of starvation the
women had to work for its bread. They claimed that when blood
feuds grew rarer, they became more industrious. But they could
never produce any evidence that the women had gained by their
new diligence.
Soon after sunset the men sat down to sup at the same table in
the sitting-room, while the women and children ate at another
table in the kitchen. The food was brought to the sitting-room by


the housekeeper who remained discreetly out of sight behind the
door where she handed it to the men. She must wash up but,
warned by the proverb which says of work done badly by firelight
because there are no lamps, ‘Evening’s work, morning’s laugh’,
she waited till the next day. Then her task was much less formidable
than one might think. At both the men’s and the women’s table
everybody ate out of a common dish, fingers were used for a meat
course, and one and the same wooden spoon dealt with soup and
any semi-liquid food that followed. The men generally had their
own spoons as they thought this more hygienic; they washed
them themselves —rather sketchily—immediately after supper, and
tucked them into their breast, ready for the next meal at home or
at a friend’s. If coffee was served, the master of the house or his
deputy rinsed out the cups, for the precious utensils must never
leave the sitting-room in case the women took to drinking coffee.
Twenty men could sup on soup, meat, bread, curds and coffee
without the housekeeper’s having more than three centre dishes
and the dining-table to wash.
A multiple household might contain as many as twenty persons,
a goodly enough number but only a pale reflexion of past glories.
All over north Albania it used to be the custom for brothers, first
and even second cousins to live with their wives and children, and
probably several aged uncles and aunts and young sisters, under
the same roof. Enormous housefuls sometimes resulted. For
instance, there were sixty-four people in Gjon Macaj’s house in
Perlat about 1900, ninety-five in Isuf Isaku’s in Zdrajshe in 1923,
and seventy in Lushan Sadrija’s in Shale even more recently. The
houses themselves, though conforming to the regulation pattern
of men’s sitting-room, kitchen, stables, store-rooms, and one bed-
room for every family unit, were remarkably small by our standards.
Quite a little bedroom suffices for seven or eight persons if they all
sleep on the floor, and both the sitting-room and the kitchen often
served as dormitories, the former for men guests and the unmarried
or widowed men of the family and the latter for women guests and
the widows of the family. The primary cause of this way of life was
the lack of public security in former times. Enemies and bandits
could wreak their will on a single-handed man, but had to respect
one surrounded by well-armed guards, and these the trustiest
possible, his nearest relatives. After Albania became independent,
public security improved so much that the need for a family to see


to its own safety disappeared, and with it the need for several
generations to huddle together under one roof if they wished to
survive. Consequently, immense households like that of Gjon
Macaj disappeared.
In the families of the landed gentry of Diber such as Cen Elezi,
life followed rather different lines. Most of the young men went
into government or army service and left their wives and children
at home, visiting them when they obtained leave, and the farm
work was done by hired servants with the help and under the
supervision of any of the family who might have remained at home.
The women were organized on the customary pattern, with some
variation in detail. A housekeeper cooked, but only for the women
and children, since a special chef was required to cope with the
hospitable requirements of the selamlik. 1 Each young wife attended
to her own room and children besides cleaning her husband’s
boots and helping him to dress when he was at home. No one was
required to work outside, but each must in turn wash up after
meals for a week at a time. The daughters of such families were
often less fortunate in their lives than the daughters-in-law. For
want of suitors of their father’s standing they must often be given
to men of lower rank and then they worked both in and out of
doors as if born and bred in a poor family.
Every house containing two or more married men included
a corresponding number of family units. Each of these looked on
its own members as we should do—as father, mother, son, daughter,
brother and sister—but in its attitude to the other units diverged
from our practice. To us the oldest men may be brothers or cousins;
to Albanians they were all ‘brothers’, irrespective of whether one
father had begotten them or not. In the next generation instead of
first cousins and in the third, second cousins, Albanians saw only
‘ brothers ’ and ‘ sisters ’ in both. The middle generation of Albanians
regarded all its elders as ‘uncle’ or ‘aunt’ (though in some,
particularly in Moslem, cases distinguishing between the paternal
and maternal lines) and all its juniors as ‘nephew’ or ‘niece’. It
was only when some need to particularize arose that they defined
the relationship according to the blood tie as ‘father’s brother’,
‘father’s brother’s wife’, ‘brother’s son’, ‘cousin’ or the like.
Not only did a man who was seen much in his wife’s company
lose face, but in a communal household his brothers, in addition to
1 See p. 21.


railing at him, threatened to make him set up a separate home,
which would reduce both him and her to a lower level of comfort.
Custom, it is true, under the stress of hard necessity, sanctioned
his working alongside her in the fields, but only on condition that
he did not indulge in unnecessary or frivolous conversation with
her. The only explanation which Albanians offered of these
restrictions was that a husband and a wife felt ‘ ashamed ’ in each
other’s presence. The same feeling existed all over the Balkans
until they came under strong western influences a generation ago.
Before that every decorous peasant bride, whatever her race or
religion, refrained for several years after her marriage from
speaking at all to her husband in public and spoke to him in
whispers only in private, meanwhile keeping her eyes modestly
downcast. This behaviour seems to originate in an idea which is
prevalent throughout the Near East. The Greeks say that since only
the celibate life is really holy, the matrimonial state is one of sin
and therefore of shame. In I Cor. vii, 8, St Paul voiced it when he
wrote, ‘ I say therefore to the unmarried and widows, It is good for
them if they abide even as I’. Moslems, too, believe this, in spite
of many being polygamists. There is, for instance, a married as
well as a celibate branch of the Bektashi Order of dervishes, but it
has so few supporters that at the central monastery at Had
Bektas in the heart of Asia Minor its headquarters are little more
than a poverty-stricken excrescence on the enormous, wealthy
headquarters of the celibates, and in Albania it has only the
monastery at Qesarake in the south-east, compared with the
seventy maintained for the celibates in different parts of the
country.
Now the Unwritten Law of Albania ordained that every married
woman had the right to visit her own relatives at least once a year.
Since these frequently lived in a different village, she could not
travel to or from them without an escort, which neither custom nor
the law allowed her husband to provide in person. Since brothers
were everywhere allowed to talk to each other’s wives, no difficulty
arose in a communal household, where any man except the
husband could accompany a wife to her parents’ home and fetch
her back. In a house with only one man matters were more
complicated. If his mother were alive and physically fit for the
journey, she might go with his wife, but who would then cook his
supper and prepare his bed for the night? If his mother were dead


or incapacitated, one of his wife’s relatives must come for her and
bring her back, but that meant the extra trouble of letting them
know that she was coming.
Each member of a household had a personal name. Though this
was usually determined by the religion professed, Moslem first
names were not uncommon among the Catholics. The usual cause
seems to have been no more than a personal whim. Thus the
junior bajraktar (‘standard-bearer’) 1 of Shale, a Catholic, was
called Avdi because his father was very friendly with a Moslem of
that name at the time of his birth. Another interesting anomaly is
found in the forty-three Orthodox villages of Shpat, near Elbasan,
where the older men have two names, a Moslem one for public use
and an Orthodox one for private. For some decades before
Albania freed herself from Turkish rule these villages were pressed
by the Moslems of Elbasan to abandon Christianity and, to save
their faith and lives, camouflaged themselves as Moslems, giving
themselves Moslem names, keeping the Ramazan fast, and so on,
but evading circumcision. At intervals they fetched an Orthodox
priest from Elbasan under cover of night so that in some dark
stable he might marry the newly wed with Christian rites and
baptize the newly born. So, to name only two examples, the
apparently Moslem Tahir Baduri of Shelcan and Ymer Tullumi
of Bujars are really the Christian Spiro Baduri and Vasil Tullumi.
Religious persecution having ended when Albanian independence
was attained, the Orthodox of Shpat shed their Moslem camouflage
and gave only Christian names to their children. If Godolesh, the
picturesque village north of Elbasan, had managed to hold out for
only two years more against the pressure to ‘turn Turk’, it, too,
might now still have been Christian. It failed to hold out, so that
its middle-aged and young inhabitants are fanatical Moslems but
the old still visit Orthodox churches in secrecy and grieve that
they must lie in a Moslem grave. One sturdy old woman, who
married soon after the conversion to Islam, boasted that she had
had all her four sons baptized. One of them confirmed this to the
author, saying he had often been told by Christian and Moslem alike
that he smelt less than did other Moslems, an agreeable peculiarity
which he attributed to his baptism. The Greeks too, who introduced
Orthodox Christianity into Albania, subscribed to the belief that
baptism takes away the smell from which all Moslems suffer.
1 See Chapter XL


Women, too, had a personal name, but after they married their
husbands were too shy to use it, and others knew them in early life
as ‘Mark’s (or Asllan’s or Vasil’s) young wife’ and in later life as
his ‘wife’ or ‘old woman’, so that their own name fell into disuse.
This contributed to their seclusion from the outside world and at
the same time avoided the superfluous; since descent in the female
line did not count, their names were not thought worth remembering.
Surnames in the sense of family names were general among the
Orthodox, comparatively rare among the Moslems, and non-
existent among the Catholics. Both Moslems and Catholics,
however, tacked on the name of a man’s father to his own and so
distinguished him from his fellows. Thus a Moslem called Sadik
Asllan was Asllan’s Sadik and different from Sadik Arif, the son of
Arif. A Catholic called Zef Nika was Nike’s Zef, i.e. Zef son of
Nike—Joseph Nicolson in English—and Zef Toma was Tom’s
Zef, i.e. Joseph Thomson, quite another person. Nika and Toma
are in the indefinite genitive, to mark possession. As Moslem names
might also be put in this genitive in Albania, Sadik Asllani, an
Albanian form, was as frequently heard as Sadik Asllan, its
Turkish counterpart. The endings of the Albanian indefinite
genitive, it should be said, are tricky and vary according to the
final letter of the root word and also according to the dialect used.
They are further liable to be confused by foreigners with the
definite article which Albanians must suffix to the name when
making a statement about a person or a place. Thus Zef Nika signed
himself so, without any suffixed article, but if another Albanian
reported that ‘Zef had gone’, he must add the definite article to
the name, saying Zefi iku. Turkish influence also made Moslems
stop at the father’s name, but the Catholics, who seem to have
preserved the oldest Albanian method of nomenclature, often
appended the grandfather’s name as well.
3
ham


CHAPTER V
THE MASTER OF THE HOUSE
Some co-ordinating authority is obviously necessary when many
workers, most of them occupied with different duties, live under
the same roof. The Unwritten Law therefore requires that in each
family there shall be a patriarchal system of government, with one
man master of the house and everybody else subordinate to him.
When there was only one man in a house, he became auto-
matically its unquestioned master. If he died while his children
were small, his brother or, much less often, his wife’s brother saw
to the family until the eldest boy grew old enough to take charge
as master. When there were two or more men in a household, the
master was elected, not born, to his position. Most frequently he
was chosen in early youth by his predecessor, but should the latter
die prematurely, he was elected at a general meeting of the men of
the household. The women were not invited to this meeting nor
were their views ascertained. The former method was preferred
because it enabled the future master to be trained by his predecessor
with incessant talk about the matters that would fall within his
competence —relations with the authorities, relations with neigh-
bours, household management, laws on roads, field boundaries,
pasturage rights and so on. If he had to be elected by the household,
he must rely on his own good sense and experience, supplemented
by consultations with his subordinates or neighbours. Since its
publication in 1933 Father book on Lek’s Kanun has
become available for reference, but previously heads of households
had only the unwritten laws for guidance.
When a new master was being chosen, primogeniture was one of
the factors taken into consideration. Albanians regarded their
elders with deference and, consequently, obeyed them more
willingly. A very young master, however, such as might emerge
from exclusive reliance on the accident of birth, could be a misfor-
tune for his family.
Primogeniture, however, counted for nothing compared to
administrative qualities such as knowledge of the law, shrewd
judgement, even temper and fair-mindedness. A reigning master


would pass over any or all of his own sons in favour of his younger
brother or nephew if the latter promised to be a better administrator.
Ymer Tullumi of Bujars in Shpat was a case in point. His father
made him heir over the heads of his two elder brothers, and in his
own old age, being childless, he selected as his successor, not his
oldest nephew or the eldest son of his eldest brother, but the most
intelligent among his nephews. For the same reason a master whose
powers had been dimmed by years or illness generally resigned his
position to his successor, although he was legally entitled to remain
master as long as he lived.
In his relations with the authorities and the neighbours, the
master had to do his best for the family. He tried, for instance, to
get the burden of taxation and unpaid labour on government roads
lightened, or, better still, shelved altogether; here he might find
some degree of literacy useful, though it was otherwise superfluous.
To keep on good terms with the neighbours he restrained his
subordinates from provocative acts such as stealing or trespassing,
and if a quarrel broke out he tried to settle it before it reached the
shooting stage, which was always a nuisance to everybody con-
cerned. At home he tried to keep the domestic wheels well oiled,
soothing the quarrelsome, reasoning with the disgruntled, never
showing anger real or feigned, assigning to each worker, whether
man or woman, a daily task. In practice the last point seldom
required thinking out, since each man had early specialized as
ploughman, shepherd, cow-herd or odd man. If ‘ hands ’ were few,
the master must work himself; if they were numerous, he confined
himself to general supervision and planning of the work of the
others. His chief duty was then to see that the fields were properly
tilled and the flocks well cared for. In some districts, when tem-
porary labourers had been hired for a special job, the master of
a household so big that he did not normally work with his own
hands ceased to supervise the workers and joined them as one of
themselves. This was regarded as gracious condescension on his
part and stimulated the hired men to greater effort.
The master’s rule over his household was absolute and extended
to every aspect of its life. Unless he first consented, no other man
might stay away from work, leave the farm for a day’s outing,
accept employment elsewhere, or even call in a doctor to attend to
his sick child; no boy or girl might be betrothed; no child might
be hired out, apprenticed, or sent to school; no woman except his
3-2


mother and others in her position, such as his uncle’s elderly
widow, might go to spend the night in her father’s house. This
gave him complete control over the time of the workers of the
household. Whatever task he assigned the other men and the
women must be performed without cavil; they must not only work
as he said but go where he bade them and even marry when and
whom he pleased. He spoke of them as ‘my people’ in English or
‘my folk’ in American parlance. When obliged to speak of them to
the authorities or neighbours, he called any young man ‘my son’,
any girl ‘my daughter’, and any married woman ‘my wife’ or ‘my
old woman ’. No decent Albanian, it should be noted, ever mentions
the women of his household to outsiders except under compulsion.
The master had also sole control of the family purse. Any
money earned by the other men by the sweat of their brow or
a windfall like a tip must be paid over to him and spent for the
family’s benefit. For, says the law, ‘the earnings of a son are
shared by his father and brothers’. Here the words ‘father’, ‘son’
and ‘brothers’ have not only the narrow application which we
English give, but also the wider Albanian sense of relatives in the
older or younger generation. 1 The farm was registered in the Land
Office and popularly spoken of under the master’s name, but this
was only for convenience. It was owned jointly by all the men on
it, and the master did not own a blade of grass more than the others
did. Yet in virtue of his position he need not consult any of them
if he wished to buy or sell a field, vineyard, wood or portion of
irrigation water. The right to buy and sell was his alone. There
were only two limitations on this right, both deriving from the
simple good sense that underlies all the unwritten laws. He could
not sell a sheep or goat without first securing the shepherd’s
permission, and if the latter preferred to give him another animal,
he must accept it, for the shepherd knew the flock better than he
did. Secondly, the farmer of the family, having sole charge of the
plough-oxen, did not require to ask his leave if he wished to help
a neighbour with his ploughing, to lend the oxen, or even to give
them away outright.
As keeper of the purse the master generally went to market
himself with whatever produce was for sale, and bought what he
thought necessary with the proceeds. It was his duty to see that
everybody in the house was as well shod and dressed as the
1 See p. 30.


family’s means permitted, and that there was a sufficiency of
coffee, sugar and cigarettes to maintain its dignity with visitors.
He must also pay government dues and instalments of the price of
any bride who was marrying into the family. Until the newer ways
of to-day came in, he had further to buy a rifle for every youth in
the family who came of military age. If he sent another man to
market in his stead, as he was entitled to do, he often put a reserve
price on the produce and always instructed his deputy about what
he was to buy. On his return the latter must give a full account of
his stewardship, saying what he had received for the produce and
what he had spent, proving that he had made no unauthorized
purchases, and handing over the remaining money intact. If the
master grew so physically incapacitated that he could no longer
make the long, arduous journey over the mountains to market
( pazdr ), he usually appointed one of the others, preferably the
future master, to the permanent post of ‘bazaar-man’. The latter
then kept the family purse, but in other respects remained subor-
dinate to the master.
It resulted naturally from the master’s hold on the family purse
that only he could lend money or contract a debt recoverable in
law. If any of his subordinates made a loan or pledged the family
credit on behalf of a friend, the borrower might lawfully repudiate
the debt on the plea that it was not lawfully contracted. Generally,
however, the master first scolded the culprit well for transgressing
the law and then told the borrower that the loan was made on his
authority, so leaving him no option but to repay it. In the same
way, when subordinates borrowed, both they and the master were
within their rights if they said the loan was illegally contracted and
refused to repay it. More often than not, for the honour of the
family, the master paid up. Again, in such matters as going surety
for a loan, a woman’s chastity, or a man’s life, which were great
features of Albanian life, only the master might act, subject to one
exception. Each man’s rifle and revolver were his personal
property —to keep, to barter, to sell or to pledge without any
reference to the master. Consequently, each subordinate might go
surety up to the value of his arms. He usually did so with circum-
spection, however, for if he lost them he must not ask the master to
replace them. The master was also responsible for any material
damage done to a neighbour by his subordinates. If, for instance,
they had stolen or killed a cow, or had set fire to a haystack, it was


he who must find the money for compensating the injured
neighbour. He sought it naturally in the common purse according
to the law that ‘the mishaps of a son are shared by his father and
brothers ’. If however, a subordinate killed a neighbour, it was just
as likely that he himself or another subordinate would have to pay
the penalty of a life for a life as that the master would have to do so.
Presumably this anomalous division of responsibility arose because
if the master alone were responsible for a murder, he would be so
closely guarded that there would be no catching him and the
murdered man’s death would remain unavenged. 1
Though the master’s authority, resting as it did on his customary
and traditional acceptance as his predecessor’s choice or on his
election by general consent of the household, was essentially moral,
it was also backed by certain powers of enforcement. He had the
right to beat a culprit, to leave him hungry, or to tie him up in
a room or cellar until he came to a more proper frame of mind. This
applied equally to the women; in fact, the commonest victim of
tying up in a cellar was a girl who had jibbed at a proposed
marriage. When a subordinate was grossly at fault and seemed
incorrigible, the master might threaten to give him his portion and
turn him out to fend for himself, and if the man did not reform, he
would carry out the threat. In Kruje the author was present when
a father expelled one of his sons for killing the other. In Turkish
times the master had another salutary form of punishment at his
disposal. This was taking away a culprit’s arms for a week or two,
so reducing him to the status of women and greybeards. ‘Once
shamed, twice shy’ was almost invariably the result. But the best
of masters might be helpless with a shiftless subordinate who had
grown too old to beat. So long as the latter avoided gross mis-
demeanours like murder, he might idle with impunity. For physical
reasons the master could not force him to work, and except in
extreme cases the Unwritten Law disapproved of turning him out
to sink or swim as an angry English parent might do. 2 The law said
1 It is perhaps more likely that this vicarious responsibility of any member of
the family instead of the master only is the survival of the more ancient practice
unmodified by more civilized conventions. It is typical of the blood feud in more
primitive societies than that of Albania. (Ed.)
2 In Montenegrin tribal law the disobedient son might be fined the first time,
confined and beaten the second and third time, and only expelled after that,
expulsion involving disinheritance. Vide Durham, Some Tribal Origins, Laws
and Customs of the Balkans, p. 84. (Ed.)


it was the offender’s birthright to remain in the house, to eat at the
common table, and to have his wife and children maintained out of
the family purse. A striking illustration of this weakness of the
communal system was to be seen in Shale in the 1930’5, when
Mirash Nue’s family included his wife, his elder son Pal, Pal’s wife
and four children, and his younger son Gjon. Since he, Mirash, was
too old to work and Pal was a wastrel, Gjon alone ploughed to feed
the household and fetched firewood to keep it warm. To get money
for government taxes and his father’s coffee and cigarettes, he
worked for the priest in his spare time. He had been unable to earn
enough to pay for a bride and at thirty years of age was still un-
married, a calamity in primitive Albanian eyes. Pal, not criminal,
just lazy and selfish, and saved from beating by his father’s ad-
vanced years and his own age, paid no attention to either his father’s
upbraidings or the barely concealed contempt of the neighbours and
turned up unfailingly for the meals he had done nothing to provide.
The master received no money payments for his services but
enjoyed certain privileges. His clothes were often newer and of
better cloth than those of his subordinates; more silver chains
crossed his breast, and more silver rings glittered on his fingers. He
was entitled to have his own bedding and coffee utensils and to
keep them until he died. If he chose to buy himself a riding horse,
a watch, or arms richly inlaid with silver and bright stones, he might
do so. His subordinates, though left to walk while he rode, to learn
the time from the sun by day and from the crowing of a cock at
night, and to content themselves with the plainest of rifles and
revolvers, did not seem to resent his magnificence. He represented
the family, and the worthier he appeared in externals as well as in
mind and character, the greater the glory reflected on each of them.
Indoors the master sat in the place of honour in the sitting-room,
the right-hand chimney corner as one looked from the fireplace
towards the door. Though marked deference was usually shown to
old people, he never gave up this place to his aged father or elder
brother except in the districts of Shpat, Qermenike and Shale,
where age took precedence over social position. The other men
grouped themselves cross-legged in front of the fire, the future
master facing it squarely, older men flanking him, and younger men
sitting behind him. The youngest of all, who had to do such work
as shutting the door, bringing firewood, and carrying in supper,
sat next to the door; he was described as the serving man. When


the master entered, all rose to their feet and remained standing
until he was seated. If he was armed, one of them relieved him of
his rifle, hung it on a peg by the door, and turned to see if he
wanted to keep his side-arms or to have them hung up beside the
rifle. As soon as he settled down he made himself a cup of coffee,
rolled and lit a cigarette, and perhaps pulled a small bottle of raw
spirit ( raki ) from his pocket. If in a gracious mood, he might make
a cup of coffee for the older men and the master designate and let
them smoke or even suck at his raki bottle, but if he wished he
might lawfully reserve these joys for himself. In any event the
younger men might neither drink nor smoke in his presence,
though they could do both elsewhere. If he chose to make
conversation, the others must follow his lead; if he preferred to
remain silent, they could not speak—like good children they must
remain seen but not heard. When supper came, no one might put
his spoon into the common dish until he had done so. When the
time came to leave the room, he led the way as he did when walking
through the fields. In the house this indicated his pre-eminence;
in the fields it was also a security measure. The others strung out
behind him at specified intervals, on the assumption that he could
deal himself with a frontal attack but needed to have his back
protected by friends.
Given his duties, rights and privileges, the master soon acquired
an air of command, whereas his subordinates, condemned for ever
to show no initiative, shrank progressively into complete nonentities
as their youthful qualities atrophied for want of exercise. But the
master must not be tyrannical or unjust, spendthrift or careless of
the general weal, and above all he must show no favouritism. If
he developed such faults, the other men might lawfully depose him
and elect another in his stead. However, the care taken initially in
selecting him made such action extremely rare. A good master
preferred the spirit to the letter of the law. For example, he rarely
sold or bought any family possessions without first consulting his
subordinates. And he was always careful not to destroy his
subordinates’ feeling that the farm and everybody and everything
on it belonged to each of them individually as well as collectively,
that the welfare of each of them concerned the whole family, and
that the general welfare concerned each individual. 1
1 Thus a youth who obviously had nothing of his own was yet perfectly in
order when he stated that he had just bought a field or even a bride for his brother.


The master designate, who might be appointed ‘ bazaar-man ’ in
the master’s lifetime, sat in a place of some honour, and might be
given coffee and cigarettes while other men went without. Often,
too, he was deputed to make the coffee and to lead the conversation
with a guest. This was training for him and practice in family
manners for his future subordinates. When the master was not
present, all the duties and privileges of headship were his. During
wedding celebrations no one might join a ring dance, however much
he wished to do so, unless commanded by the master or in his
absence by the master designate.
There is little to add to what has already been said about the
subordinate men in a communal household. Each was head of his
own particular family, with full powers to chastise both wife and
children, though not to direct their lives and work —that was the
master’s business. An older man was further regarded as a father
by his juniors. This principle was carried so far in Mirdite, though
not elsewhere, that he might lawfully reprimand and even beat
a junior’s wife and children. The junior could not retaliate in kind,
for the law holds it criminal to strike a ‘father’s’ wife. In other
respects it was a subordinate’s whole duty to obey the master.
As for the women in a communal household, the master governed
them through the housekeeper: under her official style of mistress
of the house she transmitted his orders to the other women or gave
them her own and supervised their indoor work. When they were
working outside, the master or a man deputizing for him must
oversee them, for a mistress worked only in the house and farm-
yard. She was appointed by the master and was not necessarily his
wife. Like him, she must rule justly, moderately, and impartially,
taking special pains to avoid favouring her own children, and if his
wife did not possess these qualities, he passed her over and chose
another. In no case did a mistress have as much authority as the
master; she had none at all outside her own departments, and in
these must at all times work under his orders. Nor might she buy,
sell or barter so much as an egg on her own responsibility. Her
tenure of office was also much shorter. Since strong young women
must do farm work, she was seldom appointed until nearing forty,
and since her duties were manifold and heavy, especially in summer
owing to the absence of the other women, she was superseded about
fifty when her physical strength began to wane. Her only privilege,
but one for which she was much envied by the other women, was


to work indoors. Her clothes were no better than theirs; indeed, if
she had dairy work to do, they were usually dirtier. If she was
unjust and ill-tempered, pilfered or sold family property, or
fomented rather than composed the quarrels that were endemic
among the other women, the men assembled in general meeting
and deposed her. 1
It only remains to describe a small domain with which the
master had nothing to do. In astonishing contrast to the penniless
men, all the women had their own money and controlled it
absolutely. Called pekul , from Lat. peculium, and essentially pin-
money, they spent it on kerchiefs, gewgaws, and even clothes and
shoes. Each received the first of it on the morning after her
marriage, when her men relatives filed past her in farewell and
dropped money into a plate for her. Afterwards her father or
brother might slip a coin or two into her hand when he visited her.
In the tribal districts of the north her father also gave her on her
marriage as much as half of the money which her husband had
paid him for her. Later on she might occasionally earn a few pence
by knitting socks in her odd moments or making the rough home-
spun trousers worn by peasants. Debarred by law and custom
from taking the finished articles to market herself, she gave them to
her father or brother to sell, but never to her husband or grown-up
son, for they would not let her even see the money. If near
a market-town, she might gather walnuts or hazel-nuts in the
woods and send these to market. In tobacco-growing areas she
normally got the coarse bottom leaves of the plants, to smoke or to
sell as she pleased. If she had none of these resources, she could
only steal maize, eggs, wool or cheese from her husband’s house
and send a child to the shop to barter them for what she wished to
have; she was bound to pay in kind or money, for the law forbade
her to pledge either her husband’s or her father’s credit. On these
occasions neither her father nor her brother would act as her agent,
for if such connivance in her pilfering were discovered, they would
be in serious trouble with her husband’s family. If she chose to
keep her pekul idle, she might safely lock it up in her dowry-chest
in her room; her husband never seemed to make her give it up and
no others might enter their room. Generally, however, she made
the money fructify. In southern areas like Qermenike she lent it
at the usual rate of interest, which was 30 % (enough to compensate
1 The author never heard, however, of this being done.


lenders for the want of security), and in the less-developed north
she invested it in sheep, plough-oxen, or even horses which she
hired out on the ‘ half-and-half’ system. Before a woman died, she
gave a little of her pekul to her daughters and the major part to
her sons, but nothing to her husband, so making a last comment
on the curiously detached relationship between them during their
married life.
Except in the towns, no Albanian woman ever went into
domestic service. Each worked as a girl in her father’s house and
then in her husband’s and, though never paid any money, was
assured for life of whatever board, lodging and clothes these could
provide. This applied even to families of the standing of Cen Elezi
in Diber. Consequently the Unwritten Law took no cognizance of
female servants. On the other hand, men servants —mainly farm
workers or herdsmen —were numerous enough to have been care-
fully legislated for.
Though such a servant ate out of the same dish as his master and
slept in the sitting-room or elsewhere in the same conditions as the
young unmarried men of the family, he had always to take a back
seat —in the literal sense near the door and far from the fire; and,
in the metaphorical sense, effacing himself. This befitted both his
youth and his status. For his status was like that of a woman. ‘lt
is for the master to command and for the servant to obey’, said
the Unwritten Law. If he were a shepherd, his views on the beasts
under his care commanded his master’s respect, but other servants
were required to keep their opinions to themselves. In areas such
as Martanesh where women could not be killed in a blood feud,
a servant was as safe as they were from his master’s enemies. ‘ Kill
a servant? Faugh! As well kill a woman’, was the sentiment.
There was, however, another aspect to his position: since he
came from another family in his master’s village or from another
village altogether, he was not a member of his master’s household
but was its guest. As such he was entitled to protection by his
master against all hurt from third parties. If he were hit, the
offender must pay twice, compensating him for the personal injury
of the blow and his master for the affront to his guest. If he were
robbed, his master latterly complained to the police, but in the old
days would have shot the robber out of hand in the north, but in
Martanesh and farther south, not until he saw that the servant
himself was too weak to resent the injury as honour demanded. If


a servant were killed, a modern master again told the police, but
nevertheless both he and the servant’s family considered themselves
at feud with the murderer, the former to avenge the death of his
guest and the latter to avenge the death of their relative; more often
than not, the master made it ‘tit for tat’ by killing the murderer’s
servant. In former times a servant was most commonly killed
because he was mixed up in a blood feud of his own. In that event
his master went to see his enemy and warned him that the man was
now in his service and, consequently, under his protection. If his
enemy disregarded the warning, his master never rested until he
had avenged the servant.
Again in the old days, vengeance took a fiercer turn when the
servant was from a different community. He was then counted as
a stranger, and the guest of his master’s tribe or village, as well as
of his master himself. If he were killed by one of this community,
the others rose as one man, burned down the murderer’s house and
destroyed all his goods. The modern Albanian government has
repressed this custom, but the servant’s master and family still try
to shoot the murderer.
The same public vengeance used to await the murderer of
a local servant who was working for a stranger to the tribe or village.
But in such a case it was the injury to its stranger guest which the
community wished to avenge; in itself the death of the servant was
a matter for private vengeance by his family. In aggravated cases,
as when the murdered servant as well as his master was a stranger,
the community might order the execution of the murderer by
a firing squad. This was done in 1944 in the village of Dukat, in
south-west Albania.
No Albanian ever stooped to become a servant except from dire
necessity. Most commonly he wanted to marry, and having no
spare cash, must earn enough to pay for his bride. He was usually
engaged on St George’s or St Demetrius’s day in the Old Style
calendar, and so on 6 May and 8 November in ours, dates which
correspond roughly to the beginning and end of the dry season.
His engagement was for six months or, more often, a year. His
wages and his work depended on the bargain he made with his
master before being hired. In the 1930’s his wages, including food
only, ranged according to his quality from one napoleon (16s. at
par) to half a napoleon a month, payable monthly. In late Turkish
times, when clothes as well as food were given, the rates were from


500 to 50 grosh (‘piastres’) a year, payable in two instalments, the
first after six months’ service and the second at the end of his term.
According to a list from Shkrel where wages were still on an
‘ all-found ’ basis, a servant must be given a complete set of clothes
—a shirt, drawers, cloth cap, scarf, cow-hide sandals, socks,
trousers and sleeveless jacket. He got sandals as often as he needed
a new pair, and a set of the other things three times a year: when
first engaged, at the end of three months, and during his last month.
On leaving he was given three okes of wool, which his female
relatives could work up for him.
Disputes hardly ever arose over the servant’s food or clothes, but
were common about his work. As an Albanian of Koplik said
picturesquely, ‘Before a man is hired he talks like an angel, and
then turns out a devil’, so that ‘half the men who lie in cemeteries
have died of worry over servants’. The same speaker told a lively
folk-tale of a master who was delighted to get a servant cheap and
then found him come very dear indeed. Every time he asked him
to do something, the man said it had not been mentioned in their
bargain and he could not do it unless he got a rise in wages. Little
attempt to get ‘references’ seems to have been made, perhaps
because in the old days a would-be servant would have shot the
giver of an adverse ‘ character ’ for slandering him. There was also
a feeling that a servant’s engagement was too temporary to take
seriously. Once when the author inquired uneasily about a servant
she had been urged to hire, an old mountaineer replied, ‘What
does it matter? you’re not going to marry him’.
‘Any gains made or any damage done by a servant are his
master’s’, said the law. If, for instance, a servant somehow gained
a horse, he could not send it to his own family, but must give it to
his master. On the loss side of the ledger, if a servant uninten-
tionally damaged a neighbour’s property, say, by killing his horse,
it was not he but his master who must make restitution, and his
master could not keep back any of his wages for that purpose.
Fining a servant was absolutely forbidden.
The relations of master and man with each other and with the
outside world were regulated in detail by the Unwritten Law,
using the servant’s wages as its chief instrument. Thus if the two
parted prematurely, the master being to blame, he must pay the
servant his full wages for the year. When the servant was to blame,
he had no right to more than the money for which he had so far


worked, and must forfeit the rest. To us the pound or two involved
seems too insignificant to matter to either, but to most Albanians
it was an important sum. In the event, for example, of the master’s
moving from one district to another, he might not dismiss the
servant unless he gave him a full year’s wages. If, however, he
asked the servant to go with him and the servant refused, he must
let him go but need give him no more than what he had so far
earned. In the same spirit the law forbade the master to dismiss
the servant for a frivolous reason, such as not liking him, and
forbade the servant to run away for a frivolous reason, such as
boredom. If the master disregarded this law, he must pay the
servant a full year’s wages, and if the servant disregarded it, he must
be content with the wages he had earned to date. By exception, in
Krasniqe, in north-east Albania, the master sought out his runaway
servant, and after making him find a man to guarantee his future
behaviour, brought him back to stay out his time.
If the master had good grounds for dismissing the servant, he
must warn and forgive him twice. If the warnings went unheeded,
the master said the elders must now judge between them. The
servant then went and told his story to the chief elder—the
bajraktar in tribal areas —who next asked the master what he had
to say. Thus in possession of both sides of the story, the elders sat
on the case and pronounced judgement; this turned generally on
what money was to be paid to the servant.
If the servant were lazy, an all too common occurrence, or
otherwise unsatisfactory, without being criminal, the Unwritten
Law allowed his master to reprimand him reasonably and bade
the servant swallow the reprimand. But the master must not use
foul language or hit the man. For his motive might be to force him
to leave before his time, apparently of his own volition, and so
deprive himself of his full wages. If the master transgressed this
law, the servant had leave to appeal to the elders, not only for
payment of his wages in full, but also for compensation for the
injury of being hit or violently abused.
The more serious crimes with which a servant might be charged
included theft, murder and seducing a girl or young wife in his
master’s family. In the case of theft the issue depended largely on
whether the servant stole from his master, in his master’s village,
or in another community. If he were caught red-handed robbing
his master or subsequently admitted doing so, he was immediately


dismissed with only the wages due until then. Since it was in
a sense his own house and his own father that he had robbed, he
could not be given a second chance; he was too obviously devoid
of ordinary decency to be trusted again. And since the law forbade
his master to strike him, he could not be beaten, as a thievish
woman might be, till he reformed.
Dismissal did not end his story. He had to pay the statutory fine
for housebreaking and to bring his late master two of everything
he had stolen. If he had no money for the fine, he had to find
a surety for the amount and then go and earn it elsewhere. After
European legal codes were introduced at the end of the 1920’5,
these unwritten laws lost much of their force, and it was rather by
threatening to get the thief sent to prison that an injured master
obtained restitution.
In less sophisticated days a servant who was only suspected of
robbing his master could be tried by the ordeal of the oath. If this
proved him innocent, his master had to pay him six qese (‘purses’)
for unjustly accusing him, besides a full year’s wages and clothes.
If it was later found that he had perjured himself, the elders fined
him twenty-four qese, of which half went to the church (or mosque)
and half to the tribe; he had also to return to his master the six qese
and the unearned wages and clothes which he had won from him
by perjury. It sometimes transpired, however, that the informant
who had disclosed his perjury had lied himself. Then the elders
once more declared the servant innocent, ordered the church and
tribe to return his twenty-four qese , and the informant to pay him
a year’s wages and clothes besides six qese for the false accusation.
If a servant stole in his master’s village or another community,
punishment depended on who had instigated the crime. If his
master had done so, he and not the servant was in fault, and it was
for him to make reparation to the victim. He must also dismiss the
servant forthwith as a public nuisance; but since the man was only
his tool, he must pay him a full year’s wages. If, on the other hand,
a servant stole on his own initiative, the fault was his and it was for
him alone to make restitution. In addition, he might be legally
dismissed with no more than the wages he had earned.
Much the same laws applied when a servant committed a murder.
If he did so at his master’s instigation, both were punished. He
must be dismissed, but his master must pay him a full year’s wages.
The resultant blood feud was primarily his concern, but if he


escaped from the district, his master might lawfully be shot in his
stead. When, however, a servant murdered on his own respon-
sibility, he alone should suffer for the crime. His master was
entitled, in dismissing him, to keep back the portion of his wages
for which he had not worked, and according to Lek’s Kanun ought
not to be shot in his stead. Skanderbeg’s law, however, held him
as liable in this case as in the former.
The only available information about a servant’s seducing a girl
or young wife in his master’s family comes from Martanesh and
Shkrel and dates from past times. In Martanesh the law con-
demned the man to death for incest because his master was his
‘ father ’ and the young woman his ‘ sister ’. In Shkrel he was killed
at once if he had sinned with a young wife, but if with a girl he was
dismissed with orders to hold his tongue, and only if he talked did
the girl’s father go and shoot him. As for the girl, she was married
to her fiance as quickly as possible. He was not told that she was
pregnant by another man, and would not have cared if he had been.
He wanted her as wife and worker and felt sure that he was man
enough to keep her straight after marriage; beatings always worked
wonders. The child was sent to the servant as soon as born; he
never acknowledged it but either killed it or exposed it by the
wayside. The father did not dare to beat the girl in case she ran
away to the servant; at all costs he had to keep her for her fiance,
who had presumably paid a good proportion of her bride-price and
would have killed him had he failed to deliver her. Presumably the
fact that a servant was held to be of little or no account saved the
wife or girl from the usual punishment for adultery. 1
Sometimes, despite their being ‘brother’ and ‘sister’, a servant
married his master’s daughter. Thus an ancestor of Bicaj was
a Catholic of Gjugje in Mirdite who entered the service of Hysen
Age Shteki of Bicaj, turned Moslem, and married Hysen Age’s
daughter. Even in modern times a servant may be given his master’s
daughter in marriage. This is particularly likely to happen if his
master is Moslem and he a Christian who agrees to change his
religion. His master then looks on his own consent to the marriage
as an act of piety. Servants varied in importance according to the
master they served. Thus the servant of a Moslem priest ( hoxhe)
had more power than an ordinary peasant’s and less than a bajraktar’s
—at least in the days before most bajraktars were shorn of their
1 See Chapter XXI,


power by modern governments. The value of the difference to the
servant was that the more important his master, the better he
himself was protected.
It is the rule in all denominations that priests may not carry
arms. This is no drawback to anybody under a modern administra-
tion, but in Turkish times it meant that a priest’s servant was more
exposed to danger than an armed layman’s. The Catholic church
tried to make up for the deficiency by special legislation of which
Father Gjefov gives a full account. Thus, though a priest’s servant
had a certain freedom to attend to his own business, any message
he carried to a house was treated as coming from the priest.
Whoever molested him molested the priest, and might be fined
according to the gravity of the offence but not less than ten lambs,
which went, not to the servant, but to the church and tribe.
Whoever killed the servant started a feud with his family only, if the
servant were local, but with the whole parish if he were a stranger —
here can be recognized the principle of the community’s guest —
and if the murderer was local, the parish burned his house and took
a hundred lambs and an ox from him as fine. If labourers hired by
the church were molested, the offender had to pay a fine, divisible
between them and the church; the more numerous they were, the
heavier the fine; on an average this amounted to ten lambs. If an
offender refused to pay, the parish went in a body and took what
it wanted from his sheepfold. In short, the church treated any
wrong to a defenceless priest’s servant as a major crime.
The retainers of great men were essentially a bodyguard, and
were only maintained by men with blood feuds. Some lived at
home and joined their patron for some special, and usually brief,
occasion; others lived for long periods with him, constantly ready
for whatever service he might ask. They occasionally received a gold
piece as reward; more often they were paid in kind —by being lent
money without interest for a funeral or a wedding feast, by being
given grain in bad years, by having a useful word said in the ear of
the authorities to extract them from some difficulty. While his own
children were small, the Hereditary Captain of Mirdite had eight
young relatives living permanently with him, brief holidays at
home excepted. They waited at meals or carried messages to the
servants with the lofty air of medieval pages of noble blood. Until
exiled during the war of 1939-45, Shevqet Verlaci, the formidable
Bey of Elbasan, was guarded night and day by relays of peasants
4 HAM


from his own farms, who spent weeks at a time with him. During
the same period every notable from Diber who visited Tirana
called at least six peasant neighbours to come and escort him there
and back. If his stay in the capital were short, they saw him safely
home; if long, they were relieved by others at intervals. Needless
to say, all retainers were crack shots.
Finally, the protected might also be the protector. In the 1930’s
Hamit Callaku, an influential notable of Fulqet, had a notorious
murderer from £ermenike living with him for nothing except the
assurance that so long as he kept Hamit’s enemies at a distance the
former would prevent the authorities from arresting him.


CHAPTER VI
THE SEPARATION OF BROTHERS
In spite of the modernization which Albanian laws had undergone
since 1912, brothers still separated according to the laws they had
learned from their fathers. The only change introduced by the
civil code adapted from the Swiss models was that economic
provision must now be made for the daughters of the family, who
had formerly been given only a nominal sum when their father’s
home was broken up.
There were several reasons for breaking up an old home. When
a communal household was already full of men, each with his wife
and children, it could no longer spare a room for each boy as he
grew up and married. Some of the men must hive off, although
many disliked the idea of separating from their brothers. As the
Albanian proverb says, ‘When the hive is full the bees must
swarm’.
Quarrelling was another cause of separation. Often the brothers
themselves quarrelled, the younger resenting the elder’s control of
his person and of the family purse, or ‘the devil entering both
their hearts’ they quarrelled about nothing. In the latter case
climate might play a role. Theth, for example, lay so high that the
peasants were confined to their houses for several months each
winter. Then brother got on brother’s nerves, high words were
spoken and the younger demanded a separation or the elder
threatened to expel him. When the milder weather came to release
them from confinement, their tempers cooled, but each was too
proud to retract the word he had spoken in haste. A financial cause
operated in villages near towns, such as Godolesh and Shijan near
Elbasan. With the bazaar at hand each brother wanted to control
the purse, which he could not do unless he had a separate establish-
ment. Often too brothers must separate because their wives
quarrelled. The companionship enforced by communal life
naturally bore harder on the women who lacked the blood tie and
similarity of upbringing that might neutralize clashes of tempera-
ment among the men. Occasionally brothers separated while their
father was still alive. If this was their own wish they lost face and
4-2


were publicly mocked as ‘low-class fellows’. Sometimes they had
no choice, being so disobedient and unruly that their father
compelled them to leave his house. Or they got on so badly with
each other that he feared there would be murder done.
Three factors militated against separation. There was the sense
of family which was so strong that four or five generations,
numbering twenty souls or more, might live under one roof.
Secondly, it was economically to the advantage of each man that
the household should remain together. In a large household all
branches of the pastoral and agricultural life were possible, but in
a small one activities must be restricted; one and the same person
could not tend cows and oxen, ewes and lambs. With good reason
the proverb says ‘Separation ruins a family’. In the bad old days
too, it was strategically good for brothers to stick together; the
more guns in a house the stronger it was.
When separation had been decided on, the family possessions
were divided equally without any regard for primogeniture.
Everything that could be eaten or drunk—dairy produce, grain,
haricot beans, eggs, honey, raki —was considered food and divided
equally among the mouths to be fed, and everything else—land,
livestock, farm implements, house, household utensils—was con-
sidered property and divided equally between the brothers.
The law of food, as expanded, laid down that every living soul
in the house on the day of separation, male and female, sick and
well, greybeard and infant drawing its first breath, should receive
the same share of food. Supposing one of the two brothers had
besides his wife ten children, and the other two, the first received
twelve portions of food and the second four. Then the age clause
was variously interpreted. In Diber even a child still in the womb
was allotted a full portion, but elsewhere one born so little as an
hour after the conclusion of the separation received nothing and the
prospective father naturally tried to protect himself against this loss
by delaying the separation, if possible, until the child had been
born. In Lume and Mirdite a child less than a year old was not
given food, the idea being that its mother’s milk would suffice for
it throughout the coming year —partly to avoid conception
Albanian children were everywhere suckled until they were three
years of age. In other areas a new-born child received its quota on
the assumption that before a year was out it would ‘ eat a little, spill
a little and let the cat eat a little ’. Separation generally, though not


invariably, took place immediately after harvest when bins were
full and a year must pass before the fields again yielded a crop.
Although food supply was divided in most areas into equal
portions irrespective of total quantity, in the Malesi e Madhe each
person received three loads of maize, which was considered to be
enough food for a year. Any surplus was sold and the proceeds
divided among the brothers. In other areas a surplus rarely
existed, so the specification of quantity had never been made.
For the purposes of separation the term ‘grain’ included not
only maize and wheat but also everything that grew in a field or
garden, such as fruit and vegetables. Exceptionally, in Godolesh
both olives and butter were regarded as property and divided
equally, not among the number of souls, but among the brothers.
In Perlat raki and wine were divided equally among all who drank;
some of the men did not drink and some of the women did.
Sometimes a woman tried to secure a double share of drink for her
husband by alleging falsely that she herself drank. The attempt was
usually frustrated by the other women, who, not wishing to see
their husbands go shorter than they should, exposed her fraud. In
rare instances whefe drinking water was divided, it was treated
like food.
Property, said the law, was to be divided equally among the
brothers. This applied only to property inherited by the father; the
number of children belonging to each brother was not considered.
One of two might have seven children and the other three, but
each received exactly half the property. The only exception recorded
is in Martanesh, where a brother with many mouths to feed might
be given a little extra food on condition of accepting a little less
land. It followed that the brother with the large family was much
worse off initially, though eventually, as his children grew old
enough to work, he might catch up the other because he would
have more hands at work. No doubt it was this balance of initial
poverty against subsequent wealth that led the old law-givers to
enact this law of equal division of property among brothers. It was
also immaterial that one of the brothers had a grown son; the son
counted in the division of food but not in that of property.
A dead brother was ignored when the food was divided, but if
he had left a son, his rights to an equal share of the property
remained intact. It descended to his son, who, irrespective of his
age, ranked on separation day as his father’s representative and the


equal of each of his father’s brothers. Supposing the dead man had
been one of four brothers, the three survivors and his orphan son
each received one-quarter of the property. If he had left two sons,
these became joint owners of his quarter share. Even if all the
brothers in a communal household died before it split up, the
principle of division was the same. Suppose they were three, and
the eldest had ten male descendants, the second five and the third
one, the property was divided into three equal parts, one for each
of them, regardless of the disparity in the number of their
descendants.
Division of food was relatively simple, a matter of arithmetic—
so many souls, so many portions. The process of division of
property was much more complicated, a thing of exact measure-
ments and difficult calculations. As a first step the land was
measured with a rope and divided into as many equal parts as
there were brothers. Occasionally it was measured by pacing, the
man who paced clasping his hands behind his back to steady
himself and so to keep his paces equal.
When the quality of the land was uniform there was no difficulty
about the actual partition by these methods. But it might happen
that one field or one part of a field was better than another. Good
and bad must nevertheless be shared alike by the brothers. To
make this possible, what may be called the system of ‘offset or
compensation ’ came into play. Most commonly a smaller field or
a smaller portion of the same field was given to the brother who
got the better land, and a larger field or larger portion of the same
field to the one who got the worse. The basis of calculation was the
average yield of the land, this being common knowledge in the
district. Size was thus offset against quality. Less often the
portions were valued and the brother who got the better one paid
compensation to the other; the latter was theoretically supposed to
spend the money on buying himself a piece of land somewhere else.
The term ‘land’ included arable land, vineyards, vegetable
gardens, orchards, hay meadows and enclosed lowland pastures, all
of which must be divided up when the brothers separated. It did
not include mountain pastures or woods and forest for firewood,
fodder and timber. These remained undivided, common property
for the common use of the brothers. It was rare, however, to find
a joint household owning mountain pastures and forests, for these
were generally held in common by a whole ward or even a whole


village. In Qermenike all the brothers were allowed to graze their
sheep after harvest on a divided arable field as they did when it was
whole and they were together; it was immaterial that one had
a bigger flock than the other. At least it was immaterial in theory,
but in practice they sometimes quarrelled over the grazing. Then
each must set a shepherd on his own boundary to watch over his
interests. Presumably the impossibility of providing shepherds
enough to guard the wide boundaries of forests and mountain
pastures has prevented these pieces of property from being
divided up.
Two curiosities of land division are to be noted: if an arable
field was very narrow, it must be divided short-ways, for if divided
long-ways, the plough-oxen might not have room to turn when
ploughing; sometimes, too, three brothers who were separating
amicably might wish to have each of their father’s fields divided
in three rather than each receive one field apiece. A day might
come when one of them might wish to sell his land, then there
would be more inducement to keep it in the family if it immediately
adjoined another brother’s holding. They also wished, they said,
to perpetuate the memory of their joint ownership of all the fields,
and when one field was some way from another and in different
hands, it was less easy to realize that once the same family had
owned them all. If possible they would like to keep up their
brotherly ties for a hundred years or more.
The division of the joint home was generally much more com-
plicated. Supposing there were two brothers in a house consisting
of only a sitting-room and a kitchen. By the partition method one
was given the sitting-room and the other the kitchen. Since the
sitting-room was manifestly superior it was valued together with
the kitchen. The values were added, then divided into two, and the
difference between half the total and the value of the kitchen was
paid to the less lucky brother. The payment made, it was held that
the old home had been equally divided between the brothers.
Sometimes instead of money the offset system was used, a better
portion of land being given to the brother who had received the
worse part of the house. For this purpose the land as well as the
house was valued, and if the former’s total value was 26 napoleons,
14 napoleons’ worth would go to the brother with the kitchen worth
6 and 12 napoleons’ worth to the brother with the sitting-room
worth 8, so giving each 20 napoleons’ worth of property.


Alternatively, both sitting-room and kitchen were measured
with a rope and divided into two. A partition wall of lath and
plaster or, more probably, of lath and mud was then run up in
both. This left half of each with the old door and, where it existed,
the old staircase, while the other two halves had neither door nor
staircase; a new door and, if required, a new staircase, were built
for these, generally on the opposite side of the house. Each brother
then took possession of his new home, a small poor place but his
own with its own egress to the outside world.
In the Mohammedan villages near Elbasan there were regula-
tions about windows which aimed, like the building laws, at
protecting women from prying eyes. In Godolesh the brother
getting the upper room in a two-storeyed house was told to blind
the windows overlooking the yard if his brother’s kitchen, as was
probable, opened on to this; otherwise his brother’s womenfolk
would not have full freedom to move about the yard. The brother
getting the middle storey in a three-storeyed house was given similar
instructions, but the brother with the topmost floor might leave
all his windows open as they were too high to overlook the yard.
In Labinot all windows overlooking another’s property must,
irrespective of their height, be blinded. Such regulations were not
enforced in Christian villages.
When the old house had two rooms as well as a kitchen the
division was less complicated. To begin with, one room was
assigned to each brother. If one was bigger than the other they
were both valued and due compensation paid to the brother with
the smaller one. As for the kitchen, either it was divided in two or
it was given to one brother and its estimated value paid to the other
so that he could build a new kitchen for himself on his own land.
Continuing to live under the same roof imposed certain mutual
obligations on the brothers. If the flimsy partition wall or the roof
needed repairs, both must share the expense in equal proportions.
If one could not or would not pay his quota the other was entitled
to repair only his own section of the roof, leaving his brother’s to
the ravages of the weather; or he might try to extract the money
from his brother by force; until lately, he might even shoot him
in truculent Lume. As for the partition wall, he probably repaired
it at his own expense for the sake of his personal privacy.
To avoid such quarrels and to secure more houseroom the
buying out method of dividing the old home was preferred. The


building itself was allotted to one of the brothers, almost every-
where the youngest, who became its sole owner and master. But
he must pay each of his brothers a proportionate share of its value,
half if he had only one brother, a third if he had two and so on.
Sometimes two brothers who had decided to divide the old house
with a partition wall, according to the first method of division,
quarrelled irreconcilably about the position of this wall. Then they
might switch over to the second method, one buying out the other.
If they could not afford to do this, one might legally pull down his
own section of the house, take away the timber and stones, and
build himself a new house on his own land.
Sometimes four brothers separated two by two, one pair
remaining in the old home and the other going out. In that case
the former paid between them half the assessed value of the house
to the outgoing pair. Sometimes the four separated one by one,
two remaining in the old home as before and two going out. In
this case the old home was divided by a partition into two portions,
one for each of the two brothers remaining in it and one-quarter of
its value was taken from each of them and given to each outgoing
brother.
In Diber and Perlat, possibly elsewhere, the outgoing brothers
received an extra portion of land as a site for the house they must
build. In Perlat a distinction was made between irrigable and
non-irrigable land. The extra portion given in the case of the latter,
which was nearly worthless, might amount to as much as 120 pashe.
Almost everywhere the old home was valued as it stood, but
a system not recorded elsewhere prevailed in Perlat. This took no
account of the timber, stones and mud (for mortar) which went to
the building of the house because these cost nothing but labour,
and the labour had been provided as a joint enterprise by the family
when still united. (But the brothers, remembering what the mason
who built the house had been paid, divided that sum equally
between themselves; it was generally no more than 6or 7 napoleons.)
As usual, the brother allotted the house paid cash to his outgoing
brothers. The drawback to this system was that it did not provide
for fluctuations in the value of money.
The old house was generally given to the youngest because he
was thought too young to be able to build one for himself. ‘The
man who has not built himself a house or celebrated his daughter’s
wedding does not know what trouble is’, runs the proverb. The


older brothers had had time to acquire friends and could make
their own way in the world, but the baby of the family knew nothing
about anything except his father’s house.
After the land and the house had been divided, the boundaries
between the holdings were demarcated. The house, it should be
said, included land round it and also any cattle or sheepfolds.
When the land was under water, irrigation channels were marked
out at the same time as the boundaries. Where the father had
possessed one field with an irrigation channel running down its
whole length, his sons tapped this channel without difficulty, each
digging a small transverse channel from it on his own portion of
the field. Where the stream was farther off the brothers jointly dug
a channel to the point where their land met, after which each made
a separate channel through his own ground; by preference each
took this down his own side of the little path between his field and
his brother’s. When the water came from above a field so narrow
that it must be divided short-ways, the brother getting the lower
half was entitled to dig an irrigation channel down the side of his
brother’s land. But the area it occupied must be measured and an
equivalent amount of land subtracted from his holding and added
to his brother’s. It was, of course, always stream irrigation that
was in question.
The period for which each brother might irrigate was also
settled when they separated. This was usually a matter of simple
arithmetic. If, for example, the father had had the right to irrigate
for two days, each of the two brothers was given the right for one
day and each of three brothers for sixteen hours. In Mirdite, where
few streams could be utilized, irrigation water was divided by the
oke; unfortunately there is no information available as to how this
was done.
Drinking water was seldom regulated; ‘God has given it’ and
almost everywhere in excess. There was so little in some villages
near Shkoder, however, that it was divided by the jugful, at least
during the dry season. When brothers separated in these villages
their portion of drinking water was decided. Division was as with
food, by heads, so many jugfuls per person.
Milling rights varied from district to district. Where they were
by hours or days each brother’s quota was settled on the day of
separation. It was again arithmetical, each of two brothers getting
half the father’s period and each of three getting one-third.


Generally one took over the others’ periods and compensated them
with an agreed quantity of maize per year.
In dividing the livestock the system of ‘ offset or compensation ’
was much used; four horses could not otherwise be divided equally
between five brothers. By this system four of these brothers each
took a horse and together subscribed the value of one for the fifth.
Or this brother might be given another animal, such as a cow, plus
the difference in money between its value and that of a horse. If
there were five horses to be divided among four brothers, one
received two horses and each of the others one horse and another
animal or animals of the same value as a horse, plus any money
compensation that might be necessary. In £ermenike a house-dog
was equated to a sheep and rules enunciated for its future service.
If the old home was partitioned between the brothers, it must
continue to guard this for their joint benefit. If they set up
separate houses, it went with the one to whom it had been allotted
and guarded only his house; the other must buy a dog for himself.
As for the brandings or other marks on animals, the father’s sign
was assigned to one brother and new ones devised by the others.
There were some exceptions to these rules. In Diber livestock was
divided equally among all the boys and men old enough to herd;
this is said to be Skanderbeg’s law. In Mirdite it was divided
equally among the guns in the house. In Qermenike if a brother
had a very small family the sheep might be divided equally among
the souls in the old home on the plea that a man with few hands
could not tend many sheep. Everywhere sheep-folds and cattle-
folds were divided, like the old home, equally among the brothers.
Fodder, including wheat and maize straw, hay and leaves of trees,
was divided on the same principles as the livestock, equally in
Mirdite among the guns, in Diber among the herds, and elsewhere
among the brothers.
As for poultry, custom varied. In Lume they were considered
property, not food, and so divided equally among the brothers.
In Qermenike they were regarded, somewhat uncertainly, as food,
and so divided according to the number of souls. In Mirdite the
mistress of the joint household divided the poultry as directed by
the person arranging the separation.
Farm implements included plough, sickles, saws, hatchets, hoes,
etc. If possible one article of each kind was given to each brother.
Otherwise an article was given to one and something else of equal


value or money compensation to the other. In the cases, frequent
enough, where each had had his own implements before the
separation, he took these with him to his new home.
Beehives too were divided on the offset or compensation system;
they were seldom enough to go round the brothers. Honey was
divided on a food basis, equally among old and young.
Household utensils such as spoons, milk cogs, churns, wash-tubs,
pots, saucepans and all wooden and earthenware vessels were also
divided equally among the brothers. After being taken out of the
house they were stacked in piles, one for each brother under the
direction of whoever divided the property. It was almost never
possible to find an article of the same type for each brother. So an
article was laid on one pile and the offset on the others. Less often,
an article of which there was only one was valued and a propor-
tionate share of its value paid by its new owner to his brothers.
There was never any furniture in the sense of tables, chairs and
bedsteads to divide. At most, there were reed mats and straw-
stuffed cushions in the sitting-room and some wooden stools in the
kitchen. The stools might be divided equally among the brothers;
the other things were generally treated as part of the house and left
where they were.
Certain articles in the house were not subject to division. These
included the portable oven, flour-bin, tongs, shovel and kitchen-
crook, which were the symbols of family life; and the mill, caddy,
pot and cups forming the coffee outfit, which was the symbol of
guest-friendship. The former remained in the kitchen and the
latter in the sitting-room, irrespective of whether these rooms had
been separated or left to one brother. Above all, it was unlucky to
move the kitchen-crook; it was almost as sacred as the fire on the
hearth on whose continuance depended the continuance of the
family. Very occasionally, however, it was allotted like the rest of
the property. Other articles were considered individual property
and excluded from division on that account. These included the
jack-knife, gun and revolver carried by each man (at least in the
not-so-distant past), the trousseaux brought by the married women
or being made by the girls, and the married women’s pocket-
money, wedding presents, possessions and livestock, or money lent
at interest. All these continued to be the sole property of their
owners. Bedding too was individual property, each brother’s
having been brought by his wife as part of her trousseau. If the


father was dead his bedding was divided in Mirdite equally among
the brothers; presumably it was so elsewhere. There was divergence
about his arms. In Mat and Mirdite, for instance, these were given
to the oldest brother but in neighbouring Perlat and Diber to the
youngest. In Perlat the mother’s jewellery also fell to the youngest.
With both the land and the house, it was only the father’s
property which was divided according to the number of brothers.
Any land bought after his death was divided according to the
number of adult men. All of these, it was considered, had
shepherded the family flocks or worked in the family fields, so
helping to amass the purchase price of the new land. Under this
rule, when one brother had two grown-up sons and one small son,
and the other brother had only two small sons, the small son of the
former and his little cousins received no land at all, but the two
grown-up sons received each one-quarter of the land bought
since their grandfather died. In Perlat a son taking a share of
bought land must be at least 20 years of age; in Mirdite he need
not be more than 15, the age at which he began to bear arms. In
Mat, if he herded sheep, he need be only ten.
So with the house: this went to the youngest brother only if
built or inherited by the father. If built by the brothers after his
death, it was retained by the eldest, who turned his juniors out,
paying each of them their proportionate share of its assessed value
or, in Perlat, the mason’s charges for building it.
A difference of mothers never affected the division of the
‘father’s property’. If the mother of the eldest of three brothers
had died or been divorced, he took his third just the same. If the
mother of the third brother were a concubine, he too took his
third. The inheritance came from the father, irrespective of the
mother. It was otherwise with a wife’s or a mother’s property.
This went to her son, to the exclusion of her step-son. A man who
built a house with his wife’s money might give his brothers house-
room until they separated, but they had no legal share in it; as
husband of the heiress, he was its sole owner, and when they
separated, did not pay them any part of its value. If his wife died
or was divorced and he married again, the house descended to the
first wife’s son, to the exclusion of the second wife’s. If the former
son separated from his half-brother, he paid him nothing for the
house; built with his mother’s money, not his step-mother’s, it was
his exclusive property. Such cases were rare, occurring only when


a woman was the sole survivor of her family and so inherited its
property.
It was on the principle of father’s property —or very much more
rarely mother’s—that big households containing several sets of
cousins split up. They went back to their common ancestor,
ascertained what property he had had, and divided that equally
among his sons. The descendants of each son then took their
portion and no more, regardless of their number. Supposing
a man had had three sons who in their turn had respectively five,
three and two sons. When these cousins separated the five sons of
the eldest brother received only one-third of their grandfather’s
property, no more and no less than the amount received by the
three sons of the second and the two sons of the third brother.
The question of the father’s property came up again when a man
died childless after separating from his brothers. For instance, if
four brothers all separated they divided the dead man’s property
equally as having been originally their father’s. If three were living
together apart from the fourth who had died childless, they took
his property back into the common fund, and when they separated
divided it equally with their other possessions. If one of the three
who lived together died childless, the two surviving took his
property back into the common fund and when they separated
divided it equally between themselves, but they did not give any to
the fourth brother because he had separated from them before the
death. Matters were usually complicated in Perlat and Mirdite
when four brothers had separated into two pairs. If one died
childless, any property which they had bought together was
retained by the survivor of his pair, but what he had inherited went
back into the stock of father’s property and was divided into three
portions, one for his survivor and two for the other pair. A rather
better portion of land was given to his survivor in Perlat but
apparently not in Mirdite.
Money a man had earned away from home—as government
official, gendarme, shopkeeper or servant —had to be sent home up
to the date of separation. Then it was counted family earnings and
put into the common purse on the plea that although he was away
working his brothers were toiling at home. If he kept any back for
some months before the expected separation, it was accounted
stealing, and if he was only suspected of doing so, he might be put
to the oath to clear himself. If livestock was bought with his money


that must be divided equally among all the brothers. If a house
was built with it, that again must be divided equally. The law laid
down ‘What is in the house on Separation day is part of it’.
On the same principle, any debts due by the family such as
government taxes or arrears of taxes were divided equally among
the brothers. Each had to discharge his share independently, the
others accepting and being given no responsibility for it. Any
payments due to the family, such as repayment of money borrowed,
were similarly divided between the brothers. Bride-price was in
a class by itself, being paid to the bride’s father, both while he still
lived with his brothers and afterwards as well.
In a very few areas special charges on the family property were
recognized. If, for instance, the youngest brother in Qermenike
did not yet have a gun, it was thought fair to give him money
out of the common purse with which to buy one. In Perlat before
the livestock was divided, two oxen and a few sheep were set aside
for the wedding feast of an unmarried brother. In Mirdite the
estimated cost of his wedding was paid to him, generally in kind,
as in Perlat. Elsewhere, so far as is known, no such allowances
were made.
Food and property of every description having been divided as
described, accounts were balanced. Each brother paid up what
money he had to pay and each received what money he had to
receive. This concluded the division in most cases. It will be
observed that no provision beyond 500 grosh was made for the
daughters of the family. This was probably thought unnecessary by
the old law-givers because a woman who had not reached extreme
old age or been otherwise disabled was no burden to anybody. Her
work, herding, spinning or even hoeing in the fields, was worth
more to both brother and husband than the cost of her keep. An
unmarried girl stayed with any of her brothers after their separa-
tion. She stood in the same relation to them all, it was thought,
and was no nearer to the one than to the other. The modern civil
code enacts, however, that a real and not a token provision shall be
made for each daughter.
It sometimes happened that the father was alive when the
brothers separated. If so, his welfare was provided for by the law.
If the separation took place with his blessing he went to live with
the son he liked and got on with best. This was almost invariably
the youngest, who was thought nearer to him than the others, and


if the youngest died, he went to the next youngest. Only one per
cent of fathers chose to live with another son, and then a woman
was generally to blame. If the youngest was unmarried or had
a disagreeable wife who did not give much promise of looking
after a troublesome old father-in-law, he went to a son with
a kinder wife.
Since it was understood that he would live with his youngest son
and that this son would have his house, he continued to live in his
old familiar quarters. One room was allotted for his special use,
but it frequently served as the general sitting-room as well because
he only required one corner to sit in by day and to sleep in at night.
For his support he might either keep one-eighth of his land in his
own hands or arrange to be fed by his sons, either jointly or in turn.
In the former case the son he lived with worked his bit of land, fed
him with its produce, and eventually buried him. In consideration
of the latter expense this son was allowed to keep his land and his
room, though it meant getting a larger portion than his brothers.
Sometimes the others contributed a little towards the old man’s
keep and the expenses of his funeral. In that case they had a claim
at his death to an equal share of his fraction of land and his room,
payable in money.
When all his sons contracted to feed him in turn, he probably
continued to live with the son with whom he was happiest, and
month by month asked each of the others in turn for money with
which to buy food. If they contracted to feed him jointly, each sent
him an agreed quantity of food and clothing per year. In Mirdite
this was fixed at 6 loads of maize, 3 pairs of sandals, 25 okes of salt
and 2 bushels of haricot beans. Under this arrangement there was
no eighth of land to be divided on his death. His room was kept
by the son with whom he had lived, but this son must pay a propor-
tionate share of its value to his brothers.
On Separation day after a room and an eighth of land had been
set aside for the father, the division of his property, both inherited
and bought, proceeded as if he no longer existed, but he retained
any title-deeds to all his former land which he might hold. His
eighth was never enough to feed him, and the youngest son might
become too impoverished to make up the deficiency, in which case
his only resource was to pay lengthy visits to his other sons. With
the title-deeds in his hands he was sure of his welcome; without
them he might not be. So, too, if his sons had contracted to feed


him, possession of the title-deeds made it more certain that they
would fulfil the contract. On his death the deeds passed to his sons.
These were the general rules for his maintenance, but there were
a few variants. In Qermenike a man who had managed to buy
a large amount of land during his working years had the right to
keep this back when his sons separated and to leave it all to the son
with whom he lived, to the exclusion of the others. More often
than not, he allowed it to be divided up with the land he inherited.
Sometimes he was still able to earn a little. In Lume his sons
treated his earnings as family property, taking the cost of his
funeral out of them and dividing up the rest. In Qermenike the
son he lived with paid the whole cost of his funeral and kept all his
earnings. In Mat, a relatively fertile district, a yoke of land was set
aside for him. On his death his richest son paid for his funeral and
took his piece of land in exchange. In Perlat an ox was set aside
on Separation day for the public meal at his funeral; it was kept
and worked till required by the son with whom he lived; its work
was supposed to compensate this son for the other expenses of the
funeral. In all areas the father’s portion of land was often given by
richer families to the poor or, among the Catholics, to the church.
A father had in the last resort the right to banish a son from his
house, or a son might insist on hiving off against his father’s wish.
In either case he need not give him a portion, but when he died the
son would take his proportionate share of the food and property,
exactly as if he had never been expelled. A son who separated from
his father in these conditions must restrict himself to any land his
father might have given him and must refrain from interfering
with the rest of the land or other property. The consequences of
a premature division of property may be seen in the following
story from Perlat. Two men made such scenes about their father’s
remarriage that he bade them leave his house. Of a just, or simple,
disposition, he divided his property into three, keeping one-third
for himself and giving one apiece to his sons. Afterwards he had
two more sons by his second wife, then found he could not leave
them more than his own portion of property, for land once divided
cannot be taken back, says the law. So each of the two sons he
loved best received only one-sixth, and each of the two sons he had
come to dislike one-third, of his original property. An interesting
variation of the above law is found in Kurbin. If a father gave
a rebellious son a portion, he gave it only out of the land and
5 HAM


livestock which he had bought since the son’s birth; it was half or
a third or a quarter according to the number of his sons. He kept
the rest of his property, and this passed on his death to the son or
sons with whom he continued to live, the expelled son getting
nothing. If, however, he had built his house since this son’s birth,
it fell on his death to the son he lived with, but this son must pay
the expelled son the usual proportionate share of its value.
When there was an old mother she, like the father, usually went
to live with the son she loved best; in 99 cases out of 100 this was
the youngest. The problem of her support was not so difficult as
that of an old father. The relationship between the sons and their
mother was so close that few quarrelled with her and refused her
food and shelter. If ‘wicked’ enough to do so, the whole of their
world cried shame and the old lady herself might react. A native
of Shelcan in Shpat took his wife away and settled in Elbasan,
leaving his mother in the village. She wished openly that he were
dead. More important still, a mother had economic value and was
seldom the useless encumbrance that most old fathers were. At
her weakest she had strength enough to rock the cradle and to mind
the house while her son’s wife was out working in the fields.
Besides, she had worked hard for the general benefit in her time,
and that must not be forgotten. For all these reasons, in most
places the son she lived with was content to feed and dress her. The
others might or might not contribute. If they did, their contribu-
tion was generally voluntary and at their discretion. It normally
took the form of small presents, such as a kerchief or a pair of
sandals. It was not advisable to give such presents regularly, for
that might make the son she lived with take them for granted. By
exception, in Malesi e Madhe the law bade the other sons combine
to send her three loads of maize every year as a contribution
towards her keep. In Mat, if she stayed with one son, he must
support her unaided; the others gave her no food or clothes. In
this district, however, she might opt for staying a month with each
son in turn, so making them share the expense of keeping her. In
Godolesh, and in Shijan near Elbasan, she had the right, like the
father, to take one-eighth of the general property. The son worked
this land, fed her with its produce and eventually took it into his
own holding in consideration of paying for her funeral. In practice
she seldom exercised this right, preferring to run in and out of all
her sons’ houses in turn and getting a meal in any of them. She


was expected to behave reasonably; in Mirdite if she were a trouble-
maker her son might legally send her back to her brother, giving
her three loads of grain for her support during the first year and
nothing afterwards. On her death she might be buried by the son
she lived with, as in Zerqan, or by all the sons in combination, as
in Martanesh and the Malesi e Madhe. Here good feeling rather
than the law dictated the usage.
Sometimes a minor—a small brother or the orphan of a dead
brother —had to be arranged for. The essential was that he should
receive his portion and not be left alone with his mother, as she
might induce him to sell his land or might herself take a lover. If
his grandfather were alive he remained with him. Otherwise he
went to live with an older brother or an uncle. Exceptionally, in
Shijan he lived by preference with his mother’s brother, less
probably with his father’s brother, and still less probably with his
own brother. His guardian worked his land or gave it to a third
party to work for an agreed return and fed and clothed the minor
with its produce until he came of age at fifteen. The guardian had
also to feed and clothe his mother and any small brothers and
sisters he might have. Sometimes a guardian brother remained in
the father’s house with the minor. He was its master, though not
its owner, until the minor came of age. Then he must leave the
house to the minor and himself move to new quarters.
Sometimes brothers who had separated joined up again. The
‘remarriage’ seldom lasted long; as the proverb puts it, ‘a loaf once
broken can’t be put together again’. When they separated for the
second time, their food and property were divided on the same
principles as before. Due note was taken of any house they might
have built or any land or livestock they might have bought during
their temporary reunion; these were divided as usual, not according
to the number of brothers, but according to the number of men.
If one brother had died childless since the first separation, a com-
pletely new division of the property was necessary.
The division of food and property might be effected by elders,
by the eldest brother, by a neighbour, or by a more distant relative,
or by the father if alive. The factors governing the choice of one or
other were, as usual, based on common sense. The division of
property, as distinct from food, was often so complicated that only
experienced men like elders could grapple with it. A father tended
to favour his best loved son or daughter-in-law and was often ruled
5-2


out for that reason. If the brothers were not on good terms,
division by the eldest caused quarrelling, the others accusing him
of robbing them and he retaliating in the usual manner. If they
were on exceptionally bad terms, even distant relatives feared the
unpleasantness that was bound to follow their best attempts at
a fair division. For all these reasons the choice generally fell on
elders. Their drawback was their need of a fee, but it was generally
thought better to spend money on a fee than to quarrel with
a brother. These principles were at the back of the various
practices in different places. When the choice was between
neighbours and relatives by marriage the latter were preferred
because they were always more trusted. Each brother put in his
own man.
In Perlat the father was never allowed to divide his property,
elders or relatives on the male side must do so, and when they were
at work, neither the father nor the sons might put in their word. In
Martanesh the same fear of favouritism prevailed, and elders or the
neighbours in bulk carried out the division. In south Diber the
local notables did so, their influence being thought to counteract
any tendency to break the peace over the division. In Godolesh
separation had always been on an official basis; it was arranged by
the headman of the whole village and his two assistants, as it had
been in Turkish times by the headman assisted by an elder from
each of the six quarters of the village; it is to be noted that no fee
was taken by these elders because separations had always been part
of their official duties. In Shijan the separation might be entrusted
to the husband’s or wife’s relatives since they were interested in
preserving peace in the family, yet had no personal interest in the
division. In any area, when brothers were on really bad terms,
complete strangers from another village might be called in to
arrange the separation.
When the brothers decided to engage elders, they engaged one
between them if they were on good terms; if not, each put in his
own man. In Mirdite they might engage two, four or more elders
according to the amount of work to be done.
Portions were allocated to the brothers by their own choice or,
more often, by lot. In the very few cases where the brothers were
completely friendly, the eldest said to the youngest ‘Which field
will you have, this or that? ’ Then he took for himself what was left.
If the second coveted the field chosen by the youngest, they drew


lots for it or asked elders to divide it. When the brothers were
a degree less friendly but the eldest nevertheless divided the
property, the youngest was given first choice of the portions, the
next youngest the second choice and the eldest what was left. The
law ran: ‘the eldest divides, the youngest chooses.’ It is obvious
that the risk of getting an inferior portion made the eldest divide
carefully. In Mirdite by exception it was the middle brother who
had first choice.
Lots varied: in Lume they were drawn in the modern method
with pieces of paper; one without holes, another with one hole, the
third with two holes, and so on; and by the old-fashioned with
a stone, a twig and a clod of earth. In the Males! e Madhe grains
of maize, coins and weeds as well as paper were used. Shijan
preferred straw and grass, and Godolesh grains of maize and
haricot beans. Maize was satisfactory when there were two
brothers, as one variety has white grains and the other yellow, but
when there were three brothers, haricot beans, which may be white,
black or mottled, were preferred. Somewhat curiously, though
stones and sticks were both plentiful, they were seldom used. In
Shijan, for example, the lots were drawn with elaborate care. One
of the relatives present at the division was sent some distance away
and told to keep his eyes closed. Each brother selected his token
and handed it to another relative. The first was recalled, given the
tokens, and told to place each where he chose. Each brother was
expected to accept the luck which his token had brought him, but
if one objected, lots were drawn a second or even a third time,
fresh tokens being chosen and a different relative asked to drop
them each time. The brother who got the disputed land or other
property two out of three times became its owner for good. The
various positions of land and livestock, the piles of farm imple-
ments and household utensils and the rooms in the house (if this
was partitioned) were drawn for in the same way. In Martanesh
the procedure was shorter but there was again, for greater fairness,
a man between the brothers and the person who made the decisive
throw. Each brother gave his token to one of the bystanders, who
carried it to the elder dividing the property. In ignorance of which
token belonged to whom the elder cast them on the various portions.
In Zerqan there was again an intermediary. Each brother had
a secret, unpaid representative who gave a stone to a third person
approved by all the brothers but ignorant of who represented each.


This third person threw the token stones on this portion or that.
In Godolesh there was no intermediary. Each brother gave his
token to an elder in whom they all had confidence. As they were
selecting their tokens, he arranged tokens of his own on the ground,
naming each aloud for the various portions of the land or house.
He carefully refrained from looking at the brothers’ tokens and
threw them blindly one after another on his own. ‘Here is the
sitting-room, good luck to it. Here is the kitchen, good luck to it’,
he said of the house. Each brother then claimed his token and
accepted his portion. With a similar phrase of good omen the elder
divided the land. In Lume there might or might not be an inter-
mediary. The elder taking delivery of the tokens might place them
himself or, if afraid he would be suspected of dishonesty, he might
give them to another man to do so. Well-omened phrases were
used, such as ‘The luck of this stone lies there and of this twig
here ’. In the Malesi e Madhe the elder said which portion the bits
of stick each represented, then drew them, as would be done in
England. Here the procedure seems influenced by the European
education of the priests.
The commonest fee for an elder dividing property between
brothers was two or three napoleons, but it might be as low as one
or as high as ten. Everything depended on how much the brothers
quarrelled over the division, and how hard they struggled against
yielding one to the other. In Perlat the elder made a distinction
between rich and poor, asking a sheep from a rich family but only
a kilo of coffee from a poor one. In Mirdite he had the right to
a sheep and a money fee as well; the latter was as agreed. In Lume
‘it does not do to have an elder without a sheep’. Wherever, as in
Godolesh, officials arranged the separation, no fees were charged.
Everywhere one meal at least of meat and rice pilaff must be
given to whoever came from outside the family to separate the
brothers. If these had no flocks, they must buy meat from someone
who had. The expense of these meals, which was heavy for people
so poor, was shared by all the brothers, the animals being taken out
of the common stock before it was divided and the money for the
rice, coffee and, if necessary, meat out of the common purse before
the settling up of accounts. These meals were the first charge on
the family property.
All stages of the division were watched by neighbours. Before
the persons negotiating the separation sat down to the final meal,


they reminded these onlookers how everything had been divided.
Then if disputes arose later between the brothers these could bear
witness to the division. No documents were drawn up, the oral
testimony of the witnesses in general, and in particular the mute
testimony of the boundary stones, was enough for the unwritten
law. Where a dead father had held title-deeds, these were distri-
buted appropriately among the brothers, but such cases were few.
Too often, the division was followed there and then by disputes.
Most frequently they were about the land and due to greed, for
each brother knew that on the portion allotted to him on that day
he and perhaps unborn generations of his descendants must live,
and he naturally tried to make it as large as possible. Sometimes
a brother was rightly disgruntled. Dividers were human enough
to make mistakes; an eldest brother sometimes tried to cheat when
dividing; at times even an elder showed favouritism. In such
cases the division was revised, an elder dividing instead of the
eldest brother or a second elder instead of the first, on the usual
‘elder after elder’ basis. Or instead of having one elder between
them the brothers might each put in one for himself; in this case
they must all stand aside and leave the elders to fight things out.
Not infrequently one brother was simply cantankerous. Then
the easiest way for the elders to make him see reason was to exercise
their right to have all their meals at the family’s expense until their
work was done. They might go away, leaving the division incom-
plete and refusing to return until he bent his stubborn neck and in
person fetched them back with promises to be good. This meant
an extra meal, an expense that even the trouble-maker deplored in
his heart, if not openly. As it was, surely unfairly, shared by the
reasonable brothers these were from the first careful to do nothing
to excite the other further. There was no difficulty about extracting
this meal, as the commonest source of trouble, the land, was
always divided before the livestock.
A story of Turkish times from Godolesh shows the elders
taking cruder but no less effective steps to settle matters. A family
at the top of the village refused to accept the division they proposed.
‘Where is your best ram? ’ asked the elders the first day, and ate the
animal. ‘Where is the pot of bekmes (boiled grape juice)?’ they
asked the second day, and emptied this, ‘Where is the butter jar?’
they asked the third day, and devoured that. The brothers then
came to their senses and allowed the suggested division to proceed.


The separation completed, each new household had its own
master and mistress, and its members were no longer under the
control of the master and mistress of the old home, who now
controlled only their own establishment. It was remembered,
however, that the master of this smaller home was master of the
house in which they had all lived together. When he was succeeded
by his son or another, his former position was still kept in mind.
So when the brotherhood formed at the first separation expanded
into a kin the master of this house became the ‘elder of the kin’.
If his kin was the most important in the ward, his name was given
to the ward and so perpetuated. The names of most wards were
the names of such elders.


CHAPTER VII
THE LAW OF THE DOG
The Kanun recognized four types of dog: {a) chained dogs,
(b) sheep dogs, (c) shooting dogs and (d) pet dogs. There were
different rules for each.
Chained dogs were so called because they were chained up
during the daytime and let loose only at night. Other dogs were,
almost without exception, free day and night.
Chained dogs were house dogs with the function of guarding
their master’s house from thieves and enemies. The poorest man
kept one and regarded it as a valuable article of property. A rich
man had as many as he fancied he required. Cen Elezi of Sllove
in Diber kept nearly thirty. They were confined during the day-
time in a great pit that ran the length of his house, and at night they
were released by their special attendant. This man fed them and
was the only person who could safely approach them. If Cen
himself or his sons had ventured out after nightfall, they would
have been torn to pieces by the fierce brutes.
The natural fierceness of chained dogs was fostered by their
training. As puppies they were never caressed or even addressed
kindly by their master and his children. Indeed, they were often
teased deliberately in order to make them lose their tempers. They
were never admitted to the kitchen or other part of the house, but
were restricted to the farmyard, where they had their kennel in
a corner. The kennel was generally a rough structure of wattle and
daub affording the dog imperfect shelter from the elements, and
usually placed as far as possible from the outside gate in order to
put the utmost possible distance between the dog and an incoming
visitor.
Since thieves and enemies attack only by night the house dog
must be free by night if it was to fulfil its function. Since honest
men and friends travel during the daytime, the house dog must be
chained up to keep it from doing them a mischief. So house dogs
lived ‘by the sun’. They must be chained an hour before sunrise
and might not be loosed till an hour after sunset.
This law was rigorous, only two modifications being permitted.


If a dog was unusually fierce, it might be tied up early and loosed
late. If a locality was dangerous or if the dog’s master was at feud
with someone, the dog might be loosed precisely at sundown and
left free till exactly sunrise. As a result of the latter proviso
a stranger who reached a village about sunset must ask immediately
in the interest of his own safety whether his intended host is at feud
with anyone. If he were, he called to his host from a safe distance
—the fiercest dog did not stir unprovoked beyond the outskirts of
its own farmyard. There followed an exchange of conventional
questions and answers, designed to convince the host that the
stranger came as a friend and not as an enemy. When convinced,
the host bade the stranger stay where he was and forbade him to
speak—this in case the dog charged in the direction of the voice.
He then tied up the dog while some of his womenfolk went to
inspect the stranger, and if satisfied that he was harmless, to bring
him to the house.
When a house dog attacked a stranger the law considered three
positions: (a) when the dog only threatened to bite, ( b) when it
succeeded in biting and (c) when it killed. In all three positions
there was discrimination between attack by day and attack by night.
If during the daytime a house dog threatened to bite a stranger,
the latter might kill it without incurring a penalty. The day was his
time not the dog’s, and he was in the right and the dog in the
wrong. To attack him it must have broken its chain or pulled up
the stake to which it had been tied. Its master too was at fault for
not having observed that its chain and stake were insecure.
Exceptionally in Martanesh the stranger was fined 100 grosh.
If again during the daytime a house dog succeeded in biting
a stranger its master must indemnify the stranger, and that
irrespective of whether the dog had been killed or not. In Diber
he escaped by paying the blood money due for wounding a man.
In the more picturesque north he must keep the wounded man in
his house free of charge until he recovered, pay any doctor’s bills
that might be incurred and pay the wounded man what he would
have earned if well. The northerners were so poor that they found
such expenses a heavy burden. In consequence they tested a dog’s
chain and stake from time to time and sent their womenfolk to
escort a stranger to and from the house; they could not perform
this task themselves because they did not enjoy a woman’s
immunity from attack by a lurking enemy. A poor man, desperate


as he saw his dog about to bite, might even shoot the animal,
regarding its loss as the lesser evil. Occasionally a man sought to
disclaim responsibility, shouting that he was not a chain-making
gypsy and only bought, and did not make, the faulty chain. The
stranger would retort that he was not dog’s meat. Then revolvers
might be drawn and a blood feud begun. More probably the dog’s
owner sullenly invited the wounded man to partake of the
hospitality demanded by the law.
If a house dog killed a stranger during the daytime, it was in
most places as if its master had killed him and a blood feud sprang
up between the two families. In Diber, however, the payment of
full blood money generally satisfied the bereaved family.
During the night the law was entirely on the side of the house dog
and its master. No matter how the animal might threaten a stranger
he might not kill it. If he did so, he must pay blood money or have
a feud with its master, exactly as if it was the latter he had killed.
The Kanun says clearly that ‘ at night a dog is equivalent to a man ’.
Indeed, in some places such as £ermenike the animal was thought
more important and its murder by night was more serious. If
a house dog succeeded in biting a stranger at night, the latter got
nothing from its master —neither hospitality and doctor’s fees nor
indemnity for wages lost. From his neighbours he got mockery—
‘Fancy letting yourself be bitten by a dog. You’re a fine man.’
Even if a house dog killed a stranger at night there was no com-
pensation, the death went unavenged. Once upon a time, in Lure,
a daughter-in-law of Demir Lleshi went out at night into her own
farmyard. A neighbour’s dog sprang on her and killed her, but
since it was night time, the dog’s time, her blood was lost. It was
immaterial that the dog was trespassing and that she was on her
own ground.
There was only one exception to these rules. If a house stood
near a main road an aggressive dog might be killed during the night
without penalty. A higher law stated that ‘it is not right to cut
a main road with a dog ’. In the far north bajraktars and elders had
been known to order fierce dogs near a main road to be kept chained
at night as well as during the day.
The blood money which was payable on killing a house dog at
night was generally the same as would be payable if a man had
been killed. The blood money for a bitch was the same as for a dog;
there was no discrimination between the sexes as there was in the


case of murdered man and murdered woman. In some areas, such
as Kurbin, the blood money for a house dog was assessed by the
elders or government authorities.
A stranger who agreed in his simplicity to pay the owner what
he demanded for his dead dog might find himself presented with
a fine bill. The owner would say that the dog had saved his life on
several occasions and was consequently worth six, ten or even
twenty napoleons. Sometimes the owner asked the stranger, not
for blood money, but for another dog of the same quality as the
dead animal. The cost might exceed the conventional amount of
blood money.
In the above cases a house dog had been killed in self-defence.
When it was killed out of spite matters were much more serious.
‘He who kills a house dog will steal your wife’, says the Kanim.
Such killings usually took place at night because the aggressor
would find it dangerous to approach the house in daylight. This
aggravated the crime since the night was the dog’s own time.
In Mirdite, Kurbin and Martanesh a man who killed a dog ‘in
its kennel’, i.e. on its own ground and therefore spitefully, must
pay its master 500 grosh, almost a fortune in these poverty-
stricken areas. In north Albania his life was forfeit. When he had
been killed by the dog’s master, his relatives killed one of the
latter’s family, arguing that they could not permit their relative to
be equated to a dog. In most cases the two parties being ‘ one for
one ’ the dog’s master then consented to make peace on condition
of receiving blood money for the dead animal. He might stipulate,
if he wished, that this should take the form of an ox or a horse and
so cost more than the conventional blood money. Occasionally the
feud was continued—it is on record that twelve men in the north
once died for the sake of one dog. In any region a man who
immediately pardoned the killer of his dog would be taunted as
a weakling. In Lume the man who was suspected of having killed
a house dog found dead, a crime as costly as killing a man, could
not clear himself unless he persuaded twenty-four elders to take
oath with him.
The legal discrimination between defensive and spiteful killing
made it important for a man who killed a dog during the daytime
to establish his motive. He could do so simply and surely. If his
bullet had struck the dog in the forehead or chest it was evident
that the animal was charging him and he had fired in fear. If, on the


other hand, he had shot the dog in the back he must have killed it
out of spite.
Whereas house dogs remained at home and were chained up for
half their lives, sheep dogs were normally free both day and night
and divided their time between the mountain-side and the sheep-
fold. Their function was to protect the flock from thieves and
wolves. If these approached, they must bark a timely warning so
as to bring the shepherds with their rifles and they must themselves
attack the marauders. They must therefore be alert, courageous
and fierce, true ‘ Molossian hounds ’. In districts infested by wolves
they wore iron collars set with iron spikes to prevent the wolf from
tearing open their throat. In common with other sheep dogs in the
Near and Middle East they did not handle the flock. That was led,
or occasionally driven, by the shepherd unaided.
As fierceness was their most important asset, sheep dogs were
given the same harsh upbringing as house dogs. Indeed, they
were generally removed at a still earlier age from their mother so
that they should not know even her caresses for long. But they
were gentle enough with their flocks, from which they never parted.
As puppies they were fed on ewe’s or goat’s milk—hence, said the
peasants of Shpat, their later friendliness with the animals they
guarded. In adult life they were fed on maize bread roughly baked
in indigestible looking balls by the shepherds. Nevertheless, their
strength and the sleekness of their coats showed that the diet was
sufficient.
The law of the sheep dog varied from place to place according
to the animal’s position in the local economy. In the north, where
men depended almost entirely on their flocks, the sheep dog was of
paramount importance as the guardian of its master’s whole liveli-
hood and was protected by the law to the utmost. In areas such as
Kurbin, where men combined agriculture with sheep-breeding,
the sheep dog was of less importance to its master and some
relaxation appears in the law. In fertile areas like Lume or
Krasniqe, where agriculture predominated, the sheep dog was still
less important and the law less drastic. So in the north it was more
serious to kill a sheep dog than a house dog and elsewhere the
position was reversed.
Among the mountains of the north the law of the sheep dog was
the same by day and by night. A passer-by might be bitten at any
hour of the day or night, but if he killed the dog he would be killed


by its master. No excuse for his crime could be tolerated. He
might have lost his way or be a stranger (and so a guest to be
protected). No matter! The mountain was the dog’s ground day
and night. Why had he gone near the sheep? Was it to steal one?
There was no road through the flock. He should have stuck to the
highway which was inalienably his, day and night. If he were
killed by the dog, his family had no right to claim blood money or
to start a feud; his ‘blood was lost’. In Diber the same harsh laws
prevailed. In the partly pastoral, partly agricultural area of Kurbin
a man who killed a sheep dog generally escaped with the payment
of blood money; his life was not necessarily forfeit. In Martanesh,
where the economy was similar, a man who killed a sheep dog in
terror of his life and proved his motive was fined 100 grosh, the
amount payable for a house dog in the same circumstances.
In the adjacent Qermenike he was not even fined. In fertile
Lume the law was that ‘a man can’t lose his life for a dog’, and on
that theory a traveller on the mountain might kill a sheep dog which
had refused to let him pass. For penalty he needed only to go to
the dog’s master and beg his pardon. He was generally afraid to
go alone —the dog’s master might suspect that he had killed the dog
from spite and might be in an evil temper as a result. So he
generally asked others to accompany him. These confessed his
crime and asked for pardon. It was never refused. If he had killed
a house dog during the daytime in this district, he would have had
to pay blood money as for a murdered man, or would have been
killed. On the rich plateau of Krasniqe sheep-rearing is relatively
so unimportant that sheep dogs come under the same rules as
house dogs. If, for instance, one bites a stranger on the mountain
its master must pay for the wound.
Even in the gentler areas the spiteful or senseless killing of
a sheep dog may start a blood feud. An extreme case occurred
‘ long ago ’ in Lume. The sheep belonging to the Onuzi sept were
sleeping in a mountain fold near the fold of the Dofi sept. The dogs
began to fight among themselves and the Dosi shepherd killed an
Onuzi dog. The Onuzi shepherd drew his revolver and shot the
Do?! man dead. A general fight then started among the shepherds
and in a few minutes six Onuzi and twelve Do?i men lay dead for
the sake of a dog. The feud raged on for years, not ceasing until
it was at last composed by direct order of the reigning Sultan.
Successive generations of travellers evolved practical expedients


for dealing with sheep dogs. The first was to ‘let sleeping dogs lie’.
If a traveller were so unfortunate as to find one in his path and
there was no shepherd in sight to call it in, he swerved aside,
keeping well to leeward in the hope that neither sound nor scent
of his presence would reach the dog. If a dog charged, the
traveller might follow the example of Ulysses on his return home
and sit down. The dog would probably sit down too and immobilize
him until the shepherd’s arrival, but it was not likely to charge
again. This expedient was more favoured in central than in
northern Albania. There the traveller preferred to climb a tree in
the hope that the flock would soon pass, so releasing him. The dog
was not really interested in him and went on with the flock. It has
happened when, a flock was large and grazing, that a man has had
to stay half a day up a tree, with several dogs barking under his
feet; for it was customary in north Albania to leave a grazing flock
in sole charge of the sheep dog for many hours. For that reason, as
soon as a traveller heard sheep bells —and in that country of long
narrow valleys enclosed by lofty mountains he might hear them
half an hour away —he called out. If no answering shout came, he
knew that there was no shepherd with the flock and laid his plans
accordingly. As far south as Shpat fear of a sheep dog might send
a traveller up a tree, but there rescue came swiftly because shep-
herds were forbidden to leave their flocks for long. Tracks in
Shpat were too many and travellers too numerous to allow of
lengthy hold-ups by sheep dogs. With the same motive of protecting
travellers, shepherds in the few treeless areas of north Albania were
required to remain with their flocks.
If, however, a flock was grazing near a main road, the sheep dog
came under the law already enunciated that ‘ it is not right to cut
a main road with a dog’. Day and night, when near such a road,
the sheep dog must be kept under control by means of the shep-
herd’s voice or a chain, preferably the latter as being surer.
A traveller who found a sheep dog loose on such a road and received
no answer to his call from the shepherd was entitled to kill the dog
and did not have to compensate its master.
Shooting dogs had the run of the house and kitchen as well as
the farmyard and were never tied up. Born gentle, they were well
enough treated by their masters to remain so throughout their lives.
They were not found in every house but only with the leisured or
the lazy.


A stranger who was bitten by a shooting dog could neither kill it
nor claim compensation for his wound. Indeed, he became a public
butt for being feckless enough to let himself be bitten by so tame
an animal.
If a stranger killed a shooting dog by mischance, he must
compensate the master in money —two napoleons were thought
adequate in most places. Alternatively, he must give him another
dog as good as the one he had killed. The hour of the crime was
immaterial.
If a shooting dog was killed from motives of spite, a feud
followed as in the case of house and sheep dogs.
If a shooting dog put up a hare, only its master had the right to
take the hare. It might be that the chase was long and that the hare
was shot by a stranger before the dog’s master caught it up. In that
case the latter demanded the hare and offered the stranger a fresh
cartridge in return for the one he had just expended. If the offer
was refused a blood feud started, the first shot being fired by the
stranger.
If two men went shooting with only one dog, they skinned the
hares at the end of the day and divided them equally.
Pet dogs, like shooting dogs, were free of the house as well as
the farmyard and ran loose day and night. Of indeterminate
pedigree, they were about the size of small Aberdeens. They were
not common in northern Albania, where their only purpose was to
divert their master —it was thought great fun to hang a lighted
cigarette round their necks. In central Albania where the average
flock was small and always had a shepherd, they were much prized
as watchdogs. They never failed at either house or sheepfold to
bark warningly when unwelcome visitors approached. They were
so brave that at sheepfolds they could dash out and tackle
a marauding wolf, invariably losing their life in the unequal
combat. On account of their usefulness their value was high, as
much as six or seven napoleons.
The law when they killed (a virtually impossible contingency)
or were killed was the same as it was for shooting dogs.
A few isolated rules remain to be mentioned. Clerics such as
priests among Catholics or Orthodox or hoxhas and sheikhs among
Mohammedans were forbidden to keep house dogs. Their houses
must be open day and night to their parishioners or passing
strangers and might not be closed by dogs. If they kept sheep dogs


they must not bring them home, but must leave them at the more
or less distant sheepfold. There was no ban on their keeping
shooting and pet dogs.
If a house dog disappeared temporarily during the mating
season so that its master could not find it at dawn to tie it up for
the day, he remained responsible for its conduct. It was held that
a house dog loose under such conditions during the daytime was
like one that had been duly tied up but had broken loose. Happily
for its master and for strangers, a dog was generally too much
occupied at such seasons with its own affairs to trouble about
strangers.
If any type of dog fell into a snare set by a neighbour near its
master’s house, the neighbour must pay its full value. He had no
doubt obtained its master’s consent before he set the snare, but that
did not relieve him of his liability for ensuing casualties.
Damage done by dogs must be paid for in money or by the dog’s
death. Each case was handled with a good deal of ceremony. If
a dog ate a neighbour’s eggs or killed his fowls, the latter asked its
master to tie it up. If he refused, the neighbour had the right to kill
the dog, and its master could not exact compensation. The neighbour
generally took an oath in public that the dog had developed a habit
of eating his eggs or killing his fowls, and that he had asked its
master to tie it up and had been told to kill it. If he killed the dog
without warning, he must in most places pay its value as assessed
by the local elders. But in that case its master must first take oath
that it had never eaten eggs or killed fowls. If the dog was
commonly considered valuable, the neighbour would probably
warn its master twice before he killed it. In Qermenike and
Martanesh the law was sterner; a delinquent dog had always to be
killed, but if this were done without its master’s leave, a blood feud
started. In such cases the culprit was generally a house dog.
In cases of sheep-worrying the culprit was invariably a sheep
dog. The general verdict was that the animal must die, but there
was some variation in local methods of reaching this verdict. In
north Albania and in Yugoslav Kosove the dog’s master must
indemnify the sheep owner for every sheep worried and must take
oath that the dog acted of its own impulse and had not been
specially trained to kill sheep; any proof that it had been so trained
would immediately cause him to be killed by the sheep owner. He
must also kill the dog or keep it chained up in perpetuity. If the
6 HAM


sheep owner found it loose again he would kill it without more ado
or, less probably, he would start a feud with its master. A sheep
owner of Koplik who complained about another’s dog must be able
to say that he could produce two witnesses. This might cause the
dog’s master to pay up at once for the dead sheep. On the other
hand, he might say that the witnesses, being friends of the sheep
owner, were not to be believed, and that the only evidence he
could accept was a public oath by the sheep owner. If the latter
took the oath the dog’s master must pay him the value of two
sheep for every one killed. He was left to decide whether he would
kill his dog or keep it chained up. In the latter event the evil soon
worked its own cure. The dog would worry sheep whenever it
could escape from its chain and he, tiring of paying for its ravages,
would shoot it. The sheep owner does not seem to have had the
right to kill it. In Mirdite a sheep dog might be shot by the sheep
owner for worrying sheep, but not unless caught ‘ Flesh in mouth’.
In Martanesh, too, this was the rule. In neither place was any
compensation due to the dog’s master.
If a dog harried a drove of pregnant animals, causing some to
abort their young in their terror, it might be killed by the shepherd.
Its blood was then equated to that of the aborted animals. If it
evaded the shepherd, its master must pay in full for each abortion;
he was ‘keeping a tame wolf’. If a dog killed a foal or calf,
whether playfully or not, its master must pay the accepted value
of the dead animal.
With mad dogs the rule all over Albania was ‘ Kill if you can,
and the sooner the better’. The owners neither expected nor
received compensation. Many of them broadcast the news that
their dog was mad and asked for it to be killed as speedily as
possible.


CHAPTER VIII
ROADS
Very strict rules were laid down for the construction and the
maintenance of roads, ‘ the arteries of the land ’ as they were called
by the tribesmen.
Two main types were recognized: the public highway, ‘the big
road’, or ‘the general road’ and the footpath. The former led
through a village or from one village to another, and consequently
was often called the ‘village road’. Yet another name was ‘ward
road ’ of a village which separated two wards. A footpath lay most
often across fields, but it seemed only in Zerqan that it was
described as a ‘field-path’, ‘road wide enough for a foot’, or
plain ‘road’.
The law said that a public highway must be a horse-track, wide
enough for a loaded packhorse or a pair of plough-oxen with their
plough to pass along it, unimpeded by any hedges, walls or trees
that might fringe it. The minimum width allowable was conse-
quently eight spans, the equivalent of 5I feet or 1-62 metres.
Where more space was available, whether on mountain wastes as
in Martanesh or waterless downs as in Perlat, the road was often
wider, so it was eight to twelve spans wide in Qermenike, ten to
twelve in Martanesh and Godolesh, sixteen in Zerqan and twenty-
four in Perlat. In spacious Krasniqe a road for plough-oxen was
usually a trifle wider than a horse-track, but there were no hard
and fast rules for the width of either; the only criterion was traffic
needs.
Provided that a man carrying a spade on his shoulder could pass,
a footpath was wide enough; rules were not so rigid for these as
for highways. Consequently some were only one, and many,
especially in Mirdite, only two spans wide. In other places,
however, footpaths from three to six spans in breadth were found.
In general a path across irrigable, cultivated land tended to be
narrow and one across, say, rough pasturage broad.
These rules were for mountain roads, where there were usually
so many stones that there was no mud, and the ground remained
firm under the feet in all weathers. A highway across a plain,
6-2


especially near the sea, where the soil is alluvial and stoneless, had
to be thirty-two spans wide (7 yards or 6-48 metres) in order to give
a pack-horse space to dodge the mud-holes in winter, when the
road became a morass. Excellent examples of this type of road
traverse the half-drained marshes of Ngureze at the mouth of the
river Mat.
Mountain roads eight spans wide led to villages ‘ where carts had
never gone’. Certain other roads led to the rare villages ‘where
carts had gone’. These crossed firm inland plains such as the floor
of the valley of Shkrel or the plain of Nange in Lume; in Shkrel
they had to be twelve spans wide (8 feet or 2-43 metres), and in
Lume wide enough to take a cart. A picturesque detail from
Mirdite is that a ‘ flag-road ’, that is to say, a road along which a flag
was carried in tribal, wedding or other processions, had to be as
wide as the flagstaff was long.
Roads always followed boundaries; as a general rule, when one
passed two wards or two neighbours, exactly half of it had to be in
the territory of each. In other words, their boundary had to run
down its exact middle. Few modifications of this law are to be
noted. When fields were on a slope, the road between them was
often made on the upper one. The elders laying it out had reasoned
that it would gradually slip down the hill, increasing the area of
the upper field and diminishing that of the lower one. When there
was an irrigation channel by the road, rules varied. In Theth one
neighbour left three spans of land for the channel, and the other
the same amount for the adjacent footpath. Their agreement might
be verbal, noted only by witnesses, or it might be written down by
the priest as tribal clerk and placed in the church archives. Each
neighbour had full access to path and channel alike. In Lume, on
the other hand, a path was left on both sides of an irrigation channel.
These were not only for men to walk on but also for maintaining
the sides of the channel, a necessary safeguard even on level ground.
Each neighbour, having his own path, was less liable to quarrel
with the other.
In Perlat a highway was twenty-four spans wide (16 feet or
4-86 metres), to enable a horse laden with firewood to pass another
without the loads touching. Elsewhere there was no provision for
two-way traffic. Road-making in our sense did not exist, and roads
were merely trodden out by man or beast in the scanty space
available between fields or across mountain slopes. On a typical


road two loaded donkeys might meet and pass, but two loaded
horses could not. When these met, one or the other had to step
aside from the road, turning back, if need be to find a suitable place
in which to do so. This was almost invariably of nature’s making;
there were no artificial passing places as on narrow motor roads in
England.
Load generally determined priority of passage. To use Albanian
phraseology, when a riding-saddle met a riding-saddle on a horse-
track the one with no saddle-bags or other load besides the rider
had to turn back. The riding-saddle had to make way for the
loaded pack-saddle, but had priority over an empty one. When
two pack-saddles met, the one loaded and the other empty, the
latter had to make way for the former. When they were both loaded
or both empty, the one which was nearer a possible place at which
to step off the road had to turn back. The same rules applied to
carts. In the rare cases where there was plenty of room for two
loaded horses or carts, there was no ‘Keep right’ or ‘Keep left’;
they could pass on whichever side they wished.
The rules about priority were apt to be honoured in the breach
rather than the observance. A man who was turned back on his road
felt, even if priority was not his, as much disgraced as if his gun had
been taken from him. His honour was lost, and could not be
redeemed unless he killed his rival. There have been many deaths
for the sake of precedence. The men of Godolesh, who were
satisfied when the offender was fined by the elders, were condemned
by their neighbours as soft and citified. But even in Godolesh there
was no more fertile cause of murder than disputes about who should
have the right of way. The trouble arose because priority rules
were often confused, especially on purpose by strong wilful men,
with the general law of road ownership. As enunciated by Father
Gje9ov, this law said that a village street or a public highway was
nobody’s individual perquisite, but belonged to one man as much
as to another. Hence, the living and the dead—traveller and live-
stock, bride and corpse—had an absolute right to use either, and no
man, even if the road passed close to the door of his house, could
deny this right.
A road was free to all. It was for breaking this general law that
highway robbery was punished so much more severely than other
forms of theft, and that a traveller who killed a dangerous dog on
a highway did not have to compensate its owner.


A man could not, without the elders’ consent, close an old road
that, having been used by his fellow-travellers, bridal parties and
funeral processions, was public property. If he did, it was reopened
by the elders, sometimes by force. He was often fined too. If he
had ploughed it up, so that its line was uncertain, they sought out
an old trustworthy man and made him show them under oath and
in the presence of witnesses where it had been. Then the offender
was ordered to open it again, removing any fence he had erected and,
by way of penalty, to give a meal and small fee to the old man and
the witnesses. If he shut it up once more he was liable to be shot.
As always, there were exceptions to the general rule. Owing to
the marshy nature of the land most of the fields near the mouth of
the river Mat were enclosed by hedges of living willow and
communicated with each other by stiles, not gates. If the public,
having formed a shorter route, no longer used a certain field-path,
the owner of the field could close the path and the stiles at either
end without any compulsion to reopen them; the public had the
shorter road and one was enough. If a man bought a field which
had a road round it and a right-of-way through it, he had the right
to close the latter and to make the public go by the road; only if
a long detour was involved could he be forced to leave the right-of-
way open. On the other hand, if his new-bought field was bordered
not by a road but by another field, he could not block the right-of-way
unless he made a new road entirely within his own boundaries.
This was substantially the law which governed changes of road all
over north Albania. In Lume a distinction was drawn between
permanent roads which had to remain open all the year round and
winter roads which could be closed in summer. The first were
known as ‘roads with a boundary’; the most important led to the
high pastures on Mount Gjalice. Winter roads generally went
through fields and were closed to men and animals from seed-time
to harvest; as soon as the crop was in, the roads were opened to
traffic. If somebody had great need to use one during the season,
he might take what he could carry and go along the very edge of
the sown land, taking pains not to damage the growing crop. He
could not make a habit of this or take his horse and must not forget
to ask leave from the owner of the land. Again, a few roads to the
Alpine pastures passed through wheat fields on their way. As
a necessary link with the high pastures they could not be com-
pletely closed even when the fields were under crop. An ingenious


compromise reconciled the public’s need to use the road and the
individual’s wish to protect his crop without incurring the
intolerable expense of making a fence or wall. One neighbour
put two hurdles across his half of the road, one where it entered
and the other where it left his land; both were low enough for men
to jump over and high enough to keep back animals. Each had
a hole at the bottom that was too small for animals to crawl
through but big enough to let logs through when they were
dragged down from the mountain for fuel; logs for fuel were such
a necessity of life that they could not be denied a road. The other
neighbour threw across his half of the road the Christ’s Thorn
which grows all over the plains of Albania, thus making a formidable
barrier for men and beasts. Shutting up this half of the road did
not matter; animals had no right in any case to go near a sown field,
and the other man’s hurdle was sufficient for human traffic. After
harvest the thorns were removed, leaving that half of the road clear.
The hurdle remained in place, as the clear half of the road was wide
enough for the traffic.
In 1935 a man from Nange in Lume blocked the road along an
irrigation channel for the summer, half of it with a low wall and
half with thorns, so that men, but not animals, could still travel on
it. He had wished to sow maize in his adjoining field and been too
poor and short-handed to construct a fence to keep out animals.
Since irrigation was so important, there was a special law that
‘a road beside an irrigation channel can’t be shut up’. Conse-
quently, his act was highly illegal. But his poverty was thought to
excuse it, and he had mitigated his offence by making a new road
for animals at the top of his field, where there was no maize. In so
doing he had confused the right to block a road for the summer only
and the need, when closing one permanently, to provide a substitute.
For the law forbidding a man to block an old road permanently
was not rigid. If he had good reason for the change, secured the
consent of the elders (a most important point), and provided
a satisfactory substitute, he could even move a very old road. It
was only if he failed to satisfy these conditions that he had to leave
it where it was. The poor man just mentioned transgressed by not
consulting the elders; their unusual clemency lay in refraining, out
of consideration for his poverty, from reopening the road.
When a man applied for leave to close an old village road, he
generally pleaded damage by passers-by or a need for more land to


till. In the first case he might have his house or field adjoining the
road and find his dog biting strangers and shot for its pains, his
children killed by passing horses or cattle, and his crops, vegetables,
vines or fruit damaged or plundered. Or the road might cross his
field necessitating a fence on both sides, thus preventing his sheep
from passing freely from one part of the field to another, besides
involving him in expense for making and maintaining it. In the
second case he might wish to plough up the road, a good plea since
the law said ‘Agriculture can move a highway’, and more pithily,
‘spades can shift roads’. If the elders on investigation considered
his request justifiable, they gave him leave to close the old road.
They required, however, that he should provide a satisfactory
substitute, not by a stream where sheep might drown or across
a precipice where they might break their necks; if the precipice
could not be avoided, the rock had to be blasted away with dynamite.
The new road could not be far from the old one, a distance of
200 metres being the maximum allowed. It had also to be made
by the man’s own unaided efforts, without any help from the
community, and it had to be well made. If it was poorly made,
the man suffered himself when he came to grief on it and had to
pay damages when another did so; he was also laughed at by his
neighbours as a foolish creature who did not know how to make
a road; often they went and reopened the old road. In Fulqet it did
not matter if the public was inconvenienced by the change; the
law said ‘land must not be spoiled’. In the Breg i Matit, on the
other hand, the new road had to be shorter and so more convenient.
A curious point in Krasniqe was that if a man ploughed up his
field he could reduce the public road to the width of a footpath;
this was little more than a gesture, since oxen and horses could not
in any case use the road after the field was sown and a footpath was
wide enough for other traffic. In Martanesh it was never lawful to
plough up a public road, perhaps because the fields were few and
very scattered, and the roads few, long and often dangerous.
In case of clear necessity an old public road might be moved on
the initiative of the elders. If, for example, it was inconveniently
crooked or became a morass in winter, they could divert it to better
ground. The old road became the property of the man whose land
adjoined it. The men whose land was taken for the diversion
received no compensation. They often threatened to kill the elders,
but for sole reply received an exposition of the law; they might


shoot as much as they pleased but could not have their way; the
village could not be shut up by mud, and the public good overrode
private loss. The new road was a permanency and could not be
closed or moved back to the old site except by the elders. According
to Vate Marashi, the bajraktar of Shkrel, it was easier to move the
bad road than to try to mend it. If it was under water, all the
owners of the land through which it ran had to unite to repair it,
making a ditch, repairing bridges and so on. But they had to decide
unanimously to repair it; if even one hung back nothing could
be done. The ditch too could only be made where there had once
been one before. And men whose land was some distance from the
road would object to having the water diverted from the road
towards their fields.
New roads were constantly being opened, if only because
brothers were constantly dividing their father’s property and
setting up separate establishments. For the law said ‘every field
must have access to a public highway’ and ‘every house must have
its road’. Consequently, the elders supervising the separation
were careful to specify the exact direction and character of the old
roads which the brothers might use and the new ones which they
might make to and from their houses and fields. The laws were the
same everywhere. If there were two brothers, each took half the
father’s field. When there was no cultivated land beyond this they
might make no path at all or they might make a little path along
the boundary between them, only two spans in width, as this was
enough for their own needs. Naturally each set aside land for half
its width; as this could not be worked, it was soon grass-grown.
When there was someone else’s field beyond their own and there
was no other way of entering this, they were bound to leave a track
wide enough for a horse laden with panniers of manure or for a pair
of plough-oxen. As with a field-path the land for this track came
from each.
A more complicated case occurred if three brothers inherited a
field which had a public highway running along its length, and was
divided into three longitudinal strips with the boundaries parallel
to the highway. Let it be supposed that the family home remained
in the central strip. A road to the highway from the inmost strip
was a prime necessity. It was most economically made by con-
structing a path to the old road that connected the family home
with the highway. But the new owner of the central strip might


object to its coming so near his house. In that case the elders
directed him and the owner of the outermost strip to leave land
elsewhere for it. As for the houses which the brothers in the
innermost and outermost strips had to build, the former had only to
see that his stood the canonical distance, the width of the eaves
from his neighbour’s boundary. The most convenient and
economical site for the outermost brother to build on was
a comer by the highway. But remembering that his dog might
bite strangers and his children be trampled on by passing animals,
he generally built his house with its back to the road and its yard
facing his field. Alternatively, in Krasniqe, by what seems undue
licence, he could ask his neighbour to remove the public highway
to his land. If the latter owned waste ground or a hill close by, he
was compelled by the elders to accede to the request. He could
only refuse it by convincing them that in its new position the road
would spoil his land.
New roads were sometimes necessitated by sales of land, and
might cause trouble. Suppose a field surrounded by four others
was offered for sale and the owners of the surrounding fields were
unable to buy it. Someone farther away, always described as
a ‘stranger’, then bought it and demanded a road. The natural line
for this was through the field between his purchase and his house.
If the owner of this field objected, the stranger bade him buy the
enclosed plot. When he refused, as he inevitably did, the stranger
referred the case to the elders. If these, he said, could cite any
previous purchaser of a field which had no way in and out, he
could not claim the road. If, on the other hand, and this was sure
to be the case, they found it was good law that ‘ land is never sold
without a road ’ he had to have it. There was, as usual, no need to
compensate the man whose land it took up. Fear of such complica-
tions made some men, when selling a piece of land, retain the
adjoining road in case they themselves or their descendants wished
to use it later on.
A man was undisputed and sole master of the path that led
across his field from a public thoroughfare to his house and ended
there. According to the letter of the law, whatever the condition
of the public road—good or bad, a sea of mud or even washed away
in a winter storm —animals and wayfarers had to keep to it or to
find another. They could not bypass the bad stretch by taking the
path to the man’s house; that was his private property, reserved for


his household and his visitors. Bridal parties or funeral processions
which tried to pass along his path to evade the difficulties of the
highway were not so likely as habitual travellers to attempt to
create a precedent, but he had the right to turn them back. If they
tried to force their way past him he had the right to shoot them.
Many a corpse, to quote Father Gje9ov, has found comrades in
death before being buried, and many a bride has mourned the loss
of a kinsman in her escort on the way to her bridegroom.
If, however, at a time when the highway was impassable,
occasional travellers asked a man’s leave to use his path he often
granted their request. But he always made it clear that the right of
passage was temporary and stipulated that his honour was not to
be smirched or his property damaged. In Shkrel a man whose
field adjoined a road liable to bogging in winter often left enough
land in the field for a new road. This he did as alms. Any timber
on either side of the new road remained his private property, and
could not be cut down by anyone else though he was free to cut it
as and when he pleased. He could also close the road at his
pleasure; even if the public had used it for years, usage did not
create a right and rob a man of his land. Sometimes a village, to
suit its convenience rather than to meet its need, asked a man to
allow the public to go through his land. He usually agreed, but
always stipulated that if any damage was done or he needed to work
the land, he should be entitled to close the right-of-way, informing
his fellow-villagers that they must not come that way any more.
If this became necessary, he was not required to provide an
alternative, as a man who moved a public road must do. He had
opened the road as a favour, and what was given as a favour could
not be retained by force. The option of closing the road descended
to his heirs.
The private ownership of a road is seen at its most interesting in
the case of a blind alley. This was seldom wide enough to take two
persons abreast and had an entrance but no exit. The commonest
type led across a man’s field from a public thoroughfare to his
house, where it came to a dead end. In this case it was his sole
property, and if he liked he could plough it up without consulting
anybody. Another type served several houses, and was held
jointly and equally by these. The common ownership had its
drawbacks. Two out of three owners, for instance, might wish to
plough up the section passing through their fields. Though this


might mean his going a long way round in future, the third owner
could not oppose their wish. Again the land on both sides of an
alley which three families used might belong to a fourth man. If
he persuaded or bribed two of the three to let him plough it up, the
third man had to acquiesce. A third type of blind alley began and
ended in a single field.
All types of alley were private property reserved for the sole use
of their owner, joint or single, and his family and lawful visitors. If
he found anyone else on it he could turn him back as an intruder, and
if he refused to comply could shoot him. This was irrespective of
whether he did damage or not. An honest man would not trespass.
Consequently, a trespasser’s intentions were felonious. In Labinot
a ‘foreigner’ from another village was licensed to use the blind
alley once. He might be unaware that he was trespassing. In
Zerqan, too, if he did not trespass more than once most owners
said nothing to avoid disgracing themselves. A foreigner has his
rights. In truculent Lume no allowance was made for ignorance.
About 1900 three men lost their lives because a stranger from the
town of Prizren rode by pure mischance along a blind alley in
a field in the village of Stiqan and resisted the owner’s attempt to
turn him back. In all districts a fellow-villager who trespassed
could not plead ignorance as a stranger could; consequently his
fault was graver. Even so he was not shot in Zerqan till other
measures had been tried and failed. First the owner asked him not
to use the blind alley again. If he persisted the owner complained
to the village and the village forbade the man to go by the path. If
he still persisted the village fined him. If he still persisted the
owner shot him. Such was the theory, but in practice a strong man
skipped the diplomatic stages and shot the offender at his first or
second offence. Sometimes a fellow-villager who had a genuine
need to use a private road, for instance, to regulate his irrigation
water, might be given permission to do so. But he had to go on foot
and could not take his horse.
In Godolesh, exceptionally, the question of damages affected the
rules for blind alleys. Such paths traversed the market gardens on
which the village still depended for most of its livelihood. Usually
each belonged to several owners, any of whom might use it
throughout its length, though they were forbidden to introduce
animals as these might damage the fruit and vegetables. A tres-
passer was pardoned up to three times, then one or more owners


complained against him to the elders, and he was fined ten grosh in
Turkish and two gold francs in modern times. In Turkish times
a strong man often forced his way through and only a weak man,
cowed by the guns levelled at him, turned back. The principle of
private ownership was carried so far in this village that it extended
even to a certain garden road which was not blind but had an exit
as well as an entrance. This was reserved for the villagers of one
ward, and forbidden to their animals, to the rest of the village and
to ‘foreigners’, with one exception. If a girl from another ward or
village had married into the privileged ward her kinsmen had leave
to use the forbidden path when on their way to visit her. If even
one man in the ward objected, however, he had the right to veto
their passage. It is not known how this unusual privilege came into
being. The most obvious explanation would be that the families
in the ward descended from a common male ancestor, but, in fact,
the families were of very mixed descent.
In the extreme north the individual’s safety on certain inter-
tribal thoroughfares was ensured by what was called the ‘ truce of
sheep and shepherd’, because it mainly concerned shepherds and
their flocks. Actually travellers and public messengers also enjoyed
its protection. Two or more tribes, meeting in full assembly of all
their bajraktars, heads, and youth, swore a solemn truce to attacks
on life and property on a given route or routes within their territory,
and guaranteed its observance. They prescribed the limits of the
road which it covered, regulated the behaviour of persons taking
advantage of it, and enunciated penalties for breaking it. Thus,
a shepherd could lead his flock and graze it only within a prescribed
limit. A traveller or public messenger journeying from one of the
contracting tribes to another had both going and coming to keep
within the points fixed. As soon as he had set foot in the foreign
tribe’s territory he had to go straight to the bajraktar’s house and
not turn aside to any other. He must not venture out alone but
must always be accompanied by the bajraktar or a guide of his
providing. So long as shepherd, traveller or public messenger
obeyed these rules and kept to the prescribed road, he was regarded
as a public guest and consequently was guaranteed public protection
and, what was almost more important, public vengeance in the
event of being murdered or robbed. Protection came from the
knowledge of the penalties which the foreign tribe would exact for
any harm done him. If he were murdered the price of his blood


was 22 purses instead of the usual 12. If the murderer was slow to
pay up, the tribe enforced payment. In addition, they burned down
three of the kulla (houses of two or more storeys) in the murderer’s
compound. If he did not possess so many, they burned his own
kulle and two belonging to his nearest relatives. If between them
they did not have so many, the tribe searched among his more
distant relatives until they found the required number, going
back a hundred generations if need be. They also destroyed his
property —crops, livestock and the rest —so thoroughly that nothing
of it remained. The same penalties were inflicted on a thief who
stole sheep travelling or grazing within the protected area. On the
other hand, if a traveller, public messenger or shepherd broke the
conditions of the truce, straying, for example, from the prescribed
path, he was no longer counted a public guest and lost his right to
public protection and vengeance. He was still a private guest
however. The last man in whose house he stayed before his mishap
was bound to kill his murderer or to punish the man who robbed
him.
This truce of sheep and shepherd has now died out. At the end
of Turkish times it was already confined to the Gjakove group of
tribes in the extreme north-east, such as Nikaj, Mertur, Gash and
Krasniq. But Father Gjefov found traditions of its existence in
the Dukagjin tribes of Shale, Shosh, Kir, Gjaj and Toplane, and
also in Puke, Mirdite, Kthelle, Kurbin and the mountains of Lesh.
Father Gjegov considers the custom to be so old that it dates from
days ‘before thin-necks began to vomit flame’, that is to say, before
firearms were invented.


CHAPTER IX
BOUNDARIES
According to the law, every tribe, village, house, field, meadow,
pasturage, vegetable garden, vineyard, forest and spinney required
a fixed boundary. Some boundaries were centuries old, but,
ancient or modem, they could in no circumstances be moved. The
stones that most often indicated their line were, in the absence or
rarity of title-deeds written on paper or engraved on copper, the
chief tokens of ownership of property. Consequently they were as
sacred and immovable in the eyes of the law as the bones in a dead
man’s grave. Brothers, cousins or villages might quarrel over
a boundary and keep up the shooting until it had cost a hundred
lives —nevertheless, the boundary remained where it had been
when the first shot was fired.
In fields of average size the boundary was marked by three
stones, one at either end and the third in the middle. Each had to
be planted as deep in the earth as it projected above it, and to have
its centre exactly over the boundary line so that half of it stood on
one neighbour’s property and half on the other’s. When fields
were very small, there might be only two stones, one belonging to
each neighbour. Instances can be seen in Shijan. Little heaps of
stones marked the division between fields and pastures in Shpat and
Dumre. Big cairns of rocks and boulders, each ‘as big as a house’
and at varying intervals from the next one with no charcoal under
them, divided off the vast alpine hayfields of Martanesh one
from the other and also separated its territory from that of the
neighbouring villages of Shengjerg, Bulqize and Okshtun. Some-
times in the lonelier regions of the Martanesh highlands deep holes
were dug in place of piling up the more usual cairns. In the
spacious Alps of the north only an occasional stone was used to
mark off one man’s forest or grazing-ground from another’s.
Each boundary stone ‘ had two friends with it’. These were small
stones which were more or less buried in the ground on either side
of the big one. They were almost invariably two in number, but in
Mirdite six or twelve. In most places they were picturesquely said
to be there as ‘witnesses’, but according to a more sophisticated


informant in Byty9 their business was to prop up the big stone. The
association of the three, one big and two small, was so distinct that
it could be seen at a glance that they were boundary stones.
In old days, in places as far apart as Kurvelesh in south-west
Albania and Lume in the north-east, some pieces of charcoal,
generally three, were put under the big boundary stone; in Lume
a fragment of tile was added. Centuries might pass, but charcoal
and tile remained as imperishable evidence of the true line of the
boundary. In case one neighbour charged the other with moving
the stones the elders dug these up; if they found no charcoal under
them they knew they had been moved and dug all round until they
came on charcoal and with it the original boundary. A man who
went to move boundary stones always went on a dark night when the
buried charcoal was as invisible as himself, and so far as was known
his ingenuity never ran to taking a handful with him from home.
Boundary stones were set up with all the ceremony befitting
a mark that was to last for ever. All the members of the families
concerned, the village elders, as many children and youths of the
village as possible, as many men from neighbouring villages as
possible and all the tribal elders gathered to witness the event and
to preserve its memory for their lifetime. When the entity to be
divided—field, farmyard, vineyard, etc. —had been measured with
a rope or by pacing into the required number of portions, the elder
chosen to delimit the boundary put any chance stone and a clod
of earth on his right shoulder, and after swearing upon his soul to
delimit justly, moved forward along the boundary line followed by
all the witnesses. It was his duty to walk in a straight line in order
to iron out every possibility of future conflict —‘a boundary
mustn’t twist’ said the law —but if he deviated slightly no one
could correct him; it was his responsibility. All the objector could
do was to say, ‘Well, lead the way and if you don’t act righteously
may that weight lie heavy on you in the other life’. At the two ends
and in the middle the elder—no one else —dug a hole in which he
set up the big stone at one end, packing the smaller ones round it.
When he finished, he laid his hand on the big stone and solemnly
cursed anyone who should seek to move it, saying in Mirdite,
‘ Whoever moves this stone, shall be weighted down with it in the
life beyond’. In Lume the curse was vaguer, ‘Here are your
boundaries, men’, said the elder. ‘Don’t move them because it’s
bad’—in this world where quarrelling results and in the other


where damnation follows. When the last big stone was in place the
witnesses fired in the air to signify that the ceremony was over.
When a geographical feature was available, it was often utilized
as a boundary. For instance, an irrigation channel might be
recognized as such. The dividing line between the neighbours then
ran down the middle. It could not be diverted or otherwise
interfered with by either neighbour, since it contained running
water and had been made long years before—a point that gave it
the permanence indispensable in a boundary. In Mirdite a very
old tree sometimes marked the division between two pieces of land.
In all areas growing trees of any age might outline forest and even
village boundaries. Notches were cut in each; all the ground this
side of a notch belonged to one neighbour and all on that to the
other. Between big units such as villages or forests, though not
small ones like fields or houses, a watershed or a torrent bed often
formed the boundary. ‘God has separated the two; nature has
decided their boundaries’, said the people of such cases. Some-
times a road was the boundary between the villages; a field-path
was never important enough for this purpose. Finally, in some
groups of villages near Elbasan, such as Godolesh, Griqan and
Labinot, there was so much buying of land in one village by natives
of the others that no very definite line was drawn between their
territories, though the boundaries of individual properties were
as clearly marked and as fiercely defended as they were elsewhere.
In the north, since no outsider could buy land in a village, there
was no fluidity of boundary, whether village or private.
The delimiting elder was usually one of the recognized elders of
the village. Sometimes only one was employed, more often there
was one for each new neighbour, and in sprawling areas like
Martanesh ten or even fifteen men might be asked to help. In
Shijan elders often worked only ‘ for the good of their soul ’ and took
no fee; elsewhere they charged one to two napoleons according to
local rates. In Surroj they asked no less than four napoleons but
seldom received them; to save this heavy fee, the older of the new
neighbours set up the boundary stones, and only if he seemed
to be cheating did a younger man think it necessary to call in an
elder. That elder carried the earth and stone of the oath on his
shoulder. In Qermenike, however, he carried them in his hands
and in Labinot he did not carry them at all, only spoke of doing so.
Both these usages seem degenerations from the original. The
7 HAM


expression ‘to take on the shoulder’, which is frequently heard in
speech all over the country in the sense of ‘to destroy’ or ‘to ruin’,
seems to derive from this obviously very ancient method of making
oath. ‘ If I don’t act justly, may I carry this weight in this world
and the next’, the elder swore solemnly as, irrespective of whether
he was Catholic, Orthodox or Moslem, he embarked on his
delimitation. In most cases he believed that if he were unfair the
earth and stone would punish him literally as he said. ‘Earth will
rot us all one day; we can’t put it lightly on our shoulders like
a stone. It’s a very serious thing; we stake our soul by touching
it’, were some of the expressions used to explain the general fear.
Some men were so frightened of the dread symbols that they
would not undertake to delimit a boundary, saying, ‘ It’s a serious
business to undertake such a thing; it brings you up against God’s
justice’. A few others, it must be confessed, were sceptical enough
in consideration of a bribe to defy the consequences of perjury
and to delimit unfairly.
Boundary stones then were set up by elders in the presence of
witnesses as an abiding memorial to the ownership of the land
they outlined. ‘A fence may rot, a boundary does not’, said the
proverb. ‘Let ever so many be killed; a field, or mountain,
a vineyard cannot be seized by force; the boundary stones say who
is the lawful owner’, was another aphorism. In many places it was
customary, generation after generation, to ‘ ride the marches ’ once
a year so that the old could show the young where the stones were
and so forge the next link in the endless chain of memory. Like
its British counterpart, the custom gave occasion for a public
holiday. Often performed, as in Nange, at the spring festival of
‘Summer Day’, all men and boys in a village went round every
known boundary in it. They saw that the boundary stones were
still in place and not sunk out of sight, noted their position, and
cleared away thorns and other concealing overgrowth. Often, as in
Nange, they were led by gypsies banging joyously on drums.
It was thought a sin to move boundary stones, since they had
been set up in such solemn circumstances by elders, the highest
tribal authorities. But land-hunger was so prevalent that the sin
was all too common. With the lapse of time, too, boundary stones
might sink out of sight in the ground and the boundary line be
obliterated. Disputes over boundaries were consequently endless.
To prevent them there were various deterrents. Men of weight—


tribal, religious or personal—fostered the belief that moving
boundary stones made things specially hard for the sinner in the
next world. In this world the elders punished the misdeed with
a heavy fine—of varying amount in Mirdite, 30 rams and an ox in
Bicaj of Lume, 3000 grosh and 6 rams in Kastrat, and a Turkish
pound and boycott in Godolesh. Everywhere the sinner was
publicly disgraced even if he was not always boycotted as in
Godolesh, and he had always to compensate his victim financially.
He had in fact stolen land, a valuable article of property as
representing a man’s livelihood. Consequently his crime was
punishable as a bad form of theft. In Mirdite a man who had not
only moved the boundary stones but also killed his neighbour was
fined 100 rams and an ox and publicly executed for his double
crime.
Yet in Mirdite one very primitive method of moving a tribal
boundary was permissible. If a man had no forest or other source
of timber and he had desperate need of this, he might take his axe
and go to a forest in a neighbouring tribe—naturally he did not
penetrate very far from his own tribe’s boundary. The noise his
axe made as he felled and lopped a tree soon brought up the
foresters. If he had presence of mind and strength of arm enough
to drive his axe up to the shaft in the fallen tree, and if the foresters
could not pull it out, the boundary of his tribe was advanced to the
tree. This was the manner in which Gjoke Buca of Ka<pinar won
forest from Kushnen. The method may have been peculiar to
Mirdite.
In the Malesi e Madhe a man who had a spinney might refuse to
permit his neighbour who had none to cut timber to fence in his
property. He might want to cut the timber himself next year. It
was his own business whether he sold it or not. The other was
getting food from his field; let him go and buy or beg wood else-
where for his fence. Presumably what went for an individual
tribesman went for his village or tribe.
When disputes arose, efforts were made to settle them before
they ended in bloodshed. Two types of dispute were distinguished,
public—as arising between tribe and tribe, village and village,
ward of a village and ward of a village—and private, as arising
between individual and individual.
Settlement in private disputes might be effected by the parties
themselves, by elders or by the government. The first method was
7-2


the quickest, the second tried when the first failed, and the third
when the second failed. In practice recourse to the authorities was
rare and seldom as effective as action by elders.
When settlement was made by the parties themselves, one of the
two men quarrelling might exclaim/ Well, take it on your shoulders ’
—there was no need to specify what —‘and set up the stones’. ‘All
right’, replied the other as he bent to pick up a stone or a clod of
earth or both to put on his shoulders. ‘May I carry it on my
shoulder in this world and in that if this ground isn’t mine’, or
‘May I carry this stone and this earth and the whole wide world’,
he proclaimed as he swaggered off along what he said was the
boundary line. Provided four or five witnesses were present this
ended the dispute. Either oath was too solemn to be gainsaid. The
second in particular was convincing: who would do anything as
grave as to take the world on his shoulder for the sake of an erring
rope in a measurer’s hand? Four or five friends of both parties
attended as witnesses. Fear of being asked to take this solemn
oath was a considerable deterrent against disturbing the stones.
Sometimes the older disputant took an oath, with or without
earth or stone, that the disputed land was his, and so proved his
title to it.
When the boundary had been recently delimited the disputants
might consult their other neighbours, especially if these were older
than they were themselves. Or they might ask the opinion of one,
two or three very old men from another village as likely to be
impartial. If they consulted only one, they had both to consent
formally to employing him. Sometimes, when a dispute was
dragging on interminably, an old man cut in with an offer to show
them where the boundary was, with earth and a stone on his
shoulder.
When friends or neighbours were called in they might settle the
dispute by arguing. When old men were asked, they had to point
out the boundary afresh but not till after they had taken earth and
a stone on their shoulders and made a solemn oath to carry these
through all eternity if they delimited falsely. When the old men
were from the same villages as the disputants, they were unpaid;
when from another village they were each given a Turkish pound.
By the second method of settlement the elders in Mune took two
or three napoleons from each disputant as a pledge of his future
behaviour, and arranged for five or six elders as well as some


ordinary householders to meet at an early date at the boundary. In
presence of the assembled company the claimant swore with earth
and a stone on his shoulders that the boundary was where he said.
The elders then dug to see if they could find the stones. If they did
they gave judgement in the claimant’s favour and vice versa. If
the losing disputant did not accept their ruling they kept his pledge.
In Martanesh, according to Mr Lef Nosi, the case was entrusted
to a single elder. First he tried to decide it by questioning the
neighbours of the disputants. If he doubted what they said he put
them to the ordeal of an oath on bread and the Koran. If he still
thought one or more of them was lying he bade them set up the
boundary stones where they wished. If they dared to do so he
could say no more, but sometimes they jibbed at this final perjury
and then his judgement prevailed. If the loser objected to his
allowing the neighbours to mark the boundary, he hushed him by
bidding him let them perjure themselves and then offering to
indemnify him out of his own pocket for his loss, but here the
elder was on safe ground. Shame prevented the loser from
accepting this offer.
When the elders failed to effect a settlement the injured party in
Shijan complained to the government —not always unsuccessfully.
Shijan was so near Elbasan that the government’s writ ran there
even in Turkish times. In many other places, in modern as in
Turkish times, it was thought that if elders had failed it was useless
to apply to the government, and a shooting match began. In Lume
the man who had taken the oath with earth and a stone took the
initiative. In a fury at finding he had risked his soul with an oath
for nothing he apostrophized his absent enemy, ‘I put the stone
on my shoulder. You could have done it, but you wouldn’t. Now
I’ll kill you.’ When he succeeded the bitterest of feuds started.
Sometimes for greater ignominy they beat each other with sticks.
This too started a bitter feud.
When bigger units disputed a boundary each party generally
engaged an elder, paying him a fee of 250-500 grosh in Martanesh
in Mr Lef Nosi’s time, against 50 for a quarrel between individuals.
Elders, disputants and witnesses crowded to the boundary, where
the elders questioned and argued interminably. If they failed to
come to an agreement, murder soon followed. When both sides
were sickened by the shuttlecock of the feud they called in famous
elders from another unit who could not possibly have an interest in


the matter and asked them to set up the boundary stones where they
thought right. But sometimes many lives had been lost in the
interval. Once the elders of Byty? found, when summoned to
intervene in a boundary dispute between Gash and Krasniqe, that
in two days it had cost the lives of 124 men.
Characteristic processes often marked the arbitration. For
example, when two village wards quarrelled in Qermenike, the chief
elders of the village summoned two of the oldest men in each and
questioned them separately in the presence of witnesses. If their
answers tallied, there could be no more question where the boundary
lay. For ratification the old men were asked to walk along it, earth
and stone on their shoulder, or to swear formally to its being the
correct line. If there were discrepancies in their answers, the
dispute was referred to the government authorities in Elbasan or,
more probably, to elders from another village. If two villages of
Kthelle quarrelled the three bajraktars went with the leading men
and a sufficient number of hangers-on to the boundary. One
village said where the line was, the other contradicted this. Finally,
the most important of the bajraktars, lifting a stone set it on the
shoulder of an old, wise, upright man and bade him set it down
exactly on the boundary. When he had done so the line was
established beyond controversy and no more murder could be
done for it. 1
To begin with the bloodshed method, if different villages or
tribes were involved, when men quarrelling over a boundary or
shepherds jostling over a grazing ground killed each other at the
very time that the boundary was being delimited, there was no more
need for elders. The tribal or village boundary was where heaps of
stones marked the graves of the murdered men. If it was from
a distance that they killed each other, the boundary of each village
or tribe was by his grave and the ground in between became the
common property of both. If one was only seriously wounded and
was able to stagger or roll himself along into the foreign territory
before he died, a cairn of stones was piled over him where he died,
and though in foreign territory, became the boundary of his village
or tribe. Boundaries so established were the most permanent; the
1 In Mirdite boundary disputes between villages and tribes were sometimes
decided with bloodshed or a rock, obviously very primitive methods. Indeed
the latter, a glorification of physical strength, seems to antedate the discovery of
gunpowder.


greediest man would not venture to disturb the cairn or to steal
land for which another had lost his life.
Near boundaries of villages and tribes might be won with
a boulder and distant boundaries with a slab of rock. In the former
event what was a contest in throwing the heavy weight took place;
in so poor a country the weight could only be a stone. When the
two tribes had quarrelled over a boundary each selected a champion
athlete to throw the weight. Whichever threw it farthest won the
land in dispute for the tribe. Father does not make it clear
where the men stood for the throw. When more distant boundaries
were in question, each champion carried a slab of stone or a rock on
his back until he dropped under it. The one who held out longest
won all the ground he had covered for his tribe.
The relations between a boundary and adjoining structures, such
as a fence, wall or house, and natural features like hedges, trees and
ditches, were as carefully regulated as the site of the boundary,
A fence or a wall generally enclosed a farmyard and sometimes
a field, a vineyard or the like. Fences were made of hurdles or,
much oftener, withered Christ’s Thom, depending on what grew
in the locality. In the marshes at the mouth of the river Mat
withies were interlaced between living willow trees planted like
posts in the ditches surrounding the fields. In well-watered areas
inland hedges of living Christ’s Thorn were common. Walls were
usually dry, like Scottish dykes; the more pretentious had their
stones bedded in mud. Dry or mud, they were rare round fields,
because fences were easier to make and less trouble to maintain. In
upland pastures there were neither fences nor walls, presumably
because the boundaries were too long. The rules for both fences
and walls were pretty much the same.
When an old farmyard was divided between two brothers or
cousins who were on friendly terms, their respective portions were
separated only by boundary stones. When they were not on
friendly terms what they did depended on the degree of their
enmity. If not embittered, they built a wall three spans wide
(60 cm.) or a fence, centred exactly over the boundary line and
possibly broken by a door that led from one yard to the other.
Each built half of the barrier and became the recognized proprietor
of what he built. When it was a wall he made a square niche on his
own side to mark his ownership. When it was a fence he had no such
material way of safeguarding his rights but could always rely on


public memory. If only one of the two wanted a barrier, he had to
build it unaided and entirely on his own ground, leaving the
boundary stones on his neighbour’s side. In this case its position
relative to these stones was enough to show whose it was, but he
nevertheless constructed the usual niche on his own side. He
could not, however, build the wall right against the boundary
stones but had to leave its width free between them and its outer
base. For the law said that any rain that fell on a man’s house or
wall must run off on his own ground and not damage his neighbour’s
property. It needed no legal compulsion, of course, to make him
construct the various buildings in his own yard in such a position
that their drips did not damage his fence. Incidentally the 60 cm.
of free space served at need for a footpath. When two brothers
were embittered, each built a partition wall, naturally without
a communicating door.
If a man wilfully damaged a tree or other property on his
neighbour’s land he had to answer for his crime by paying
damages. If a stranger who did not know he was trespassing on
another’s property and was not warned off by a shout from the
owner did similar damage, he, too, had to appear before the elders.
But if he could prove ignorance of trespass, he had no damage to
pay. To keep animals under control so that they should not stray
to another’s property, a wall or at least a fence round the yard was
an essential concomitant of a house. This too had to be its own
thickness inside its owner’s boundary to guarantee that rain drips
did not damage the ground next door. In the Malesi e Madhe the
man building the wall could claim any timber that during building
operations fell not more than half-way down on his neighbour’s
side. But whatever fell more than half-way or reached the ground—
even the scrap of land he had left himself between the wall and the
boundary—became his neighbour’s. This discrimination applied
to every form of wall.
Sometimes when one of two brothers was enclosing his yard he
was permitted to utilize his neighbour’s wall for one side of his
enclosure. There was no risk of this confusing the ownership of the
wall, for the neighbour, when building it, had not only put
a proprietor’s niche on his own side but had also left the boundary
stones outside so that they fell within the new yard. A more
distant relative could not utilize an existing wall, but had to build
one of his own, parallel to the neighbour’s and distant by the


regulation width from the boundary. If this involved him in more
expense it also saved him and his descendants from ever quarrelling
about the wall. It also gave his dog room enough to run round his
house at night, a not unimportant point. But even a brother could
not be allowed to erect a building against his neighbour’s wall. The
risk from the drips of rain from it was too serious.
If one neighbour wished to fence or wall in his field he did
no wrong, strictly speaking, by building the barrier along the
middle of the grass-grown footpath along the boundary between
fields, and so on the very boundary line. But this caused so many
quarrels that in Mirdite and the Malesi e Madhe the law bade him
leave the width of his barrier free between its outer base and the
boundary, just as he must do when building a wall across his
courtyard. In its wisdom the law was providing for the future.
Theoretically, a man could not only build his fence or wall
along a boundary line, but could also ask his neighbour to make
half of it. In practice, however, the neighbour might be too lazy
or might say he was too poor or too ill to do his bit. In Kastrat 1 he
could be fined 250 grosh and three rams for his unneighbourliness,
and this possibility sometimes drove him to action. In the ingenious
Malesi e Madhe the first man might in malice run up a fence
parallel to the boundary but with an opening sixteen spans
(3*20 metres) wide at either end. This ensured that his animals
strayed through the opening on to his bad neighbour’s field and
ate it up. To give the neighbour no chance to make him move his
fence he ran it up four spans, half the width of the horse-track,
from the boundary. Most men, however, preferred to make the
whole fence themselves, constructing it at least half the width of
a footpath from the boundary. If two neighbours made half the
fence each, but one made his half badly, this man was at fault —
whether his sheep strayed into the good fencer’s field or the good
fencer’s into his. The loss always fell on him; in the first case he
had to compensate his neighbour, and in the second he had no
right to be compensated for the damage done by the animals.
Sometimes a man wished to fence in a field which was bounded
by a road. In Krasniqe and some other hilly districts he had to
leave a strip of his land as well to allow for the fence slipping down
on to the road, an ever likely possibility.
Most hedges of dead thorn were directly over the boundary line,
1 See Appendix, Document V, § n, p. 264.


and if properly placed to begin with, caused no trouble. The same
was true of living hedges inland. On the other hand, living hedges
in the marshy areas near the mouth of the river Mat sometimes
grew so tall that they damaged the neighbouring land with their
shade. To prevent this, the owner had to lop overgrown trees once
every three years. Failing this, his neighbour could complain to
the headman; inevitably they gave him leave to cut the trees down
to the root on the owner’s ground, an intrusion that was in itself
a punishment, and fined the owner 250-450 grosh for breaking the
law about lopping.
Similar rules regulated the planting of fruit and other trees, olives
being included among the former. In Mirdite a fruit tree might be
planted only 5 ‘feet’ (1 metre) from the boundary; another kind
had to be at least 10 feet away. In Godolesh, a great fruit-growing
area, a fruit tree could be planted on the very boundary, but in
adjacent Labinot it had to be a span away. In Shkrel it could be
planted anywhere on one’s own ground, as it never caused trouble
by itself. As with living hedges, care had to be taken that a tree did
not cast harmful shade over a neighbour’s land. If one did so in
Shkrel the owner agreed amicably to lop it, raising no objections
unless he had already quarrelled with his neighbour over something
else. In Mirdite he was bound to lop the offending branches; if
he failed to do so his neighbour could lop them as high as he could
reach with a hook, the handle of which did not exceed 3I spans in
length. In the mountains of Lesh the owner had to uproot the tree
or to pay annual damages to his neighbour. In Godolesh the
neighbour was entitled to stretch as far as he could and cut the too
luxuriant branches with his short-handled axe. If a tree was
doing no damage to neighbouring ground, it could not be lopped
except by its owner. A man who transgressed this law in Mirdite
had to pay its owner 500 grosh.
Sometimes an open drain adjoined a boundary. When it was
first cut, each of the two neighbours provided half the ground
required, did half the work and retained the earth excavated from
his own side. Three stones, one big and two small, were left at the
head to mark the boundary; the two other sets, normally placed in
the middle and at the foot, were removed to make room for the
water; as the drain discharged into a bigger channel, they could
not possibly be left at the foot. The boundary naturally ran exactly
down the middle. In most places the drain had to be cleared out


annually. In Godolesh the two neighbours did it in alternate years,
having exclusive right to the earth with its valuable fertilizing
properties for the year when they did the clean up. In Lume two
neighbours cleared the drain together year after year and flung half
the earth on one side and half on the other.
In other places one ditch seldom drained two neighbouring
fields on the principle that ‘ you can’t walk on my path or use my
drain’. In Gurreze the man who wanted a drain had to cut it on
his own ground with a ‘footprint’ (20 cm.) of land between the
boundary and its edge for the protection of his neighbour’s land.
Without this buttress the drain might overflow or burst its bank to
the detriment of his neighbour. In either contingency its owner
had to pay compensation to his neighbour, but prevention of
damage was always better for both parties. His neighbour might
also accuse him of encroaching on his land, an insulting remark
that provoked instant retaliation. If, later on, the neighbour
wanted a drain he had to make one for himself, also a ‘footprint’
away from the boundary. In Lume and Elbasan there was little
risk that open drains would flood, but there too a space had to be
left between their edge and the boundary. The avowed purpose of
this space was to support the boundary stones. In all cases of single
ownership the owner, on clearing the ditch, threw the earth on his
own side, where it testified to his ownership if this was ever
questioned.
Sometimes a man of Shkrel wanted both a drain and a fence. In
that event the ditch was cut along the boundary and a strip of
ground of the same width was set aside on the other side of the
boundary. All the earth excavated from the ditch was thrown on
this strip and so the neighbours became quits, one had a ‘hole’ on
his land and the other a ‘hill’. The fence was erected on the ‘hill’.
We come now to one of the most important considerations in
boundary making. North Albania is one of the wettest regions in
Europe, and when the land was waterlogged it inevitably tended
to slip downhill. The tropical intensity of many rainstorms
increased the mischief. Terracing the fields would have helped to
check it, but such manual labour is contrary to the habits and
dignity of the north Albanian, His law, however, gave him every
possible protection. When there were two fields on a slope, one
above the other, they might be separated by a field-path, a road, an
irrigation channel or a fence. (The term ‘field-path’ includes the


little ‘headland’ which formed along the top of the lower field as
the plough-oxen turned in their ploughing.) It was vital to save
the upper field from being undermined by the tillage of the lower
one. So the field-path (or headland) was always assigned to the
upper field, with the boundary and the fence, if any, along its
lower edge. The upper man was strictly forbidden to work the
path, generally grass-grown, and so fairly cohesive. The lower man
was even more strictly forbidden to cultivate right up to the path
for fear he brought it down; since his own land slipped a little
lower every year as he tilled it, the field-path soared higher above
it. Only if the lower field was in grass did the law revert to its
usual form. If the upper field was planted with maize and the
lower one a grass meadow, all the land under the boundary stones
belonged to the lower field because grass is in itself binding enough
to stop landslides.
If a road or an irrigation channel divided the two fields, the
upper bank belonged in most places to the upper man, and the
lower to the other, since there seemed no risk that cultivation of
the lower field would undermine the upper one. In Greater
Diber, however, no risks were taken. Both banks of an irrigation
channel were given to the upper man in case the lower one worked
too close to it. In any area, the owner of a lower field who made
a drain for it had to make it four finger-breadths from his own
boundary to make sure it did not damage the upper field.
If building a new house, the owner of the lower field had to keep
it far enough away from the boundary to do no damage to the fence,
as any such damage would make the upper field slip. On the other
hand, the owner of the upper field had licence to build his house as
close to the fence as if the site were flat, that is to say, with only half
the width of a footpath intervening, but he was never foolhardy
enough to do so.
Sometimes it was the lower man who received protection from
the law. In Martanesh, for example, when the upper one built
a fence or wall round his field, he had to leave the boundary stones
as well clear of it as if the field were flat. This was in case it moved
and encroached on the boundary.
Sometimes a fence was misplaced. Even if it was only one cm.
inside the neighbour’s land, it had to be moved. In Bicaj the
neighbour sent a mutual friend to say so to the owner; if the latter
ignored the message the neighbour took down the fence and saw


that when next it was erected it was correctly sited, otherwise
shooting began. In the Martanesh area the village headman, with
two official and two unofficial assistants, was usually called in to
set the fence up on the exact boundary line. If the offender moved
it forward again, the elders sent word to his relatives that if he
touched it again, there would be shooting. So restrained, he
usually settled down.
An opening was never to be made in a fence by force or without
the owner’s leave. Only a foolish and ‘lawless’ man would do such
a thing; it could only be the preliminary to using the field as a road,
or to stealing something.
Fines were imposed as a deterrent. These amounted to 50 grosh in
Turkish times and 100 korone in the 1920’s in the Malesi e Madhe,
with 150 grosh and 3 rams in Kastrat in 1892; even if the offender
closed the gap again, he had no right to make it in the first instance.
If he destroyed a fence altogether in the marshes at the mouth of
the Mat he was fined 250 grosh, five times the amount imposed for
opening a way through it. If he did not pay the fine he was killed
by the owner. As many as three lives have often been lost for one
opening.
So with a wall in the marshland of the Mat. If it was holed, the
owner asked the offender furiously if he was agreeable to having
elders assess the damage. If the offender objected to assessment or
refused payment, the owner shot him; at best he was sharply fined
by the village. A breach in a fence or wall had always to be repaired
by the owner.
Elsewhere manners were milder. In Martanesh there was no
punishment at all for making a hole in a fence. In Perlat permission
to make one was readily given either as a favour or in exchange for
a passage through the other man’s. In Fulqet a traveller could
make one without leave if the highway was deep in mud and the
only dry ground within reach was the field behind the fence. Often
enough the owner of fence and field shot at him, but this was
illegal; there was only one legitimate way of keeping the traveller
to the muddy road. This was for the owner of field and fence to fill
up the holes in the road with stones. If he took this trouble and
the traveller still trespassed on his field he had full right to shoot
him.


CHAPTER X
PASTURAGE
Mountainous northern Albania is largely a pastoral country with
large flocks of sheep and goats and considerable numbers of
plough-oxen, cows and horses.
To a great extent the nature of a village’s pasturage depended on
its position, whether it was in the shrub zone, the oak zone or
higher up among the pine and beech forests of the alpine slopes. In
the low-lying belt of shrublands the poorest type of grazing was
found, and here the pastoral life was seen at its lowest level. A poor
man might have only one to five sheep, a cow or, where foliage was
more plentiful, a few goats. Most villages had little or no pasturage
proper and the animals grazed on the verges of paths and fields, in
small spinneys and in the waste spaces overgrown with shrubs.
Each family would do its own herding, the animals being tended by
the old people and by small boys and girls. For security against
thieves and wolves the animals were brought home at night to the
little farmyard with its low stone wall, or to a stable under the
living rooms of the farmhouse. The low altitude of such holdings,
where the climate was neither too hot in summer nor too inclement
in winter, ensured fairly constant grazing all the year round.
During the winter, however, when the daylight hours were fewer,
a meagre sheaf of maize and, less frequently, wheat straw or chaff,
was fed by hand to each animal on its return from the open. When
wheat chaff was fed to a horse it had to be well damped with water
or the horse would not touch it. As for the goats, they would be
given an armful of dried leaves which had been cut and stacked by
the men in autumn and carried into the house by the women. No
grain feed and no roots were fed to the animals; the former was
needed for human consumption and no root crops are grown in
Albania. Occasionally, however, when oats of a very poor quality
were grown, the grain as well as the straw was fed to the animals.
Albanians were astounded to learn that the British eat porridge.
‘Food for animals’ they would exclaim at the sight of a packet of
porridge oats.
Poor and insignificant as they were, these small owners were


so numerous that their livestock amounted to a considerable
percentage of the total in Albania. They were found mostly in the
shrub areas, though a few very poor men lived also in the oak zone.
But the vast majority of this leafy belt herded their flocks on
a larger scale. Above each village there was always the overhanging
mountain with its forests of beech and pine to hold the waters and
keep the pastures green and sweet. Under the higher beech trees
no grass grew, but in the sloping clearings the animals could graze
at will. In winter, however, these clearings were too high to
permit of habitation; besides, such tilling of the soil as did take
place occurred at roughly the same level as the village, and it was
there that the flocks found most of their feeding. In summer the
fields and meadows, whether open or enclosed, provided hay for
the animals; in the autumn the stubble served for a few weeks;
while in winter they wandered over the grass. In spring the winter-
sown wheat was improved by being eaten down a few inches by
the sheep. Dried leaves from the numerous oak trees supplemented
this winter feeding.
Sometimes the number of animals was such that all these sources
did not suffice during the lean months, or sometimes a village had
no suitable winter pastures or had lost them for political reasons.
Many animals would then be slaughtered at the commencement of
winter and the meat smoked or salted down, while the remainder
lived to fare as best they could. The many owners who could not
afford meat, fresh or salted, had to try to maintain their livestock
until the spring. By that time the poor creatures were no better
than living skeletons hardly able to walk out to the pastures.
On the long coastal plains and marshy river banks the owners of
large flocks and herds were scorched out of their pastures in
summer or plagued by the mosquitoes from the marshy swamps.
This necessitated a wholesale migration at the beginning of summer
to the cooler alpine slopes, a feature of Albanian life as charac-
teristic as picturesque.
A few of the purely winter pastures belonged to the State, a few
to private persons, and the immense majority to some community,
either a tribe, a village or a village ward. State-owned pastures
dated from Turkish times and were consequently found only on the
plains near big centres, as Turkish control had little reality else-
where. Examples of these were the forested swamps of Mamuras
and the Highland village of Gurreze on the left bank of the river


Mat. They were extensive, if not numerous, and must be dis-
tinguished from the other state-owned pastures which, also
in Turkish times, were added piecemeal to the community’s
possessions from the confiscated property of tribesmen who had
transgressed an important law.
There were both alpine and winter pasturages in private hands
in the 1930’5, but the former were few and small; examples of
these were some meadows on Mt Dragu between Bulqize and
Zerqan, and an upland plateau east of Sllove in Diber. The former,
carrying 1500 sheep, was owned by Dervish Ali of Fulqet, and the
latter, carrying not more than 1000 sheep, by Cen Elezi of Sllove.
Up till 1920, when Prenk Bib Doda Pasha bequeathed all his
property to the tribe of Mirdite because he disliked his heir, the
Mai i Shenjt (Holy Mountain) above Orosh was the private
property of each Hereditary Captain. As for winter pasturages,
much of the marshy land from Mamuras to below Durres was in
private hands. Thus the estate known as Cakale belonged to Abas
Kupi of Kruje, and several others near Shijak to members of the
Toptan family. Some scandal was caused in the 1920’s when three
of these were leased for 99 years to Italians. A few meadows, some
coppices and all the fields of stubble (for arable land was never
owned by the community), complete the tale of winter pasturages
which were private property.
Everything else, big and little, on the mountains and the plains,
by the river bank and the wayside, belonged to some community.
This was usually the nearest. For example, the plateau on the
mountain overhanging Zerqan was owned by that village, the
upland meadows round Okol in north Shale by the various wards
of Theth, one by each, and the swamps between Gurreze and
Mamuras by the village of La? near Milot. A major exception was
the summer grazing which belonged to the village of Kuturman in
Qermenike. This pasturage lay twelve hours away on Mount
Shebenik, more popularly known as the Mai i Kuq (the Red
Mountain) on the eastern frontier between Albania and Yugo-
slavia. But its acquisition has been accidental. Most of it came as
the dowry of a girl of Rice who was her father’s sole surviving heir
and who married a man from Kuturman. The rest was subsequently
purchased by the village; the copper plate on which its title to this
portion was engraved in Turkish, a great curiosity in view of the
rarity of title deeds, remained in the possession of Beqir Ali of


Kuturman until his family died out and the plate disappeared. The
summer grazing which belonged to the village of Bershenj near
Fulqet was three days away on Mt Dragu. The Highlanders,
living at the mouth of the river Mat, had their summer pasturages
on Mt Vermosh five days away from their winter homes.
A clear distinction was drawn between the laws governing
private and public pasturages. In broad outline what was private
could be fenced or sold or built on at its owner’s sole pleasure, and
was divided up between his sons at his death. What was public was
marked off by boundary stones from neighbouring properties but
had neither outside fence nor internal boundaries. Though all the
households in the tribe or village had equal rights in it and could
each graze as many animals, cut as much firewood or timber, build
as many huts or folds and shoot as much game on it as they pleased,
these rights came to them only as members of the community and
were not transferable to strangers. They could not sell their
grazing rights to an outsider, share a hut with him or graze his
animals along with their own; if they wanted to give an outsider
friend pasturage, they must do so on their private ground. They
could not sell part of the common or dispose of firewood, timber
or game for their individual gain; only the community could
negotiate such sales, and all the profit or loss from them was
community profit or loss. They could not build a permanent house
on the common. When the head of a family died, his rights were
not divided among his sons like his private property but descended
to them jointly. Gypsies, it may be added, were allowed to pitch
their tents, graze their animals and gather firewood on the common.
Being as resourceful in Albania as elsewhere, they needed no
permission and snared what game they could; as they did not
carry firearms they could not shoot it.
Those communities which did not possess their own private
summer pasturage, hired or rented it from near and far. Breg i Matit
rented theirs partly from Shkrel and partly from Theth, and the
latter was a full week’s journey away. Modernity having come to
Albania, they paid cash down. Fulqet rented a neighbour’s
mountain every summer and paid for it in the old-fashioned way
with half an oke of butter, the same of sour-milk cheese and oke
of sweet cheese for every forty sheep. Perlat again gave their own
winter pasturage in return for leave to summer on the mountains
of Lure and Selite. In Turkish times, Lure asked neither money
8 HAM


nor produce nor an exchange for summering the flocks brought to
the Crown (Kunora) by tribesmen living north of Shkoder, but
welcomed them because their sheep manured the fields. Com-
paratively recently, Lure gave a Selite man leave to summer his
flocks gratis on Mt Murije, which, lacking their manure, would
hardly have been worth the labour of tilling. Dervish Ali of Fulqet
too was glad to let hundreds of sheep graze free in his meadows on
Mt Dragu. Surroj and Arm pastured sheep belonging to the
Hereditary Captain of Mirdite without payment, because they also
had so little arable land.
Except where the soil was so poor that the manure was welcome,
as in Lure, or where grazing was very plentiful, as in Theth,
outsiders were rigidly excluded from alps which were owned or
rented by a community. Nange said it had not enough feed for its
own flocks. Martenesh, Gurreze and Breg i Matit said they did not
want their pastures disturbed by strangers. All infringements of
the ban, both petty and grave, were punished by fines.


CHAPTER XI
BAJRAKTARS
It is an Albanian tradition that when the Turks began to raise
Albanian levies for their army they chose specially brave tribes-
men to lead the levies and called them by the Turkish name of
deli , meaning ‘madman’ or ‘desperado’. At a later date they
called them spahis (cavalrymen), and at a still later date
bajraktars (standard-bearers), from the Turk bajrak , standard.
So the word bajraktar conveys the business of the man so-called,
and the origin of his title. He was the military leader of his
tribe and owed his appointment to the Turks, not to his fellow-
Albanians.
Neither delis nor spahis seem to have been blood ancestors of the
bajraktars. Each tribe knows how its first bajraktar won his flag
but never says that he was either a deli or a spahi. In the folk-tales
which purport to recount their deeds, the spahis figure not as
heroes but as ordinary cavalrymen of the type we still find in
Algeria. Certain families, notably in Lume and Yugoslav Losove,
are surnamed Spahi. These claim descent not from medieval bravos
but from relatively modern cavalrymen, and they are not bajraktars.
The memory of the delis and their deeds survives only in folk-tales
and an occasional personal name. The bajraktar of Hot at the
beginning of the century was Deli Mete £uni. In the folk-tales
the delis, more fortunate than the spahis, preserve their reputation
as doughty fighters.
Tribal traditions agree that most bajraks were bestowed on the
original holder like a Victoria Cross, for valour in battle. The
combats were generally against the Serbs and Montenegrins,
natural enemies of the Albanians as they were their nearest
neighbours, and had not ceased ever since they appeared in the
Balkans to steal ancient Albanian territory. Some bajraks are said
to have been gained hundreds of years ago, and others only a
few generations since. The historical details in the traditions
are generally meagre and the chronology vague, but these defects
make on the whole for greater credibility, assuring us that no lively
imagination has been at work. To minds running as Albanian
8-2


minds do on courage as the highest of virtues, the traditions are
a great inspiration, 1
The following traditions are samples. The bajrak of Hot was
won four hundred years ago by an ancestor of Deli Mete Quni who
distinguished himself by cutting off Montenegrin heads, a pastime
in which the family has ever since indulged with gusto. Sul Alija,
the great-grandfather of Adem Bajrami, who lived four generations
ago, was made bajraktar of Krasniqe in reward for the bravery he
displayed during a war between Turkey and Montenegro. Sefer
Ahmeti was given his bajrak at Moraf near Belgrade after a battle
against the Serbs. The first bajraktar of Nikaj also won his stan-
dard at Mora 9, possibly in the same battle. Kole Voci, who lived
six generations ago, became the first bajraktar of Shale-Gimaj in
consequence of killing a Serbian bajraktar and carrying his head
and standard to the officer commanding the Turkish forces. In
the same battle the bajraktar of Plan was killed, but Voci caught up
and saved his bajrak from capture by the enemy. Avdi Kola,
a later bajraktar of Gimaj, was proud to boast that since Voci won
the flag no male of his house had died in his bed.
Certain tribes had more than one bajraktar, some as many as five.
Where there were two or more bajraktars the senior took precedence
over the junior. If a senior bajraktar was killed in battle it was the
junior’s duty to take his flag.
The office of the tribal bajraktar was hereditary, going from
father to son. If a bajraktar died without leaving a son he was
succeeded by his brother, his brother’s son, or in default of these,
a cousin in the male line. If he was too old or too ill before his
death to act, these relatives deputised for him. If the natural heir
was a minor at his father’s death, his father’s brother or nephew
took office until he came of full age and powers when twenty,
twenty-five, or even thirty years of age, the date varying according
to his capabilities. In 1933 Kole Ndue was senior bajraktar of
1 The bajrak was not, however, always granted for military valour but was
sometimes conferred for less martial reasons. For instance, Pec Peci of Pecnikaj,
Shale, was summoned to the presence of the head of the Begolli family to explain
why he, a peasant, had seven wives, while the great Begolli contented himself
with only three. Pec’s explanation, that only one of the women was really his wife
and the others servants who looked after his land and flocks as menservants
might have done, though known to be untrue, so fascinated Begolli by its
astuteness that he forthwith made Pec bajraktar not only of Shale, but also of
all Dukagjin.


Shale but only as trustee for the small son of Lush Prela, his
predecessor, killed some years before.
Succession from father to son depended on merit, and was
determined in the lifetime of the reigning bajraktar. A son who was
obviously unfit was passed over in favour of his younger brother.
Both, if unfit, might be superseded by their paternal uncle or
cousin in the male line.
If the natural precedence between brothers was once lost, the
bajrak generally passed from the elder’s heirs for good. Only when
the son of a dispossessed elder brother turned out much more
competent than the other heirs of his generation could he regain
the glory which his father’s weakness had lost. For example,
Muharrem Bajraktar, the standard-bearer of Ujmishte, Lume, was
the son of Nezir Bajraktar, a younger son. His cousin, Liman,
son of the elder brother to whom Nezir was preferred, was almost
as capable as he was but had no right to compete with him for the
succession.
For grave cause the claims of heredity were sometimes dis-
regarded. If a bajraktar’s family produced no competent male for
several generations, another family might wrest the standard from
its feeble hands. The transfer had naturally to be approved by the
tribe. Muharrem Bajraktar of Ujmishte, Lume, descended not
from the original bajraktar who lived at Shkavec, Lume, but from
the family which superseded the feckless descendants of the
original man some generations ago. The first bajraktar of Nik?
was Gile Prentashi, but eventually the family degenerated to such
an extent that the bajrak was taken over by Turk Vuksani, a very
distant cousin who lived in the same quarter as the natural heir.
A more remarkable transfer took place early in this century in
Perlat. For three generations there had not been a good male
in the family of its bajraktar. Then Prenk Pasha, consulted
as the head of the Gjomarkaj family of Mirdite and therefore
the source of all wisdom, advised Perlat to desert its inadequate
leader for his sister’s son, the bajraktar of the neighbouring tribe
of Rrshen. Perlat took the advice and followed this man and after
him his son Zef Bardhoku, thus going right outside the tribe in
the quest for a better leader.
With the exception of the bajraktar of Lume, all bajraktars
hitherto discussed were military leaders of tribes which were wholly
or predominantly Catholic. Mirdite, Boge, Vukel, Shale, Nikaj,


Mertur and some others were wholly Catholic. Nik?, Selce, Hot,
Kthelle and Lure were more or less mixed Catholic and Moham-
medan. Certain tribes such as Has, Byty? and Krasniq are at the
time of writing completely Mohammedan but were partly Catholic
until three or four generations ago, as their genealogies testify.
Lume asserts that it has been completely Mohammedan since the
coming of the Turks five centuries ago. It was also not fully tribal,
since each bajraktar’s following consisted not of a single kin or
agglomeration of kins with the same ancestors, but of a number of
little kins of varying ancestry.
There were also bajraktars in certain non-tribal areas, such as
Shpat and Martanesh in central Albania. Here the dignity was not
hereditary and localized, but moved with successive holders from
family to family, from quarter to quarter or even from village to
village. Fitness for military leadership of the local levies was
always demanded, and that quality did not necessarily remain from
one generation to another, in the same family, quarter or village.
Hysejn Zavolina of the village of Shelcan was a famous bajraktar
in Shpat in the last years of Turkish rule, but it was at Fushe e Kuqe
in the more central village of Gjinar that he set up his standard.
Hysejn Ramaj became bajraktar of Martanesh because he was as
popular as he was competent. After having carried his standard to
victory in Montenegro he ‘got religion’ and turned dervish. As
Baba Hysejn (Abbot Hysejn) he presided first over the Bektashi
monastery (tege) at Kruje and then over that at Martanesh and
was buried in the monastery of Zerqan. When he took to the
cloister the bajrak passed to Murat Xhabolli, who was from the
Gjoni quarter and quite a different family. The great lawgiver,
Mus Ballgjini, of the village of Gurakuq was bajraktar of the
district of Qermenike when Turkish rule over Albania ended, but
his son did not inherit the office. When Albania developed
a conscript army of European type, there could be no more
bajraktars in central Albania. Officers led the conscripts, and there
was no hereditary principle to preserve the ancient title as there
was among the tribes of the north.
In certain areas of the north there were no bajraktars. Since
beys were feudal lords of the soil it fell to them to lead their
henchmen in war. So wherever there were beys of any importance
there were no bajraktars. Mat was the classic instance. There were
bajraktars to the north of it in tribal Kthelle and Lure; there were


bajraktars to the south of it in non-tribal Martanesh; but there was
none within its own boundaries. There factions, not tribes, were
the social units, and all power, military and otherwise, was con-
centrated in the hands of four powerful bey families.
From first to last the primary function of a bajraktar was military.
When one learned that war was imminent and troops were required,
he had immediately to inform the tribe in the first instance by
firing eight shots in quick succession into the air, and in the second
by sending out the official runner called kasnec with news and a
statement of how many men were wanted. One from each house
was the usual number. The muster was soon complete, for it was
thought shameful to hang back or to hide at home and no time was
wasted hunting for deserters. When all had gathered, the march
began. Two tribesmen in some cases, and in others four, led off
singing. Next came a man closely connected with the bajraktar,
preferably his eldest son, carrying the flag. The rank and file
followed, firing constantly into the air to show their joy at the call
to arms. Any sign of depression at leaving their homes would have
been thought disgraceful and unmanly. The best warriors among
them had the bajraktar in their midst and would guard him and the
flag with their lives till they all came marching home again. No
equipment was issued to bajraktars or ‘soldiers’; each brought his
own rifle and pistols and came in his ordinary clothes. Nor was
any military training given them. Their value as soldiers depended
upon the rifle practice which they had had at home. It was usually
sufficient to make them all good shots. After a few months the war
ended and they came home again, still in their peasant clothes and
again firing into the air for joy.
In time of peace the bajraktar performed civilian duties. One of
the chief was caring for the poor. If they got into trouble or needed
work he intervened with the authorities. If they were benighted
he gave them free board and lodging. On high occasions he sent
them a ram on which to feast. So that they could buy on credit
what they needed for their weddings and funerals he went guarantee
for them at the village shops; perhaps he even paid for the goods
when the following harvest failed and left them unable themselves
to clear the debt. At times he lent them money without interest.
In return he asked only that if required they would put their rifles
at his disposal, joining him in attacking an enemy, spending some
weeks annually in his house as unpaid or poorly paid guards,


escorting him to town, guarding him during his stay there and
escorting him home again. If they refused without justifiable
cause to give him such service, he withdrew his support from them
at least for a time.
The bajraktar was also much occupied with local administration
Here he was assisted by one or more headmen, hereditary officials
like himself. Independently or together, he and they checked
quarrelling, judged and formulated new laws. He was admittedly
their superior, and when their views diverged his prevailed. If
pressure of work made him think an increase in their number
desirable, he had power to make extra appointments provided only
that he first submitted the names of his nominees to the Turkish
government for approval. In short, he was the acknowledged head
of the local administration.
As supreme administrative head the bajraktar had power to
summon a general meeting for administrative as well as military
purposes. If the matter at issue was important and affected the
whole tribe, he sent the kasnec (tribal messenger) to command the
presence of one man per house. If narrower issues were involved
he summoned only one or more headmen and the local gjobtare
(fine-collectors) or other elders. Plenary meetings dealt with anti-
social acts grave enough to involve the death penalty or expulsion,
judged cases of sacrilege against the church, tightened up tribal
discipline by enacting new or re-enacting old laws, decided
whether to revolt or not against the Turkish government, and
heard important messages from the government. In 1908 a plenary
meeting 1 was held by each tribe to decide whether or not it should
accept the Young Turk Constitution. Smaller meetings handled
business where fines were sufficient punishment for transgression.
Notably they regulated grazing rights, fixing the day for a general
move to summer pastures, stipulating how many animals each
family might feed on a common. They also regulated wood-cutting
rights and controlled the supply of water for irrigation. The
bajraktar presided at all such meetings, took an active part in the
deliberations, and signed or set his seal on any minutes that were
kept. He and the elders, as being socially superior, sat apart from
the commoners. In the Malesi e Madhe he sat on the ground while
the tribesmen stood respectfully on their feet.
1 See M. E. Durham, Some Tribal Origins, Laws and Customs of the Balkans,
P- 74-


In certain cases the bajraktar and the local headman could act
alone. For example, in case of sacrilege against the church they
had power to pronounce even a death sentence. In practice,
however, they preferred to consult the tribe and the ecclesiastical
authorities. After the Young Turks introduced their constitution
in 1908 they tried to make everything in Albania very legal and
proper. If land was bought, for example, they required a deed of
conveyance where the word of witnesses had formerly sufficed. The
best lawyer in the land might write out the document and great men
witness it, but it had no legal validity until the bajraktar and local
headmen had affixed their seals.
As a legal figure the bajraktar had special weight. If called to
serve on a jury of twenty-four men, his single person was counted
equal to the twelve jurors left unnamed by the elders. A peace
made in his presence was particularly binding. If at all distinguished
he was often called in by another tribe to settle a dispute that had
baffled its own elders. In his own tribe, besides acting as judge in
many ordinary cases, he was ultimate referee in all difficult cases.
Boundary disputes, the most fertile source of trouble among these
land-starved tribes, were often referred straight to him for settle-
ment. Disobedience to his ruling might entail the worst penalties.
Particularly in the Malesi e Madhe, he and the local headman had
power to appoint elders to settle a quarrel. If these failed to do so,
or were found to have based their decision on a false oath by one of
the litigants, it fell to the bajraktar and the local headman to reopen
the case and to pronounce a final judgement. If a headman judged
a case and gave a verdict the bajraktar disliked, he could upset this
verdict and substitute one of his own. But neither headman nor
elders could upset his judgements; these were always final and
unalterable.
All the above applies to the non-tribal areas of central Albania
as much as to the northern tribes. Mus Ballgjini of Qermenike, for
instance, was almost more famous as a law-giver than as a military
leader. By a seeming exception the bajraktar of the Perlat tribe of
Kthelle did not judge but left such matters to the elders. The
explanation of the anomaly probably lies in his notorious incom-
petence. It was every bajraktar’s province to judge in peace as well
as to lead in war.
In all areas the jurisdiction of the bajraktar was subject to certain
limitations. If the commoners did not like one of his decisions,


even if made in concert with the headmen and elders, they were
not bound to abide by it and could compel him to re-examine the
case. Neither he nor a headman could, singly or in combination,
fine a tribesman without first securing authority from the tribe.
After all, he and the headman might have a personal grudge against
the man and might fine him for no other reason. To take an example
from the non-tribal valley of Bulqize, Miftar Meta the bajraktar
and Lam Isaku his assistant were much respected and admired but
they had no power, on their sole responsibility, to fine a man from
Fushaj, their own village. Still less had they power to fine a man
from another village in Bulqize. They could not act in either case
until they had secured the backing of the culprit’s village at
a general meeting. Nothing less, it was felt, guaranteed the
impartiality of the sentence.
If a bajraktar misconducted himself, all the headmen and
commoners of his tribe, or possibly the commoners alone, sat in
judgement on him. They could not ostracize, expel or burn him
out like an ordinary criminal; he was too inherently a tribal
institution for that. But they could, and did fine him. In 1907, 1
the Kryezi tribe assembled in plenary session, one man from each
house, and fined its bajraktar and headmen 100 rams and an ox for
some judgements they could prove to have been unjustifiable and
prejudiced. The commoners could also ask an erring bajraktar to
give a rifle or other valuable as security for his good behaviour in
the future.
The misconduct for which a bajraktar was fined was seldom more
heinous than sending his sheep to pasture on another’s ground or
pronouncing a biased judgement. On the whole, each was so
carefully selected and trained by his predecessor in office that he
rarely committed the graver crimes. When one did, he was sure to
be so ‘strong’, i.e. influential, that the tribesmen thought it more
prudent to close their eyes to his iniquity. There was much
grumbling at the venality of bajraktars, but neither the tribal law
nor the Turkish government took cognizance of this offence. If
a bajraktar, serving as judge or arbitrator, took a bribe, the only
remedy lay in the individual tribesman’s freedom to choose another
law-giver next time. If a bajraktar accepted a ‘ present ’ for doing
a favour, there was no remedy at all. His victim could only comfort
himself by noting how God, or Allah, punished such greed. It was
1 See Appendix, Document xn, p. 271.


popularly believed in Shkrel that the three sons of Vate Marashi,
the bajraktar, and the three daughters of the Voivode Preng
Mirashi, had turned out badly because the deeds of Vate and Preng
had been evil.
In time of war a bajraktar from the north-west group received
triple pay and triple rations. A bajraktar of Shale received double
pay and double rations, one portion as a person and the other as
standard-bearer. He also received pay and rations for three
servants, two of whom followed him to the war both to guard and
to serve him, while the third, a specially trusted man, remained
behind in his house in Shale as guardian of his property, women-
folk and children. The allowances for these servants were only
what ordinary soldiers received, food and katik (pocket-money:
in Turkish, any relish eaten with bread) at the rate of one grosh per
day, which was barely sufficient for their tobacco.
As an administrator a bajraktar was unpaid in so far as he had no
fixed salary. He earned something, however, by his judgements,
for which he was paid at the same rate as an elder. In the
Malesi e Madhe, as often as he appointed elders, he too received
a fee, although they did all the work and he did not stir from home.
If they could not agree on a verdict, the litigants appealed to him.
He then received a double fee, one the same as the elders’ and the
other in respect of his own journey to the scene of the quarrel. In
other tribes or groups of tribes he did not get off so lightly; he had
always to judge the case himself before he received any payment.
The fees varied with the importance of the case and the rapacity
of the bajraktar. In the tribal, but not in the non-tribal, areas any
fines imposed were divided between the bajraktar and the headmen
or ‘ good families ’ of his tribe. In the Malesi e Madhe a bajraktar
who was summoned to Shkoder received ten grosh (50 korone) per
day from the Turkish government for his expenses. But everywhere
a bajraktar’s best source of income was bribes.
The bajraktar was both the military and administrative head of
his tribe. His military and administrative precedence came ‘ from
the staff in his hand’, the flag stick of Turkish donation, but
descent was the test for social precedence, and priority of descent
was not always his. In many tribes there were ‘good families’ who
descended from an older brother or a social superior of his
ancestor, and on that account had, generation after generation,
taken social precedence of his family.


Modern civilization with its army and dense array of gendarmes
and officials swept away the military and administrative functions
of the bajraktar, but his social position remained untouched. So
in Krasniqe, Sali Mena, the bajraktar in 1939, had the precedence
because he descended from the eldest son of Gjo Vata of the village
of Bunjaj; but Hakik Meta, the bajraktar of Lure, remained
inferior to Do?!, Nezhe and Vlad families in that tribe because
their ancestors were from better families than his.
Social precedence was marked in several characteristically
Albanian ways. For instance, if the bajraktar of Perlat in Kthelle
met a Simonaj and a Gjet-Kolaj at a feast, his seat would be third
from the comer and his portion of meat only the leg. The Simonaj
would sit in the comer and get the head and the Gjet-Kolaj would
sit next to him and get the shoulder. Even in wartime a bajraktar
was kept in his civilian place except during the actual fighting. On
the way to and from the battlefield he sat in the seat and ate the
portion of meat that appertained to him by descent. In 1935 Lure
was mustered to check a revolt at Fier in central Albania. The
bajraktar’s men carried the flag out of Lure into Mat, and by
arrangement met Zef men at Burrel in Mat. There, though
both were on a warlike errand, Zef Dofi sat in the chief seat and the
bajraktar and his flag in the fourth. The revolt was suppressed
before the tribesmen advanced beyond Burrel. If they had gone
on, rifles would have cracked at Fier before Zef Do£i had to yield
the first place to the bajraktar. If one of the bajraktars of Kthelle
found it necessary to discuss something with one of the six ‘ good
families’, he could not ask its head to come and see him as he
would an ordinary tribesman. Instead, he must gird up his own
loins and go and see the other. If they disagreed during the
discussion, he could not persist in his own view but had to fall
in with the other’s. Trivial though this insistence on correct
precedence and its manifestations may seem, it had its value in
maintaining tribal discipline. Slackening of the social framework
in communities so backward as these tribesmen would only have
ended in anarchy.
The ‘first families’ excepted, the bajraktar was unquestioned
first among the tribesmen, this being signified in the usual
manner of corner seat and choicest portion of meat. Any male of
his family old enough to walk enjoyed the same precedence and
was, by the courteous and diplomatic, addressed as ‘bajraktar’.


A ‘bajraktar’ of tender years could evict a greybeard commoner
from the corner seat, and the greybeard would be distressed if
left in it. A worthless and ignorant ‘bajraktar’ got the head of
the roast lamb while successful and learned commoners had no
precedence by right—they belonged to their father’s tribe and
were counted aliens in the bajraktar’s. Sometimes, however, the
tribesmen gave them precedence as a courtesy.
When a bajraktar or any male in his family, infants excepted,
died in his bed, a black flag was stuck at the head of his grave to
mark his rank during life. Otherwise he and his were treated in
death like ordinary mortals. If he himself was murdered, the
ensuing blood feud was no worse than it would have been for
a commoner—Lek had laid down that in death one man was as
good as another. Besides, another bajraktar succeeded him and
with the office continuing, the personality of the holder had no
special significance. His family alone had to show a sense of his
unusual importance; it could not stain its honour by accepting
blood money instead of killing the assassin. If a bajraktar was
killed by somebody in another tribe, his tribe undertook to hunt
down the assassin, but this was no more than it would have done
for any tribesman dead in comparable circumstances. Conversely,
when a bajraktar killed anyone, his victim’s family sought his blood
precisely as they would have sought a commoner’s.
As between bajraktars, seniority of the ancestor’s appointment
determined precedence. Gjejaj of Dukaj, the first bajraktar in
Perlat, lived long before there was a bajraktar of Rrshen. His
modern representative was, as already said above, so weak that
Perlat had abandoned him to follow the Rrshen man’s leadership.
Yet in everything social, by virtue of his ancestor’s seniority,
he walked ahead of his supplanter. Once, however, a Kthelle
tribesman entertained all three bajraktars of his tribe together.
There is no record of how he seated them, but when the roast
lamb appeared, he split the head in two, gave the two halves to two
of the bajraktars and a shoulder to the third. Half a head being
reasonably equated to a shoulder, he thus gave equal honour to all
three men and did justice both to descent and to strength.
When a bajraktar encountered a beg, as a bey is called in north
Albania, the latter sat in the corner because a beg is bigger than
a bajraktar. When bajraktar and agha met, the bajraktar sat in the
corner. Such a meeting was rare in the north owing to the paucity


of aghas. The title of agha was a courtesy title bestowed by the
populace. By special provision of the Turkish Government there
had been hereditary aghas since the Turkish conquest at Botush
in Yugoslav Kosove; these, says their representative in Albania,
took precedence of all bajraktars in Albania and Kosove.
Given the pride of a bajraktar in his standard and of a ‘first
family’ in its descent, a clash between the two was not uncommon.
When this took the form of an ordinary isolated quarrel, elders
were called in from another tribe to judge between the disputants.
Their own tribe did not venture to try the issue, knowing that it
might suffer, as outside elders could not do, for an unwelcome
judgement. If the elders failed to effect a settlement, shooting
began between the parties, both bajraktar and ‘first family’ being
followed by his own kin. A man related to both followed the one
to whom he was more nearly related; this at least in theory. In
practice they often showed a naive sense of which side their bread
was buttered and joined the disputant with the stronger following.
Sometimes a long struggle for precedence developed between
a ‘ first family ’ tenacious of its ancient privileges and an ambitious
bajraktar. In Lure, for instance, both the Catholic Zef Dofi of
Lure e Yjeter (Old Lure) and the Mohammedan Ibrahim of
Kreje had long been rivals of the Mohammedan bajraktar Hakik
Aliu Meta. In 1926 Gjo<pi had the largest following, because he
maintained the tribe with surpassing generosity. Within a decade
he ate himself out of house and home, and then lost nearly all his
power, retaining only the tribesmen’s affection and respect for his
past benefits. He therefore ceased to hamper the ambitions of the
bajraktar. Zef D©9i, the ‘ first family ’ in the whole tribe, was a more
obstinate rival, as his power rested less on his lavish doles than on
his descent and personal wisdom. Ancestor after ancestor had been
‘captains’ in Turkish times, whereas and Meta had never
been ‘captains’ till created by King Zog. The bajraktar began by
undermining Dofi’s position with traditional doles. He sent sheep
to the poor at every festival and went guarantee for them in the
shops during crises such as weddings and burials. ‘So they all
follow me now’, he told the visitor with disarming simplicity. He
had resorted to direct action, seizing every chance to kill off the
guns in Do9i’s family. In 1933 some brigands, who had killed one
of Llesh Do9i’s men, were harboured in a mountain sheepfold by
the bajraktar’s shepherds. Together with Zef and other relatives,


1926
1933
1935
Zef Dofi
150
50
23
Ibrahim Gjo^i
3 00
40
32
Bajraktar
4
3°°
400
Llesh ambushed the brigands and wounded one. As one of his men
was killed, the two sides were ‘one and one’, equalized, and could
have made peace. But the opportunity was too good for the
bajraktar to miss. By the law of the mountains Llesh should not
have attacked the sheepfold until he had asked the bajraktar to
withdraw his protection from the brigands and had met with
a refusal. So the bajraktar vowed he would not make peace but
would have blood for the ‘injury’. Soon he learned that
Zef Dofi and all his male relatives were at a wedding in a poor
man’s house. Under cover of darkness his followers crept up to
the house and shooting through the windows killed two and
wounded four of the wedding guests. A year later the bajraktar
managed to have a third man from Zef’s family killed, leaving Zef
almost alone.
In his charities this bajraktar of Lure took no account of the
recipient’s religion, helping a Catholic as readily as one of his
fellow Mohammedans. If he discriminated between the two he
would gain nothing from the Albanian government, which ignored
religious differences. In Turkish times discrimination in favour of
Mohammedans would have furthered his designs by winning
approval from the Turkish government. He found, however, that
the proved loyalty of his family to King Zog’s stood him in even
better stead. A marriage had also proved a useful asset. Mete
Hoti, the best shot in Lure, would have been expected to join Zef
Do9i, because his mortal enemy, Dalip Kaci, followed Zef’s enemy,
the bajraktar. Unfortunately for Zef, Mete had a sister married to
one of the bajraktar’s household. Since joining Zef meant shooting
at the bajraktar’s men, Mete feared to have the blood of his nephews
on his hands and continued reluctantly, side by side with his
mortal enemy, to follow the bajraktar.
The result of the struggle can be shown by the numbers of the
levies raised by the three captains for the Albanian government in
1926, 1933 and 1935 respectively. They were as follows:
It would have been interesting to revisit Lure to see the effect
on the position established by the Italian occupation. The bajraktar,


as King Zog’s man and therefore anathema to the Italians, must
have lost much ground. Zef Dofi as his enemy and as a good
Catholic may have regained some.
According to Albanian tradition there were no bajraktars before
the Turks came, and headmen were literally the head men of their
tribe. This would seem to be confirmed by a document dated 1403
which cited Alexius Kastrati, as headman of the tribe of that name,
in a list of Albanian chiefs who were rewarded by the Venetians
with gifts of cloth, Albanian tradition further alleges that the
Turks aimed deliberately at weakening Albanian chieftains. So,
on the one hand, Sultan Mahmut destroyed thirty-six kins, root
and branch, and his son Mexhi a further number. On the other
hand, Sultan after Sultan appointed bajraktars, ostensibly as
military leaders but really as pillars of Turkish rule. By recognizing
their nominees as administrative heads as well as military leaders
they reduced the old headmen to a subordinate position, and thereby
lessened their chances of engineering a successful revolt. This
policy would explain why some bajraktars were social as well as
administrative and military leaders, and others were not. The
former presumably descended from headmen who were com-
plaisant enough to accept Turkish rule, and the latter from strong
men of lower position in tribes where the headmen were recalcitrant.
The Turks must have trusted that pleasure in their official rank,
and the increased possibilities of money-making would keep the
bajraktars quiet in their turn. Recognizing the hereditary character
of the bajraktar was another shrewd step on their part. As the
non-hereditary delis and spahis aged or died, a hiatus unfavourable
to their rule might arise. When it was a case of ‘ the bajraktar is old
or dead, long live the bajraktar’, they never lacked an agent. When
King Zog, as Minister Ahmed Zogu, began to unify Albania he
saw the danger from the numerous bajraktars. Accustomed to lead
their tribes to war, unaccustomed to any restraint by a central
authority, ignorant and untravelled for the most part and generally
of autocratic temper, all of them might not have been willing to
submit to the new government in Tirana. Methods of bringing
them into line with or without their own wish had, therefore, to be
devised. If one was willing to serve loyally, the government
treated him as the Turks had long before treated a pliant headman.
It made him an officer in the reserve, the modern equivalent of the
ancient bajraktar, gave him the half-pay of his rank, and provided


for his sons and nephews, granting them state scholarships on
which to complete their education or military training abroad, and
finding them employment as officials or officers when they came
home. The most notable example of this ‘ pliant headman ’ type of
bajraktar was Hakik Meta of Lure, who was himself a captain and
had several relatives who were officers in the Albanian army. If
a bajraktar was likely to be recalcitrant, King Zog’s government
tried two methods. The first was a duplication of the system applied
to the pliant headman type with reserve rank, half-pay and provi-
sion for relatives all included. Thus Gjon Markagjoni, the
Hereditary Captain of Mirdite, who rebelled openly in 1921
against the central government, was rewarded for his subsequent
submission by being made a lieutenant-colonel in the reserve.
Cen Elezi of Diber, whose father was killed in battle against
King Zog’s men in 1924, was later made a major. But fewer of the
relatives of such men were educated at state expense, and the
education given to those few was not so advanced—it seems to have
been dangerous to put too much knowledge into their heads. And
when they were ready for office they were kept in outlying
unimportant districts, ‘safe’ areas.
The second and far more important method employed by King
Zog with possible recalcitrants was the Turks’ very own. The
usual favours of rank in the reserve, half-pay and the provision for
dependants were bestowed on a number of tribesmen who had
given proof in the past of their loyalty to the regime and were
‘strong’ enough in the military sense to combat the influence of
the obstinate bajraktars. Captain Mark Miri of Gurreze, who was
a counterpoise to the Gjete Coku family of Breg i Matit as well as
to the bajraktar, was one example of this type. So was Major
Miftar Selmani of Lume, who was supposed to balance his fellow-
villager, Muharrem Bajraktar. The transfer of the administrative
powers of the bajraktars to state officials completed their weakening.
The unity and stability which characterized King Zog’s Albania to
an extent surprising in a Balkan country were the best commentary
on the policy.
9
HAM


CHAPTER XII
ELDERS
It is impossible to understand the laws and customs of the Albanian
mountains without a knowledge of the varieties and responsibilities
of the elders. A man could be an elder not only in the literal sense
but as a legal personage. Seven types developed in sequence one
from another among the southern tribes.
Everywhere the word for ‘elder’ is (sing.) plak (plur. pleq ),
which is pure Albanian and means literally ‘old man’. There is
a corresponding feminine (sing.) plaka , ‘old woman’. In house-
holds of any size there might be several men and women who were
really old in years and were ‘elders’ in the literal sense. These
were the first type. The majority were ordinary people and had no
legal importance.
The idea of age disappears with the second type, found in every
household irrespective of its size. Here there were always one man
and one woman who bore the special title of ‘old man (or elder) of
the house’ and ‘old woman (or elder) of the house’. These under
their more usual Albanian titles of master of the household and
mistress of the household were not necessarily elders in the sense
of ‘older people’. They might have attained their position when
under forty and have found themselves in authority at that com-
paratively early age over older men and women.
The third category of elders appeared as soon as a household
split up and each brother or male cousin in it acquired his own
house. Then, a ‘brotherhood’ {vllazni) was formed. In this
community each new house was as much a separate entity as the
parent one, and was no longer under the control of the master and
mistress, the ‘ elders ’ of the old joint home. It had its own ‘ elders ’
of both sexes who managed all its affairs, external and internal. The
‘ old man ’ of the joint home, now administering a much smaller
household, thus lost a proportionate share of his importance.
But the new masters also lost some of theirs. So long as the
family lived together any competent adult among them might
deputise for the master in village or tribal affairs or in the adminis-
tration of the communal home, but from the day they separated,


the old master reserved such business for himself and his sons,
leaving only their own concerns to the masters of the new houses.
As he remained the eldest or the most capable of the brothers, his
help and advice tended to be sought by the others, particularly in
external business, and his opinion was more regarded by outsiders
such as tribal or government authorities. So he developed into
the ‘old man (or elder) of the brotherhood’. As the generations
passed and the houses of the original brotherhood split up in their
turn, the dignity of brotherhood elder remained in his family,
handed down inalienably from master to master. The term
‘brotherhood elder’ was little used, however; ‘first (or head) of
the brotherhood ’ was preferred. There was no woman elder of the
brotherhood or any larger unit. The mistress of the household of
a brotherhood elder had neither authority nor influence outside
his house, as he had. She was a foreign importation into the
brotherhood, a stranger to it in blood, her only duties being to bear
her husband’s children and to work in the house, her only rights
proceeding from her fulfilment of those duties.
In course of time so many households split up that a number of
new brotherhoods were formed. In some the sense of brotherhood
or even cousinship with the others faded, and only a remoter
feeling of kinship due to descent from a common ancestor persisted.
The agglomeration of brotherhoods then constituted a ‘ kin ’ (fis).
In this, the fourth type, each brotherhood retained its own elder,
and at the same time looked up to the elder of the original brother-
hood as leader, calling him ‘elder of the kin’ or ‘head of the kin’.
In the next, fifth stage of development several kins united to form
a village. They might be distantly related to each other as in the
village of Vuksanaj in Shale, or of quite different stock as in the
village of Nange in Lume. If related, they remembered which kin
descended from the eldest brother in the ancestral home and
regarded the elder of that kin as the village elder. If not related,
they selected one of the kin elders, preferably the head of the
strongest kin, for that position. Alternative names for him were
‘senior elder’, ‘senior headman’ and ‘head elder’. According to
the usual pattern of development each kin and each brotherhood
in the village retained its own elder. Already it is possible to
understand such data as the following. In the tribe of Lure there
were twelve elders, two for each kin. In the village of Perlat there
were two men called village elders or senior elders; in the last days
9-2


of Turkish rule these were the famous law-givers Dede Lleshi and
Like Gjegjaj. Again, when Per Dede Ndoj was senior headman of
the village of Gojan in Mirdite, he took the lead in publicly executing
a man of his own kin, Bufaj, for murdering a guest who belonged
to the Martinaj kin in the same village. The story is related by
Father Gjefov.
This fifth type was the recognized superior of the sixth, the body
of men who were unitedly called ‘village elders’. These consisted
of all the brotherhood and kin elders in the village as well as the
village elder himself. For instance, in the district of Kurbin there
were sixteen villages, each of which had its ‘head (or village) elder’.
But according to a document published on p. 129 of Father
book, there were altogether forty-five elders in Kurbin.
Besides the sixteen ‘head elders’ there were twenty-nine ordinary
‘village elders’, some of them kin elders and some brotherhood
elders. In Mirdite these village elders were known as ‘canon
elders’, because it was their business to see that the law was
respected and applied. To avoid confusion between the single
village elder and the body of village elders these will henceforth be
alluded to as canon elders.
The document mentioned by Father Gjefov introduces us to
the seventh type, a personage styled ‘ chief elder ’. In the document
he was chief of the ‘forty-five elders of the region of Kruje’
(i.e. Kurbin). There is no explicit information of how his position
came to this man or whether it was hereditary in his family. It can
only be inferred that as he was a Pervizi of Skuraj, and this family
led Kurbin, the position was hereditary and a tribute to the
outstanding strength of his family. In so large an area as Kurbin
there could not be any question of all the villages being related by
blood and owning allegiance to Pervizi as the descendant, master
after master, of the master of the ancestral household. In other
districts where a chief elder existed, it may be assumed similarly
that he owed his position to the personal qualities of his family
rather than to its descent.
Some other kinds of elder were found, both among the southern
tribes and elsewhere, but it will be easier to understand their
position after the characteristics and functions which were common
to the elders have been elucidated.
Viewed as a human being, an elder was an ordinary man without
privileges other than the corner seat, head of the roasted animal


and first cup of coffee, which were offered to any man of standing.
He lived in the same style as the rest of his social unit and was their
equal in the eyes of the law. The latter point was clearer in the old
days. If he were killed an ordinary blood feud ensued; if this was
compounded, the price of his blood was no higher than an ordinary
man’s. If he killed someone, his life was forfeit in the usual manner
to his victim’s family. If he committed a crime against the
community, he was liable to the usual punishments for such a crime
and could be asked to give the community a rifle or other
recognized article as security for his good behaviour in future. He
had also the same social obligations as humbler tribesmen. These
included serving in the tribal ‘army’, feeding the tribal ‘youth’,
doing forced labour for the government, sharing communal labour
for the village, and subscribing to public objects like buying an
extra piece of communal pasturage or forest. He had also, like
common men, to do military service and work annually without
payment for a short period on the roads.
As a legal personage, however, an elder was on a higher footing
than ordinary tribesmen. If, for instance, a village elder were to
witness an oath in a case grave enough to require twenty-four
jurors, his single person counted as the twelve jurors who were left
unspecified by the judging elder. Another elder did not count as
high, for a village elder ranked higher than a kin elder, and the
latter higher than a brotherhood elder. An elder’s duties were
twofold, administrative and legal. The former were an expansion of
the master’s, for he had to take the same fatherly care of his
brotherhood, kin or village that a master took of his household and
had to run it on much the same system. On the external side he
had to present its case skilfully to higher authorities and defend it
from oppression. Internally he must maintain law and order by
checking the chief evils, assassination and damage to property. He
had to try to nip quarrels in the bud by persuasive reasoning,
arbitrate when they menaced and judge when they developed. He
had to lend the weight of his presence not only to the giving of an
oath but also to the bequeathing of a legacy to church or mosque,
the planting of boundary stones, and (generally) the separation of
brothers. The embodiment of the tribal law, he was at once
advocate, judge and law-giver.
An elder’s age and wealth did not matter to the ordinary
members of his social unit, who drew no invidious comparisons


between him and themselves on those grounds. Provided he was
correctly descended from the master of the ancestral household
through a succession of what were conventionally called ‘eldest’
brothers, and were really the most competent, they accepted him
as their elder as unquestioningly as the English nation accepts its
king. Sometimes a new elder seemed unfit for his duties. Then the
others took him with them when they went to work, and told him
how his dead father judged or arbitrated: the most telling and
least offensive method of training him.
When a dispute occurred it was the duty of the aggrieved party
to inform his brotherhood elder first of all. When he did so and the
matter was trifling and lay between two members of his brother-
hood, this elder judged the case out of hand. If the disputants
belonged to different brotherhoods, he consulted with the elder of
the second brotherhood. When the case was graver he carried it to
his kin elder, who might judge it straight away or carry it to the
village elder. The village elder might in his turn pronounce
judgement forthwith or call a General Assembly of the village in
order to thrash the matter out in public and get a backing for any
decision taken. Often the aggrieved party went straight to the
village elder who was accessible to all tribesmen. In that event
neither his kin nor his brotherhood had the right to resent the
man’s going over their heads. Moreover, the village elder’s
superiority was so well established that no resentment was likely
to be felt. In no case was it lawful for an aggrieved man to seek
advice from an elder in an outside village before he had consulted
one of his own. If a kin elder or the brotherhood elders in the kin
oppressed others in the village it was the duty of the village elder to
repress them; and he had the right to summon the elders of the
other kins in the village, if necessary, to his support. Article 10 in
the Convention of Kurbin 1 betrays a strong feeling that there must
be no shooting until the village elder has been informed of the
dispute and given a chance to settle it by quieter means.
Elders could also act collectively. In the old days no new law
could be passed, nor any judgement affecting their social unit be
pronounced, unless they were present and gave their approval.
When the bajraktar summoned a General Assembly for such
important purposes as concluding a truce, trying a serious case or
enacting new laws of tribal behaviour, their attendance was
1 See Appendix, Document XI, p. 271.


compulsory. Any who failed to attend and could not justify their
absence were fined. Together with the general public, they had to
investigate complaints against a senior elder or a bajraktar, and if
they found him guilty, they had to fine or ostracize him. In their
attempts to prevent breaches of the peace they were entitled to try
any method from peaceful persuasion to forcible restraint by the
whole village. When, for instance, a tribesman refused to accept
a judgement that was demonstrably lawful and unbiased, they
could call a General Assembly to discuss the case. A public fine
generally ended the man’s obduracy. If not, the village elders could
ask all the headmen and ‘ soldiers ’ of the tribe to come and bring him
to his senses by threatening to destroy his house and property. They
continued to apply the old law, the public preferring these methods
to those of modern officials.
Canon elders were subordinate to the bajraktar and the voivodes
of their tribe, acting as their assistants at General Assemblies.
In non-tribal districts like Shpat and Martanesh the canon elders
of Mirdite were represented by a body of men called ‘local elders’.
These were hereditary, found in every village and restricted in
their law-giving to their own village.
Another type were called ‘specialist elders’ in the southern
tribal areas, ‘regional elders’ or ‘mountain elders’ in Martanesh,
and plain ‘elders’ in Theth. The great majority owed nothing to
heredity and everything to themselves, being ordinary men who
had gradually built up a reputation for good sense, conciliatory
temper and especially knowledge of the mountain law. A few were
hereditary elders who had displayed the same qualities. Except in a
few unusual cases they did not hand on their gifts or their position.
As it required time to build up their reputation, the generality
were older than herditary elders when they attained this position.
They began by settling petty troubles within their brotherhood and
gradually as their reputation grew, they extended their sphere of
action to their kin, village and district in succession. A brotherhood
elder must not interfere in another brotherhood, a kin elder in
another kin or a ‘local elder’ of Martanesh in another village. But
the specialists might travel far and wide outside their own social
unit judging and arbitrating wherever required. Provided that they
judged according to the law, their judgements were binding and
overrode any delivered previously by a local man. As gifted men do
not arise at will, they were never common but were found only


here and there. After the introduction of modern codes of justice
they had little chance to emerge.
Above all elders, in both Mirdite and the adjacent tribes, came
the Gjomarkaj family. This family was regarded as the source of all
knowledge of the mountain law and represented the final court of
appeal. The villagers of Martanesh carried many of their graver
troubles to its head, but at the same time had often a ‘ special elder ’
whom they consulted in such cases. Selim Peshku, who died about
1910, was the latest example. The tree under which he sat dis-
pensing justice in Martanesh is still shown. In the north the bishop
or a specially gifted priest was the ultimate referee. They were
consulted not so much for their knowledge of the law but because
of their reputation for probity.
Functionally the brotherhood elders of Mirdite were represented
in the Malesi e Madhe by the ‘ward elders’, who ruled and judged
in their own small community, the village ward in which they lived.
They were more commonly called gjobtare (‘fine-collectors’) from
their primary function of collecting fines. As legal functionaries
they resembled specialist elders rather than brotherhood elders
because they were ordinary tribesmen and owed their position as
elders, not to hereditary right, but to special appointment. They
were selected, however, not by the public like the specialists, but
by the local bajraktar or voivode. On taking up an appointment to
judge or arbitrate they were known as ‘soul elders’, on account of
the solemn phrases with which they were commissioned. The
commissioning bajraktar or voivode first asked, ‘Do you pledge
your souls, elders, that it was so ? ’ On receiving their assent he laid
a stone on the ground before them, saying, ‘With body and soul,
with a stone in front of you and with God’s justice set these two
people straight in any way that you can see ’. It goes without saying
that only upright men were willing or were asked to accept
a charge laden with such danger to their soul after death. These
northern ward elders had no connexion with the ward elders of
Godolesh near Elbasan, who were seven in number for the six
wards (mehalle), all subordinate to the paid non-hereditary head-
man and his two assistants.
Another functional type, which was most important for the
repression of crime and was found everywhere, was constituted by
‘juror elders’. When trying a case, the judging elders might decide
to make one of the disputants take an oath that he was not guilty.


Then, to guard against the man’s forswearing himself they stipu-
lated that a certain number of men must swear at the same time to
his innocence. These might or might not be more than men of
standing and reputed probity. Whether or not, they were called
‘juror elders ’ for the period covered by the oath.
A subsection of juror elders was known as ‘ murder elders ’. Men
of unusually high repute who never shot without cause or stole or
burned a neighbour’s property, but not necessarily drawn from the
ranks of canon elders, these were qualified by their character for
swearing to the innocence of a man accused of murder. This crime
being the most serious of all, twenty-four of them had to be found
on each occasion. As usual, half were nominated by the judging
elders and half found by the accused. When the first half had given
their oath the accused was virtually cleared and the oath he then
gave was only a formality. In Lume the more important ‘ murder
elders’ refused to waste time on giving their oath in cases of petty
crime but always came forward in murder cases if they thought the
accused innocent. The mere fact of their coming forward in a case
sometimes ended it, the rest of the proceedings seeming farcical by
comparison.
In the more organized north there were, besides the Gjomarkaj
family, recognized substitutes for elders. The Hereditary Captain
of Mirdite represented the family which had ruled over the Alpine
region of Orosh and its kindred of Diber, Fan, Kushnen and Spa 9
for several hundred years and was said by some to be descended
from the Albanian national hero, Skanderbeg. It had remained
Catholic, and its long pedigree may be found in the church
registers of Orosh. This family was the ‘foundation of law’.
Specially difficult cases in Mirdite were referred straight to its head
for solution. Any case which three pairs of elders had failed to
settle was taken to the chieftains of the subtribes and finally to the
head of the Gjomarkaj family. Beyond this there was no appeal.
Outsiders, even Mohammedan outsiders, were often glad to refer
knotty problems to the family. In view of his exalted position the
head had many legal rights. He took precedence in every assembly
wherever and whenever met. He had the right to summon
chieftains and populace to a General Assembly. Whenever necessary
he could summon one man per family to a General Assembly in
Shen Pal. At every trial or arbitration he could intervene. He had
the right to uproot a family and expel it from Mirdite. He could


even pass a sentence of death, for the ‘quarters of the body are
a matter for the tribes but the head belongs to Gjomarkaj ’, says the
law. In virtue of these rights, if a village rebelled against the
authorities of its tribe, word had to be sent to the Gjomarkaj
family, which then summoned the other subtribes and led them
against the insurgent villagers and reduced them to reason by
fining some, banishing others and destroying others root and
branch.
But there were limitations to the head’s power. Laws made in
concert for themselves by the elders and commonalty of a village
about such matters as instigation to crime, breaking one’s pledged
word, murder and robbery could not be upset by either the tribal
authorities or the Gjomarkaj family, provided that these new laws
were not innovations contrary to the spirit of the ancient law of the
mountains.


CHAPTER XIII
THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE
It was the law that every injustice done by Albanian to Albanian
must be righted by means of elders and pledges, not by killing.
This was crystallized in the adage, ‘ Killing for a fault is not per-
missible’. If, for instance, a man caught his neighbour stealing his
sheep he had no right to kill him. He should bring him before an
elder who would set the proper legal machinery in motion against
him, even sending him if necessary before a General Assembly.
Associated with the elders in the administration of justice were
the bajraktar and voivodes with, in Mirdite, the Gjomarkaj family.
They were not judges in the Western European sense of public
officers appointed to administer the law. They were men who
judged by right of birth or weighty personality within their native
area and they were permanent officers, irremovable so long as
their physical powers lasted. They were always illiterate, trained
only in the school of experience; practical men and not theorists.
It was their special function to preserve the peace in their area by
wise and just judging. They were in the literal sense of the words
Justices of the Peace. But they could only interpret and apply the
law. To make it was the prerogative of a General Assembly of the
tribe.
As administrators elders received no fees, nor did they receive
any when serving as juror or murder elders. But they were almost
invariably paid for judging or arbitrating. In the Diber area their
fee was simply called ‘pay’, but it was camouflaged as ‘sandals’ in
the north and Mirdite, and as ‘coffee’ in the south. In north
Albania, where the formula was ‘ fee by the jobs’, the fee was fixed
and varied with the case. In Lume, for instance, it was six Turkish
pounds in a murder case and a watch worth one napoleon in
a water dispute. In Mirdite it was five grosh for a case slight
enough to finish in one morning and ten grosh for more serious
cases in which the elder, stone on shoulder, had to give his oath.
Ten grosh was the canonical fee in Kastrat after the Convention of
1892. 1 In Perlat the fee was adjusted to the client’s means, an oke
1 See Appendix, Document V, § 17, p. 264.


of coffee if he were poor, a sheep if he were rich. Farther south,
the fee varied with the elder’s importance and the bargain he made
beforehand. In Martanesh it was ordinarily one Turkish pound,
but Selim Peshku accepted this only in easy cases; he asked, and
was gladly given, three or even five in more complicated cases.
Cen Elezi of Diber asked in 1938 twelve napoleons from each of
two cousins who were quarrelling about a boundary. Two elders
employed in a dispute were usually paid alike, each disputant
paying half the total. But when each disputant bargained separately
with his elder, one elder might be paid more than the other. Even
where fees were conventionally fixed as in Lume, an elder often
bargained for a larger one. An elder who came from a distance
was naturally paid more, as he had to spend at least one night and
two days away from home. An average fee in Shkrel for such cases
was one napoleon, whereas for cases near at hand it was a silver
Turkish dollar in Turkish times or 10-20 korone in 1932. Almost
always an elder was given a sheep in addition; ‘an elder without
a sheep doesn’t do ’, it was said. Elders could not exact prepayment;
it was evidently felt by the old law-givers that if prepaid they
might be tempted to default on the work. At the same time they
had to be protected from the litigant who tried to default on their
fee. A litigant had, therefore, to deposit a rifle or a silver watch or
a silver tobacco box or the like at the outset of the case as a pledge
that he would pay the fee at the end of the case. Judgement
pronounced, he paid the fee and was given back his pledge.
Because of this arrangement elders were called ‘pledge elders’
when they undertook work involving a fee.
In addition to his fee and sheep an elder also expected at least
one meal for himself and his party. It had to be of the highest
class, with meat and rice pilaff, and the meat had to be goat, ewe
or ram, more rarely beef and never that inferior thing, chicken.
When the elder’s party was small, the sheep-breeders of the north
gave maze, a delicious dish compounded of butter, cheese and
maize flour. In Kosove the meal was generally taken from the
richer disputant so as to save the poorer litigant expense, or from
the one who had insisted on calling in elders. In Martanesh it was
taken from the one who had caused the trouble. In Shale, on the
contrary, each elder ate at his own client’s expense except in road
cases, where both elders and their suites ate at the expense of the
litigant in fault. In Zerqan, if the case dragged on so long that the


elders required two meals, each disputant had to provide one; if
the case was shorter and only one meal was required, the two
disputants halved the expense and both sat down at the table with
the elders, not always with too good a grace on the loser’s part. If
dinner-time found the party up on the mountain, far away from
either disputant’s house, the food had to be sent up to them there.
If supper-time found the party still at work or only just finished,
they all ate and slept in the house of one disputant. The expenses
of feeding the elders and their party had, despite its burden, to be
faced by the poorest man when wronged, for without an elder’s
intervention he would be trampled on by his fellows. The thought
of its cost sometimes acted as a deterrent to the litigiously minded.
Litigants themselves chose the elder who was to judge between
them, much as Englishmen choose their lawyer. In non-tribal
areas litigants were completely free to select whichever elder they
trusted most, irrespective of where he lived. In tribal areas they
were obliged to choose one from their own village, at least to
begin with. It is obvious that such an elder was likely to have some
independent knowledge of the case and its rights and wrongs. In
Mirdite and Kthelle a litigant who insisted on going outside his
own village had to engage the bajraktar or a voivode of his tribe,
not a smaller man, and must not go outside his tribe. The higher
fee required by the bajraktar and voivode was usually enough to
make the man stick to his own village. If a quarrel was not bitter,
the two parties often agreed to entrust the case to a single elder and
to divide the cost of his fee and meals. They then said to each other,
‘Whom shall we have?’ and mentioned various names. After
debating—usually at some length —the merits of the owners of the
names they fixed on one. Each then asked the other ceremoniously,
‘Have you confidence in this elder?’ ‘I have’, the other replied.
Great importance was attached to this unanimity; it made the
elder’s decision more binding on both disputants, procuring in fact
judgement by consent.
The preliminaries over, the two litigants contacted the elder,
generally by going to his house, and told him their trouble. ‘Are
you willing to leave it to me?’ he would ask. On their consenting
formally to do so he stated his fee. This depended in Mirdite on
the importance of the case and elsewhere on the importance of the
elder, the distance he had to travel, and the astuteness of the
litigants. In Martanesh a gold Turkish pound was commonly


paid, for which reason both elders and litigants thought bargaining
about it superfluous.
The litigants having formally consented to pay his fee, the elder
next asked each of them to bring him a pledge. This served a
threefold purpose. Once given, it could not be taken back till the
case was settled and the fee paid. The litigants might repent of
going to law or of engaging this particular elder, but unless they
forfeited their pledges, they could neither stop the case nor change
the elder. The pledge was, secondly, the elder’s security for pay-
ment of his fee. As soon as he had delivered judgement he was
entitled to his fee, and until it was paid he was entitled to retain the
litigant’s pledge. Occasionally in Zerqan an elder trusted a client
enough to dispense with a pledge, and some in Martanesh asked
only a token one, such as a cigarette, thus paying the integrity of
their clients a high compliment. The normal pledge was of greater
value than the fee, or share of the fee, payable by each litigant.
Since pledges had been instituted in days so distant that money
was hardly—if at all—known, a material article such as a gun,
a revolver, a watch or a silver tobacco-box was generally handed
over. It was for the elder to choose which it should be.
In Mirdite the article deposited was known as the ‘pledge of
acceptance or agreement’, because its third purpose was to bind
the litigants to accept the elder’s decision. If one was refractory
the elder had the right to retain his pledge. In a certain boundary
case Cen Elezi of Diber, having stipulated for a fee of twelve
napoleons from each litigant, asked each to bring his tobacco-box
as a pledge. As his son put it, this did not nearly cover his fee but
was rather a preliminary ‘symbol of acceptance’ of his decision.
Indiscipline in such matters naturally weakened the social fabric
by destroying one of its most unifying factors, the authority of
elders. Various steps were taken to reinforce decisions. Selim
Peshku of Martanesh charged fees that ranged from five gold
Turkish pounds to one, but he never took up a case until the larger
sum had been deposited in pledge of submission to his judgement,
and in case of recalcitrancy he showed no scruples about pocketing
the pledge money. The disparity between his lowest fee and his
unvarying pledge shows that he was trying, not so much to safe-
guard his own fee, as to maintain social discipline. Mirdite sought
the same end by enacting that a judgement delivered without
pledge being taken was invalid before the law and that a verbal


pledge was valueless; something concrete and tangible must be
given.
The pledges deposited, the elder set to work on the case in
earnest, questioning any villager who had information, visiting the
scene of trouble, interviewing any private informant who volun-
teered to give evidence, and so arriving at the rights and wrongs of
the simpler cases. In more difficult cases he put one of the litigants
to the oath, dictating his terms and stipulating the number of ‘ good
men and true’ who were to be persuaded by the litigant to take it
with him. This rarely failed to show which litigant was in the
wrong, and the elder came forthwith to his decision with confidence.
When the litigants were friendly, they might agree to engage two
elders. In that case they selected them one after the other by the
same method of mutual consent as they would have selected one.
They also agreed to divide the cost in elders’ fees and meals. That
done, they laid the case before the elders, one after the other, and
bargained with each about his fee and the number of meals he was
to be given. These rewards were not necessarily the same for both
elders. Sometimes they visited the elders together; more often each
visited one only. In the usual way each was required to deposit
a pledge with the elders.
When the litigants were not friendly, and this was the most
common contingency, each found an elder for himself, without
consulting the other or considering his views on the man. Each
brought his own elder whatever pledge he desired; this meant that
one litigant might have to deposit a gun and the other a tobacco-
box. Each also bore the sole responsibility for his elder’s fee and
meals and made for himself the best bargain about them that he
could.
A pair of elders worked on these same lines; singly perhaps
during the period of investigation, certainly meeting at its conclusion
to argue out the pros and cons of the case. If each represented
a separate litigant, each tended to favour his own client, so intro-
ducing a new principle. The elder was no longer only a judge as he
was when he was engaged by the two litigants; he was also the
advocate of his own litigant, trying to do the best for him by
arguing against the advocate of the other litigant. The loser was
more likely to contest the decision under such circumstances.
When the two elders had hammered out an agreement they sent
for the two disputants, said they had come to an agreement, and


asked if they were willing to accept this. In the most fortunate event
the disputants consented and the elders communicated their
decision. Each then said to his own man, ‘ Now bring me my dues
and I’ll return your pledge’. As soon as his fee was paid he gave
back his pledge to his client. If the disputant had no ready money
for the fee, a common enough occurrence, he said he would wait
a month or two, provided that the disputant could find someone to
go bail for him. When the term he had fixed was up without
bringing payment of his fee, he sold the pledge and so recouped
himself. If he got rather more for the pledge than the amount of
his fee the disputant had no right to claim the extra money. The
elder never sold the pledge before the date he had fixed. If within
the term he fixed the disputant found enough money for his fee,
he was no longer allowed to pay it directly but had to transmit it
through his guarantor, who in return brought back his pledge from
the elder. Sometimes the guarantor saw that the disputant would
never be able to redeem his pledge and paid the elder’s fee for him.
Unfortunately, elders had no power behind them with which to
enforce their judgement. Their work was in fact arbitration rather
than judging in the English sense. It was, therefore, common for
elders in central Albania to communicate their findings to the
disputants and then to add, ‘Now settle the matter as you like. We
have decided that this one of you is in the right.’ Too often the
loser shot his successful rival, so starting a bad blood feud.
Pjeter Gjoni of Theth had his house burgled, and the thief bribed
the elders into putting too low a value on the stolen property,
assessing it at two napoleons. Pjeter, who had already spent
one napoleon on finding out who had been the thief, declared
immediately that he would not abide by this judgement and killed
the thief. In revenge the thief’s family burned down Pjeter’s house
and carried off all his cattle.
Naturally many attempts were made to prevent such sequels to
judgements. In Martanesh, Selim Peshku kept the pledges of both
disputants for a time. This was against the rules, but Peshku had
the peace of the community at heart and made ‘ anything for peace ’
his motto. In Zerqan all the elders in the village would meet and
would fine a recusant before he could shoot the successful litigant.
Sometimes in the same village the two elders refused to deliver
judgement until the disputants had promised to abide by it and had
each found a guarantor who undertook to see that they kept their


promise—if they did, there would be no shooting. Each had to give
this guarantor a pledge of the usual type —rifle, revolver, watch—
which was laid before the elders. The elders then delivered their
judgement, the two disputants accepted it and had their pledges
returned. If a disputant broke his promise and shot his rival, the
village Council of Elders would fine the guarantor, asking him why
he had let the man break his word. In this way, through the medium
of the guarantor a good deal of pressure was brought to bear on the
loser to make him keep the peace. In the Elbasan area it was agreed
that a disputant who gave a meal to the elders thereby accepted
their judgement, so that the strong instincts of hospitality came
into play. In Mirdite the elders whose decision was flouted
bade the disputants ‘go to Shupal (St Paul’s Church) or the
Gryke e Oroshit (Defile of Orosh)’, i.e. bring the matter up before
the next General Assembly for the tribe at one or other of these
famous meeting-places. If the loser would not abide by the decision
of the General Assembly he could be fined by the tribe, ostracized
or even banished for a period. Occasionally a strong man sub-
jected to such sanctions killed the offending elder; by so doing he
involved himself in yet another blood feud. In Mirdite and adjacent
areas emphasis was laid on the fact that the recusant loser had
himself chosen and approved the offending elder, and had signified
the same by giving him a pledge. By these acts he had stripped
himself of the right to take back the pledge or to express active
disapproval of the judgement given. Only in the event of the
judgement’s being demonstrably biased or unfair were the dis-
putants allowed to challenge it. ‘A crooked judgement can be
annulled’, the law stated. Often the crookedness was established
by the loser going secretly to ask another elder for his opinion. In
that event the disputant had everywhere the right to appeal against
the judgement and to call for a new examination of the case by
another elder or pair of elders. In some parts, the law ruled that
‘the law does not admit of elder on elder, and trial on trial’,and
that a man who had ‘ chosen and approved ’ elders had no right to
call in others.
Frivolous changing of elders was restrained by the extra expense
this entailed. In Lume, for instance, if two brothers were dis-
pleased by the manner in which their chosen elders were dividing
their property, they could call in one more elder, a staraplak
(ancient), whose decision was final. But his regulation fee was five
10 HAM


napoleons. In cases other than those of division of property he
received only two napoleons. He took over the two pledges from
the original elders, and as these were redeemed from him at
a price by the two disputants, the first pair lost their time and
trouble and received nothing. If a disputant in Martanesh was
disgruntled he could call in a regional elder, but he had to pay, not
only the fee of the elder whose judgement he questioned, but also
that of the regional elder. One of Selim Peshku’s devices for
making a recalcitrant litigant keep the peace was to bid him bring
another elder and he, Selim, would pay the fee as well as return the
litigant’s pledge. The man, knowing no elder would reverse
a decision by Selim Peshku and somewhat stunned by the latter’s
generous offers, invariably submitted.
Another check on frivolous lawsuits was the arrangement under
which the litigants were not allowed to tell their stories to the
second pair of elders. These were briefed by the first pair, apart
from the litigants, who were also required to stay with their
comrades among the general public while the new elders argued
out the case. There was, in theory at least, no possibility of the
new elders being ‘got at’. In Mirdite, the head and fount of the
law, rules were more stringent. The disputants were not allowed
to choose the second pair of elders; this was done by the first pair.
They had also to hand over to the second pair the pledges they had
taken from the disputants. If the second pair found the first pair’s
judgements sound, the disputants had to pay a fee to both the first
and the second pairs. If, however, they found the first pair’s
judgement unsound, they, by this time the holders of the pledges
of the litigants, were paid their fees by the first pair, who in
addition got no fee at all for their previous trouble. A third pair of
elders might be chosen in Mirdite but no more. After that it was
a matter for the expensive chieftains or the Gjomarkaj family to
settle. In Kurbin, too, it was the rule that when elders failed to
come to an agreement, it was they and not the litigants who chose
the second pair. In disputes about water, land, boundaries and the
like up to sixteen elders might be chosen, two by two. If any pair
came to an agreement, their predecessors and the litigants had to
accept their decision. Each of the successful pair received
a napoleon as his fee; the unsuccessful elders received nothing.
When the sixteen possibilities within the tribe had been exhausted
without result, elders were called in from an outside tribe, naturally


at an enhanced fee. These outside elders were generally taken from
old, important tribes like Mirdite, Beshkash, Kthelle and Lesh, or
from Kruje town.
Here then we have the working basis of their judgements. The
elder or elders originally judging the case had an interest in settling
the matter because they received a fee for their judgement. They
had a further interest in settling it quickly because their fee was
fixed at the outset, and by contrast with lawyers in a western law
court they received no more if the case dragged on. Delay over one
case also entailed a risk of being unable to undertake other cases
that might arise. They had an interest in not splitting hairs with
each other, for that might preclude their coming to an agreement
and cause their supersession by others, with consequent loss of fees.
They had an interest in not giving a crooked judgement because
that might lawfully be upset, again causing them to lose their fees.
They had, lastly, an interest in not taking bribes, for an elder who
was detected in that was detected only once; he was never again
asked to be an elder.
10-2


CHAPTER XIV
GENERAL ASSEMBLIES
Turkish suzerainty affected the life of the remoter areas so little
that each tribe, and in non-tribal areas each region, was virtually
a self-governing unit. The governing bodies in tribal areas were
the General Assemblies and the Partial Assemblies. In Turkish
times these meetings were often called mexhlis (from Arabic
‘ majlis ’ meaning council, assembly, parliament). Kuvend is the
Latin ‘ conventio ’ (gathering) in Albanian dress. In non-tribal
areas regional or village assemblies corresponded to the general and
partial assemblies of the tribes.
The General Assembly was usually a tribal gathering, but the
word Kuvend was used by the Albanians to indicate the national
parliament during the German occupation in 1943-4 when Albanian
nationalism expressed itself in rejecting the use of words of foreign
origin.
In the fifteenth century there was a Kuvend of great historical
importance when the men of the region of north Albania met to
hear Lek Dukagjini, the lord of the extreme north, debate points
of law with Skanderbeg, the lord of north central Albania.
Tribal assemblies brought together one or more tribes. These
were plenary, attended by the whole tribe (or region) on the basis
of ‘one man from each house’. They were convened and presided
over by the highest authority available. This was the bajraktar
in most tribes, but one of the Gjomarkaj family or a bajrak-
tar in Mirdite. In Diber, Mat and Kurbin it was the head of
the leading family, and in Qermenike the regional elder. Miss
Durham found the president elected in Theth, and stated that
this innovation was spreading. Where a General Assembly of
two or more tribes took place the meeting resulted from a con-
ference of the chief men of each tribe, convened by the highest
dignitary in each tribe and presided over by the highest of these
high dignitaries.
Partial Assemblies too were plenary and were convened and
presided over by the head of the unit concerned. The more impor-
tant were formed by a village or a kin. In a document preserved for


us by Father Gjegov, 1 the last clause announces that though the
Pecnikaj kin of Shale laid down the law enunciated in clause 2, it
had the support of the Lotaj, Abati (Abat) and Bobi (Bob) kins
in doing so. Its first and its fourth clauses consider the adhesion of
the brotherhood of Theth as well. Occasionally there was a partial
meeting of a brotherhood, and at the bottom of the scale there were
household meetings at which the master set some common
problem before all the men in the family.
Generally speaking, assemblies of all types took place at irregular
intervals, to meet some special need, though the demand that they
should be called regularly once a year was not unknown. 2
When a kin or smaller meeting was in question, the convener
sent anyone he could find to call it. Bigger meetings were summoned
by word of mouth by the public messenger. In Mat a gipsy beat
out the summons on his drum and in Shpat church bells were rung.
Attendance at a plenary meeting was compulsory, non-attendance
punishable by a fine. For instance, an elder of Kurbin who failed
to turn up and could not satisfy the other elders that his absence
was justified was fined five rams. An ordinary tribesman in the
same area was fined one ram and in Kastrat 250 piastres. The
strength and solidarity of the tribes were closely connected with
the plenary character of their assemblies.
Most public meetings took place in the open air, as church
houses were usually too small and schoolrooms and village halls did
not exist. Meeting places had to be central and free from cultiva-
tion, rock, scrub and forest so as to provide adequate seating space
In Catholic areas the yard of the church was commonly used for
General Assemblies and in Moslem areas that of the mosque.
Assemblies of a village or kin could be held in the most central of
the smaller clearings of the area, and a house was big enough for
a brotherhood or household assembly.
Some meeting-places were specially famous. At Lesh, a thriving
seaport at the mouth of the river Drin, and not the malarial inland
townlet into which it has been converted by the advance of the
Drin towards Italy, Lek Dukagjini and Skanderbeg met by
preference, as it was centrally situated for both their domains.
The place of meeting was probably the grassy sward near the ruined
church on the right bank of the Drin, opposite the modem town.
1 See Appendix, Document XII, p. 272
2 See Appendix, Document V, § 16, p. 264.


In Lower Martanesh Selim Lashku dispensed justice to the
village of Martanesh under a branching tree by the Gur i Kuvendit
(Stone of Assembly). At the spring called Gurre Gega, which is
at the confluence of the Shemil and Gurakuq torrents in Qermenike,
he used to meet his famous contemporary of Gurakuq village,
Mus Ballgjini, at plenary meetings of the twelve villages of
Qermenike. A list of the usual meeting-places of his day is to be
found in Father Gje9ov’s book.
The convener fixed the time and place of meeting. The favourite
time was the early morning, as this left the whole day free for
arguing.
The bajraktar presided over the General Assembly and sat cross-
legged on the ground in the most honourable place. Near him sat
other dignitaries—voivodes, village elders, clan elders, village
ancients and clan ancients in due order of social precedence.
Facing them and well apart sat the rest of the tribe, the youth, the
commoners, the public messengers and the fine-collectors ( gjobtare ),
in a half-circle in Mirdite, and elsewhere in a roughly shaped
rectangle or circle. The essential thing was that each man present
should see and be seen by everybody else, and should have room
to advance, if required, to the dignitaries. Since neither youth nor
voivodes and fine-collectors existed in southerly districts like
Martanesh, General Assemblies there consisted only of the baj-
raktar, elders, commoners, and public messengers.
Every effort was made to keep a meeting orderly. When
a presiding dignitary, a judging elder or a witness was speaking no
interruption was allowed. Insulting remarks and abuse were
prohibited under pain of a fine that might amount to as many as
five rams. Calling another a liar meant a fine of 500 piastres. For
the better observance of these rules when a case was being tried,
the disputants were not allowed to address the court. Each had to
go some distance away with his elder in order to tell him his story
quietly, and had to return to his place at the meeting to await
judgement in silence. The elders drew apart from the meeting
after their briefing, argued the case out with each other, and returned
to the meeting to announce their decision in the hearing of all
present. In this way only two or three men talked, the rest sat
quiet and listened. In Mirdite a stranger might not take part in
a general meeting, but in Lume and Qermenike, in the belief that
a stranger could have ‘nothing in his bosom or his pocket’, that


is to say, no interested motive for his opinion, he was actually
encouraged to express his views. Among the Catholics of the far
north the priest was permitted to speak, as though he were one of
the tribesmen, but his views did not necessarily prevail.
It was unthinkable, of course, that the tribesmen should come
without their arms in view of possible dangers on the way. So the
law said explicitly that they might bring them. But as soon as they
took their places cross-legged on the ground they had to lay their
guns on the grass in front of them or on their laps and had to keep
them so until the meeting ended. The Catholics sometimes let the
priest coax them into depositing their arms in the church house
for the duration of the meeting. If anyone raised his gun in anger,
it was promptly taken from him by his neighbours. If anyone fired
his gun the rest of the meeting immediately formed itself into
a firing squad and killed him, and then went in a body to his house
and burned it down. Even at the smallest meeting there were four
or five important men present who kept a sharp look-out ready to
prevent trouble. The priests too kept good watch, and a Franciscan
found in Theth by Miss Durham in 1908 told the following story:
‘We nearly had a row at the mexhlis 1 a little while ag0.... I heard
a fearful noise and as I ran out a lot of them got up into a bunch like
bees and raised their rifles. They were just going to fire. They
would not listen to me. I rushed into the church and rang the bell
as hard as I could. It had a splendid effect. As soon as they heard
the bell, from habit they all shoved their pistols into their belts and
took their guns in their left hands and began to cross themselves.
No one knew what had happened. They poured into the church to
see. By the time we came out again.. .they were quieted.’
Proceedings usually began with a statement by the president
that the tribe had assembled to consider certain matters in the
manner required by God and the canon, that is to say, with justice
and without innovations or departures from the established law.
Great importance was attached to the latter point. The decisions
of specialist elders were accepted only on condition that they
conformed to the accepted law and did not constitute innovations.
This proviso was thought unnecessary in the case of elders who had
been bred to the law as the specialists had not, and were therefore
trusted to stick to it. This conservatism maintained the strength
of the law, the main factor in keeping the tribe together.
1 General Assembly.


The following story told by Miss Durham 1 throws light upon
the mind of a tribe on this point:
In the spring of 1908 a tribesman of Gjan, quarrelling with
a tribesman of neighbouring Shosh, snatched a firebrand from the
hearth and flung it in his face. It would have been bad enough to
kill the man of Shosh, but it was worse to insult him with such
a blow. The Gjan man, fearing the wrath to come, fled with all
speed. The Shosh man was so enraged that, unable to catch the
actual culprit and clear his honour by shooting him, he went to
Gjan and shot ‘an unhappy little boy, unarmed and but eight
years old’,,.‘whose only crime was that he belonged to the same
tribe as the offender’ ‘Gjan was filled with rage. That Shosh
had the right to take blood of any man of the tribe they freely
admitted, but to kill a child was dishonourable.’ On the following
Whit Sunday a General Assembly of Shosh met to debate the case.
‘ Shosh was violently indignant over the affair and public opinion
ran so high that the murderer had not dared to remain in the tribe
but had fled. The Mexhlis now was held to decide whether his
house should be burnt as punishment. Many were in favour of
this. The difficulty was that there was no law under which this
could be done. The blood had been taken outside the tribe; it was
therefore not a crime against the tribe and not punishable by it.
The duty of vengeance lay with the dead boy’s family. All agreed
that if they liked to come and fire the house Shosh would not
oppose it. But as the near relatives were a crippled father and
a child they were incapable of executing justice in the face of the
opposition which would certainly be put up by the murderer’s
family. The question caused great excitement. The burning of
the house would entail passing a new law to punish a man for
a crime against another tribe. This would mean an entire recon-
struction of the code and nothing less than considering themselves
as a nation, and not as detached tribes,’ Miss Durham asked
‘whether it were not possible at least to pass a law to punish any
man killing a child not of age to bear arms’. It was pointed out
that if Shosh did so and neighbour tribes did not, Shosh would be
at a disadvantage.... The question was discussed for two days, and
was undecided when Miss Durham left.
Proceedings at a General Assembly terminated in Catholic areas
with the drawing up of minutes by the priest, the only man present
1 See Some Tribal Origins etc., p. 165.


who could write. Though strictly speaking a stranger, he was
expected by every tribe, Mirdite included, to attend all its meetings
and to act as clerk. Sometimes each man present, sometimes only
the president, appended his mark, generally a Turkish seal, to the
document. The priest signed as witness, added the date and place,
and placed it in the church archives for safe keeping and future
reference.


CHAPTER XV
ASSEMBLIES AND THEIR WORK
Assemblies sometimes dealt with internal matters such as criminal
trials, formulation of laws, local administration, and sometimes
with the external relations of the community. Internal affairs
were dealt with, according to their gravity, by the tribe, village
or kin, but a plenary assembly had to be called to consider
foreign affairs.
During the nineteenth and early part of the twentieth century
the northern tribes of Albania were singly or collectively in con-
stant opposition to Turkish sovereignty, and plenary assemblies
were summoned by tribes whenever they planned to break out
into open revolt. Earlier in 1855 and 1862 there had been attacks on
the Montenegrins by the Mirdite, which had followed on plenary
assemblies of the Mirdite tribes.
In 1881 the Albanians of Kosove formed the League of Prizren
in order to struggle more effectively for independence of Turkey.
All over Kosove and what afterwards became the kingdom of
Albania plenary meetings were held by tribes, and, where these did
not exist as in south Albania, by districts, to decide on whether to
join this League or not. Again in 1908, as Miss Durham relates, 1
the northern tribes held plenary meetings about accepting the new
Turkish constitution. The Albanian attack on the Turkish
garrisons in Skoplje and adjacent towns, that began the Balkan
war of 1912, was prefaced by general assemblies of every tribe in
Kosove and north Albania. In the summer of 1914, when Esad
Pashe Toptani revolted against Prince William of Wied, then
Mhret (king) of Albania, his supporters raised central Albania in
his favour by carrying the Koran in one hand and a crucifix in the
other to plenary meetings of the villages and bidding the Assembly,
generally consisting of Moslems only, choose between the Moslem
Esad and the Christian ‘Mbret’. In 1942 a plenary meeting of all
Mat was convened by the subprefect of Mat in the hope of
enforcing obedience to the Italian government of the day. The
decisions reached at the meeting were embodied in a document
1 Some Tribal Origins etc., p. 120, n. x.


published in the Albanian newspaper Tomori on 7 November 1942, 1
a curious mixture of Fascist ideology and ancient mountain law.
But the decisions were honoured only in the breach. A few months
later, many hundreds of families represented at the meeting were
homeless, victims of Italian reprisals for their persistent revolts.
Sometimes a tribe met in plenary session to deal with inter-
tribal matters. It might have quarrelled with a neighbour over
a grazing or forest boundary between their territories, or the
neighbour might be harbouring one of its dangerous criminals. In
either case the tribe had to meet in plenary session, first of all to
discover by public argument the best way of enforcing its boundary
rights or procuring the surrender of the criminal, and secondly
to secure public sanction for the steps it decided on. These might
even include war. Miss Durham describes a General Assembly of
Shale which she witnessed in 1908. 2 The Moslem tribes to the
north and east, surreptitiously armed by the Turkish government,
had threatened to massacre Shale and its Catholic associates if
they did not embrace Islam by the next Ramazan. Shale met in
General Assembly, and amid scenes of wild enthusiasm passed
a resolution to warn its Moslem neighbours that within seven days
of their receiving notice Shale and its fellow-Catholics would be
at war with them.
Sometimes a pair of tribes met in plenary assembly for mutual
aid. Several examples of contracts made on such occasions
are given by Father Gje9ov; translations of three appear as
Documents IV, VII and VIII. 3 In the first the tribes of Nikaj and
Mertur pledge the safety of man and beast at certain times of the
year. The second is between the tribes of Nikaj and Shale in 1894,
and the third, dated 1895, is between Nikaj and Curraj, a ‘brother-
hood’ of Nikaj. In these latter, each contracting party guarantees
the safety of the other’s tribesmen when travelling along certain
specified roads in its territory; in the first Shale’s guarantee is
extended to tribesmen of Shosh, its western neighbour, and
Nikaj’s guarantee to tribesmen of Mertur, its eastern neighbour.
In this way they facilitated a considerable amount of movement
from tribe to tribe. Such documents were really an early form of
passport, allowing the tribesmen of one tribe ‘to pass freely
without let or hindrance ’ in the territory of the other.
1 See Appendix, Document XIII, p, 272.
2 Op. cit., pp. 71, 72. 3 See Appendix, pp. 263, 265, 267.


Like tribes, villages sometimes met together to try to agree
about matters of common interest. Villages often quarrelled over
irrigation water, and a forest or pasture boundary. They quarrelled
even oftener perhaps because the tracks of stolen animals led from
one to the other; cattle-lifting and sheep-stealing were common.
The most satisfactory way of dealing with troubles was for the two
villages to meet in full assembly. After thrashing the matter out in
public they generally reached a settlement, failing which they
could only go to war. In the early years of the twentieth century
cattle thieving was listed as one of the thirteen most important
matters brought before General Assemblies in Martanesh. In
1942 it was still so active a disturber of the public peace that the
pro-Fascist subprefect of Mat legislated for it among the questions
which were the real occasion of his calling together the 5000
families of Mat. 1
Law-giving was also an important function of General Assem-
blies. This activity came to an end with centralization and western
legal codes, and its nature can be studied in the documents quoted
by Father and reproduced as an appendix to this book,
pp. 261 sqq. These documents show the variety of matters with
which the law-giving of the Assembly was concerned. For instance,
Document I, coming from Malesi e Madhe and dated 1864, is
wholly devoted to such subjects as betrothal, bride-price, divorce
and abduction or elopement. Document XI, which comes from
Kurbin in 1906, is much occupied with stealing and with tightening
up the social fabric by making attendance at General Assemblies
imperative and the authority of elders supreme. With the procla-
mation of Albanian independence of Turkey only six years ahead,
it contains an interesting political note; no Kurbin man is to
become a gendarme in Turkish service or to give one food and
shelter; and no Moslem of Kurbin is to curry favour with the
Turkish authorities by denouncing a Christian fellow-tribesman.
Document XIII, which comes from Mat in 1942, is also dated by
its politics enjoining support of the Italian regime in Albania.
In the midst of the variety of subjects in the documents, crimes
against life and property are continually appearing as the funda-
mental threats to the security of the community. A study of the
documents shows them as reaffirming and modifying old and
recognized laws, rather than formulating new ones. Assemblies
1 See Appendix, Document XIII, § 4, p. 273.


were called together to deal with specific problems and their
findings emphasize aspects of the law relevant to these problems.
The agenda of the assemblies therefore, reveal a good deal of social
history. For example, in Document 111 from Kastrat dated 1891,
six of its eleven provisions deal with the use of mills, fountains and
springs. Document V, also from Kastrat dated 1892, restates what
must have been established law about the constant threat of
murder and theft, but it also includes provision for dealing with
the owner of a dog entering a field or vineyard without a wooden
collar, and the person who washes clothes at the place where the
district gets its water.
In 1894 again Kastrat decrees penalties against the man who
takes a woman to live with him without marrying her; against
anyone tearing his face in mourning for the dead; against persons
obstructing chiefs and fine-collectors in carrying out the tribal law.
The documents from Nikaj and Shale also throw light on the
social order to which they refer and its special problems at the time
of their formulation. Document VII, dated 1894, is concerned
mainly with safety from attack on the roads and the ‘pledge of
safety’ for certain classes of people—mowers and reapers, shooters,
women, etc. It was found necessary to reiterate many of the same
provisions with the penalties attached to their breach in the
following year in Document VIII.
A letter from Shale to Theth, dated 1907 (XII), asks that the
latter shall subscribe to a number of rules about murder and the
position of the murderer laid down by Shale, and after discussing
this important subject, states that the rules are under the authority
of the Youth.
Document XI (1906) is particularly interesting from an historical
point of view, as it combines concern with the usual domestic
issue of stealing with anxiety about the machinery of government,
and reflects the opposition of the tribe to the Turkish sovereign.
There are clauses about non-attendance at General Assemblies and
about the use of elders to settle disputes. Heavy penalties are laid
down for men joining the Turkish government police, complaining
to the government about a Christian, or for anyone giving food
or entry to his house to any policeman whether Christian or
Mohammedan.
The most recent of the documents (XIII) is the so-called
Covenant of Mat which appeared in the Albanian newspaper


Tomori on 7 November 1942. The greater part of this document
deals with an entirely new situation and the methods by which the
people of Mat undertake to adapt themselves to it. But even in this
document there appears the familiar restatement of old laws against
the familiar crimes of murder, theft and the abduction of women.
Differences in the penalties laid down for the same offence may
possibly point to social and economic differences among the tribes.
For example, in Nikaj, Shale and Curraj (Documents VII and VIII)
a defaulting debtor is to be deprived of civil rights and may be
killed or robbed unless he meets his obligations. In Kastrat (V) he
is fined twenty-three grosh as a defaulter, but much more heavily
fined if his sureties have to pay his debt. Nikaj was a poorer area
than Kastrat, and that fact may explain to some extent the difference
in penalty. The treatment of stealing also differs as between
Kastrat and Shale which was the poorer of the two. In Kastrat the
robber of another’s house or sheepfold is to be fined 500 grosh and
five rams, but in Shale (X) the thief who steals a single animal—
a ewe, a goat, a cow —is to have ‘his harvest burnt, his fields
plucked bare and his grain panniers smashed’.
Some stories related by Father Gjefov illustrate the application
and development of the law. About iB6O a villager of Fregene in
the Mirdite tribe of Diber told a neighbour to kill a certain man
and promised that when the time came to pay the blood money he
would see to it. On the faith of this promise, the neighbour
ambushed the man on the high road and shot him dead. A little
later, Captain Bibe Doda, the Gjomarkaj of the day, went on tour
for the purpose of composing current blood feuds. The Fregene
feud came up, among others, and the murderer was ordered to
rebuild his victim’s house by way of paying blood money. He
asked his evil counsellor for the money he had promised, but the
latter declined to pay. Captain Bibe and the heads of the tribe
summoned this man, and asked him if he had told his neighbour
to commit the murder and promised to pay the blood money. The
man dared not deny doing so. Then Captain Bibe, together with the
bajraktar of Diber and other heads, reasoning that ‘ lips can’t land
a man in a blood feud’ and ‘words don’t make a funeral’, made it
law that ‘Murder depends on the finger’; that is to say, the
murderer who must pay with his life or money for the crime is
the man whose finger pulled the trigger. They then sentenced the
Fregene murderer to pay blood money for his crime, saying that


while he had gone to the ambush by another’s instructions he had
walked there on his own legs. As the instigator of the crime had
broken his promise about paying the blood money, they sentenced
him to have his house burned down by the tribe.
On one occasion Lek Dukagjini had come at Skanderbeg’s
invitation to discuss some blood feuds at a General Assembly of all
the tribes in the land. Skanderbeg opposed the principle of ‘ a life
for a life ’ on the grounds that all men were not equal; the blood of
a physically fine man was different from that of a poor type. At
Lek’s suggestion, however, he inquired of his mother, upon oath,
what sort of a man his father had been. On learning that he had
been a poor type, Skanderbeg at the next Assembly agreed to the
principle of equality!
About 1870, when Kole Prenga the Great was Captain of
Mirdite, a jar of butter was stolen from the church house in Orosh
during the priest’s absence. On his return his servant, who had
also been away at the time, informed him of the theft. The priest,
a Franciscan, informed the bajraktar of Orosh. The latter convened
the tribe ( bajrak) but no one confessed to the theft. The bajraktar
then informed Captain Kola. The captain undertook to track down
the culprit, and one day ordered the tribe to assemble on the open
space in front of the church at Orosh. In spite of Captain Kola’s
questions no one came forward to confess to the crime. Then
Captain Kola, together with the chiefs of the tribe, sentenced the
unknown thief to death and banishment from the tribe; his house,
too, was to be destroyed and his land left uncultivated. Not long
afterwards the thieves were discovered. They were two young men
of Orosh, Prenge Kole Marku and another whose name has been
forgotten. Captain Kole Prenga the Great again ordered the tribe
to assemble, one man from every house, at the church at Orosh.
The two young men also came by order to the meeting. Captain
Kola read out the sentence that had previously been pronounced.
The two thieves were stood in the middle of an open space,
unarmed and with their hands folded at the waist. The tribe stood
up awaiting the captain’s order to fire. But the priest, filled with
pity for the culprits, begged the captain, the chiefs and the
commoners to grant them their lives. This was done, they paid
money to the church for their sacrilege, returned twice the quantity
of what they had stolen, paid the usual fine and were expelled from
the tribe.


It was not the theft but the sacrilege that on this occasion called
the tribe of Orosh to a General Assembly and made them pronounce
even the death sentence; without the sacrilege the fine would have
been penalty enough. Murder of a priest, again heinous sacrilege,
raised the same issues, but without hope of any reprieve from death
save what secret flight might provide. Murder of a guest or of a
man with whom the murderer had previously sworn an oath of
peace, that is to say, of persons who had a right to protection, also
came before a General Assembly and was punished by the severest
penalties, including death. Yet theft in the ordinary way was
handled by elders and punished by a fine, and murder of the
ordinary type was left to the victim’s family and punished by blood
vengeance. These were crimes against the individual and matter
for individual handling. Sacrilege, however, and the murder
of protected persons, were crimes against society, the former
threatening the authority of the Church and the latter the tribal
fabric.
When a man’s general behaviour was a public menace or nuisance,
he usually found himself before a General Assembly. To begin with,
the elders of his social unit took the matter up as was their duty,
attempting first to reason him into a better frame of mind. If this
failed, they had to call a plenary meeting of the village to try the
culprit and to carry out whatever sentence was pronounced. This
was usually burning down his house and leaving his land untilled
for a specific number of years. If he still persisted in his evil-doing,
and this was serious socially speaking, the elders could call the
whole tribe to their assistance. For public pests incited public
extermination, and this required the sanction and the whole force
of the tribe. Miss Durham relates what she calls ‘an amazing case
of wholesale justice ’ which occurred in the Mirdite tribe, Fan, in
February 1912. A certain family in this tribe had become notorious
for evil-doing, robbing, shooting and general misconduct.
A ‘gathering of the whole tribe’ condemned all the males of
the family to death. Men were appointed to lie in wait for them
on a certain day and pick them off. And on that day the whole
seventeen of them were shot. One was only five and another only
twelve years old. It was even proposed to kill an unfortunate
woman who was pregnant in case she should bear a male and so
renew the evil. 1
1 Durham, op. cit. p. 75.


Disobedience to accepted authority was not permitted to an
individual tribesman, a villager or even a tribe if that formed part,
like the Mirdite tribes, of a group of tribes. Several of the Docu-
ments end by indicating the penalties that await tribesmen who
defy the authority of the General Assembly that had laid down the
preceding laws for the public good.
Examples of penalties prescribed are a fine of 3000 grosh,
a choice between being burnt out or paying an ox to the tribe and
300 grosh and a ram to the government’s representative, and
a sentence of having one’s house burned down and oneself expelled.
Number XIII, the Fascist document from Mat, simply declares
that any delinquent will be called a traitor. In each case the whole
tribe was to meet again in General Assembly and go in a body to
carry out the sentence. According to Document XI the breaker
of a pledge guaranteed by the General Assembly of the Elders
and Commoners of Kurbin was warned that the said Elders and
Commoners would be obliged to burn his house and expel him.’
Elders were seldom tried before a General Assembly. They were
kept in check by the fact that if their judgements were found unfair
they lost not only face but also fees, for they were seldom asked to
judge again. If there were complaints against one he was first
asked, like an erring bajraktar or voivode, for a pledge; if he refused
to give it he was haled before the General Assembly.
If a disputant flouted an elder’s just and carefully considered
judgement, he found himself before a General Assembly. For an
elder represented a lawful authority. ‘ If you don’t like the decision,
go to St Paul’s church or the Defile of Orosh (Gryke e Oroshit )’
was the formula in Mirdite in such cases, church and defile being
the favourite meeting-places for the General Assemblies of all its
five tribes. If the Assembly upheld the elder’s judgement, the
penalty usually imposed was banishment for three years for the
culprit and his family, the burning down of his house, the destruc-
tion of his crops and trees, and leaving his land untilled until he
returned.
Sometimes a village was a public nuisance, harrying travellers,
stealing its neighbours’ beasts, cutting off their irrigation or mill
water, trespassing on their forest or grazing, and so on. The
bajraktar, voivodes, elders, and all the commoners in the rest of the
tribe then gathered in General Assembly, one man from each house,
and brought the village to its senses, fining the more harmless
II HAM


offenders, banishing others, and executing the ringleaders if these
had committed any crime entailing the death penalty.
Sometimes a village went to actual war with the rest of the tribe.
As it never did so unless it knew itself to be very strong, the rest of
the tribe was sometimes unable to reduce it. If the tribe was alone,
the war went on until both sides were exhausted enough to cry halt.
If the tribe was one of a group its heads could call in all the men of
the other tribes to reduce the belligerent. In Mirdite a Gjomarkaj
called the General Assembly which decided on this step, and led
its members against the belligerent.
Sometimes, like a pestilent village, a tribe that formed part of
a group made itself a nuisance to its neighbours. In that case the
General Assembly of the other tribes in the group sentenced it
wholesale to the usual penalties—fines for mild offenders, burning
out for medium offenders and death for bad offenders. A whole
tribe, however, could not be banished. It could only be ostracized,
cut off from all intercourse with its neighbours; this penalty lasted
until it consented to furnish the usual pledges for its future
behaviour.
Village Assemblies dealt with matters of exclusively village
interest. They regulated wood-cutting and irrigation rights, for
example. They fixed the date at which beasts might be sent up to
their summer pasturage on the high mountains. They stipulated
the number of beasts that might be sent up by each family. They
took steps to see that no one appropriated more than his fair share
of forest, irrigation water or grazing. In so doing they made
a valuable contribution to the public peace. Some aspects of
murder also engaged their attention. The actual crime and revenge
for it were the concern only of the families of the murderer and his
victim. But it was the concern of the village that the range of
revenge should not spread, increasing the number of avenging
assassinations and so disturbing the village peace. So the law
having laid down that the avenger must allow the murderer a day
or two’s grace to settle up his affairs before he was besieged in his
house, the village had to extract a promise of this grace from the
avenger. In cases where the grace lasted for thirty days, the village
had to see that the murderer did not abuse his privilege and harry
the victim’s family. If he showed any such tendency, the village in
General Assembly had to fine him and bring his period of grace to
an untimely end.


Assemblies of tribe or village watched above all over their
honour. Sometimes their interpretation of honour took strange
lines. Father Gje?ov gives the following story from the Mirdite
tribe of Spa?. The sister of a villager of Gomsiqe was married to
a villager of Dush in the same tribe. It happened that on one
occasion when she came to pay a visit to her brother she took ill and
died. He and his friends laid her on a bier and carried her, not
to their own cemetery, but to her husband’s house in Dush,
presumably to avoid the expense of burying her. When the village
heard what they had done, they met in General Assembly, and
after carefully appraising the dishonour brought on Gomsiqe by
such a public exhibition of meanness, fined the man a cow. This
they divided into fifteen portions, which they distributed among
the fifteen houses of the village. The fine was justice at its most
precise. If the man had buried his sister as he should have done,
the funeral feast would have cost him a cow. The event took place
about 1903.
Another type of meanness had a similar end. About 1872
a villager of Ure e Shtrejte in the tribe of Drisht happened to call
on a neighbour about midday and was kept for dinner. As they
finished, his host scraped his plate. The visitor afterwards com-
plained to the village of the disgrace brought on his own dinner-
table by the host. The village met in General Assembly and fined
the host 500 grosh for his meanness. According to the law
‘ a dinner-table is disgraced in a guest’s eyes when the host wipes
or licks the porringer or scrapes his plate’.
The smallest General Assemblies —those of brotherhoods and
households —dealt with what were essentially family matters. They
met perhaps to decide on expelling or even killing any hopeless
member if his misdeeds were serious enough to threaten the whole
brotherhood or household with wholesale punishment by the tribe.
They considered the pros and cons of buying an extra bit of land.
Tribal government was entirely democratic —of the people, by
the people and for the people, but it differed from tribe to tribe and
from time to time, enough to prevent unity. As the tribes in
general would not have accepted the law of any one of them as
supreme, it was ultimately necessary for Albanian unity that tribal
government should be superseded by a modern system evolved in,
and exercised from, a capital.
11-2


CHAPTER XVI
THE OATH
I. OATH-TAKER AND COMPURGATORS
Elders faced with a knotty case concerning property might put one
of the disputants to the oath. The victim of the crime, suspecting
who had committed it, might test his suspicions by asking that the
man should make oath in public that he was innocent. It was only
by oath too that a suspect could clear himself; mere protestations
of innocence were not enough. ‘Denial means an oath’, said the
law. The oath (be, oath; beja, the oath) was in fact a most efficient
instrument of tribal justice, cutting gordian knots for elders,
settling the ownership of property, clearing the innocent and
convicting the guilty. It was equally efficient as an instrument of
social cohesion, binding the tribe when occasion arose to concerted
action against crime within and danger without.
The subject is difficult to understand, because of its remoteness
from English practice. The following example from life gives the
general scheme of the ordeal, for such it was. The story comes from
Labinot, a village well south of the tribal area; but with one or two
small exceptions each item might have come from anywhere in the
tribal north. It is a criminal case, but if the words ‘claimant’ and
‘oath-taker’ be substituted for ‘accuser’ and ‘suspect’ it can be
read as a property dispute. The general procedure was the same in
both cases.
A Moslem of Labinot called Qazim who had lost a plough-ox
suspected Asllan, a fellow-villager, of having stolen it, and through
the headman demanded an oath from the suspect. The latter, though
protesting his innocence, agreed. A few days later when the accusa-
tion was formally laid at the Village Assembly, Qazim, as was his
right, immediately began to name half the number of twelve compur-
gators insisted on by the headman. These were chosen on account
of their connexion with the accused—had this not existed he could
have refused to accept them. Asllan was then told to find six other
compurgators and attend the Assembly with them again a week later.
The week was spent by the compurgators in investigating the
case, by the accuser and accused in visits to the compurgators,


each seeking their support. Had four refused at this stage to take
the oath Asllan would at once have been publicly convicted—if less
than four, two substitutes would have had to be produced for every
one that refused; two for one, four for two, and six for three, and
there would have been no extension of the time limit. In this case,
however, all the compurgators agreed to swear to Asllan’s innocence,
and he himself, towards the end of the week, swore on the Koran
that he had nothing to do with the theft. Later the compurgators,
led by Qazim’s nominees, took the oath of Asllan’s innocence
before the whole village. Actually, Qazim cut short the proceedings
after six or seven had sworn, as by then the compurgators most
likely to know the truth had sworn to the suspect’s innocence.
Having celebrated his acquittal with a banquet to the compur-
gators, Asllan two days later yoked the stolen ox, hidden during
the case in a lonely sheepfold, to his plough. Now, although the
mistake —either designed or accidental —of the compurgators was
obvious, there was no legal machinery for annulling the verdict. In
the opinion of the village, however, Asllan received his punishment
when shortly afterwards his son was born lame. 1
Qazim in Labinot put his case into the hands of the headman of
his village. In the tribal north he would have entrusted it to the
elder of his brotherhood, ward or village or perhaps to the bajraktar
of his tribe.
Tribal officials, being hereditary, had more authority to act for
their community than had the temporary headman in non-tribal
districts such as Labinot. In Milot, the most northerly village of
Kurbin, the victim tackled the suspect himself, asking him first if
he had committed the outrage and then if he would take oath that
he had not. In view of the fieriness of Albanian tempers this
information is surprising—one would expect shooting to put an
abrupt end to such an interview —but it is confirmed by informa-
tion from the neighbouring village of La?. When one of its inhabi-
tants denied having received a loan, the lender asked him directly
to swear in the presence of two or three witnesses that he had never
been lent the money.
Only men of military age and capacity had standing enough to
1 A very similar system of compurgators exists among the Naga tribes of
Assam. There, however, though in some tribes there is no means of modifying
the verdict if an oath prove to be false, in others a compurgator who discovers
that his principal is lying can ‘withdraw his life’, otherwise in danger from the
false oath, and so reopen the case ah initio. (Ed.)


be put to the oath; such an ordeal was not for boys under twenty,
old men over sixty, women, gipsies or lunatics. All of these were
considered so irresponsible that even their sworn word carried no
weight. One exception comes from Zerqan, where a woman
accused of a petty theft like stealing a dress might take an oath in
the semi-privacy of her home that she was innocent. If her fault
was more serious, her oath was not accepted. A man —her husband
or son or, failing these, her brother—had to take one for her, as he
would have done for his senile father or his infant son. Another
exception occurred in family oaths, as described later. But this
exception was apparent rather than real. The infant boys who were
present did not themselves take the oath. The master alone
repeated the words dictated; the boys and other males were
present solely to be implicated to the maximum extent possible in
the dread consequences of perjury.
In criminal cases it was the suspect, the man who denied an
accusation, who had to take the oath. In such cases its sole purpose
was to clear him of suspicion; if he could take it, he was acquitted,
and if he could not, he was convicted. The accuser was never
allowed to support his accusation by an oath; even if he insisted
that with his own eyes he had seen the crime being committed, he
could not swear upon oath that what he said was true. For motives
of spite might have induced him first to accuse his neighbour
falsely, and then to swear a false oath. So the law said firmly ‘lt’s
for the denier to take the oath’.
Occasionally a suspect refused to take the oath. Then his
accuser was at least tempted to shoot him. If it was a case of
stealing he had to think twice; shooting the suspect would start
a blood feud because ‘murder for a fault (like stealing) isn’t
allowed ’, and perhaps the lost property was not worth the nuisance
which the blood feud would cause. If it was a murder case, it did
not much matter if he did shoot the suspect; he was already at feud
with the murderer. In property cases refusals to take the oath
seem to have been unknown when the dispute was in the hands of
elders; if they ordered a disputant to take an oath, he dared not
disobey for he knew that the whole community would gather to
enforce the order. If one disputant, before the case had reached
the elders, asked the other to take an oath that the property was his,
his request was refused as often as not, and then shooting became
inevitable.


More often a suspect volunteered unasked to take an oath. For
example, about 1931 a man in Zerqan shot his wife for some reason
unknown and was then, very properly by local standards, hunted
by her relatives. In desperation he offered to take an oath with
twelve compurgators, the statutory number for a murdered woman,
that he had not killed her. He managed to persuade all twelve to
take the oath, and so, though the public still believed him guilty,
he secured a formal acquittal and escaped further molestation by
her relatives.
Here is another example. In the early 1930’s a villager of Nange
in Lume killed a neighbour, in order to marry the widow. The
victim’s cousin, as required by ancient custom, shot the woman
and tried to shoot the man. He missed him again and again, but
made his life such a misery that the man volunteered to take an
oath with twenty-four compurgators, the statutory number for
a man, that he had not killed his neighbour. Less lucky than the
scamp of Zerqan, he was left to the cousin’s vengeance. One
compurgator failed to come to take the oath, so convicting him. It
transpired later that the cousin had bribed this compurgator with
two napoleons not to come, but the verdict of the oath could not
be quashed and the case retried.
In property disputes the choice of the oath-taker depended
almost universally on the wishes of the elders. When they decided
that a dispute about land, or irrigation water was to be settled by
an oath, they generally said that one of the disputants must swear
that the property was his. Most often they preferred the man in
possession, but sometimes they chose the one with the weaker
claim in the hope that he would shrink from the ordeal, and so
bring the dispute to a speedy end. In Qermenike, and no doubt
elsewhere, when there was some disparity of age they selected the
older disputant, on the assumption that his greater age would
mean greater knowledge of the facts. Very occasionally, before
the dispute was laid before the elders one disputant bade the other
take the very serious oath on the head of his son. Sometimes,
particularly in boundary disputes, the elders put neither disputant
to the oath. Instead, they chose an old man who had no direct
interest in the dispute, but had learned the facts from his father
and was trusted.
There were various names for the two principals. In all types of
case and in all areas the oath-taker was called ‘the master of the


oath’, but in theft cases he was often called the ‘thief’, and this
from the outset of the case until he was cleared. Father Gjefov also
calls the oath-taker in criminal cases ‘the accused’, but this seems
a literary term chosen by himself rather than a popular usage in
Mirdite. In theft cases, the accuser was most often described by
a periphrasis—being called in Godolesh the ‘plaintiff’, in Mirdite
‘the owner of the lost property’, in Martanesh ‘the owner of the
stolen property’, ‘the injured party’ or ‘the man robbed’, in
Fulqet ‘the injured party’, and in Zerqan ‘the owner of the
property’.
In murder cases, save for Father occasional ‘loader’,
the accuser was always called ‘ the man with the feud ’, the ‘ avenger ’
(lit. ‘the owner of the blood’), and in disputes about property ‘the
plaintiff’.
When an oath has been sworn by a suspect or a claimant to
property, the innocence of the one or the claim of the other had
generally to be established by the oath of a predetermined number
of compurgators.
It was legally impossible for a suspect to clear himself by his
unsupported oath. In the words of a proverb ‘A wolf licks his own
flesh and eats a stranger’s’. An oath-taker might not flinch from
perjury in order to establish his own innocence or his claim to
a property, but as compurgator he was likely to be more scrupulous.
So the law said there could be no complete oath without a jury.
But as usual it made exceptions. When a suspect or claimant was
ordered to swear one of the very solemn oaths in which perjury
involved the extinction of his whole family, his personal stake was
so great that a jury was dispensed with. The best example comes
from Martanesh, where a jury was necessary in oaths sworn on the
Koran or bread, but not in family oaths sworn at Balim Sulltan’s
grave.
It was both the right and the duty of the members of the jury to
gather all available evidence about the case and to make up their
minds about its rights and wrongs before they came finally to
court to record their verdict. An interval was therefore left
between the nominations of jurors and the final oath-taking, in
order to give them time to investigate the case. As a last step in
their collection of evidence they then gathered to hear the oath-
taker take the prescribed oath. They brought in their verdict by
exercising their right to decide whether or not to take the oath. To


return a verdict in the oath-taker’s favour they turned up on the
appointed day to repeat his oath themselves in public. They
returned one against him in either of two ways; either they refused
during the period of investigation to take the oath, or they did not
turn up to do so on the appointed day. In the case of early refusals
some modifications were allowed, but at the final oath-taking the
law was rigid. If even one compurgator failed to turn up the
suspect or claimant lost his case; there was no question of
majority vote. They took no oath until the end of the case. They
were not sworn, as elders were, to investigate fairly and to bring
in a true verdict.
The general rule for selections was that half the compurgators
in criminal cases were chosen by the oath-taker and half by the
accuser or by the elders: the latter in Mirdite, Godolesh and
Fulqet, the former in the Malesi e Madhe, Lume, Martanesh,
Zerqan and Labinot. In disputes about property the elders almost
everywhere named the jurors. Whether they did or not seems to
have depended mainly on whether they were local or from a distance.
When local, they knew the character of each potential juror and
could safely make their selection. When from a distance they did
not have enough knowledge to choose, and preferred to leave the
choice in the hands of the claimant. In Kurbin when house
quarrelled with house or village with village about irrigation water,
the claimant named twelve of the twenty-four compurgators
required.
It did not much matter who were chosen as compurgators by
a suspect. The practical certainty that they were his partisans and
would clear him made their oath comparatively unimportant. For
that reason they were not allowed to take it until the accuser’s
nominees had done so. In Mirdite the suspect was expected to
announce their names to the elders before the ceremony, but
elsewhere, as in Zerqan and the Malesi e Madhe, he had only to
bring them along to the oath-taking. The only person he was
forbidden to include was himself; ‘though 100 compurgators are
needed the suspect can’t be one ’, said the law. If he liked he could
even include a gipsy. He seldom or never did so, of course; regard
for his own prestige prevented him from choosing so low a creature.
On the other hand, it mattered very much who were named by the
accuser. His quota took the oath first and so gave the others their
cue. Their oath was weighty for several reasons. As the accuser’s


nominees they were supposedly free from bias in the suspect’s
favour. Then they were very carefully selected.
Since the truth or falsity of the result of the ordeal depended in
the first place on their probity, and since it had to be certain that
one or more of them would refuse to sell his soul by swearing
falsely to a criminal’s innocence, their personal honour had to be
beyond question—they must never have been caught, for instance,
swearing a false oath or taking bribes. They had further to be free
from ill-will against either party —they must not be malicious. It
was also important that they should have some knowledge of the
case at either first or second hand. Hence the accuser liked to name
the suspect’s relatives and neighbours, as in the case of Qazim of
Labinot, men who came from the suspect’s village if not his
brotherhood. In the case of a stolen animal, for example, the
relatives in particular might have seen the meat being eaten by the
suspect’s family or the bones being gnawed by his dog. In all cases
of theft a near relative would know that the suspect was not at home
at the time. But if any of the suspect’s relatives were unscrupulous
the accuser naturally preferred to nominate others. Better an
ignorant but upright compurgator.
Certain members of a tribe could not be compurgators. A gipsy,
we have said, might serve on a suspect’s behalf, though he might
not be put to the oath to discharge himself of an accusation or to
make good his claim to a property. Old men, boys and lunatics
were never allowed to take oath either as suspects or as compur-
gators ; nor were women except in very rare cases.
A Moslem hoxha or sheikh counted as only one compurgator,
but, being regarded as a man of weight, tended to come high on
the accuser’s list. A Catholic priest was theoretically exempted by
his office from being put to the oath as either suspect or compur-
gator, but if named as compurgator, he counted in his single
person as equal to twenty-four. If a bajraktar of Mirdite or one of
the Gjomarkaj family was chosen as compurgator in a case involving
twenty-four, the court named twelve others and declared the
bajraktar or Gjomarkaj equivalent to the remainder.
The suspect had the right to object to the accuser’s nominees if
they were not in a position to know the truth of the case, or to risk
taking an oath to clear him. If his objection was obviously well
founded, the accuser had to change his nominees. The suspect was
also protected from ill-will on the part of a compurgator. As


soon as they were named, the presiding authorities were legally
bound to ask if he thought any of them would leave him in the
lurch out of jealousy or spite. If he could produce reasonable
evidence that any of them would, those he mentioned had to be
changed. But only up to a maximum of three where twenty-four
had been prescribed, and of two where twelve or eight had been.
In Zerqan, however, the suspect could not raise objections to the
accuser’s nominees; in compensation the replacement rules were
somewhat relaxed.
Men sometimes declined nomination. Those proud of their high
reputation for uprightness disdained to be mixed up in a case
where the suspect was notorious for evil-doing, even if it was known
that for once he was wrongfully accused. Others would not lend
their weight to a petty case and consented to take the oath only in
serious matters, such as murder.
In most of the tribal areas, a man whose wife was pregnant could
ask to be excused. It was believed that it would be a crime for him
to take the oath. If he swore falsely, through inadvertence or not,
his sin would be visited on the unborn child, bringing it into the
world lame or with such deformity as six fingers instead of five.
Sometimes he agreed to take the oath if it were postponed until
after the child was bom, but more often his brother or cousin took
it in his stead.
Refusals for such personal reasons as the above almost always
took place as soon as the nominations were made. No difficulty was
made about accepting them and before the Assembly dispersed
another compurgator was named in each recusant’s place. Later
refusals were never prompted by anything but disbelief, real or
feigned, in the suspect, and were treated differently. At the same
time as the compurgators were named, the authorities informed the
suspect of the precise terms of the oath which he and his compur-
gators must take to vindicate him, and of the time of the ceremony.
It then became his duty, not only to find his own quota of com-
purgators, but also to inform the accuser’s compurgators that they
had been nominated. His own never caused much difficulty. One
or more of the others might decline. A compurgator who could
not believe the suspect’s oath dared not repeat it himself. Possibly
the suspect was likeable enough but ‘ an oath can’t be taken out of
favouritism’. Other nominees did not refuse out of hand but
waited until they had made some inquiries into the case and


cross-questioned the suspect. Anyone who discovered that the man
was guilty sent in his refusal to go on the jury. Sometimes, too,
a nominee was bribed or persuaded by the accuser into refusing.
Or one might have a grudge against the suspect, and, though
knowing him to be innocent, might seek to gratify his grudge by
declining to take the oath.
On every occasion when a named compurgator eventually
declined to serve, the suspect had to find two substitutes for him,
and these had to satisfy the accuser. If the first pair suggested did
not please him, the suspect had to search until he found two who
did. In Qermenike he was allowed twenty-four hours in which to
find them. But if more than three out of a total of twelve or eight,
or one out of a smaller number, declined, this provision did not
apply. It was concluded that the oath could not be taken, and
without more ado the suspect was pronounced guilty; he had in
criminal cases to pay the legal penalty for the crime, and in
disputes to forfeit the property he claimed. Occasionally, as in
Zerqan, when the recusants were strongly suspected of refusing
from motives of spite, an accuser might overlook their refusal and
inform the suspect that he need not even find one at all. More
often, however, a Zerqan accuser followed the usual practice and
exacted two compurgators for every one that drew back. In
Fulqet it was the Village Assembly, not the suspect, who selected
substitutes for recusants.
The number of compurgators depended on the nature of the case.
For such trifling matters as the theft of a pig, sheep or goat a ‘little
jury ’ of one man sufficed. Otherwise a jury consisted of anything
from two to twenty-four men, according to the importance of the
case. In murder cases there was a universal rule that twenty-four
compurgators were necessary when the victim was a man and only
twelve when she was a woman. In most other cases the number
required varied with the locality. Although it might have been
expected that economic factors would explain these variations,
that where horses, for instance, were scarce, the case would be
thought more important and the number of compurgators increased
in proportion, this does not appear to have been so.
If a dog was killed in the farmyard in Lume, twenty-four
compurgators, the customary number for a murdered man, were
required. The murder of a dog was as serious in Lume as the
murder of a man, as is further indicated by the fact that the same


blood money had to be paid. Possibly, too, there was a feeling here
as in other areas that the dog’s owner might have emerged into the
farmyard and been killed by its assassin. In all cases of damage to
property the number of compurgators depended, not only on the
value of the property, but also on the risk to the owner’s life which
the crime entailed. This risk depended largely on the site of the
crime. If, for example, a house was set on fire, it was reckoned that
one of the men in it might have lost his life; if not burned to death
he might have been shot by the incendiary when trying to escape
from the burning building. The oath in such a case was on that
account with twenty-four compurgators. But if a haystack was
fired six were enough. The risk to life was infinitesimal, and the
value of the haystack much inferior to that of a house. Similar
considerations graded thefts. If a house was burgled by a thief
who went upstairs and stole bedding or kitchen utensils there were
again twenty-four compurgators. For a thief wicked and desperate
enough to enter another’s house was an obvious killer. A thief who
bored a hole in the wall of the farmyard and stole something from
the yard was certainly ‘a big thief’, but so much less of a menace
to his victim’s life that he was put to the oath in Kurbin, Fulqet
and Zerqan with only twelve compurgators. A thief who stole at
a distance from the farm buildings needed only six in Fulqet. In
Zerqan, however, even this form of theft was considered heinous
enough to demand twelve compurgators.
Some of the same principles operated in thefts of sheep and
goats. In Martanesh, the Malesi e Madhe and Shale only one
compurgator was required when a single sheep or goat was stolen
at a distance from the farm buildings. The animal’s value was small
and the risk to a man’s life infinitesimal. The number of compur-
gators increased, up to a maximum of twenty-four in Martanesh
and twelve in Shale, with the number of animals stolen. In Fulqet
the grading was more detailed. If a single sheep or goat was stolen
at a distance, the suspect, most exceptionally, required no compur-
gators to back him up; it was enough if he swore himself that he
was innocent. If, however, the stolen animal was a bell-wether,
the most valuable animal in the flock because it led it, he had to
take the oath with six compurgators. 1 If an ordinary sheep or goat
was stolen from the farmyard he had to find four compurgators, and
if several animals were so stolen, twelve. In Labinot the law was
1 Vide infra, p. 208.


more severe, three to six compurgators being needed when only
one goat had been stolen in the most innocuous circumstances,
while grazing in the forest. In Kurbin the law was still more
drastic. Whether the stolen animal was an ordinary sheep or
a bell-wether, an ordinary goat or a bell-goat, and whether the
theft took place in the lonely forest or in the fold at the farm, the
suspect had to take the oath with all his family, the gravest oath
of all.
In disputes about property the number of compurgators mainly
depended on its value. In Kurbin as many as twenty-four might
be prescribed in irrigation disputes, this number probably
reflecting the frequency with which such quarrels ended in murder.
In Fulqet there were twenty-four compurgators in land disputes
but in neighbouring Diber twelve were enough. In Fulqet all the
land is under water, but in Diber very little can be irrigated.
A rod of land in Fulqet is consequently more valuable —better
worth fighting for—than a rod in Diber.
The number of compurgators was not absolutely fixed by law
and so might vary with the case. In all areas it was settled by the
elders in disputes about property, but in criminal cases the usage
differed. In Mirdite, Labinot and Godolesh the elders again said
how many there should be, but in Malesi e Madhe, Fulqet and
Martanesh the accuser had this privilege. Too often the number
then depended on the degree of ill-feeling between the parties. The
angrier the accuser was, the more compurgators he demanded. For
the more they were, the more trouble the suspect had in persuading
them to take the oath that would acquit him.
The compurgators, it should be mentioned, received no pay-
ment for their trouble except for the meal given them in most
places by the suspect.


CHAPTER XVII
THE OATH
II. THE OATH-TAKING
When the elders first sat on the case in small or large Assembly,
either they or the accuser issued full directions for taking the oath,
prescribing the time, the place, the sacred formula, the sacred
object and the terms in which it had to be taken.
In the case from Labinot the Assembly—or rather the presiding
elders—decreed that the suspect should take the oath about a week
later. The case being one of simple theft, they considered this
interval long enough for the suspect to find the compurgators and
for these to make the necessary inquiries. In Mirdite, the
Malesi e Madhe and Diber too, the elders fixed the date for taking
the oath at their first Assembly; it was near or remote according to
the clarity or obscurity of the case. A month was the average
allowance in the Malesi e Madhe, but in graver cases a year might
be allowed. In Zerqan the day was not fixed until after the suspect
had found his compurgators. This done, he informed the accuser
that whenever the latter chose, he was ready to take the oath. The
accuser then appointed the day without consulting the elders.
After fixing the date, the elders warned the suspect that if the
oath was not taken by that date, he would lose his case. At the
same time they informed the accuser that he must have patience for
the appointed term. If the oath was not taken when stated, he
would gain his case by default. Sometimes, however, the final
oath-taking was postponed. In Labinot and Zerqan postponements
were not favoured; it was considered that legal business should not
be allowed to drag on; obviously the longer the period of uncer-
tainty the greater the danger of gun-work. In Mirdite, however, if
the case was so complicated that the compurgators could not
complete their investigations or make up their minds, they had the
right to postpone taking the oath for as much as six months or even
longer; it was only the named compurgators who sought to exercise
this right. In the Malesi e Madhe the right of postponement lay
with the accuser, not the compurgators. Any compurgator who was
still dubious about the case could ask the accuser to extend the


time limit. The request was always granted. But a second could
not be made by the same compurgator. If the final day slipped
by unnoticed, as sometimes happened when it was distant, an
extension was generally arranged by mutual agreement.
In Catholic areas the incidence of Lent might delay matters, as
Catholics did not take oaths during holy seasons.
In most districts it was the elders who said where the oath was
to be taken, but in Kurbin and Lume it was the accuser. A spiteful
accuser of north Lume, for instance, could send a suspect, with all
his compurgators, to take the oath in south Diber, a four days’
journey there and back, with all expenses falling on the suspect. It
was probably to prevent such displays of malice that the choice of
place generally rested with the elders.
There was often a close connexion between the place at which,
and the sacred object on which, the oath had to be taken. The chief
sacred objects on which Catholics were called to swear were the
Gospel, the crucifix and the local church or its altar. Among
Moslems, there were the Koran, the local mosque and a saint’s
grave. The Gospel in the one case and the Koran in the other was
usually chosen. Diber, a purely Sunni Moslem district, and some-
what fanatical, claimed to take the oath only on the Koran.
North Albanians went to church to swear on the Gospel or
crucifix, but to their scandal the Catholics of Kurbin, Mirdite and
Lure had these sacred emblems carried to the suspect’s house.
Indeed, in Kurbin and Lure an oath was never taken on the Gospel
except outside the precincts of the church; the same was
presumably true in Mirdite. No reason for the taboo is known;
perhaps the combined sanctity of Gospel and church was thought
to involve too much risk. When swearing on an altar, the oath-
takers had naturally to enter the church, but when swearing on the
church itself they remained outside, touching only a stone in the
south door, possibly the threshold, perhaps a door-jamb. Some-
times they repeated the prescribed oath in the neighbourhood of the
church. Oaths were most commonly taken on the church in cases of
petty theft; graver cases demanded an oath on the Gospel or crucifix.
Moslem procedure was in general so similar to Catholic that it
seems to have been inherited from the days when all the area under
study was Catholic. To swear on a mosque, as the Moslems of
Qermenike sometimes did, it was enough to touch its door-jamb or
threshold, precisely in the Catholic manner. To swear on the Koran,


some preferred to go to the mosque, as the Catholics in the north
went to church. But more often the Moslems, like the Catholics of
Kurbin, went to the suspect’s house. Since no possible sanctity
could attach to a private house, it seems to have been the sacred
book rather than the building which gave such oaths their value.
In Zdrajshe and Zerqan, indeed, it was openly said that provided
an oath was taken on the Koran, the place where it was taken did
not matter. It is probable that the same view was held in Krasniqe
in the north-east, where oaths were taken in either the mosque or
one of the shady spots called ulice. It seems possible that these
groves might be sacred because growing on the sites of former
churches, but the local Moslems said that there had never been
churches there and that no sanctity attached to the spots. 1 When
taking oath by a sacred grave, Moslems usually entered the
mausoleum; for such oaths there was no Catholic parallel.
In Zerqan a suspect must never be asked to take an oath in or
near his own house, for if he swore falsely the house might collapse
or otherwise come to grief. This fear was not acknowledged in the
many other areas where such oaths were common, but it may have
been implicit. If a suspect staked his own house by taking the oath
in it, he would naturally try harder than ever to avoid perjury.
In mixed districts the suspect and the accuser might be of
different faiths. In that event when the decision lay with the elders,
the suspect’s religion decided whether it was in the church or
mosque, on the Gospel or the Koran, that the oath should be
taken. When the decision lay with the accuser his wishes prevailed.
In such districts the jury too was often mixed. They had all to take
the same oath as the suspect. So Catholics had to make oath in
a mosque and on the Koran if the suspect was a Moslem; and in
the opposite case Moslems had to make it in a church and on the
Gospel. In Vinjolle, lying some six miles north of Kruje, after it
became Moslem an oath could still be taken on the Gospel as well
as on the Koran. In Lure, when it was abandoning Catholicism,
a man could swear, at least in conversation, by the mosque or
church, according to which came into his head first, irrespective
of his own or his hearer’s religion.
Moslems but not Catholics might take oath at a sacred grave.
This might stand in a single mausoleum or form part of a monastery.
The most important of these graves were Sulejman Pasha’s at
13
HAM
1 But doubtless a pagan survival of the sacred grove ( lucus ). (Ed.)


Tirana, Sheikh Hasan’s at Nange in Lume, Sheikh Ibrahim’s at
Surroj across the river Drin from Nange, Sheikh Fejza’s at Bulqize,
Balim Sulltan’s at Martanesh, and those of two abbots at Kruje.
Sulejman Pasha and Sheikh Ibrahim lie in an isolated mausoleum,
Balim Sulltan in a cave, and the others in monasteries. These
saints belonged to different sects; Sulejman Pasha, the soldier who
founded Tirana in the seventeenth century, was a Sunni; Sheikh
Hasan, founder of the monastery at Nange, and his brother,
Sheikh Ibrahim of Surroj, were Khalvetis; Balim Sulltan of
Martanesh and the two abbots of Kruje were Bektashis; and
Sheikh Fejza, founder of the monastery at Bulqize, a dissident
Bektashi. Sometimes it did not matter to what sect the buried
saint belonged. Sheikh Hasan of Nange was so renowned that the
local population, even if not Khalvetis, took their oaths on his grave
and never in the mosque, and Catholic as well as Moslem oath-
takers came in serious cases to his grave from Shkoder, four days
away. Sulejman Pasha’s grave drew oath-takers from as far away
as Martanesh; these had long since forgotten his history, and,
though ardent Bektashis, did not care that he was a Sunni. Sunni
Albanians are not so liberal however; taught to abhor the Bektashis
as unorthodox Moslems, they left the graves of Balim Sulltan of
Martanesh and the two abbots of Kruje to Bektashi oath-takers.
Sheikh Fejza, abhorred by Sunnis as almost a Bektashi and by
Bektashis as a backslider from their faith, commanded allegiance
only among his own followers in Bulqize. Oaths used to be taken
in three mausolea in the Bektashi monastery at Kruje, but by 1930
the abbot refused to open one for such a purpose. Once, as an
oath was being taken in this mausoleum, both disputants fell dead;
there had been roguery on both sides as the buried saint was quick
to detect. Ever afterwards the abbots restricted oath-takers to the
two mausolea in which the saints seemed slower to wrath.
Among invocations of the Deity used in oaths, the following are
recorded: ‘By the Lord ’ (Perlat and Shkrel); ‘By this Lord Who
gave me life’ (Perlat); ‘By this Lord Who is in Heaven’ (Shale);
‘By Our Lady’ (Shkrel); and ‘By the Blood of Christ’ (Shale). In
all these the influence of the Church is evident, but there are hints
in the Albanian originals that some are older than the Church.
The Deity was invoked by Moslems as follows: ‘By that Lord ’
(Godolesh); ‘By God’ (Diber); ‘By God, with God, from God’ 1
1 Vallahi, billahi, tallahi.


(Godolesh and Lume). The first two phrases are evidently old
Albanian and have nothing exclusively Moslem about them; the
second (lit. ‘ May I see God ’) has even a Catholic ring. The third is
widely known all over the Moslem world and in certain areas
which were once under Moslem rule. But it is used in a magical
rather than a religious sense. It is found in magical formulae
among the Arabs of Egypt and the Christian Greeks of the island
of Zea, next door neighbour to Euboea. 1
The only invocation of the Deity which the author recorded
among the Orthodox was in Shpat and ran as follows: ‘By that
Christ in Whom we believe.’ It is evidently a Church formula.
There was no sign that any of these oaths was preferred to the
others; they seemed to have equal value. Readers who know the
Catholics and the Orthodox, the two religions which divided
Albania before the Turks came in the fifteenth century, will be
struck by the paucity of references to Christ and the Virgin Mary
and by the emphasis on God; this may be a further indication that
the oaths go back to pagan days when neither Christ nor the Virgin
was known.
Formulae for invoking Catholic saints were such as ‘By that
St Nicolas’ in Kurbin and ‘By the candle of St Nicolas’ among
the Highlanders of Breg i Matit and Gurreze. Both were very grave
oaths. The candle in the second is the wax taper lit before pictures
of the saint by the devout; oath-takers seem to have feared that
perjury would extinguish the flame of their life as easily as a candle
could be put out. Of all their saints too, the Catholic Highlanders
preferred St Nicolas. No Moslem saints were invoked as such;
it was rather by their graves than themselves that oaths were taken.
A strange oath, which comes from Surroj, was an exception. This
ran ‘By this patron saint of coffee’. Coffee, the peasants of
Surroj explained, has a ‘very important’ patron saint. All over
Albania coffee-house keepers make a libation to him every morning
by pouring away the first cup of coffee that they make. They hope
that after being placated in this way the saint will send them
many customers. Some believe that he lies buried somewhere in
the east of the Turkish empire, possibly in Arabia.
Catholic priests and Moslem clergymen —hoxhas and sheikhs
among the Sunnis, abbots (baba, sing.; baballar, plur.) among the
Bektashis —were respected as men of God, and Bektashi abbots
12-2
1 See Folklore, Vol. xxxvn, p. 195 (June 1926).


even became saints at their death, but an oath ‘by the priest’ or
‘by that hoxha’ was never taken; it would have been regarded as
sacrilege.
A most interesting oath was taken by both the Orthodox and the
Moslems of Berat town and district. Its commonest forms were
‘ By Him of Tomorr ’ and ‘ By the Holy One of Tomorr ’. The deity
that dwelt in pagan days on the summit of Tomorr, the lofty,
beautiful mountain that dominates the town of Berat, is still a living
force in the district. He was, indeed, so dreaded that even in
conversation he could not be named, but only darkly alluded to.
‘By that mountain top’ is no less solemn an oath than the more
definite pair already given. No man had been known to swear any
of them falsely.
By what was perhaps a survival of early nature worship, oath-
takers sometimes invoked natural objects as in the oaths, ‘By this
bright light which is dawning’, ‘By this evening which is coming’,
‘ By this night we have to-night’. These were all given by Catholics
in Perlat. The first two were used for oaths taken in the morning
and the third for those taken in the evening. Moslems in Godolesh
and Labinot sometimes swore ‘By this sun ’ and ‘By this earth ’. The
latter was a very solemn oath, earth being weighty for two reasons:
man was made of it and it lies heavy on a dead man who committed
sins such as perjury during his lifetime. Apparently oaths were not
taken ‘by this fire’ or ‘by this moon’; perhaps both fire and moon
lack the inevitability and stability that fitted dawn and darkness,
the sun and the earth, for worship by primitive Albanians.
Among oaths by sacred buildings were such as ‘By this church’
spnong Catholics and ‘ By this mosque ’ among Moslems. They were
chiefly employed conversationally, and meant little more than our
own expression ‘on my honour ’. Indeed, a man of Lure used them
indifferently, irrespective of whether he or his hearer were Catholic
or Moslem. But when a Moslem of Martanesh swore ‘by this holy
place’ as he stood in Balim Sulltan’s mausoleum, his oath was very
solemn. So, too, were the oaths in Bulqize ‘by that shrine’, the
domed tomb of Sheikh Fejza; in Tirana by the grave of Sulejman
Pasha, the seventeenth-century founder of the town; in Kruje by
the tombs of two Bektashi abbots; in Nange, Lume, by the tomb
of the Khalveti saint, Sheikh Hasan; and in Surroj, by the grave of
Sheikh Hasan’s brother, Sheikh Ibrahim. In the last case the
formula was rather unusual; standing in the mausoleum ( teqe ) the


oath-taker began by saying ‘ May Sheikh Ibrahim cut short my life ’.
In the other cases he used some vague formula such as ‘By this
holy place’ or ‘By this shrine’.
Oaths by smaller sacred objects were all very similar. The formula
used in swearing on an altar was in Shale ‘By this altar’; on
a church door in the Malesi e Madhe and Kurbin, ‘By these
things of the Lord ’; on a crucifix or gospel in Mirdite, ‘By this
holy thing of God’; in Kurbin ‘By this thing of God’. The more
fanatical of the Moslems preferred to swear on the Koran under
a Turkish, or rather Arabic, name. Thus ‘By this holy book’ was
liked in Lume, and ‘By this sacred book’ everywhere. Others, as in
Vinjolle and Zerqan, swore ‘ By this thing of God ’, or if in Godolesh,
‘By the holy thing of this our God’. The last oath is very close to
the oath of Catholic Mirdite on the Gospel, and there is little doubt
that this Moslem oath was once Catholic or Orthodox. Indeed, it
may have been pagan. The vagueness of their phraseology made
the transference from one religion to another easy. A similar
vagueness characterizes most of the oaths in this paragraph. Its
origin lay in the simple Albanian’s idea of respect for a sacred
object; he thought that naming a person or thing detracted from
the majesty of that person or thing. Besides preserving the efficacy
of ancient oaths through later changes of religion, this vagueness
also reduced any repugnance which a Catholic or Moslem in
a mixed jury might feel at being asked to swear on the holy book
of the other’s religion. It has even led Catholics of Lure, when
Islam was fast displacing Catholicism, to anticipate the future
conversion by swearing the essentially Moslem oath ‘By this
hajmali (sacred book) ’ on the Christian Gospel.
A curious and most solemn oath among Catholics was ‘by the
stone’. This was not any ordinary stone that the oath-taker might
pick up regardless of his religion, but was a special one found only
among Catholics. Triangular in shape, it had a hole in each of its
three corners for attaching the balance in which persons minded to
offer votive candles to church weighed the wax of which each was
to be made. It derived such sanctity from this association with the
church that an oath on it was as serious as one on the Gospel or
crucifix. Such an oath was in fact reserved for occasions of special
gravity, as when a man suspected of a heinous crime was put to the
ordeal, or a whole tribe swore to refrain from acts disturbing the
public peace, or a community took oath to stick together through


thick and thin. No memory of oath or stone survives in areas such
as Qermenike and Lume, which abandoned Catholicism some
centuries ago.
A number of very solemn oaths were taken on objects that had
no obvious association with religion, and these seem to date from
the oldest days of Albanian existence. Thus an oath in very common
use all over the country was ‘By bread’. Among the Catholics
where the priests combated everything that they thought was
pagan, this oath was more often heard in conversation than in
ordeals, but among the Orthodox and Moslems it held a higher
place. The most solemn oath of the Orthodox of Shpat was ‘ By
that Christ in Whom we believe and by that bread we eat’. The
Moslems generally used a loaf, treating it like a Koran.
Sometimes at least in Martanesh an uncooked maize-cob served
instead of a loaf. Both in Martanesh and in Lume salt was often
added; the formula then was in Lume ‘By the bounties of the
Lord’.
One advantage of swearing on bread was that the oath could be
taken, and peace made as soon as trouble arose. If two men who
had met in a house quarrelled, one accusing the other of letting
his animals stray into his maize-field or of cutting firewood in his
forest or the like, the accused could immediately clear himself,
provided two or three other men were present as witnesses; no set
jury was necessary. All he had to do was to lay his right hand on
bread and say, ‘May the bread kill me’. This oath was known in
places as far apart as Labinot and Lume. It has already been said
that though a woman could not make oath on the Koran, she might,
in Zerqan if accused of petty pilfering, make one on bread. Men
in Godolesh, which was an Orthodox village till 1910, sometimes
swore ‘by this bread’ but did not consider it one of their most
serious oaths.
The reason for choosing bread for such a serious occasion as an
ordeal is not certain. The Orthodox oath from Shpat speaks of
eating it so that the idea of its being the staff of life seems present.
Its conjunction with salt in Lume and Martanesh supports this
idea. On the other hand, the influence of Holy Communion also
seems at work. The Orthodox of Albania as of Greece speak of it as
the Body of Christ, and on that account consider it sinful to cut
rather than break it before beginning to eat. Moslems regard even
crumbs of it as too sacred to tread on. Most probably the idea that


it is the staff of life is the oldest, and religious conceptions come
later. As essential to life, it was suited to oath-taking; as shown by
the oath ‘May the bread kill me’, it had power to punish perjury
with death.
Two more formulae remain to be mentioned. The first was ‘By
my head ’, and the second ‘ By the head of my son’. The former was
thought justifiable; one might do as one pleased with one’s own
head. But a man who swore on his son’s head was strongly
disapproved of; only a low fellow, it was thought, would risk his
child’s life by such an oath. Nothing less was involved, as appears
in the following full formula for a land dispute. ‘ By the head of the
son that I have, this land is mine. If it is not mine, may I weep for
the son that I have.’ 1
When the time came to take the oath, both Catholics and
Moslems behaved as if about to perform an act of worship.
Catholics removed their caps and made the oath bareheaded; they
also crossed themselves as they began. Sunni Moslems performed
the ceremonial ablutions incumbent on them before they pray. By
their preliminaries the Catholics sought to indicate respect for the
Deity; by theirs the Sunnis sought also to make their oath binding
—without them, so they believed, it would be null and void. The
Moslems of Martanesh, being Bektashis, did not perform the
ceremonial ablutions, but suspect and compurgator when taking
the oath in a house had to stand facing Mecca, with the witnesses
behind them. As each man’s turn came, he advanced towards the
Koran or loaf of bread, knelt, and laying hand on the book or
bread repeated the prescribed words. This reverence for the sacred
emblem was shown by both religions, sometimes with quaint little
ceremonies. Thus, when the Catholics of Lure swore in the open
on the Gospel, as was their common practice, they picked up some
grass or other greenery and held it over the book while they recited
the oath; the purpose of the grass is not clear. 2 After the conversion
of Vinjolle to Islam from Catholicism oaths were sworn indifferently,
as has already been said, on the Gospel or Koran. When at a house,
the sacred book was laid on fresh grass near the house or on a clean
place in the farmyard. Each oath-taker kissed it three times,
before venturing to put his hand on it and repeat the oath.
1 The oath on a son’s head is common to the Moslem world and if perjured
involves the son as well as his father in eternal damnation.
2 Possibly it involved the false swearer in withering like the plucked grass.


Ordinarily the Gospel might be open or closed and the Koran bare
or wrapped in a cloth. A most interesting survival from Christianity
comes from Fulqet, where the men, who now are all good Sunni
Moslems, tapped their breasts with their fingers when making an
oath; the gesture had lost the definite form of making the sign of
the cross, but its origin seemed unmistakable.
The oath was taken in two stages. First the suspect swore in the
presence of all the compurgators that he was innocent of the crime,
and then the compurgators swore in the presence of witnesses that
the suspect was innocent. He and they swore in the same manner.
Bareheaded and making the sign of the cross if Catholic, with
hands and face ritually cleansed if Moslem, each in turn invoked
the Deity or laid his hand on the sacred object prescribed and
repeated the oath. The compurgators did not as a rule take the oath
until the suspect had done so and thereby assumed all possible
responsibility before God and man for its truth. But, exceptionally,
in Lume a suspected murderer —and probably a suspected thief
too —did not take the oath at all unless the compurgators, fearing
that he had committed the crime, and lacking convincing proof one
way or the other, wished to secure such evidence as his oath
provided. In Zerqan a suspect took the oath only when the com-
purgators doubted his innocence.
Of the compurgators the accuser’s nominees came first, headed
by the suspect’s nearest relatives and neighbours, the most
responsible because the most knowledgeable of them all. As soon
as the first two or three had taken the oath the others shed their fears
of perjuring themselves and took it in their turn. Lastly came the
suspect’s quota, free of qualms. When the jury was large, the
accuser often interrupted the proceedings before all the suspect’s
quota had sworn. Since his own nominees, ‘good men and true’,
and the first of the suspect’s quota had taken the oath, there could
be no doubt that the remainder would do so. In Dukagjin, the
Gjakove highlands (Males! e Jakoves), and a few other areas in
that neighbourhood, only half of the compurgators ever recited the
oath; the others merely put their hand on the Gospel and passed
by. The first man recited the oath in full, the second touched the
Gospel and passed by, and so on. According to the Franciscan
priest of Theth the even numbers were there to vindicate the odd
numbers, the only complete oath-takers, but Father Gjefov
describes the custom somewhat differently. He says that half the


compurgators took the oath and half stood listening with their
hands folded at the waist. As only the former touched the Gospel
they were called ‘oath-hands’. Possibly Father Gjefov’s informa-
tion came from a different area of Dukagjin, or even since his time
the details may have been modified.
The compurgators took the oath on the day officially appointed.
The suspect took it a few minutes, a day or several days earlier, as
best suited the general convenience, and generally in the presence
of the compurgators only. The taking of the oath by the compur-
gators was a more public affair. The accuser’s presence was in most
places indispensable. If he would not, or could not, attend the
ceremony, he had to give up trying to get his rights by an oath and
had to find a private detective to take up the case. In Zerqan,
apparently, the accuser did not need to be present, in theft cases at
least. The number and quality of other witnesses varied in some
places, such as Kurbin, with the gravity of the case, and in others
with local custom. In Fulqet, Godolesh and Qermenike it was
obligatory for the village to turn out; otherwise the oath was not
considered valid. In Mirdite the elders trying the case had to be
present and so too in Theth, Diber and Qermenike; if, however,
one of them found it inconvenient to attend, he could, in Diber at
least, send a deputy. In Lure the Catholic priest had to be present
when the suspect was Catholic, as had the Moslem sheikh of
Ceren when he was a Moslem. In the Malesi e Madhe, Bytyg and
Martanesh, an oath was valid if witnessed by the accuser and a few
of his friends.
In grave cases a whole family might be asked to take the oath. In
that event the master spoke in his usual capacity of household
representative, for the rest of the family as well as himself, and it
was forbidden to ask them to repeat his words. In Mirdite the
women and children were not involved, but in Malesi e Madhe all
the males of the family had to be present regardless of their age, and
the master held an infant boy in his arms while he swore that he
and they were innocent. In Martanesh, too, the accused had to
bring all his sons, all his brothers and all his brothers’ sons to the
ceremony. The suspect had to swear to the whole family’s ignorance
as well as innocence of the crime.
In most districts this oath was taken at any of the usual places for
oath-taking, but in Martanesh it was taken in the most solemn
circumstances possible, at the grave of Balim Sulltan. It was a very


serious oath, entailing the extinction of the whole family if the
oath-taker perjured himself. This was symbolized clearly in the
Malesi e Madhe ceremony. The master’s perjury, if any, and its
penalties would, it was believed, run through his body and the
infant’s like an electric current and destroy both. The wording of
the oath seems to have been suitably strong as well as comprehen-
sive. The only available example comes from the Malesi e Madhe,
and runs, ‘ By this holy oath of the Lord, if I did it, may He reward
me. As for the male of yours who has been killed, neither I nor my
kinsmen, male or female, have killed him with our hands or our
guns or with a guest’s or agent’s hands or gun.’
The family oath was reserved for men who were expected to deny
a serious crime of which there was strong evidence that they were
guilty. In the Malesi e Madhe, and apparently in Martanesh also,
this was murder. So in these areas a family oath was tantamount
to one with twenty-four compurgators. In Mirdite and Kurbin it
was chiefly used in theft cases. If a sheep or goat in Kurbin was
stolen, the thief had to return two sheep or goats to the owner, and
pay a fine besides; if, however, he denied the theft, he must swear
with his whole family that he was innocent. By contrast, a man
who denied stealing an ox, a horse or a mule, was only ordered to
take the oath with six compurgators. The theft of these animals
was less serious than stealing a sheep or goat; for they only
represented wealth, whereas the sheep and goats provided food for
their owner.
In Mirdite the accuser had the right to ask a family oath of any
man whom he strongly suspected, and could also say that he must
take it with a jury. In that event he had to specify the various
families in the village who were to compose the jury. For the
Malesi e Madhe there is no evidence, but in Martanesh a jury was
seldom required in family oaths. Group oaths were used in cases
where the suspect, told to take the oath with twenty-four compur-
gators, failed to find so many ready to swear to his innocence and
volunteered to take the oath with all the males of his family in
Balim Sulltan’s mausoleum. If he did so, nothing more was
required of him.
In Mirdite, as Father informs us, a truculent accuser
might also ask the oath by the head of the suspect’s son; in that
case the accused could not refuse to take it, unfair and dangerous
to the child though it was. If there were more than one boy in the


family, the oath had to be taken on all their heads. On the appointed
day, the accuser went to the suspect’s house, where the suspect
gathered all the males in his family and drew their heads together.
After laying his hands on their heads to establish the contact which
would involve them in his perjury, if any, he took the oath, saying,
‘ By the heads of my sons, I have not done you the wrong of which
you have accused me, and I do not know who has done it’. The
gravity of this oath made it particularly useful in ending embittered
disputes before they came to bloodshed, for only a man very sure
of his position or one utterly unscrupulous would swear it.
Social oaths were designed to check lawlessness and breaches of
the peace within the tribe and were the commonest types. In
Document 11, Mnele and Gomsiqe swear 1 to stick together what-
ever may betide for mutual defence against external danger. Some-
times the tribe, or at least the brotherhood in the Malesi e Madhe,
swore that they would not enter a certain house. Though this oath
was never taken except to make the law-breaker obey a tribal
judgement, it was not considered a good oath, and breaking it soon
after it was sworn was advocated. Sometimes, too, a village would
assemble and take oath not to send their animals to the summer
grazing grounds before a fixed date or to cut wood in each other’s
forests. In Lure irrigation rights still depended on oaths taken by
the various claimants several generations ago and still binding on
their descendants. This example shows how the perpetuity of
oaths prevented renewals of litigation; a right once settled,
remained settled.
When about to pronounce a decision or just after pronouncing
it, elders frequently took oath that they had judged or would judge
righteously. In all the tribal area they inevitably carried a stone on
their shoulder to signify that they must carry it throughout eternity
if their oath was false. In Shale their formula was, ‘With body
and soul, with good luck and good fortune, so far as I can tell
I have decided this matter without guile, without bribery and
without prejudice’.
1 See Appendix, Document 11, p. 262.


CHAPTER XVIII
THE OATH
III. VERDICT AND PENALTIES
The only way of bringing in a verdict in the suspect’s favour was,
as has already been said, by his taking the prescribed oath himself
and inducing the prescribed number of compurgators to repeat it.
This done, he was acquitted {u-la, lit. ‘he was washed’).
By contrast, there were several ways of reaching an adverse
verdict. The suspect might pronounce it himself. Sometimes
superstitious fear made him refuse at the first asking to take the
oath. This only occurred when he knew he was guilty of the crime,
or had no lawful right to the disputed property. Sometimes
a bolder suspect got as far as the door of the church or mosque, and
then was stricken with sudden fear of the perjury he was about to
commit, confessed to the crime and faced up to the consequences.
A slyer suspect, hoping that the matter was forgotten, sometimes
let the day for taking the oath pass. But the accuser was generally
on the watch and frustrated his hope. First he informed his own
elder that the appointed day had come and gone without the oath
being taken. This elder having passed on the information to the
suspect’s elder the two dignitaries went together to the man’s
house, pointed out that the term was up and declared that since he
had not taken the oath he had lost his case.
There were at least three ways by which the compurgators
might bring in a verdict of guilty. The first was when three out of
twenty-four compurgators, two out of twelve or eight, and one of
a smaller number, informed the suspect soon after their nomina-
tion that they did not have enough confidence in his innocence to
take the oath that would clear him.
Again, if the compurgators did not believe the suspect’s oath,
they could take one of two courses. They might tell him there and
then to go and pay the penalty for his crime because they did not
believe his oath and must refuse to acquit him with their own. Some
of them were, of course, certain to know the truth from other
sources and so could check his oath. Or they might wait till the day
of taking the oath and then, without giving the suspect any warning,


fail to turn up. If even one so failed, the suspect was declared
guilty. Indeed, the easiest and least obnoxious way of convicting
the suspect was not to turn up for the oath. Such was the almost
universal rule. In the Malesi e Madhe, however, a message was
sent to a missing compurgator to make sure that he had not merely
forgotten the date. If he replied that he had not come on purpose
because he thought the suspect was guilty, the case ended, a verdict
of guilty being returned. If he replied that he was absent for
personal reasons, an attempt was made to find two others to take
his place at once; if this succeeded, the oath was taken. If only one
compurgator did not attend in Byty?, the oath could be taken,
particularly if the reason for the compurgator’s default was the
newly discovered pregnancy of his wife. These rules applied only
to the accuser’s quota. If one of the suspect’s compurgators failed
to turn up, any bystander who could be persuaded to join the jury
might be substituted. As the suspect was not bound to disclose
the names of his quota, the public was often unaware that the
second man was a substitute and not the suspect’s first choice.
In Mirdite the verdict was virtually known before the taking of
the oath. When the suspect felt ready to take the oath he invited
the compurgators to a meal in his house. If they declined his
invitation it meant that they thought him guilty and would not take
the oath. If they accepted his invitation he could sleep in peace,
secure in the knowledge that whenever the time came for them to
take the oath, they would do so. Once they had eaten his food, the
oath was as good as taken. This custom may have developed because
the suspect had to assemble the compurgators to hear him take
the oath and was forbidden by his instincts of hospitality to leave
them unfed. In Labinot, Qermenike and Zerqan, the suspect also
offered the compurgators a high-class meal, with meat and rice
pilaff, but not till after they had taken the oath, and only if he had
been cleared. The meal was thought to ratify the oath and to reward
the compurgators in some measure for their trouble.
A loser who did not abide by the verdict of the oath lost ‘face’.
Some years ago, a family in Fulqet died out. Two neighbours,
more or less related to the family, claimed its land, one taking
possession of it and the other gathering a stackful of hay from it.
Even the women quarrelled so fiercely over it that they had to
be separated by gendarmes and the elders intervened and said that
the relative in possession must take an oath with twenty-four


compurgators that the land was his. He took the oath, but the
other refused to accept its verdict and the quarrel continued. The
whole village denounced this as ‘very shameful’.
Some losers were made to accept the verdict by the realization
that resistance would only plunge them into the difficulties of
a blood feud, and others submitted in fear of losing ‘face’. The
elders had normally little machinery for enforcing the verdict. In
one difficult case observed by the author in Qermenike however,
they succeeded by the unusual device of putting both claimants to
the oath. An old, forceful man had quarrelled about irrigation water
with a young rascal who was his distant relative. The elders decided
that if the young man could take the oath, he should have the
water; if he could not, the old man must not think the water his
but must take oath on another day that it was his by right. As the
young man was a notorious liar, it was not expected that he would
be able to muster the requisite number of compurgators. But to
the general surprise he succeeded, and took the oath. The elders
decreed that he should have water for six hours every five days. The
old man seemed at first to acquiesce in this decree, but later held
up the water and turned out his own compurgators to take oath
along with himself that it was his. But the elders would not
countenance such disobedience, particularly as he had originally
submitted to the verdict of his relative’s oath; and by refusing to
come and witness his oath they prevented it from being taken.
Eventually he gave in, and allowed the young man to have water
according to the oath that he had sworn as prescribed by the
elders.
Another interesting case occurred in Diber about 1935. Cen
Elezi was asked to arbitrate between two cousins in Qaje, in
south Lume, who were quarrelling about a piece of land. He asked
a fee of twelve napoleons from each, and accepted their tobacco
boxes in pledge thereof. The boxes were silver but not worth
anything like his fee, so they were only a token pledge. Cen then
went to see the land and discovered that neither cousin knew
exactly where its boundaries lay. He pointed this out and said that
this and their relationship made arbitration difficult. One of them,
whom he named, must therefore take oath with six named and six
unnamed compurgators that the land was his. First of all, however,
he must set up the boundary stones in their proper places. On the
day arranged Cen could not go himself to witness the oath. He


sent the cousins word to that effect and said he was sending a deputy.
When the latter arrived, he found the named cousin ready to take
the oath but no boundary stones in place. He refused to witness
the oath because Cen’s condition had not been observed. The
matter was referred back to Cen, who said that since the cousin put
to the oath had been unable to take it as enjoined, the other must
have the land. If they did not wish to accept this judgement, let
them bring him four napoleons each as his fee for the incomplete
oath, and let them find another elder and he would pay his
expenses; he was no guarantor to make them accept his judgement.
The cousins prepared to accept his decision, but when the winner
began to plough the land, the loser shot one of his men dead and
wounded another; the feud continued for many years.
The oath derived its efficiency as a legal instrument from super-
stitious fear of punishment for perjury. God, as the Almighty, was
naturally the chief agent of this punishment. ‘ Don’t let God catch
a perjurer’, said the aphorism. In invocations the connexion
between oath and Deity was simple. The oath-taker called God or
one of His saints to witness to the truth of what he was about to
swear, and did so in the full knowledge that if he angered Him by
perjury, he must expect a manifestation of Divine wrath. There was
a very definite belief that God was watching. In oaths sworn on
a sacred object or building, such as ‘ By this good thing of the Lord ’,
there was an indirect invocation of the Deity, but also while the
oath-taker swore, he had to keep his hand on the sacred object—
Gospel, crucifix, altar, church door, Koran, saint’s grave—just as
a witness in an English law court must take the oath with his hand
on the Bible. This act established physical contact between the
oath-taker and the Deity or saint with which the sacred object or
building was associated. To a simple tribesman this was a very
solemn thought. On this account these contact oaths were preferred
above all others. Probably the contact also made the tribesman
think punishment more certain. All over the Near East the
principle of direct contact with holy things plays an important
role. This is most familiar in cases of sickness, as when people
knot rags to sacred graves or trees; the holy influences with which
they have thus linked their persons penetrate their whole being and
cure their maladies. Many instances will be found in the author’s
book Christianity and Islam under the Sultans. But suppliants for
such favours must placate the holy influences with prayers or


other offerings. If they irritated them, as an oath-taker would do
by perjuring himself, they could only expect punishment.
A most interesting example of the working of physical contact
which is certainly of pagan origin was found in the Moslem district
of Sulove, south-west of Elbasan. There the most hardened oath-
taker dare not forswear himself in a serious case, for he must then
take the oath with a coin in his mouth, and perjury would bring
him certain death. The coin was clearly Charon’s obol, as was the
coin slipped on to the chest of Albanian dead in many widely
separated areas.
In the exclusively Catholic oath ‘ by the stone ’ the solemnity of
the oath came from the contact with a holy thing, and punishment
for perjury was inflicted in any form that the sacred object chose.
When, however, elders swore their equally solemn oath with
a stone, log of wood or other weight on their shoulder, or when
a man, stone on shoulder, claimed repayment of a dead man’s debt,
no principle of contact was involved. There was rather a quite
crude belief that a perjuring elder would be punished by having to
carry the weight for ever and ever in the next world.
God punished the perjurer both in this world and in the next.
When the man died, his soul was lost, for being ‘heavy-laden
before the Lord ’ it had nowhere to go. If he was an elder who had
taken an oath with a stone on his shoulder, he was doomed to carry
the stone through all eternity. The first of these terrors was evidently
inspired by the Church. The second is an older fear. The elder,
when taking the oath, often expressed his willingness to carry the
stone in the next world if he perjured himself, but an accused man
left his future condition to be inferred, except for the cryptic phrase
‘lf I did it, may He reward me’, which he sometimes inserted in
his oath. When he was thinking only of himself he meant, according
to the Catholics of Kurbin, ‘lf I lie may God kill me. If I tell the
truth, may He forgive me my sins.’ When he contrasted himself
with his accuser he meant, ‘lf I did it may I suffer for it. If I
didn’t, and you’ve made me run the risk of taking this oath with-
out due cause, may you suffer for it.’ This sentence seems to have
died out among the Moslems.
Death was the commonest, and most dreaded, form of punish-
ment in this world. In the most solemn oaths it was specified—
a son’s in the oath by the child’s head, the oath-taker’s own in the
oaths by his own head, with Charon’s coin in his mouth, and in


such phrases as ‘May Sheikh Ibrahim cut short my life’ and ‘May
the bread kill me’. Sometimes the mechanism was crude and
obvious, as in Jove’s thunderbolts, the lightning that struck the
perjurer dead, set his house on fire, or killed his livestock. Even if
a perjurer escaped death, it was expected all over the country that
he would fall ill or go from bad to worse till he came to ruin.
Poverty and sickness must be his lot. His family might even die
out, most dreadful of calamities. His son might be bom with
a physical defect, lame or blind or with a withered arm or too many
fingers to his hands. A man of Ternove, near Martanesh, took
a false oath, and as a result one of his eyes a year later was as large
as his fist.
There were also social penalties to be faced. A man detected in
a false oath became an outcast, despised and condemned by all his
fellows, and was never again invited into any house in the tribe. In
grosser cases in the Malesi e Madhe he might even be expelled by
the tribe. In Mirdite his family was branded with shame for seven
generations. All over the Catholic areas he was also fined. In
Mirdite there were elaborate rules for these fines. If there had
been a jury of twenty-four, the perjurer had to pay 100 rams and an
ox to the Gjomarkaj family. If the jury had been smaller, the fine,
which was presumably of the same amount, went to the tribe. In
addition, the perjurer had to pay a fine to the Church and 500 grosh
to each compurgator for leading him into perjury and outrage to
the Church, and so exposing him to the usual punishments for
perjury and sacrilege. For the Divine wrath fell on an unwitting no
less than on a witting perjurer. It was no excuse for a compurgator
in God’s eyes that he had forsworn himself in reliance on the
suspect’s oath; he had had the responsibility of ascertaining the
facts for himself. The compurgators and the perjurer had to go to
church in order to obtain absolution for their sins. Just before
leaving, the perjurer had to leave money on the altar to pay all the
fines he had contracted to pay when he took the oath before the
compurgators. In the Malesi e Madhe he had to give six purses
to the Church as well as one to each compurgator. In Martanesh
which is, of course, completely Moslem, the same compensation
was payable to each compurgator in a perjury case, but in neigh-
bouring Zerqan the practice was unknown. The fine was obviously
a considerable deterrent to would-be perjurers, especially when the
jury was large.
13 HAM


As Father Gjefov remarks, perjury harmed the soul, imposed
a fine and disgraced the man in the eyes of his fellows. All three
consequences worked powerfully in their different ways to keep
oath-takers on the path of truth. A thief, for instance, might get
as far as the door of a church or mosque, but there his heart would
fail him and he would exclaim, ‘Forgive me, I did steal it’. Then
he would proceed to make the usual reparation. Even innocent men
dreaded the oath and took it with great reluctance. In poverty-
stricken Theth many were so afraid of it that even when wrongfully
accused, they preferred to pay whatever fine was due for the crime.
In Lure people professed to fear nothing so much. ‘You may rob
me of my life, but I will not break my oath’, they used to say. As
for oaths taken to settle disputes, generations afterwards the
descendants of the original disputants were afraid to break the oath
of their ancestors. This fear kept boundaries that had been trodden
out by an elder under an oath immovable for all time, and preserved
water rights. In modern Lure there is some maldistribution of
irrigation water, but no attempt is made to remedy this by force of
law. Many years ago, the people say, their ancestors took an oath
about the irrigation rights of each family and they dare not violate
this oath. One of the derisory stories told in sophisticated Tirana
about the Highlanders relates that they were such poor stuff that
one said, when brought to court, ‘ I have sworn a solemn oath not
to tell, but press me a little and I will speak’.
There were occasions, however, on which perjury was thought
permissible or even commendable. A man of Lume, when asked
to be compurgator in a murder case, would sometimes consider
whether he might help to make peace between the parties if he
forswore himself. If he decided that ‘ giving a living man for a dead
one was no way of doing’, he would swear a false oath. In the
Males! e Madhe, a village ward or a tribe had sometimes to swear
not to enter a malefactor’s house; when this punishment came to
seem excessive it was thought advisable to break the oath.
In general, the modem mountaineers drew a distinction between
their own old jury system and the law court that was superseding it.
Reluctant though they remained to forswear themselves by their
old system, they would do so joyfully in the modern court, especially
if this saved a friend or relative or concealed their possession of
a rifle; this weapon being their chief treasure, they would deny
*SOO times’ on oath that they had it. Instead of public censure


they met with public commendation in such cases. The modernity
of the court-house was against the oath; there had been no time for
the growth of stories about punishment for perjury in it. For the
same reason the new church in Nikaj was not thought so good
a place for taking an oath as was the old one.
It happened inevitably that some men were sceptical or sacri-
legious enough to take a false oath and plausible enough to persuade
the requisite number of compurgators to swear to their innocence.
A thief could send a stolen cow to graze with his own, yoke the
stolen ox into the plough with one of his own and hang a bell on the
neck of the stolen sheep or goat. The real owner might recognize
the animal, but he could not claim it. The public too might
recognize it, but they had to shut their eyes. The law said, ‘what
is won by an oath belongs to him who wins it’. The law disliked
this principle but had to accept it because there was no way of
bringing home a crime to a man who had been cleared by an oath.
This legal defect made it essential that honourable and knowledge-
able compurgators should be chosen. The same defect made every
tribal authority, in the interests of justice, foster the general fear of
perjury to the utmost.
In spite of the fear of punishment for perjury, some jesting
stories, which are possibly apocryphal, were told of perjurers. Once
there was a headman in the village of Peladhi, near Zerqan, who
wrapped up a block of wood in a cloth as if it were a Koran and
summoned the village to swear on it that they would no longer go
and cut wood illicitly in each other’s forest. They took the oath and,
believing they had done so on the Koran, kept it. He too took the
oath, but knowing it to be void because taken only on a profane bit
of wood went afterwards to his neighbour’s forest and cut all the
wood he wanted.
13-2


CHAPTER XIX
WITNESS (KËPUCAR)
While compurgators empanelled for an ordeal by oath were
collecting evidence about the case, neither they nor their informants
were on oath, and the verdict depended on whether they judged it
right or wrong to swear to the suspect’s innocence at the conclusion
of their inquiries. Many cases, however, were decided on the
evidence of a single informant known as a kepucar , who was
generally sworn in before being allowed to speak. As he was also
severely cross-examined by elders and the verdict depended on the
impression made by his evidence, he approximated more closely to
the English witness than did the compurgators to the English jury.
An informant was a man who gave information leading to
the detection of a criminal, above all when a secret murder or
a cunningly concealed theft had taken place. His information had
to be based on personal observation.
It was believed that all criminal problems could be solved either
by oath or a witness. In some of the most secret crimes, as when
a haystack was burned or a dog killed in his own farmyard, there
was practically no hope of discovering the criminal save by witness.
There were other occasions on which trial by witness was chosen
in preference to ordeal by oath. If a witness was known to exist,
many elders, particularly in Mirdite, declared forthwith that an
oath was superfluous. In Martanesh and Zerqan they often waited
to see if a witness would come forward before they ordered the
suspect to take an oath. In other cases the accuser was allowed to
choose between the two methods. He might do so at the outset of
the case, when everything was still vague. In Labinot, for example,
as soon as the Village Assembly was notified of the crime, both
accuser and suspect being present, the headman habitually asked
the accuser which method he was using. Whatever his reply, the
suspect himself, in a fury at being under suspicion, gave the
accuser the choice of method. Or the choice might be offered when
the preparations for the suspect’s taking the oath were almost
concluded. In Mirdite, for instance, as soon as the compurgators
announced that they were ready to clear the suspect, the elders bade


the accuser come and witness their oath or produce a kepucar. An
accuser who had good reason to be dissatisfied with the suspect’s
acquittal was entitled to pursue his inquiries and, securing fresh
evidence of the suspect’s guilt from an eye-witness, to lay this
before the elders with a demand that the case should be reconsidered.
Indeed, many elders after delivering a verdict of ‘not guilty’
reminded the accuser that if he was dissatisfied he was at liberty
to find a kepucar. He could not, of course, have the suspect put
to the oath a second time; ‘oath upon oath’ was not allowed by
the law.
An eye-witness had always to come forward of his own accord;
the accuser could not go and look for him directly. In ordinary
cases, the accuser let it be known through private channels that he
would be glad to find one, but in the cases of arson and murder of
a dog already mentioned, the Village Assembly might issue a public
appeal for information. No time limit was ever set. Information
given a year or more after the crime had been committed was
treated as seriously as if it were only a day old.
In every type of case the witness first approached the accuser
saying, that he had found the stolen property, the murderer, or the
falsity of the oath as the case might be. The accuser then had to go
to the suspect and demand restitution. In Mirdite, at least, he had
to be accompanied by two friends who were sometimes asked
afterwards to confirm that he had warned the suspect. If the latter
refused to make atonement, the accuser had to warn him that he had
a witness. If the suspect persisted in his refusal, saying, ‘ Produce
your witness ’, the accuser then, but only then, settled the witness’s
fee and secured his information. The elders then formed a com-
mittee for the purpose of cross-examining the witness. In Zerqan
this consisted of five or six men appointed by the suspect and two
or three friends of the accuser. In Mirdite it was selected from the
prit 'etare (sing, pritetar), men fitted to be judges or compurgators by
their honour, wisdom and experience in cross-examining witnesses.
In the Malesi e Madhe the committee was formed by the bajraktar
and one to four headmen; the qualities which such personages
were believed to inherit along with their position were thought
sufficient equipment for dealing with a witness. Elsewhere one
elder was considered enough in simple cases; he was chosen by the
suspect at the bidding of the accuser, by the two together, or by
the other elders.


With a few exceptions, the greatest precautions were taken to
conceal the witness’s identity, as the criminal would have killed him
if he had discovered who he was. In Mirdite he was allowed to
object to the nomination of men whom he thought too indiscreet
to preserve his incognito, and those eventually selected had to take
an oath that so long as they lived they would not without his
permission divulge his identity. He was always interviewed in all
secrecy; often the accuser alone knew who he was. He might be
taken to an empty house where the elders awaited him, or led at
night to the house of an elder who questioned him from a balcony
while he stood unseen by all the inmates, the elder included, in the
dark farmyard. In the Malesi e Madhe he was often given
a rendezvous by night in another village altogether. In Zerqan he
usually met the committee in some lonely spot at sunset, with them
on one side of a thick hedge and him on the other so that they
could not see him. However often he was interviewed, it was
always in the same secrecy.
No doubt owing to the danger involved in trying to bring
a criminal to justice, a witness was always given a fee. With the
delicacy characteristic of Albanians the fee was cloaked under the
name of kepuc'e (lit. ‘shoe’), presumably in allusion to the shoe-
leather which he wore out in finding or conveying his informa-
tion. Consequently, kepucar means literally the ‘man who gets
shoe-money’.
In the case of theft the witness’s fee was not allowed to exceed
the value of the stolen property. It was generally determined by
agreement between witness and accuser at their first meeting, often
after lively bargaining, particularly if the witness was greedy
enough to ask more than he should. When the accuser let it be
known that he was looking for a witness, he often specified the fee
he was willing to pay. When the theft took place in a house, the fee
was doubled, because human life had been endangered and the
house’s honour tarnished; house-breaking always implied that the
men in it were weak or the womenfolk light. In Kurbin and Lume,
for example, four napoleons were paid to an informant who found
an ox that had been stolen from the farmyard or stable under the
house, but only its value, which was always less than four napoleons,
in those districts when it had been stolen while grazing outside.
A man who disclosed a woman’s adultery to her husband
received no fee; and a friend was not allowed to take money for


such a service. In this type of crime there was, of course, no trial
in view; the husband’s rifle was the only possible arbiter.
The examination which an eye-witness had to pass was very
stiff. As a first step, he had to take oath before the elders that he
would tell the truth without prejudice or spite; the man he accused
was not to be troubled till his accusation was proved to be just. The
only extant example of his oath, which comes from Qermenike,
runs, ‘Look upon this earth, these mountains, these plains, this
sky. You must carry them (through all eternity) if you lie’, said the
elders. ‘Let me carry them. It is as I say,’ the witness replied.
Sometimes an elder recognized the witness and, knowing him to be
of good character, did not ask him to risk his future by taking an
oath. Even if he did not recognize him but only liked his manner
and general appearance, he might excuse him.
When everything was set for cross-examination, the elders
questioned the witness closely, noting any discrepancies in his
statements, and looking out for any sign that the accusation was
false. If it was a case of perjury, they had to be specially patient
and careful as the penalties involved were so much heavier. The
witness was not a professional like our detectives. Often he was
a man so trusted by the thief that he had constant access to his
house and so was in a position to see the stolen goods as soon as
produced.
The witness had to give a detailed description of the crime and
stolen property to the elders. In most cases of theft he must have
either seen the thief in the act of stealing or leaving the scene of the
theft or observed the stolen goods in the house or hand of the thief.
When an ox had been stolen, he had to say where he saw the animal,
where the thief had killed it, sold its hide and so on. When several
oxen had been stolen he had to report according to their colouring
that one was black, another white and a third dappled, that the
thief took first this road, then that, killed one ox at such and such
a spot and sold another to so-and-so. Whatever he said was subject
to confirmation. When he alleged a sale, the elders sent independent
agents to inquire whether it had really taken place. When he said
the ox had been eaten, he had to produce concrete evidence,
a token such as a bit of the skin, a horn, or some other part. This
was the most conclusive of all possible evidence.
If the witness stood up well to the cross-examination, the elders
declared that the suspect was guilty and must make the statutory


atonement. If the witness had come forward after the suspect had
taken an oath and been acquitted, the elders declared the suspect’s
oath invalid, pronounced him guilty, and sentenced him, not only
to the usual penalties for his crime, but also to punishment for
perjury.
Apart from what his perjury, if any, cost him, the convicted thief
had to pay the value of the stolen property, the witness’s fee and
the elders’ fee. He had to hand the witness’s fee to the owner of the
stolen goods, who had to pass it on to the witness, whose anonymity
was thus preserved. In order to extract the witness’s fee the elders
commonly valued the stolen property at a good deal more than its
real price; when the thief paid up, the owner retained the real price
and handed the surplus to the witness. In Mirdite, says Father
Gje9ov, the accuser who failed to warn the suspect at the outset
that he had a witness, could not, even if the suspect was convicted,
recover more than half the witness’s fee. There does not seem to
have been a similar law elsewhere.
If a thief continued to deny the theft and refused to pay his
various fines after being declared guilty on a witness’s evidence, the
elders said he must take an oath that he was innocent, and then the
compurgators stepped in, forbidding him to perjure himself and so
confirming his conviction. This was in Mirdite and Lume. In
Martanesh, the law apparently went further. If a man convicted
by a witness of having stolen from a house —the worst type of
theft—denied the theft, was ordered to prove his innocence by an
oath, and succeeded in doing so, and if the accuser still persisted
in his accusation, the latter was asked to produce his witness before
a new committee of elders. If a searching cross-examination
convinced these that he was telling the truth, they ordered the
thief to swear with forty-eight compurgators that he was innocent.
This was double the number usual even in murder cases, and far
more than he could ever hope to find.
The cross-examining elders sometimes concluded that the
witness was lying. In Dukagjin, when quite certain of this, they
made him instead of the thief pay for the stolen property. In the
Malesi e Madhe, attended by their followers, they went and burned
down his house, killed him if they caught him, and confiscated his
property, making it common land on which all were free to graze,
although none could plant grapes or sow maize. If some time
elapsed before they discovered he had lied and if in the meantime


they had punished the man he denounced, they repaid any moneys
taken from this man out of the false witness’s property, selling
a portion of it if necessary.
In some southern areas manners were softer. In £ermenike and
Zerqan a lying witness was dismissed with a contemptuous word,
suffering only disgrace in the accuser’s eyes. Since his identity had
never transpired, the public thought neither more nor less of him
than before.
Sometimes the witness convicted himself of being the thief. This
happened especially when he knew too many details, describing too
exactly, for instance, the colour of a stolen animal’s hair, the number
of its spots, or the shape and twirls of its horns. The elders then
called him the thief outright and sentenced him to pay their fee as
well as the value of the stolen property and the amount he had
extracted from the accuser as his own fee. ‘ So you wanted to steal
twice over from him, did you? ’ they would exclaim. In Martanesh
they also disgraced him publicly. The elder in whose yard he was
being secretly examined called out to the accuser to come and seize
him like the thief he was; during his cross-examination the accuser
had remained, as was everywhere customary, out of earshot. As
the yard was bolted for the night, the thief could not escape. Next
day he was led out in front of the assembled village, denounced by
the elders, and publicly sentenced to pay the sums described above.
It often happened that they saw him then for the first time.
In Mirdite, it sometimes happened that a witness, observing
that he had failed to convince the elders, and certain of his evidence,
came forward publicly, seized the thief (or murderer) by the arm
and denounced him as the criminal. Such courage never failed to
win credence for his story.
If the witness was dismissed as a liar or convicted as the thief,
the accuser lost the money he had paid him as well as the value of
his lost property. That explains why a suspect could not be put to
the oath a second time, yet could be retried as it were on a witness’s
evidence. It cost the accuser nothing to make a suspect take an oath,
so that if the law had allowed ‘ oath after oath ’, a litigiously minded
man might have made himself an endless nuisance to suspect,
elders, compurgators and general public. But there was no such
risk with a witness. The accuser had to prepay him whatever fee
they agreed on, and if he had been foolish enough to trust an
unsatisfactory person, he lost his money.


CHAPTER XX
THEFT AS A CRIME
Most of the material on theft comes from the history of Turkish
times. The Turks, none too efficient in the towns, did not even try
to control the mountaineers, and theft was, therefore, very common.
During the twenty years between the Great Wars, the only period
of independence that Albania had enjoyed for 500 years, theft was
not one of the major crimes. This was often commented on by
Major-General Sir Jocelyn Percy, who, as Organizer in Chief of
the Albanian Gendarmerie, had cognizance for twelve years of
every crime committed in the country. When the first British
officers arrived in Albania in 1943, the machinery of modern
government had already broken down. In view of that fact, and
of the general effect of war conditions, it was not surprising that
they should have found the mountaineers stealing frequently and
on a large scale.
In the eyes of the law, thieves were divided into several categories
according to the gravity of their crime. In Mirdite they were
pilferers, robbers or highwaymen. The pilferer ‘pinched’ a small
article from a house; the robber stole a beast with his own hands;
and the highwayman robbed with violence. In Fulqet the categories
were pilferer, timid thief and complete thief. The pilferer was
a bad type because he came near enough to a house to steal clothes
on its fence; the timid thief stole sheep in the forest; and the
complete thief broke into houses and was ready to kill as well as to
rob. In Diber a thief with sandals was never so bad as a thief in
shoes, stealing only a sheep or two, whereas the thief shod and
dressed in European fashion was a serious menace. Here there was
a sly reference to government officials and gendarmes, the only
persons dressed in the ‘ French’ manner whom the average Dibian
knows.
Thieves were also classified according to their motives. A pilferer
was usually prompted by innate wickedness and was consequently
incorrigible. Others, especially the Highlanders of the north-west,
stole for fun and were, therefore, worse than murderers who had
some compelling motive for their crime. Many stole because


everyone else did, and they would only have been laughed at if they
had refrained. As the proverb says, * One bunch of grapes, seeing
another ripening, then ripens itself’. Then there were incidental
offenders: a man who could not recover a debt might distrain on
his debtor by turning highwayman and seizing his pack-pony or
sheep on the public road; or men might steal out of spite. The debt
recovered or the spite vented, such thieves usually became law-
abiding citizens again. Though poverty is, and always has been,
extreme in this mountainous land, hunger rarely made a man steal.
Few broke into a house to help themselves because of the risks
involved. Many, however, would catch a lamb or kid on the
mountain where the risks were less and, after killing it, make
a cooking-vessel of its paunch and boil the meat over a gipsy fire.
Sheep stealing often took place on a grand scale between family
and family, village and village or tribe and tribe. There are many
popular tales of forays for fun or glory. ‘ Ragging’ the other house,
village or tribe and, more especially, the hated Serbs and Mon-
tenegrins, was a recognized sport, and the bigger the booty the
greater the glory. There was a picnic atmosphere about such
expeditions. A hundred men might go, half to drive the sheep and
half to take pot-shots at pursuers. As soon as the first party found
the flock they killed the bell-wether and cut off its head. One of
them held this out, bell and all, to the other sheep and ran off at top
speed. As the sheep galloped helter-skelter after the head, the rest
of the party ran hither and thither shouting and cursing, laughing
and beating the sheep with sticks to make them run faster. Being
pressed for time, they left the leader’s carcass on the ground. They
usually disarmed the shepherd and carried him off to prevent his
giving the alarm. On releasing him they gave him what they
pleased.
On the whole there was little shame about individual and group
thieving, although there were many expressions of disapproval. The
men of Lume had a saying, ‘Better be a good-for-nothing than
a thief’, which was in direct contradiction to their reputation. The
Malesors asserted that all other tribes were thieves, but that they
themselves never stole. The Catholics of Kthelle used to say that
it was better not to sleep too softly like the Moslems of Mat, whose
oxen had often been driven away, killed and eaten before they got
out of their beds. The man who stole because he had been stolen
from evoked universal admiration. There were, however, two forms


of theft which were no less universally regarded as shameful.
A man who stole from another with whom he had broken bread as
host or guest disgraced himself for ever. A woman must not steal
for fun or spite. If she did, not only her husband’s family, but the
whole village felt ashamed and took steps to deal with her.
The accomplice who helped the thief, the host who fed him and
the receiver who hid the booty were all considered as no less guilty
than the thief himself. ‘A thief and his host are the same’, and
‘ Like thief, like receiver ’ were common sayings. All had to suffer
punishment in proportion to their share in the crime and booty.
The owner of stolen goods had the right to remove them from the
premises of a receiver and to claim compensation, and the receiver
had no legal claim for redress as against the thief. On the other
hand, if a man bought stolen goods in good faith he had to give
them back to the rightful owner, but he was entitled to recover
what he had paid for them from the thief.
All possible means of protection against theft were adopted by
the mountain peoples. Every man carried a gun by day, and slept
with it beside him at night. Dogs were kept in every house and
sheepfold. Domestic animals were branded with a mark that could
not be destroyed, as when sheep had both their ears notched.
Farmyards were surrounded by walls too high to scale and had
stout wooden gates heavily bolted at night. Thieves, however, could
make holes in the mud and stone walls, and frequently forced an
entry that way. The walls of many village shops were lined with
wood, so that a thief’s chisel, striking it, would make sufficient
noise to put the householder on the alert.
In Turkish times many villages sent out armed patrols every
night, composed not of professionals like the night watchman of
the towns, but of unpaid villagers who served in turn as directed
by the village headman. When there was danger of sheep-stealing
on a large scale, the threatened villages sometimes bought the
protection of some strong man. For example, the villagers of Re?,
now in Yugoslavia, hired protection from sheep-stealers of Diber
by paying the Kaloshi family of Diber a thousand napoleons a year.
Nor were the parties deterred from contracting together by the
fact that the Kaloshis were Moslems and Albanians, and the villagers
of Re? were Orthodox and Macedonian Bulgars.
In the extreme north and south of the mountains, guns could
legitimately be used when a thief was caught in the act of breaking


into a house or sheepfold, though in some districts the house-
holder or shepherd had to warn the thief three times before
shooting in order to avoid a blood feud. The local law said,
‘A thief’s blood is lost’. In Mirdite, however, there was a saying
that ‘A blood feud is not stopped by felony’, and there it was
forbidden to kill a housebreaker at sight. This prohibition had been
introduced to prevent men killing their enemies and placing their
dead bodies in the farmyard to give the impression that they had
been caught in the act of theft.
A man who robbed a child or a woman, stole a loaded packhorse,
or another man’s gun, could be shot even when not caught in the
act, though a blood feud might follow such action.
In Turkish times, the authorities had to be informed of the
death of anyone in the act of theft, but they did not punish the man
who had killed him. They required only that he should keep watch
and ward over the body till some official arrived and send word to
the relatives to make arrangements for burial. After the funeral,
the relatives and the killer resumed ordinary relations. Strong men,
of course, sometimes overrode the ordinary rules and decencies.
Thus Deli Beg, the overlord of Preze, an old market centre, was so
determined to stop all raids on his flocks that he not only killed all
thieves, but shamed them when dead. He tied their bodies on
horses, with the heads propped up with a muleteer’s forked stick,
and drove them through the village streets. He never troubled to
inform the authorities of the deaths.
There were elaborate rules for the detection of the thief who
succeeded in escaping with his booty. In Lume the village
authorities had the right to search one house after another for the
stolen property. Everywhere the victim might try and find it for
himself. He would follow the tracks of a stolen animal, generally
in the direction of the home of someone known to have a grudge
against him. When the tracks ended at a house or its immediate
surroundings, the master was regarded as convicted of the theft.
‘Track on the ground, animal found’, and the owner had the right
to take it away immediately if it was still alive. The thief might
refuse to produce it and the owner could then ask leave to search
the premises. If such permission was not given, the owner had to
turn to the elders to enlist their help, as he also had to do if it were
found that the animal was dead.
When the beast’s tracks stopped between two houses, the


formula then applied was ‘The beast or an oath’. Each house had
to make oath separately that it did not harbour the stolen property.
The same routine was followed when the tracks stopped between
two villages, the villages as a whole having to take oath.
The tracks of an animal might be destroyed by the thief, or the
property stolen might not be an animal at all. In such cases, the
owner had to rely on information supplied by third parties, and
this was seldom lacking in small communities where there were
few secrets. If the whereabouts of the stolen property was dis-
covered, the suspected thief might admit the crime, and if so, the
owner and he might settle about repayment themselves, or leave it
to the elders to do so. If the suspect denied the theft, the owner
informed the village headman of his loss and of the identity of
the suspected thief, and the latter called an Assembly to which he
summoned owner and suspect. A suspect who did not appear was
declared guilty and ordered to pay for the stolen goods. If the
suspect came, the owner was given the choice between ordeal
by oath and trial on the evidence of an eye-witness, and the
proceedings then took the ordinary form.
The convicted thief had first of all to make restitution in
accordance with the ‘twofold’ or ‘two-for-one’ rule, which
exacted twice the value of the stolen goods in kind or money.
In Mirdite, when animals were given in restitution, their selection
was left to the thief, and, to quote from Father Gje9ov, ‘it sufficed
if they could walk on their feet’. In Martanesh a committee of two
or three was appointed by the thief to make the choice, and this
committee had to be accepted by the owner. In addition to
restitution, a penalty might be imposed, either in the form of a fine
or by ordering an extra number of compurgators if the oath was to
be taken. The amount of the fine was largely fixed by tradition
though the elders might vary it according to extenuating or
aggravating circumstances.
There were various generally recognized kinds of aggravating
circumstances. For instance, if a thief lost, spoiled, or ate what he
had taken, the penalties were often heavy. In Martanesh and
adjoining districts a loser could put any value he liked on a stolen
article that had been destroyed. In Zerqan, it was regarded as
a disgrace to the owner of a stolen sheep if it was eaten by the thief
on the mountain. Punishment then was not only for the theft, but
for the injury to the honour of the victim.


Another aggravated form of theft was that which took place on
the public highway. There was a rule that ‘the public highway
must not be cut’. If a robber stole a wayfarer’s horse, mule,
donkey or sheep, shooting inevitably took place; if the thief
survived, he had to return the animal, and to pay whatever the
Village Assembly decreed. A man very often turned highwayman
because he thought his victim was in his debt. If this belief
turned out to be mistaken, he had to pay a fine for cutting the
highway, besides returning the stolen animal and compensating
the owner for the loss of its services. When a sheep had been taken,
and was not returned at once, the thief might even be expelled from
the village with all his family.
Robbery of a Catholic church was sacrilege and a very serious
view was taken of it. The thief was shot by the tribe and could not
be avenged. His family was expelled and his nearest relatives
bought his land, the price going to the church. Stealing from the
priest’s house or from church lands was still sacrilege, but not so
severely punished. In addition to returning two-for-one, the thief
had to pay a fine for violating the sanctuary of the house or lands
and another to the community for the threat to it. In Mirdite the
same penalties were imposed if the theft occurred elsewhere but
the booty was hidden in the church.
Thefts from Orthodox churches and Moslem shrines were also
regarded as sacrilege, but not thefts from the houses of Orthodox
priests or Moslem clerics, as they were usually at some distance
from the places of worship and no sanctity attached to them.
Breaking into any house in order to steal was regarded as a very
serious crime, for it brought dishonour as well as material loss to
the householder. Opening the farmyard gate or the house door,
without giving due warning and being invited to enter, was regarded
as housebreaking and punished as such. In Krasniqe, the fine for
burgling a house was four times that for burgling a sheepfold.
Stealing out on the lonely mountain was regarded as still less
heinous, and only one article had to be given in restitution; nor
was any fine imposed.
A man might be dishonoured by other forms of theft than that
of housebreaking. In the Malesi e Madhe, a fine of 500 grosh was
imposed on the man who helped himself to another’s tobacco box
or cigarette, and a mere touch on another’s pocket might bring
a fine. A story is told of a man who was shot at a General


Assembly by his neighbour from whose tobacco box he had
inadvertently rolled a cigarette. In every tribe and village, a man’s
honour was so stained by the theft of his gun or his wife that he
had to shoot the thief and take the consequences of the ensuing
blood feud.
The penalties imposed depended also on the nature of the
articles stolen. North Albania was predominantly pastoral and, as
the safety of the flock of sheep depended on the bell-animal,
penalties for stealing this animal were heavy. 1 In Lume the
owner could demand six or seven sheep for the thief: ‘as well steal
the whole flock as its leader.’ In Perlat stealing a bell-wether was
such a disgraceful act that in the blood feud against the thief’s
family, even a woman could be killed. The bell of the leading
animal was even more precious than the animal itself, and in Perlat,
if it were stolen, it had to be returned and a sheep with it. In
Labinot, the bell was thought too unlucky to be hung round an
animal’s neck again, and instead of returning it, the thief had to
pay twice its value or be shot. In Mirdite a fine of 500 grosh was
imposed for the dishonour done to the owner.
The two-for-one rule was applied to thefts of all farm animals,
with the exception of pigs and cocks. The man who stole a pig had
to pay 500 grosh in hard cash. This sum was often ten times the
value of the animal, but the pig was the mainstay of the poor man
and required special protection. The same sum of 500 grosh had
to be paid for a cock, as ‘ the cock is the poor man’s watch ’. It was
said that in Krasniqe an actual watch had to be paid instead of the
money penalty.
Firewood was usually collected by women, and when they stole
it their husbands were held responsible. It was common practice
to seize the axe with which the thief cut the wood and the rope
with which she slung it on her back. These articles were sometimes
used as visible evidence of her guilt, sometimes retained as com-
pensation, or as a guarantee for the payment of the penalty, or of
the fee due to the elder who dealt with the case. Women might
steal other things than firewood, and responsibility was always
placed on the husband. It is recorded that, during the reign of
King Zog, men might even be imprisoned for their wives’ thefts.
It was they who had to take the oath if an oath was required. The
woman did not, however, get off scot free. In most areas she was
1 Vide supra, p. 173.


beaten by her husband, and no matter how severe the punishment,
her brother, who was her natural protector, would be too ashamed
of her conduct to interfere. If a thieving woman did not mend her
ways, her husband usually divorced her. The southern Catholics,
anxious to reform erring wives and to avoid divorce, sometimes sent
wrongdoers to spend a night in the lonely church of Shen Ndue in
the forest above the village of La? in Kurbin. This treatment is
said to have been effective in many cases!
By the laws of hospitality, a man never robbed his guest nor
a guest his host. If a third party robbed either, the other did his
best to find the thief and the stolen goods. But such laws were not
always respected, and penalties were prescribed for their breach.
In Mirdite a guest who stole was ostracized as well as having to
pay the usual penalty. In Kurbin he was expelled for ever from
the tribe. If a guest in Mirdite was robbed by a fellow-guest, their
host demanded double redress from the criminal —for the injury
to his guest and for housebreaking. If a guest was robbed after
leaving his host’s house, it was still the host’s duty to punish the
thief, as the latter would know where the victim had been.
14
HAM


CHAPTER XXI
MURDER WITHIN THE FAMILY
When a man murdered his son, father, brother, paternal uncle,
paternal uncle’s son, or brother’s son, the usual verdict was that
in killing so near a relative the murderer had ‘killed himself’. The
victim’s blood was therefore lost, ‘no one sought-to-avenge him’,
and it had only been his ‘ill-luck’ so to die.
From another point of view it might be argued that since the
murderer was the victim’s nearest relative, other relatives could
not act over his head and avenge the dead man. For example,
when a man murdered his paternal uncle, if the latter left neither
son nor brother, his blood was lost, for the murderer was his
nearest relative and by killing him had only killed himself. On
the other hand, if the uncle left either a son or a brother, that son
or brother was nearer to him than the murderer and avenged his
death. In view of his relationship to the criminal his vengeance
generally took the form of exacting blood money. In the same way
when a man murdered his brother’s son, the victim’s blood was lost
if he left neither father nor brother. But if he left either, the
murderer had to pay blood money. The rule of the nearest relative
failed only if one brother killed another while their father was
alive. Though the father was the nearest relative of the victim, the
fratricide being only a neighbour by comparison, the victim’s
blood was lost. The father could not avenge him except by killing
his surviving son, and even from the best of motives no decent
father would kill a son.
The motive of the murderer seldom affected the situation. The
murder of a son, an extremely rare occurrence, was oftenest due
to his adultery with his young stepmother. His blood was lost, not
because of his sin, but solely because the father who murdered him
was his nearest relative. Again, one brother sometimes fell in love
with the other’s wife, and knowing, especially in north Albania,
that if she became a widow he could by customary law marry her,
could not always resist the temptation to make her a widow. The
victim’s blood was lost in spite of the murderer’s motive, and the
fratricide married the widow and suffered no disability except some


loss of face. At Kruje in 1930 when the authorities sought to
punish a man who had murdered his brother during a quarrel, the
widow swore that the pistol had gone off accidentally when her
brother-in-law was trying to wrest it from her husband, who had
threatened suicide. Having thus prevented the authorities from
taking action, the widow made no effort to keep the true story of
the murder quiet, but repeated it every day during the month
when the women met for the ceremonial ‘keening’. She was also
openly commended by the public for preventing the government
from shaming her husband’s family by arresting the murderer.
Exceptionally, if the murderer’s motive was bad by tribal stan-
dards, his relative was well avenged. For instance, if a man killed
his cousin or nephew to get his land, the crime was considered so
anti-social that the murderer was killed by the community, his blood
was lost, and his family expelled. Again, exceptionally, a motive
might be so good by tribal standards as to win the murderer public
admiration. Thus children in Shale were taught with great pride
that once a tribesman killed his brother for killing a guest, for an
Albanian’s duty to his guest transcends the claims of blood
relationship.
Two modifications of the general rule are to be noted. In
Mirdite in spite of the victim’s blood being lost, the murderer had
to pay the tribe the fine due in cases of ordinary murder, 100 rams
and an ox. In the Malesi e Madhe if the two brothers had separated
the fratricide had to pay blood money to his brother’s dependants.
If the widow had no children, she took all the money; if she had
a daughter only, she again took it all, for when the time came for
the girl to marry, she would as ‘head of the family’ have to pay the
wedding expenses; if she had a son, he took all the money, for his
father’s death had made him head of the family. The blood money
was therefore alimony payable to the widow and orphans who had
been robbed of their breadwinner. If the two brothers had not
separated, the fratricide as a matter of course supported the widow
and orphans along with the other members of his household and
the question of alimony did not arise.
Parricide was thought the most abhorrent of all murders within
the family. In a sense a father had the right to kill his son without
being asked by anybody what he had done, but a son unnatural
enough to kill his father could surely not have been got by that
father, but must be a bastard. Even where his crime was regarded
14-2


as suicide so that he escaped with his life, and that was the com-
monest result, he was treated as ‘a low-class fellow’, visited by
none but bad characters, and, if a Mohammedan, never given the
greeting ‘Peace be with thee’. In Mirdite, always more rigorous
than other districts, he was considered so anti-social that he was
either killed or expelled in perpetuity by his kinsmen, or, according
to another version, by the whole village along with his kinsmen.
The murder of certain relatives did not concern the family. Thus,
if a man murdered a relative by marriage, such as his son-in-law,
father-in-law, wife’s brother, or sister’s husband, the crime ranked
as an ordinary murder and was expiated with a life or with blood
money. The marriage tie was disregarded; the important point was
that, unlike two brothers living under separate roofs, murderer and
victim belonged to different families. Such murders were very
rare, for marriage relationships were always contracted to secure
a valued friend, and no Albanian in his senses ever threw a friend
lightly away. Again, if a man murdered his maternal uncle or his
sister’s son, murderer and victim belonged to different families,
and blood money at least was payable for the crime. The contin-
gency rarely arose, since a maternal uncle was regarded as a father
and a sister’s son as one’s own child.
If a woman was taken in adultery, and her husband killed her and
her paramour together—‘kerchief and cap together’—he incurred
no feud; their deaths went unavenged; it was a case of ‘blood for
blood’, one equal to the other. To prove them guilty he sent for his
wife’s brother and her lover’s brother to see them both lying dead;
his message would run, ‘ I killed her because I caught her sinning’.
The wife’s brother would hand him a cartridge, saying, ‘Here is
a cartridge for my sister. Bravo for doing this’. The paramour’s
nearest relatives came to the house, drank coffee, and took away the
corpse; the murderer accompanied them to their house, drank
coffee, and so peace was established between them. If the para-
mour’s brother was ‘a gentleman’, ‘a man’, he would give
a cartridge to the husband, saying, ‘ I pardon your crime because
my brother has sinned’. Even the father of the paramour might
say to the murderer, ‘A blessing on your rifle’, and give him coffee
as a sign that there was peace between them. In modern times the
government accepted the evidence of the two bodies lying together
and punished the husband with no more than two or three weeks’
imprisonment.


This custom of the wife’s brother giving a cartridge to a husband
who had murdered his erring wife explains the phrase often heard
in Albania, ‘ a bride with a cartridge on her back’. In Martanesh it
was an old, but long disused, custom to tie a cartridge on the back
of a bride’s veil as she left her father’s house; this cartridge she
was to give to her husband on her wedding night, and he would
keep it against the day when he found her unfaithful and then kill
her with it. This custom, if it existed elsewhere, has been forgotten,
but the phrase is universally known.
In Lume, if a husband suspected his wife of illicit love-making,
he could not tell her people because he was being disgraced. He
could only lie in wait till he caught the pair together and then kill
them. Sometimes when he could not catch them together, he
divorced her; in one instance a man did so on the insistence of his
kinsmen, who thought themselves as well as the husband disgraced
by the wife’s notoriously loose living. He admitted that he could
not manage her, divorced her for the sake of the family honour, and
then, being too poor to pay the bride-price of another wife, lived
alone. Divorcing the wife also ensured that the husband ran no risk
of having a feud with either her brother or her lover’s family. The
Highlanders held similar views—the husband could not question
his wife or tell her lover not to come to the house; he could again
do nothing but lie in wait until he caught them. A few Highlanders
held that the husband might inform her people of her misconduct;
if they believed him, they would say, ‘Kill her’, or perhaps kill her
themselves; in either case her death went unavenged. They
preferred to kill such a wife for they were Catholics in the main,
and as such could not remarry if they divorced their wife. As it was
permissible in Martanesh to kill the guilty pair separately, an
adulterous wife was never divorced but always killed. If a woman
was divorced in Mat, her brother always asked what wrong she had
done; if she had been an adulteress, he killed her, provided that
the husband first killed the lover. In north-east Albania, if the
lover was the husband’s brother, divorce was thought the easiest
way out. Only an exceptionally brutal man would kill his brother;
the average man would prefer to say to his wife, ‘You have com-
mitted this sin, and are divorced’.
If the husband killed only his wife, her brother avenged her
death in most cases; without seeing his sister dead by her lover’s side
he was unwilling to believe in her guilt and apt to think the husband


had killed her out of ill-will. After her brother had killed a male
from his house, the husband would kill both her brother and her
lover; then peace would be made between all three families. In
Martanesh and Lume if the husband did not kill the lover as well,
the wife’s brother, when threatening vengeance, would say, ‘You
killed the bitch; why didn’t you kill the dog also ? ’
Sometimes a husband had not the courage or the heart to kill his
wife; then perhaps his people killed her. Or perhaps he sent word
to her father that he had found her sinning and asked him to kill
her. But the father generally replied to such husbands, ‘ Kill her
yourself, because I gave her to you to look after’. If the wife
suspected this interchange of messages, she might run away to her
father. In that case her husband sent him word saying, ‘Either
kill that bitch or see me destroy you root and branch’. The father
then either killed her or sent her to her husband to kill. If the
father protected the wife, a blood feud began between him and the
husband, for the latter could not bear the world to think that he
had swallowed such a disgrace.
In Martanesh, it should be noted, it was permissible, as it was
not elsewhere, to kill the lover and the wife separately, if they
could not be found together. This seems to have been the case in
Diber also. About 1916 a man in Vleshje (Diber) found his wife
unfaithful and killed the lover. The wife ran away, but the husband
caught her, poured paraffin on her, and burned her alive, yet
seems to have escaped her brother’s vengeance.
If the outraged husband killed only the lover, then he had to fear
vengeance from the lover’s family. In Lume on the principle that
‘vengeance is not abandoned because of guilt’, vengeance was
sometimes taken by a ‘bad’ brother for a man killed in adultery.
He might kill the husband, forgive him, or demand blood money.
A gruesome story of collective punishment of a guilty pair comes
from Martanesh. About 1912 a young man was caught with a
young wife. The ‘circle’ of the young man took him and the
‘circle’ of the wife took her out to an appointed spot where they
stood them up together. The youth’s uncle shot him dead, and the
girl’s brother shot her, while the drums beat and the other men
danced. The honour of the two families being thus cleared, they
buried the two close together, but in separate graves, at cross-roads;
no hoxha was present to commit them to the grave, nor were they
washed and changed. In the neighbouring Zdrajshe also a guilty


couple were buried in any sort of hole, but in separate graves,
without a hoxha or being washed on boards and changed. In Lume
other customs prevailed. Both were buried in the cemetery in the
ordinary way, unless they had been caught outside in some wood
or thicket, in which case they were buried where they were killed.
Public opinion is growing against such double murders. It was
too often the custom to give young girls to old men, with the
inevitable result that the young wives were apt to fall in love with
men more of their own age and had therefore to be killed by their
fathers.
At Zdrajshe, when a bride was found on marriage to be pregnant
by another man, the unusually mild divorced her at once, but the
general rule was to have her killed. The groom locked up the bride,
sent for her father, and bade him find her lover. The father always
asked for three or four days’ respite during which he made inquiries.
If the bride had indeed done wrong, an honest father sought out and
killed the lover and then came to shoot his own daughter. Or
perhaps he gave the bridegroom a cartridge and bade him shoot her
with it. All the principles involved are well illustrated by a story
from Lure, still the most undisciplined of all Albanian tribes.
About 1928 Mete Hoti, having taken a bride from Vehib Runa in
Gur, found her within three months of bearing a child by another
man. He sent her back to her father, bidding him find the lover and
kill them both. The father would not kill his daughter and persisted
in his refusal in spite of Mete’s threats to kill the whole family if he
did not do so. The father’s kinsmen supported Mete, and when he
came one night and killed the father, mother, daughter and infant
and four other people in the house, they refused to avenge these
deaths because the father had transgressed against the unwritten
law. For the same reason the government merely imprisoned Mete
for a few months.
A woman might be killed for various reasons by a man in her
husband’s or her father’s family. For example, her husband or his
representative had leave to kill her for heinous crimes like adultery,
incorrigible pilfering, or murdering one of his relatives, but if they
killed her for any other reason, her father killed one of them. Two
principles were involved: one, that a man bought only the services
of his wife and not her life; the other, that a woman retained till
her dying day her right to protection by her father’s family. Her
son by the murderer could not avenge her, because killing his


father, his only means of doing so, was forbidden. Her son by
another husband, belonging as he did to another family, was free
to avenge her. If a woman’s son killed her for any but the above
heinous crimes, her husband could not avenge her, since to do so
he must kill his son. In Mirdite her brother could kill her son or
other male in his family, but elsewhere it was held that her brother
was as helpless as her husband because her son was a nearer relative
and her nearest relative having killed her, her blood must be lost.
If she was married for the second time and was killed by the son of
her former marriage, her husband could kill his stepson, but as
before, her brother’s hands were tied, except in Mirdite, by the
law of nearest relative.
When a man killed his brother’s wife for any other reason than
those stated above, her husband took no action if he and the
murderer had not separated; the murder was a family affair. Her
brother, however, killed one of them. If the two brothers had
separated, the murderer had to pay blood money to her husband.
If the husband did not exact it within a year, her brother killed
either the murderer or her husband. Her husband never killed his
brother: ‘l’d never kill my brother for the sake of my wife’, was
a common saying.
When a woman was killed by her father or brother, her blood
was always lost by the rule of nearest relative. If she was married,
her husband did not, in most districts, continue friendly relations
with the murderer, but in some, such as Krasniqe, he asked him for
another girl and on receiving her forgot his annoyance at the other’s
murder. The same was true if the murdered woman was only
betrothed, for a betrothed girl ‘is counted the man’s wife’. When
a woman was killed by some other man in her own family, by her
uncle or her nephew for instance, by the rule of nearest relative her
blood was lost if she was neither married nor betrothed. If she was
either and was not killed for a heinous crime, her husband felt he
had been disgraced and avenged her by killing a male in her family.
When murders were committed by women, the situation was
complicated by the fact that women belonged to two families,
their husband’s and their father’s.
If a woman murdered her husband, both his family and her
father’s were involved. The important factor was her motive,
which was usually love for another man who had probably bought
the necessary rat poison in the bazaar. If her lover was her


husband’s brother, she married him and her husband’s blood was
lost exactly as if he had died by his brother’s hand. If her lover
was an outsider, her husband’s brother killed her. He had the
right to do so, woman though she was, for a question of honour
was involved, and for questions of honour women might lawfully
be put to death. Her son by the dead man could not kill the
murderess because matricide is not allowable. Her husband’s son
by another wife was under no such inhibition, for he was only her
stepson and therefore no relative. If her father’s family believed
in her adulterous motive, they sent a cartridge to her husband’s
brother, thereby signifying that they gave him leave to kill her
and would not avenge her death. If they did not believe in the
alleged motive, they avenged her by killing a man in her husband’s
family and an unusually bitter feud resulted.
Sometimes her husband’s brother was too high-spirited or too
angry to rest content with killing the murderess and killed one of her
male relatives as well; he would plead that a woman’s blood could
never equal a man’s and that her male relatives were responsible
for her misdeeds. Sometimes a murderess escaped alive to her
father’s house. In that case she was held to have escaped from the
suzerainty of her husband’s family and became a stranger; as
a stranger she must expiate her crime, but her sex shielded her
personally and threw the onus of expiation on her male relatives—
‘Women don’t have blood feuds’. Her husband’s brother was
therefore bound to kill one of her relatives. To avoid losing a male
for his daughter’s crime her father sometimes killed her himself,
a desperate act that always satisfied her husband’s brother.
A woman rarely murdered any other man than her husband. If
she did murder her brother, it was assumed that it had happened
by accident as he was her surest protector. There are no records
of the murder of father or paternal uncle by a woman.
The last category of murders within the family includes the very
rare cases in which a woman murdered a woman in her husband’s
or her father’s family. If she murdered her mother or her daughter,
both most unlikely contingencies if she were sane, the victim’s
blood was lost by law of nearest relative. In all other cases the
result depended on whether her victim was single or married. Thus
the murder of her unmarried sister, paternal aunt, brother’s
daughter, counted as a suicide and the victim’s blood was lost. If
she murdered her husband’s sister, the victim’s blood was again


lost because the only possible avenger was the woman’s husband,
who was not likely to kill the wife, who had cost him good money, for
the sake of his sister, though he was more likely to do so for the sake
of his father or brother. If she murdered a married woman of her
own kin, her victim’s husband exacted blood money from the males
of her family or perhaps another girl. If she murdered a married
woman in her husband’s kin, his brother’s wife, for example, or her
own brother’s wife, her victim’s brother exacted blood money or
even a life from the males in her family.
When a woman killed the wife of her husband’s brother, her
victim’s husband had to suffer the loss of his chattel in silence. He
could not kill the murderess because a man might not kill his
brother’s wife for any reason other than adultery or thieving. Nor
could he kill her husband because a man might not kill his own
brother. In his default his wife was avenged by her brother, who
might kill either him or his brother if they were not separated, but
only him if they were. Whatever the issue, her sex saved the
murderess from expiating her crime.
When a woman killed her mother-in-law or her daughter-in-law,
her sex again saved her from expiating the crime. Her victim’s
brother was the only possible avenger, for no member of her
husband’s family could kill the murderess for anything except
adultery and thieving. The avenger could kill any male in the
family of the murderess; the marriage relationship did not count.


CHAPTER XXII
BLOOD FEUD
I. FAMILY VENGEANCE AND COLLECTIVE
VENGEANCE
To understand the fabric of the Albanian blood feud it is essential
to remember several things. Till after the 1914-18 war communica-
tions in Albania were so bad, government centres so few and the
gendarmerie so ill-organized that communities were largely self-
governing. These communities consisted in the narrower sense of
the family, and in the wider sense of the tribe. If a person was
injured, the family in most cases, and the tribe in a few cases, by
the law of self-government punished the wrongdoer. Since the
individual was almost completely submerged in his family, an
injury to him was an injury to the whole family and might be
punished by any of its members. When the tribal community was
involved, the injury might again be avenged by any of its members.
When the injury took the form of murder, vengeance generally
took the Mosaic form of a life for a life, but sometimes was achieved
by the exaction of blood money or the imposition of exile.
When the family of a murdered man, in default of government
action, took the punishment of the murderer into its own hands
and killed him or one of his male relatives, the head of his family
might admit that both sides were equal and make peace. On the
other hand, while still admitting that both sides were equal he
might prefer to continue the feud by killing a second male from
the avenging family; that done, a second life was forfeit on his side.
In this way the feud might rage backwards and forwards for years
or even generations, each family being in turn murderer and victim,
hunter and hunted. ‘To take vengeance* was ‘to take the blood’
(that is, of the man already killed, not of him who was to make
atonement); the criminal was called ‘ the bloodstained ’, and avenger
and criminal thought of each other as the ‘ enemy ’. In north Albania
the criminal was also called the ‘ agent ’ and the avenger the ‘ master
of the blood of the victim ’, i.e. the master of the house in which the
victim lived. ‘To incur a feud’ was ‘to fall into blood’ or ‘enmity’.
This simple outline was filled in with all manner of elaborate


details; vengeance could not be taken indiscriminately, but was
governed by a multiplicity of rules. Thus, a murdered man found
his most natural avenger in his brother, especially if they had not
separated. If his father was not too old, and his son too young, to
bear arms, they shared the brother’s obligation. In slightly less
degree so did his father’s brother and cousin in the male line, and
their sons and grandsons, that is to say, all the other males who
were in the collective sense his ‘ father ’, ‘ brother ’ and ‘ son ’, through
being at the time, or having recently been, members of his house-
hold. If his son was in the cradle, the child’s mother and the
neighbours told him of the crime as he grew up and urged him,
failing another avenger, not to rest till he had done his duty. No
matter which of these relatives took revenge, his ‘rifle could be
hung up’ and ‘go to sleep’, to quote the picturesque phrases of
Diber and the North. The lawful representative of his murdered
kinsman because he belonged to the same household, he had only
made the two sides equal, with one of two results; either peace could
be made or the feud continued between the same two families.
A man might kill his enemy where and when he could—in
a chance encounter, in a meeting deliberately sought or in a care-
fully laid ambush. If he was ‘ strong ’ with plenty of good shots in
his house, he and his family went alone on set expeditions. If he
was weak he was probably accompanied by friends, who included
friends in the ordinary sense, relatives by marriage, dependants
and servants. They came, not for pay, but on his invitation or of
their own accord. Invitations, always verbal, requested the
recipients to come with so many rifles to such-and-such a place by
such-and-such a day and hour. Those invited were bound to come;
those who volunteered were praised by the public for their bravery
and devotion, a much coveted distinction. The distance from which
they came was immaterial; a feud had no geographical limits.
If the enemy fell to the rifle of a friend, the shot was always
credited to the ‘ master’, who was expected to assume responsibility
for it. The enemy accepted the kill as a bout in the feud and either
made peace or continued the feud with his original antagonist. The
friend who fired the fatal shot could ‘ hang up his rifle ’ and let it
‘go to sleep ’; he did not need its protection for he was quit of the
affair. If he had been alone when he killed the man, he would have
‘brought the feud home’, i.e. involved himself in a separate feud
with the victim’s family while leaving his friend’s feud unaffected.


In a few cases vengeance was lawfully taken by men who were
not, strictly speaking, members of the victim’s family. Theoretically,
the man who had ‘ drunk blood ’ with the victim 1 and so had become
his foster-brother could not go alone to avenge him, for he had not
been an actual member of his household. In Lume and Labinot
such a man was held to the letter of the law, and could take vengeance
only when accompanied by the victim’s ‘ brother ’; taking it when
alone involved him in a separate feud with the murderer, with no
benefit to the victim’s family. In many other districts it was
recognized that great love must have existed between the two men
before they swore blood-brotherhood, and in virtue of that love one
could, even when alone, lawfully avenge the other. In Diber,
indeed, he had no choice but to do so, and often outstripped
a brother by birth. In Shkrel such vengeance has been taken
‘five hundred times’. On the other hand, a compromise was the
rule in western Mat. Solitary vengeance by a foster-brother was
theoretically as unlawful as in Lume, but in practice it was
generally legalized by the ‘master’ of the feud, who sent the foster-
brother a cartridge and so recognized him after the event as his
emissary. Wherever foster-brothers had the right to take solitary
vengeance, they seem to have derived it from their community of
blood with the victim. For only those united by the drinking of
blood possessed the right; those united by any other ceremony, by
hair-cutting, for instance, were denied it. And in districts where
they had the right, one could not go alone to avenge any relative of
the other’s. During their lifetime each regarded the other’s
relatives as father, brother, etc., and was regarded by them as son
and brother, but when one was killed, the other ranked as an alien
by blood and household and could only avenge his foster-brother
by joining an expedition led by their ‘master’. And almost every-
where blood-brotherhood was recognized as a complete bar to
marriage between the two families.
Relations on the female side could always avenge a murdered
man by joining an expedition led by his ‘master’. Opinions
differed about their right to avenge him when alone. Shkrel, the
Malesi e Madhe generally, and Labinot held to the logical view.
A sister’s son, they said, although called ‘nephew’ like a brother’s
son, belonged to his father’s family and was an outsider in his
mother’s. He had, therefore, no right, joint expeditions apart, to
1 I.e. had sworn blood-brotherhood with him.


avenge or to be avenged by his maternal ‘uncle’, that is to say, the
males in his mother’s family. The two men belonged to different
households, and if one attempted independently to avenge the
other, he meddled in business that was no concern of his and so
could only involve himself in a separate feud. The men of Shkrel
in the Malesi e Madhe who felt so little duty towards their maternal
‘uncle’ that they would entertain his murderer were therefore
within their rights. On the other hand, in central and east Albania —
in Qermenike, Diber, Kurbin, Lume and Martanesh—it was held
that a man could not avenge his maternal ‘uncle’ but could be
avenged by him, a law said in Kurbin to have been of Skanderbeg’s
making. As a corollary, if a native of these districts did avenge his
maternal ‘uncle’, he plumed himself on the deed more than a
nephew in the male line could have done; the latter, as a member
of the dead family, could not escape the obligation and would not
have been involved in a new feud as he, the outsider, had been.
The confused practice is locally explained as follows: A man
could not avenge his maternal ‘uncle’ because he was the son of his
mother and she as a woman had no rifle, presumably to hand on to
him with all its offensive and defensive possibilities; the rifle he
carried came to him as a member of his father’s family. On the
other hand, he could be avenged by his maternal ‘uncle’ for the
same reason that the latter was entitled, when his ‘ sister’s ’ daughter
was married, to receive a ‘ maternal uncle’s fee ’ at the time of the
wedding and, if she was afterwards killed, to avenge her. For the
maternal ‘ uncle ’ regarded his ‘ sister’s ’ children as his own and as
part of his own household; in Kurbin, indeed, a man owned
a quarter share in his ‘ sister’s ’ son. Further, since a woman could
not carry a rifle, a ‘ sister ’ could not defend herself, and therefore,
retained the right for herself and her children to be protected by
her ‘brother’. In Diber, where rich and powerful men were so
few that girls must often be given in marriage to men who were
neither, this feeling that ‘sisters’ and their issue might require
protection was pronounced.
In south Albania, on the other hand, a man would both avenge
and be avenged by his maternal ‘uncle’. A classic instance of the
former process at Melesine near Leskovik is commemorated in the
song beginning:
Melesine on a hill,
For his uncle fights a sister’s son.


This want of restrictions may be attributed, partly to the smaller
emphasis which south Albanians lay on descent in the male line,
partly to the greater store which, probably under Greek influence,
they set on relationships in general. North Albanians, when sent
to work in south Albania, always expressed lively astonishment
when they found, for instance, a southerner claiming as a relative
a man who was only the brother of his wife’s brother.
It occasionally happens that a young widow with a son remarried
in another family, who probably lived in another village or even
district, and had a son by her second husband. Almost without
exception the son by her first husband remained with his father’s
family, so that the two boys grew up apart. Even if the first son
accompanied his mother on her remarriage, he had at an early age
to return to his father’s family. There never was any doubt that
the two boys belonged to different households. They recognized
each other as brothers, however, and if one was killed, the other
had as much right as a full brother on the father’s side to avenge
him. But if either wished to avenge another male in the other’s
household, he could only do so by joining an expedition led by the
master of that household; he could not do so independently, for
except to his half-brother he was an outsider.
‘Women do not have rifles’ ran the Kanun. As a corollary
‘Women do not have blood feuds’, it continued. One result of
these Kanuns was that women could not properly avenge their
murdered relatives. It was also recognized that they were generally
too timorous to do so. A few ‘strong characters’, however, had
been known to lay aside their feminine fears and to kill an enemy.
Thus the virgin Emin of Orenje in £ermenike avenged her father.
When he was killed she was still in the cradle and as she grew up
she became aware that her four cousins, the only males left in the
family, did not show too much zeal in avenging him. When she was
fifteen, she secretly bought a rifle and, seeing the enemy one day
come within range of the windows of her home, she fired at him
and killed him with the third shot. Then her cousins were trebly
annoyed. She, a woman, had proved herself their superior in
courage; for her crime one of their lives was forfeit; and they had
hoped to compound the feud without further bloodshed, a hope
she had destroyed. In fact, she had embittered the feud by putting
the enemy to the shame of losing a relative at a woman’s hands.
Again, a woman from Terba9, near Elbasan, hearing that her son


had been killed at a third person’s instigation, took his revolver and
killed the instigator. Unfortunately for her, the date was about
1923 when a modern government was already functioning; she
was arrested and tried for murder, but in view of the circumstances
she was condemned to no more than a year and a half’s imprison-
ment. The public were astonished to find that the government had
punished a woman on much the same terms as a man.
Assuming that a woman could steel herself to murder anyone, it
is natural to find her avenging her father, son or brother. Given
primitive Albanian ideas about the proprieties between husband
and wife, and the feeling that the wife remained a member of her
father’s household, it is somewhat surprising to find one avenging
her husband. A woman of western Mat went one day to the
bazaar and there saw the man who had murdered her husband. In
spite of the press of people she drew a revolver and shot him dead;
as she had come provided with the weapon, there is little doubt
that she did not act on the spur of the moment. About 1883
Fatime Almetaj, a woman bom in Kosteje near Martanesh and
married in Pervall, was busy baking one day while her husband
talked to a neighbour. On hearing a gunshot she rushed out to find
her husband already dead and the neighbour running away. She
ran inside, seized her husband’s rifle and again rushed out. The
neighbour had already reached his own doorstep when she fired.
As soon as she saw him fall dead, she re-entered her house and
resumed her baking; her husband had been avenged, there were
others in the family to feed, and the dough was getting cold. In
neither of these cases do records show whose life the enemy took
in return for the one she had taken; by right it should have been
one of the males in her husband’s family.
In certain cases both the avenger and the expiator of a murder
might be drawn from outside the household directly concerned.
For instance, if a murderer and his brother were separated, the
avenger might kill the latter while his blood was boiling, a period
estimated in Diber at one hour and in Mirdite and elsewhere at
twenty-four hours. When his blood had cooled he must not molest
the separated brother, and might be required to find a guarantor
that he would not do so. Conversely, a man separated from his
murdered brother might avenge him during the regulation period,
but not afterwards.
Sometimes the rule of ‘boiling blood’ was extended to larger


units. For twenty-four hours after a murder in Lume, a district
peopled by little groups of kinsmen, any man of the victim’s kin
might avenge him on any man of the criminal’s kin. So long as
members of this group survived no other would move. If they
were killed off, other groups, beginning with the nearest neighbours,
might seek vengeance. Within living memory this licence found
dreadful expression in Theth, the beautiful northern part of Shale.
About 1890 a man who lost a lamb promised to give a cartridge
to a shepherd if he found it. When the shepherd succeeded, the man
went back on his promise saying he would ‘ give him five ’(sc. fingers
on the trigger) instead. For the moment the shepherd let the matter
drop, but later met the man and asked once more for his promised
reward. Again the man refused it, not too courteously, and was
immediately killed by the incensed shepherd. Unfortunately, it
was Easter Sunday and the murder took place in a meadow where
all the men of Theth were gathered for the festival. Immediately
the dead man’s vllazni (brotherhood), comprising all the males
descended from the same ancestor, sought vengeance on the
murderer’s brotherhood. These were not backward in replying,
and within an hour fourteen men lay dead for the sake of one
cartridge.
Whole tribes might be affected by the rule of ‘boiling blood’.
In the Malesi e Madhe if a Kastrati tribesman killed a Koplik man,
any member of the latter tribe had licence for 24 hours to kill any
man from Kastrati. The murderer was, therefore, bound to
announce his crime at once so that his fellow-tribesmen might
take cover. The time limit elapsed, vengeance lay as usual between
the two households. In such cases of inter-tribal aggression each
tribe became temporarily a single family in which each member
represented the whole.
In Qermenike, kinsfolk were sometimes fused into one family,
not by boiling blood as described above, but by a particularly
atrocious murder such as that of a guest by his host, when ‘ circle
after circle’ was the rule. The guest’s ‘circle’, consisting of his own
household, his kinsmen in separate homes, his neighbours and the
sons of the married daughters of his family, wherever these last
might live, tried to kill the murderer, and failing to find him or
other members of his household, they might kill one of his ‘circle’.
On succeeding, they held that they had avenged their relative’s
death, and their victim’s family agreed. In other districts they
15 HAM


would have found themselves involved in a new feud with the
household of the man they had killed, but by the local rule of
‘ circle after circle ’ he died as proxy for the real criminal and no new
feud entered into the question. There seems to have been no time
limit to their extended vengeance.
National solidarity was recognized in the debatable border lands
where Slav and Albanian lived side by side. If an Albanian was
killed by a Slav, any Albanian would kill any Slav in revenge. The
crime, it was felt, had pitted the Albanian family against the Slav
family. This national sentiment was so strong that though there
has never been any love lost between Gegs (north Albanians) and
Tosks (south Albanians), no Geg would allow a Slav to kill a Tosk
without seeking in return to kill any Slav he could find. The less
warlike Tosks did not feel a similar impulse. If one of their number
or a Geg were killed by their Bulgarian or Greek neighbours, they
left vengeance to the victim’s family.
The community also acted as a single family when certain public
servants were killed. If the victim were a Roman Catholic priest,
he might lawfully be avenged by his parish, the tribe in which the
parish lay, and his own family. If action were taken by the parish
or tribe, the matter ended. The avenger’s act closed the feud, and,
fearing no retribution, he could hang up his rifle. If the priest’s
family afterwards killed another of the murderer’s men, they began
a new feud. Generally the family did not wait for the parish or the
tribe to act. When a Mohammedan or an Orthodox priest was
killed, it fell to his relatives to avenge the crime; the feeling that
sacrilege had been committed was too slight to drive their
parishioners into action.
If a field-guard of Lume were killed, he was publicly avenged.
If the murderer was from another village, any of the field-guard’s
fellow villagers could lawfully kill any man from the murderer’s
village during the first twenty-four hours, and afterwards he could
kill the murderer or any other man in his household. In either
case he could hang up his rifle. If the field-guard were killed by
a fellow-villager, the village expelled the murderer. On the other
hand, if a miller were killed, vengeance rested with his family; the
village could not act. A field-guard was a public necessity; without
his services the village economy would suffer, and he must be given
public protection. A miller had taken up his work for the sake of
private gain and was not a public necessity; if he were not at the


mill, the villagers themselves could work it; the miller was therefore
not entitled to public protection. The village blacksmith, with few
exceptions a gipsy, was in even worse case than the miller. He was
a public necessity, since Albanian peasants will not make horse
shoes or farm implements, but he was only a gipsy and no Albanian
community would trouble about so low-class a creature. If he was
murdered, only his family would avenge him, and they probably
lacked the spirit to do so.
15-3


CHAPTER XXIII
BLOOD FEUD
II. COURSE OF THE FEUD
The fatal shot fired, a murderer’s life was in such instant danger
from the avenger that it behoved him to fly with all speed. But
often his ‘ blood seized him ’ so that ‘ his legs gave way under him ’
and he was rooted to the spot from shock. Custom therefore
prescribed in Shkoder, Lume and Godolesh that he must drop on
the ground a cartridge or an article of clothing such as his fez, sash,
or handkerchief; in Elbasan, Shpat and £ermenike that he must
lick the muzzle of his rifle or pistol; alternatively, in Elbasan that
he must inhale the smoke of the gunpowder or let his comrades
slap his face; in Labinot that he must hold the cartridge case in his
mouth and bite his little finger and suck the blood, and in Mat that
he must eat a little gunpowder. That done successfully, ‘ his blood
was set free’, ‘the seizure passed’, and he was able to run away.
When an article of clothing was left behind, it served to identify
the murderer; where none was left, word had to be sent to the
victim’s family. It was everywhere ‘held dishonourable’ to kill
and not to tell. It was also thought unfair for reasons that varied
with the locality. In Mirdite the victim’s relatives might go mad if
they did not know the identity of the murderer; in north Albania
the murderer’s kinsmen would not know to hide while the avenger’s
blood was boiling; in south Albania the crime might be laid at the
wrong door. Besides, the normal murder was matter for boasting;
committed only to avenge some wrong or insult, it showed that the
murderer was spirited enough to resent ill-treatment.
Latterly, when the government was attempting to repress murder,
the murderer, certain of arrest, left no token and did not inform the
relatives. The community, however, was always on the watch and
from its members’ observation of those who came from the direc-
tion of the shots and from their knowledge of the whereabouts of
the victim’s enemies at the time, the murderer’s identity was
established—at all events to the satisfaction of the community.
In the early days of a feud the father or brother of the victim
might in his furious rage kill the murderer and shoot a second time


at the lifeless corpse. When the feud was older, it was not permitted
to kill and shoot again. A murderer seldom looked at the corpse,
a fact which gave men quick-witted enough to feign death a chance
to escape. In some places, such as Mirdite, the murderer was
expected to turn the dead man in the right direction for one of his
religion—with his head towards the east if Christian, whether
Catholic or Orthodox, towards Mecca if Mohammedan, and to
rest his rifle against his head; if unable to touch him, he had to tell
the first man he met to attend to those matters. In Shpat the
murderer left the cartridge-case by his victim, allegedly not to
‘set his own blood free’, as in Lume, but to avoid carrying away
a thing that was unlucky because stained with blood and sin. In
Mat and the Malesi e Madhe, the murderer’s own life being in
grave danger from the avenger, it was thought ‘ brave ’ to tread in
the victim’s blood as a last insult.
A murderer must not rob his victim; he had killed him only to
defend his honour and not to enrich himself. As was popularly said,
‘low-class fellows’ take a man’s rifle, watch, money or clothes;
‘good-class men’ take only vengeance. In some places sanctions
reinforced public disapproval of the robber-murderer. In Lume
he saddled himself with one and a half feuds, i.e. the need to pay for
the murder with blood money as well as a life; in Mirdite, where
he was expected to lay the dead man’s rifle against his head, he
incurred two feuds. Certain exceptions to the rule were admitted,
A murderer could everywhere, except in Mirdite, take his victim’s
rifle to prove that he ‘had really trodden in his blood’, but he must
afterwards send the weapon to the family. On similar terms he
might take the dead man’s watch also. When the murderer was
a hired assassin, he commonly took a token from his victim, usually
his cap, to prove to his paymaster that he had earned his money.
When a man’s enemy lived at a distance, he might again take his
cap to prove to his own friends and neighbours that he had killed
him. Robbery of the corpse by a third person was not to be feared;
since everybody within range, the dead man’s relatives included,
rushed up at the sound of the shot, there was publicity enough to
prevent such an outrage. As for the supernatural dangers thought
to beset the bodies of persons dead in ordinary circumstances, it
was well known that Satan feared a rifle too much to approach the
body of the murdered man.
When describing how Albanian men used to shave their heads


except for a tuft on the crown, as a few old men and young boys
still do, the Highlanders of north Albania asserted that a murderer
had licence to cut off his victim’s head. The tuft, they said, was
left so that an enemy might conveniently carry the head when he
cut it off; failing such a handle, he would thrust his finger into the
dead man’s mouth, an intolerable insult. The veracity of this story
appears doubtful, since although the Highlanders, Slavs, and Turks
all cut off heads, Albanians as far inland as Elbasan shaved their
head save for the tuft on the crown, and it is unlikely that all
anticipated murder by Slavs or Turks. Whatever the purpose, the
tuft was not confined to Albanians, but was seen in 1926 worn by
small boys in the Turkish villages in south Serbia where the
population was of mixed Turkish and Bulgarian stock.
A murderer usually announced his crime to the victim’s family
by a crude message to fetch him from such-and-such a place and
bury him. He was always expected to surrender the body, but if
a feud was unusually bitter, the murderer might forbid the body to
be buried in the cemetery in the ordinary way. If he was backed by
enough men to make his ban effective, the body was buried in the
secrecy of night. Sometimes he forbade it to be taken even at night
to the cemetery; in that event it had to be buried elsewhere. A
story comes from Sopot in Diber. About 1893 Abas Kamber’s
enemy killed one of his men and forbade him to carry the body to
the cemetery. Abas, strong though he was, could do nothing but
bury it in the courtyard of his house. Just before it was lowered
into the grave, the enemy repented and sent him leave to bury it
in the cemetery. To show that he was not always prepared to do the
enemy’s bidding, Abas sent back the message that he would not dig
up the body again and concluded that burial as it had begun.
Hiding the body was universally deprecated. When men stole
a grazing cow, it was said they killed it, roasted and ate what they
could of the meat and hid the remainder. But it was not to eat
a man’s flesh that they killed him and they must not conceal his
body like the cow’s. If they did, the feud was doubly embittered.
By rights a man was never buried where he was killed. Even if
the spot were two days distant, or if, like Kol Mali’s victim, he had
lain three weeks undiscovered, he was carried home for burial.
‘He had been theirs’, his relatives said, and neither distance nor
a natural repugnance could prevent them from doing their duty by
him. In the northern mountains, in Mirdite and in Kurbin, a heap


of stones was made where he was killed; on this every passer-by
was expected to throw a green leaf, a blade of grass or a pebble while
expressing a wish for the repose of his soul. In Shkrel, according
to one informant, a stone was stuck at the head and another at the
foot, as though the place was a real grave, but a murarie was not
made. Any relatives who wished to mourn him went to his grave,
not to the place where he had been killed. Exceptionally, what
seem real graves may be seen near the meadows of Ternove above
Zerqan; ten or twelve in number, each roughly outlined with
stones, they are known as ‘the murdered graves’ and are said to
contain the bodies of men who fell there in a long-past battle
between the villages of Ternove and Sopot. Again exceptionally,
when Muharrem Bajraktar of Lume fled in 1934 to Yugoslavia, the
Spahi family, his hereditary enemies, killed one of his servants.
Muharrem said this man was not to be buried in Bicaj, his native
village, but by the wayside where he fell, so that when he himself
returned from exile he should see the grave and be reminded to
take vengeance.
The ideal was to take vengeance as soon as possible. In Kurbin
the piled stones served to make the dead man’s kinsmen hasten to
take vengeance, reminding them of his death and so ‘ heating their
blood ’. For the same purpose the Catholics of the north frequently
buried the man in his blood-stained clothes; the Mohammedans,
however, obedient to the dictum that all who profess their faith
must go to the grave in a clean winding sheet, discarded this
custom. A still stranger reminder of the need to take vengeance,
a little bottle filled with the dead man’s blood, was used all over
north Albania and in Kosove. This bottle the relatives looked at
day and night. As soon as the blood ‘boiled’, i.e. fermented, they
seized their rifles, cocked their skull-caps over one ear to show
their determination, and rushed forth to kill the murderer. If the
blood did not ‘boil’, they might accept a money indemnity instead
of taking a life. In western Mat they dipped a rag in the dead man’s
blood; when it looked stained and brown, they knew the hour to
avenge him had struck. None of these reminders was found as far
south as Qermenike and Shpat.
Public opinion also spurred the avenger on. A man slow to kill
his enemy was thought ‘disgraced’ and was described as ‘low-
class’ and ‘bad’. Among the Highlanders he risked finding that
other men had contemptuously come to sleep with his wife, his


daughter could not marry into a ‘good’ family and his son must
marry a ‘bad’ girl. As far south as Godolesh on the outskirts of
Elbasan, he paid visits at his peril; his coffee cup was only half-
filled, and before being handed to him it was passed under the
host’s left arm, or even his left leg, to remind him of his disgrace.
He was often mocked openly.
All over north Albania it was permissible for the victim’s kin to
burn down the murderer’s house. The veteran Mirash Nue of
Vuksan in Shale boasted that once he saved his house from this fate
by sending a message to the avenger which ran: ‘ Spare the ashes
on my hearth for the sake of the open house I’ve kept.’ The
avenger, touched by the reminder of Mirash’s noted hospitality,
yielded to the plea. In 1935 a Dibran took to the mountains after
wounding a fellow-villager with whom he was at feud; on recovering,
his victim did not dare to sleep at home in case he returned under
cover of darkness to repair his bad marksmanship by setting fire to
the house and burning him to death. In hot blood an avenger
might in some places do as much material damage as possible to the
murderer, burning his hay as well as his house, scything his ripening
grain and harrowing over his growing maize. For fear of reprisals
in kind he could nowhere harm his children or animals.
Burning down a murderer’s house is said in Martanesh to have
been a recent innovation, and in Diber and Lume to have been
formerly much more common than in recent times. Various con-
siderations suggest that the latter view is correct. The reason given
in Lume for the waning of the custom is that it grew progressively
more serious as people abandoned the straw huts in which they
once lived and built themselves stone houses; the huts were cheap
and easy to rebuild, but the houses were not so easily replaced.
With poverty as general and murder as frequent as they used to
be, it is obvious that if burning the murderer’s stone house and
destroying his crops had been freely permitted, the life of the tribe
could not have gone on. To restrict the attacks on property,
sanctions were introduced. In Diber an avenger guilty of incen-
diarism was banished in perpetuity by the community. In Kruje
the crime was deprecated as doubly unwise; it might cause further
deaths, so involving the avenger in further feuds, and women and
children might be among the victims, in which case the avenger
would be covered with disgrace. In Shpat an avenger who burned
his enemy’s house found the whole community against him as


a man willing to burn women and children to death and to harm
property; in Shpat property was so sacrosanct that one must not
touch even ‘the leaf of the leek’ belonging to one’s enemy.
When the community decided to bum out a man whom they
had sentenced to banishment for committing a heinous murder,
their numbers and their power to exclude him completely from the
tribal life made it impossible for him to resist. It was otherwise
with the victim’s kin. For want of power to exclude the murderer
from more than their own section of tribal life they could not make
him submit tamely, and in their attempts to use force they were
often baffled by the fire-resisting principles on which most moun-
tain houses were built. With the walls of stone, only the roof and
the outer door were inflammable, and with no matches available
these could only be set alight by blazing brands, probably of pitch
pine, brought from another house. If the murderer was a rich man,
he lived in a house surrounded by a courtyard wide enough to keep
incendiaries at a safe distance from both roof and doorway; one or
two towers in the walls of the courtyard sufficiently protected its
gateway. If the murderer was poor, his house had no courtyard. But
like the rich man’s, it consisted of two or more storeys, the stable
on the ground floor and the living-rooms above. The roof was,
therefore, too high for the avenger to throw firebrands among the
rafters. The door was surmounted by machicoulis through which
the defenders could shoot or pour boiling water, and loopholes at
the corners of the living-rooms commanded the approaches; in
cases of bitter feud the door was sometimes covered outside with
tin plates. Windows in a stable being thought unnecessary, the
door was the only break in the solid walls of the ground floor.
Sometimes avengers who were weak in guns hired men to fire the
murderer’s house. These hirelings came especially from Mirdite,
for Mirdites were notoriously brave enough to face the risk entailed
and poor enough to think only of the money offered; this amounted
to some thirty napoleons (£4O in the 1930’5) per man.
When an avenger burned down the murderer’s house in hot
blood, his motive was to do the murderer as much damage as
possible. When he burned it down in cold blood, his motive was to
drive the murderer into the open to be shot at. A murderer not
infrequently shut himself up in his house during the daytime and
stirred outside only at night, so remaining beyond the avenger’s
reach. When his house was set on fire, he knew that if he remained


inside the blazing building, his death was certain, and that if he
came out, he had a sporting chance of escaping the avenger’s
bullets. He had, therefore, no choice but to leave the burning
house. In the same way when gendarmes surrounded a house in
which a desperate criminal was hidden, he preferred to run the
gauntlet of their fire rather than wait tamely to be seized and led
off perhaps to death as a menace to society. This was particularly
true of Turkish times, when dangerous criminals were generally
shot out of hand when arrested.


CHAPTER XXIV
BLOOD FEUD
III. EXPIATOR AND EXPIATION
In most cases of murder one life only was forfeit to the avenger;
‘ one for one ’ was the formula. This was irrespective of the social
standing or the character of the victim. Hence the murder of a
standard-bearer (bajraktar) was neither better nor worse than the
murder of the least of clansmen, and that of a priest was neither
better nor worse than that of a layman.
The formula of ‘ one for one ’ was disregarded only in a few cases.
In Lume, a district which prided itself on its ‘spirit’, ‘two for one’
was the rule when a man killed his social superior; nothing less
would content his victim’s injured pride. In most districts a man
who suffered the more grievous forms of bereavement, losing his
wife, guest or child at a murderer’s hands, took double or even
triple vengeance. In the Males! e Madhe the victim’s family, if
‘ strong ’ with all the pride that the epithet denotes, might kill two
of the murderer’s relatives if they found them together, though not
otherwise. Spiro Toli of Shenjon, near Elbasan, a man as proud
as any Lumjan of his ‘spirit’, felt so degraded when his brother was
killed by a hireling at another’s bidding, and that hireling a gipsy,
that he killed both the instigator and the hireling. Pride, of course,
was the ruling motive in every blood feud. By his successful crime
the murderer had proved himself the better man, and the victim
could not endure this inferiority and was bound to strike back in
kind.
The person of the expiator seems to have undergone an historical
development. Long ago, ‘blood feuds went by the finger’, that is to
say, only the actual murderer, the man whose finger had pulled the
trigger, was made to expiate his crime. Father Gjegov aptly com-
pares Deuteronomy xxiv, 16. In modern times the merging of the
individual in his family was stressed as in the case of the avenger,
and expiation might be made by any male who lived in the same
house as the murderer and was in either the actual or classificatory
sense his ‘father’, ‘brother’ or ‘son’.
This rule was subject to several important reservations. The


man killed in the murderer’s stead must not be too old, feeble-
minded, or physically frail to carry arms, for such men were
counted women, and women could not be killed in blood feuds.
If the avenger killed such a man, he lost caste, was publicly branded
as ‘ low-class ’ and made it certain that the feud would not be closed.
It was also illegal to kill boys who were still too young to carry arms,
that is to say, under fifteen or in some cases twenty. In the
Malesi e Madhe, however, it was held that one must take vengeance
where one could, and that in default of an adult enemy one might
kill a boy. Even in that region such a crime was not committed
except by a very bad man or one who was frenzied with rage at the
recent murder of a relative or otherwise. For instance, in 1933 a
subaltern of the Alije family, whose wife had been carried off by
another Dibran, refrained for some years from avenging the insult
in the way demanded by mountain law. Taunted with this restraint
at a chance meeting in a cafe, he put aside the civilization acquired
during his military education in Albania and in Italy and rushed for
his revolver. As he was unable to find the man who had taunted
him, he lay in wait for the latter’s schoolboy son, aged fourteen,
and shot him dead.
The men of Shale said that vengeance on a boy was commoner in
Pult than in their own tribe; the men of Pult, they added con-
temptuously, were in every way their inferiors. Much the same
was said by the tribesmen of Lure of their neighbours in Mirdite and
Kthelle, who returned the compliment in kind. In Lume a man
who took such vengeance was never again given the greeting ‘ Peace
be with thee’, which is every good Mohammedan’s due from his
fellows. The manner of such vengeance was inevitably very brutal.
Thus two men from Shlak, when working in Bardhanjol, found the
small son of their enemy and tore him in two; they are said not to
have troubled to kill him first. More often the enemy wrenched
the cradle off a woman’s back and in her presence cut the infant’s
throat. A particularly nasty case was reported about 1932 from
Shale, one of the most backward regions of Albania. While two
families were quarrelling about a piece of land, the wife of Grimes
one day voiced her opinions so volubly in Gjelosh’s house that he
lost his temper and pushed her out. She fell down some steps by
the door and bruised her hip. She showed the bruise to the
gendarmerie, who were sympathetic enough to arrest Gjelosh and
to imprison him for three months. The woman, who cared more


for the violation of her honour by the push than for the bruise, was
not satisfied and instigated her son, a boy of twelve or thirteen, to
vindicate her honour by killing Gjelosh’s son, who was of the same
age. Since the boys habitually herded their goats together, her son
found an opportunity of pushing the other boy over a rock and as
he lay there helpless he stoned him till he died. Then Gjelosh, still
in prison, paid a man to kill the little murderer. Grimes retorted by
killing Gjelosh’s remaining son and dooming Gjelosh’s family to
extinction.
Two instances, both from Beshkash in western Mat, in which
a child was killed by a woman in revenge for the death of a relative,
are recorded. In the first (about 1918) the only son of Pushko Zefi
of Beshkash had been killed, and the cousins, who were his natural
avengers, did not seem inclined to do their duty. Maddened by
their inaction, the victim’s sister, who was married in Perlat, took
the opportunity provided by a visit to her old home and called at
the enemy’s house. On being left alone for a moment with a small
boy in the kitchen, she cut his throat. Another woman in Beshkash,
crazed by the murder of her grown-up son by Pal Dede Hajo, went
to Pal’s house and cut off the head of a little boy she found asleep
in his cradle.
Since women do not have rifles or blood feuds according to the
Kanun, a woman could not possibly be killed to avenge a murder.
It follows that when a woman avenged a murdered relative, she
could not be killed in return, and indeed this did not happen very
often. The tabu on killing a woman in any circumstances was
reinforced by all the forces of public opinion and superstition.
Killing a woman save when taken in adultery or incorrigible
pilfering was the most disgraceful thing that an Albanian could do.
Only one who came from ‘a low-class family’ would do it, he
never again had any luck with his rifle and he could not hope to
have his crime pardoned, but must wash away his crime with his
blood. He need pay with only one life, but if his victim was a
married woman, he could hardly hope to save it, for two or even
three families sought to take it. The dead woman’s husband wished
to avenge his wife, her father his daughter, and, in Martanesh,
her maternal uncle his niece. At Shenjon, near Elbasan, the father
asked the husband if he meant to kill the enemy; if from cowardice
or weakness he said no, the father at once set about tracking down
the enemy. Since ‘rifles can’t weigh’—that is, discriminate—a


woman was sometimes shot accidentally in a man’s stead in spite of
the tabu. In that unhappy event in Kurbin a woman in the
murderer’s family might be killed in return. If, too, a feud was
unusually bitter, as was, for instance, the Kaloshi family one in
Diber, all barriers of law and disgrace were thrown down; ‘ kill at
all costs ’ was the order of the day, and in its execution women and
children were as likely as men to suffer.
This tabu on killing women had several sources. In the first
place, a woman was ‘a sack for carrying’ things, i.e. she was the
vehicle by which a family was carried on, and killing her might
mean the loss of more than one man to her husband’s family. Then
she carried no arms, and therefore was classed with old men,
children, and lunatics as safe from an avenger. Again, she was
always regarded as an article of property, belonging in her maiden
days to her father and afterwards to her husband; her father had
the right to her work till she married, and her husband afterwards;
in token of this work her father sold her dear, and her husband
bought her dear. Articles of property could not be damaged in
the course of blood feuds. There was also the feeling that it was
a disgrace for a ‘strong’ man to kill anything so inferior as a
woman.
The tabu on killing women was so strong that when one
committed a murder, not she but one of the males in the family
expiated the crime, if expiation were possible. Murders by women
fell into two categories, the first outside and the second inside the
family. In both cases the murderess might commit the crime on her
own account or butt into a men’s quarrel to avenge a murdered
relative.
One more class of expiator remains to be considered. It some-
times happened that a man hired an outsider to kill his enemy. In
the Breg i Matit some held that such a man was a ‘witch’, and
since witches could not have blood feuds, he must go scot-free and
his hireling suffer, like any other murderer. In most places, if the
instigator could not be discovered, or if time was passing without
vengeance being taken on him, the hireling was killed. These
practices were exceptional, and in general the feud was credited to
the principal rather than to the subordinate who fired the fatal shot.
Vanity as well as justice came into the question, for the instigator
was usually a more important person than his instrument, and
killing him brought the avenger more glory.


If expiation took the form of blood money, no distinction was
made for age; the payment for a worn-out man of eighty or an
able-bodied man of thirty was the same as for a boy of five or an
infant of a few weeks. As when a life was taken for a life, no distinc-
tion was made for social standing or moral character; the payment
for a bajraktar was the same as for a labourer. A female’s ‘blood’,
however, cost only half a male’s. In the early days when these
payments were determined, money was so distributed that the rich
had a great deal, while the poor, who formed the bulk of the
population, were all but penniless. The fear of having to pay
a large sum in blood money was therefore a considerable deterrent
against murder.
Blood money was accepted only in Mirdite and north Albania,
Elsewhere it was scorned. ‘ Blood money and bride-price do you
no good’, said Lume. ‘We don’t sell blood for money; that is a low
thing to do’, said £ermenike, a boast repeated in Diber in even
stronger terms. In Labinot and Godolesh blood could not be
washed away with money on the north Albanian system. In all
these districts the formula after a murder was ‘ either pardon or kill ’.
It must be admitted that neither lived up to its pretensions, the
north being more truculent and the other districts less truculent
than they claimed. In the Malesi e Madhe, for instance, only
weak, low-class families would accept blood money; if other
families did so, they were held to have ‘disgraced themselves’.
Indeed, a bajraktar’s household, a voivode’s or a ‘leading family’
should seek for fifty years, if need be, to kill the murderer of one
of their men. On the other hand, a £ermenike man sometimes
accepted blood money, but if he so demeaned himself, his aim
was to ruin his enemy and he fixed the price accordingly. In
Diber no man would accept blood money for a male relative unless
it was accompanied by the present of a rifle as a conventional sign
that he was still free to kill the murderer if he could. In Lume
a subtle use was sometimes made of blood money. Normally,
when a life had been paid for a life, peace was made. But when an
inferior killed his superior, the latter’s relative would not make
peace till he had killed two of the other’s men. At the peace-
making the first was paired with the original victim and for the
second the superior’s relative paid blood money.
Given the stigma attached to blood money, it was seldom paid
except in lighter cases. After an accidental murder, for instance,


honour was in most places satisfied by a money payment. For
example, two men of Kruje were examining a revolver together,
not knowing it was loaded, when it went off suddenly and killed
one of them. The other was held guilty of murder, but in view of
the circumstances escaped with a payment of twenty-five napoleons,
the conventional six purses. If an animal killed somebody, the
death was considered accidental and the payment of blood money
sufficed. In Breg i Matit the grazing was good enough to carry
a considerable head of cattle which wandered freely through the
swamps, with consequent risk to the public from the bulls. If
a man was killed by a bull which its owner knew to be dangerous,
the latter had to pay blood money, failing which he was liable to
be shot. If he did not know the animal’s character, he was excused
the payment of blood money but had to surrender the bull to its
victim’s relatives as a minor atonement.
Accidental though a murder might be, the murderer could not
rely on saving his life with blood money. Especially while the
crime was fresh, he was well advised to lie low until responsible
men had weighed the case and confirmed its accidental character.
After paying the money he was not absolutely safe unless he found
a guarantor.
In Mirdite when blood money was accepted the murderer had
also to pay fines of 100 rams and one ox to the tribe and of
500 grosh (piastres, i.e. one purse) to the family of the Hereditary
Captain of Mirdite; the animals were eaten at a public banquet by
the tribe. These fines were imposed on the murderer for disturbing
the public peace. In cases of accidental murder, however, no fine
was payable; the formula ran: ‘The rifle which kills accidentally
entails blood (really blood money) for blood, but not a fine or
pursuit.’
The payment of blood money also solved the difficulties in
certain cases of murder within the family where atonement had to
be made, yet could not properly be exacted in the form of a life for
a life. For instance, if two brothers in Shkrel had separate house-
holds, when one killed the other’s wife for any but a question of
honour, the victim’s husband could not kill his own brother for
her sake but had the right to exact blood money; after all, he had
been unjustly deprived of his wife’s services and must buy another
wife. If a married woman in Shkrel were killed, again unreservedly,
by some member of her husband’s family, her son, if fifteen years


of age or more, could not kill the murderer, his own relative, but
exacted blood money. In Shale another principle came into play.
If the dead man’s relatives did not succeed in killing the murderer
within seven years, they accepted blood money. In places like
Mirdite where a fine was exacted when blood money was accepted
for a murder, no fine was payable in cases of wounding.
In Mirdite ‘wounding went by the part’. If the wound was
inflicted at the waist or upwards, even if the bullet only grazed the
man’s head, the aggressor had to pay three purses; if the wound was
below the waist, he need pay no more than 750 grosh, i.e. 1J purses.
In Lume if a wound left a man lame for life, the wound-money
was assessed at seventeen napoleons, roughly four purses, or two-
thirds of a man’s value; if not, five napoleons were enough. In
Krasniqe if a man was so wounded in the private parts that he
could no longer be a husband, his assailant had to pay him twelve
purses, double the price of a dead man. The doctor’s expenses had
always to be paid by the aggressor; in Martanesh these were
customarily reckoned at 200-300 grosh (piastres), and if they were
paid, wound money was sometimes not asked. In Mirdite the
doctor’s expenses were not fixed by custom but were due only
when the victim’s relatives regulated the matter, not when the
headmen did so. In Qermenike if a man wounded his enemy, that
is to say, the man with whom he had a feud, he did not pay the
doctor’s expenses; if he accidentally wounded a friend or a neutral,
he did. This rule was maintained by King Zog’s government.
Once an American missionary of Korche had taken a class of boys
for a walk in the country when one fell down a precipice and was
gravely injured; the government refused to allow the American to
leave Albania until the boy, months afterwards, was restored to
health and the American had paid the doctor’s bills.
As with a death, accident was no excuse. For example, in 1932
two men from Zdrajshe in Qermenike were cutting down a tree by
the wayside, when a man from Neshte, on his way to fetch maize,
rode by. The woodcutters called to him to stop, but he paid no heed.
As he passed, the tree fell, pinning him to the ground. He was
carried home, where he lingered for three months and then died.
After his death the woodcutters had to pay his family three purses
for wounding him. Wounds inflicted by animals, though considered
accidental, had also to be paid for. Those inflicted by dogs fell
into a special category. In Shkrel the elders were summoned to
l 6 HAM


assess the doctor’s expenses, which were then paid by the animal’s
owner.
A murderer might also expiate his crime, voluntarily or involun-
tarily, by exile. If voluntarily, he ran away fearing for his life, but
only a weak man who was personally a coward, or had few adult
males in his family to keep the enemy at bay, consented to show the
white feather.
Voluntary exile might be temporary or permanent. In the former
case the murderer did not give up the idea of eventually making
his peace with the victim’s family and securing their permission to
return home.
A normal exile’s hope of ending his feud lay in several directions.
The victim’s family might become so weakened by other blood
feuds that they knew themselves to be no longer formidable and
sank their pride enough to accept blood money in full payment.
They might even become poor enough to be tempted by the offer
of money. Or they might consider an absence of ten or twenty
years’ duration as part atonement and for the rest content them-
selves with blood money. They might even, on the intervention of
friends, forgive the crime outright. In £ermenike, in the days when
‘ murder went by the finger ’ and a murderer’s relatives could not
make vicarious atonement for his crime, he commonly retired to
another district for four or five years, after which the victim’s
family probably gave a conditional assent to his return. If he
risked returning, he kept discreetly out of the way while mutual
friends interceded for him. Occasionally they secured his pardon;
more often he had to withdraw for a further period of four or five
years. During this second absence the enemy’s heart almost
certainly softened enough to make his next return definite.
Voluntary exile might become permanent for several reasons. It
might, for instance, be so protracted that the murderer grew used
to his new surroundings and, ceasing to hanker for his old home,
settled down where he was. Hysen Age Jella, of Tirana, having
killed Ramiz Bey Toptan, also of Tirana, fled to Bulqize and took
refuge with the noted brigand, Sul Hupi. Under the latter’s
protection and by reason of his own wealth and prestige, he
acquired such a position in Bulqize that when eventually the feud
with the Toptans was closed, he did not return to Tirana, preferring
to remain in Bulqize.
Again, an exiled murderer sometimes prospered so much that


he found it to his interest to stay away permanently. If he found
the climate or the soil of his new home kindlier, he might sell his
paternal holding through an intermediary and with the proceeds
buy land in his new home. Before he ran away, he had probably
sent his wife to her parents, who no doubt lived in another village.
There he visited her at intervals until he was installed in his new
property, when he sent for her and their children, if any. A
voluntary exile, it may be added, was content to leave his wife in
his brother’s charge; a compulsory exile took her with him. Good
examples of voluntary exiles turned permanent from motives of
advantage are provided by the many Bojdan families from Bicaj in
Lume, who in recent centuries involved themselves in blood feuds
and fled to Kosove. Their feuds were compounded in every
instance, but the greater fertility in Kosove was not to be resisted.
To-day their descendants live scattered as far apart as Ka9anik and
Blace, near Skoplje. They still preserve memories of their kinship
one with another and with Bicaj; in fact, till the break-up of
the Turkish empire in Europe after the Balkan wars interposed
new frontiers between the Albanian lands, they made occasional
pilgrimages to the homes of their ancestors in Bicaj.
Sometimes an exiled murderer set up a small business, selling
cigarettes and cleaning shoes, and made money as he could never
have done in his mountain village. Sometimes, too, he entered the
service of a rich man and in return for his devotion was given
a grant of land.
The emergence of a central government which punished murder
tended to increase the number of permanent exiles and to make
the strong as well as the weak run away. An Albanian would face
boldly enough the vengeance of his victim’s relatives, but he
detested being imprisoned by the government. A man of Bashabun,
near Elbasan, killed a neighbour years ago. Blood money was paid,
and so far as his victim’s family was concerned, he was free to
return home. Unwilling, however, to serve the short term of
imprisonment to which the government would condemn him, he
remained in exile in Bosnia. A Milot murderer remained in exile
after the payment of blood money had closed the feud, because he
feared imprisonment by the government. In an accidental meeting
with his victim’s brother, both forgot the closing of the feud and
shot at each other, the brother killing the murderer. Then only the
taking of the oath with twenty-four men cleared him from the
16-2


accusation of taking government money to kill the murderer after
he had taken blood money from the family.
The same fear of government action was at work in Kosove, a
province largely populated by Albanians but assigned to Yugo-
slavia after the Turkish empire broke up in 1912. A steady drift
towards Albania proper went on among the Kosovars. Some were
impelled by land hunger to go and take up the free land which the
Albanian government had offered them; others came to evade
Yugoslav justice. By contrast with the Albanian government, which
did not yet punish severely homicide that was justifiable by tribal
law, the Yugoslav government hanged most murderers. To avoid
this ignominy, a Kosovar murderer preferred to emigrate, lock,
stock and barrel, to Albania. Most interestingly, this emigration
was the ebb of the tide that within recent centuries peopled Kosove
with Albanians.
Sometimes a murderer did not run away of his own accord, but
was forcibly expelled by the community. Although when murder
was not punished by government, only the weak ran away volun-
tarily, the community expelled a strong man as readily as a weak
one. In tribal districts like Mirdite which contained several villages,
the murderer’s village could not expel him without the other
villages’ consent and help. If the village resisted the expulsion,
the tribe as a whole had the righf to ‘proclaim’ the village or to call
in other tribes to bring it to reason. In small tribes like Nikaj the
murderer’s kinsmen could expel him independently of the tribe.
In non-tribal districts like Shpat, where each village was a self-
contained unit, it needed to ask no one before expelling a
murderer.
A man sentenced to communal expulsion was always one whose
crime struck at the roots of society as understood in the mountains.
Perhaps he had violated the acknowledged sanctity of the ‘ pledged
word’ by killing his enemy during a public truce or even after
making peace with him. Perhaps he had infringed the sacred laws
of hospitality by killing his host or guest. Perhaps he threatened
family solidarity by killing a cousin to get his land. Perhaps he had
killed a man to steal his rifle and thereby as good as robbed him of
his manhood, for a man without a rifle is as nothing, no better than
a woman. Perhaps he had committed sacrilege by killing someone,
possibly the priest himself, inside the territory of church or mosque,
or by breaking into the church to steal.


For any such anti-social murder no ordinary vengeance, no
pardon was possible. The community assembled and passed
judgement in the time-honoured formula that so-and-so ‘is
burned, roasted, cut down and expelled from the tribe’. Without
loss of time —probably immediately after passing sentence —they
burned the man’s house, killed, roasted and ate his sheep, goats
and cows, cut down his trees, and drove him into exile. They
further required him to make public confession of his guilt by
himself applying the burning brand to his house. In Mirdite and
elsewhere he had at the same time to make himself a public
scapegoat, saying as he lit the fire, ‘On my head be the ill-luck of
the village and the tribe’. If he and the other men in the house
who were qualified to represent him refused to set the house alight,
the head of his clan bade his next nearest relative do so. The fire
once started, the whole village or tribe kept it going until its work
was done, for it was essential that the whole community should take
part in executing the communal sentence. But they could not
touch the fire until the criminal had lighted it. In the same way,
the murderer had to be the first to apply the axe to his trees and
vines; if he jibbed, his nearest relative took his place and the work
was completed by the whole community. If he had a vegetable
garden it was destroyed in the same fashion. On the same day all
his edible livestock was roasted and consumed by the community
at a public banquet. This was by way of a fine. He himself, with
his wife and children, was escorted to the tribal frontier to make
sure that he was not killed on the way. At the frontier he was ordered
never to return again. In Shpat he was literally drummed out of
the village; the community hired gipsies to lead the way beating
drums, and all the men sang to mark their joy at getting rid of a
bad character.
The community destroyed the murderer’s house, fruit trees and
livestock not to punish him directly for his crime, but to make it
impossible for him to defy the sentence of exile by remaining in his
home. For the essential feature of their sentence was the condem-
nation to exile, the expulsion of an undesirable, of one whose act
had dishonoured the whole tribe and must be repudiated by the
whole tribe. Since robbery was not their motive, the murderer was
free to take his money with him; in any case, it could not be seen,
securely hidden as it was in a purse in his armpit.
Sometimes the expulsion was for ever, sometimes for three, five,


ten or twenty years, according to the crime. In Mirdite, pre-
sumably under church influence, the murderer of a priest was
expelled for ever, and other anti-social criminals for five to fifteen
years. In Martanesh the injured man might after an interval inter-
cede with the local elders and secure a remission of part of the
sentence; otherwise the murderer and his descendants must remain
in exile. Several local traditions maintain that sentences of perpetual
banishment were formerly much commoner. In Martanesh no
such sentence has been pronounced for 200 years, and in Shpat
none for 100 years. In Lure any murderer used to be banished in
perpetuity; witness the numerous families of Lure origin who now
live in Prizren, Tetovo, Reka and other places in Yugoslavia.
In Lure when a man was sentenced to perpetual banishment, his
nearest kinsmen, those who would have been his heirs in the event
of his dying childless, divided up his land. His family was in fact
reckoned as extinct so far as the tribe was concerned. In Mirdite
also he was considered as dead to the tribe. Father Gjegov gives
two accounts of what happened there to his land. For ordinary
expulsions it was left uncultivated and used for public grazing.
When a man was expelled for breaking into a church or for killing
a priest, his land was bought by his nearest kinsmen and the money
given to the church. In Shpat again the murderer’s nearest
kinsmen divided up his land; but there the elders valued it and the
kinsmen paid the murderer the estimated sum before he was
drummed out; if they could not raise the money, the village found
it, subject to recovering it later from the kinsmen. On the other
hand, when a murderer was banished only for a term of years, his
land everywhere remained uncultivated until his return, when he
built a house and resumed cultivation. During his absence, his
ownership of the land was uncontested, but he was not allowed to
derive any profit from it, A voluntary exile was in a different
position; he could empower a kinsman to work his land and
throughout his absence to remit to him in his place of exile an
agreed proportion of the profits.
When a man was expelled for good, the community signalled the
same by tearing up the four corner-stones of the foundations of his
house after they had burned it down. When his banishment was
temporary, the corner-stones were left in place to await his return.
Again when his banishment was perpetual, there could be no more
giving or taking in marriage for him in the village; any engagements


subsisting at the time of his expulsion were voided by that fact.
When his banishment was temporary, his marriage engagements
remained binding.
Even in cases of temporary banishment the murderer’s separa-
tion from his tribe was thoroughgoing. For the specified period
‘he could not light a cigarette in a single house of the tribe’, as the
men of Lure put it. Nor could he, or his, return to borrow honey,
that most important commodity where sugar is scarce. In Mirdite
a tribesman who admitted him to his house for any of the above
purposes was publicly ‘ burned, roasted and expelled ’ for breaking
tribal discipline.
The banished murderer’s obligation to take root whether he
wished it or not in some alien spot is another of the factors which
produced the many colonies of diverse origin in Albanian lands.
The exiles, home-sick like exiles the world over, often gave the
name of their ancestral village to their new settlement.
If the murderer did not choose to go into exile of his own accord,
he was condemned by the avenger to virtual imprisonment in his
house. Sometimes he shut himself up voluntarily; more often,
especially in north Albania, he was peremptorily ordered to do so
by the avenger. For the period of his ‘imprisonment’ fear that the
avenger was lurking near prevented him from stirring outside
during the daytime and restricted his movements to the night
hours. If he left home, he had by dawn to find shelter under a
friend’s roof and he could not continue his travels until the next
night fell. These disabilities were his so long as he eluded the
avenger, and he might do so for years, as in the case of a native of
Sheshaj who had been shut up by his enemy for twenty-five years.
At Belsh in Dumre, as a result of this confinement, two men who
had been shut up for twelve years were ‘waxen and yellow as the
dead’. They longed to walk in the sunlight and were bored indoors
where they could do nothing to pass the time except strip maize
and knit (most curiously, knitting is one of the staple occupations
of the men, but not the women, in Dumre). But they could not
help themselves, since it was certain death to step outside during
the daytime.
Just as the murderer’s house could not be burned down in case
women and children perished in the conflagration, so his ‘ imprison-
ment ’ could not be allowed to stop the work of the family in case
women and children died of starvation. There were several


provisions for carrying on the work. The first was the law that
women, children, servants and domestic animals must not be shut
up. So in comparative security the able-bodied women, on whom
fell the heaviest burden, tilled the fields, went to market, ground
corn at the mill and fetched water from the spring and firewood
from the forest. The boys and aged women herded the cows, sheep
and goats. The servants took part in any or all of these tasks, but
few households could afford the luxury of servants.
A social phenomenon alleged to be a by-product of this immunity
of women and children is interesting. To-day a good proportion of
the agricultural work of Albania is done by women, while the men
idle; a generation ago the bulk of it was so done. The men of to-day
excuse their idling by saying it is a habit formed when they or their
fathers were shut up by blood feuds; whatever their natural
inclination to work, they were then driven perforce into allowing
their women to toil alone to feed the family. This plea may or may
not be valid; as the frequency of blood feuds decreased, the men’s
industry increased.
In bad feuds the immunity of women and children was some-
times denied. Even to-day the women of Murat Kaloshi’s house-
hold cannot stir outside his compound except under heavy escort;
failing that, they would be shot without pity by his enemies. The
numerous children in his household are growing up illiterate four
minutes’ walk from an excellent school; if they attended this
school, a battalion of gendarmes or men-at-arms could hardly
ensure their safety. Another bad case is to be found at Milot, where
even the boys in the cradle in Gjin Bardhoku’s house have to share
the men’s imprisonment. In £ermenike the immunity of women
was never absolute; there was always a danger that the avenger
might lose his temper and kill them. Within living memory two
women in Fenars, one of the more accessible villages in
once tried to plough and were discovered by the avenger. On their
declining to desist as he bade them, he fired at them with
unexpectedly fortunate results. He wounded both but only
severely enough to make them fall to the ground while letting go
the oxen. They made a speedy recovery and, each wound counting
as half a ‘blood’, the avenger was considered to have taken
vengeance. The two parties were then ‘measure for measure’
and made peace.
Again with a view to feeding the murderer’s family an avenger


sometimes yielded to a friend’s pleadings and allowed one or more
men in the ‘imprisoned’ man’s household to come out and work.
The same friend went security to the murderer for the lives of the
man or men released. In Shpat, if one of the men imprisoned
died, the avenger sent word that one of those hitherto free must
shut himself up in his stead. It is not known whether this was the
rule in other districts or not.
In earlier times, according to vague traditions still current in
£ermenike and Martanesh, only the actual murderer was shut up
and the other men in his household were free to work and to travel.
This tradition is supported by the history of the Balli family in the
village of Fenars. Seven generations ago, i.e. about 175 years ago,
Sali Balli of Martanesh killed a friend and was shut up by the
avenger, while his four brothers went free. He grew so bored in
his ‘prison’ that he ran away from Martanesh and settled in
Fenars, where he founded a family now headed by Isuf Balli. The
descendants of his brothers still live in the old home in Martanesh.
When an avenger felt too bitter to release indefinitely one or
more men in the imprisoned murderer’s household, he was some-
times induced to make a minor concession. When all the men were
shut up, women were able to hoe, to carry manure, to sow seed, to
reap wheat and to harvest maize successfully, but they could not
plough—so it was believed in north, though not in south, Albania,
where the wives of many emigrants must to this day plough if
they and their children are to eat. There was therefore danger in
north Albania that if all the men were shut up during the ploughing
season, the family would, in spite of the women’s efforts, starve.
This led to a ticket-of-leave system, called hese , literally ‘pledged
word ’, ‘ truce ’, or kuvend, ‘ agreement ’. At the instance of a mutual
friend the avenger granted the murderer leave for one or more men
in his household to come out and work his land for a stipulated
period, varying from three to twelve months. As so often, the forces
of public opinion reinforced the friend’s urgings; indeed, it was said
of an avenger who refused his enemy leave to plough that he ‘was
not to be entered in the register’, i.e. could not be classed as a man,
and of one who did not that he was both brave and honourable.
In Dukagjin the kanun of murder was so stern that neither the
murderer nor his womenfolk were allowed to work his land if the
avenger was strong. Indeed, the avenger often worked it and
carried home the produce, leaving the murderer’s household


dependent on charity. At best the elders fixed a sum to be paid by
the murderer for leave to work his own land: the money paid, the
avenger gave his word not to molest him; or a ‘strong* friend
guaranteed his safety as he tilled his fields. This arrangement
continued until he was killed elsewhere or the avenger consented
to make peace.
Various devices were tried to outwit an avenger too venomous
to make the smallest concession to his ‘imprisoned’ enemy. The
commonest was for the murderer to let his land to a neutral on the
usual Albanian terms of ‘halves’. Once some men of Lure,
trusting to the prevailing immunity of women from attack, dressed
in their wives’ clothes and went out to work. They were soon
discovered and compelled to return home. Frequently a woman
was made to work alongside the men, the assumption being that
from fear of accidentally hitting the women and so disgracing
himself the avenger would not fire on the party. The man who
murdered the brother of Kodhel Dede of Nezhar in Shpat belonged
to a large family, the members of which went to work with a woman
between every two men. Kodhel thus found it impossible to kill
one of them and after a long period of years made peace. Some-
times a man’s wife kept watch while he worked; if she signalled the
enemy’s approach, he seized his rifle and prepared to defend
himself. During Kodhel Dede’s feud with the Trepsanishti family
he found himself long baulked by the vigilance of his enemy’s wife.
At last his chance came on the eve of 15 August. The wife had her
mind set on making melata (sacrificial foods) for distribution on
the festival, and, forgetting her husband who was at work on the
threshing floor, she went home to make them. Kodhel, who had
crept up through a maize field, shot her husband as soon as her
back was turned. In the hilly landscape of Fulqet in west Mat a
different sort of watch was kept. The ‘ imprisoned ’ men, aided by
friends, dug a hole on top of a hill commanding a wide view. One
of their best shots, rifle in hand, settled down in this hole ready to
snipe the avenger if he tried to kill any of the men at work.
Work in the fields apart, an ‘imprisoned’ murderer might for
short periods leave his house under escort of a friend. This friend
had to be ‘strong’, otherwise the murderer might be killed by his
enemy, a lasting disgrace to the man whose protege he was for the
time being. Sometimes murderer and avenger had a common
friend who took the former out; in that case the friend ran less risk


of losing his protege, but even so he had to be fairly ‘strong’. In
Mat such a friend might take the murderer out three times with
impunity. Afterwards he was sure to receive a message from the
avenger which ran, ‘ Don’t stir out again. Stay indoors. It was for
your sake that I didn’t fire.’
In the majority of cases the murderer neither ran away nor was
shut up, but went about his normal business, taking certain pre-
cautions. An Albanian never despised his enemy; the strongest
man will say, ‘I am stronger than he is, but a rifle doesn’t care
for bravery, a rifle kills’. He remembers also that an enemy is
ever on the watch: ‘A wooden stake rots, but an enemy doesn’t.’
Yet another saying—this from west Mat—‘Wood rots, a wrong
doesn’t’. ‘A feud can’t be forgotten.’ ‘A man with an enemy is like
a hare sitting on its form, he must watch all the time.’
The first precaution a hunted man had to take at home was never
to answer the door himself.
Since the laws of hospitality were rigid and seldom transgressed,
a guest seldom killed, or was killed by, his host. Frok Gjeta of
Kthelle, however, had lost his father at a guest’s hands; three men
had called and been unsuspectingly admitted; the old man was
hospitably making coffee when they suddenly opened fire and
killed him.
About 1910 some men called at a house in Orenje, in £ermenike,
and were admitted by its widowed mistress as guests. They seized
the only adult male in the house, her stripling son and, hanging
him head downwards by a rope slung across a rafter, demanded
money and avowed that they were avenging the murder of one of
their kin by the family. The son said he had no money; the mother
screamed that she had a little, but they hanged her son.
Another precaution commonly taken by a ‘wanted’ man was to
live in a house of more than one storey. Such a house never had
more than slits for windows in the ground floor and those in the
upper room were square holes without glass, across which stone
shutters were drawn at night. In £ermenike the outside staircase
that led down to the stables on the ground floor was always fenced
in carefully with wood. For greater security the women lived on
the ground floor protecting the men who lived above. If a man
were rich enough, he built a high wall round the house; this gave
him the freedom of his courtyard. In this case all the windows
looked inwards on the court; the outer walls were blank save for


the loopholes. A still richer man, or one with many enemies, had
several doors in his courtyard wall and watch-towers at strategic
points. (The turrets at each corner and in the middle of the long
walls effectually commanded these entrances, and many loopholes in
the walls provided space for many defenders to shoot from.)
Shevqet Bey Verlaci of Elbasan had several posterns in his garden
wall, each commanded by a watch-tower and each providing him
in case of need with a possible means of escape.
Incidentally, back entrances in the mountains were useful for
guests with enemies. These could enter unseen by other guests,
among whom there might be one or more who would inform the
enemy of his whereabouts, and so endanger his life. They were also
useful if the master had sent a group of his followers to shoot his
enemy; if they failed, they could creep in unseen by the guests; in
case of failure on such an errand, they did not wish the attempt to
be known.
A wanted man who wished to work in his fields might station
a child herding goats or a woman minding a cow at a vantage point
where an enemy could be detected and the watcher give him
warning, so that he might seize his rifle and defend himself. As the
enemy’s trump card was surprise, he was likely to retreat when
detected. Before the wanted man left the house the women and
children would look through the windows to ttiake sure no enemy
was near. A man with blood on his hands might wish to go to the
forest to cut firewood, a place too distant for his women to keep
watch. In that case he might send a scout ahead to reconnoitre the
road, and himself follow rifle in hand. In Zdrajshe, £ermenike, the
communal hay-field was so far away that a wanted man made no
attempt to go and cut his hay; the others, however, gave him his
due share, though he had done nothing to earn it. A man who, in
spite of risks, kept moving about might never stir outside, especially
at night, without his rifle. He never told where he was going and
travelled by an unlikely route and at unwonted times.
In the summer of 1935, to return from Tirana, whither he had
been officially summoned, Murat Kaloshi of Diber sent out an
attendant to find a car willing to drive at once to Diber, and within
five minutes of its drawing up at the door of his lodging started.
This was at 2 p.m., an hour when Tirana is plunged in sleep on
a summer afternoon. He supped at the wayside inn of Lunik, an
insignificant village without telegraphic communication, four or


five hours from Tirana, travelled on through the night, and in the
early morning as the car neared Peshkopi, he got out and walked
home across country, (With him were a number of attendants
armed to the teeth.)
Needless to say, such a man never announced beforehand the
time of his departure, if his intention to depart could not be
concealed.
An obvious precaution was never to stir outside the house. When
a Diber notable went to Tirana, he took at least six armed atten-
dants along with him, who might or might not live with him
permanently. The armed attendants of the Hereditary Captain of
Mirdite were mainly young relatives of his who spent years with
him, at once his clansmen and his relatives; their loyalty was
beyond doubt. The bodyguard of Shevqet Bey Verlaci of Elbasan
were generally peasants from his farms who had been long in his
service. Less rich men who needed numerous attendants on their
walks abroad drew them from their neighbours. Selman Nus Cohu,
for instance, an attendant of the bajraktar of Lure, lived at home
and only joined the bajraktar when he or another member of his
family needed him for a journey or some other cause. When
Miftar Selmani of Lume came to Tirana he brought a posse of
armed neighbours who constantly changed as their services were
required at home; some came with him for the outing, others out
of bounden duty to requite the help he had given them in earlier
times.
Men still poorer contented themselves with reinforcing the men
of the household with a single permanent retainer. Such a man was
the peasant from Shengjerg who fled to Namid Qallaku of Fulqet
after committing three murders, and in return for his board and
an occasional tip protected his protector. In Mat it was also
customary to go and stay for a month at a time with a friend who
had need of an extra gun.
Failing armed attendants, a hunted man was not without
protectors on his journey. In districts where women were immune
a woman’s company, on a journey as at work, was sufficient. When
Shale as a tribe was in blood with its neighbour, Mertur, a man
from Shale could safely go to Mertur with a woman born in Shale
or another tribe who was married in Mertur, for she counted as
belonging to Mertur and the man was therefore her guest. On the
other hand, a daughter of Mertur who was married in another tribe


was no protection, for she had lost her Mertur nationality as it were
by her marriage, and so her company did not in itself make the
traveller a guest of that tribe. In Mat it was a protection to have
a foreigner in front of you, for a foreigner was as sacred as a woman.
This held for most districts of Albania.
The principle of the guest’s sacrosanctity was often invoked.
If a guest of an important man in Diber had an enemy and was
travelling alone, his host would give him an attendant when he left.
This attendant must see him safely to his next destination; should
any harm befall him on the way his powerful host would avenge
him. The protection, and with it the obligation, of his host ended
by nightfall, for he would by then have either reached home or
become the guest of another man. His journey being thus limited
to a day’s duration, the mere fact of his being accompanied by
the attendant would generally suffice to keep him safe, for within
the radius of a day’s journey, on foot, everybody knew everybody
else, and on his being seen in the company of the attendant, it was
at once recognized whose guest he had been and who his avenger
would be.
There were interesting extensions of the principle. It was not
necessary to have been actually a guest of the strong man for him
to avenge the traveller’s murder; it was sufficient to say one was
about to be his guest. In the time of Lan Kaloshi, one of the Alijes
on his discharge from detention as a hostage by the Turks was on
his way to stay with the Lleshaj of Kander when he was killed by
the powerful Ali DO9L Although he had not actually become the
guest of the Lleshaj, it fell to that family to avenge him. They,
however, realizing that they were no match for Ali Do9i, told the
family that the only way in which the murder could be avenged
would be to declare that the victim had been on his way to visit
Lan Kaloshi. They did this. Lan accepted the responsibility, and
avenged the murder.
In Shale a traveller, no matter whether native or stranger, could
travel safely provided he called out some native’s name in a loud
voice. Scattered though the population of that mountainous valley
might be, there was always some goatherd or cowherd within hail
to report on whom the traveller had called; in case of need, that
involuntary protector recognized that the man was travelling under
his protection and took whatever steps were necessary.
It sometimes happened that a hunted man, when paying a visit


to a friend, found his enemy was his fellow-guest. This was natural
enough, for especially where both belonged to the same village,
hunter and hunted always had a number of mutual friends. All over
Albania the two enemies, being fellow-guests, did not molest each
other, but rather, out of courtesy to their host, talked together as
if nothing divided them. In the old days they would in £ermenike
even shoot at a target together without turning their rifles on each
other. In £ermenike the hunted man’s immunity was not quite
complete, varying according to his behaviour. If he cocked his fez
to one side and held his head high, his enemy might kill him even at
their common host’s in his exasperation at his effrontery. If, on the
other hand, the murderer pushed his fez straight to the back of his
head and kept his head down, his enemy would almost certainly
not touch him till both had left the house. Sometimes hunter and
hunted were invited to the same wedding or funeral feast. Then the
same rules of courtesy came into play. The enemies sat at one table,
ate out of the common dish, passed each other their tobacco boxes
and drank coffee side by side. If toasts were drunk among the
Highlanders, they would not drink to each other’s health nor would
they willingly address each other, but otherwise they gave little sign
of their enmity.


CHAPTER XXV
BLOOD FEUD
IV. PEACE-MAKING
Peace was seldom made until the same number had been killed on
both sides. If the first man was only wounded, and in revenge
killed his enemy, the elders made the first pay wound money, half
a blood, so as to make it ‘one for one’. In the same way if three,
say, were killed on one side and two killed and one wounded on the
other, peace was made on condition that the latter side should pay
one wound money; then two killed, one wounded, and one wound
money paid made the equivalent of the three killed on the enemy’s
side. The killings and the woundings might be done in one
engagement or might be distributed over a number of years, taking
place in the swing backwards and forwards of the feud. Killing or
being killed by a woman was sometimes not accepted in the
reckoning. The virgin Emin of Orenje in Qermenike killed the
man who had killed her father, and so made it technically ‘ one for
one’. But her enemy refused to make peace, saying that a kill by
a woman did not count and they were not yet therefore ‘ one for
one’. In Shpat peace was never made until shots had been fired
at least once by the relatives of the man first murdered; that done,
it did not matter much whether the victims were ‘one for one’
or not.
Peace was always made through an intermediary. If it were
directly solicited by the hunted, the enemy’s triumph would know
no bounds, and he would arrogantly refuse to grant the other’s
request. But he could not indefinitely turn a deaf ear to the
pleadings of friends; to do so risked quarrelling with them. ‘You’ve
shot enough’, they said, as though to convince him that he had
vindicated his honour. ‘Forgive him, we beg you’, they added.
At length he replied, ‘All right, I’ve forgiven him’. Then both
enemies were safe from gossiping tongues, that bogey of primitive
communities, for no one could say that one or the other man was
either brave or cowardly. Sometimes not private friends, but a
whole tribe, through their spokesman, intervened.
The ceremony of ratifying the promise of forgiveness varied


from place to place. In Shpat the original criminal must take the
initiative and go to his enemy’s house, escorted for safety’s sake by
at least one friend. The enemy came to meet him in the open air,
but did not offer him his hand, for a man reserves his hand for his
friends. Then both went into the house, the coffee, the all-essential
to a peace-making, was soon served, followed perhaps by a meal with
meat. Both coffee and meal were ‘ like a funeral ’, enlivened by next
to no conversation and with little cordiality of mien. A day or two
later the enemy must go to the original criminal’s house, and the
same ceremonies were gone through. Alternate visits had to be paid
for some time, until at last the original enemy declared that he had
forgiven the other. A marriage very often cemented the peace-
making. Occasionally the attempt to make peace broke down —
one’s gorge rose at the idea of making friends with the murderer.
Then the whole evil story began again, murder alternating with
murder.
The ceremonies in Qermenike and Martanesh followed much
the same lines. New elements were introduced farther north, for
example, in Krasniqe. Accompanied by six to eight men, the man
originally at fault, with his hands tied behind his back, went
unexpectedly on a festive evening to his enemy’s house. The host,
as in duty bound, said, ‘ Come in! ’ and invited them to sit down.
They refused to do so until in sign of forgiveness he untied his
enemy’s hands. He never refused, for he said, ‘ Better forgive, and
forget one dead man than quarrel with ten living ones’. If he had
not granted their request, the murderer’s escort would never have
visited his house again. That night the uninvited guest ate a meal at
the involuntary host’s house, and the next day the man forgiven
carried them all off to his house, where he provided a meal with meat
pasty and sweets. Forgiveness in Krasniqe was more easily obtained
for a murder done in hot blood, and the ensuing friendship was
more genuine; if the murderer had ambushed his enemy, peace
was more difficult to establish and the resultant friendship less
real. In Lume the murderer was thrust into his enemy’s house
before dawn so that his enemy might not see him coming; no
notice of his coming was given beforehand. If the host did not
untie his hands, the friends who accompanied him refused to drink
coffee; the host always yielded to the threat of this disgrace.
In Kurbin peace was made by the same methods as in Lume and
Krasniqe. The murderer, who had the sailor collar of his jacket
17 HAM


thrown over his head, a sign of mourning and penitence, as well as
his hands tied behind his back, a sign of helplessness, remained
standing near the door, while his friends sat down round the hearth.
The host gave coffee to them, but not to him; his forgiveness was
not yet assured, and without such assurance he could not drink his
coffee. The friends pleaded with the host to untie his hands; they
threatened as well as pleaded saying, ‘lf you like, forgive him—
otherwise kill us along with him’. At length one of two things
happened. The host consented to pardon the murderer, got up to
throw down his collar and to untie his hands, and bade him sit
down and drink coffee, saying, ‘You are pardoned, friend’. More
frequently, he said he could not at once pardon the man, but would
give him a truce of six months, a year, or more; in sign of his
mollification he probably gave him coffee, though he sent him
away with his hands still tied behind his back and his collar over
his head.
If the murderer were pardoned, a meal with meat was given in all
but the poorest houses —these must content themselves with coffee.
On the departure of the guests a further ceremony took place. The
host saw the party off as he would on any other occasion. On leaving
the house he took a hammer and chipped out a little cross on the
door. Each of the others in turn took the hammer and chipped out
a little more, first the host’s party and then the visitors. The host
said, ‘ God send us no more grief’ and ‘ May he be forgiven ’. Each
guest said, ‘Honour to you for pardoning him!’ After chipping
out his portion each dropped the hammer on the ground for the
next man to pick up; this was to make sure of not handing on the
feud to him. The last man on the murderer’s side threw the
hammer away, repeating, ‘Honour to you for pardoning him!’
The cross signified that the family had had an enemy, had fired
shots; the more crosses on a door, the more valiant the family. In
Kurbin there are houses with ten or twelve. Since the district is
now predominantly Mohammedan, the chipping of the cross is an
interesting survival from the time when they were all Roman
Catholic. The following day or the next the enemy paid a visit with
his friends to the murderer’s, and was regaled with coffee and a
meal with meat; in every case the chief intermediary was an
honoured guest. It may be added that modernization has attacked
the ceremonies; as early as 1930 a murderer from the Saseri family
of Kruje refused to have his hands tied when he went to his enemy’s


to be pardoned; he said it was ‘disgraceful’, and the plea was
allowed.
The Highlanders had still another method. They called a
‘St John’ an infant which had not yet been sent to have its hair
cut by its godfather, it being believed that St John the Baptist was
Christ’s godfather. When the time for peace-making seemed due,
the friends brought pressure to bear to secure forgiveness. This
promised, they arranged to take the murderer on a certain day to
his enemy’s house, his hands again tied behind his back, and take
a ‘St John’ in its cradle with them. Probably they did not bring
the murderer into view; at most they kept him in the background.
One of the visitors turned the cradle with the infant, who was, as
always, well strapped in, upside down, saying to the host, ‘Put it
straight; Turn it right side up! ’ If he were willing, and few were
not, for leaving the infant upside down might kill it and leave him
with innocent blood on his hands, he turned the cradle right side
up, saying, ‘All right, I pardon him for the sake of God and the
Saint’. Then he went and without another word untied the
murderer’s hands. Next he said, ‘A pardon for my murder;
a pardon for my father’s (or brother’s) murder; be it forgiven’, and
turned to embrace the murderer. Coffee was then served and drunk
by all amid general conversation —the Highlanders are unusually
lively. Having fixed a day when they would all go to eat a meal with
meat at the murderer’s house they took their leave. This meal at
the murderer’s concluded the proceedings; afterwards all went
about their business; no cross was made on the enemy’s door as
in Kurbin.
Friends were not the only interveners. Occasionally the Turkish
government took a hand, declaring on penalty of imprisonment,
internment and burning out that all feuds more than seven years
old were to be compounded by a money payment and not reopened.
When during the 1914-18 war Austria-Hungary was in occupation
of all north Albania, she also ordered blood feuds to be ended with
a money payment; the resentment of Qermenike at this attempt to
force them to make peace on northern terms is still hot. Sometimes
a whole community itself interfered. The procedure of west Mat
was typical. When a man had been killed on either side and the feud
was ‘one for one’, the neighbours took effective steps to prevent its
continuance. They each forbade the avenger to come on his land
to kill his enemy; if he did so, he would be considered a trespasser
17-2


and would have a feud with the owner. If, after this warning, the
neighbour saw the avenger trying to kill his enemy on his land, he
shot at him, and if he killed him, he had no feud, for he had
forbidden him to raise his rifle on his land.
Religious influences also were brought to bear on the two
enemies. The Bojdani sheikh of Bicaj in Lume often intervened
when there was shooting, both before and after the murder was
committed; telling both parties they were in the wrong, he induced
them to make peace. There is no record known to the author of an
Orthodox priest acquiring influence enough to end a feud, and
a Roman Catholic parish priest, though not ridiculed by his flock
as his Orthodox brother too often was, had no power to curse people
who kept up blood feuds, and without such power he could not
compose a feud. Even a bishop was powerless in such cases.
Jesuits, on the other hand, had the power and on occasion exercised
it; it is commonly believed to this day that they are sent by the Pope
and they are correspondingly feared. Every ten years or so,
summoned by the archbishop or the priest in charge, at the
instance of the village, they toured the Roman Catholic districts,
their main object being to compose blood feuds. In 1932 three
priests went to Shkrel for the best part of a week. Due warning of
their advent had been given, and all devout Roman Catholics were
bidden to attend church every day. Banners depicting the flames
of hell and the crimes which earned them were hung round the
church and the sermons were in the same strain. On the second
day these placed emphasis on the privileged position of Roman
Catholics; in return for this good Catholics should settle their
blood feuds rather than risk losing the blessing of the church for
themselves and their families during their lifetime and after it
burial in consecrated ground. On the third day the priests
inveighed against keeping up grudges; those who cherished their
blood feuds risked the curse of God. This meant that nothing
would go right for them. They would be shunned by everyone —an
engaged girl could not marry with the blessing of the Church, but
only by civil marriage—if indeed her betrothed did not prefer to
give her up, although this meant losing her bride-price. On this
occasion in Shkrel the vehemence of the priests’ exhortations and
the fear of the consequences of the curse resulted in the termination
of several outstanding feuds.


APPENDIX
LAWS PASSED AT GENERAL ASSEMBLIES
(TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL ALBANIAN)
I. Some Laws Ratified by the Prefecture of Shkoder.
(From Father Gjefov, Kanun, pp. 128-9.)
1. Bride-price is not to be altered. The amount fixed seven years
ago remains in force. It is, therefore, 600 grosh, a sum which
includes everything. Whoever acts contrary to this order will be fined
iooo grosh.
2. Girls will be betrothed by their father, or if they have no father by
their brother and, failing him, by their nearest male cousin. Women are
not to interfere in betrothals.
3. Every betrothal will be arranged openly not secretly, and there
will be a go-between as witness. When the betrothal has been completed
and rifles have been fired off in front of the betrothed girl’s house, the
men who have the right to betroth her will go to the parish priest in
order to register the names of the betrothed pair, the registrar and the
witnesses, together with all the circumstances. Whosoever does not
abide by this decree will be fined 1000 grosh.
4. Whoever refuses to go through the marriage ceremony when the
priest comes for that purpose will be fined 1000 grosh.
5. Whoever incites a married woman to run away will be fined eight
purses.
6. Whoever gives a bride to a man who has divorced his lawfully
wedded wife will be fined 1000 grosh.
7. Whoever shall dare to send away his lawfully wedded wife in
order to take another woman in unlawful wedlock will be fined
1000 grosh.
8. Whoever sells his daughter or sister or other female of his blood
relations will be fined, like the buyer, 1000 grosh.
9. On the basis of the ancient customs, which are still observed
among the Christians of the mountains of Shkoder concerning betrothals,
marriages, enticing of other men’s wives, running away of wives and
other similar causes of trouble, some laws have been enacted for the
repression of the aforesaid evil acts and have been approved by His
Lordship the Archbishop of Shkoder, Mgr Luigi £urgi, and by the
mountain chiefs. These laws after being weighed by the Government
Council have been approved and ordered to be put into execution.


io. The government authorities therefore by this Decree order that
the nine points above-mentioned shall be observed and put into execution
without fail or opposition.
Issued by the Government Authorities of Shkoder
Shkoder, Albania
May 9th, 1864
L.S. Mareshali
Civil and Military Representative of the
Government with the Prefecture of Shkoder
ISMAIL PASHA
11. Solemn Pledge between Mnele and Gomsiqe, February 13th,
1873.
(From Father Gje9ov, Kanun, p. 118.)
At the meeting we are holding to-day we have decided to write out
the following document in order to have it for reference.
We, the tribesmen of Mnele and Gomsiqe, comprising 150 houses,
have solemnly promised each other to hold ourselves ready and of one
mind for every need that may eventuate.
The witnesses of this pledge are:
[Here follow the names of 15 tribesmen, headed by the bajraktar.]
Written this day of February 13th, 1873.
111. Laws Enacted by the Twenty-four Elders and Agreed by the
Chiefs, etc. Written in the Village of Kastrat on November 2nd,
1891.
(From Father Kanun, p, 125.)
1. From Krue i Ri, which belongs to all Kastrat, up to She i Gurit;
from Vorr Gjolaj to Breg i Gurres, marching with Gjelosh Luce;
from Shkamb Grope Molle to Brigje; from Gjeke Petroviqi to
£uke e Gurres.. .whoever quarrels or fires a weapon within these
limits will be fined 3000 grosh and 24 rams.
2. Whoever refuses to allow a woman to fill her water-pitchers at
fountains and springs saying she has no right to a share of the water,
will be fined 250 grosh and 3 rams.
3. Whoever calls another names in the above-mentioned places or
calls another’s mother and father names, will be fined, if he is full
15 years old, 250 grosh and 3 rams,
4. Whoever goes to do a mischief in a mill must, if he is full 12 years
old, pay a fine of 250 grosh to the miller and 500 grosh and 3 rams to
the chiefs.


5. Whoever moves the stones of an old boundary and puts them in
a new place will be fined 3000 grosh and 6 rams.
6. No one is to frighten a flock sheltering from the heat in a place it
was in first. 1 Whoever does this will be fined 250 grosh and 3 rams.
7. The mill question remains inviolate as always and neither the
Vukpalaj nor the Gjolaj may start a degame , 2 and any miller who takes
more than 5 pet cent of the flour will be fined 500 grosh and 6 rams.
8. Any man who cuts down a tree under which animals take shelter
from the heat or cuts off a mill or an irrigation stream will be fined
500 grosh and 6 rams.
9. Other fountains and springs are left under the old law, that is to
say, whoever destroys a fountain or spring or prevents another from
filling water-pots will be fined 500 grosh.
10. Milling is by order of arrival. Any miller who mills for a man
who comes later than another and breaks the order either out of
favouritism or because corrupted by bribes will be fined 150 grosh and
3 rams.
11. Whoever admits a stranger to huts on a mountain pasturage will
be fined 500 grosh and 6 rams. 3
IV. Truce Sworn between Nikaj and Mertur on August 10th,
1892.
(From Father Gje9ov, Kanim, p. 121.)
The two tribes have sworn a truce with each other:
(1) As from August 14th up to the day of Our Lady of Mertur.
(2) As from December 26th up to the day of St Sebastian.
The guarantors of Flock and Shepherd, i.e. Nikaj and
Mertur and the Bajraktars of Krasniqe and Gash.
V. Laws Enacted in Kastrat and Bajze on November Ist, 1892 a.d.
(From Father Gje?ov, Kanim , p. 126.)
At a general meeting held under the presidency of Brahim Beg the
serxherde, Kasem Beg the bylikbash and the four and twenty chiefs
(elders) of Kastrat, the following laws were enacted.
1. Whoever murders a man of Kastrat or of any of the other moun-
tains will be fined 3000 grosh and 24 rams.
1 This must be a mistranslation. The Italian version of the sentence runs:
che nessuno ardisa impaurire il bastiame gravido.
2 The Italian version of this very obscure clause is as follows: Le disposizioni
riguardanti i mulini rimangono inaltarate per sempre e non possono causare litigi ne
fra ilpovero nhfra il ricco, clearly referring to the principle, enunciated again in
§ 10, which compels the miller to treat all his clients on the principle of ‘first
come, first served ’. It is possible that the Albanian version has been misunderstood.
3 This refers to the letting of some of the tribe’s scanty pasturage to strangers.


2. Wounding a man means a fine of 1500 grosh and 12 rams.
3. Whoever fines another without doing it through a General
Assembly and by common consent, will be fined 1000 grosh and
10 rams.
4. Whoever disputes with another or calls him names or aims his
rifle at him in the following places—Breg i Shpelles, Viri, and Krue i Ri
—will be fined 1000 grosh and 10 rams.
5. Whoever breaks down another’s hedge in order to make a patch
for himself must pay 150 grosh (3 rams) to the owner of the hedge.
6. Whoever murders anyone on the high road will be fined 3000 grosh
and 24 rams.
7. Whoever robs another’s house or sheepfold will be fined 500 grosh
and 5 rams.
8. Whoever dishonours a woman or an engaged girl will be fined
3000 grosh and 10 rams.
9. Whoever does not wish to engage elders and goes away saying
‘ May I never forgive you ’ will be fined 500 grosh and 5 rams.
10. Whoever lets his animals graze on another’s land will be fined
250 grosh and 3 rams.
n. A man who will not hear of fencing in his portion of land, going
halves in the fence with his neighbour, will be fined 250 grosh and
3 rams.
12. A man who does not meet his obligations at the term fixed will
be fined 23 grosh.
13. Whoever steals an ox, a cow or a horse in his own village will be
fined 500 grosh and 5 rams.
14. A man who does not respond to the village’s call to come to
a General Assembly or some other requirement of the village will be
fined 250 grosh.
15. A man who closes a gap which has always been in the hedge will
be fined 150 grosh.
16. The chiefs are to meet in General Assembly once a year, one
week after St John’s Day. Whoever does not conform to this decision
will be fined 500 grosh.
17. ‘ Pledge elders ’ are not to take more than 10 grosh as their fee for
a judgement, and commoners not more than 5 grosh.
18. Whoever murders his adversary after their feud has been com-
pounded by order of the government will be fined 12 purses and expelled
from the village and turned into a ghost.
19. A dog which enters a vineyard with a wooden collar on its neck
may not be killed. A dog which enters a vineyard or field without
a wooden collar may be killed.
20. Whoever brings a house-dog with him to church or to Shpelle
will be fined 50 grosh.


Whoever brings pigs or sheep to Shpelle will be fined 50 grosh.
Whoever washes clothes at Shpelle will be fined 50 grosh. 1
21. A man who leaves his sureties to pay his debt is to pay a fine of
225 grosh to his creditor and 150 grosh to the chiefs and 5 rams.
VI. Supplement dated 1894.
(From Father Gjecpov, Kaniin, pp. 124-5.)
1. Whoever takes a woman to live with him without marrying her or
runs off with a married woman or a girl shall pay 1000 grosh to the
Church, 500 grosh to the chiefs and 10 rams.
2. Whoever tears his face in mourning and lamentation for the dead,
shall pay 1000 grosh to the Church, 1000 grosh to the chiefs and 10 rams.
3. Whoever does not permit the chiefs and fine-collectors to carry
out a tribal law will be fined 500 grosh and 5 rams.
4. Whoever commits a murder during a truce or after the feud has
been compounded will be fined 6 purses and 10 rams.
5. Whoever fires a rifle in a house where there is a wedding shall,
whether he be a guest or the master of the house, pay 500 grosh and
5 rams.
The same fine shall be paid by whoever annoys another with abuse
at table whether at a dinner or a wedding.
6. Whoever acts contrary to these laws, whether he be chief, fine-
collector, or commoner, shall pay 3000 grosh.
Brahim Beg serxherde
Kasem Beg bylikbash
Dode Pren?i bajraktar
Zenel Shebani
Gjoke Doda
Keq Prela
Zef Gjeka
Prele Toma
Gjelosh Nika
Vukusa’ Leka
Brahim Vuksani
[ln front of each of these names there is a Turkish seal.]
VII. Solemn Pledge for Flock and Shepherd in Nikaj and Shale,
St Prende’s Day 1894.
(From Father Gjefov, Kanim, pp. 119-20.)
1. As regards roads it has been enacted as follows:
From* the fountain in Faqe to the crucifix in Brazhde the road is
1 (Note by Father Gje£ov; Shpelle is the place where Bajze and district take
water.)


solemnly pledged to safety for whoever goes to spend the night in Nikaj
or Shale. If any tribesman of Shale who goes along this road is killed
by a tribesman of Nikaj, the guest of all Shale is killed, from dawn of day
till the fall of night. If any tribesman of Nikaj who goes along this road
is killed by a tribesman of Shale, the guest of all Nikaj is killed, from the
dawn of day till fall of night.
Between the same points the road is safe for Shosh and Mertur and is
under the protection of Nikaj and Shale. If a tribesman of Shosh kills
a tribesman of Mertur he kills the guest of Shale; if a tribesman of
Mertur kills a tribesman of Shosh, he kills a guest of Nikaj.
Whoever resorts to violence on this road must make an oath with
twelve men taking the oath and twelve standing by. 1
2. A flock and its shepherd are not to be killed by anyone; their
safety is solemnly pledged and guaranteed. Any man who kills them
must pay 20 purses or be killed and have his life equated to theirs.
3. If the pledge of safety is broken and a tribesman of one tribe kills
during the period of pledge and guarantee and a tribesman of the other
tribe does not so kill, twenty-four men of the tribe that had a man killed
must take oath saying, ‘You killed me when guaranteed*.
4. The whole road to Curraj up to the Krue i Ftofet (Cold Spring) is
under a pledge of safety.
5. Mowers and reapers with scythe and sickle are under a pledge of
safety in both summer and winter pasturages.
Cutters of pine slivers and timber are under a perpetual pledge of
safety.
Shooters are under a pledge of safety from St Nicholas’s Day in
summer (May 9th) to St Nicholas’s Day in winter (December 6th).
A man irrigating during the night is under a pledge of safety.
6. A house with hearth and flour-bin and the keep of a house are not
under a pledge of safety.
Sheepfolds are under a pledge of safety.
7. If anyone goes out from the keep or the house in order to go to
the sheepfold which is under a pledge of safety he must say, ‘ Look, man,
we’re going to the animals (or the fold), which are under a pledge of
safety.’
8. As for women in Shkoder and Gjakove:
If any of them wants herself to run away or to behave badly for the
fun of it, good luck to her.
1 (Note by Father Gje9ov: It was the custom in Dukagjin to make half, not
all, of the jurors take an oath. If twenty-four jurors are ordered, twelve go and
lay their hand on the Gospel and the other twelve stand listening with folded
hands. In many mountain districts unless the principal person concerned
excuses someone, it is the custom of all the jurors to go and lay their hand on
the Gospel while repeating the words of the oath.)


If any man meddles with one by force he has meddled with a person
under a pledge of safety.
If any man dishonours a woman or ravishes her he has meddled with
a person under a pledge of safety.
The Gjklika family is not under a pledge of safety.
Ndue Lika’s family is under a pledge of safety for its flock and shepherd.
9. Whoever touches sheep belonging to Nikaj or Shale must pay
500 grosh or give a Martini rifle, the value of which is 500 grosh. He
must also return two animals for every one stolen and pay 500 grosh to
the owner of the stolen animals.
10. A detective is to receive 100 grosh for tracking down a sheep and
twenty for tracking down a cow or an ox.
11. If a Nikaj or a Shale man goes to a house to kill someone, he has
leave to do whatever the fingers of his hand or the muzzle of his rifle can
do. But chisels, wood and any form of iron are not to be used.
Whoever breaks this law, unless he is killed and buried, must pay
20 purses and until he pays them he must look out for his life. If he is
killed, the matter must be left at a head for a head.
12. Whoever plays false to this pledge treating it with contempt or
ignoring it must give an oath with 24 persons who must say they know
nothing, as arranged by the other tribes. If he cannot give such an oath
he must pay 20 purses like a man who kills another.
13. A borrower who owes money to someone must go to the head of
his ward. If he does not give this head satisfaction, he must go to the
Bajraktar. If he does not give the Bajraktar satisfaction he is without
protection. He may be robbed and killed until he enters the way of the
Bajraktar.
14. The roads from Shale and Nikaj to Shosh and Mertur are
guaranteed by Shale and Nikaj and if they are cut, 20 purses must be
paid.
15. The chapels ( koniqet) of Nikaj and Shale in which no candle is lit
to St John, St Nicolas and St Bastian (Sebastian), are under a pledge
of safety.
16. Complaints in Shkoder and Gjakove are annulled.
VIII. Pledge for Flocks and Shepherds in Nikaj and Curraj,
St John’s Day, 1895.
(From Father Gje<pov, Kaniln, p. 120.)
1. Any man who kills a shepherd will have his house burned down and
his land kept untilled for three years.
2. His neighbours will not have their houses burned down but must
pay five purses, 1000 grosh of it for the master of the feud and three
purses for the guarantors.


3. Nobody may help to bury a murderer till three years have passed
unless the master of the feud wishes. When somebody does help to bury
him five purses must be paid to the master of the feud, either in money
or in beasts, as may be arranged among themselves.
4. A murderer is never under a flock-and-shepherd guarantee until
the murder has been avenged or the feud composed.
5. A cutter of pine slivers and a reaper with sickle are under a pledge
of safety from the eve of St Anthony to the eve of Our Lady of Alshiqe.
6. A mower with scythe is under a pledge of safety.
7. A shooter is under a pledge of safety from the eve of St Anthony
to the eve of Our Lady of Alshiqe.
8. The Ndermaje—Livath i Math (Great Meadow) —Shale road and
the Koder Flak—Shale road are under a pledge of safety for flock and
shepherd.
9. Whoever steals small animals must pay 250 grosh and return two
for every one stolen.
Whoever steals a cow or ox must pay 500 grosh and return two for
every one stolen.
to. Whoever removes the tiles of a house must pay 500 grosh.
11. If a debtor does not meet his obligations he is to be accused before
the head of his ward. If he still does not meet his obligations, he has no
pledge of safety and may be robbed and killed until he enters the right
path.
Guarantors: 3 tribes.
IX. Resolutions Made at Kashnjet, Mirdite, on August 17th, 1904.
(From Father Gje9ov, Kantm, p. 128.)
We, the tribe of Diber, met for some business in General Assembly
at Kashnjet and we have examined the business legally as required by
God and the Canon of Mirdite.
1. Whoever murders one of his kin shall be expelled for fifteen years
from the tribe, his land shall be left untilled and he shall pay a fine of
100 rams and an ox and have his house burned.
2. Whoever allows a man who has murdered one of his own kin to
enter his house becomes as guilty as the murderer.
3. The kindred which does not take the lead against such culprits
commits a fault against the whole tribe.
[Here follow the names of the leaders, headed by the bajraktar.]
In whatever business the tribe may have these people will take the
lead of the whole tribe.
Witness:
Dom Ndue Melguzhi, Pepaj, parish priest of Kashnjet.


X. Decisions Taken on April 30th, 1905, by the Youth of Shale.
(From Father Gjegov, Kanim , pp. 126-7.)
1. As from to-day up to Ash Wednesday the percentage on loans at
interest is to be paid with 25 okes of grain. If this is not paid by Ash
Wednesday, a percentage of 30 okes is to be taken by force from the
debtor.
As interest 100 grosh or 100 okes of grain as the creditor wishes are to
be paid. Let him take 100 grosh if it suits him, or if he says, T’ll have
grain’, let them give him 100 okes of grain.
2. Grain is never to be given to anybody by a man of Shale unless it
is wanted for a funeral meal or it is desired to make a present of not more
than 20 okes.
3. Raki is never to be produced by a man of Shale at a funeral meal
except during the seven weeks of Lent.
4. No man of Shale is ever to give away more than 100 grosh either
outside or inside the tribe.
A godmother is not to present a red xhamadam (sleeveless jacket).
No woman is to go to a wedding in a party of five or more and they
are not to seek a woman outside the same house. 1
5. Whoever fires the first shot in the yard of a church or inside its
boundaries is to have his house burned and must pay 20 purses under
the guarantee of flock-cum-shepherd and the youth of Shale.
6. If a man disturbs a mass that is being said and if the priest,
crucifix in hand, says, ‘So-and-so has troubled me’, the offender will
have his house burned and must pay a fine of 2 oxen to the tribe.
7. Whoever touches Church property must pay a fine of 2 oxen to
the tribe.
8. Whoever molests the Church servant must pay a fine of 2 oxen to
the tribe.
9. If anyone borrows coffee and sugar from the priest for a funeral
meal and does not return them to him within four weeks, and if the priest
complains, he must pay a fine of one ox to the tribe.
10. Whoever steals an ewe, goat and cow from a man of Shale and
whoever does anything to his neighbour that disgraces him, shall have
his harvest burned, his fields plucked bare and his grain panniers
smashed. He will pay fines of one ox to the youth and 2 rams to the
government representative.
11. These laws, enacted by the youth of Shale together with the
1 The last clause of § 4 is given as in Mrs Hasluck’s MS., but there seems to
be some mistake, as the corresponding passage in the Italian version of Father
Gjefov’s Kantln runs:
Lo shalano non pud fare il compare piii di 5 volte, e non pud chiedere che si
leghino in comparto piu di 5 famiglie.


bajraktar, are perpetual like the law about fire 1 and other laws. Whoever
breaks this law must pay an ox to the tribe and 300 grosh and a ram to
the government’s representative, otherwise he will have his house burned.
The Youth of Shale
April 30th, 1905
XI. Laws Enacted by the Tribe of Kurbin on August 5-7, 1906.
(From Father Gjefov, Kaniin, p. 129.)
1. Whoever joins the government police shall have his house burned
and be excluded from funeral gatherings and hospitality.
2. A man who goes to complain to the Turkish government about
a Christian shall pay a fine of 1000 grosh.
3. A man who steals from his neighbour or breaks into his house
must, if he denies doing so, give his oath with 12 compurgators. If he
proves to be a robber, he must pay a fine of 1000 grosh, and return to the
owner of the house two for every article stolen.
4. If an ox is stolen and the accused denies the theft he must give
his oath with 6 compurgators. If on enquiry he proves a thief, he must
pay a fine of 500 grosh and return to the animal’s owner two oxen for
the one stolen.
This judgement holds also for a horse and a mule.
If a cow is stolen and the theft denied, the accused’s oath needs three
compurgators. If he proves a thief the penalty is returning two for one
to the owner and a fine of 250 grosh. So too for a donkey.
If a bell-goat or a bell-wether is stolen two for one to the owner and
a fine of three rams. If the theft is denied the oath must be given by the
accused and all the males in his house.
For every small animal two for one to the owner and a fine of two
rams. If the theft is denied the oath is with all the males in the accused’s
house.
5. Setting fire to a house 2 means a fine of 2500 grosh; to an animals’
fold, a haystack and a hedge, a fine of 1500 grosh and returning two for
one to the owner,
6. A man who does not come to a General Assembly when summoned
by the village elder will be fined one ram.
7. If word is sent to the elders to come to a General Assembly anyone
who does not come must pay a fine of five rams. If he has an excuse this
will be weighed by the other elders.
1 The Italian version already alluded to Codice di Lek Dukagjini ossia
Diritto Consuetudinario delle Montagne d’Albania, Tradotto dal P. Paolo Dodaj,
Roma, 1941) here reads il mugnaio, ‘the miller’ (cf. supra p. 263).
2 The Italian version reads La violazione {per furtd) del focolare domestico, and
taking fire from a neighbour’s hearth without permission is frequently taboo
among primitive peoples.


8. As for jurors, in every crime committed in Kurbin, a murder
excepted, the jurors must give their oath, saying, ‘That it has been
stolen from you, I don’t know’. 1
9. What an informant says is said with an oath of how it was in
mind. 2
10. If a man quarrels deliberately with another and without
informing the village elder, he will be fined 500 grosh.
If he informs the village elder and the latter asks for a pledge of good
behaviour from the one who is oppressing the other and this man refuses
to give it, he will be fined 500 grosh.
If the village elder cannot put things right he gives both men a month’s
grace and informs the other elders who shall settle the quarrel in accor-
dance with the local law.
11. Anyone who gives food or admittance to his house to a Christian
or a Mohammedan who is a policeman in the service of the Sultan shall
be fined 1500 grosh.
12. If a man breaks a pledge of security given and taken in the
presence of elders and commoners in Kurbin, the elders and commoners
are under an obligation to burn his house and to expel him from the
tribe.
Written in Delbinisht, Kurbin, at the spring of water under the
mulberry tree near the Archbishop’s palace on August sth, 6th and 7th,
1906.
Gjin Pjeter Mark Pervizi of Skuraj, Kurbin, senior elder among the
45 elders of the environs of Krue, in the name of the elders and
commoners.
Also present at this General Assembly and registrars of the aforesaid
laws:
Mgr. Nikolle Kasorri, witness.
Father Shtjefen K. Gjefov, Franciscan, witness.
XII. Letter from Shale dated May 12th, 1907.
(From Father Gjegov, Kaniin, p. 127.)
1. Greetings from the bajraktar of Shale, the notables and youth to
you, chiefs and youth of Theth. We beg to inform you that the under-
mentioned laws have been enacted by the tribe of Lower Shale. We let
you know, asking if you too will abide by these laws. We laid down the
1 The Italian version of clause 8 runs: II dorere del giurato per tutto cid che
accada nel territorio di Kurbini, salvo che nelle cause di uccisione, consiste nel
giuramento di non cognoscere il colpevole.
2 The Italian translator has La deposizione del delatore deve essere accom-
pagnata dal giuramento.


laws and gave our oath to abide by them and not to break them. The
laws are as follows:
2. Pecnikaj enacted a law that when a man is murdered the murderer’s
heir shall find the guarantors and has three days of guaranteed safety.
He has to go with the head of his ward to the victim’s representative who
shall give him a pledge of security for a week 1 and the murderer’s
‘brethren’ shall bring forward two guarantors. If the victim’s repre-
sentative objects, he shall be left to nominate one and the murderer’s
‘ brethren ’ shall nominate the other.
Whoever murders someone after the enacting of this law and the
swearing of this oath has his safety guaranteed for three days.
Whoever commits a murder murders on his own responsibility and
his own risk a person under the protection of Pecnikaj and will have
a feud and will never be forgiven for that murder and if anyone kills him
he does so by order of the whole tribe of Shale.
3. Although this law was laid down by Pecnikaj, Lotaj, Abat and
Bobi concur.
4. As representative for witnessing Theth’s oath all Shale has chosen
Tahir Deli, who was at this meeting of the General Assembly.
5. Whoever murders someone in Shale—apart from the actual
murderer —must not burn his house. 2
6. In case he burns his house 2 he must pay for a fine of four Martini
rifles to the Youth of Shale and must pay twice the value of the house
and the damage done to the owner of the house.
7. If, after the ‘ brethren ’ of the murderer have gone to their homes,
anyone goes to break into one of their houses either to burn it or to kill its
men, he must pay to its owner and the Youth 20 purses and a life for a life.
8. Mules are under the protection of the Youth and anyone who takes
them takes them subject to the appropriate penalty.
9. What is written in this letter is guaranteed by the bajraktar and the
Youth of Shale and the government’s representative.
10. From Preke Ndue Mashi to Ndue Ule Bobi whoever pilfers
a neighbour’s unmilled grain must pay a fine of one ox to the Youth of
the tribe and a ram to the government’s representative.
XIII. Covenant of Mat.
(From the Albanian Newspaper Tomori, November 7th, 1942.)
1. The people of Mat, comprising 5000 families, hereby pledges
itself either to denounce to the competent authorities or itself to arrest
1 The Italian version above referred to seems to omit this provision for a
week’s security from revenge.
2 According to the Italian translation the house of the murderer only shall be
burned, and if anyone else’s house is set on fire the murderer shall pay the
specified fines.


any political intriguers against the present regime who may be found
within its territory.
2. If, after the conclusion of this covenant, one man kills another
with or without just cause, his family shall be punished by the people
of Mat with banishment from Mat for three years and his property, both
movable and immovable, shall be confiscated and become state property.
3. The same penalties shall be imposed on any man who runs off
with a betrothed girl or a married woman.
4. When a domestic animal has been stolen and the thief cannot be
found, the village to which the tracks lead must either pay the animal’s
value or prove that the tracks lead away from its land.
5. Whoever aids criminals and gives them food and shelter renders
himself liable to the penalties detailed in clause 2. 1
6. Whoever carries arms of any description without declaring them
renders himself liable to the death penalty.
7. Whoever spreads false rumours about the policy of the State,
public security or public finances to the detriment of the present regime
and its policy shall be punished as laid down by the Lieutenant-
General’s decree No. 185. 2
8. The people’s representatives are to regulate and to examine all
complaints which may be made concerning land, irrigation, water, roads
and forests and if a commission succeeds in settling a dispute between
two persons, the decision of the commission shall be inviolable. If it is
contested, the contestants shall take the matter to the proper court.
9. Land in Mat is generally held without regular title-deeds and
ownership is proved by nothing but a written receipt ( senet ) and a meal
according to the local custom. It appears that lately the ownership of
properties bought 5, 10, 20 or 30 years ago with a receipt and a meal, as
witnesses also confirm, is often disregarded or if regarded, is a constant
source of disorders and murder. To put an end to such quarrelling the
local Commission must not meddle with exchange of land so made until
the Government has registered all the land according to the laws
concerned.
10. The chairman of the Commission shall be the local sub-prefect,
and its members the political secretary of the sub-prefecture, the
gendarmerie commander, the Fascist Albanian militia’s commander,
and the representatives of the people who assist in drawing up the
present covenant.
11. It is learned that Communists or, as some call them, Bolshevists,
have made their appearance among us. We must get rid of these persons,
18
HAM
1 (Author’s note. At this time the term ‘criminals’ included not only
transgressors of the law but also patriots resisting Italian rule.)
2 (Author’s note. No copy of this decree can be found.)


whether they be young or old, and must not let them exist within the
boundaries of the district of Mat. If there are any such persons, the
people of Mat, together with the local authorities, must destroy them,
not only with the rifle, but also with the fist. For no one can endure
a person who is a traitor and has neither character nor morals. The
entire people must disown such men and attack them with all its
strength until it destroys them root and branch.
12. By statutory law the Albanian and the Italian peoples are brothers
with the same mother and the same father. That is to say, the two peoples
have the same father who is the King Emperor and the King of both
Albania and Italy. So we shall destroy anyone who insults the King by
talking against him and we shall punish the fellow as specified in clause 2.
13. This Covenant which we have made at a plenary meeting of the
people of Mat is to remain valid until the end of the General War, and
anyone who breaks it is to be considered a traitor to his country and to
the regime, that is to say, a betrayer of his fatherland and the regime.
Sgd. Beqir Sitki Hasa
Chairman of Commission
Sub-Prefect of Mat.


INDEX
Abas Kamber, 230
Abas Kupi, 112
Abati kin, 149, 272
Abduction, 156, 157, 158, 208, 273
Accursed Alps, 3, 95
Adem Bajrami, 116
Adultery, 48, 198-9, 210, 212-15, 218,
231, 237, 265
Aghas, 125-6
Alessio. See Lesh
Alexius Kastrati, 128
Ali Do?i, 254
Alije family, 236, 254
Allaman, Mt, 2
Animals. See Cattle, Livestock
Arbitration, 100-2, 144
Arm, 114
Asllan, 164-5
Assembly, General, 11, 12, 122, 145,
175, 207-8, 264, 270; business of,
139, 154-63; constitution of, 148;
convention of, 120, 134-5, 137, 149;
place of, 149-50, 161; procedure at,
150-3
Assembly, Partial, 148-9, 156, 160,
162-3. See also under Village
‘Aunt’, definition of, 30
Austrian occupation, 9, 20, 259
Avdi Kola, 116
Baba Hysejn, 118
bajrak, 115-17
Bajraktars, 32, 46, 75, 93, 253, 263;
and General Assemblies, 120, 122,
134, 148, 150, 161, 268; and
Turkish government, 114, 120, 122,
123, 127-8; functions of, 102, 119-
21,124,136,139,158,159,165,197,
267, 270, 271-2; in non-tribal areas,
118, 121, 122, 123; limitations to
power of, 10,48, 121-2; misconduct
of, 122-3, 135. 161; murder of, 235;
number of, 116; origin of, 115-16;
precedence of, 123-6, 170, 239;
succession of, n6-xB, 125
Bajze, 263
Balim Sulltan, 168, 178, xBo, 185, 186
Balli family, 249
Banishment, temporary, 10, n, 145,
161, 273; in blood feud, 246, 247,
268. See also Expulsion
Bardhanjol, 236
Bashabun, 243
‘Bazaar-man’, 37, 41
Bedding, 16, 19, 21, 60-i, 173
Bedrooms, 18, 21, 27, 29
Beech zone, 4-5, in
Beehives, 60
Begolli family, 116 n.
Bektashisect, 31,118,178,179,180,183
Belsh, 247
Beqir Ali, 112
Berat, 180
Berishe, 14
Bershenj, 113
Beshkash, 147, 237
Beys (begs), 10, 118-19, 125
Bibe Doda, 158
Bicaj, 48, 99, 108, 231, 243. 260
Bishops, 136, 260
Bishtrik, Mt, 13
Blace, 243
Blacksmiths, 227
Blood feuds, 28, 160, 205; bodyguard,
252-4; burial, 230-1; causes, 44,47,
49, 75-6, 78, 80-2, 125, 133, 144,
145, 152, 158, 166, 190, 208, 214,
217; collective vengeance, 224-7;
exile, 242-4, 246; expiator, 235-8;
family vengeance, 219-24; fortified
dwellings, 251-2; identification of
murderer, 228; imprisonment, 243,
247-51, 259; incendiarism, 232-4,
272; loss of caste, 231-2,236; peace-
making, 220, 256-60; treatment of
corpse, 229-30; wounding, 241,
248,256. See also under Banishment,
Children, Expulsion, Women
Blood money, 93-4,125,229,231,242,
243-4; exacted by community,
158-9, 219, 259; exacted by family,
210, 211, 212, 214, 216, 218; for dog,
74, 75, 76, 78, 173; for elder, 133;
legitimacy of, 239-41; scale of, 239
Bobi kin, 149, 272
Boge, 3, 117
18-2


‘Boiling blood’, rule of, 224-5, 231
Bojdan, 243
Botush, 126
Boundaries, between fields, 95-6;
between houses, 22, 23; between
tribes, 99, 102-3 ; between villages,
97, 102-3; demarcation of, 58,
95- ; disputes over, 12, 98-102,121,
146, 155, 156, 167; fees for demarca-
tion, 97, 100, 101, 103; penalties for
moving, 99, 263; permanence of,
96- 102-3; rainfall effect on, 104-
5, 107; roads as, 22, 23, 84, 97, 107,
108
Boundary stones, 71, 95-8, 100-2,
103-4, 106-7, 108, 113, 190-1, 263
Boycott, See Ostracism
Breg i Matit, 88, 113, 114, 129, 179,
238, 240
Bribes, 12, 122, 123, 147, 170, 172
Bridal parties, 84, 86, 91
Bridegrooms’ huts, 20-1
Bride-price, 37, 44, 48, 63, 156, 213,
239, 260, 261
‘Brother’, definition of, 30
Brothers, living together, 27, 29, 56;
remarriage of, 67; separation of, 51-
72 (see also Separation)
Bucaj, 132
Buene, river, 6
Bujars, 32, 35
Bukanik, Mt, 5
Bulgars, 226, 230
Bulqize, 95, 112, 122, 178, 180, 242
Bunjaj, 124
Burgajet, 2
Burrel, 124
Qaje, 190
Cakale, 112
Cartridge, as symbol, 212-13, 217,
221, 225, 228, 229
Catholics, 14, 15, 17, 32-3, 48, 49, 65,
80, 117-18, 137; and Assemblies,
149.151. 152. 155; and murder, 213,
226, 229, 231, 258-9, 260; and oath-
taking, 98, 170, 176-85, 192, 193;
and theft, 203, 207, 209. See also
Priests
Cats, 16-17
Cattle, 4, 5-6, 58, 110—11, 248; as
fines, 49; family division of, 59;
stealing of, 37, 156, 158, 186, 195,
264, 267, 268, 269, 270, 273. See
also Livestock, Oxen
CenElezi, 21, 30, 43, 72, 112, 129, 140,
142, 190-1
Ceren, 185
Qermenike, 2,4, 42, Ix 2, 201;
Assemblies, 148, 150; bajraktars,
118, 121; blood feuds, 222, 223,
225, 228, 231, 239, 241, 242, 248,
249, 251, 252, 255, 256, 257, 259;
boundaries, 97, 102; dogs, 75, 78,
81; households, 28, 39, 50; oath-
taking, 167, 172, 176, 182, 185, 189,
190, 199; property, 55, 59, 63, 65;
roads, 83
Charcoal, as boundary mark, 96
Children, 20; care of, 27, 28, 30;
employment of, 26, 35; food of, 52;
illegitimate, 48; in blood feud, 2x2,
232-3, 236-7, 239, 247-8, 252, 259;
in oath-taking, 166, 185-7; theft
from, 205
Chimneys, 16, 17
Christ’s Thom, 3, 87, 103
Chums, 19, 60
‘ Circle after circle ’ rule in blood feud,
225-6
Climate, 4,7, 51, no
Clothes, 39, 42, 45
‘Cluster’ house, 18-19
Coastal plain, 6, 7
Cock, theft of, 208
Coffee, 29, 40; and oath-taking, 179;
and precedence, 41, 133; as fee,
139-40; as symbol, 60, 212, 232,
255. 257. 258, 259; utensils, 16, 17,
60
Communications, 4, 12
Communists, 272-3
Community sense, 11
Compurgators, 168-9, 175-6, 1 84-5,
188-90, 195, 196, 197; number of,
164-5, 167, 169, 170-1, 172-4, 186,
193, 200, 206, 266, 267, 270;
refusal to serve as, 171-2; selection
of, 169-71
‘Qota’s tableful’, 28
Curraj, 155, 158, 266
Dajt, Mt, 2, 3
Dalip Kaci, 127
Daughter of family, 30, 51, 63
Daughters-in-law, 27, 30, 218


Death penalty, 10, n, 120, 159-60,
162, 163, 205, 207-8
Debts, 37, 63, 158, 203, 265, 267, 268,
269
Dede Lleshi, 132
Deje, Mt, 2
deli, 115, j 2B
Deli Beg, 205
Deli Mete £uni, 115, 116
Demir Lleshi, 75
Dervish Ali, 112, 114
Devoll, river, 1
Diber, 1,2, 15, 21, 24, 30, 50, 52, 108,
112,137,139,148, 268; blood feuds,
220, 222, 224, 230, 232, 236, 238,
239, 252, 253, 254; dogs, 74-5. 78;
murder, 158, 214; oath-taking, 174,
175, 176, 178, 185, 190; property,
57, 59, 61, 68; theft, 202, 204
Distaff, 16, 27
Divorce, 209, 213, 215, 261
D©9i family, 78, 124, 254
Dogs, 22-3, i°S, 157, 204, 241; house
(‘chained’), 59, 73~7, 78, 80-1; pet,
73, 80, 81; sheep-, 73, 77-9, 80, 81-
2; shooting-, 73, 79-80, 81; killing
of, 75-6, 77-8, 79-80, 81, 82, 172-
3, 197, 264; mad, 82
Dragu, Mt, in, 113, 114
Drains, cutting of, 106-7
Drin, river, 6, 13, 149, 178
Drisht, 13-14, 163
Dukagjin, 13, 94, xx 6«., 184-5, 200,
249, 266 it.
Dukaj, 125
Dukat, 44
Dumre, 95, 247
Durham, Miss M. E., 14, 148, 151,
152, 154, 155, 160
Durres (Durazzo), 1,3, 6,7, 9, 112
Dush, 163
Elbasan, 23, 32, 49, 51, 66, 101, 102,
107, 145, 228
Elders, 75, 149, 156, 160, 198, 205,
241, 250, 264; ‘ancient’, 145-6;
brotherhood, 130-1, 132, 133, 134,
135, 165; canon, 132, 13s;
chief, 132; house, 10, 130; juror,
136-7, 139; kin, 72, 131, 132, 133,
134, *35; local, 135; murder, 137,
139; pledge, 140, 264; ‘soul’, 136;
specialist (‘mountain’, ‘regional’),
135-6, 146, 148, 151; tribal, 96, 99,
121, 126, 150; village, 23, 96, 97-8,
102, 109, 131-3, 134-S, 141. !SO,
165, 270, 271; ward, 136, 165, 267
And boundaries, 96, 99-101; and
oath-taking, 164, 166, 167, 169,
175-7, 185, 187, 188, 190, 192; and
property division, 67-71, 169, 174;
and roads, 84-90; as judges, 46-7,
76, 81, 104, 133-7, 139, 142-7, 169,
190, 196-7, 199-201, 206, 246; as
law-givers, 10, 12, 132, 133, 134,
262, 263; choice of, 141; Council of,
145; fees of, 68, 70, 123, 139-42,
144,145-6,147,161; misconduct of,
133, *35, 161; murder of, 133;
precedence of, n, 120, 132-6, 161
Emin, 223, 256
Esad Pashe Toptani, 154
Exile, 242-4, 246. See also Banishment
Expulsion, permanent, 10, 38, 39, 120,
122, 159, 161, 193, 207, 271; in
blood feud, 232-3, 244-7
Family. See Household
Fan tribe, 137, 160
Farm implements, 18, 59-60, 69
Father of family, maintenance of, 63-
6; succession to property of, 61-2,
65-6
Fatime Almetaj, 224
Feeding-stuffs, animal, 4-5, 26, 59,
iio-ii
Fejza, Sheikh, 178, 180 4
Fenars, 28, 248, 249
Fences, 22, 87, 88, 99, 103-5, 107-9,
264
Field-guards, 226
Field-paths, 83, 86, 89, 90-3, 97, 107-8
Fields, 86-7, 88, 89, 90; boundaries of,
95, 105, 107-9
Fier, 124
Fines, imposition of, 10, 11, 120, 122,
123, 135, 136, 144-5, 162, 163, 261,
262, 266, 271, 272; for boundary
offences, 99, 105,106,109, 263, 264;
for dog-killing, 76, 78, 80; for
murder, 211, 240, 241, 263, 264,
265, 267, 268; for perjury, 193; for
road-closing, 86; for sacrilege, 49,
159, 207, 269; for theft, 22, 47, x6o,
186, 206, 264, 267, 268, 269, 270;
for trespass, 92-3, 114; relating to


Fines ( cont .)
Assemblies, 149, 150, 16 1, 264, 270.
See also gjobtare
‘First families’, 124, 126
‘Flag-road’, 84
Floq, 223
Food, apportionment of, 52-4, 65, 67
Footpaths, 83-4, 89, 104, 105. See
also Field-paths
Foreigners, sacrosanctity of, 254
Forests, acquisition of, 99; ownership
of, 24. See also Trees
Fratricide, 10, 210-n, 213, 216, 218
Fregene, 158
Frok Gjeta, 251
Fulqet, 50; blood feuds, 250; bound-
aries, 109; houses, 22; oath-taking,
168, 169, 172, 173, 174. 184, 185,
189; pasturage, 112, 113; roads, 88;
theft, 202
Funeral, expenses, 64, 65, 66; pro-
cessions, 86, 91
Fushaj, 122
Fushe e Kuqe, 118
Gash tribe, 94, 102, 263
Gegs, 226
Gibb, Prof. H. A. R., 14
Gile Prentashi, 117
Gimaj, 116
Gjaj, 94
Gjakove, 94, 184, 266, 267
Gjalice, Mt, 2,5, 86
Gjan, 152
Gjefov, Father, 13, 14, 15. 34. 49. 85,
91, 94, 103, 132, 149, 15°, 155, 156,
158, 163, 168, 184-5, 186, 194, 200,
206, 235, 246, 261-71 passim
Gjejaj, 125
Gjelosh, 236-7
Gjet-Kolaj, 124
Gjete Coku family, 129
Gjin Bardhoku, 248
Gjinar, 118
Gj6 Vata, 124
gjobtarS (fine-collectors), n, 120, 136,
IS©
Gjoke Buca, 99
Gjomarkaj family, 117, 136, 137-8,
139, 146, 148, 158, 162, 170, 193
Gjon Macaj, 29
Gjon Markagjoni, 129
Gjon Nue, 39
Gjoni, 118
Gjugje, 48
Goats, 4, s, 6,26,28, no, 140; theft of,
172, 173.174.186,195, 203, 269,270
Godolesh, 32, 51, 56, 68, 69; blood
feuds, 228, 232, 239; boundaries,
97, 99, 106, 107; elders, 136; oath-
taking, 168, 169, 174, 178-9, 180,
181, 182, 185; property, 53, 66, 70,
71; roads, 83, 85; trespass, 92
Gojan, 132
Gomsiqe, 163, 187, 262
Greeks, 14, 32, 179, 226
Grimes, 236-7
Griqan, 97
Guests, 17, 29, 43-4. 132* 160,
163, 204, 209, 211, 225, 244, 251,
253-5; of the community, 44, 49,
93-4
Gun. See Rifle
Gurakuq, 118, 150
Gurre Gega, 150
Gurreze, 107, in, 112, 114, 129, 179
Hakik Meta, 124, 126, 129
Hamit Callaku, 50
haremlik, 21
Has, 13, 118
Hasan, Sheikh, 178, 180
Headmen. See under Village
Hedges, 86, 105-6, 264, 270
Highlanders, 20,113,202; blood feuds,
213, 230, 231, 255, 259; oath-taking,
179, 194
Highway robbery, 85, 207. See also
Theft
Homesh, 21
Horses, 5-6, 43, 59, 76, no; pack-,
83, 84-5, 89; theft of, 186, 207, 264,
270
Hospitality, 17, 21, 145, 204, 209, 2xl,
244, 251. See also Guests
Hot, ns, 116, 118
House, construction of, 16-21,57, xo8;
division of, 55-9, 61, 69; fortified,
21,251-2; furnishings of, 16, 19-21;
repair of, 56; situation of, 22-3;
types of, 18-19, 20, 21, 29
Housebreaking, 22, 47, 198, 203, 205,
207, 209
Household, communal, 27-31; break-
ing-up of, 51 ff.; family units in, 30;
headship of, 9-10 (see also Master,


Household ( cont.)
Mistress); number in, 27-8, 29, 52;
precedence in, 10, 39-41; utensils,
16, 52, 60, 69
Housekeeper, 27, 28, 29, 30, 41
Hoxha (sheikh), 48, 80, 170, 179-80,
207, 214-15, 226, 260
Husband-and-wife relationship, 25,
27, 30-1, 42, 43
Huts, bridegrooms’, 20-1
Hysejn Ramaj, 118
Hysejn Zavolina, 118
Hysen Age Jella, 242
Hysen Age Shteki, 48
Hysni Dema, 21
Ibrahim, Sheikh, 178, 180-1, 193
Ibrahim Gjo9i, 126-7
Imprisonment, 10; in blood feud, 243,
247-51, 259
Individual and Community, 11, 12
Informer. See Witness
Insect pests, 7-8, x 11
Irons, Peak of the, 3, 5
Irrigation, 5,23,120,156,162,167,169,
174, 187, 190, 194, 263; channels,
58, 84, 87, 97, 107, 108; periods, 58
Ishm, river, 6
Isuf Isaku, 29
Italian occupation, 1, 127, 154-5, 156,
274
Jesuits, influence of, 260
Jezerce, Mt, 3
‘John, St’, a, 259
Judgements, sequels to, 144-5
Judging, fees for, 139-44, i45“7
Juries, 10, 121, 133, 168-9, 172, 177,
186, 193, 194, 196, 271. See also
Compurgators
Ka9anik, 243
Ka9inar, 99
Kadije family, 2
Kakarriq lagoon, 6
Kaloshi family, 21, 204, 238, 248, 252,
254
Kander, 21
Kanun, the, 14,48,73,75,76, 223, 237
Kaptine, Mt, 2
kasnec. See Messenger
Kastrat, 139, 149, 225; boundaries, 99,
105,109, i2B;laws, 157,158,262,263
Kastriot, 15
katik, 123
kepucar. See Witness
Kin, the, 131; Assembly of, 149
Kir tribe, 94
Kitchen-crook, 16, 60
Kitchens, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 27, 28, 29,
55-6, 60
Knitting, 26, 247
Kodhel Dede, 250
Kol Mali, 230
Kolate, Mt, 3
Kole Ndue, Ix 6-17
Kole Prenga, 159
Kole Voci, 116
Koplik, 82, 225
Korab, Mt, 2
Korche, 241
Kosove, 81, 126, 140, 154, 231, 243,
244
Krasniqe [Krasniq], 3, 46, 118, 177;
bajraktars, 116, 124, 263; blood
feuds, 241, 257; boundaries, 102,
105; dogs, 77-8; murder, 216;
roads, 83, 88, 90, 94; theft, 207, 208
Kruje, 2,6, 7, 112, 118; blood feuds,
232, 240, 258; laws, 15, 147;
murder, 211; oath-taking, 178, 180
Kryezi tribe, 122
Kthelle, 94, 102, 203; bajraktars, 118,
121, 124, 125; blood feuds, 236,
251; litigation, 141, 147
kulle, 18, 94
Kulle Pashaj, 15
Kurbin, 65, 94, 146, 198, 209;
Assemblies, 148, 149; blood feuds,
222, 230, 231, 238, 257; dogs, 76,
77, 78; elders, 132, 134; laws, 156,
16 1, 270-1; oath-taking, 165, 169,
173, 174, 176, 177, 179, 180, 185,
186, 192
Kurvelesh, 96
Kushnen, 99, 137
Kuturman, 112-13
kuvend, 148, 249
Labinot, 56, 92, 196, 208; blood feuds,
221, 228, 239; boundaries, 97, 106;
oath-taking, 164-5, 169, 173-4,
175, 180, 182, 189
La?, 112, 165, 209
Lam Isaku, 122
Lan Kaloshi, 254


Land, definition of, 54; division of,
54-5,61,65,67,69,71; sale of, 90,121
Language, Albanian, 33
Law-giving, 10, 12-15, 156-62
Lef Nosi, 101
Lek Dukagjini, 12-15, 48, 125; his
meeting with Skanderbeg, 15, 148,
149.159
Lesh (Alessio), 1,6, 15, 106, 147, 149
Levies, raised from Lure, 127; raised
by Turks, 115
Like Gjegjaj, 132
Liman, 117
Lis, 2
Litigation, 139-47
Livestock, 4-5, 26, 28, in, 245;
division of, 59, 63, 67, 69, 71;
housing of, 18, no
Llesh Do9i, 126-7
Lleshaj, 254
Lope, Mt, 2
Losove, 115
Lotaj kin, 149, 272
Lots, drawing of, 68-70
Lume, 2, 52, 92, 115, 150; bajraktars,
116, 117, 118, 129; blood feuds, 221,
222, 225, 226, 228, 229, 232, 235,
236, 239, 241, 243, 253, 259, 260;
boundaries, 96, 99, 101, 107; dogs,
76, 77-8; elders, 131, 137, 139, 140,
145; murder, 213, 214, 215; oath-
taking, 167, 169, 172, 176, 178, 179,
180, 181, 182, 184, 190, 194;
property, 56, 59, 65, 69, 70; roads,
84, 86, 87; theft, 203, 205, 208;
witness, 198, 200
Lunik, 252
Lure, 2, 19, 75, 131, 215; bajraktars,
118, 124, 126-7, 129; blood feuds,
236, 246, 247, 250, 253; oath-taking,
176, 177, 180, 181, 183, 185, 187,
194; pasturage, 113-14
Lush Prela, 117
Lushan Sadrija, 29
Macedonia, 6
Mahmut, Sultan, 128
Maize, 4,5, 7,8, 53, 59, 66, no
Mai i Kuq, 112
Mai i Shenjt, Ix 2
Malesi e Madhe, 53, 66-7, 69, 70, 211;
bajraktars, 120, 121, 123; blood
feuds. 221-2, 225, 229, 235, 236,
239! boundaries, 99, 104-5, io 9!
elders, 136; laws, 156; oath-taking,
169, 173, 174, 175, 181, 185-6, 187,
189, 193, 194; theft, 203, 207;
witness, 197, 198, 200
Mamuras, in, 112
Mark Miri, 129
Market gardens, 92
Marriage, customs relating to, 31, 37,
42, 44, 48, 261
Martanesh, 1,2, 4, 10, 15, 114;
Assemblies, 150, 156; bajraktars,
118, 119; blood feuds, 222, 232, 237,
241, 246, 249, 257; boundaries, 95,
97, 101, 108, 109; dogs, 74, 76, 78,
81-2; elders, 135,136,140,141, 142;
litigation, 144, 146; murder, 213,
214; oath-taking, 168, 169, 173, 174,
178, 180, 182, 183, 185, 186, 193;
property, 53, 67, 68, 69; roads, 83,
88; servants, 43, 48; theft, 206;
witness, 196, 200, 201
Martinaj, 132
Master of the household, 72, 130, 134,
185-6, 219; and money, 36-8, 42;
choice of, 9-10, 34-5, 38, 40;
designate, 41; duties of, 29, 35, 36,
37. 131, 133, 149; powers of, 35-6,
38, 41; privileges of, 39-40, 131
Mat, 1,2, 10, 15, 24, 213; Assemblies,
148, 149, 154, 156; bajraktars, 118,
124; blood feuds, 221, 224, 228, 229,
231, 237, 250-1, 253-4, 259;
Covenant of, 157-8, 16 1, 272-4;
property, 61, 65, 66; theft, 203
Mat, river, 6, 20, 84, 86, 103, 106, 109,
112, 113
Matricide, 217
maze, 140
Meals, at oath-taking, 189; in peace-
making, 257-8; provision of as fee,
70, 71, 86, 140-1, 143, 145, 174;
serving of, 27-9
Melesine, 222
Mertur, 3, 94, 118, 155, 253-4, 263,
266, 267
Messengers, public, 93-4, 119, 120,
149, ISO
Mete Hoti, 127, 215
Mexhi, 128
mexhlis, 148, 152
Miftar Meta, 122
Miftar Selmani, 129, 253


Millers and milling, 26, 28, 58-9, 226-
7, 262-3
Milot, 15, 112, 165, 243, 248
Minors, provision for, 67
Mirash Nue, 39, 232
Mirdite, 5, 13, 19, 52, 5 8 , 94. ”7;
Assemblies, 148, 150, 153, 154, 162,
163; blood feuds, 224, 228, 229,
230, 233, 236, 239, 240, 241, 244,
245, 246, 247; boundaries, 95, 96,
97, 99, 102, 105, 106; dogs, 76, 82;
elders, 132, 13S. 136, 139,
Hereditary Captains of, 49, 112,
114, 129, 137-8, 159, 240, 253;
households, 41; laws, 158, 160-1,
268; litigation, 141, 142, 145, 146;
murder, 211,212, 216; oath-taking,
168, 169, 170, 174, 175, 176, 180,
185, 186, 189, 193; property, 23, 59,
61, 62, 63, 64, 67, 68, 69, 70; roads,
83,84; theft, 202,205,206,207,208,
209; witness, 196, 197, 198, 200, 201
Mistress of the household, 41-2, 72,
130-1. See also Housekeeper
Mnele, 187, 262
Money. See Purse, family; pekul ; and
under Master of the household
Montenegrins, 115-16, 118, 154, 203
Morag, 116
Moslems, 30,31,48,118,137,155,156,
203, 204, 212, 229, 236, 258;
Assemblies, 149, 154; houses, 21;
names, 32-3; oath-taking, 98, 164,
176-85, 192-3; priests, see Hoxha;
women, 17, 23, 56
Mothers, maintenance of, 66-7
Mothers-in-law, 26-7, 218
Mountain ranges, 1-3, 6-7
Muharrem, 117, 129, 231
Mune, 100
Munelle, Mt, 5
Murat Kaloshi, 21, 248, 252-3
Murat Xhabolli, 118
Murder, by blood relations, 210-11,
268; by relations by marriage, 212;
by servants, 46, 47-8; by women
relatives, 216-18; for adultery, 212-
15; for theft, 166; in boundary
disputes, 99, 101; in irrigation
disputes, 174; of child, 152; of
debtor, 158; of guest, 132, 160, 211,
225, 266; of messenger, 93-4; of
neighbour, 10, 38, 99, 167; of priest,
i6o, 226, 235, 244, 246; of servant,
44, 49; of shepherd, 93-4, 266, 267;
of traveller, 85, 93-4, 264, 266; of
woman relative, 167, 215-16, 240.
Also Ch. xxi-xxv passim
Murije, Mt, 114
Mus Ballgjini, 118, 121, 150
Myzeqe, 1,4, 6
Names, 32-3, 115
Namid Qallaku, 253
Nange, plain of, 84, 87, 98, 114, 131,
167, 178, 180
Ndermajne Pass, 3
‘Nephew’, definition of, 30
Nezhar, 250
Nezhde, Mt, 2, 5
Nezhe, 124
Nezir, 117
Ngureze, 84
‘Niece’, definition of, 30
Nikaj, 3, 94, 116, 117, 195, 244; pacts
made by, 155, 157, 158, 263, 265-7
Nik?, 117, 118
Nikolle Gjete Coka, 19
Oak zone, 3,4, 5,6, in
Oath-taking, 10, 47, 136-7, 143, 197,
201; false, 121, 171, 193, 194-5, 200
(see also Perjury); family, 166, 168,
174, 185-7; in criminal cases, 166,
167, 168, 169, 172, 173-4, 196; in
property disputes, 167, 168, 169,
172, 173, 174; invocation forms of,
98, 100, 175, 178-83, 186, 187, 191,
192-3, 199; occasions of, 76, 81-2,
86, 101, 164-7, 182, 186, 190, 243,
266, 267, 270; persons subject to,
165-6, 167, 170, 186,206; place and
sacred object, 176-83, 185, 191, 192,
195; procedure, 167-9, 176-7, 183-
7, 191; refusal of, 166, 188; social,
187; time of, 175-6, 185; verdict
after, 188-91, 195, 196; witnesses at,
185. See also Compurgators
‘Offset or compensation’, 54, 59, 60
Okol, 112
Okshtim, 95
Olives, S 3, 106
‘One for one’ rule in blood feud, 76,
159, 235, 248, 256
Onuzi, 78
Orenje, 251


Orosh, 2, 112, 137, 14S. iS9 - 60, 161
Orthodox Church, 17, 32, 33, 80, 98,
179, 180, 181, 182, 204, 207, 226,
229, 260
Ostracism, 11, 99, 122, 135, 145, 162,
209
Ownership of house and land, 22, 23,
24, 25, 6x, 246, 273. See also
Property, division of
Oxen, 36, 43, ss, 63, 65, 83, 89, 108;
as fine, 49, 76, 268; care of, 27, 28,
110; theft of, 164-5, 186, 195, 198,
199, 203, 264, 267
Pal Dede Hajo, 237
Pal Nue, 39
Parricide, 10, 211-12
Pasturage, community-owned, 23, 54,
112-13; privately owned, 54“5. 112;
state-owned, 111-12; laws governing
113; renting of, 113-14
Patrilineal nature of society, 25, 223
Peace-making. See under Blood feuds
Pec Peci, 116 n.
Pecnikaj kin, 116 n., 149, 272
Peje Pass, 3
pekul, 42-3
Peladhi, 195
Penalties for crimes, 10-11, 156-63.
See also Banishment, Death penalty,
Expulsion, Fines, Punishments
Per Dede Ndoj, 132
Percy, Maj.-Gen. Sir J., 202
Perjury, 47, 166, 168, 177, 179, 186,
187, 191-S, 199, 200
Perlat, 29,53,109, 113,208; bajraktars,
117, 121, 124, 125; elders, 131, 139;
oath-taking, 178, 180; property, 57,
61, 62, 63, 65, 68, 70; roads, 83, 84
Pervizi, 132
Pig, theft of, 208
Pine zone, 3, 5
Pjeter Gjoni, 144
plak , plaka, 130
Plan, 116
Play-pens, children’s, 20
Pledges, 100, 139, 140, 142-4, 146,
161, 271; guarantors of, 144, 145;
sale of, 144
Poultry, 59, 81
Preng Mirashi, 123
Prenge Kole Marku, 159
Prenk Bib Doda Pasha, Ix 2, 117
Preze, 205
Priests, 49, 80, 84, 136, 159, 207, 260,
269; and Assemblies, 151, 152-3;
and oath-taking, 170, 179-80, 182;
murder of, 160, 226, 235, 244, 246;
servants of, 48-9. See also Hoxha
Primogeniture, 10, 34
Prizren, 246; League of, 154
Property, division of, 52-71, 145. See
also Ownership
Puke, 6,7, 94
Pult, 236
Punishments within the household,
38, 41, 45-7
Purse, family, 36-7* 38, s°. St. 62, 63
Pushko Zefi, 237
Qazim, 164-5
Qesarake, 31
Radohine, Mt, 3
Rainfall, 6-7; and boundary-fixing,
104-5, 107
Raki, 40, S 3, 269
Ramiz Bey Toptan, 242
Re?, 204
Reka, 246
Retainers, 49-50; in blood feud, 253
Rice, 112
‘Riding the marches’, 98
Rifle, 37, 40, 60, 119, 194, 204, 222,
252,265; as fine, 267,272; as pledge,
122, 133, 140, 142, 145; a s symbol,
228, 229, 239; at Assembly, 151;
‘hanging up’, 220; theft of, 205,
208, 244; women and, 223, 224, 237
Rivers and streams, 5,6, 7
Road, first all-weather, 9
Roads, and boundaries, 22, 23, 84, 97,
107, 108; blind, 91-3; closing and
moving of, 86-9, 91; mountain, 83-
4; new, 88-91; ownership of, 85-6,
91-3; permanent, 86; precedence
on, 84-5; public high-, 83-91, 93-4;
‘village’, 83, 87-8; ‘ward’, 83;
width of, 83-4; winter, 86
Rodoni, Cape, 1
Rosh, Mt, 3
Rrshen, 117, 125
Ruling caste, 9-11
Sacrilege, 120, 121, 159-60, 193, 207,
226, 244, 269


Sadik Asllan, 32
Safety, public, 29-30
Sali £ota, 28
Sali Mena, 124
Salonica, 6
Saseri family, 258
Scutari. See Shkoder
Seduction, 46, 48, 267
Sefer Ahmeti, 116
selamlik, 21, 30
Selce, 118
Selim Lashku, 150
Selim Peshku, 136, 140, 142, 144, 146
Selite, 113-14
Selman Nus Cohu, 253
Seman, river, 6
Separation of brothers, reasons against
52; reasons for, 51-2; time of, 53;
property-division on, 52 ff., 103-4
Serbs, 115-16, 203
Servants, 28, 30, 43-9, 123
Shale, 2,3, s, 13, 14, 112. 211;
Assemblies, 149, 155; bajraktars,
116, 117, 123; blood feuds, 225,
236, 241, 253, 254; elders, 131, 140;
households, 29, 32, 39; laws, 94,
157, 158, 265-7, 269-70, 271-2;
oath-taking, 173, 178, 181, 187
Shebenik, Mt, 112
Sheep, s-6, 36,43, 55, 59, 63, 88, no-
-12, 114, 122, 126, 263; as fee, 70,
140; as fine, 49; care of, 28,61,77-9,
248,266,267-8 (see also Shepherds);
-stealing, 139, 156, 158, 172, 173,
174, 186, 195, 202, 203, 204, 206,
207, 208, 264, 269, 270; -worrying,
81-2
Sheep Track Pass, 3
Sheikh. See Hoxha
Shelcan, 32, 66, 118
Shemil, 150
Shen Ndue, 209
Shen Pal, 137
Shengjergj, 95, 253
Shenjon, 23 5, 337
Shepherds, 8, 23, 28, 35, 36, 55, 61,
203,205, 225; and sheep-dogs, 77-9;
murder of, 93-4, 266, 267
Sheshaj, 247
Shevket Verlaci, 49-50, 252, 253
Shijak, 112
Shijan, 51, 66, 67, 68, 69, 95, 97, 101
Shkavec, 117
Shkoder (Scutari), i, 2, 3,4, 6,7, 9, 13,
15, 123, 178; blood feuds, 228; laws,
260-1, 266-7
Shkrel, 2, 45, 48, 113, 123, 140, 178;
blood feuds, 221, 222, 231, 240, 241,
260; boundaries, 106, 107; roads,
84, 89, 91
Shkumbi, river, 1, 6
Shlak, 236
Shosh, 94, 152, 155, 266, 267
‘Shoulder, Take on the’, 98
Shpat, 5, 15, 20-1, 32, 95, 149; blood
feuds, 228, 229, 231, 232-3, 244,
245, 246, 249. 250, 256, 257; dogs,
77, 795 oath-taking, 179, 182;
precedence, io, 39, uB, 135
Shrubs, 3-4, no, in
shtepi, 17, 18
Shupal, 145
Simonaj, 124
Sitting-rooms, 17-18, 21, 27, 28, 29,
39, 55-6, 60, 64
Skanderbeg, 13-15, 137; laws of, 15,
48, 59, 222; his meeting with Lek,
15, 148, 149, XS9
Skoplje, 154, 243
Slavs, 226, 230
Sllove, 21, 73, 95
Sopot, 230, 231
Spa?, 137, 163
Spahi family, 231
spahis, 115, 128
Spas, 13
Spinning, 20, 26
Spiro Baduri, 32
Spiro Toli, 235
staraplak, 145
Stiles, 86
Stiqan, 92
Strangers, 22, 113, 114, 217, 263; and
Assemblies, 150-1; and dogs, 74-6,
78, 80, 90; entertainment of, 17 (see
also Hospitality); trespass by, 92,104
Sul Alija, 116
Sul Hupi, 242
Sulejman Pasha, 177-8, 180
Sulove, 192
‘Summer Day’, 98
Sunni sect, 176, 178, 183, 184
Surroj, 14, 97, 114, 178, 179, 180
Table manners, 29, 265
Tahir (Spiro) Baduri, 32


Tahir Deli, 272
‘Take on the shoulder’, to, 98
Terba?, 223
Temove, 193, 231
Tetovo, 246
Theft, 37, 99, 144, 156, 157, 237; after
murder, 229; aggravation of, 206-7;
detection of, 196, 199, 205-6; oath-
taking in relation to, 164-5, 1 66,
167, 170, 172, 173-4, 175, 184, 186,
194, 195, 200; precautions against,
204; punishment for, 10, 22, 46-
7, 85, 94, 158, 159-60, 200-1,
204, 205, 206-9, 215, 218, 264, 268,
269, 270; types of, 202-4. See also
under Cattle, Goats, Horses, Oxen,
Sheep
Theth, 51, 84, 135; Assemblies, 148,
149; blood feuds, 225; laws, 157,
271-2; oath-taking, 185, 194; pas-
turage, 112, 113, 114
‘Throwing’ for boundaries, 103
Tirana, 2,7, 9, 50, 128, 178, 180, 242,
252, 253
Tomori, 155, 158, 272
Tomorr, Mt, 180
Toplane tribe, 94
Toptan family, 112, 242
Tosks, 226
‘Tower’ house, 18-19, 94
Travellers, 17, 73, 78-9, 85-6, 91, 93~
4, 109, iSS, 254
Trees, damage to, 104,263; forest, 3-5,
Ixo, 111; fruit, 106; lopping of, 99,
106
Trepsanishti family, 250
Trespass, 92-3, 104, 109, 259
Trials, public, 10
Tribes, Assemblies of, 148 ff. (see also
Assembly, General); government of,
12; headship of, 10; punishment of,
162; religion of, 117-18; and
travellers, 93-4
‘Truce of Sheep and Shepherd’, 93-4
Tufts, 230
Turkish influence, 21, 33, 129, 230;
invasion, 13-14, 15; names, 32-3,
115, 148; rule, 6,9, 14, 101, 109,
1 x I—l 2, 118, 120, 122, 123, 126,
127, 128, 154-5, 156, 157, 202, 204-
5, 234, 259, 270
Ujmishte, 117
‘Uncle’, definition of, 30
Ure e Shtrejte, 163
Utensils, household, 16, 52, 60, 69
Valona (Vlone), 7
Vasil Tullumi, 32
Vate Marashi, 89, 123
Vehib Runa, 215
Vermosh, Mt, 113
Village, Assembly of, 11, 134, 148,
149, 156, 160, 162-3, 164, 172, 187,
196, 197, 206, 207; government of,
10, 12, 92 (see also under Elders);
headman, 9-10, 68, 109, 120, 121,
122, 123, 128-9, 135, 136, 164-5,
196, 197, 204, 206, 241; pastures,
in, 112; patriotism, 11; punish-
ment of, 161-2
Villages, boundaries between, 97, 102;
disputes between, 156; location of,
4
Vinjolle, 177, 18 1, 183
Vlad, 124
Vleshje, 214
Voivodes, 123, 135, 136, 139, 141, 150,
161, 237
Vukel, 117
Vuksan, 232
Vuksanaj, 13 1
Vuksani, 117
Wages, servants’, 44-8
Walls, 103-5, io B, 204, 251-2
Wards, 54, 72, 93, 99, 102, m. See
also under Elders
Washing up, 29, 30
Water, disputes about, 146; drinking-,
58; selling of, 23; supply, 157, 263.
See also Irrigation
Weddings, 41, 63, 84, 265, 269
Wheat, 4,7, S 3, m
William of Wied, Prince, 154
Windows, 16, 19, 21, 23, 56, 251
Wine, 53
Witness ( kepucar ), trial by, 196-201,
206
Wolves, 77, 80, 110
Women, position of, 25, 28, 29, 30-1,
33, 34, 35-6, 41-2, 43, 215, 238,
266-7; segregation of, 17, 23, 28;
and money, 42-3; and visits to rela-
tives, 31-2; in blood feuds, 43, 223-
4, 232-3, 236, 237-8, 239, 243, 247-


Women ( cont .)
8, 249,250, 251,252, 253, 256; theft
by, 42, 204, 208-9; theft from, 205
Work, men’s, 24, 25, 26, 28, 30, 31,
248, 249; women’s, 25-30, 41-2, 63,
248, 249. 250
Ymer Tullumi, 32, 35
Young Turks, 120-1
Yugoslavia, 1,3, 13, 81, 112, 115, 126,
244, 246
Zadrime, plain of, 1
ZcMjshe, 29, 117, 214-15, 241, 252
Zef Bardhoku, 117
Zef Do9i, 124, 126, 127-8
Zef Nika, 32
Zerqan, 67,69,112,118,206; litigation,
140, 142, 144; oath-taking, 166, 167,
168,169,170,172,173,175,177,181,
182, 184, 185, 189, 193; roads, 83,
92; witness, 196, 197, 198, 201
Zog, King, 1, 19, 126-9, 208, 241
Zogolli family, 2
Zogu family, 10


THE NORTH ALBANIAN MOUNTAINS AND TRIBES


349.496
HAS
HASLUCK *Margaret
The unwritten I*w1 *w in Albania
109635*55


