

THE LIBEL CASE,
ATTORNEY-GENERAL OF TASMANIA
V.
“ LAUNCESTON EXAMINER,”
TRIED IN THE SUPREME COURT, HOBART TOWN, ON
JANUARY 20 and 21, 1874,
Reprinted from the “ Launceston Examiner” of January 24 and 27,
with corrections and additions.




GIBLIN v. AIKENHEAD & ANR.
In publishing in its present form a report of this now somewhat
celebrated case, it may be explained that it is owing to the demand for
the papers in which it originally appeared having far exceeded the sup-
ply. Whether the action itself was not in the last degree frivolous
impartial readers will decide. Certainly it would have been con-
temptible but for the political significance with which it was invested.
That it was a deliberate attempt to intimidate or crush a journal that
dared honestly and fearlessly to oppose the present Government cannot
for one moment be doubted.
To secure a fair and accurate report of the trial, it was indispensable
a special reporter should be despatched to Hobart Town for the purpose.
As the trial occupied the greater part of two days the report necessarily
extended over two issues of the Launceston Examiner f and even then it
was necessary to condense some of the speeches and merely to name
authorities. In republishing the report as a pamphlet an opportunity is
given to supply the omitted portions, to quote in full most of the authori-
ties, and to correct the verbal and literal errors which escaped notice in
the hurry of preparing for the newspaper.
January 31, 1871.




io - -ns.
THE EIBEE CASE,
gdtettejj-toml wsus “ |pium«shm dxamitut.”
SUPEEME COUET, HOBAET TOWN.
Before the Hon. Mr. Justice Dobson (Puisne JudgeJ, and a
Jury of Seven,
FIRST DAY.—TUESDAY, JAN. 20, 1874.
The Court sat at 11 o’clock.
On the list of jurors being called over,
several were excused for reasons stated
Arthur Hopkins, who did not answer to
his name, was fined £l. A large number
of spectators were in court throughout
the day, and considerable interest ap-
peared to be felt in the proceedings.
Giblin v. Aikenhead and Anb.
For plaintiff, the Solicitor-General
(Mr R. P. Adams), and Mr Adye
Douglas (H. Dobson, attorney); for
defendants, the hon. Robert Byron Miller
(Ritchie and Parker, attorneys ; Allport
Roberts and Allport, agents).
Jury.—Messrs. Arthur Rumney (fore-
man), Thomas Stanfield, G. P. Kenny,
George Ibbott, Charles Gorringe, James
Robertson, and F. J. Foot.
Charles Toby and Wm, Waterhouse
were challenged by Mr Miller.
Mr Douglas opened the pleadings. The
declaration was as follows :
Tasmania (to wit). The Honorable William
Robert Giblin by Henry Dobson his Attorney
sues William Aikenhead and Henry Button who
have been summoned to answer the said W. R.
Giblin by virtue of a writ issued on the 30th
October 1873 for that before the publication of
the defamatory matter hereinafter set forth a
horse being the property of one James Griffin
was seized sold and disposed of as a distress for
the Railway Rate then payable by the said
James Griffin under the provisions of an Act of
the Parliament of Tasmania intituled “An
Act to make further temporary provision for
carrying on and working the Launceston and
Western Railway and for vesting the Railway
District ” (36 Viet. No. 20) And the defen-
dants being and as the printers and publishers
of a certain newspaper called the Launceston
Examiner printed and published at Launceston
in Tasmania falsely and maliciously printed and
published of the plaintiff in relation to his
office of Attorney-General in Tasmania of Her
Majesty the Queen which he then held and en-
joyed and of and concerning the said seizure
sale and disposal of the said horse in the said
newspaper a certain letter in the words follow-
ing (that is to say)
griffin’s horse.
To the Editor of the Examiner.
Sir, —Thanks to our paternal Government,
and the wisdom of the Attorney-General
(meaning the plaintiff), the seizure of Griffin’s
horse (meaning the said horse of the said Jas.
Griffin) for the unjust railway rate, bids fair to
become a red-letter day in the calendar. The
horse has been pretty well trotted about; but
when and where he is to rest is a question that
will take them some time to decide.
When the horse was sold at Deloraine, why
was he not handed over to the purchaser ? for
I have always understood that anything sold
under an execution of distress warrant was sold
without any reserve; if so, upon what
grounds does the Attorney-General (meaning
the plaintiff) presume to place a reserve upon it
on behalf of the Government? I see by the
reports of Parliament that the Attorney-
General (meaning the plaintiff) in answer to a
question put to him respecting the horse said it
was sold, but he did not know the name of the
purchaser (meaning thereby that the plaintiff
had made a statement to the House of Assembly
of the Parliament of Tasmania, which he then
kn ew to be false.) How does he (meaning the
plaintiff) reconcile that answer with the tele-
gram he sent to Mr Propsting (meaning one
James Propsting, the chief district constable of
and for the police district of Selby, in Tas-


mania to whom the custody of the said horse lin, is the Attorney-General of the colony,
alter its seizure as aforesaid had been entrusted aTir i fu A •. £ ,-r 1
by and on behalf of the Government of a™ the defendants are proprietors of the
Tasmania) ordering him to forward the horse to
Hobart Town as his (meaning the plaintiff’s)
friend the Treasurer (meaning thereby the
Colonial Treasurer of Tasmania) had purchased
him (meaning the said horse! for 71 10 s (mean-
ing thereby that the plaintiff then pretended to
the said James Propsting that the
said horse had been purchased by the said
Colonial Treasurer. ) When the order that he
(meaning the plaintiff) sent for payment of the
money is placed before him, psrhaps he will re-
pudiate that! (meaning thereby and falsely im-
puting to the plaintiff that he had sent an
order for the sum of 71 10 s for the purchase of
the said horse by the said Colonial Treasurer to
the said Jas. Propsting). What a precious
honest Government we are blessed with (mean-
ing and imputing thereby that the plaintiff as a
member of tho Government of Tasmania was
corrupt and dishonest). If the heads of depart-
ments are given to such conduct (thereby im-
puting corrupt and dishonest conduct to the
plaintiff), what can bo expected of subordinates ?
The Treasurer says the roll is preparing, and
the second instalment is to be enforced forth-
with ; perhaps he will find the pound of flesh
may not be parted with so easily and quietly as
he imagines. At all events I hope none of the
municipalities will allow any of their officers to
aisist him in his dirty work. As it is now in
the hands of the Government, let the Govern-
ment officials try and collect it. It will be a
fine opportunity for Inspector Forster to display
his abilities; he can collect his toadies, and
march to the scene of action, and strike terror
into the hearts of defaulters ; and fill the Trea-
sury chest. The taxpayer will also know that
these worthies are at last doing a little work for
the money he is robbed of for their support.
(Signed) “ Fair Plat.”
And the plaintiff claims £lOOO.
Defendants pleaded (1) the general
issue not guilty ; and (2) that the alleged
defamatory letter in the declaration set
forth was a fair and bona fide comment in
a public journal, upon the several matters
and premises therein contained and re-
ferred to, and upon the conduct of the
plaintiff in his public capacity as Attor-
ney-General of her Majesty the Queen in
the colony of Tasmania and in reference
thereto, and was printed and published
by the defendants in such “ public jour-
nal ”as and for such comment, and with-
out any malicious intent or motive what-
ever.
The parties joined issue.
The Solicitor-General stated the case,
and said—Gentlemen of the jury,—lt be-
comes my duty to open the case, and it
will be necessary in doing so to make a
very few remarks, because the facts are
of a very simple kind indeed. You have
heard the declaration read and the pleas,
and you kno# that the plaintiff, Mr Gib-
Launceston Examiner newspaper, which
has distinguished itself for some time past
in its opposition to the present Govern-
ment, and Mr Giblin as one of its mem-
bers. lam quite sure in Hobart
Town a jury has as much consideration
for the fair and impartial decision of a
case as a Jury in Launceston would have,
although I am aware the defendants
profess to be of a different opinion, but
X am at a loss to conceive why it should
be supposed your minds should be
prejudiced against the people of the
N orth—
The Judge—l don’t know,Mr Solicitor,
that it is material to enter on those
points ; is evidence to be given of change
of venue 1 1 think you should confine your-
self to a statement of the facts in your
opening.
The Solicitor-General—l think, your
Honor, I am justified in saying the de-
fendants will receive all consideration at
the hands of a Hobart Town jury. To
proceed with the facts, however, I will
state that it is part of the law of the land
that a rate should be collected in the
Launceston and Western Railway Dis-
trict for 1873. During the collection of
the first moiety of that rate a good deal of
resistance was shown,and one person more
obstinate than the rest, refused to pay
his rate ; and he was treated as all the
others would be treated ; an information
was laid against him, and the magistrates
made an order for payment. In default
of payment an execution was issued, and
a seizure was made of a horse ; that
horse is now known as Griffin’s horse (a
laugh). The horse was put up for sale at
Deloraine, but it was not sold there, and
fromDeloraineit was removed to Launces-
ton. There, the horse was not sold,though
it was subsequently disposed of. I refer
to it to show what is the nature of the
charge. After the horse had been put
up for sale, the Attorney-General was
interrogated in the House of Assembly, or
there was some debate on the subject
there, during which reference was made
to Griffin’s horse, and from what was said
there the libel first commences. I will read
to you shortly the letter—“ Thanks to our
paternal Government, and the wisdom of
the Attorney. General, the seizure of
Griffin’s horse for the unjust railway rate
bids fair to become a red-letter day in the
calendar. The horse has been pretty
well trotted about ; but when and
where he is to rest is a
2


question that will take them some time to abilities ;he can collect his toadies, and
decide. When the horse was sold at march to the scene of action, and strike
Deloraine why was he not handed over to
the purchaser ? for I have always under-
stood that anything sold under an execu-
tion of distress warrant was sold without
any reserve.” We are not here to give
the law upon that question ; it is sufficient
for us to understand their views. “If so,
upon what grounds does the Attorney-
General presume to place a reserve upon
it on behalf of the Government ? I see
by the reports of Parliament that the
Attorney-General, in answer to a question
put to him respecting the horse, said it
was sold, but he did not know the name
of the purchaser.” I have searched the
papers in vain for this ; I have searched
the Cornwall Chronicle and Examiner, and
can’t find any such report.
Mr Miller—lt is in the Cornioall Chro-
nicle !
Solicitor-General—l am at a loss to find
where the Attorney-General said the
horse was sold, but he did not know the
name of the purchaser. “ How does he
reconcile that answer with the telegram
he sent to Mr Propsting,”—of course
that’s a direct imputation of falsehood,
but it is more serious when it is hurled
against a person in the position of Mr
Giblin. “How does he reconcile that
answer with the telegram he sent to
Mr Propsting, ordering him to for-
ward the horse to Hobart Town,
as his friend the Treasurer had pur-
chased him for £7 10s. When the
order that he sent for payment
of the money is placed before him, per-
haps he will repudiate that.” There is
another allegation, that Mr Giblin is a
repudiator, a serious charge to make
against any person. “ What a precious
honest Government we are blessed with.
If the heads of departments are given to
such conduct, what can be expected from
subordinates 1” Mr Giblin is head of a
department, and when he puts it in that
way it is an imputation that Mr Giblin is
a dishonest man. “ The Treasurer says
the roll is preparing and the second in-
stalment is to be enforced forthwith ; per-
haps he will find the pound of flesh may
not be parted with so easily and quietly
as he imagines. A.t all events I hope
none of the municipalities will allow any
of their officers to assist him in his dirty
work. As it is now in the hands of the
Government let the Government officials
ry and collect it. It will be a fine oppor-
tunity for Inspector Forster to display his
terror into the hearts of defaulters, and
fill the Treasury chest. The taxpayer
will also know that these worthies are at
last doing a little work for the money he
is robbed of for their support. ” I
am sure such writing as that
is in execrable taste, but it is
not for execrable taste that the
defendants are brought into Court; it is
for the false allegations made against Mr
Giblin. To the declaration the defen-
dants have pleaded first not guilty, and
then a second plea which they might
have omitted, for it is included in the
first : they say that “the alleged defama-
tory letter in the declaration set forth
was a fair and bona fide comment in a
public journal upon the several matters
and premises therein contained and re-
ferred to, and upon the conduct of the
plaintiff in his public capacity as Attor-
ney-General of her Majesty the Queen in
the colony of Tasmania, and in reference
thereto, and was printed and published
by the defendants in such public
journal as and for such comment
and without any malicious intent
or motive whatever.” Gentlemen, you
will be called on to say if it is a fair and
bona fide comment, and if it be without
any malicious intent or motive whatever.
I have come to a very different conclu-
sion, and I have found it impossible to
conclude that there was no malicious in-
tent or motive whatever. If you take up
an Examiner, either before or since the
libel, you will find injurious articles. In
the same paper as that in which the libel
is contained is an allegation respecting
huckstering, and that Ministers of the
Crown should be prohibited from becom-
ing purchasers of goods distrained upon
for rates. Then I take the Launceston
Examiner of the 7th October —“As an-
nounced in our last issue, the horse of
Mr J. Griffin, of Deloraine, seized by the
Government owing to default in the pay-
ment of the Western Railway rate by Mr
Griffin, was not sold, the highest bid
being a shilling. On Saturday the animal
was offered for sale in Messrs. Bell and
Westbrook’s yards. It had become gene-
rally known that the horse would be put
up, and there was a good muster in con-
sequence of lovers of the sensational.
Two or three horses having been disposed
of, the innocent cause of the excitement
was brought before the auctioneer, amid
frantic gesticulations and shouts and yells
3


of “ the railway horse and had not the of forbearance is to be made with respect
owner, Mr Griffin, requested the assem-
bly to cool themselves, in all probability
some damage would have been done by
the affrighted brute. Before the sale
commenced, Mr Griffin protested against
the sale, on the ground that he had
bought the horse the previous day, hav-
ing made the highest bid—that of a shil-
ling.”—l don’t intend to go through the
article.
Mr Miller—Perhaps you had better, as
the Examiner goes on to say it does not
approve of it.
The Solicitor-General—Well,! will read
it;—“The sale then proceeded ; the first
bid was 1 Deloraine price.’ Auctioneer ;
c What’s that V Bidder ; ‘ A shilling. ’
The next bid was ‘ Another shilling ’ ;
the next bid a penny. Some individual
in the back in a tremulous voice, too low
for the auctioneer to catch, bid a pound.
An immediate ‘ boo-hoo,’ a shower of ex-
pletives, and other expressions of indigna-
tion was the result, which caused the of-
fender meekly to explain that he didn’t
intend to buy the horse—he knew there
was a larger reserve than £1 on the horse,
and that he would not be sold for that.
Two men then appeared bearing a coffin on
their shoulders, and placed it immediately
in front of the auctioneer’s rostrum, amid
shouts and general confusion. The horse
was then run up to £4 or £5, but was
withdrawn, the bids it being supposed
were not genuine, as no one could be seen
bidding, and the animal was taken from
the yard, the crowd hurrahing and cheer-
ing lustily. The coffin was left in the
yard, the words ‘ For the Collector of the
Railway Rate” being chalked upon it.
Yesterday the horse was delivered to Mr
Propsting by order of the Government,
and it was generally reported about town
last evening that the Attorney-General had
bought the historical horse for £7
10s.” Well, there’s another article
on the 18th of October (a com-
munication by “ Boz” ): “Mr
Treasurer Fysh having got the House
to set its foot down on his proposal of a
generous finality in respect of the Laun-
ceston and Western Railway Vesting and
Maintenance Bill, that bill is apparently
deemed to be law ; indeed, in anticipa-
tion of this joyous consummation, pro-
clamations are ready, circulars prepared
for immediate issue calling on the district
to pay the rate. Nay, more—although
it is known that many persons will be un-
able to pay until next harvest, no promise
to these individuals. We predict, how-
ever, that Mr Fysh’s calculations will be
considerably upset by results. He will
not get more than seventy per cent, of
the second moiety for this year, and the
attempt to collect the two £lo,ooo’s will
be utterly futile. Mr Lewis may talk
nonsense ; Dr. Butler may be unable to
shut his eye to a fact; Mr Young may
maudle ; Mr Swan do Bismarck ; the
Minister of Lands be practical; and the
Attorney-General be pert and gassy as
usual, but the rate is doomed.” I don’t
want to read more.
Mr Miller—Read on.
Solicitor-General —“ They would very
soon see whether the law was master in
this community, or whether two or three
misguided individuals were masters : no
need to be defiant, Mr Fysh. The law
will of course be master. To it there will
be no active resistance, but there will be
lots of Griffin’s horses, and it will not be
found by any means a good thing to re-
lease seizures from bailiffs at £7 10s, and
resell at £6 (or 7 s 6d less) to Mr I-forget-
his-name, as announced by the gentle-
man who delights in the ‘bald and vague. ’
But the learned member may have re-
ceived mis-information. Would it sur-
prise him to be told that within the last
twelve hours the mare was comfortably
grazing within a mile or so of St. Leonards
whilst the saddle and bridle were quietly
pegged at the residence of Mr District
Constable Propsting, to whom by supreme
command the moke and trappings were
handed over by Bailiff Williams?
However, Mersrs Barracouta & Co., as
distraint agents, may yet get pretty well
out of this spec, inasmuch as three or
four thousand pennies are said to have
been subscribed in the district, and if the
present owners will be content with a
reasonable profit the lot will be bought
to be handed back to Mr Griffin. But
don’t let this success induce over specu-
lation, Mangles and second-hand tooth
brushes may not find a ready sale (a
laugh). Tell us, Mr Fysh, was not the
counting-house more rosy than the port-
folio ? Would it not be very nasty if some
member, ‘ whose ignorance is so astounding
as to be almost sublime,’ were to move for
the production of all correspondence
including telegrams —on the sub-
ject, say between members of the
Cabinet, the Collectors, Bailiffs,
and District Constables ? It’s a shocking
small affair.” What was anticipated has
4


come to pass, for my learned friend is Under these circumstances it is for you to
prepared to produce the documents. ma ke good the grave charges you have so delibe-
After this Mr Henry Dobson, Mr Giblin’s made ; and to give you the opportunity
or rim nor a. » hotnvo a mrv T mil erf- -i--. "U
golicitor, wrote to the defendants ; you
will gather all from an article in the
Examiner of Nov. 4th ;
AN ATTEMPT TO GAG THE PRESS.
We publish the following correspondence for
which we had not space in our last issue :
Hobart Town, 24th October, 1873.
Gentlemen, —I have been consulted by the
Hon. W. E. Giblin, with reference to the libel-
lous statements in the letter headed “ Griffin’s
Horse,” and signed “ Fair Play,” printed in your
issue of the 21st inst.
A moment’s consideration would have si own
you that the statements referred to were ut-
terly false, and I have to request that you will
retract them and make a full apology to my
client. Your apology must be approved of by
myself and be publisned at your expense in a
Hobart Town and Launceston newspaper.
If you will not comply with my request be kind
enough to furnish me with the name of your
solicitor by return post. —Yours faithfully,
Henry Dobson.
Wm. Aikenhead and Hy. Button, Esqs.,
Proprietors of the Launceston Examiner.
Examiner Office, Launceston,
October 25th, 1873.
Dear Sir,—We are in receipt of your note of
yesterday’s date in reference to a letter signed
“ Fair Play” that appeared in the Examiner of
21st inst.
In reply we beg to assure you that we would
not designedly publish what was untrue ; and
that when it is shown that we have been led
into error, it will be our pleasure, no less than
our duty, to make what x-eparation is within our
power. ' Will you, therefore, be good enough to
inform us what are the statements in the letter
referred to of which complaint is made, and in
what respect they are untrue. —We are, dear
Sir, yoars truly,
Aikenhead & Button.
H. Dobson, Esq., Hobart Town.
Hobart Town, 28th October, 1873.
Gentlemen, —I am this day in receipt of your
letter of the 25th instant, and notwithstanding
the seeming candor of its tone, cannot help feel-
ing that you do not appear to appreciate the
position of the matter.
You have for some time past given cur-rency
to statements imputing that my client had
abused Iris position as a Minister of the Crown
to procure, either for himself or a colleague,
some private profit by purchasing and re-vending
an article seized under a distress for Eailway
Bate. This accusation was denied by my client
publicly in the Hmise of Assembly; yet, at a
subsequent period, you being aware of such de-
nial, deliberately publish a letter which re-
affirms the truthfulness of the original accusa-
tion, and professes the ability of the to
show from actual documentary evidence,bearing
my client’s signature, that Mr Giblin has been
guilty of falsehood and dishonesty.
rately made ; and to give you the opportunity
of doing so before a jury, I must request to be
furnished by return of post, with the name of
your solicitor ; otherwise, I shall have no alter-
native but to cause personal service of a writ to
be effected. —I am, gentlemen, your obedient
servant,
Henry Dobson.
W. Aikenhead and H. Button, Esqs.,
Proprietors of the Launceston Examiner.
Examiner Office, Launceston,
October 29, 1873.
Dear Sir, —-We are in receipt of your letter of
yesterday’s date, and, in reply, would respect-
fully ask if there is not some misapprehension
on the part of Mr Giblin, as we cannot discover
that we have “given currency to statements
imputing that your client had abused his posi-
tion as a Minister of the Crown to procure,
either for himself or a colleague, some private
profit by purchasing and re-vending an article
seized under a distress for railway rate. ”
We can only repeat that if we have inadver-
tently done Sir Giblin a wrong in any way, we
shall be very glad to make reparation if an op-
portunity is afforded, which, from the vague
character of the complaints, has not yet been
the case ; otherwise, we shall comply with your
request to be furnished with the names of our
solicitors.—We are, dear Sir, yours truly,
Aikenhead & Button.
H. Dobson, Esq., Hobart Town.
[To this letter no reply was vouchsafed, but on
Friday Mr Dobson’s Launceston agents, having
ascertained the names of our solicitors, served
them with a summons.]
We have never before met with such a bare-
faced piece of bounce. It is plain, as they say
in Hobart Town, that Mr Giblin is too big for
his boots, and we shall be happy to commit our
case to a jury, and allow the Attorney-General
the opportunity of riding Griffin’s horse another
stage.
With all this before you, we are asked,
and you are asked to believe that the
letter was a fair and hona fide comment in
a public journal upon the conduct of the
plaintiff, and that the same was printed
and published by the defendants in such
journal as and for such comment, and
without any malicious intent or motive
whatever. I shall ask you to decide that
point. It is for the defendants to make
out their case, if necessary ; Mr Giblin is
here, and will get into the box, and my
learned friend Mr Miller will do as he is
disposed. Mr Giblin will have no hesita-
tion in getting into the box and giving
his evidence. lam told there is another
newspaper article, in fact there are so
many that I am apt to overlook them—
this is one about the Attorney-General,
November 25th. lam not going to read
it through, I take it up here :— ‘ ( If the
5


intentional £ vagueness and baldness’ of outcry is raised at its indefiniteness—its
the Giblin contract was conceived with an
eye to that kind of parliamentary
manoeuvring which is better suited than
bill-drafting to the Attorney’s capacity,
or prudent finance, to that either of Mr
Chapman or Mr Fysh, nothing could have
been better. As long as district can be
pitted against district, North and South
kept in a state of mutual irritation, the
public divided between modes of taxation,
and room left for a Loans Bill at
the last moment to tide over immediate
difficulties with, so long will an essenti-
ally Chapman administration reign. The
author has nothing to say for himself, but
to affect that for some profound reason,
too profound for the vulgar to ask about,
he made it so on purpose. He was not
outwitted, he was not negligent, he was
not indolent —not he ! That was discredi-
table. He was vague on purpose ?” There
is a little more, but as it refers to myself,
and I am not sure whether it is compli-
mentary or otherwise, I shall not read it
(a laugh). lam told I should introduce
some of this and therefore I proceed :
“ What does the Solicitor-General do ?
We have imagined that the preparation of
chance will also be prolonged of Mr Attor- contracts between the Government and
ney slipping out of the mess, and taking various contractors belonged to his de-
the reward of eminent legal talent, by partment !If not, they certainly should,
promotion to the Bench, bequeathing his
Main Line Contract as a puzzle or a hint
to do likewise to his successor ! But, has
the colony resigned itself to be Attorney-
General ridden ? Will it reap no lesson
in future ? Is it satisfied that affairs in
which hundreds of may be at
stake, shall be left to windbags ?”—My
learned friend smiles, and writing of this
kind any man can afford to over-look ;
but it’s a different thing to being charged
with falsehood and dishonesty—“Or shall
it not resort to men of well-trained busi-
ness habits, of experience, circumspection,
and professional ability ? Windbags, like
reptiles of different genera and species,
may be necessary to some purpose or
other,” —my learned friend is compared
to a reptile—“ they may be an inseparable
incident of a deliberative Assembly ; but
let them be confined to their proper sphere.
Let them gabble there.” We didn’t
know before that a reptile gabbles (a laugh)
“ Let them gabble there. They can be
put down without much trouble when
they exceed the bounds of patience. Their
pert flippancy soon becomes distasteful.
The trick of speech which astonishes the
select auditory in a Police or Criminal
Court, or at an election meeting, becomes
flat on accustomed ears. Sound sense and
solid information carry the day in the
long run. But while talk, and huge as-
surance continue, as they will, to have a
great sway in determining who the gover-
nors of the land shall be, it seems to be
plain that provision should be made for
the real business of the country being en-
trusted to different hands from the talky-
talky tribe. Here is Tasmania just now
saddled with a contract for interest on
£650,000, likely to prove a million ; and
when this contract is tested and public
nor do we consider that he would be much
tasked by the work.” That is a matter of
opinion (a laugh). “We are at a loss,
indeed, to conceive what professional work
there is for two law officers, and the sta-
tistics and Acts of Parliament passed in
recent sessions do not help us to solve
that question. But what is more impor-
tant to observe is that from a permanent
law officer the colony might expect to get
careful, skilful, and trustworthy work in
contracts ” —I take it for granted that is
a compliment to me (a laugh) “ which
is quite hopeless from any of those 1 acci-
dents ’ that get hoisted into the post of
Attorney-General for their gasiness, and
their unscrupulousness to ‘ go in ’ for
the last new thing on the poli-
tical board.” That’s a direct re-
ference to my learned friend here. “Re-
sponsible government is dear enough
already, and it may be too much that
Ministers should be relieved of any of
their duties ; but this will be cheaper
than ‘ vague, bald’ agreements—about
the intention of which the least
said, perhaps, the better.” Now,
gentlemen, of course having stated
the facts to you, it might possibly be a
question with some of us whether one
should take any notice ; it may be paying a
poor compliment to Aikenhead & Button,
but many might hesitate and say, “Oh,
it’s only a newspaper, take no notice of
what’s in a newspaper” (a laugh). It
would be paying a very bad compliment
to Messrs Aikenhead and Button if no
notice were taken of it at all. It is not
the duty of Mr Giblin to allow news-
papers to say what they like, and to take
no notice of it; it is not right for a
Minister of the Crown to allow himself
to be assailed as Mr Giblin has been in
6


the Launceston Examiner without bring-
ing it before a" jury. Gentlemen, I will
read a short passage from an admirable
judgment of Chief Justice Oockburn in
the case of Campbell v. Spottisxvoode, 'an
action against the Saturday Review :
“It has been said in argument that it is
for the interest of society that a man’s
public conduct shall be criticised without
any limit, except that which it is ad-
mitted on all hands must be imposed,
namely, that the writer must only write
according to what he thinks just and true.
But it seems to me that the public at
large have an equal interest in the main-
tenance of public character, without
which public affairs could never be con-
ducted with a view to the welfare and the
best interests of our country ; and I
think that we ought not to sanction at-
tacks upon public men which, if allowed,
would be destructive of their character
and honor, unless such attacks are well
founded.” Gentlemen, no one admits
more freely than Ido the right of the
newspapers to comment on public men,
but such comments must be within
bounds ; and no one could have read the
judgment to which I have referred with-
out being able to subscribe to the opinion.
It is for the defendants to prove that Mr
Giblfn has been guilty of a want of truth-
fulness, and that he is one of those men
who are dishonest. I shall call two or
three persons, although I feel it is almost
supererogatory to do so. You, gentle-
men, can read English, and it is for you
to say whether the libel does not bear the
imputations we say that it does.
The learned gentleman said the news-
papers were admitted.
Mr Miller —Not the last one.
The Solicitor-General then put in the
Launceston Examiner of the 21st October
(containing the alleged libel), 7th and 18th
October, and Nov. 4th and 25th.
Rev. George Clarke, called and exam-
ined by Mr Douglas—l am a minister of
the Congregational Church, at Hobart
Town.
Have you read the article in the Laun-
ceston Examiner signed “Fairplay?”—l
have.
What is your opinion of the article 1
Will you carefully look through that part
of the letter—“if so, upon what grounds
does the Attorney-General presume to
place a reserve upon it on behalf of the
Government 1” To whom do the words
“Attorney-General” refer?
The Judge said that was quite unneces-
sary, as they could take knowledge that
the plaintiff was Attorney-General.
Mr Douglas—Will you turn to that
part—“ 1 see by the reports of Parlia-
ment that the Attorney-General, in an-
swer to a question put to him respecting
the horse, said it was sold, but he did
not know the name of the purchaser.
How does he reconcile that answer with
the telegram he sent to Mr Propsting, or-
dering him to forward the horse to Ho-
bart Town, as his friend the Treasurer
had purchased him for £7 10s ?” What
do you think of that ?
Witness—You want to know what con-
struction 1 put on that sentence ?
Yes.
Witness—lt says that Mr Giblin ap-
peared by the reports in Parliament to
have said the horse had been sold, but he
did not know the purchaser. The ques-
tion then follows, “ how does he recon-
cile that answer with the telegram he
sent to ordering him to
forward the horse to Hobart Town, as his
friend the Treasurer had purchased him
for £7 10s 1” The implication is that the
Attorney-General had stated publicly in
his place in Parliament a wilful false-
hood, inasmuch as he made reference to a
fact about which he could not be mistaken,
namely, whether the Treasurer had or
had not purchased the horse, and whether
he had not sent an order to Mr Propsting
to send the horse to Hobart Town, be-
cause the Treasurer had purchased the
horse. I think that is the construction.
Mr Douglas—What imputation does it
bear ?
Witness—l should say the wilful and
public falsification of a fact.
Mr Douglas—Then look to the next
paragraph, “ When the order that he
sent for payment of the money is placed
before him, perhaps he will repudiate
that.”
Witness—Looking to the construction
of that sentence it is so far qualified by
the word “perhaps” as to express doubt
of the Attorney-General’s integrity, but
that is withdrawn in fact by the following
sentence, which does not express a doubt,
but a denial of the honesty of the Go-
vernment. There is a reference to the
same in the word “such.” “If the
heads of departments are given to such
conduct, what can be expected from
subordinates?” The word “such” may
refer to what is stated immediately before,
namely, that the writer doubted whether Mr
7


Giblin would not repudiate the order he
had himself sent ; or it may refer to all
the prior proceedings : that is, it may be
an imputation of political falsehood or dis-
honesty in repudiating his own order in
this case—a reflection on the honesty and
integrity of the Attorney-General.
Cross-examined by Mr Miller You
said you were a Minister of the Con-
gregational Church, 1 believe Mr Giblin
is a member of the same denomination ?
Witness—Yes.
In fact a shining light—a local preacher ?
Not that I am aware of.
Does he belong to your Church ?—He
does.
Now look at that letter ; I suppose you
have read more violent articles than that,
have you not ?—I daresay I have, I’ve
no doubt I have.
No doubt ; and a great many of them
in this town ?—ln this town I have read
articles exceeding that in violence.
In this morning’s Mercury for in-
stance ?—I have not seen this morning’s
Mercury.
Do you observe that (the alleged) libel
is not a leading article I —Certainly.
And I presume you are aware that the
column for newspaper correspondents is
an open one ? —Yes.
You are also aware that the proprietors
of newspapers do not hold themselves
responsible for the communications of
their correspondents ?
The Judge—Not for their own ideas,but
they must take the consequences.
Mr Miller—l don’t mean the legal, but
rather the moral consequences ?—Witness,
Yes.
I suppose you are aware that it is im-
possible for newspaper proprietors to make
themselves so thoroughly acquainted with
the facts stated in letters of correspon-
dents, as if they were waiting their own
article ?
Yes, but at the same time the editor
of a paper should exercise common pru-
dence.
But they are not answerable for the
letters of correspondents, as for their own
articles ?
They are legally and morally technically
responsible, and personally, though the
responsibility is very much modified.
Admitting that, will you turn to the letter
and say on what authority does the
writer proceed when he says I see by
the reports of Parliament ?”
Witness—Upon the authority of re-
ports.
In the papers he may take in 1
A man may get hold of any paper, I
should not confine it to the paper he takes
in ; the writer does not speak of any par-
ticular paper.
He speaks of reports of what had taken
place within the walls of Parliament 1
Yes.
Look at this paper (the Cornwall Chroni-
cle) of October 17.
Witness read the article, a telegraphic
message from the Parliamentary corres-
pondent as follows :
Thursday, October 16.
LAUNCESTON AND WESTERN RAILWAY VESTING
BILL.
In Committee.
Another acrimonious debate arose during the
consideration of clauses in this bill. The feel-
ing of South versus North was very strongly
exhibited.
The Attorney-General read a paragraph in
reference to Mr Griffin’s celebrated horse, which
appeared in Wednesday’s Cornwall Chronicle
from the Hobart Town special correspondent of
that journal, and said the animadversions made
thereon by the correspondent were calculated to
cause mischief. Some members entertained
this view of the matter seriously, while others
laughed at the apprehensions of the hon. the
Attorney-General.
Mr Cox said the opinions of anonymous cor-
respondents expressed in the newspapers did
not represent those of the landowners in. the
raliway district.
Mr Innes spoke strongly against certain
opinions expressed by the Northern journals.
The Attorney-Genei al said the horse about
which so much had been said and written, had
been sold for £6, but he did not recollect the
name of the purchaser. [Loud laughter].
Mr Miller—l think you stated that the
charge of untruthfulness against Mr Gib-
lin must be inferred because he denies
knowing a fact which must have been
within his knowledge ?
Witness—lt must have been, as Mr
Giblin spoke of a fact that he must have
had within his knowledge.
Mr Miller—So say we.
Witness—That must have been, for the
writer of the letter says, “ How does ho
reconcile, &c., as his friend the Treasu-
rer had purchased him for £7 10s.” If
that were so, Mr Giblin must have known
who the purchaser was.
And “ Fair Play,” then, if that did
not take place, has apparently been mis-
led by trusting to the report in that
paper? Not entirely; more than that
the report says nothing about the
Treasurer.
Mr Miller—l am speaking about not
knowing.
8


If the Attorney-General sent an order chaser. Suppose the writer believes that,
to Mr Propsting to forward the horse to
Hobart Town, saying “his friend the
Treasurer had purchased him for £7 10s,”
of course he must have known,
Mr Miller You don’t contend for
that ?
Witness -It is not the language of the
telegram.
Mr Miller—Not in so many words, but
the substance is that if the Attorney-
General directs some one to go to the
railway department to receive the £7 10s,
it must be on the order of the Treasurer.
Is the Treasurer also a member of your
congregation ?
Witness—Yes.
Mr Miller—lt’s a pity there is not a
minister of religion in the case also (a
laugh.) In speaking of his “friend the
Treasurer,” you don’t suppose “Fair-
play ” is speaking the language of the
telegram ?
Witness—l suppose the writer of the
letter thought it was in a telegram.
Suppose we are able to prove that the
Treasurer did send an order to the rail-
way department to pay £7 10s, and that
the Attorney-General did direct the
district constable to go and receive over
that amount, would not “ Fair Play” be
justified in making the allusion he did ?
It excuses him.
Suppose the Attorney-General directed
the officer entrusted with the execution of
the warrant to go to the railway depart-
ment and receive £7 10s, and that the
Railway Manager had at the time re-
ceived a telegram from the Treasurer
directing him to pay over the £7 10s,
would not that be substantially what is
stated in that letter ?
Yes, I think that’s possible.
And if these were the actual facts as to
the purchase of the horse—-that the At-
torney-General himself directed the dis-
trict constable to go to the railway depart-
ment to receive the money, and then that
the Treasurer had sent an order for pay-
ment of the £7 10s—would you not say
;hat a reasonable man would infer that the
leneral must have known who
purchased the horse ?
I think he would have known.
Put yourself in the writer’s position ;
le had given credit to what he believed to
>e the report of proceedings in Parlia-
ment ; he had seen the Cornwall Chronicle ,
ind what the Attorney-General was made
o say in his place in the House, that he
lid not recollect the name of the pur-
and he knows the facts as to the order for
the £7 10s and the direction to Mr Prop-
sting to send the horse to Hobart Town, do
you not think he was justified in imputing
to the Attorney-General that if he stated
he did not know the purchaser, he must
have stated that which was untrue, for
he himself had previously directed the
Superintendent of Police to apply to the
Railway Department to pay him the £7los
ordered by the Colonial Treasurer to be
paid ; assuming all that, I ask you was the
writer not excusable, or, more than that,
justified in the imputation to the Attor-
ney-General of having stated what was
untrue ?
Supposing all that to have taken place,
yes.
The Judge—The fact is this, first of all
here’s a statement in Parliament that the
Attorney-General said the horse had been
sold, but he could not tell the name of the
purchaser; next he sent in no name
whatever, but directs the £7 10s to be
paid to the District Constable—
Mr Miller—And further, the fact that
the Colonial Treasurer, through the Rail-
way Department, pays over the £7lOs —
The Judge—ln that case, do you think
it necessarily follows that the Attorney-
General must have known the name of the
purchaser of that horse ?
Witness—l think it a very probable and
excusable inference.
Mr Miller—l should think so. Let me
ask you as to this part of the letter, “ I
see by the reports of Parliament that the
Attorney-General in answer to a question
put to him respecting the horse, said it
was sold, but he did not know the name
of the purchaser.” Is there any infer-
ence to be drawn from that much of the
letter as to the first inuendo, thereby
meaning that the plaintiff made a state-
ment in the House of Assembly which he
knew to be false 1
His Honor—l shall not put that to the
jury, Mr Miller, as either of two appa-
rently contradictory statements cannot
stand alone.
Mr Miller—ls there any charge con-
tained in that letter that the Attorney-
General or Colonial Treasurer made any
private profit by the transaction ?
Witness —I think not.
Mr Miller—Listen to this then (Mr H.
Dobson’s letter to the defendants) :
“You have for some time past given cur-
rency to statements imputing that my
client had abused his position as a Min-
9


ister of the Crown to procure, either for
himself or a colleague, some private profit
by purchasing and re-vending an article
seized under a distress for railway rate. ”
In that letter of “ Fairplay ” is anything
to be inferred as to a charge of doing what
is alleged for private profit, or for a poli-
tical purpose 1
Witness—l think it might be for a poli-
tical purpose.
Holding to that, does it impute to the
Attorney-General and the Colonial Trea-
surer that they had been guilty of petty,
disgraceful conduct, of having for
some private profit purchased and re-
vended the horse ?—Not for their own
private profit.
Mr Miller—No, certainly not! I pre-
sume,Mr Clarke,you read the local papers,
and the proceedings in Parliament ? This
letter goes on to say “ this accusation was
denied by my client publicly in the House
of Assembly.” Do you remember seeing
that I
Witness—That was the “accusation”
against the Examiner.
Mr Miller—Yes but it is put as a charge
made by the Examiner. Now look at that
paper (a paper containing a full report of
the Attorney-General’s explanation in the
Assembly on October 16), is that not a
denial of the charge referred to in the
solicitor’s letter 1
Witness—Certainly this passage does
refer to the Attorney-General.
What paper does Mr Giblin refer to ?
The Cornwall Chronicle.
Mr Miller—lf this had been an action
against the Cornwall Chronicle it would
have been different. The following is the
article referred to from that paper :
The Attorney-General said the real question
was whether the law was to be obeyed or not.
There were 44 defaulters whose combined
amounts did not exceed £4O; certainly one or
two had been obstinate. He particularised the
case of Mr Griffin, and did not think that he
should, escape because he was obstinate and con-
tumacious. He read the following paragraph
taken from the Cornwall Chronicle which had
come to town that morning, and said it was
utterly untrue, false, and malicious, The
charge might be applied to himself or the Colo-
nial Treasurer. The paragraph was as follows
“ ‘ Who bought Griffin’s horse ?’ ” seems to have
usurped the place of the vulgar expression
‘Who stole the donkey?’ Without pausing
to inquire who the individual was that ‘ shook’
the stupid quadruped, the finger of rumor
points out unmistakably to a prominent mem-
ber of the Administration as the purchaser of
the Deloraine moke. Nor does the busy jade
(rumor, not the Minister) content herself by
stopping at that stage, for it has transpired that
the honorable puchaser did a bit of huckstering
by the transaction—that while he was patrioti-
cally upholding the law with one hand, he waa
selfishly lining his pocket with the other ! and
it has now become a nice point to discern where
the Minister ends and the huckster begins. It
is a sad spectacle to see her Majesty’s advisers
in such a transaction ! It is a degradation to
our institutions and a libel upon the disciples of
Chesterfield —if we have any amongst us,
Ministers should not interfere with the course
of the law. If it is not forged securely enough,
it is their place to call in the assistance of the
Parliament, and not descend to the paltry sub-
terfuges of becoming deputy-assistant bum-
bailiffs ! If, as it is asserted, a Minister of the
Crown bought this animal in his public capacity
and sold it in his private capacity, clearing a
certain amount of money for his private use
and benefit, then it becomes a scurvy transac-
tion (roars of laughter).'’
Mr Miller—l don’t wonder at it.
“That statement would be ridiculous and
absurd but for one thing ; of course he need
not say that the horse was sold for 6 1 within a
few shillings, and that went to pay the rate.
The statement was circulated through the dis-
trict, and was read and believed. People who
read it would believe that the horse was sold in
Launceston, and that the Ministers of the
Crown put the balance of the money into their
pockets. It was a great deal of idle talk of this
kind which made it so difficult to carry out the
law. With regard to the amendment which
had been proposed, he believed from informa-
tion which had been supplied to the Govern-
ment that the great bulk of the rate would be
paid this year. It was because of what different
writers said, and especially letter writers—
though of course he knew that newspapers did
not hold themselves responsible for the senti-
ments expressed by correspondents—and what
was said by speakers at public meetings, that
the people were endeavoring to get up this re-
sistance. That was the real secret of there
being any talk about resistance. The people of
the North, he was quite certain, were a quiet,
law abiding people, and the rate would be col-
lected without difficulty. (Ironical cheers.)”
Mr Miller—That does not refer to the
Examiner ?
Witness—That appears to be in the
Cornwall Chronicle.
Mr Miller—Then, in point of fact, this
that is in the solicitor’s letter appears to
have been sent to the wrong paper:—
“This accusation was denied by my client
publicly in the House of Assembly ; yet,
at a subsequent period, you being aware
of such denial, deliberately publish a
letter whichre-affirms the truthfulness of
the accusation, and professes the ability of
the writer to show from actual docu-
mentary evidence bearing my client’s
signature that Mr Giblin has been guilty
of falsehood and dishonesty.”
Witness—Yes.
His Honor—The accusation was denied,
whatever paper it was taken from.
10


Mr Miller—lt had never been asserted
by the Examiner that the plaintiff had
abused his position for private gain.
His Honor—Before the letter of “Fair-
play” was published the fact was denied.
Mr Miller—No, the fact was denied
that he had purchased the horse and
sold it for a profit.
His Honor—Or that he purchased it at
all. *
Mr Miller—No ; what is denied is that
he made a profit of it, and the fact is stated
that it sold for £6. The words “people
who read it would believe that the horse
was sold in Launceston, and that the
Ministers of the Crown put the balance of
the money into their pockets” were not
asserted by the Examiner at all.
The Judge said that was nut proved.
The Solicitor-General—We admit it.
Re-examined by Mr Douglas—Look at
the Examiner of the 7th Oct. What does it
state in reference todheAttorney-General?
Witness—“ Yesterday the horse was
delivered to Mr I’ropsting by order of
the Government, and it was generally re-
ported about town last evening that the
Attorney-General had bought the histori-
cal horse for £7 10s. ”
Mr Douglas—Look at the Examiner of
Oct. 18.
Mr Miller submitted that this did not
arise out of the cross-examination ; he
had examined on the statement in “Fair
Play’s” letter, but he had not examined
on any of the statements put in for the
purpose of showing malice. Had he done
so he should have gone through the whole
of those articles. He had simply
tested the witness’s evidence as to
the letter of “ Fair Play ;” and he sub-
mitted that he was entitled to re-examine
witness if this were allowed.
The Judge said the learned counsel had
referred to the letter of the solicitor as to
previous facts.
Mr Miller—Only to test the evidence as
to “Fair Play’s” letter.
His Honor overruled the objection.
Witness (reading the article from Ex-
uminer of 18tb Oct.) —“The law will of
■coarse be master. To it there will be no
active resistance, but there will be lots of
Griffin’s horses, and it will not be found
by any means a good thing to release
seizures from bailiffs at £7 10s and re-sell
at £6 (or 7s fid less) to Mr I-forget-his-
name, as announced by the gentleman who
delights in the bald and vague.”
Mr Douglas—Does that apply to Mr
Giblin ?
Witness—l should be sorry to say cer
tainly.
Mr Douglas—Will you refer to another
letter in the Examiner of the 21st (a letter
signed “ Illaroo ”), the paper in which the
libel is contained.
Witness (reading)—“Of course the
Government ought not to be de-
nied the glorious privilege of de-
porting the distrained goods wherever
it chooses, between Hobart Town
and Mount Bischoff—because there
will be no chance whatever of selling
within (or even near) the district. But
the pound of flesh should be got openly,
not sneakingly. Proper and timely an-
nouncements should precede the sale,
which ought to be public. Above all,
Ministers of the Crown and all public
servants should be prohibited from
becoming purchasers. Nothing can by
possibility bring the law into greater
contempt than to see men in power turn-
ing hucksters.”
Mr Douglas—Who does that refer to ?
Witness—l think it refers to Ministers,
including the Attorney-General.
Mr Douglas—l should like to call atten-
tion to another paragraph (in a communi-
cation signed “ Boz,” Oct. 18).
Witness (reading)—“ However Messrs
Barracouta and Co., as distraiijt
agents, may yet get pretty well
out of this spec, inasmuch as
three or four thousand pennies
are said to have been subscribed in the
district, and if the present owners will be
content with a reasonable profit the lot
will be bought to be handed back to Mr
Griffin. But don’t let this success induce
over-speculation. Mangles and second-
hand tooth-brushes may not find a ready
sale.”
Mr Douglas— “Barracouta and Co.”
Who does that refer to ?
Witness—Messrs. Barracouta and Co.
refers to Mr Fysh and his colleagues.
Mr Douglas—And “this spec ?”
Witness—That refers to this affair of
Griffin’s horse.
Bev. J.R. Buckland examined by the
Solicitor General. I am master of the
Hutchins School. I have seen the letter
of “ Fairplay.”
Solicitor-General —That paragraph “ I
see by the reports of Parliament that the
Attorney-General, in answer to a question
put to him respecting the horse, said it
was sold, but he did not know the name
of the purchaser. How does he recon-
11


cile that answer with the telegram he sent
to Mr Propsting, ordering him to forward
the horse to Hobart Town, as his friend
the Treasurer had purchased him for
£7 (10s.” What imputation does that
convey in your opinion 1
Witness—l understand it implies that
the Attorney- General in Parliament told
a falsehood.
Solicitor-General —“ When the order
that he sent for payment of the money is
placed before him, perhaps he will re-
pudiate that.” What do you understand
by that ?
Witness—That he will possibly be guilty
of an act of repudiation.
Solicitor-General —“ What a precious
honest Government we are blessed with.
If the heads of departments are given to
such conduct, what can be expected from
subordinates ?” What does that convey ?
Witness —That as the head of a depart-
ment, he will be guilty of dishonesty and
repudiation.
Cross-examined by Mr Miller. And
the whole basis rests on the writer’s
credence in the report of parliamentary
proceedings 1 Yes.
If Mr Giblin were guilty of un-
truth in that instance, you say
it imputes that there is a possibility of
his also being guilty of dishonesty and
repudiation ? —Yes.
' Then the superstructure rests on what
was said in Parliament I —Yes, what was
said in Parliament.
You have read that the horse was
bought by the Government and re-sold for
£6. Do you understand that to mean in
their private or their political capacity ?
—I do not understand that it applies to
them in their private capacity.
Mr Miller—No ; exactly so. I will read
this to you from Examiner of 7th October:
Mr Griffin’s horse promises to become a celeb-
rity. Our readers are no doubt aware that Mr
Griffin refused to pay the Western railway rate.
A summons to the Deloraine Police Court pro-
duced no effect, and the order to pay the sum
demanded with costs was utterly disregarded.
Tinder the circumstances an execution should
have been put in without much delay, but for
some reason best known to themselves the
authorities took no further action for many
weeks. Public curiosity was aroused, and
numerous were the speculations on the subject,
but the general understanding arrived at in the
Deloraine district was, that in the event of any of
Mr Griffin’s goods being seized no one would
make a single bid at the sale. At length the
authorities mustered up courage, and seized a
horse. So far, there was no opposition; but
having the horse, they were, of course, anxious
to turn him into cash. He was accordingly
put up by public auction last Friday, but no one
would make an offer. The eloquence of the
knight of the hammer was all in vain : the late
owner of the animal offered one shilling, but
that was not accepted, and the horse was de-
clared to be not sold. Thinking he might have
better luck elsewhere, the Deloraine Superin-
tendent of Police brought the animal into Laun-
ceston to Bell and Westbrook’s Saturday’s sale ;
but the result was the same, and the exhibition
of sympathy with the rate defaulter by the large
crowd of persons who had assembled was not
to be mistaken. Mr Superintendent seemed
very glad to get out of the yard with his trouble-
some charge. Orders have now come to send
the horse down to Hobart Town for sale there.
It seems probable the animal will turn out a
“white elephant ” to the Government, for the
forage bill and expenses of attendant will, we
imagine, come to a good deal more than any
one even in Hobart Town would like to give for
the horse. We do not say we approve of the
non-payment of the first moiety of the rate,
nor of the countenance given to it, and certainly
we think that the introduction of the coffin into
the sale yard on Saturday was going a little too
far under any circumstances ; though there is
no doubt it was intended, like the threat of the
Minister of Lands the other day, more in joke
than otherwise. But we bring forward these
facts to show the strong feeling of antagonism
to the collection of the rate which is beginning
to exhibit itself throughout the railway district.
We tell the Government plainly that they will
never be able to collect £10,700 a year, or any-
thing like it, from this part of the island, be-
cause the people are smarting under a keen
sense of injustice. They feel tlrat faith nas
been broken with them by the terms upon
which the Main Line is being constructed, and
therefore they will resist payment of the rate to
the uttermost. A portion of the second moiety
due this month may be collected by veiy
strenuous exertions, but we certainly do
not envy the Collector, for he will
have a most disagreeable task. But
after this we do not believe the amount obtained
will be sufficient to cover cost of collection. We
know of men of great respectability and intelli-
gence, peaceably disposed men too, and men
who perhaps would not feel the payment very
severely, who declare that after the current
year they will pay no more direct local railway
rate. The Government may distrain right and
left, but if there are no purchasers for the goods
seized upon, what will be the use of taking
them ? A horse may be sent down to Hobart
Town without very much trouble, but bulky
articles of furniture could not without great
loss; and we believe that were it attempted
there would be something worse than passive
resistance to deal with. We are not alarmists
—we have no wish by giving publicity to threats
to intimidate the Government or Parliament.
We simply record from our own observation and
knowledge,aided by those of persons on whom we
can depend, what is the feeling of the people in
the Launceston and Western Railway district.
If the Government and our representatives are
wise they will no longer postpone the final set-
tlement of the railway difficulties, but deal
with them at once by imposing a direct general
rate for these particular liabilities.
12


What is your opinion of that ? astounding as to be almost sublime,”
The Solicitor-General objected to the referred to ? —No.
article being used,as it was not in. The Judge—Mr Buckland could not
Mr Miller contended that he was en- know it.
titled to use the whole contents of the Mr Miller—You did not understand
paper, from which an article had been that it was a quotation from Mr Giblin’s
read. own words.
The Judge—You can put it in as your Be-examined by the Solicitor-General—
evidence. You have been asked whether the
Mr Miller—My complaint is that it is charge made was that the transaction was
attempted to put in articles in aggra- for the private or public profit of Minis-
vation, but articles deprecating what took ters ; listen to this; “Yesterday the
place you do not read. A mere report in horse was delivered to Mr Propsting by
the shape of intelligence you receive, but order of the Government, and it wag
articles commenting on that, and de-
precating what took place you wish to ex-
clude.
His Honor said Mr Miller had a right
to put it in.
Mr Miller—l put it in now. (To wit-
ness) —Taking that article in conjunction
with the other you read, have you any
doubt as far as the Examiner is concerned
that the Examiner never attempted to
charge Ministers, either the Treasurer or
the Attorney-General, with seeking in
the transaction of Griffin’s horse their
own private ends ?
Witness—Not by that article which you
have read.
Mr Miller And taking it in con-
junction with the other ; as far as you
read you understand the articles in the
Examiner deal with them in their public
capacity as Ministers ?
Witness—l am not aware whether you
mean the leading articles or letters.
generally reported about town last even-
ing that the Attorney-General had bought
the historical horse for £7 10s. ” Do you
understand that was in his private or
public capacity ?
Witness—That refers to his private ca-
pacity.
Solicitor-General—And the libel ?
Witness—The libel may refer to his
public capacity ; there’s nothing to show
that it does not refer to his public capa-
city.
Solicitor-General Take this pas-
sage from “ Fair Play’s ” letter :
“ Ordering him to forward the horse to
Hobart Town, as his friend the Treasurer
had purchased him for £7 10s.”
Witness —That might refer to them in
their public capacity.
Solicitor-General—lf it referred to their
public capacity would the expression “ his
friend the Treasurer ” have been used ?
Then this passage (from the letter signed
I\lr Miller—ln both. I ask you another “ Illaroo ”) :
question. The words “ purposely bald
and vague” have been read two or three , course the Government ought not to be
times ; who do you understand to have iTtraffied dfoosl^’bXSS
used that phrase . Hobart Town and Mount Bischoff—because
Witness — l don’t know that I have there will be no chance whatever of selling
read it. within (or even near) the district. But the
'Mr Miller—Not read it! Do you P oand- of flesh should be got openly, not sneak-
vnp-rn tf> sav vrai have not 1 ln g'Y- Proper and timely announcements should
sa y .> 0 _ • precede the sale, which ought to be public.
Witness I do not read the parhamen- Above all, Ministers of the Crown and all pub-
tary reports. lie servants should be prohibited from becoming
Mr Miller — l commend your taste. I purchasers. Nothing can by possibility bring
read this (by “ Boz,” October 18) : “ Tell ?he law into greater contempt than to see men
us, Mr Fysh, was not the counting- ln P ower turmn S Asters.
more .f os y th an P ol t' What do you understand by that ? Was it
folio . VV ould it not be very nasty if intended to be conveyed that it was a pur-
some member ‘whose ignorance is so chaBe b y the Attorney-General or the
astounding as to be almost sublime were Treasurer personally ?
to move for the production of all com- w .. , c . .
munications—including telegrams—on the Witness-That > conveys the inference
subject, say between members of t h e that 11 was m their P nvate
Cabinet, the Collector, Bailiffs, and Dis- Solicitor-General—Just so. That’s the
trict Constables?” Do you know who inference to be drawn from the word
those words, “whose ignorance is so “hucksters.”
13


Samuel Smith Travers examined by Mr
Douglas—
You live at Boa Vista I —Yes.
Have you read the article of the 21st
October, the letter of “ Fair Play ?”
Yes.
Will you refer to that portion —“ I see
by the reports of Parliament that the At-
torney-General, in answer to a question
put to him respecting the horse, said it
was sold, but he did not know the name
of the purchaser. How does he reconcile
that answer with the telegram he sent to
Mr Propsting, ordering him to forward
the horse to Hobart Town, as his friend
the Treasurer had purchased him for £7
10s.” What imputation is cast on the
Attorney-General in reference to that por-
tion of the letter ?
That of telling a falsehood, stating that
which is not true.
Mr Douglas —“ When the order that
he sent for payment of the money is
placed before him, perhaps he will repu-
diate that.” What about that ?
Witness—lt implies dishonesty.
Mr Douglas—“ What a precious honest
Government we are blessed with. If the
heads of departments are given to such
couduct, what can be expected from
subordinates ?” What is the imputation
in the words “ honest Government ?”
Witness—lt implies that they are dis-
honest.
Mr Douglas —■“ And if the heads of de-
partments are given to such conduct what
can be expected from subordinates ?”
What conduct is that ? Does it not refer
to the falsity of the statement of the At-
torney-General ?
Witness—Yes general dishonesty.
Mr Miller declined to cross-examine
Mr Travers.
William liobet t Q-iblin was then S'yorn
and examined by the Solicitor-General.
You are the Attorney-General, and plain-
tiff in this case ?—Yes.
You are also a member of the House of
Assembly ?—I am.
On the 16th October last was there a
debate in Parliament in reference to the
Launceston and Western Railway rate ?
—There was.
And you addressed the House ?—I
did.
Did you on that evening give an answer
to a question in reference to Griffin’s
horse that it was sold, but you did not
know the purchaser ?
No question was put to me in respect
to the horse ; I voluntarily introduced
the matter in consequence of what ap-
peared in a paper (the Cornwall Chronicle)
which reached Hobart Town that morn-
ing.
Did you say you did not know the
name of the purchaser of the horse ?—I
did.
Was that a fact ? —lt was.
Did you know, and do you even now
know, of your own knowledge who was
the purchaser ?—Certainly not.
You have reason to believe who has
become the purchaser of the horse ?—Yes,
within the last three days 1 have seen a
letter giving the name of the purchaser,
and the name of the purchaser at the
sale, I did not know either of the names
before.
What did you do with reference to thfl
horse after it reached Launceston 1 I
can produce all that has passed, copies of
the telegrams, and the telegram from the
Treasurer.
What are they ?
On the 3rd Oct., I received a telegram
from Mr Williams, Superintendent of
Police, at Deloraine ;
Deloraine, 3rd October, 1873.
To Attorney-General, Hobart Town.
Griffin’s horse put up for sale, but only one
shilling bid. I notified before sale that it would
not be sold for less than amount of distress and
expenses. Mr Griffin demanded horse as he
had bid for it, and on my refusing to give it up,
gave me notice that he should at once take legal
proceedings against me. Please send me in-
structions.
Edward Williams.
In reply to that, on the same day, I
caused the following message to be fient;
to Mr Williams ;
Hobart Town, 3rd October, 1873.
To Superintendent of Police, Deloraine.
Send horse into Launceston by first morning
train for sale by Bell and Westbrook.
For the Attorney-General,
F. Stops.
On the following morning I had this
telegram :
Deloraine, 4th Oct., 1873, 7.25 a.m.
To the Attorney-General, Hobart Town.
If no instructions have been sent to Bell,
please let me know if horse is to be sold without
reserve. Answer to Plough Inn, Launceston.
E. Williams.
1 replied :
Hobart Town, 4th October, 1873.
Mr E. Williams, Plough Inn, Launceston.
No instructions have been sent to Bell. You
can instruct him. Do not let it go under dis-
tress and expenses, but buy on behalf of the
Government, if no other sufficient bid is made.
14


Telegraph result and the true value of the pro-
perty seized. „
v J W. R. Giblin.
I received in the afternoon of the same
day the following telegram :
Launceston, 4th Oct., 1873, 1.4 p.m.
To the Attorney-General, Hobart Town.
Horse put up. Two shillings only bona fide
b J d. Bought it in. Seven pounds ten shil-
lings. What am I to do with it ? Can I get
pass to take it per rail? I had to pay fifteen
shillings to-day to bring it from Deloraxne.
Send answer to Plough Inn, Launceston.
Edward Williams.
I replied the same day :
Hobart Town, 4th Oct., 1873.
To Mr Edward Williams, Launceston.
Be good enough to hand over the horse to
D.C. Propsting, of the Selby Police, to whom
this will be an instruction to send horse, &c., to
Hobart Town by one of his constables. You
have not answered my question as to the true
value of the horse. If seven pounds ten shil-
lings required, apply to R.W. Lord, of Railway,
who will pay you amount on behalf of the Go-
vernment.
W. R. Giblin.
The same day I sent the following
telegram to Mr Propsting :
Hobart Town, 4th Oct., 1873.
D.C. Propsting, Selby Police, Launceston.
A horse has been seized for railway rate, and
purchased by Government for £7 10s. Will
you send one of your constables on the horse to
Hobart Town, so that the horse may be sold
here. The matter is of far more importance
than the amount nominally involved. I have
telegraphed to Williams to hand the horse to
y° u - _ „ « . ™
W. R. Giblin, A. Gl.
And I also received the following from
Mr Coulter, Superintendent of Police,
Launceston :
Launceston, 4th Oct., 1873.
To Attorney-General, Hobart Town.
Mr Propsting at Scottsdale. I have taken
over horse from Williams, and will deliver to
Mr Propsting to have dealt with as instructed.
J. Coulter.
The following Monday morning I re-
ceived a telegram from Mr Williams :
Deloraine, 6th October, 1873.
The Attorney-General, Hobart Town.
Horse worth about eight pounds (8/).
Bdw'aed Williams, Supt. of Police.
On the same day, having heard that the
rate would be paid privately, 1 sent a
telegram to Mr Propsting :
Hobart Town, 6th Oct., 1873.
To Mr C.D.C. Propsting, Launceston.
Keep the horse until to-morrow morning,
when you will receive further instructions. If
in the meantime you can get £7 10s for the
horse, sell it. It is expected that the rate will
be paid to-day.
For the Attorney-Gen eral,
F. Stops.
I received tlie following on the same
day:—
Launceston, 6th October, 1873.
The Attorney-General, Hobart Town.
The horse of Griffin is overvalued. It is not
worth more than 5 1, together with saddle and
bridle, which is of little value. 1 can obtain 5 1
for them if authorised to sell them.
J. Peopsting, C.D.C.
The following day a telegram was sent
to Mr Propsting :
Hobart Town, 7th Oct., 1873.
To C.D.C. Propsting, Launceston.
If rate not yet paid, send horse quietly down
to Campbell Town Show sale, Thursday next.
If not sold there send it on to Hobart Town.
Reserve should be seven pounds.
W. R. Giblin.
And he replied as follows ;
Launceston, Bth Oct., 1873.
To the Attorney-General, Hobart Town.
I cannot learn that the rate is yet paid. Wil-
liams is absent from Deloraine. I can get six
pounds for horse if authorised to sell. The
horse will not realise that at Campbell Town or
Hobart Town. Please answer immediately.
J. Peopsting, C.D.C.
To which the following was sent ;
Hobart Town, Bth Oct., 1873.
To C.D.C. Propsting, Launceston.
Sell at six pounds.
W. R. Giblin.
And then I got this message :
Launceston, 10th Oct., 1873.
To Attorney-General, Hobart Town.
To whom am I to pay the money realised by
sale of horse ?
J. Peopsting.
I answered ;
Hobart Town, 10th Oct., 1873.
To C.D.C. Propsting, Launceston.
Retain money pending further instruction.
For the A. G.,
F. Stops.
The following additional copies of tele-
grams I hand in :
Hobart Town, 10th Oct., 1873.
To Superintendent of Police, Deloraine.
Report fully in writing what has been done
re Griffin’s horse, and the disposal of the
money.
For Attorney-General,
F. Stops.
Hobart Town, 4th October, 1873.
To R. W. Lord, Esq., Launceston.
Pay to Superintendent Williams upon applica-
tion seven pounds ten shillings on account of
Colonial Treasurer.
P. O. Fish.
15


L saw the original of this telegram from
Mr Fysh. This is only a copy.
L. and W. Railway, 6th Oct., 1873.
To the Hon. P. O. Fysh, Hobart Town.
, Y °ur instruction re payment to Superinten-
dent Williams has received my attention.
R. W. Lord.
This is Williams’s letter for advice and
the reply of the Solicitor General.
Deloraine, 27th Sept., 1873.
Sir,—l beg respectfully to ask your advice
under the following circumstances:—l have
levied, for railway rates, on a horse, saddle, and
bridle, the property of Mr James Griffin, and I
have every reason to believe that there will
either be no bid for the property when offered
for sale, or that one shilling only will be offered.
I wish to know, in the event of the latter
course being pursued, whether I am compelled
to take such a bid, and allow the property to sro
for such a sum ?
I am sorry to have to trouble you so often,
but I feel confident that I shall have an action
brought against me if I act illegally in this mat-
ter, and hence my anxiety to be prepared for
anything that may occur.—l have, &c.,
Edward Williams,
„ Supt. of Police.
The Hon. the Attorney-General,
&c., &c., &c., Hobart Town.
Will the Solicitor-General be good enough to
advise upon this matter. Every precaution
must be taken to ensure a proper carrying out
of the writ.
n „ , , W. R. Giblin.
30 | 9 | 73.
I advise the constable to notify at the time of
proceeding to a sale that the horse, &c., will not
be sold for less than will cover the rate levied
for and expenses ; and if a sale is not effected,
that the constable shall telegraph the result and
await further instructions.
„ , , Robt. P. Adams.
30 | 9 | 73.
Solicitor-General—Had you any pe-
cuniary interest in that horse, Mr Giblin ?
None whatever. [ may be permitted
to explain that between the date of the
last telegram and the day when I made
the statement to the House, I had
ascertained that no sale had been
effected by Messrs. Bell and Westbrook
on the 4th October, and that Mr Williams
misled me in stating that he had bought
the horse for the Government. The only
sale effected was by Mr Propsting on the
Bth October ; Mr Williams’s information
that it had been sold before was inaccu-
rate ; the horse was not sold at all on the
4th October. The actual sale took place
in consequence of my telegram on the Bth
October to Mr Propsting, and it was as to
that I said in the House I did not know
the name of the purchaser, nor did I.
Solicitor-General—That was in refer-
ence to the sale by Propsting ?
Witness Yes, by my instructions,
there having been no other sale.
Cross-examined by Mr Miller :
What was the date of the order to Mr
Lord—the Treasurer’s order?—The 4th
October.
And your own telegram to Mr Williams
telling him to hand over the horse to Mr
Propsting ?
The telegram to Williams was on the
4th October.
And the date of the telegram to Mr
Lord to pay Superintendent Williams £7
10s on account of the Colonial Treasurer ?
—The 4th October.
And the date of the telegram from Mr
Lord that the instructions would be
obeyed ?
The 6th, the Monday following, the 4th
being on Saturday.
And the date when you made the state-
ment in the House that you did not know
the name of the purchaser ?—I believe the
16th October.
And you are perfectly aware that Mr
Lord had obeyed the instructions, and
had paid over the £7 10s ?
I am aware that Mr Lord paid the £7
10s to Williams, and that subsequently it
was returned to Mr Lord.
At the time of that payment, was not
the purchase by the Treasurer on behalf
of the Government ?—Certainly not.
You and your present solicitor were
formerly attorneys in co-partnership in
considerable practice ?—We were.
Now, what was Mr Williams’s position
in respect of the horse ?
He was Superintendent of Municipal
Police at Deloraine, and the warrant was
addressed to him to levy for the non-
payment of the railway rate.
And for the due execution of that war-
rant to whom was he responsible ? Was
it not to the magistrate who signed the
warrant ? and was he not bound to make
a return to him of the mode in which the
had dealt with it ?
Witness—As a matter of fact or of
law ?
Mr Miller—lt’s a difficult matter to say
perhaps.
The Judge—He was responsible in
many ways ; it’s simply a waste of time
to ask the question.
Mr Miller—l presume the warrant,
like all others, was from the magistrate,
to levy, and the return should have been
made to the magistrate, the proceeds
16


handed over to the execution creditor,
and the surplus paid to the debtor.
The Judge—That is the common form
of warrant.
Mr Miller —Will you tell me, how you
came, as Attorney-General, not only to
advise, but to direct this officer ?
Witness—Because the Superintendent
of Police applied for advice what to do.
Subsequently you direct him to sell,
how to sell, and to whom to sell ?
Yes.
Your telegrams are directions and in-
structions are they not ? Yes, he said
“ please send instructions.”
And you instructed him what to do.
“ Send horse into Launceston by morn-
ing train.” Do you consider it part of
your functions as Attorney-General to
give instructions ? For the Launceston
and Western railway rate, yes.
Will you tell me in what capacity—are
you the Treasurer ? No. I sent the
telegram after consultation with the Trea-
surer.
Would it not be the duty of the Trea-
surer ?
The J udge—lf you (as a solicitor) place
a writ in the hands of a bailiff, you give
him instructions as to the levy ; and here
a distress warrant is in the hands of the
Superintendent, and if the man does not
know what to do, to whom is he to go ?
Mr Miller—The Sheriff would not take
instructions and act in such a case unless
he were indemnified. In the case of a
warrant from a magistrate, the officer is
bound to execute it ; but here, the mo-
ment the warrant is granted, the Govern-
ment takes upon itself to give specific in-
structions as to how and where the dis-
tress is to be disposed of ; and it certainly
places the Government in a peculiar posi-
tion.
His Honor —The position of the Attor-
ney-General is very clear if a penalty be
for her Majesty. What do you do in an
information for smuggling ? If a difficulty
occurs you go to the Attorney-General for
advice, as the Government have an inter-
est and he is in a public position, and he
gives advice accordingly.
Mr Miller, with all submission to the
Bench, urged that it was overstepping his
duty to give instructions as well as advice.
It was all very well to say as Attorney-
General he gave instructions, but in a
question of this kind he had a very deep
political interest.
His Honor —No further interest than
seeing that the law is carried out. But,
Mr Miller, I don’t desire to discuss the
question at this time ; it seems so useless
to impugn the action taken. You
say he has overstepped his duty in giving
instructions ; but assuming that there is a
combination not to purchase at the sale of
the distress, what is to be done ? Why,
send to Launceston where there is a larger
population and try to sell there. I don’t
think in giving instructions to that effect
the Attorney-General goes beyond his
duty. His Honor further observed that
he thought it better to come to an under-
standing at once.
Mr Miller (to witness)—Do you not
know that it is the duty of the officer
entrusted with it to execute the warrant ?
Witness —Yes.
Do you consider the officer in this case
did his duty by handing the warrant over
to some one else ?
The Judge—That is a question of law.
Mr Miller —You did direct him when
he asked by telegram—“ If no instructions
have been sent to Bell please let me
know if horse is to be sold without re-
serve.” That was Griffin’s horse! Yes.
And the officer entrusted with the ex-
ecution of the warrant asks you whether
he shall place a reserve on the horse, or
whether it was to be sold without re-
serve ? —Yes.
You instructed him not to let it go un-
der distress and expenses, to buy in his
own name “on behalf of the Govern-
ment 1” —I did, if there was no sufficient
bid.
Williams telegraphs, “horse put up,
two shillings only bona fide bid, bought in
£7 10s. What am Ito do with it ? Can
1 get pass to take it per rail 1 I had to
pay 15s to-day to bring it from Delo-
raine.” Your answer treats the animal
as belonging to the Government ?
I was under the impression that it
was bought for the Government at that
moment.
The custody of the horse was then
transferred by you to Mr Propsting?—
Yes.
Mr Propsting received it as the pro-
perty of the Government ?—That was my
impression at that time.
Under that impression you instruct Mr
Williams to apply to Mr Lord, who you
say would pay the £7 10s on behalf of the
Government, and a telegram is sent by
the Colonial Treasurer to Mr Lord, “Pay
to Superintendent Williams upon appli-
cation £7 10s, on account of Colonial
Treasurer.” Then on the 4th, as far as
17


your knowledge went, the horse was sold
to the Government on the faith of the
telegram, and the £7 10s was obtained on
the Treasurer’s order ?
The money was not paid on that date,
but Williams afterwards received the £7
10s for the value of the horse.
At the time that order was cashed by
the railway department, the Treasurer
had become the purchaser at £7 10s ?
Certainly not.
You direct Williams in a public capa-
city '?
It was not the Attorney-General or the
Treasurer who bought it, but the Govern-
ment who bought it.
Mr Miller—Oh, you draw that dis-
tinction. It was paid for out of the pub-
lic funds on the order of the Trea-
surer ?
I cannot say it was not out of the
public funds ; an advance was made for a
presumed purchase for the Government,
but the payment was made in error.
Was the advance out of the public funds?
—The seven pounds ten shillings was
an irregular advance from the public
funds ?
And at the time it was advanced out of
public funds was the horse itself in the
possession of the Government ?
I believe not. I believe the £7 10s
was paid four or five days afterwards, and
at that time the horse had been resold.
Tire order was on Mr Lord to pay £7 10s
to Williams, but Williams did not obtain
the £7 10s till the horse had been sold
by Propsting.
Mr Propsting was not the officer named
in the warrant, and he 'had the horse de-
livered to him by the Government?
I say no sale was made.
Where ?
Anywhere. Williams said he bought
it in ; I afterwards ascertained that he
had not done so. I told Williams to bid
£i 10s on behalf of the Government if
there was no sufficient bid.
Did you put a reserve on the horse ?
I did not.
You told him to buy it for £7 10s if
there was no sufficient bid: is that not buy-
ing it in ?—No.
If the plaintiff under a fi fa causes
some one to bid on his account up to the
amount of the levy do you call it buying it
so as to close the transaction ? As to
telling Williams not to let it go under
the amount of the distress and expences
it was simply telling him to do his duty.
The telegram of Saturday the 4th Oct.
to Propsting says;—“A horse has been
seized for railway rate, and purchased by
Government for £7 10s. Will you send
one of your constables on the horse to
Hobart Town, so that the horse may be
sold here. The matter is of far more im-
portance than the amount nominally in-
volved. I have telegraphed to Williams
to send the horse to you.” From the
moment Mr Propsting received these in-
structions, did he not hold the horse as
the property of the Government ?
Those words were written on the faith
of the telegram from Williams. From
the time the horse passed out of his
hands to Propsting, Williams had nothing
to do with it.
Mr Lord’s telegram of the 6th Oct.
says—“ Your instruction re payment to
Superintendent Williams has received
my attention.” Do you not know how it
received Mr Lord’s attention, that it was
by giving an order on Mr Douglas, of the
Deloraine station ?—No.
Now, Mr Giblin, will you tell us, does
Williams answer your telegram as to the
value of the horse, that it was worth £8 ?
—Afterwards, he did.
There are your instructions to Mr
Propsting, “sell at £6;” on whose be-
half was that ?
I supposed on behalf of the Govern-
ment. I believed at that time that the
horse had been purchased by the Govern-
ment.
Your answer to MrPropstiug’s enquiry,
what should he do with the money
was —“Retain money pending further
instructions ?” —Yes.
Whose money was that ?—As I sup-
posed at that time, the Government’s
money.
And from the time you telegraphed to
Williams to buy on behalf of the Govern-
ment, 4th Oct. to the 10th Oct., you con-
sidered and treated this horse as having
been purchased by the Government.—l did.
On the 6th the horse was said by Mr
Propsting to be over valued at £B, and
he thought it was not “worth more than
£5 together with the saddle and bridle,
which is of little value.” As an answer
to that you say “sell at £6 ?”
No, 1 said the reserve should be £7,
and told him to send the horse quietly
down to the Campbell Town Show Sale. He
replied that he could get £6, which could
not be realized at Campbell Town, and
then I told him to sell at £6.
Is not that something like ‘ ‘ huck-
stering ?”
18


I*7 Not on my behalf. He offei’ed £5 which
was refused, and he then offered £6 ; I
acted for the public, not for myself.
Mr Miller—No, I don’t impute that,
but is it not “huckstering ?”
Witness—l was doing my best for the
public.
Do you complain that a newspaper
writer should call the transaction “ huck-
stering ” ?
Certainly not, if the imputation were
confined to my public acts.
You admit that such a term might justi-
fiably be applied to the acts of a public
man ? I should not object to it as a public
man.
Of all these facts you were aware, tho-
roughly aware when yon made the explan-
ation in the House ; were you not aware
that the Treasurer’s order was cashed and
returned ?
I was aware the money had been ad-
vanced and repaid, and that when 1 made
the statement in the House that the horse
had been sold for £6.
In other words, you kept back the in-
termediate transaction ?—There was no
intermediate transaction.
Were you not asked for those docu-
ments, the telegrams ?
Yes, when you had given me notice of
action,'and, no doubt, acting under advice.
Therefore you refused to produce the
telegrams ?
In accordance with parliamentary usage
I refused to give up public telegrams for
the purposes of a private action. Mr
Chas. Meredith was the member who
called for them ; and there was a second
application, also I think by Mr Chas. Mere-
dith, and that was refused because legal
proceedings had been taken. I did say, in
answer to the second application, that I
was aware proceedings were pending in
which all these matters would be brought
forward, namely by Griffin, and against
the Examiner.
In your explanation on that occasion I
see the newspaper reports of what took
place, vary, as they will vary. The organ
you term the Thunderer lias these words
as part of your explanation—“of course
he need not say that it was sold by the
Government to a man whose name he need
not give;” did you say that I
I did not say that. The Chronicle was
more accurate ; 1 believe the words used
in the alleged libel were accurate.
Did you say “ the horse was sold by
the Government?”—l cannot say that I
did.
Did you consider it had been sold by
the Government ?—No.
What authority had the Government,
through Mr Propsting, to sell that horse;
did you believe at that time it was sold by
the Government and not by Williams for
£6?
I believed at that time it was sold by
Propsting; I had dealt with the matter.
I cannot make the irregularity worse or
better than it is. At the time I made the
statement in the House I knew it had
been sold by the Government, and I had
instructed Williams to inform Griffin that
the horse was sold for £6. I did my
best to put matters straight.
Mr Miller—l notice that the article in
the Cornwall Chronicle says —
“If as is asserted, a Minister of the
Crown bought this animal in his public
capacity, and sold it in his private
capacity.”
Witness—l denied that in the House,
and cleared myself by my simple denial ;
and the statement was not met by “ loud
laughter,” as the Cornwall Chronicle has
it.
That is another variation ?—lt’s that
which will happen in reporting.
Do you not consider that supposing the
transaction not to be a proper sale, yet
that it is sufficient to justify a reasonable
belief that the horse had been sold to the
Government for £7 lOs I—Certainly not.
What I say is, here is a horse paid for
by the order of the Colonial Treasurer for
£7 10s, taken possession of by the Govern-
ment, and supposing the writer of “ Pair-
play” to be aware of those facts, would it
not, in your opinion justify the belief
that it had been purchased by the Govern-
ment for £7 10s ? —The writer must have
got his information improperly.
Do you suppose Mr Griffin would make
no enquiries respecting his horse ?
Certainly he would.
“How does he reconcile that answer
with the telegram he sent to Mr Prop-
sting, ordering him to forward the horse
to Hobart Town;” is that an unreasonable
enquiry ?
I did not say “because my friend the
Treasurer had purchased him.” The libel
says I did.
And you complain of that ?
Yes, because it says “my friend the
Treasurer had purchased him,” and that,
following on what had been previously
said in the Examiner. The writer assumes
to write from a knowledge of facts, with
authority ;he affirms the existence of
19


facts. The whole strain of the letter is to entitled you to ?—I have dared to express
impute falsehood and dishonesty ; and he
refers to written documents.
Mr Miller—There are the telegrams.
Witness—But not bearing the construc-
tion this writer puts on them.
Is it not borne out by the telegrams of
that date that the Treasurer sent an order
for payment to Williams of £7 10s ?—No.
Had you referred to the Treasurer’s
telegram in your telegram ?—Certainly
not.
Listen to this, Mr Giblin : —“ If £7 10s
required, apply to B. W. Lord, of rail-
way, who will pay you amount on behalf
of Government.” That was to Williams.
And then ; “Be good enough to hand
over the horse to D.C. Propsting, of the
Selby police, to whom this will be an in-
struction to send horse, &c., to Hobart
Town.” Was not Propsting to see that
telegram ?
1 intended him to see that part of it,
but you will see the telegram so far from
stating that it was to be sent to Hobart
Town for my friend the Treasurer, says
“ that the horse may be sold here,” in
Hobart Town ; and I gave Mr Propsting
his own instructions.
Was it not Mr Williams’s duty to show
that telegram to Mr Propsting ? As a
man of experience and common sense
would you not expect Williams as a mat-
ter of course to hand it to Propsting to
read ?—Yes.
Then, in point of fact, it was addressed
to Propsting, in conjunction with Wil-
liams ?
Yes, but I sent to Propsting separ-
ately.
Was not this telegram for Propsting’s
guidance as well as that of Williams 1
I sent the same day to Propsting; they
are both in harmony with one another ;
so far as relates to the removal of the
horse to Hobart Town, yes.
And did you not expect Williams would
communicate the fact mentioned —the
mode in which he was to get that money ?
Would it not be a natural occurrence ?
I don’t know.
Did you before commencing the action
against the Examiner apply for the name
of the correspondent “Fair Play?”—l
don’t know ; my solicitor acted for me.
Have you written in newspapers ?—Yes,
but very rarely, and I have sometimes
signed my own name, and sometimes a
nom de plume.
And you have not hesitated to express
yourself with that freedom your privilege
my opinions freely.
You have not hesitated to impute mo-
tives to political antagonists I—Not1 —Not per-
sonal dishonesty.
Have you not to persons in the North ?
No ; I heard you read an article this
morning, to the effect that I expressed my
conviction that the people in the North
were a loyal and law-abiding people,
I believe you have used strong language
in reference to the acts of the magistrates
in not amending the Western Bail way
Valuation 801 l ? I did, and felt very
strongly.
And those whom you attacked also felt
strongly ?
The Solicitor-Gfeneral appealed to the
Judge whether this line of cross-exami-
nation were relevant.
Mr Miller said he was examining Mr
Giblin just in the character of an expert.
His Honor said he did not accept it in
that light. If the witness had said any
thing about Griffin, or the Examiner, or
he could connect what he had said with
the Examiner in any way, it would be per-
missible, but his opinion was that the line
of examination proposed to bo taken
by Mr Miller was irrelevant.
Mr Miller, with great deference to his
Honor, said if he found a gentleman had
habitually used very much stronger lan-
guage regarding a body of gentlemen
than that alleged in regard to the libel;
and speak of bodies of men in the exer-
cise of his privilege as a member of the
House was allowable, he (Mr M.) might
ask his opinion as an expert on the
character of the alleged libel as com-
pared with his own utterances.
His Honor thought it might tend to
mislead the minds of the jury as to the
real question for them to try ; and if
he permitted it, they would have to go into
the reasons he had for so speaking in
in each case to get the real facts before
them ; and it might appear that his lan-
guage was too mild under the circum-
stances of any particular case : therefore
other issues would have to be raised. A
man might possibly use strong
language, but if jthat man brought
an action for libel he was not
to be deterred, because on some
previous occasion he had libelled the
same parties, unless he had provoked it
all. The designation of rogue might be
too mild for some particular transactions.
The great object of an action was to
decide the particular issue raised. Of
20


course if the witness had made an attack
on the Examiner, or an attack on any
person which could be connected with
the Examiner, it might be admitted ; but
that he should have called John Smith,
or anyone else unconnected with the case,
a rogue was wholly irrelevant, and Mr
Miller could not get in by a side-wind
what was not pertinent to the issue. If
Mr Giblin had exceeded the bounds of
propriety in any other case, it did not
justify the importing of questions affect-
ing the magistrates or other body, be-
cause they would require to have the
whole circumstances brought out to
enable the jury to decide upon the case.
Mr Miller wished to ascertain if in the
opinion of the witness he was entitled to
use language, under the shelter of his
privilege, imputing disgraceful conduct to
the absent.
The Judge—The privilege of Parlia-
ment is one thing, and the privilege of
discussing the conduct of public men is
another. It does not follow that if Mr
Giblin has imputed something to others
in the House that you are to repeat the
language, without having the circum-
stances brought out.
Mr Miller—l should also propose to
ask him as to language by others.
The Solicitor-General—And I should
submit that it would be most objection-
able.
Mr Miller—Yes, most objectionable
language used by others to men outside
the House.
His Honor wished it to be understood
that he was desirous to have all that was
material to the case.
Mr Miller (to witness) —One of your
complaints is that the honesty of the Go-
vernment has been impugned ?
Witness— My honesty.
That refers to the whole Government.
“What a precious honest Government
we are blessed with that’s a charge of
political dishonesty, is it not ?
Of personal dishonesty.
Then you are of opinion it is easier to
protect your own honesty than the
collective honesty of the Govern-
ment ?(a laugh). Rather ungenerous of
you. But suppose you admit it is
‘political dishonesty, is it not very common
to apply that to Governments ?
Very common to speak of a dishonest
and corrupt Government.
Mr Miller—The Thunderer is very fond
of it, is it not ?
I do not remember at this moment.
Do you claim to have sustained pecu-
niary damage ?
Solicitor-General We don’t claim
special damage.
Witness—l don’t. 1 cannot say I have
sustained any pecuniary damage; it’s hard
to say my practice has fallen off.
Mr Miller—To the exient of a farthing ?
I cannot say I have.
Have you lost your office ?
Not yet (a laugh)
Then this action gives you a larger
claim than you estimate ?
I am not prepared to prove any damage.
Do you believe the Launceston Exami-
ner has any considerable circulation in
Hobart Town ?
No, quite the contrary ; but I believe
it has an extensive circulation in the Nor-
thern part of the island.
I suppose you believe that through the
medium of your action more persons will
know of “ Fair Play’s ” letter than with-
out it ?
That is one of the unfortunate results
of an action.
You have given in evidence a number
of articles as political attacks of the Ex-
aminer ? —Yes.
For instance, you are attacked for hav-
ing used that expression “ purposely bald
and vague.”
It is an expression I never used in the
way that it’s put. It was only used in
reference to the route of the Main Line
Railway.
It’s a question that’s causing excitement?
—Yes, in some districts.
Did you not say in the House that the
contract was “ purposely made bald and
vague in its details,” seeing that the great
point was to secure a railway between
Hobart Town and Launceston ?—That is
not what I said.
You never seem to be reported cor-
rectly, even in your crwn organ the Thun-
derer.
£ I am, like yourself, a rapid speaker, and
the reporters don’t always follow me.
Mr Miller—That very question of route
has almost brought the Government to
the verge of litigation with the Main Line
Railway Company. One of the articles
in the Examiner is based on the supposed
use of that language. Did you draw the
contract ? Witness —I did.
Yours is rather a peculiar position ;
your former partner, Mr Dobson, was
solicitor to the Company ?
My former partner was, but we had
dissolved partnership.
21


Of course those persons whose principles
the Examiner represents are at issue with
the Government on the question of the
Main Line Railway ?
I don’t know in what manner the Main
Line Railway is connected with this case.
Do you not know there is a very grave
feeling in the L. and W. Railway districts
on the question of the local railway rate ?
I do not.
The Judge—What he thinks of the
feeling there is very immaterial to the
issue.
Mr Miller—You are aware of articles
in the Launceston Examiner antagonistic
to your Government ? Witness—That is
my misfortune.
Now, Mr Giblin have there not been
articles in the H. T. Mercury laudatory
of your Go\ eminent ?—A few.
Have there not been as well articles in
the Launceston Examiner antagonistic to
your Government ?
The Judge—l must say, Mr Miller, if
all the papers are in favor of the Govern-
ment or antagonistic it has nothing to do
with this case. You are endeavoring to
get in a mass of matter wholly irrelevant.
Mr Miller—There are two objects I
have : the case is being seriously
prejudiced by articles in the Government
organ, and in the second place that is the
very paper that is complimenting Mr Gib-
iin.
The Judge said If one paper praises
Mr Giblin 1 don’t think it is the privilege
of another—on that account—to libel
him. If the Mercury has done wrong, let
the Examine prosecute it, and it will
get the same measure of justice as the
Examiner will receive.
Mr Miller—This article by “Boz” was
read, read as aggravation of the alleged
libel ; is it your language that is quoted
here—“ Would it not be very nasty if
some member, ‘whose ignorance is so
astounding as to be almost sublime’ were
to move for all correspondence ”?
I quoted those words, but they are not
original.
Then to some extent this article of
“Boz” is repelling by strong language,
strong language of yours. You say you
are unaware of any very grave feeling as
to the Main Line Railway ?
The Solicitor-General objected to the
question as irrelevant.
Mr Miller submitted that as the article
was in the Examiner of the 7th October,
which had been put in on the other side,
he could examine upon it.
The Judge thought he could not as] it
had been held that in putting in an
article, it did not put in the whole news-
paper.
[The Court here adjourned for half
an hour, the jury being admonished
before they left the box, that although
they were permitted to go out of Court,
they must not communicate with third
persons on the subject of the case. The
Court resumed.]
The letters of plaintiff’s attorney and
letters of defendants were then put in ;
also the telegrams and various copies of
the Launceston Examiner, and that closed
the plaintiff’s case.
His Honor said during the adjournment
he had looked into the question on which
he had ruled, that in putting in a news-
paper article the whole newspaper was not
putin, and he found that the books showed
it to be a disputed point, some decisions
being one way, and some the other, and
therefore he should admit the articles
alluded to by the counsel for the de-
fence
Mr Miller said in approaching the de-
fence he felt some embarrassment, because
he represented a journal published on the
other side of the island, and which, as far
as the jury had any knowledge at all, was
supposed to be antagonistic to the in-
terests of the South, or the public feeling
of the South ; and although he (Mr Mil-
ler) did not share in it to any extent,
some might suppose the feeling or preju-
dices of the jury would not enable them
to do their duty, as a Southern jury. Of
course the defendants would have pre-
ferred to have had a set of arbitrators on
the issue to be tried, who had never heard
of North or South, or of the Launceston
and Western or Main Line Railway—
who had never heard of the Launceston
Examiner or of the Hon. Mr Giblin. But
inasmuch as in every community they
must have recourse to some tribunal;
and from his (Mr Miller’s) knowledge of the
jury, derived in his experience of South-
ern juries, he believed they would en-
deavor to shut out from their minds any
prejudice derived from the perusal of their
own local journals. Of course that was a
difficult thing to do, when they reflected
that such a paper as the Hobart Town
Mercury, circulating from day to day, had
given its own version of the questions on
which the South and North were supposed
to be at issue. Of course the jury re-
ceived their information from that jour-
nal, and they were apt to regard that in-
22


formation as strictly true ; and upon the question, which but for the freedom
those supposed facts they exercised their
own reason as to what the merits of those
questions were. While he need hardly
say in every question there were two
sides, they were likely to be unconsciously
misled, unless they could, as with a
sponge, wipe out those impressions
from their minds, they could scarcely
help, even with a sincere desire
and with the disposition and will
to perform their duty between party and
party, they were liable to entertain un-
conscious prejudice—however they might
desire to come to the consideration of the
case with unbiassed minds. Unless they
could shut out those views of North and
South which were so industriously put
forth from time to time—he did not care
whether by Northern or Southern jour-
nals, they were alike mischievous in re-
sult—now they were trying the question,
they might, in spite of all their attempts,
be unduly influenced, unless they had put
a strong guard on themselves. But, he
again said, from his experience of South-
ern juries, he was hopeful that they
would do it, and in that confidence he ad-
dressed them. It was at any time
an unhappy state of things when
questions on which the two sides of the
colony were divided, were discussed with
feelings of acrimony. His learned friend
alluded to a strong feeling of resistance to
authority in the North, and to that
journal known as —he was going to say—
the Thunderer, a journal which while it
fulsomely complimented the members of
the Government maligned a large body
of their Northern fellow colonists. He did
not know whether the gentlemen of the jury
had the same feeling, but he believed that
their common sense would tell them that
where a large body entertained strong
political feeling about a great question of
the day, they must have a show of in-
justice. He had the misfortune to differ
with the paper that represented those
colonists on many topics, but as the advo-
cate forthe proprietors of that paper on the
present occasion, he (Mr Miller) should do
his duty, and ask the jury for the sake of
their own freedom, not to gag the press.
In the eyes of some the Government
of the day could do no wrong, while in
the eyes of others, the Government of the
day could do nothing right ; but the
jury having both sides of the question
presented to them, would be practically
enabled to see through the conflict of
opinion and arrive at a right estimate on
of the press, that very licence of the press
which was complained of would
not have disclosed the state of things
which the case presented to them.
-The freedom of the press had secured
their rights and their freedom ; and any
proceeding that might be successful in
rendering them cowardly in giving their
opinions to the community on the public
acts of public men, would tend to degrade
the G-overnment into a state of tyranny.
While the jury would believe that
the people of the North were in
a state of strong antagonism to
the Government, they would also
believe, what must be apparent to their
minds, that they had a fair show of equity;
they considered the attempt on the
part of the Government to levy the Laun-
ceston and Western Railway rate inexpe-
dient, and they had acquired the right to
treat the act of the Government in en-
deavoring to enforce it as a deliberate
breach of faith ; and therefore they inti -
mated their intention to do what the Non-
conformists at home did for so long a
period in reference to tithes and church
rates, namely, to show their sense of in-
justice by saying to the Government
“take the levy if you will, I offer no re-
sistance ;”and it was for the jury to believe
that a large body of men, men of integ-
rity and honesty, respected in private
life
The Judge—Mr Miller, I am not here
to accept statements as to what is the
public feeling in any part of the colony ;
we are simply going into this case as a
libel on Mr Giblin, and not the feeling of
the North as to anything approaching a
resistance to the law.
Mr Miller in continuation observed that
his object was simply to ask the jury to
exercise their own common sense, with a
view to see that those who opposed the
views circulated among them as the case
was being tried in the South of the island,
though the cause of action arose in the
North had fair play; and to guard against
the prejudice attempted to be excited
by the H.T. Mercury between North
and South. He was endeavoring to show
that the common sense and experience of
the jury would tell them there were two
sides to the question, and that they might
feel that the information they derived from
the one-sided source on the question was
not to be all taken as gospel; and there-
fore that they were not to do what had
been attempted to be enforced, to accept
23


this as a case of between North and
South. The articles in aggravation
were produced for the purpose of
influencing the minds of the jury. As
his Honor intimated, the question they
were to try was libel or no libel, and to
show that there was malice on the part of
the conductors of the Examiner as against
Mr Giblin those articles on the public
policy of the Government regarding those
questions on which they were at issue,
were unfairly introduced to do that which
his Honor the Judge deprecated as being
done by him (Mr Miller). He would, in
deference to his Honor approach the
immediate question at issue, and in doing
so, would make his learned friends a
present of the admission, considering
under what aspect he had to address
them. They had had the article read,
they were readers from time to time, and
they knew what the particular warfare
was that was going on between
the newspapers ; they had known the
tone in which those articles were written ;
and he might be allowed to ask them if
they were not astonished to find that the
article, the letter of “Fairplay,” was
made the subject of an action for libel ?
I want to know (said the learned Counsel)
what the plaintiff is to gain by this action.
Is this action the result of childish petu-
lance on the part of my learned friend
Is he so fall of his own effulgence as not
to allow specs to be seen on the sun ? Or
is the action a mere unworthy scheme to
obtain in the South a little cheap popu-
larity by sacrificing on the altar of
prejudice an opposition paper ? I cannot
understand in what aspect it is to be pre-
sented. Is it as a question of pounds,
shillings, and pence, or is it and if
so, no language is strong enough to
designate it—a political dodge 1 I can de-
termine it but upon one view,regarding his
position ; he isthe Attorney-General, and
in that capacity he grants patents ; gentle-
men, I congratulate him on having
granted a patent to himself (laughter) ; I
congratulate him on being the first At-
torney-General of this country, the first
Minister of the Crown in the colonies or
in Great Britain, who ever asked a
jury to give him a money-plaster for
damage done to his political reputation,
to this gentleman who owes his education
to this colony; he is not the first native
Attorney-General; his Honor on the
Bench, and Sir Francis Smith, the Chief
Justice—
The Solicitor-General—No !.
Mr Miller—Well, if not natives, they
have been here from early childhood (a
laugh). And they got their legal notions
from the mother country. I suppose those
Attorney-Generals have had comments on
their actions to which this paltry,
trumpery little letter is mild as milk
compared to vinegar, and they accepted
the unjust censures of the press as part
of their inheritance, a necessary concomi-
tant of their official position. But Mr
Giblin modestly seeks by a pecuniary
compensation to vindicate his reputation
as Attorney-General, and if he succeed,
one of two things must follow—either an
addition to his income, or his establish-
ment in office by means of gagging the
press. And why should that be ? To
use the words of Lord Erskine: —“If you
are firmly persuaded of the singleness
and purity of the author’s intentions,
you are not bound to subject him to
infamy because in the zealous career of a
just and animated composition he
happens to have tripped with
his pen into an intemperate
expression in one or two instances. If
this severe duty were binding on you,
the liberty of the Press would be an
empty sound, and no man could venture
to write on any subject, however pure his
purpose, without an attorney at one
elbow and a counsel at the other.” And
if for every mistake a public journal were
to be amerced in the expense of such an
action as tins, it would be impossible in
our small community to carry on inde-
pendent journalism ; for journalists
must not dare to write comments on the
Government, but they must be satisfied
with pursuing a course conducive to my
learned friend’s feelings, by indulging in
fulsome compliments such as those of the
Government organ, in reference to my
learned friend, who can scarcely sneeze
without its being recorded in capital let-
ters (a laugh). Scarcely in the old coun-
try was it ever known for a Minister of
the Crown, in the worst times of political
tyranny, to come into Court and ask com-
pensation in pounds, shillings, and pence
for his wounded political honor. He has
told you that he cannot say he has sus-
tained any damage. Ido not suppose he
can, for those who heartily support him
will not think anything the worse of him,
and those who are opposed to him politi-
cally will not think of him anything the
better for coming into Court and asking
for damages on account of political
loss. Some Ministers of the Crown
24


in the old country when they free Press, which pervades and checks, and
have felt themselves aggrieved, may perhaps in the last resort nearly governs the
have shown their desire for venaeanee whole, would give but an imperfect view of the
nave snown tneir aesne tor vengeance Governmcnt of England.
by filing a criminal information ; but it
has been reserved for a provincial attor- Fr ° m an we turn to a French
ney, on coming to the position of Attor- statesman. M - Thiers :“
ne'y-General to find a political action to iikeßy ofthe Press afforc \ s
, ,-ij c j • i- t through which the injured may challenge his
be the best means of advancing his poll- oppre * or at the,bar of the nation: ic is the
tical profit. Well suited this for the dark means by which public men may in case of
ages of Tasmanian history ! It is the first misconduct be arraigned before their own and
time that any Minister of the Crown ever succeeding ages ;it is the only mode in which
sued for pecuniary damages in his politi an< * undisguised truth can press its way
it \ ° t p _ into the cabinets of monarchs, and it is the
cal character and it was reserved for Mr privilege by means of whicll he ’ w ho vainly lifts
Giblm to initiate this new system, if, b i s voice against the corruptions or prejudices
gentlemen, you do give your sanction to of his own time, may leave his councils upon
that claim, I tell you, you will be traitors record as a legacy to impartial posterity,
to your own rights, to your children’s cruelty .which would deafen the
• if ,i ■ -u, c , ear, and extinguish the sight of an individual,
rights and the rights of your country; res ’ mbleS) in e
some similar degree, his guilt,
and believe me, you will find that you a l a 0) who, ,by restricting the freedom of the
and they will suffer, because you sacrificed press, would reduce a nation to the deafness of
your and their most sacred birthright, prejudice and the blindness of ignorance. The
Since I have been clown here, I have downfall of this species of freedom, as it is the
been referring to some of the greh writers
whom I will briefly quote, premising with tion, and it may be justly pronounced that they
respect to this case, that if you give the cannot exist separately.”
plaintiff a verdict with damages, it will thoughts these, couched in noble
carry with it no moral weight. I should i an g ua g ej and coming from a country
have thought his warmest friends would where tlie liberty of the press is not al-
have represented to him the derogatory ways ma i n tainecl. Macaulay, in his Re-
position he has placed himself in ; but v j ew 0 f Southey, argues against the inter-
seeing they have not done so, or if they f ere ixce of a government with the freedom
have that Mr Giblin has not heeded their 0 f Gie p regS- jp e says ;
advice; and since he has not done so, , j k j- eu are never go ii b , 3 iy to settle a question
since he has ventured to treat us as he rightly as when they discuss it freely. A go-
has done, by bringing us to this vernment can interfere in discussion only by
side of the island, where so much making it less free than it would otherwise be.
has been done to foment the di- Men are most likely toform just opinions when
,i, . • , , , w , i i they have no other wish than to know the truth,
visions that exist between J oiti and and are cxemp t f rom a ll influence, either of
South, and to create so ill feeling fear. Government can bring nothing
between man and man ; and since I can- but the influence of hopes and fears to support
not help saying that a dangerous attempt
of this kind against that constitutional
freedom of which we are so fond of boast-
ing, is strongly to be deprecated, let me
turn to more eloquent language than I
can use in speaking on this subject, and
then gentlemen you will say whether the
conductors of the Examiner have gone
beyond the strict province of their duty
in asserting and availing themselves of
the freedom of the Press, which I have
every confidence that you will not allow
to be betrayed. For what is the case of
the Examiner to-day may be the case of
the Mercury to-morrow, and in after times
its doctrines, It carries on controversy, not
with reasons, but with threats and bribes. If
it employs reasons, it does so, not in virtue of
any powers which belong to it as a govern-
ment. Thus, instead of a contest be-
tween argument and argument, we have
a contest between argument and force. Instead
of a contest in which truth from the natural
constitution of the human mind has a decided
advantage over falsehood, we have a contest in
which truth can be victorious only by acci-
dent.
Bulwer, in speaking of the Fourth Es-
tate, says :
The newspaper is the chronicle of civilization
—the common reservoir into which every stream
pours its living waters, and at which every man
t. • • • , • • t pours its living waters, and at which every man
when successive ministries come m. I come it is the news y papOT
will begin with the language of Canning, wllich gives to ii ber ty practical life, its per-
who says : petual vigilance, its unrelaxing activity ; the
newspaper is a daily and sleepless watchman
He who, speculating on the British Oonstitu- that to you every danger which menaces
tion, should omit from his enumeration the the institutions of your country, and its in-
mighty power of public opinion embodied in a terests at home and abroad. The newspaper in
25


forms legislation of public opinion, and it in-
forms people of the acts of legislation; thus
keeping up that constant sympathy, that good
understanding between people and legislators,
which conduces to the maintenance of order and
prevents the stern necessity for revolution.
I introduce these quotations lest you
might possibly in some respects be dis-
posed to sacrifice the great interests of
the press ; a result which you yourselves
would be the very first to regret. I might
go on and multiply these quotations from
the great names of Erskine, Curran,
Grattan, and Sir James M‘lntosh, whose
whole eloquence seems to have been
mainly devoted to the assertion of the
freedom of the press, which was in a
transition state, struggled for, and which
now you are called on to sacrifice. Why
take that letter as the basis of an action ?
There is no private slander on Mr Giblin
in his private character; no dragging
forward any dark, dirty scandal as to his
earlier years, or as to anybody belonging
to him ; but simply a newspaper corres-
pondent using that freedom in a public
Journal which may be used, that is so long
as it is confined to decorous language.
Here’s a writer exercising that privilege
venturing to comment on his political
acts, and not referring to private acts ;
but as a politician, putting things
together, and challenging his political
veracity as a political man. What does
that writer say, and on what does he base
his assertions 1 He bases them on what
he supposed to be actual facts, and he
draws his inferences therefrom. And,
gentlemen, I will ask you are you not of
the same opinion, and will you come to
that opinion after quietly considering the
evidence ? You have heard Mr Giblin’s
explanation, but you will think with me
that explanation is obscure, and that even
now it is scarcely intelligible. He is
really under an obligation to the writer,
and to the conductors of the Examiner,
for calling attention to the facts ; and
what do they say 1 “We must take his
public acts, and if they bear a doubtful
appearance, we are entitled to ask for an
explanation ; if a man will place us in a
position such as Mr Giblin has placed us
in regarding this celebrated horse, the
very fact of its being a public matter
entitles us to comment on it.” He ought
to be sensible of his obligation for giving
him the opportunity of explaining, al-
though to this moment we cannot fully
understand it. I confess I sympathise
with “ Fair Play the plaintiff seems to
dabble in all things by turns, and
nothing long. In bringing such a
trumpery, such a petty action as this,
it is impossible to do credit to him-
self, or that he can long maintain his
position. If he be such a puny insect as
not to be able to stand against public
opinion, he had better return to the ob-
scurity of the office desk. Let us come
to see how far the writer was justified.
The Examiner inserts a report of what did
occur, the absurd proceedings of the sale
of the horse, which was treated more in
the light of a joke. Do you think the
auctioneer did not take the bids just as
he would do in other cases ? and there
was nothing beyond a little good-humored
chaff—nothing to dread. And yet my
learned friend withdrew the light of his
countenance from the sitting of the Court
in Launceston. Whether the proceedings
at Bell and Westbrook’s mart acted in-
juriously or not, he did not venture to
show among us. Therefore, though his
physical nerves are so sensitive, I assure
him there is nothing to dread, and per-
haps the next time we shall see his beam-
ing face amongst us, so as not to throw
additional labor on my learned friend the
Solicitor-General, which is scarcely fair.
If he had any real dread, we must rejoice
that it was altogether without ground.
Now, let us quietly see this pre-
cious letter. I have no doubt in
One sense the action is regretted.
Don’t you think the direction to Mr
Propsting, first to take the celebrated
Griffin’s horse to Hobart Town and then
to Campbell Town, was peculiar ? When
and where it is going to rest I don’t
know. The learned counsel here re-
ferred to a facetious notice he had seen of
the Chudleigh races on New Year’s Day,
when the Railway Rate Stakes were con-
tested by three horses : Griffin’s horse,
Attorney-General, and T.D.C., and won
by “Griffin’s horse,” Attorney-General
second, and T.D.O.—nowhere (a laugh).
He then referred to “Fairplay’s” letter, and
said to a certain extent he coincided with
the writer, when he said “ When the
horse was sold at Deloraine, why was he
not handed over to the purchaser ?” It
was the practice to sell within the district
without reserve, and the law afforded pro-
tection to the purchaser. He (Mr Miller)
asserted firmly that the Government
should have had nothing to do with the
horse. An information was laid, an order
made, and execution issued. Williams
did his duty up to a certain time, but he
failed in his duty in taking instructions
26


from the Government; he might have repudiator to scorn. Coupling the tele-
asked the Attorney-General what was the
legal mode of proceeding, hut the moment
he went beyond that he did wrong.
Still more had the Attorney-General over-
stepped his line of duty. The Examiner
advocated in the strongest manner, the
proceeding regularly, but it deprecated
Mr Giblin’s proceedings, and the pro-
ceedings at the sale. I say the
writer will have my sympathy and
yours in saying that the horse ought to
have been sold in the district, and the Go-
vernment might have had article after
article seized and sold until the levy was
satisfied, although it would have made it
costly to the owner. On the other hand,
it was dangerous for any of them, for the
officers of a political Government to take
their property under cover of law and to
have it sold beyond the district.
What protection was there for men
residing in the district ? Mr Mil-
ler took occasion to remark upon the
fact that his learned friend (Mr Douglas)
appeared in the case, and on the fact that
whenever the Government were in a diffi-
culty, either in Parliament or in requiring
a representative at a public meeting, his
learned friend was always to the fore (a
laugh). It was, he said, a compliment to
him, and showed the zeal with which he
had committed himself to the present Minis-
try. In commenting on “Fair Play’s”
letter, and that portion “How does he
reconcile that answer with the telegram
he sent to Mr Propsting, ordering him to
forward the horse to Hobart Town, as his
friend the Treasurer had purchased him
for £7 10s.” Mr Miller remarked “ Oh ”
says my learned friend, “that is utterly,
foully, false,” for he did not say “my
friend” the Treasurer ; but did the jury
understand that when that letter was
written the writer attempted to give the
language of the official telegram 1 But
what were the facts ? He contended that
the facts were such as to justify the very
statement made. Was the horse pur-
chased ? They found the horse was taken
possession of, and he asked the jury as
men of business if that was not going a
great length towards proving it was pur-
chased ? Of course, according to the
evidence his learned friend was placed in
a peculiar position, and the jury would
say fif in every day business such a pro-
ceeding would not be deemed a purchase
and a contract; and if the contract were
attempted to be repudiated whether
they would not laugh the would-be
gram of the Treasurer to Mr Lord,
of the railway department to “ pay
to Superintendent Williams £7 10s on ac-
count of the Colonial Treasurer” with the
telegram of Mr Giblin to Mr Propsting
that “ a horse had been seized for rail-
way rate and purchased by Government
for £7 10,” was not the writer, knowing
as he must have done of the telegrams,
warranted in concluding that the horse
had been purchased by the Colonial Trea-
surer ? And then they found that the
horse had been handed to Mr Propsting,
and why? Because it had been pur-
chased—ostensibly at least —for £7 10s.
Was it not substantially true what the
writer said in that letter ? It was all
very well to order the money to be re-
turned, and to say that because Williams
did not strictly act up to Mr Giblin’s in-
structions to ‘ ‘ buy on behalf of the Go-
vernment if,” &c., to say it was not
“bought on behalf of the Government.”
Williams said he told the auctioneers’
clerk that if there was no bid it was to be
knocked down to the Government, which
was tantamount to acting as the Attor-
ney-General instructed him to do. If
that were so, they were not only justified
by the truth, but entitled to repel malice
by the circumstances ; and if there was
not malice there was privilege, which
would protect the defendants as public
journalists. And the facts would show that
Mr Griffin’s property was sold, and that
substantially it was bought by the Go-
vernment, and the £7 10s paid by the
Telegraph Department in this exquisite
huckstering transaction ought to appear
in the books of the department, and
Griffin’s horse ought to appear to the
credit of the country ; if not, those ac-
counts would be falsified. He again
asked what authority the Attorney-Gene-
ral had to sell the horse, if it had not been
bought by the Government ? It could
not have been sold by the Government if
it had not first been purchased by them.
He (Mr Miller) asserted that the horse
was purchased by the Government, and
that they had no power to rescind the
bargain, because they dealt with the
horse as their own property, and if it
were illegal to buy the horse it was just
as illegal to sell it. He invited the jury
to take those telegrams in their
hands, and asked could any one
doubt that the horse was in possession of
the Government? His learned friend
had drawn a fine distinction that it was
27


not the Treasurer but the Government, never charged a Government or any mem-
and that there was a misunderstanding as her of a Government with being per-
to the way in which Williams had carried sonally dishonest, but he (Mr Miller)
out the instructions of the Attorney- submitted that political corrupt
General, Now, was not that a rigmarole tion was moral corruption, and
of an explanation by Mr Giblin! Asbusi- that the writer was justified in the
ness men, would any one of them, having suppositious inferences he drew from the
heard the facts, say there was not reason
to conclude the horse was purchased by
the Treasurer for £7 10 ? The next thing
they did was to telegraph tp Propsting
“ Keep the horse until to-morrow morn-
ing when you will receive further in-
structions. If in the mean time you
Can get £7 10s for the horse, sell it.”
Connect with that the telegram two days
previously ; “A horse has been seized
for railway rate and purchased by Govern-
ment for £7 10s.” “ Fair-Play ” says “I
see by the reports of Parliament that the
Attorney-General said it was sold, but he
did not know the name of the purchaser.”
Was not that true substantially, and if
justified in saying it was true, should not
the defendants be entitled to a verdict 1
And assuming the statement to be sub-
stantially true they were not bound to
the preclce techanical language used. If
they showed that the circumstances war-
ranted them ; then, it was a fair comment
on the public acts of a public man. Mr
Clarke said, supposing they were
able to prove that the Treasurer
did send an order to the railway depart-
ment to pay £7 10s, and that the At-
torney-General did direct the district con-
stable to go and receive over that amount,
the writer would be excused if not justi-
fied in making the allusion he did. He
further said, suppose the Attorney-Gene-
ral directed the officer entrusted with the
execution of the warrant to go to the
railway department and receive £7 10s,
and that the railway manager had at the
time received a telegram from the Trea-
surer directing him to pay over the £7
10s, it was possible that that was substan-
tially what was stated in “ Fair Play’s ”
letter ; and he added that if these were
the actual facts as to the purchase of the
horse—that the Attorney-General himself
directed the district constable to go to the
railway department to receive the money,
and then that the Treasurer had sent an
order for payment of the £7 10s, he (Mr
Clarke) would say that a reasonable man
would infer that the Attorney-General
must haveknown who purchased the horse.
Then Mr Giblin when asked if he ever
wrote an article imputing dishonesty and
corruption to a Government, said he had
facts. “ When the order that he sent for
payment of the money is placed before
him, perhaps he will repudiate that
and “if the heads of departments are
given to such conduct, what can be ex-
pected from subordinates ?” If it were
desirable that transactions of a public de
partment should be explained, why should
there be any attempt at mystifying
matters 1 He should like to know how
they were to get to the bottom of any
transaction in a public department if a
public writer were not allowed to ask for
explanations from Government officials.
The writer goes on towards the end of the
letter to say “it will bo a fine opportu-
nity for Inspector Forster to display his
abilities ; he can collect his toadies and
march to the scene of action, and strike
terror into the hearts of defaulters, and
fill the Treasury chest. The taxpayer will
also know that these worthies are at last
doing a little work for the money he is
robbed of for their support.” He (Mr
Miller) was surprised that Mr Forster had
not brought his action ! A more harm-
less, inoffensive attack upon a public man
he never knew, and if Mr Giblin could
not stand such a puny shock as that, he
must have a most sensitive nature indeed.
He was an Independent ; had he forgot
the story of Harrington’s “ Oceana,”
and Cromwell. “The ‘Oceana’ was
seized by the Usurper as a libel, and the
way it was recovered is remarkable. I
mention it to show that Cromwell was a
wise man in himself, and knew on what
Governments must stand for their sup-
port. Harrington waited on the Pro-
tector’s daughter to beg for his book,
winch her father had taken, and on en-
tering her apartment snatched up her
child and ran away. On her following
him with surprise and terror, he turned
to her and said, ‘ I know what you feel as
a mother, feel then for me ; your father
has got my child,” meaning the ‘ Oceana.’
The ‘ Oceana’ was afterwards restored on
her petition ; Cromwell answering with
the sagacity of a sound politician, ‘ Let
him have his book ; if my Government is
made tg stand it has nothing to fear from
paper shot.’” And such paper shot as
“Fair Play’s” letter was surely not worthy


to disturb the equanimity of his learned the bitterest comments were made in a
friend ! A Minister of Spain, which was public journal, the London Times. A
it exactly the country to look for the
eedom of the Press, asked who could
iject to the censures of the Press I He
did not, because c 'they were either true or
not; if not true they would not hurt him,
and if they were true they would help
him to amend his conduct.” How could
any man of common sense commend or
approve such an action as this ; surely his
friend’s common sense ought to have told
him he could not give force and vitality
to his waning celebrity by such an action
as this ! (A laugh.) As he was compelled
to admit, numbers would hear of this
letter, who would not otherwise have
done so, and therefore the increased
publicity of the matter would be the
result of his friend’s own action and not
of the defendants’. His learned friend
the Solicitor-General had quoted part of
a judgment—an authority to which they
all bowed—in Campbell v. Sp&ttiswoode, in
which Chief-Justice Oockburn says “You
have a perfect right to criticize a man’s
public conduct; you may denounce its
impolicy ; you may denounce its folly ;
you may denounce its absurdity ; you
may point out the mischievous conse-
quences which will result from it.
Where the public conduct of a public
man is made the subject of observation,
and the writer who is commenting upon
it makes imputations of motives which
fairly, and properly, and legitimately
arise out of the conduct itself,” &c. And
upon that authority was not the writer of
the letter perfectly justified, from the
conduct of the Attorney-General in this
transaction, in concluding that the horse
was disposed of as alleged in the
letter ? Did not the inference drawn by
the writer “properly and legitimately
arise out of the conduct itself ?” He (Mr
Miller ) claimed the benefit of Campbell v.
Spottiswoode, on the ground that the
writer of that article formed well founded
conclusions on the conduct of the Attor-
ney-General. If anything were done of
which that writer was ignorant, it was
what he was not responsible for. Mr
Giblin’s own conduct laid him open to the
imputation whether true or not, and he
had no right to come there and ask a jury
to punish the proprietors of this journal
for the performance of their duty in in-
serting such matter from a correspon-
dent, for it was no article of theirs,
lie would then pass on to the case
of Wason v. Walters, in which some of
petition was presented to the House of
Lords by the plaintiff praying for a
Committee to enquire into certain
charges against Sir Fitzroy Kelly ; the
petition was dismissed, and the de-
bate was not only faithfully re-
ported in the paper, but in
comments on the case imputations were
made of the foulest motives, and the
Thunderer of the World in the action for
defamation was declared privileged, on
the authority of Campbell v. Spottiswoode.
There were two counts to the declara-
tion—one for publishing the proceedings
and the second for falsely and maliciously
printing and publishing a leading article
commenting upon the petition and the
discussion which had taken place upon
it, and treating the charges as false and
malignant. Chief Justice Oockburn, who
presided at the trial, had given a direc-
tion to the jury, of which the following is
a notice :—“With reference to the second
count, the Chief Justice directed the jury
that the debate and the charges which led
to it were matters of public concern, upon
which a public writer was justified in
making such comments as the circum-
stances warranted, and which a jury
should be of opinion were fair and rea-
sonable with reference to the subject mat-
ter of the discussion ; and that the jury
would have to say whether the article
was, in their judgment, an unfair com-
ment-one which could be ascribed to
malicious and sinister motives, or only a
fair comment which a public writer, exer-
cising his privilege in discussing a matter
of public concern, might fairly indulge
in.” That charge was objected to, and it
came on for argument, when the Court
confirmed the principle of the privilege of
the Press and said ; “We are of opinion
that the direction given to the jury was
perfectly correct. The publication
of the debate having been justifiable,
the jury were properly told that
the subject was for the reasons we have
already adverted to, pre-eminently one
of public interest and, therefore, one on
on which public comment and observation
might properly be made ; and that conse-
quently the occasion was privileged in the
absence of malice. As to the latter, the
jury were told that they must be satisfied
that the article was an honest and
fair comment on the facts; in other words,
that in the first place they must be satisfied
that the comments had been made with


an honest belief in their justice; but that If they did so, and an action were brought,
was not enough, inasmuch as such belief were the political articles so published to
might originate in the blindness
of party zeal or personal or
political aversion ; that a person
taking upon himself publicly to
criticize and to condemn the conduct
or motives of another, must bring to the
task, not only an honest sense of justice,
but also a reasonable degree of judgment
and moderation, so that the result may
be what a jury shall deem under the
circumstances of the case a fair and legi-
timate criticism on the conduct and
motives of the party who is the object of
censure.” In this case there’s a party
giving a reasonable comment on the pub-
lic matter, just as “ Fair Play” wrote of
the Attorney-General in his public capa-
city. That case has been followed more
recently by one in 1872.
His Honor—ln the Privy Council.
Mr Miller—Yes. And it was because
his learned friend felt the pressure of the
doctrine established in Wason v. Wal-
ters that they sought to introduce evi-
dence of express malice by the production
of other articles. In some remarks on
the question of malice, he said he re-
pelled the imputation of malice ; and if
Mr Giblin in his own mind believed there
was malice, all he could say was that
there was no ground for it, and he was
remarkably thin skinned in bringing this
action. The articles that were adduced
to prove malice all had reference to the
principal topics of public interest, and
the principles, policy, and public conduct
of the members of the Ministry, the Main
Line railway, Launceston and Western
line ; and surely those were topics of fair
comment, and they had a right to discuss
what they regarded as obnoxious mea-
sures brought forward by an obnoxious
Government, or an obnoxious Attorney-
General ? But all that did not amount
to malice. Was it inconsistent with
liberty for the press to sound the note of
warning I God forbid that they should
attempt to silence the watch-dog ; let
him bark, and let him not become dumb
at the instance of Mr Giblin that he
might repose quietly on the Treasury
benches, that the present Government
might be allowed to retain office without
molestation. Was not the press privi-
leged to discuss their conduct, to refer to
their shameful tergiversation and their
want of principle, when they
found them shifting their policy
with every turn of the wind ?
be brought forward as indicative of
malice ? And because a paper in the dis-
charge of its public duty publishes in its
columns moderate articles were the jury
to say they were written in malice? Their
common sense would tell them it was not
malice, and there was produced in this
case no such article. Although for con-
tributions to the Impress they were not
morally responsible, he admitted they
were legally. But, if “ Fair-Play” had
stated any thing that was not accurate, no
doubt Mr Giblin or some friend of
his might have written a letter to
set it right; the columns of the
journal were open to him. But
no, it was evident Mr Giblin had but one
desire—to bring an action against the
paper for what the correspondent had
written; and therefore he never once
asked as was ordinarily done who was the
writer—“give up your authority, we know
you admit correspondence and you don’t
hold yourselves responsible for the
opinions of your correspondents, there-
fore give us the name of the writer.” No-
thing of the sort; but they had deter-
mined to have an action and to have it
tried at Hobart Town, where they said
the newspaper was never read, and where
it could not do him any harm. But what
did the attorney say? “A moment’s
consideration would have shown you that
the statements referred to were utterly
false.” What was false? That he did
not purchase the horse ? Would a mo-
ment’s consideration have satisfied the de-
fendants that Mr Giblin and the Treasurer
were not the purchasers of that horse ?
“ And I have to request that you will re-
tract them and make a full apology to my
client. Your apology must be approved
of by myself and be published at your
expense in a Hobart Town and Launces-
ton newspaper. If you will not comply
with my request be kind enough to fur
nish me with the name of your solicitor
by return post. ” Now listen to the an-
swer of those who were supposed to cherish
animosity to Mr Giblin. What did
the Examiner say ? “ We beg to as-
sure you that we would not designedly
publish what was untrue ; and that when
it is shown that we have been led into
error, it will be our pleasure, no less than
our duty, to make what reparation is
within our power. Will you, therefore,
be good enough to inform us what are
the statements in the letter referred to of
30


which complaint is made, and in what re-
spect they are untrue.” Now, he ap-
pealed to the jury, could there have
emanated from any conductors of a pub-
lic journal a more moderately, a more re-
spectfully worded document ? Oh, but it
did hot satisfy the solicitor whose client
was bent on bringing his action, and
therefore he wrote : “You have for some
time past given currency to statements
imputing that my client had abused his
position as a Minister of the Crown to
procure, either for himself or a colleague,
some private profit by purchasing and re-
vending an article seized under a distress
for railway rate. ” Was that statement
true : was a single word of it true ? The
Cornwall Chronicle did make such an im-
putation ; the Examiner did not. But it
did use the phrase “ huckster,” and that
was fully borne out by the telegrams.
Just let the jury fancy an Attorney-Gene-
ral who first said money was no consider-
ation, and yet higgled over a horse and
the difference between £5 and £6. A
commercial man might be supposed to be
used to that kind of thing ; but for the
Attorney-General, the Minister of J us-
tice, a representative of the Imperial Go-
vernment, that he should chaffer in this way
—going at £6, going, going, gone (a laugh)
was something unusual even in the case
of colonial Attorney-Generals. Was there
ever a transaction more unworthy, more
contemptible in what was called a Gov em-
inent ? a Government —an honorable Go-
vernment in a place like this where his
friend was called “honorable”—he (Mr
Miller) was “honorable”—they were
all “ honorable” (a laugh)—and it
was to keep up offices in the
State, and to make them resemble
the order of things in the old
country ; and was this petty huckstering,
so contemptible, so unworthy, not to be
commented upon, not to be taken excep-
tion to 1 Having then made some re-
marks on the spectacle presented by
the Attorney General in Court, and
the determination that he should
get into the box to produce
the telegrams, and give his testi-
mony as one behind the scenes, and the
evident idea of the plaintiff to rely on the
ignorance of facts by the defendants,
and snatch a verdict from the supposed
prejudices of the jury, the learned
counsel said the plaintiff had ransacked
the columns of the Examiner, and he
challenged them to say if any one pro-
duced justified the charge made. “ You
have for some time past,” said Mr Dob-
son, the solicitor for the plaintiff, “given
currency to statements imputing,” &c.
Now, Mr Clarke was put into the box by
his learned friend, and he put his con-
struction on the writing; Mr Clarke,
minister of Mr Giblin’s denomination, a
gentleman, a scholar, and one well versed
in the construction of language;he said the
words of “Fair Play’s” letter did impute
untruthfulness to Mr Giblin ; the de-
fendants never denied that, but they said
the circumstances were such as to justify
the comment in the interests of the public.
“ Under these circumstances,” said the
solicitor, “it is for you to make good
the grave charges you have so deliberately
made.” To that, the defendants reply
“We would respectfully ask if there is
not some misapprehension on the part of
Mr Giblin, as we cannot discover that we
have given currency to statements im-
puting, &c. We can
only repeat that if we have inadvertently
done Mr Giblin a wrong in any way, we
shall be very glad to make reparation if
an opportunity is afforded, which, from
the vague character of the complaints,
has not yet been the case ; otherwise we
shall comply with your request to be
furnished with the names of our solici-
tors.” He (Mr Miller) asked the jury,
as men of business, could anything be
more reasonable, more moderate than
the letter of the defendants, even
under the provocation of the bounce-
ible letters of Mr Dobson. Did not
the jury think it was a political scheme
to divert attention from the proceed-
ings of the Government? Mr Giblin
might or might not have been supposed to
concede too much to the North, and if there
were any political spirit, the next elec-
tion was likely to tell upon the position of
the Government ; hence that little device
to turn attention to trifles that greater
matters might be unheeded. But the
jury had to decide the question now be-
fore them, and it was for them to say if
after hearing the evidence of Mr Williams
and Mr Propsting whom he should call,
and the production of the telegrams
they had not justified the privilege
claimed ? They might have had
to call Mr Lord, Mr Gunn,
and everybody who could have given in-
formation, but practically by the produc-
tion of the telegrams in obedience to Mr
Giblin’s subpoena, much of that evidence
was rendered superfluous. Nevertheless
he should call Williams and Propsting,
31


and when they should have given evi-
dence, he (Mr Miller) should have another
opportunity of addressing them, and then
it would be for them to say whether there
was anything to justify Mr Giblin in put-
ting the defendants to the great expense
of coming all the way from the other side
in such a trumpery, petty case. The re-
sult he should not speculate on, but he
did sincerely trust the jury would agree
with him, and that they would think the
writer of that letter “ Fairplay ” was en-
titled to public gratitude for having
can be sold. As to cattle I have a doubt
whether they should be put in the local pound,
and I think they had better be kept in the police
yard until sale, or if not in the police yard then
iii some other safe place. 5 Burns J. (30 edn.), ■
p. 1151. Atkinson V. Sheriff, p. 229.
Robt. P. Adams.
26 | 9 | 73.
P.S. —I would advise that the goods, &c., be
offered for sale at a place reasonably near the
place of levy, and if not sold there, that they be
removed to where a sale is more likely to be
effected.
E. P. A.
26 | 9 | 73.
brought to light some of the grossest
irregularities that ever could take place . Deloraine, 27th Sept,, 1873.
in any department of the Government.
He would now proceed to call wit-
nesses :
Edward Williams, Superintendent of
the Deloraine Municipal Police, proved
that he received a warrant of execution
against James Griffin, for railway rate.
He had returned the warrant to the Coun-
cil Clerk. He seized a horse ; from the
time he seized the horse he considered he
acted under the orders of the Govern-
Sir, —I beg respectfully to ask your advice
under the following circumstances: —I have
levied, for railway rates, on a horse, saddle, and ;
bridle, the property of Mr James Griffin, and I
have every reason to believe that there will
either be no hid for the property when offered '
for sale, or that one shilling only will be offered.
I wish to know, in the event of the latter
course being pursued, whether I am compelled
to take such a bid, and allow the property to go
for such a sum ?
I am sorry to have to trouble you so often,
but I feel confident that I shall have an action
brought against me if I act illegally in this mat-
. _ , uiuuguu agciiuou lire xx jl civu xxx uuxo mau-
ment, or properly speaking, the advice of ter, and hence my anxiety to be prepared for
the Attorney-General. He applied to him anything that may occur. —I have, &c.,
for advice and instructions, because he Edward Williams,
did not know how to act legally ;he could n „ ~ ~, n Su P' t - of Pohce.
_ _r ' - ' ’ho Hrm r.rw* A rrnm av_l I
have obtained the warrant if he had ap-
plied for it. He produced a letter of the
23rd September, signed by Mr Fitzgerald
to the Attorney-General and one by him-
self to the Attorney-General
Deloraine, 23rd Sept., 1873.
The Hon. the Attorney-General,
&c., &c., &c., Hobart Town.
Will the Solicitor-General be good enough to .
advise upon this matter. Every precaution
must be taken to ensure a proper carrying out'
of the writ.
W. R. Giblin.
jLyviviuiuv, 1 w * 5 YV . XV. VjrliyLiiN.
Sir, —At the request of the Superintendent of % 30 |9 ( 73.
Police, who is ill, I have the homor to request
the favor of your opinion, for his information, I advise the constable to notify at the time of
on the following points, viz.;— proceeding to a sale that the horse, &c., will not
He is about to levy on certain cattle and other be sold for less than will cover the rate levied
chattels on different farms and premises by for and expenses; and if a sale is not effected,
virtue of warrants of distress for railway rates, that the constable shall telegraph the result and
Can he legally remove such chattels off a farm await further instructions,
or premises to another part of the district, or to Robt. P. ADAMS,
the public pound (in ease of cattle), for the more 30 |9 | 73.
lilt: jJUUIIL- [JUUIIU (111 vdoc U 1 Ullllcjj IUI ullC mule jOI I G.
convenient detention and sale of such chattels ? The horse was not sold, and he telegraphed
He also anticipates a combination to abstam f Instructions which he received •he did
from bidding or purchasing at such sales, and in tor instructions, wmcn ne received, lie did
the event of such being successful he apprehends
some difficulty as to what should be done with
the property thrown on his hands.—l have,
&c.,
J. Fitzgerald,
Council Clerk.
The Hon. the Attorney-General,
Hobart Town.
280-73.
Referred to the Solicitor-General.
W. R. Giblin.
24 1 9 | 73.
The property taken under distress warrant
may bo removed to a place of safety until they
not carry them out entirely, namely in
bidding for the horse himself; he put a
reserve of £7 10s on it. When he went
to Messrs. Bell and Westbrook’s with the
horse for sale, in Launceston, Mr Bell was
not there ; witness told them the horse
was not to go for less than £7 10s. He
said if there was no bid to that amount
it was to be knocked down to the Govern-
ment. He sent a telegram after the sale,
but he understood it was sold to the
Government, but he could not tell what
bids there were. He received a telegram. ’
to hand the horse over to Mr Propsting,
32


and to get £7 10s of the Eailway de-
partment ; the £7 10s was received by
him from Mr Douglas, a railway official at
the Deloraine Station. The amount was
£7 2s 6d as he found afterwards, so that
there was 7s 6d over, as the auction
clerk said he would not charge com-
mission. If the Government afterwards
sold it for £6 they must have sold it at a
dead loss. Witness did not see Mr
Propsting after he handed over the
horse. He next heard from the
Government about the 9th Oc-
tober to report fully in writing. Up to
that time he had paid the money to the
sub-collector, Mr Fitzgerald, less costs
and charges amounting to £4 15s, and
he had a balance of 7s 6d. The
money was subsequently paid to Mr
Gunn, collector of the railway rate. He
had no letter repudiating the sale ; he
delivered the horse over to the Govern-
ment before he received the money. From
that time the horse was oat of his control
entirely. The Government never gave
him notice that he had exceeded his in
structions. They never gave him notice
that they did not consider he had sold
the horse at all. Witness did not recol-
lect seeing the letter containing the libel
in the paper. Witness considered the
Government the purchaser at the time ;
he made a communication afterwards to
Mr Griffin, having received instructions
to tell him the horse was sold for £6, but
he had considered up to that time that it
was sold for £7 10s. Griffin was of
opinion it was not sold at Bell and West-
brook’s, and witness was of opinion it was
sold ; the reason why Griffin said it was
not sold was that he thought it was legally
sold at Deloraine. The moment witness
parted with the horse to Propsting, he
considered he had no more to do
with it.
Cross-examined by Mr Douglas —At
Deloraine there was a combination not to
bid for the horse and only Is was bid,
and that was by Griffin. There was a
great deal of disorder at Bell and West-
brook’s mart ; witness was holding the
horse, and he could not make out what
was taking place as to bids.
Why did you not carry out the instruc-
tions given by the Attorney-General ?
Because I was not a servant of the Go-
vernment, but a servant of the munici-
pality of Deloraine, and I believed the
Council did not approve of my bidding
for the horse.
Then, yon wilfully went against the
advice of the Attorney-General ?
No, I instructed Mr Bell's clerk to tell
Mr Bell to knock the horse down at £7
10s to the Government, and I thought
that would amount to the same thing as
my bidding.
Did not Mr Bell’s clerk tell you it was
no sale I—No,1 —No, but I believe he told a
person I sent.
Did you hear any threats used by par-
ties in the yard if they bade for the
horse ?
No, I was so engaged with the horse.
Was a riotous mob gathered there 1
Yes, certainly they were riotous. I
heard Mr Bell say the horse was the pro-
perty of the Government. There was a
great deal of noise, it was impossible to
hear all that took place. I did not go
back to Mr Bell’s as I considered it was
sold.
When did you find out that the horse
was sold ?
It was some days after ; I cannot say
myself whether the horse was sold or not,
to the present time.
Ee-examined —I was not afraid, except
at the horse jumping about. They did
not attempt to rescue the horse. The
Government never called on me to recoup
any money.
C.D.D. Propsting proved that he was
under the direct control of the Govern-
ment authorities. He received Griffin’s
horse oq behalf of the Government.
He produced copies of the documents.
He received the horse believing that
it was the property of the Government.
The warrant of distress was never in his
possession and he never saw it. He met
a constable 11 miles from town who told
him that the horse was at Parr’s stable,
and he brought it to him at St. Leonards ;
it remained there till the 24th of the
same month. On the Bth he offered £6
and bought the horse for his own use.
It passed out of his hands on the 24th,
and was sold by witness to Mr James
Bennett, Bed Gate, for £6. The £6 he
paid to the account of Mr Gunn, Eailway
Eate Collector,
Cross-examined by the Solicitor-Gene
ral—l did not mention who the purchaser
was. I first mentioned who the purchaser
was in Hobart Town last Friday.
The Court then adjourned till the fol-
lowing day.
33


SECOND DAY.—WEDNESDAY, JAN. 21.
The Court sat at 10 a.m.
The jurors having answered to their
names, and taken their seats, the case
was resumed.
Mr Miller rose to sum up the evidence
for the defence, and said, before com-
mencing his address to the jury, the evi-
dence being concluded, he desired to take
the opportunity of publicly correcting a
mis-statement in the Mercury of that
morning. He did so because it professed
to give an opinion of his on the legality
of the rate, and as copies of the Mercury
might be circulated in his district a mis-
chievous result would arise if the matter
■were not noticed by him. He therefore
stated that he did not, he never had, and
did not now entertain, as a lawyer, the
slightest doubt of its legality under the
Acts of Parliament. He had taken op-
portunities always to express the same
opinion he had formed on the spot, and
yet the paper said he went out of his way
to cry down the attempt to collect the
railway rate.
His Honor said Mr Miller had satisfied
himself and the Court.
Mr Miller said he carefully abstained
from taking part in politics, and all he
did say was to ask the jury as far as pos-
sible to avoid taking the productions in
the Mercury as a source of information.
The Judge said the learned counsel was
at liberty to ask the jury to draw a pre-
sumption from the conduct of' certain
men, but they had gone so far without a
single fact to the jury irrelevant to the
issue.
After some further remarks by the
Judge and the learned counsel,
Mr Miller proceeded with his address,
and repeated what he had urged in his
first address that they should if they could,
as with a sponge, wipe out from their
minds impressions they might have re-
ceived before they came into Court, and
apply themselves, as his Honor said, most
anxiously to a consideration of the
facts. He had no doubt the jury
had already come to a conclusion
in their own minds, but if
any of them had received an
impression from aught but the evidence
alone, he trusted they would be able to
divest themselves of it, and to become
satisfied that the defendants had done
nothing that they were not entitled to do
in accordance with that freedom of the
press which was their privilege. The •
evidence was now fairly before them, and
had been most fairly considered, especially
with reference to the telegrams. He for
some time hesitated whether it was worth
while to call those witnesses, and but for
Mr Giblin’s denial of the purchase of the
horse on behalf of the Government, not-
withstanding those telegrams, he
might not have done so. He now
felt that it was more satisfactory to
have had those two witnesses—Mr Wil-
liams and Mr Propsting—in the box. He
had, however, put them in the box, not
knowing very well what they would say ;
and he asked the jury whether they had
not completed the' justification of
privilege? Mr Giblin said there never
was a purchase by the Government of
that horse for £7 10s ; he said the only
sale of that horse was a sale—not by Wil-
liams, the officer entrusted with the dis-
tress ; but he coolly and deliberately got
up in that court and asserted that the
Government sold the horse for £6, they
sold on their own responsibility the
property of another man ; but they
would agree with him that the Govern-
ment had no right to do anything of the
kind. He might take Mr Giblin’s state-
ment of what the Government did ; they
sold the horse, and Mr Giblin, as At-
torney-General, coolly got up, and said
the horse was never sold for £7 10s, and
it was sold by the Government. Surely
Mr Giblin could not see the full force and
effect of such an admission by him that
the Government might deal as they liked
with men’s property, and that they could
do so without responsibility ! That was
the effect of his evidence, and they must
remember he was not an ordinary minis-
ter of the Crown, but the Minister of
Justice, the statement came from one in
the position of Minister of Justice, and
the Public Prosecutor. He sub-
mitted that the very fact, if they took the
statement of Mr Giblin being dragged to
light by the publication of “Fair Play’s”
letter,would be deemed ample justification
of the writing of that letter, and
of the freedom of the press ; be-
cause but for that freedom of the press,
but for that letter of “ Fair Play,” it
would have been taken for granted that
the Government might sell a man’s goods
where they liked, for what they liked,
and if anybody dared to write about the
transaction, down would come the Govern-
ment, and a libel action would be brought
34


against the unfortunate proprietor, which Williams exceeded his instructions,” and
might involve his complete ruin in the they attempted to show that they did not
arnnnanra Tv iCJ narmti < £ • II 1 J ™
stoppage of his paper, “ O” they would
say, “ you accuse us of improper con-
duct ; come along, you have no right
to reflect on our conduct, we are the
men, we will let you see who are the
Government, don’t talk of privilege, of
the freedom of the press. You have no
right to interfere with our liberty to
do what we like.” And, the gentlemen
of the jury would remember that what
might happen in Launceston might hap-
pen at Hobart Town ; the privilege they
were contending for was not for one
paper : the Hobart Town Mercury, and
the Tasmanian Tribune were as deeply
interested in the question as the Launces-
ton Examiner, and the case of the
take possession of the horse as Govern-
ment property ; therefore that they had
liberty to ignore the whole transaction as
if it were not a transaction at all. But
the jury could not wipe facts away ; Mr
Lord, who paid the Colonial Treasurer’s
order for £7 10s, must, if he had done his
duty—as he (Mr Miller) presumed he had
—have entered the payment in his books
as for Gritfin’s horse, and that he was
afterwards recouped. His learned friend
had spoken of it as an “ irregular appro-
priation,” and what was the meaning of
that 1 Sir James Wilson, in conversation
recently, had told him (the learned coun-
sel) that at the late Intercolonial Confer-
ence one of the members deliberately de-
clared that there was no crime in Tasma-
me case oi xne ence one or tne members deliberately cle-
Exammer to-day, might be that of the dared that there was no crime in Tasma-
Mercury, or the Tribune to-morrow, nia ; but they knew that there was a
according to what Government might be contrary impression in the other colonies,
in office. Therefore he contended that and it was asked if a man stopped another
it was for the public benefit that the
whole transaction of the Government as
to Griffin’s horse, the whole conduct of
the Government, should be exposed. He
would go further, it was for the benefit of
his learned friend, who was not only a
Minister of the Crown, but Minister of
J ustice. He had made an explanation in
the House, he had given his evidence in
that Court, but at that moment they
could not determine the great advantage of
the affair being brought to light, as the best
justification was, that it was a bona tide
sale. An order was sent to the Railway
department to pay the £7 10s ; it was
paid, and the horse was taken possession
of on behalf of the Government; he (Mr
Miller) would like to see how that account
was entered in the books of the depart-
ment ; it ought to appear as a payment
on the purchase of the horse ; a horse
which was bought for £7 10s, and after-
wards sold for £6. Surely'that transaction
was enough to provoke the censure of any
one who dared to censure the conduct of
Mr Giblin and the Government to which
he belonged ! It was no doubt much
easier to represent it as a sale for £6, and
to leave out the ugly fact that the Go-
vernment had bought the horse at a high
value and 'sold it at a low figure. Such
facts as that were certainly not discourag-
ing to persons who were inclined to offer
and took away his watch, what would he
call that ? “Oh,” said the person interro-
gated, “ I should call that an irregular
appropriation !” (a laugh). That was
what Mr Giblin said—that there was an
irregular appropriation of £7 10s for
Griffin’s horse (renewed laughter). When
his learned friend, who was Public Prose-
cutor, next prepared a charge for stealing
a watch, would he frame the information
as for “ an irregular appropriation of a
watch ?” (laughter). The jury would say,
as men of business, that that horse was
bought by the Government, and
was sold by the Government. But if
they had any doubt, what could they
make of Williams’s evidence ? He was
instructed to bid for the horse on the
part of the Government ; he did not do
that but he did what amounted to the
same thing, he told the auctioneer to buy
the horse in for £7 10s, and he heard the
auctioneer say ‘ ‘ the horse was the pro-
perty of the Government.” The learned
counsel appealed to the jury, was not that
a most perfect construction of the in-
structions he got from Mr Giblin ? Mr
Bell would not take the 7s 6d commission
on the sale of the horse, and the Colonial
Treasurer was the richer by that 7s 6d.
Williams said he never doubted the sale ;
he told the owner of the horse the horse
was sold, but Griffin said it was no sale,
passive resistance : let such things go on, being of opinion that the horse had been
let the case be multiplied by hundreds sold at Deloraine, when he himself bid
and thousands, and what would become of for it. But what did Williams say ? Sold
the revenue ? That £7 10s was the result or not sold he got the money ;he dis-
of a bona fide sale, but it was said, “ Oh, closed that— that they had brought out.
35


The jury could not think that Williams and Farther communication with Mr Giblin
Propsting held their tongues when they
received the telegrams. Williams was
bound to give information to the owner,
and more than that, it would be a strange
state of things if the latter could not enquire
what had become of the proceeds ; there-
fore Williams was not only justified in
giving, but bound to give information.
Williams went on to say he retained his
costs. He was never questioned, and he
had never been asked to give
back the money ; they did not
say he was appropriating the money ;
nothing of the kind. All that the Go-
vernmentgotwas£4odd, and the difference
was about 30s. Williams said he always
considered he was acting on the instruc-
tions he received from Mr Giblin. Then,
Mr Propsting was called, and Mr Prop-
sting said he never had any doubt that
the Government bought the horse ; he
bought it himself, blit said he never had
a warrant to take the horse ; he took it as
an officer of the Government and obeyed
the instructions he received from the Go-
vernment. Before he acted the animal
was put on his premises by a constable.
He had instructions from the Attorney-
General, who said the money was of no
consequence.
The Solicitor-General—He did not say
that.
Mr Miller—Well, the Attorney-General
said, “ the matter was of more importance
than the amount nominally involved,”
which was about the same thing.
The telegram to Mr Propsting was as
follows—“ Hobart Town, 4th Oct., 1873.
—A horse has been seized for railway
rate, and purchased by Government for
£7 10s. Will you send one of your con-
stables on the horse to Hobart Town, so
that the horse may be sold here. The
matter is of far more importance than the
amount nominally involved. I have tele-
graphed to Williams to hand the horse to
you. —W. R. Giblin, A. Gl.” Now sup-
posing he had complied with that, the
constable would have been taken away
from the district, his expenses would have
to be paid, the horse’s expenses to be
paid, and with what result? How much was
the horse worth ? It was a case of buy-
ing a horse for £7 10s, sending him to the
other side of the island at great expense,
and then to be sold at a considerable loss.
Mr Propsting was more prudent; and the
result of his communication was that the
horse was to be taken to Campbell Town,
for disposal at the agricultural show sale.
led to first an offer of £5, and then an
offer of £6, which was ultimately accepted,
being the most that could be made of a
bad bargain ; and he (Mr Miller) was of
opinion the term ‘ ‘ hucksters ” was rightly
applied to the Government as to their
conduct in the transaction. That £6 was
all that was received, no more. What did
Mr Giblin tell the House of Assembly 1
The horse was sold for £6, and the £6
went to the Treasury and paid the rate
within a shilling or two.
Solicitor-General—He made no such
statement.
His Honor said the Cornwall Chronicle
of the 17th October contained it, and the
Examiner of the 18th.
Mr Miller gave it from the Examiner of
the 18th, and said it was the true state-
ment. Mr Giblin himself spoke of the
mischievous tendency of what had been
written, and said it was not to be treated
in a jocular spirit, as a joke ; they must
not call ahorse a “moke.” He spoke in
his place in Parliament, but he did not
seem at that time to be very much
injured ; not that his own per-
son had suffered. He said :—“The
thing would be too ridiculous, too ab-
surd for notice but for that ; and besides
such writing did mischief by going out
and being circulated and believed as to
the way in which public matters were
dealt with by the Government.” But he
(Mr Miller) thought the disclosure of how
matters were dealt with by the Govern-
ment was far more injurious. “It
was a great pity that such things
went forth to the public, when it must
be known not to be true. The effect,
however, was to make it more difficult to
carry out the law, and to make it more
irksome than it need be. The fact was
the horse was sold here for £6, which
went into the Treasury, and it paid the
rate and the expenses within a shilling or
two.”
Solicitor-General—That only shows my
learned friend the Attorney-General
never said anything of the sort.
Mr Miller—My learned friend says the
Mercury did not report correctly, then
that the Cornwall Chronicle did not, and
now that the Examiner is incorrect. Mr
Giblin closed his testimony by referring
to the way in which the people of the
North acted and the cheerfulness with
which the shilling rate had been
paid by persons who even had no
interest in the railway, and also the fact
36


that there were only 44 defaulters. In
fact, the amount collected was in excess
of the estimate. As to the importance of
public proceedings being reported, they
found judges bearing testimony to the
value of reports, whilst others referred to
the fact that reports should be submitted
from time to time for the revision of the
speakers ; but they could only act on
such reports as they had, although they
were not on all occasions strictly accu-
rate, and of course reporters were not
perfect any more than any other people,
and therefore they sometimes made mis-
takes. His learned friend, in saying the
horse was sold “ here,” might have been
talking conventionally, for part of the
contract for the horse would be made in
Hobart Town ; however, that was of very
little importance. He would turn to the
Mercury after giving that report in the
Cormvall Chronicle.
The Judge remarked that he had no
Mercury before him.
Mr Miller said he was only going to
show the unanimity of the press, but they
had both Williams’s and Propsting’s con-
firmation of those telegrams that there
was a bona fide sale. The Treasurer sent
his order for payment of £7 10s for the
horse, which was subsequently sold for
£O. He asked the jury to put them-
selves in “ Fair Play’s” position as some
resident in Launceston or the country,
looking at the papers to see what was
taking place in Parliament, and he, per-
haps, knowing about the horse —for the
affair would be made known in that dis-
trict—that it was sold on the Treasurer’s
order for £7 10s, that the Government
had ordered Mr Propsting to take posses-
sion, and that the animal was actually in
Mr Propsting’s paddock at St. Leonards ;
and he read a report on the 17th or 18th
Oct. of what Mr Giblin had said in Par-
liament, that he had deliberately got up
in his place in the House and stated that
he did not know the name of the pur-
chaser, a circumstance that could not
have been forgotten, would not they, if
in “ Fair Play’s ” position, have felt
justified in suggesting that the Attor-
ney-General was chargeable with un-
truthfulness, and could a writer
have commented more delicately 1
Surely it would be believed that a writer
in the public press was legitimately enti-
titled to ask for an explanation of such a
strange statement from the Attorney-
General • that he did not know the name
of the purchaser, when he had been the
medium of selling the animal ? Would
they not express their surprise at the
statement that he did not know who was
the purchaser of that remarkable “ screw”
(a laugh) ? Then he came to the other
part of the libel as a necessary inference ;
granting that he knew of the documen-
tary evidence, and inferring that as he
made one statement that was to all appear-
ance untrue, perhaps he would repu-
diate the documentary evidence. He
had repudiated the knowledge of the
purchaser, and it would literally justify
“Fairplay” in the inference that he
would repudiate the documents, the tele-
grams. He had sent an order for the pay-
ment of the money, had he not repudiated
that, after all that evidence, and has ho
not ventured to repudiate it, and when
his own signature, his own order were
produced perhaps he would repudiate
that as well ? He had done so, and in
that respect amply justified the inference.
But the law did not require that they
should justify, and they had not justified ;
it was sufficient to plead that they were
privileged to comment on the public con-
duct of a public man, and that the alleged
libel was not in excess of the privilege,
and that their belief was not a mere
capricious belief, but based on a reason-
able interpretation of his public acts.
Taking that to be the law, he asked the
jury if “ Fair Play ” had not reasonable
ground for his belief ; if the facts brought
before them were not sufficient to afford
a well-founded belief and to justify the
comment, which he contended was a fair
comment ? In that aspect, the Attorney-
General himself was a debtor to “Fair-
play,” because it afforded him an oppor-
tunity of explaining. He did not think,
however, Mr Giblin’s explanation
was satisfactory ; his (Mr Miller’s)
own belief was that he had made
“ confusion worse confounded ; ” he
had deepened the charge, and his own
declaration was all the more damaging ;
the dealing with other people’s property
on such slight grounds was far more
damaging than the imputation of saying
in hisplace in Parliament what was untrue,
and far more unworthy. With respect to
the articles which were put in in aggrava-
tion they were put in to express malice.
What did they consist of ? Truthful re-
ports of what took place in respect to the
sale of Griffin’s horse. All the papers
reached the office of the Attorney-General,
and he might, for all he (Mr Miller) knew,
be a private subscriber to the Examiner ;
37


and surely he had the opportunity of
writing to the papers and objecting to or
explaining any report or articles that had
appeared in that journal 1 It was said
“Fair Play” wrote in antagonism to Mr
Giblin ; well, they all knew the Examiner
was in opposition to Mr Chapman and the
Attorney-General politically, and wrote
against their policy, as all opposition
journals did ; it was the ordinary course
for all opposition journals to pursue.
The supporter of the Government in-
dulged in fulsome commendation of
these heaven - sent benefits, and
they ought, according to their or-
gan, to pray for a continuance of them
for some time to come; while the opposi-
tion journals spoke out in strong terms of
the demerits of the Government; but it
was absurd to charge them with malice.
The jury could not believe on the face on
those articles that the Examiner had an
animus against Mr Giblin, or made any
attacks on him either in his private capacity
as a citizen or a private advocate ; if they
had, that would be malice. But
by producing those articles he had
driven matters to the extreme, and the
articles in question had no reference to
this action at all. It was not to be ex-
pected that they would abstain from
attack on the Government, but that did
not imply malice, for that would be a be-
trayal of their trust as journalists, and an
abuse of the privilege of comment on the
public conduct of public men. But they
could not be expected to abstain from
noticing the proceedings of Government
because an action was pending. That
would not be just to those whose prin-
ciples they represented in the Examiner,
and those persons, their subscribers and
their readers, would have a right to say,
“ You know what our principles are, you
have not given us the information we are
entitled to, and the political instruction
it that has been your wont to
afford us, as you have been silent on all
those topics since October last.” It would
not satisfy them to say, “We have a libel
action pending, and we must not publish
articles on controversial politics: we must
not say anything about the Main Line,
the Mersey and Deloraine Tramway, the
Launceston and Western railway, or even
Griffin’s horse (a laugh). That might
involve comment on the public conduct of
trial of the libel action.” They could not
be expected to do that, while during the
same time the Government organ was al-
lowed to say all kinds of things adversely
to the principles of an opposition journal.
If that were to be submitted to, did not
the jury see that it would be the most
effectual way of having the press gagged 1
He would turn to one of the articles in the
Examiner of the 15th October. In the
very same paper was published the cor-
respondence between the attorney for the
plaintiff and the defendants, and it would
be seen that the attorney’s letters were
most discourteous on the one side (of
course by the Attorney. General’s in-
structions) and the defendants’ letters most
courteous and conciliatory on the other.
Could the jury believe it was not intended
to frighten the Examiner into silence ? An
apology was not desired ; therefore when
the Examiners were produced, having no
reference to this case, they could judge of
the object. If an opportunity had been
given, the conductors of the Examiner
might have made enquiry into the
matter, and they show their willingness
to do so when they write ‘ ‘Tell us what it
is you complain of; we would not de-
signedly publish what was un-
true, and when it is shown that we
have been led into error, it will be our
pleasure no less than our duty to make
what reparation is within our power.”
Did that look like malice ? But no op-
portunity of the kind was afforded, and
none was intended, although they found
there was nothing but conciliatory lan-
guage. If the Examiner had written in
the same bouncible tone as the letter of
the attorney, it would have been different;
if, on the other hand, for doing their
duty they had made an abject apology,
their influence would have been gone,
they would have been gagged effectually,
a powerful political journal would have
been silenced, and the object of the At-
torney-General and those members of the
Government who approved of his action,
would have been effected. Mr Miller
went on to read the following article from
a copy of the Examiner, which had been
put in by the plaintiff:
The “happy family” which sits in Hobart
Town and disposes of the liberties and the pur-
ses of the people as it pleases itself, are con-
summating the ruin of the colony as fast as
the Attorney-General and the Govern- possible. On the 17th instant theJLaunceston and
ment to which he belongs, and if we dare Western Railway Bill was introduced, and great
£ia a, S& Wthem *‘ lle arti l eS to
11 be produced in aggravation on the ment propounded in the measure—another
38


£7,500 to be wrung from the Railway District in
the current year, and £lO,OOO more in 1874. If the
North were to respond in sympathy to the glib
utterances of Messrs. Fysh and Giblin, we
should prostrate ourselves in humble gratitude
like Eastern slaves. But Ministers will be dis-
appointed. What has disturbed the North,
and justifies all the disaffection which pervades
this part of the island is, what Mr Lines cor-
rectly alleged, the violation of principle—for
which the former Chapman-Giblin Government
is answerable —in the different terms applied
to the Main Line Railway. Deny it as Minis-
ters and their abettors may attempt to do, it is
incontrovertible that when the principle of
local liability or guarantee was adopted in re-
spect to the Launceston and Western Railway,
it.was with a distinct understanding accepted
by the Railway District that this principle
would be enforced in respect to any other rail-
ways that might be constructed. It is idle to
say that there is no instrument in which the
bargain is set forth. It would be a
strange thing if there were. Covenants
between the legislature and the peo-
ple or any section of the community,
we never heard of in any other shape than in
the expressed opinions of Ministers and leading
statesmen, the tacit approval of these in de-
bate, and the generally accepted obligation of
dealing with parallel cases on identical princi-
ples. All these elements of an understanding
at the date of passing the Launceston and
Western Railway Bill and the acceptance of the
obligations contemplated in that measure on the
part of the local ratepayers, are pi'oducible, and
have been quoted in these columns over and
over again. Will Mr Giblin have the hardihood
to say that when the poll was taken in this dis-
trict the voters submitted to the liability they
undertook, even though a railway should be
constructed in some other district of the colony
on totally different conditions ? By what special
pleading will he establish that the ratepayers of
the Launceston and Western Railway district
agreed to be made an exception to the rest of
the colony ? With as much consistency as it is
now placed in the position which Mr Fysh and
Mr Giblin insist upon, might the Road District
of Chudleigh or Deloraine be saddled with
rates for the Franklin Road District. Neither
on the basis of any accepted understanding, nor
of consistency with the principle on which the
local guarantee was based, can a special obliga-
tion for our railway be upheld since the prin-
ciple of local guarantee was put aside on the
Main Line Bill. And we have in these columns
many times quoted the speeches of Ministers in
Parliament wherein they argued that
it was a safe course to grant the
Launceston Railway, because the people
in the district were willing and able to pay
for it; and if any other railway were clamored
for the same conditions being insisted upon it
could be granted also with like safety. There
was no danger, and there could be no injustice,
it was said, while one rule was adhered to in res-
pect to all projected railways. But the
love of power was too strong for con-
sistency and principle to be upheld ; and when
the Main Line agitation set in, after combating
it for some time as only to be acceded to on the
same terms as our Launceston and Western
Railway,—the tide being strong,—and place,
power, pay being in peril, it was all of a sudden
found out that a line from Hobart Town stood
in a totally different position to one from Laun-
ceston. Mr Treasurer Chapman did not repeat
what he said when the scheme was only feebly
supported in the Assembly : “ Show me the
ratepayers along the proposed Main Line ready
to guarantee the interest on its construction as
the ratepayers of the Launceston and Western
district have done, and then I go with you.”
This was all forgotten, and it suited a Southern
Parliament to prescribe one rule for the North,
and another and much easier one for the South;
and because the North kicks, it is held up as a
community of repudiators, etc., etc., and Mr
Giblin reads insulting homilies to the effect
that it should be obedient and honest!
Mr Douglas’s appeal to Ministers to mitigate
the dose by postponing the collection of the
second moiety of the rate for 1873 has been
ignominiously rejected, and Ministers have
even been rated by their friends for being too
indulgent to the district. It is, however, to be
said in extenuation of the relentless feeling to
which some honorable members gave expression,
that the country ajjpears by Mr Fysh’s account
to be steeped in wealth. Everything is flourish-
ing ; gold is as abundant as silver, and silver as
copper used to be, and the Western District is
looked upon as peculiarly sharing in this abun-
dance of the precious metals. We hope the
Treasurer will find his estimate substantiated,
when he has to prove it. Another shilling in
the pound in 1873, one-and-sixpence in 1874,
and a taste of Income Tax ; thus Tasmania goes
ahead!
The Judge said in his opinion that
article was immaterial to this case.
Mr Miller said it was from a paper put
in, and showed that the Examiner was a
mild and moderate opposition paper.
His Honor on looking at the paper
(Examiner , 18th October,) said the article
had not been read.
Mr Miller observed that papers had
been put in to show malice, and he read
the article to show that nothing could
be more moderate for an opposition
journal. He next read an article from
the Examiner, (previously quoted),
October 7, giving an account of what took
place at Bell and Westbrook’s mart.
Again he asked the jury if the article as
to what took place at the auction mart,
which he had just read, was not mild and
moderate from first to last ? There was
no enmity evinced. No article could be more
complimentary to plaintifl’s gift of speech,
although it might not be so complimen-
tary to his ability as a lawyer, in _ which
capacity he made the contract with the
Main Line Railway Company purposely
“ bald.”
Solicitor-General—Which he denied.
39


Mr Miller—No, he said it was “pur- drowned bodies, while sanctity remained in
posely bald and vague” as to the route, them, but at length, becoming buoyant by
Was not a writer at liberty to comment on
his conduct as a public man—as the State
lawyer, the guardian of our privileges ? If
there was no malice, if what he inserted
was honest and bona fide ; if it were a fair
comment on what facts were stated inside
and outside of Parliament—then he said
it was privileged. He trusted that no
feeling on the part of the jury would be
allowed to lead to a violation of their
duty. It had been well said—and he
always preferred to use other language
than his own—“ thoughts that breathe
and words that bum let him turn to an
authority, reminding the gentlemen of the
Jury that they were at that moment guar-
dians of the freedom of the Press, and it
was for them to say if that were libel or
not libel— whether it was not the right of
the Press to comment on the public acts of
public men ? In their hands was the free-
dom of the Press ; if they by their ver-
dict said that the acts of the Government
in reference to this celebrated horse were
not to be canvassed and commented on,
then the Press would be gagged, and the
community would be driven to put up
with a Press that could not be trusted—a
one-sided and practically corrupt Press.
Curran said in his defence of Hamilton
Rowan :
What then remains ? The liberty of the Press
only: that sacred Palladium which no influence,
no power, no Government, which nothing but the
folly or the depravity, or the folly or the cor-
ruption of a jury can ever destroy. And what
calamities are the people saved from by having
public communication left open to them ? I will
tell you, gentlemen, what they are saved from ;
I will tell you also to what both are exposed by
shutting up that communication. In one case,
sedition speaks aloud and walks abroad; the
demagogue goes forth ; the public eye is upon
him ; he frets his busy hour on the stage ; but
soon either weariness, or bribe, or punishment,
or disappointment bears him down, or drives
him off, and he appears no more.
He then contrasts the effect of that free-
dom upon different countries, and pro-
ceeds :
But, gentlemen, if you wish for a nearer and
a more interesting example, ycm have it in the
history of your own Revolution ; you have it at
that memorable period when the Monarch
found a servile acquiescence in the ministers of
his folly—when the liberty of the press was
trodden under foot—when venal sheriffs re-
turned packed juries to carry into effect those
fatal conspiracies of the few against the many —
when the devoted benches of public justice were
filled by some of those foundlings of fortune,
who, overwhelmed in the torrents of corruption
at an early period, lay at the bottom like
them, but at length, becoming buoyant by
putrefaction, they rose as they rotted, and
floated to the surface of the polluted stream,
where they were drifted along, the objects of
terror and contagion and abomination. In that
awful moment of a nation’s travail of the last
gasp of tyranny, and the first breath of freedom,
how pregnant is the example ! The press ex-
tinguished, the people enslaved, and the prince
undone. As the advocate of society, therefore,
of peace, of domestic liberty, and the lasting
union of the two countries, I conjure you to
guard the liberty of the press, that great sen-
tinel of the State, that grand detector of public
'imposture; guard it, because when it sinks, there
sinks with it, in one common grave, the liberty
of the subject, and the security of the Crown,
There was language worth listening to.
He would read some graphic lines from
Thomson, quoted by Erskine in the de-
fence of Hardy :
“ Unblest by virtue, Government a league
Becomes a circling junto of the great
To rob by law : Religion mild, a yoke
To tame the stooping soul, a trick of State
To mask their rapine, and to share the prey.
Without it, what are senates, but a farce,
Of consultation deep and reason free,
While the determined voice and heart are
sold?
What boasted freedom, but a sounding name ?
And what election, but a market vile,
Of slaves self-barter’d ?”
Small as is our place, that is as applicable
here as it was at the time when Erskine
used it. If, gentlemen, you allow any
feeling on your part to assist you in be-
traying that great right of the freedom of
qhe press, by yielding to the claim of a
verdict and damages on the part
of the Attorney-General, the plain-
tiff on this occasion, and in
preventing the discharge of your duty,
you part with your guardianship of the
Palladium of our liberties, and give room
for the deterioration of the press, so that
it will become a venal and corrupt press,
and the community will become slaves.
The real Thunderer, the London Times ,
might be able to cope with conceited and
ambitious men who would sacrifice the
sacred right of liberty at the shrine of
selfishness ; but in a small place, where
the proprietors of the press were men of
small capital, when it was once known, or
supposed that they could not bear the
pressure of legal proceedings, it would
give impunity to those who wished to
tyrannize over them, to gag the press
in fact, and as Erskine said, “the
liberty of the press would be an empty
sound, and no man could venture to
write on any subject without an attorney
at one elbow, and a counsel at the other.”
40


He trusted the jury would take care not
to confine the press of this country within
such narrow limits. If Mr Giblin were
successful, the press would be tamed, it
would either cease to publish, or it would
be worthless for the high purposes for
which the press should be maintained.
The learned counsel said he earnestly
trusted the jury would calmly consider
those facts, and if they did so they must
come to the conclusion that the de-
fendants were only discharging their duty
as journalists; that the writer of the letter
was doing a public duty ; that it was but
a fair and reasonable comment on the
public acts of a public man, seeing that
all public men were justly amenable to
criticism and to public opinion. He
trusted their verdict would be for the
defendants, and that they would thereby
express their conviction that Mr Giblin
should not have gone so far as he did, that
he should have confined himself to the
aftording of advice, and not exceeded his
functions by giving directions ; and above
all that if he chose to maintain his high
position, he should be taught to remember
that he was not beyond the censure of the
public press, that he should follow
the example of his predecessors,
who had to submit to their
conduct being talked and written about,
and on some occasions commented on in a
manner that was not pleasant or agree-
able, without coming into Court whining
like a well-beaten school boy, and who
never would have consented to seek for a
money solatium for any supposed wrong
inflicted by public journalists. He again
said it was unprecedented for a Minister
of the Crown in a British colony to have
ever brought such an action. There had
been cruel prosecutions and severe exac-
tions, which had produced mischievous
consequences enough ; but no Minister of
the Crown had ever before been petty enough
to come into a court of justice and ask a
jury to give him pounds, shillings, and
pence as a compensation for injured
dignity. Mr Giblin might have come and
asked leave to file a criminal information ;
he might have given the proprietors of
the Examiner an opportunity of purging
themselves of the charge, and of showing
that no wrong was intended or actually
done. But Mr Giblin had not taken that
course ; he had reserved to himself the
peculiar distinction of being the first
Minister of the Crown who had ever come
into a court of justice to ask for pecu-
niary damages for a supposed defamatory
article against himself. He (Mr Miller)
deplored for Mr Giblin’s own sake, he
deplored for the country’s sake, while
the town was crowded with strangers,
that he had given the opportunity to
afford such a strange sight—that the
Attorney-General of the colony, a Minis-
ter of the Crown, should ask a jury of
seven gentlemen for pounds, shillings,
and pence for what he was pleased to
term a libel. He (Mr Miller) again said
he trusted the verdict would be for the
defendants, and that when Mr Giblin
should have had more experience, he
would learn to confine himself to his
duties—that he would come to the deter
mination to perform his duties more
patiently, to take as well as give, to ac-
cept the rough with the smooth, and to
endure the censures of those from whom
he himself had not withheld the lash.
He could have taken the opportunity, as
he did in the case of the Cornwall Chroni-
cle, of making his own explanation in the
House, or to communicate with the jour-
nal if they wrote what he supposed was
untrue or not justified. After all, it
might have done him no harm ; if he were
maligned, the injury would have recoiled
on those who maligned him. The learned
counsel concluded a powerful speech by
saying he left the case to the jury with
some confidence. As to the effect of
statements which had been made in a
Southern journal purposely to prejudice
their minds, he hoped the jury would do
their best to wipe away the impression ;
and if they did so, he felt that he should
have a right to expect, as he was entitled
to, a verdict for the defendants. He
need hardly say that those injurious
remarks which had been made with a
view to prejudice a Southern jury
against a Northern journal, and to
create and foster bitter feeling between
North and South would recoil on the
writer himself. He believed the jury
would have the power to raise themselves
above the influence of local feelings, and
that they would as cheerfully do their
duty in a case from the other side of the
colony as they would in one arising in
the Sovrth ; that they would not suffer any
feeling for Mr Giblin or the Government
to which he belonged to interfere with
the due performance of their duty. He
trusted the result would be to vindicate
the freedom of the press, on which so
much of their liberties depended ; that
they would feel the interests of the colony
and of true British freedom were now in
41


their guardianship. Liberty herself, to use Examiner.
the words of Erskine, was the last and
best gift of God to his creatures, and she
must be taken just as she was : they
might pare her down into bashful regu-
larity, and shape her into a perfect model
of severe scrupulous law, but she would
then be Liberty no longer; and they
must be content to die under the lash of
this inexorable justice which they had ex-
changed for the banners of freedom. But
if they did their duty to the cause of jus-
tice and liberty, their duty to the coun-
try, to themselves and their children, by
justifying the confidence he, from his ex-
perience of Southern juries, felt in the
result, they would return a verdict for
the defendants, and in that way send Mr
Giblin home, it might be, a sadder but a
wiser man.
The Solicitor-General replied on the
whole case. He said it had been his lot
to hear his learned friend on many oc-
casions, and he always found it necessary
to divest his mind of a great proportion of
his remarks, many of which he might as
well Have left out (a laugh). He had told
them of the industry with which he had
selected extracts from works and writers
on the subject of the liberty of the
press, and he had produced some little
book which any school-boy might be the
possessor of, and he had treated seven
gentlemen of the jury who had arrived at
the years of discretion with some extracts.
And he affected to believe that the jury
were going to be led away from the path
of their duty by the reading of those ex-
tracts showing what were the opinions of
men in times gone by before they and he
were born. If he had been giving a lecture
to little boys it might have been appro-
priate, and he had no doubt the book was
selected from the nursery (a laugh). But
the idea of coming to talk to the seven
gentlemen of the jury in such a strain,
and in doing so to take up an hour and a
half of their time was something
monstrous. The freedom of the press !
They all knew the object of his learned
friend in reading those extracts, to blind
them to the true question at issue, and
that the way in which his learned friend
had referred to it might be re-
ported in the Launceston Examiner
to-morrow (a laugh), that the people in
the North might learn that a Southern
jury were traitors to their liberties and to
the interests of the colony for doing their
duty, and returning a verdict for the
plaintiff for defamatory writing in the
What were those burning
words to which he alluded 1 If the jury
gave damages they would be traitors to
their rights. Traitors to their rights !
What did he mean by rights ? Were de-
famatory articles in the newspapers their
rights 1 Were those our treasured privi-
leges ? He told them the paper was justi-
fiable in publishing such articles, but he
(Mr Adams) said it was not. They heard
of the freedom of the press, and he
had enlarged on that subject, but where
did he select anything about the licence
of the Press ? The freedom of the Press !
True. But no one was justified in the
free unbridled licence of the Press, and
that was what the Examiner had indulged
in. Was there any licence for a news-
paper proprietor to designate a person as
a liar, and to say he was ready to repu-
diate his acts —to charge him with being
dishonest ? Was there any privilege for a
newspaper writer in that respect above
any other man ? Had any persons the
privilege to become slanderers, to be libel-
lers ? And a newspaper proprietor stood
in no better position. It was unnecessary
for him (Mr Adams) to read cases ;
he stated the law to them with respect to
newspapers and newspapers writers,
that they were in no better posi-
tion than any ordinary member of
the community. It was their privilege
to comment on the acts of public men,
but they had no liberty to abuse the fact
of having a broadsheet to found charges
prejudicial to any individual, public or
private. He agreed with the dicta laid
down in the books—undoubtedly public
men must expect their public acts to be
commented on ; but they could not legally
be charged with dishonesty, untruthful-
ness, unless indeed the charge could be
proved. And there was no plea of justifi-
cation ; his learned friend said it was a
fair comment, but that was no justifica-
tion. He had been endeavoring to show
that the whole of what was stated was per-
fectly true. If so, why not have pleaded jus-
tification, and let them know what he was
going to do ? His learned friend ob-
served that Mr Giblin should not have
taken notice of all that was said, nor
would he, nor did he take notice of those
articles which appeared previously to
“Fair Play’s” letter; but when that
abusive letter appeared he begun to think
of the other things that had appeared ;
and when it was said nothing wrong was
intended, was not the plaintiff justified in
coupling the articles and seeing what the
42


motives were ? And was lie not justified ? a cow should have been seized for the de-
He was charged with being a huckster, a
wind-bag, a reptile ; and with that could
it be said that there was no malicious
feeling towards Mr Giblin ? But it was
said it was reserved for the Attorney-
General to bring an action of this kind.
He (Mr Adams) was not prepared to say
whether an action of the kind had been
brought before ; he did not remember
one ; but if no action had been brought
what would have been done ? He might
have filed a criminal information, and
what would have been said if a criminal
information had been filed ? It would
have been said, “Here’s a harsh mea-
sure ; why didn’t you bring an action, and
give the defendants an opportunity of
justifying what they had done 1” Be-
cause, however, the defendants were not
in the prisoners’ dock, were they to pooh-
pooh the case because it was the first
action of the kind? He (Mr Adams)
could not see what his learned friend had
to complain of on that score ; they had
simply taken the mildest course. His
learned friend had said he was brought
down there as the defendants’ counsel,
and he (Mr Adams) supposed his words
would go forth to show how liberal he
could be in the abuse of everybody con-
nected with the case ; he did not know
who he had let off—except himself (Mr
Adams) for which he was thankful (a
laugh). His friend had asserted that the
allegations contained in that letter of
“ Fair Play ” were true ; he did not wish
to deal with others, as Mr Chapman, and
Mr Fysh, but the newspaper was continu-
ally alleging how infamous the Ministry
were. His learned friend said this was
the grossest irregularity ever committed
by a colonial Government, a contemptible
transaction unworthy of a Government,
so that no language was considered too
strong to designate it ; but what was the
gist of the matter before them ? That it
had become necessary to compel payment
of the railway rate on the North side of
the island ; there was an anticipated com-
bination not to purchase a distress ; that
it being brought under the notice of the
Attorney-General, Mr Williams, the Su-
perintendent of Police asks advice and
receives it. He was thankful his learned
friend was not able to pick a hole in his
ficiency, and if that were not enough,
then another and another until the whole
rate were recovered. But the object was
to protect the interests of the Govern-
ment, and it was the interest of the Go-
vernment the plaintiff was looking after ;
he would have been unworthy to be a
member of the Government if he had not
done so. Had he done as his friend sug-
gested, by the time the £7 10s were
raised Griffin, for whom by the by,
his friend had brought an action,
might have been ruined. The horse
was, however, removed to Launces-
ton to get a market, if possible. What-
ever “Fair Play ” or others might say to
the effect that Mr Giblin was doing a
huckstering business, insinuating that he
was taking a course whereby he might
put money into his own pocket; and
though by some that might be believed at
the present time, the fact was the horse
was sent to Launceston for the purpose of
getting, if possible, a proper price for it.
Was Mr Griffin to be treated differently
to other men, in any other way than a
poor man or a rich man oughtto be treated?
There, they were watching narrowly in
the North the action of the Government,
his learned friend was ready to pick holes
if he could, and bring home some gross
irregularity to the Government. The
horse was put up at Deloraine, and there
was no hoiia fide bid ; it was then taken
to Bell and Westbrook’s Mart at Launces-
ton, where also there was a combination not
to buy,to defeat the collection of the rate,
which would be the effect should
the combination succeed. The ob-
ject of sending it to Launceston, was
that it might be sold and all matters con-
cluded as between the public and Mr
Griffin ; not that the Attorney-General or
the Colonial-Treasurer was to be the pur-
chaser ; there was no such idea, and he
did not believe his learned friend thought
so for a moment. What was the irregu-
larity ? Not that he (Mr Adams) admitted
there was irregularity. But Mr Williams
was instructed to buy the horse for the
Government, and there he might say it
only showed the misfortune, the unhappy
position they were in at that time, in the
police not being all under one head ;
Williams was a member of the Municipal
(the Solicitor-General’s) law; so far he was police at Deloraine ;he sought advice;
fortunate. Then the Attorney-General but he did not take it; the advice was to
is asked what was to be done ; according bid for the horse on the part of the Go-
to his learned friend the horse should have vernment, but he neglected his duty, and
been sold to the highest bidder, and then left a message with the auctioneer’s clerk
43


to buy for the Government. When asked inflated language “ full of sound but
why he did not do what he was told to meaning nothing” (a lauahV It marlo
do, he said because he did not
know whether the members of
the Municipal Council would like
his buying the horse ; he was
afraid to act up to his instructions,
afraid he should get into hot water if he
bought the horse in reference to the col-
lection of the railway rate which was
unpr pnlar at Deloraine. It was deplorable
that such a thing should happen, but
while it was the law, it must be enforced.
Was the horse purchased? If so, where
was the evidence of it ? Mr Giblin told
them he believed it was bought for the Go-
vernmentonthe faith of what Williams had
telegraphed, but it was not. Let them
take the facts ; the Examiner of the 7th
October said “ the horse was run up to
£4 or £5 but was withdrawn.'’'’ They
might go even further than that ; Griffin
who was at the mart told Williams the
horse was not sold ; Williams did not see
the horse sold ; so that there were three
separate testimonies that the horse was
never sold, and what could be
more conclusive than the evidence
that Mr Bell would not charge com-
mission, as the horse was simply with-
drawn. Well, it was said that knowing
all this, Mr Giblin should have told Par-
liament that the horse was bought by the
Government; but between the 4th and
16th October, the error was detected and
the money was refunded, and then Mr
Giblin went to Parliament and explained
the circumstances. But his friend meant
that Mr Giblin ought to have told a lie to
the Parliament of Tasmania, and said
the horse was bought by the Government,
although it had been discovered that such
was not the fact. Then the horse went
to Mr Propsting. He (Mr Adams) was
not going to weary the jury by giving
them the telegrams over again, but in all
that was done it was plain the Govern-
ment were trying to protect the public
and Mr Griffin, who would be always
liable for the rate until paid. Who was the
purchaser ? Mr Propsting said he pur-
chased that horse, but he never told any
one until three days ago. Did the jury af-
fect to disbelieve Mr Giblin when he told
Parliament he did not know who pur-
chased the horse ? Yet they were" told,
there was irregularity; the grossest ir-
regularity ever committed by any colonial
Government ; but they all knew it was
merely some of those inflated words his
learned friend knew how to blow forth—
meaning nothing” (a laugh). It made
one almost laugh ; and it was said without
attempting to show the phrase was well ap-
plied. For his (the Solicitor-General’s)part
he did not see where the irregularity was.
The only mistake was the mistake on the
part of Williams. Thus he had endea-
vored to clear up the matter, for it was
the foundation of the charge made by
“ Fair Play,” or, as he called it, “ Un-
fair Play.” Were the jury prepared to
say that “Fair Play” was justified in
asserting that Mr Giblin had been guilty
of untruthfulness ? For that was the
starting point—all the others were based
on that; he said he was guilty of un-
truthfulness, and that he was likely to
repudiate his own instructions. Then
there was the charge of dishonesty ; what
was there to prove dishonesty on the part
of Mr Giblin ? He (Mr Adams) knew
not. He had gone through these trans-
actions, and he solemnly protested that
he did not know to what it could apply.
The Northern press indulged in refer-
ences to a dishonest Government, but it
was for the jury to say they were not to
be allowed to call all the Ministers dis-
honest, liars, and repudiators. It was
said it was quite justifiable for the news-
papers to make charges. He would not
refer in detail to those charges, but if the
jury read them, they would agree with
him that, taken in connection with “Fair
Play’s ” letter, that letter could not have
been written with an honest intention.
His learned friend invited them to find a
verdict for the defendants ; he (Mr
Adams) trusted there would be no such
result. His friend might desire a brother
professional to retire from that Court “a
sadder and a wiser man,” but he believed
the plaintiff must have a verdict, and in
that case the question would be what dam-
ages they would award. His learned friend
Mr Giblin said he could not say he had
sustained damage ; it was difficult to
prove damage in such a case. But on
the supposition that he was entitled to a
verdict, it was not necessary to prove
special damage. The verdict of the
jury would necessarily carry temperate
damages, reasonable damages ; but he
invited them not to treat it as an insig-
nificant matter, and limit the damages to
40s —that would be an insult to the plain-
tiff’s character. If he proposed to read
an article from the Examiner of a certain
date, his friend might object.
Mr Miller—Most certainly.
44


The Solicitor-General anticipated that
the same course would have been adopted
on the other side as the plaintiff had pur-
sued, and that Mr Aikenhead would have
got into the box ; he might then have told
them who “Fair Play” was, and they
should have had a useful bit of informa-
tion—that Mr Aikenhead himself, or
some one else, was the writer. Then, he
(Mr Adams) proposed to have asked
about a little article referring to the ques-
tion of damages. He asked the jury to
consider who the plaintiff was. His
learned friend had congratulated himself
in coming down here to defend the
Examiner, with whose principles he did
not agree, and he (Mr Adams) supposed
he thought it a labor of love when he
undertook to speak of Mr Giblin’s
career. He had instituted a comparison
between the present Attorney-General
and those who had preceded
him, and had availed himself
of a disgraceful opportunity of
sneering at the plaintiff as a provincial
attorney. What did he mean by that ?
All honor, said he (Mr Adams ) to the pro-
vincial attorney who had raised himself to
the position which he had attained ! As an
English barrister he should be sorry to
think that his friend Mr Miller had done
that of his own accord ; was not that lan-
guage used merely as the mouthpiece of the
defendants, did it not come from Mr
Aikenhead who showed himself there to
instruct his counsel ? If it came from his
learned friend he could only say he
thought it was in extremely bad taste.
Provincial attorney, forsooth ! He (the
Solicitor-General) happened to be a col-
league of Mr Giblin, as a law officer of
the Crown, and he must say he felt it an
honor t’o be associated with such a nlan.
Mr Giblin, young as he was, was well-
known not only in Tasmania, but in many
of the Australian colonies ; and supposing
the time to come for him to remove from
Tasmania his memory would be cherished
with affection and regard when his de-
tractors’ names should have been lost in
the mists of time. He (Mr Adams) said
it was folly to hope to escape from damages
by such sneers ; it was only an aggravation
and showed a malicious feeling. Whether
his learned friend made the sneer of his
own accord, or from instructions re-
ceived from Mr Aikenhead, he (Mr
Adams) regretted the bad taste exhibited;
he could scarcely believe it was an emana-
tion of his learned friend ; it must have
been put into his mouth by his client. For
what purpose was the plaintiff sneered at
as a supposed local preacher, and why
was the Rev. Mr Clarke asked a question
of that kind ? “Is he a member of your
congregation, a bright and shining light,
a local preacher ? ” Well, what if he was ?
He (Mr Adams) failed to see if he were a
local preacher, that it was any justifi-
cation for the defendants to libel
him. Again, he was asked if he were a
contributor to the press. All that, was
before them, he was called a provincial
attorney, a local preacher, and a con-
tributor to the press ; and those sneers
were to show that he was a person to
be libelled, and that damages, if any
were given at all, were to be in the
smallest sum. He (Mr Adams) trusted
nothing had been omitted by him by
which his client’s interests would be
affected. His learned friend Mr Douglas re-
minded himthat even the mode of examining
those two witnesses, who were called for
no earthly purpose, was unfair. They
were called to produce the telegrams, and
to say how they were carried out, and to
show that Mr Giblin had acted in an un-
derhanded way. And was there any-
thing underhanded ? It only showed that
Mr Williams had been advised, properly
and truly advised, in reference to his con-
duct at Deloraine ; but the real object
was to show that Mr Giblin had been
guilty of some dishonest conduct. He
said the production of those witnesses
was entirely unnecessary, as the telegrams
had been produced by his learned friend
the Attorney-General. The learned coun-
sel concluded by observing that he should
not further labor the case, but he left it
to the gentlemen of the jury in the full
confidence that they would come to a
proper decision, and return a verdict for
the plaintiff with such temperate dam-
ages as would be commensurate with the
importance of the case.
Mr Justice Dobson then pro-
ceeded to charge the jury. He
said : —Gentlemen of the jury, this is an
action brought by William Robert Giblin,
Attorney-General, against William Aiken-
head and Henry Button, proprietors of
the Launceston Examiner newspaper. The
action is for falsely and maliciously pub-
lishing defamatory matter of Mr Giblin.
The defence substantially is that it Con-
sists in a fair comment on the public acts
of Mr Giblin as a public man ; and that
is, shortly, a statement of the record.
Gentlemen, I have attempted to keep out
of the case as far as possible all those facts
45


which struck me as utterly irrelevant to
it, and which could not fail to consume
the public time, if not to prejudice your
minds against the real facts. It is a great
thing in a court of justice to confine the
case to the facts that are relevant, and
that has been my endeavor. I am satis-
fied this Court is not a desirable arena to
discuss any course taken in the North ;
and if I allowed it to be discussed on one
side, 1 could not shut it out on the other
side ; therefore I believe I have shut out
simply that which is utterly irrelevant, and
which I told you ought not to be in your
minds. Now with reference to the facts. The
case arises on the other side of the island,
and it comes for trial at Hobart Town.
You have been appealed to by both sides
to divest your minds of local prejudice,
and of what you may have read in the
public journals. I make no such appeal to
you. You will have simply a hearty de-
sire to do justice ; but as to local feelings,
you will shut them out, as far as it is in
human power to do so, and come to the
consideration of the case, as that of Mr A or
Mr B whom you have never seen or heard
of before. The letter signed “Fair Play”
has reference to what is called
Griffin’s horse ; and prima facie,
I think it admittedly imputes what
is defamatory to the conduct of the
Attorney-General ; it imputes that
he said things in Parliament in
reference to the horse which were in-
consistent with those telegrams. Gentle-
men, I may tell you that any matter
written of another that is defamatory
and. without justification constitutes a
libel : and the first question is was the
article published at all 1 That is ad-
mitted by the defendants ; and the great
question then is, is the occasion privileged, by
reason of the public position of the person
assailed ? It is clear law that the public
conduct of a public man is open to the
fullest discussion ; it may be subject to
hostile criticism, or hostile animadversion,
provided the language be kept within the
limits of public duty, and if it be
not made the means of promulgating
slanders maliciously. In the course of
political discussion strong feeling, angry
feeling is likely to arise, and the fullest
freedom must be allowed, but that feel-
ing must not be based on reckless impu-
tations, and it must be confined to com-
ments which the jury will consider fair
in spirit and intention. There is another
thing in reference to the public con-
duct of public men, that whilst you
may discuss their conduct, denounce their
want of wisdom, expose its folly, and
declaim against its mischief to the public ;
if you go further, and impute base and
sordid, or corrupt motives, you go beyond
the privilege of public discussion on
public affairs ; and a writer who takes
on himself to impute such base, sordid,
or dishonest motives, must show
that it is not without foundation.
The conduct of every man in a public po-
sition may be canvassed and criticized;
the Judge on the bench, the general in
the field, the statesman in the senate,
the jury in the box, the clergy-
man in the pulpit, every one is liable to
have his actions discussed and hostilely
commented on, provided those comments
are fair in the spirit and intention of the
language used. And you may denounce
the general in command'of a fortress be-
sieged by the enemy for having commit-
ted mistakes and for surrendering that
fortress and thereby doing irreparable
injury to his country ; but if you go a
step further and say he is guilty of that
which is dishonourable or dishonest,
that he has placed it in the hands of the
enemy under a corrupt consideration
if not founded in fact, you are not
justified or excused. With reference
to the liberty of the press of which we
haveheard somuch, nodoubtinthiscolony
it has the fullest freedom as in every part
of the British dominions ; and no man
who cares for the integrity of our public
men, impartiality in the administration
of justice, or the decency of public morals
would desire to see it fettered ; and if en-
gaged in the honest discharge of its func-
tions, we must bear in consideration the
immense benefits which the whole com-
munity reaps from having a free press,
and fair discussion, provided that it be
true and within the limits I have laid
down to you. There is probably no pub-
lic man who having been subject to
the criticism of the press, has not
at times felt that his conduct has been
misrepresented, and who from the bottom
of his heart knows things to have been
unfairly imputed to him ; yet he bears it,
and puts up with it because he knows
that it is incident to a public man’s posi-
tion to be criticised, and that the very
comments that are made are likely to be
useful in the performance of his public
duty. These are the principles which
ought to guide the Court, and the great
question whether the defendants have kept
within those limits—whether the article
46


goes beyond fair and honest comment —is
for you to decide. Now the facts, gen-
tlemen, are for you, but it is my duty to
assist you as far as I can ; what I say in
law does not bind you, but you must
exercise your discretion. To go to the
facts ; the first matter we have here is
that Mr Griffin has not paid his rates,
and the communication to the Attor-
ney-General, first by the Council Clerk,
and then by the Superintendent of Police
asking for advice. There is a distinction
drawn between advice and instruction ;
first the Council Clerk asks the Attorney-
General for his opinion ; next he is asked
for advice, and the Solicitor-General
advises on the matter ; and the first per-
son who used the word “ instruction” is
the Solicitor-General, who says “a reserve
should be put on the horse.” I think we
have the words opinion, advice, and in-
structions, but there is very little dis-
tinction between them, under the circum-
stances ; for I think if you ask the advice of
a person so high as the Attorney-General
and he gives advice which is carried out
as instructions, it is very nearly a dis-
tinction without a difference. The
horse was not sold ; we find a combination
to avoid the process of the law being
executed; the horse is put up, as we
know an action was threatened by Griffin,
because the horse is not knocked down to
him for a shilling ; that, gentlemen, is not
now a matter of law for us to consider,
but as civilians not as lawyers, you may
take it that what is manifestly absurd
is not law. Then it has been said
the horse should have been delivered
and the distress renewed, that was
a question of law ; according to law a dis-
tress is to be kept five days after seized
and then sold ; then if another horse is to
be seized that must be kept five days be-
fore sold, and the same thing repeated ; if
that were done I am afraid the expenses
would be rather more than the result
would justify ; so that if in a certain dis-
trict a chattel is to be sold, and there be
a combination not to buy, and the chattel
is not sold, the right thing is to remove
it to a district where there is no such com-
bination, and where what is necessary to
the enforcement of the law can be done.
That may be made the subject of com-
ment, but 1 do not think it affects the
merits of this case. We go a step fur-
ther ; a telegram is sent to the Attorney-
General that the horse is not sold at
Deloraine, and to know what steps are to
be taken ; the reply is “send the horse to
Bell and Westbrook’s Mart at Launces-
ton.” The horse is forwarded to Launces-
ton accordingly ; there we know what
takes place the horse is still in
the possession of Williams ; there he was
holding the horse, and he could not tell
what was going on, except that there was
hooting, shouting, to defeat the sale of
the execution. Williams’s impression is
that the horse was knocked down to the
Crown ; his instructions were to “buy the
horse in his own name if there were no
other bids.” Williams says he was not
prepared to buy the horse in his own
name, because being an officer of the
Municipal Council he did not know that
the Council would approve of his doing
so, and he went to the clerk and told him
to knock it down to the Government.
Subsequently he believed it was so
knocked down, and he telegraphed to the
Attorney-General to that effect. The
Attorney-General’s telegram to him was
—“No instructions have been sent to
Bell. You can instruct him. Do not
let it go under distress and expenses, but
buy on behalf of the Government if no
sufficient bid is made. ” Whether Wil-
liams believed that he could buy in his
own name on behalf of the Government is
a question not raised here. Williams then
telegraphs to the Attorney-General—
“ Horse put up. Two shillings only bona
fide bid. Bought it in. Seven pounds ten
shillings. What am Ito do with it V*
The Attorney-General acted as if Wil-
liams had bought the horse on behalf of
the Government for £7 10s ; but he cer-
tainly made no bid whatever ; he says his
impression was that the horse was
knocked down to the Government, and
he went away believing that the horse was
the property of the Government. But
the language of the telegram is incorrect,
and the Attorney-General put a construc-
tion on it as if it had been knocked down
to the Government, for the man had no
authority to buy in the horse. Upon that
supposition the subsequent acts of the
Government took place. Gentlemen, you
might pause here and ask whether it was
knocked down to the Government as
Williams believes it was ; and you may
take into consideration Mr Giblin’s state-
ment that the error was found out some
few days afterwards, and it had trans-
pired that the horse was not bought in,
and Mr Bell would not receive the 7s fid
commission for the sale ; if it had been
sold to the Government he would have
been entitled to the 7s fid. Then, again,
47


the Government acted on the belief that whether it was sold or not. The learned
it was so sold up to the 10th October.
There are two pieces of evidence : the
Examiner said it was withdrawn; the
words are—“ The horse was then run up
to £4 or £5, but was withdrawn, the bids
it being supposed were not genuine, as no
one could be seen bidding.” That
looks as if there were no bona
fide bids, and that tbe horse was
withdrawn from sale ; and it goes on to
state—“ The animal was taken from the
yard, the crowd hurrahing and cheering
lustily.” Another passage occurs in the
Examiner of the 7th, in which the Ex-
aminer properly expresses its disapproval
of what took place at the sale. The Ex-
aminer in a very fair, a very moderate,
and a very proper leading article
expressed its condemnation of the course
pursued, still anticipating that there
would l)e difficulties. So far as that
article was concerned, it was fair. I look
at the fact that the leading article gives
an account of it :—“ Mr Griffin’s horse
promises to become a celebrity. Our
readers are no doubt aware that Mr
Griffin refused to pay the Western Rail-
way rate. A summons to the Deloraine
Police Court produced no effect, and the
order to pay the sum demanded with costs
was utterly disregarded. Under the cir-
cumstances, an execution should have
been put in without much delay ; but for
some reason best known to themselves the
authorities took no further action for
many weeks. Public curiosity was aroused,
and numerous were the speculations on
the subject, but the general understand-
ing arrived at in the Deloraine district
was, that in event of any of Mr Griffin’s
goods being seized, no one would make a
single bid at the sale. At length the
authorities mustered up courage, and
seized a horse. So far, there was no
opposition ; but having the horse, they
were, of course, anxious to turn him into
cash. He was accordingly put up by public
auction last Friday, but no one would
make an offer. The eloquence of the
knight of the hammer was all in vain : the
late owner of the animal offered one shilling,
but that was not accepted, and the horse
was declared to be not sold. Thinking
he might have better luck elsewhere, the
Deloraine Superintendent of Police
brought the animal into Launceston to
Bell and Westbrook’s sale ; but the result
was the same.” So that the paper itself
gives an account of what took place, and
says it was “not sold.” The question is
counsel himself declared it was a truthful
record of what took place, and I have no
doubt it was intended to be so : at any
rate, both assert that no sale took place,
and if no sale took place, the horse did
not become there and then the property of
the Government ; but the Government,
acting on Williams’s telegram, considered
the horse was their’s, and directed Wil-
liams to be paid the £7 10s, and the horse
to be delivered to Propsting on behalf of
the Government. Now, gentlemen, it is
put to you as sensible men, that the Go-
vernment sold that horse for £6, that
by paying £7 10s, and taking the
horse, and selling it, they admitted
themselves to be the purchasers,
and that they were in fact the purchasers.
The Attorney-General said “ we be-
lieved ourselves to be the purchasers, but
found the horse had not been purchased ;
the money was consequently returned, and
the horse was sold by Mr Propsting for
£6.” The question is, was there a sale
to the Government ? The learned coun-
sel Mr Miller says the Attorney-General
dishonestly repudiated the contract made ;
did he ? He acted on that telegram of
Williams, he paid the money and took
over the horse, but was there a contract,
a contract by which the Government took
over the horse from Williams ? The At-
torney-General was not aware till the
10th that there had been no sale, and
Williams was then instructed to inform
Griffin that the sale had taken place for
£6. It has been asked how the Govern-
ment came to sell through Mr Propsting?
Well, gentlemen, perhaps I should say it
was rather an unusual mode of proce-
dure, but the legality of it is not the
question for us here ; it is rather what is
the truth. Did the Attorney-General
when he spoke in Parliament know that
there was a sale ? Was there a sale ?
When do you think there was a contract ?
All has arisen from the proceedings of
those who were rebelling against the law,
and what took place is imperfectly known.
The Attorney-General was informed that
the horse was bought for the Govern-
ment, and he acted on that belief
and re-sold the horse ; he acted on that
belief till the 10th ; on the other hand the
Attorney-General is called dishonest, and
a repudiator of the transaction by him.
These are the facts as to the horse and
how are we to apply them to the letter
written ? The letter containing the
alleged libel says—“ Thanks to our
48


paternal Government and the wisdom
of the Attorney-General, the seizure of
Griffin’s horse for the unjust railway rate,
bids fair to become a red-letter day in the
calendar. The horse has been pretty w 7 ell
trotted about; but when and where he is
to rest is a question that will take them
some time to decide.” That is pex’fectly
harmless ; the question of the railway rate
is perfectly open to any one to discuss.
“ When the horse was sold at Deloraine,
why was he not handed over to the pur-
chaser 1 for I. have always understood that
anything sold under an execution of dis-
tress warrant was sold without any re-
serve ; if so, upon what grounds does the
Attorney-General presume to place a re-
serve upon it on behalf of the Govern-
ment 1” Well, the question of law does
not arise, as it was a sham sale, the horse
was not sold. “ I see by the reports of
Parliament that the Attorney-General in
answer to a question put to him respect-
ing the horse said it was sold, but he did
not know the name of the purchaser.”
That was a fact ; the authority for that is
the Cornwall Chronicle's telegram ‘ ‘ The
Attorney - General said the horse
about which so much had been said and
written, had been sold for £6, but he did
not recollect the name of the purchaser. ”
That was the telegraphic account of it in
the Cornwall Chronicle. Then there was
an account given fully in the Chronicle to
which Mr Giblin called attention in the
House :
Who bought Griffin’s horse ? seems to have
usurped the place of the vulgar expression, who
stole the donkey? Without pausing to in-
quire who the individual was that ‘ shook ’ the
stupid quadruped, the finger of rumor points
unmistakably to a prominent member of
the Administration as the purchaser of the De-
loraine moke. Nor does the busy jade (rumor,
not the Minister) content herself by stopping at
that stage, for it has transpired that the honor-
able purchaser did a bit of huckstering by the
transaction —that while he was patriotically up-
holding the law with one hand, he was selfishly
lining his pocket with the other ! and it has
now become a nice point to discern where the
Minister ends and the huckster begins. It is a
sad spectacle to see her Majesty’s advisers in
such a transaction !
The Attorney-General said “ it would be
ridiculous and absurd but for one thing ;
of coux’se he need not say that the horse
was sold for £6 within a few shillings, and
that went to pay the rate. The statement
was circulated through the district, and
was read and believed. People who read
it would believe that the horse was sold
in Launceston, and that the Ministers of
the Crown put the balance of the money
in their pockets. It was a great deal of
idle talk of this kind which made it so
difficult to carry out the law.” Then the
Examiner on the 18th in reporting
the same thing said, “Mr Giblin
referred to the late Deloraine horse affair,
and the telegram sent to the press by a
M.H.A. giving an account of the sale,
when there was a combination of people
to prevent a bond fide sale. He deeply
regretted that the Northern press thought
it right to refer to such resistance of the
law in a jocular spirit. The Cornwall
Chronicle which had arrived to-day con-
tained a false and malicious account as to
this horse, which he should not have no-
ticed but that those who did not know
Ministers might take it for granted. The
thing would be too ridiculous, too absurd
for notice but for that ; and besides such
writing did mischief by going out and
being circulated and believed as to the
way in which public matters were dealt
with by the Government. It was a great
pity that such things went forth to the
public, when it must be known not to be
true. The effect, however, was to make
it more difficult to carry out the law, and
to make it more ix-ksome than it need be.
The fact was that the horse was sold here
for £6, which went into the Treasury, and
it paid the rate and the expenses within
a shilling or two.” It was said
it was sold here, but that must
be a mistake of the reporter. Those were
the statements in the public press, and
those all appeared before this letter of
“ Fair Play.” The Cornwall Chronicle , as
read by Mr Giblin, states that he did not
know the name of the purchaser ; he was
right, for Mr Giblin says he did not know
it till three days ago —till Friday last.
Therefore when the Attorney-General
on the 16th of October, ixx Parlia-
ment, said he did not kxxow who the
purchaser was he was correct. On
the other hand it was said to be untrue,
and it was perfectly justifiable to say so,
and the comxxxent was a fair oxxe, for the
Government were the purchasers ; and a
inference is made to what took place,
therefore that Mr Giblin had said what
was not true. The question is whether
you believe for one moment that it was
bought by the Government, and that Mr
Giblin knew it ? If he did, 1 should say
the language is not severe enough ; if you
believe he was dishonest, the words of
the writer and the argument of
counsel are fully justified; he told ft
49


falsehood in Parliament, and was guilty question is what does “ honest ” apply to,
of dishonesty. The question is was the
horse bought ? Is the plaintiff right in his
version that he erroneously supposed the
horse to be bought, and supposing that,
acted on the supposition 1 Of course this
is the point of the case, because I say if
the horse was bought by the Government
and Mr Giblin knew it and then repu-
diated the transaction, you ought at once
to give a verdict for the defendants. For
comment is not only fair and privileged,
but the libel is justified by the facts. But
assuming that there was not a sale, and
the Attorney-General spoke the truth
when he said he did not know the name
of the purchaser, then the belief of the
writer of this letter is a very material
element in the consideration of the case ;
for the honest belief of the writer goes
far in mitigation of damages, although
belief alone would not justify the impu-
tation of dishonest or dishonorable con-
duct ; you must have some foundation in
fact. The question, gentlemen, is for
you ; do you believe the true interpreta-
tion of the libel was given by Mr Clarke,
Mr Buckland, and Mr Travers ? You
must draw your own conclusions from
the words —“ How does he reconcile that
answer with the telegram he sent to Mr
Propsting, ordering him to forward the
horse to Hobart Town, as his friend the
Treasurer had purchased him for £7 10s.”
There are the telegrams ; it is put to you
that they are explicit and conclusive. On
the other hand it is said it is all a misap-
prehension. and the moment it was
found out the £7 10s was returned.
Mr Miller—Your Honor will forgive
me, but Williams said he never had any
transaction with the Government after-
wards ; and as far as related to the money
received, it never was refunded.
His Honor—Of course he was entitled
to receive his expenses for what he had
done, and out of the £7 10s he deducted
expenses. If the balance were recouped
it would amount to what Mr Giblin said,
for he was entitled to his expenses out of
the distress. There is the explanation by
the Attorney-General of the words “ as
his friend the Treasurer had purchased
him for £7 10s the point is not knowing
the name of the purchaser, and then he
goes on to say “how does he reconcile
that answer with the telegram,” that is
the pith of the case—“he sent to Mr Prop-
sting ordering him to forward the horse to
Hobart Town ? What a precious honest
Government we are blessed with.” The
whether to the dealing or the statement
in Parliament 1 What are the facts that
enable a public writer to make statements
within the limit of privilege ? If you im-
pute dishonest or dishonorable conduct to
a than, ordinarily privilege is exceeded,
and the jury should take care that it was
founded in no mere suspicion, no vague
fancy, but that there was satisfactory
proof to you that the imputation is well
founded. It is sa d that “Fair-Play” saw
the report and telegrams ; gentlemen, you
have nothing to do with the writer ; it
may be Mr Aikenhead, or any body
throughout the colony, but the responsi-
bility attaches to Messrs. Aikenhead and
Button, whether the matter in question
be a report or a leading article. They
say they are not responsible for corres-
pondence, that means they are not re-
sponsible for the opinions of correspon-
dents ; they may allow all sides of a
question to be discussed, but they are
responsible for defamatory matter ; they
became as responsible for it as for a
manuscript written by themselves. In
this case if the editors were aware of
the real state of the facts and aware
that the statement was untrue they should
never have put it in. What their know-
ledge is at the time is a material matter
here ; not what the knowledge of “ Fair
Play” was ; “ Fair Play” is unknown.
Before this was published, there was
the direct statement of the Attorney-
General. Gentlemen, do you think there
was a substantial foundation for that
imputation ? It is put to you that the
telegrams are a substantial foundation.
Certainly the telegrams go a long way —
a very long way—towards establishing a
well grounded foundation. Did the
sale take place ? If there was
not a sale, under any circumstances
they ought to have immense weight with
you as to damages ; for if the writer saw
the report of the Attorney-General’s
statement in Parliament, and then saw
the telegrams, although the telegrams
did not say Williams was the purchaser—•
Mr Miller submitted that in point
of law the question was not only
whether the fact were true ; but also, on
the question of privilege, the motives
by which the writer was actuated,
if the facts were such as to justify reason-
able men in believing they were true ;
though in point of fact not true, still were
such as to induce a reasonable man to
think himself justified they had the right
50


to make bond fide comments. There
were cases to that effect.
His Honor—l take the summing up of
Mr Justice Crompton in Campbell v.
Spottiswoode. He says “ There is a class
of cases in which, from the particular
circumstances in which a person is placed,
he is called upon to assert what he be-
lieves. And in these cases if an action be
brought, the plaintiff is obliged to prove
express malice. Ido not think that there
is any such privilege in the case of a
writer in a periodical. ... I cannot
think for a moment that because he bond
fide believes that he is publishing what is
true that is any defence in point of law.”
Mr Miller —There are other cases, your
Honor, in which the contrary is held.
His Honor—lt is held here that the
case of a newspaper is not a case of privi-
lege.
Mr Miller—l submit that if the facts
are such as to induce a reasonable man to
consider the statement true, he is excused
in treating them as true, although they
may turn out not to be true. I, with
great submission, take the language your
Honor used, that there was no telegram
importing that there was not a real sale.
I take the telegram to Propsting for in-
stance directing him to take the horse to
Hobart Town.
His Honor—lf you impute dishonesty
to a man, it will have to be true to be
privileged.
Mr Miller again respectfuliy submitted
that on the authority of the cases, the
belief of the truth of the statement on
the part of the writer, justified him in
making the comment. In this case, there
was nothing to correct the opinion
formed by a reasonable man as to the effect
of the telegrams.
His Honor—Mr Miller, 1 reserve to
you leave to move on that point.
What I put to the jury is are
the statements well founded, do you
think gentlemen, they are well founded,
founded on facts, because a man’s charac-
ter is not to be defamed simply because
another man thinks there’s reason to be-
lieve what he states, and therefore that
that belief is to be broadly stated and
urged, that it should become no offence
whatever. The law with reference to that
point is laid down in Campbell v. Spottis-
woode, in which Chief Justice Cockburn
says :—“ It seems to me that the public
at large have an equal interest in the
maintenance of public character, without
which public affairs could never be con-
ducted with a view to the welfare and the
best interests of our country ; and I think
we ought not to sanction attacks upon
public men, which, if allowed, would be
destructive of their character and honor
unless such attacks are well founded.
Where the public conduct of a public
man is made the subject of observation,
and the writer, who on commenting on
it, makes imputations of motives which
fairly and properly and legitimately arise
out of the conduct itself, and the jury
shall be of opinion, not only that Ihe
criticism was honest, but also well
founded there I should be prepared to
to say that the imputation so made would
not be the subject of an action. But Ido
not think we should be laying down the
law according to what has always been un-
derstood to be essential to the best inte-
rests of the community if we were to say
because a writer may fancy that the con-
duct of a public man is open to the suspi-
cion of dishonesty, that therefore he is
entitled to denounce that man as dis-
honest.” The imputations must be well
founded; and that is the substantial
question here, because I don’t know that
in the imputation of untruthfulness and
dishonesty it has been attempted to prove
actual malice from other sources. The
articles from the newspapers have been
put in, and been read, and commented
on. Some are capable of being used for
that object, others certainly are not so.
It has been pointed out that the designa-
tions of ‘‘windbag,” “ reptile,” and one
or two other things, have been applied to
the Attorney-General. It is said all these
tend to show personal malice, personal
vindictiveness, and personal ill-will on
the part of the Examiner, and if you think
you can connect them with the letter of
“Fair Play,” and that they were not
written in the honest discharge of their
public duty, but written out of spite
in a small way ; if you think it, say so.
The question is this : whatever a public
writer writes must be written in the
honest discharge of public duty ; if it
goes beyond that, no privilege should
protect him from the consequences. I
will not trouble you more with these
papers ; you can read them if you desire
it. The question really is, do you be-
lieve the articles to be libellous 1 In the
next place, do they come within the privi-
lege of discussing the public conduct of
public men] As I told you, that privi-
lege extends to the liberty of full discus-
sion and comment, but it must be fair in
51


the spirit and intention of the lan-
guage used ; if you consider that
the language does not go beyond
that, and if you regard the comments fair,
and that the writer believed in their
truth, and that they were well founded ;
if you find that they are well founded—
find for the defendants. If you find they
were not well founded, that they did not
represent the real state of the case—you
will find for the plaintiff with moderate
and temperate damages. But, gentle-
men, you have a right to look at the
facts, to see the position of matters in
and arising from the telegram of Wil-
liams. It is put to you that the Attor-
ney-General has not been damaged to the
extent of one shilling. It has been said
with reference to the question of damages
that either a man’s character is so bad that
you must give him large damages, or so
high that he has not suffered, and there-
fore should not have damages at all; and
it is only when a man’s character is bad
or doubtful that damages will be of any
advantage to him. But I have no doubt
that a man to whom dishonesty of charac-
ter is imputed will be entitled to sub-
stantial damages. If the paper that pub-
lishes the defamatory matter be largely
circulated, the man must be proportion-
ately injured. The question is at what
time a man is to take proceedings to up
hold his honor. It is said this ought to
have been treated as too trivial a case
for the Attorney-General to notice.
That, gentlemen, is a matter of feeling ;
some men are thin-skinned and some are
thick-skinned ; but the question in this
Court is not whether a man is one or the
other, but whether the comments are in
excess of privilege, or if they are well-
founded. Is this a libel, is that statement
well founded, is it based on a sound
foundation, or not ? And do you consider
the comments are made in the honest be-
lief in their truth, and fair in spirit and
intention ? That is a question for you,
gentlemen, and if you find for the defen-
dants you will have no more trouble ; if
you find for the plaintiff give moderate
and temperate .damages, looking at the
position of the plaintiff, and the mistakes,
for no doubt there were mistakes, and the
conclusion here drawn must be fairly con-
sidered.
Mr Miller directed his Honor’s atten-
tion to the last edition of Starkie’s Law
of Libel, 1869, page 524, which con-
tained deductions from all the previous
cases, including Lillie v. Price, 5 Ad. and
E. Henning v. Trenery, 9 A. and E.
Lucan v. Smith, 26 L. J. Exch. p. 94,
and others in which was upheld
the principle that where an impu-
tation was made on the public conduct of
a public man honestly, and with some
reasonable ground for belief, a distinction
was drawn between that and its being true
in fact.
The Solicitor-General referred his Honor
to the case of Wason v. Walters, to show
that the essence of defamation of charac-
ter was its truth or otherwise.
His Honor—l have read what Mr Jus-
tice Crompton says, and I prefer that to
the statements of text writers.
The jury retired at I‘3o p.m. to con-
sider their verdict.
At six o’clock they were summoned into
Court, and asked by the Judge if there
was any probability of their agreeing to a
verdict?
The foreman said there was not the
slightest chance.
His Honor said he had no power to deal
with a jury until they had been in delibe-
ration for six hours. He must therefore
adjourn the Court until half-past seven
o’clock, when he could deal with them.
The Court accordingly adjourned until
half-past seven o’clock.
Precisely at half-past seven o’clock his
Honor resumed his seat on the Bench, and
in obedience to his summons, the jury
again came into Court.
The Judge’s Associate (to the jury)—
Gentlemen are you all agreed upon your
verdict ?
The foreman (after a pause)—We have
come to no decision at all.
The Judge’s Associate—Are five of you
agreed ?
The Foreman—Only four.
His Honor—ls there no likelihood of
five coming to an agreement if you con-
tinue your deliberations?
The Foreman—We appear all to agree
to disagree.
His Honor—Then there is no proba-
bility of your agreeing ?
The Foreman—None whatever, your
Honor.
His Honor—Then under these circum-
stances it cannot be of any benefit to the
ends of justice or to the parties in this
cause to detain you any longer. You
are therefore discharged from further
attendance until 10 o’clock to-morrow
morning.
The Court then adjourned.
Printed at the “ Launceston Examiner ” Office.
52
U AT i
016 JU v




