

THE
EAGLE HERALD.
The Eagle Herald.
No. I.— March 9th, 1853.
NOTICE.
At a large meeting of the Intermediate Passengers,
held yesternight, it was unanimously resolved that a
Newspaper, to he entitled the Eagle Herald , should he
commenced, to appear every Wednesday. One copy
to he supplied to the first and second cabins, one copy
to the second cahin between decks, and two copies to
the intermediate.
Contributions are respectfully requested from all
passengers.
Communications for the Editors to he sent to the
Intermediate Cabin (enclosed), Berth No. 41, not later
than Monday, at 10 o’clock a.m.
On hoard tlie “ Eagle,”
3rd March, 1853.
TO OUR READERS.
When a periodical is commenced in the great country
we have left, it is customary for its projectors to explain
their motives and unfold their principles.
We are told of the great void which has, for so long
a time, existed in the world of letters—of important
interests unrepresented—of wrongs demanding redregs
—of laws administered with partiality —and of the vast
numbers whose hopes and fears, feelings and desires,
have heretofore found no audible expression.
In issuing the first number of the Eagle Herald, it
seems proper to follow the time-honored custom. The
notice, inserted above, intimates that our paper appears
in obedience to the unanimous voice of a large meeting.
Having from our earliest days been accustomed, daily
or weekly, to hear how it fared with the great world
around us, it is natural we should seek some means of
communication with the community on board our gal-
lant ship. Coming from the same country, travelling
together to the same distant land, cherishing the same
affectionate remembrance of friends left behind, and
looking forward to the uncertain future with somewhat
of the same hopes and fears, we have much in common.
To be the means of communication between all the
passengers; of conveying appropriate and useful infor-
mation ; of affording innocent amusement; and of reliev-
ing, in this way, the dull monotony of a life at sea, is
the province of the Herald. ~
Called into existence by yourserees, we cannot think
you will allow it to die till it has served its end, and
we are enabled to Herald our near approach to Aus-
tralia Felix. Existing for your instruction and amuse-
ment, we expect you will not be slow to convey,
through its pages, the knowledge of anything you
believe will increase our comfort and pleasure during
tlie voyage, or the bettor fit us for waging successfully
the battle of life in the Southern Hemisphere. Are
there any on board who have been in Australia ? We
know there are. Will you not lend experience to your
fellow voyagers, by giving such information and offer-
ing such hints, as may the better enable them to perform
their part with honor and success in the land which we
hope soon to reach?
“ In the republic of letters there is no aristocracy.”
Our pages are open to all. There is no one on board
who may not, on some point, be the instructor of all
the rest; and no one who, from the book of his own
experience, may not afford amusement. Let your
emulation then, be, who shall best promote the general
good.
Our little bark is now launched. Upon you will it
depend whether it be overwhelmed by the first adverse
wind or angry wave; or whether, with its sails filled
with the potent blast of popular sympathy, it speed
before the wind, breast the foam-crested billows of a
troubled ocean, and nobly outride the storm, till our
voyage be ended and our bark be safely anchored in
Hobson’s Bay, amidst universal applause.
As Editors, whilst not responsible for every senti-
ment that may appear in our pages, our care will be to
exclude every communication couched in uncourteous
language, or which is likely to evoke discord or excite
■recrimination.
The Herald is now before you, and when our voyage
is ended, it will not have existed in vain, if it has been
the means of diffusing one useful hint, of correcting
one abuse, or of promoting the exercise of forbearance
and charity.
W. G. MunitAY, Editor.
James Scott, | Sub . Editorg>
i). Drummond, J
HEALTH, OCCUPATION, AND CONDUCT OF PASSENGERS.
We are glad to be able to announce, that the passengers arc gene-
rally. in excellent health. The sea sickness, which was all but
universally prevalent for the two first days of our voyage, made
some of our companions present sucli strange appearances, that the
less we say of them the better will, they be pleased. Now that it is
entirely gone, and all have recovered their appetites, and are finding
abundance to satisfy them, many occupations arc engaged in to
pass their leisure time.
The fair portion of our fellow vovagers employ themselves in
walking, reading, sewing, chatting, or hi working mysterious looking
articles in party-colored worsted.
Of our male passengers several are first rate pedestrians, and
practice so zealously, that some have been attributing, to their exer-
tions, our hitherto rapid voyage. Others read most industriously.
In some future number we may give a summary of the literature in
greatest demand. Finding time hang heavily on their hands, others
pass it in various games and amusements—some of these are not all
that could be wished, but so far as we have seen they are carried on
in the best spirit. We would, however, remind our readers who
amuse themselves in this way, that too much time may be spent in
games. True enough, an emigrant ship is not the most favorable
“ IN THE REPUBLIC OF LETTERS THERE IS NO ARISTOCRACY.”


school for study; but a willing mind and persevering application
could do much, even on board the “ Eagle,” to enlarge our acquaint-
ance with several branches of literature.
Every one must have remarked the general good conduct of the
passengers. So far as we have come, and so far as we have ascer-
tained, there has been little to mar the general harmony.
Let us all be willing to oblige, to be as ready to help others as our-
selves, and to show forbearance when subjected to annoyance.
This is proper in all positions—in none more so than on board
ship. Policy and principle alike admonish us to live as much as
possible at peace with all. Acquaintance with many of our fellow
passengers dates only from 21st February, 1853—we hope it mav, in
many instances, ripen into friendship before the e termination of our
voyage.
W. G. M.
SMOKING ON BOARD.
Tins is a subject to which we would specially -wish to draw the
attention of our readers, as being one liable to be attended with
serious consequences. Fire is, perhaps, the most powerful element
as an antagonist we have to cope with, generally; but its dangers are
tenfold increased in the isolated position in which we are placed.
We regret to perceive that more caution is not exercised in this par-
ticular, considering the immensity of the stake at issue. Is there
no possibility of a stray spark (of which there are plenty) flying
about from uncovered pipes—especially at night—settling down on
any of the numerous objects liable to ignite ? We should think
there is no improbability in the 'matter, and the less so, from the
increased dryness of material consequent on our nearing the equator.
We would, therefore, trust that those who enjoy their pipe would
see the propriety of exercising the utmost circumspection (especially
at night), as the most casual observer cannot fail to perceive the
necessity for some regulated system in this matter, in order to allay
the well-grounded fears'entertained by no inconsiderable number of
the passengers.
We disclaim all intention of trenching on the freedom of anyone
—that is not our province—but we trust we are not exceeding our
legitimate bounds in drawing public attention to a custom which, if
not properly regulated and kept within proper limits, is fraught with
much danger. A small spark kindleth a great fire.
W. K.
THE LOG.
March Bth.—At 6 a.m., St. Antonio, one of the Cape de Ycrd
Islands, was distant 75 miles; at noon, it was distant 109 miles,
and bore N.E. by E.
.Handsome Reward.—So much interest being taken by all on
board to ascertain the exact moment in which we reach the equator,
the Editors, from their own resources, magnanimously offer the
reward of a handsome pair of gold spectacles to the person who first
sees the line. —G. M.
"We have much pleasure in informing our readers, that the gentle-
man of the firet cabin, who in last week’s Express offered a reward of
51. for the recovery of his appetite, has had it restored to him. It was
accidentally found by an intermediate passenger (while taking his
usual walk betwixt five and six, a. m.), who declares that had he not
got quit of it, it would have ruined him in less than a fortnight. "We
have not heard whether the poor man has yet received the promised
reward, but if not, we would suggest the propriety of its being
doubled, as the straits the poor fellow was reduced to, in endeavouring
to sustain the gentleman’s appetite, by a plentiful supply of sucking
pig and chicken soup were frightful in’the extreme.—W. K.
A Discussion Society.—We have heard that it is the intention
of several gentlemen in the first cabin to form a Discussion Society,
which we presume is to be open to all classes of passengers. This
we conceive to be liberal and iust, and will be productive of much
entertainment, inasmuch as there are many men of education a»d
talent both in the first and second cabins and intermediate, who
would meet and exchange their sentiments upon subjects of interest
to all. Had not such a proposal emanated from this source, many of
the intermediate passengers would have, ere now, formed them-
s.dves into such a society. To accommodate all persons who may
desire to be present would not be found difficult if the poep, with its
awning extended, were appropriated for the purpose, so that the
voice may be better heard. At any rate a “ ’tween decks” dis-
cussion in the tropics would, we guess, be more than ordinarily
“ warm work.” We will be glad to hear more of the details from
the parties immediately concerned in the society’s formation. We
aliali report the discussions.—H.
Deck Studies.—Almost every body on deck, above and also be-
'low, pass their time in reading. We have been curious enough to
look over a great many shoulders, and are happy to record that we
have not observed a single publication but what may be properly in
the hands of any person. This, among other things, speaks well for
our intellectual and moral status. Had the contrary been the case,
we should not have scrupled to have noticed it.—l
H.
When shall we get to Australia ? The splendid weather
we have had fer sailing since our departure, and the knowledge that
we have got over the most difficult ground, and arc now within the
calculation of steady and invariable trade winds, would seem to
promise a passage in seventy days. The “ Marco Polo,” if she has
kept her day, sailed on Monday and will have a rare job to catch us.
- ■ H.
A Question.—What shall we do ?—This question may appear
to some to he uncalled for, though I trust Ifrhen they have read this
article they will bear with it, as the author is only desirous of putting
the subject before the public, trusting that it may be an assistance
to some, information to others, and offensive to none. Perhaps,
reader, you have heard this question very often put as you have
passed the several groups that are scattered here and there on our
decks. For my own part, lam weary of hearing the same talk of the
tediousness of our voyage, when a few moments thought might con-
duce so much to the happiness and advantage of Eagle Town.
lhat we have spare time on our hands no one can deny, that we are
responsible for the use of that time, and that the better use we make
of it the higher will be our reward, is also a fact. Are we not now
brought into contact with people who are totally different to what
we have been used to ? their customs are different, their ideas are
new, their abilities on the whole are certainly above mediocrity.
Could we not, lay forming a discussion class to meet, say for an hour
or more of an afternoon, improve our minds and enlighten others;
the mysteries of Shakspeare be unmasked, the beauties of Erskine
enjoyed, to say nothing of the pleasures of vocal or instrumental
music. I think that m this manner the voyage might be to the
benefit of all. To our fair friends I need only say with an old
philosopher that “ Time is the warp of life. Go, tell the young, the
DEEP INDIGO.
gay, the fair, to weave it well.”—]
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Eagle Herald.
Cavendish Square,
Bth March, 1853.
Sir, —It was with much pleasure I saw the announcement
of your forthcoming publication “The Eagle Herald.” I sincerely
hope it will meet witn that success and encouragement to which tk©
design is so eminently entitled. You have only to make it the fear-
less, free, and liberal exponent of real public opinion on board this
ship, and success is certain.
Ir glancing over the printed list of prices of stores for sale on
board, (issued X conceive by authority of Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and
Co.) and posted close by the Purser’s room, I observe tobacco is
offered for sale at 2s. 6d. per lb. Can you inform me by whoso
authority the Purser charges 2s. 6d. for a piece of Tobacco weighing
eight or ten ounces only? This exorbitant charge is a grievance
complained of by almost every smoker on board, who feelshe has
been deceived while relying on the correctness .of the price list.
Many would have brought a sufficient supply of the “ weed” from
Liverpool, had it not been in the expectation of obtaining it cheaper
on board. I am, &c.,
A SMOKER.
[We cannot give the information desired by “ A Smoker,” but
trust that some one may do so in our next publication.—Ed.]
To the Editor of the Eagle Herald .
Bth March, 1853.
Sir, —Since I became a resident of this floating island (the Eagle)
I have been much pleased with its king and officers of state, their
seeming impartiality to all the classes in the money-made - divisions
of this moving isle.
But, Mr. Editor, my chief attention has been directed to the 321
residenters who have come from so many different places of the
United Kingdom : for although of different physiological-, and phre-
nological organic forms, and placed from birth amidst circumstances
which influenced the formation in them of different religious faiths,
yet we find diffused among them a charitable forbearance towards
each other, and kind, social, moral feeling for the temporal welfare
of all, which, if continued to the termination of the voyage, must end
in those beneficial results which ’always accompany deeds of social
morality in communities whether on land or sea.
Bat Sir, there is another class of passengers on board to which I
must briefly refer. I mean the sheep, pigs and poultry which ard
kept in “ durance vile*' for the benefit of one class of passengers
alone, viz., the “ first cabin.” These being the monied class, have
been thought to be the best educated, and consequently the most
moral class. How strange it seems then, that they should set the
lower deck passengers such a cruel, immoral, and anti-sanitary ex-
ample, for if they lived on the same rations as the lower deck
passengers, all the unnatural sufferance of those animals would be
unnecessary, and, in a sanitary view, all classes would be spared the
unpleasant smell arising from the filth caused by them, which, I


think, would compensate for any advantages the appetite and
stomach might receive from the use of these, in some measure,
■ diseased live stock.
I was somewhat disappointed, that the whole of the business to
be settled at the meeting called to establish the Eagle Herald, was
not gone through. W ith regard to a Debating Class being established,
I would suggest, that another meeting be called, and the names of
all those who intend taking a part in the discussions, be taken down,
and that all subjects be open to investigation, whether political,
philosophical, or theological, believing, as I firmly do, that truth
cannot suffer by investigation. Wishing every success to the Eagle
Herald, I remain, yours respectfully, W. T.
[The Discussion Society suggested above, and by several other
correspondents, ought to be established immediately, but we would
respectfully suggest that all theological subjects be excluded.
We have no sympathy with the remarks regarding the live stock,
but insert our Correspondent’s letter.-
EDs. E. H.
POETRY.
JAMIE DUCKS’* DREAM.
A TALE IN VERSE.
Whilst sailing down the stream of j
life, *
’Mongst joys of peace and scenes of '
strife,
*Tis oft out lot to see and hear .
Many things baith droll and queer,
That what wi* ae thing and anither,
It puts folk in a perfect swither,
To ken what's false or what is true.
Or what’s to sense or justice due.
Some tell greatwonders they have seen, ’
Whilst others brag of where they’ve -
been,
Extolling big on every theme
The painting of imagined dream.
Imagination leads the way
Where sober sense is fain to stay.
To steer ones bark in every season
By the helm of truth and reason.
But to my tale.
The other night
Old Luna cast abroad her light, *
The stars shone forth with twinkling
ray
To hail the opening morn of day;
Old Neptune lay in deep repose,
Whilst Boreas laid aside his blows t
Calmness reigned upon the deep—
The hero of our tale did sleep.
Oh Sleep! thou art fair Nature’s
• child—
Thy reign be ever sweet and mild!
The noblest freeman and the slave
Alike proclaims thy power to save
The energies of exhausted strength.
Ensconcedwithinthe * Eagle’s* breast,
Brave Jamie Ducks found quiet rest:
Old Time just struck his wee short
number,
When, 10l a voice disturbed his
slumber.
Oh! gentle friends, it makes me
mourn,
To see poor human nature torn;
Life’s a battle at the best:
How oft the son ot toil’s oppressed 1
Ha 1 Jamie, honest, decent carle.
Ye little ken of sic a peril
That hangs like millstone round your
neck.
But hark ! the kelpy’s on the deck,
A withered, wrinkled queer-like knave,
New risen frae a watery grave.
(To be concluded in our next.)
THE SABBATH AT SEA.
Hallowed day of heavenly rest,
Sacred to the Christian’s soul,
Again thou coraest us to bless,
Amidst the ocean’s ceaseless roll*
Whatever spot on earth we tread,
Whatever lot to us be given,, . ..
Be thou a prelude to the day'
Of everlasting rest in heaven*
* The name always given to the person in charge of the ducks, hens, and
other live stock on board ship.
A thousand years he there had been,
’Mongst every fish and beast unclean.
The monster’s eye—he had but one—
Was flaming like a tropic sun;
A horn grew frae the creature’s head
Enough to fright the very dead;
His back was clothed wi’ coral rocks,
Where bung men’s bones like crystal
drops;
His bead was crammed wi’ ugly eels
That ran like lightning to his heels ;
And scorpions hissing from bis ears,
With forked tongues like Roman
spears;
His huge black tongue, and iron
claws,
His rows of teeth, like cross cut saws,
His cloven feet, his dreadful tail-
lie had a lend o* frae the de’U*
The wrecks of ships are his delight;
He pays his visits under night:
But woe to every crazy craft
He claims his own, frae fore to aft*
A goodly ship he soon avoids—
He kens fu* weel Al at Lloyd’s.
But whiles he likes to tak’ a peep
And see if ilka ane’s asleep.
That night he slippit past the watch,
And plumpt right down the ( Eagle*
hatch $
The monster stood and gazed around,
His horrid teeth la rage he ground;
But now it tried his patience sore,
To hear around a general snore:
He poised his trident in the air.
Determined not a soul to spare. -
* He vented now satanic pleasure
To think he clutched his human trea-
sure.
He struck out right, he struck out left,
Dire blows, an ox’s head would cleft;
He made a plunge at a red head, —
A hairs-breadth more the chap was
dead.
A canny body, short and wee,
Was sorely pestered by a flea,
And ilka time he hitched and clew
The trident harmless past him flew.
Another starts wi* pain he feels—
A rat is polishing his heels I
There’s Rob,he’s mumbling to himael*
A secret thing he widna tell;
Whilst Jamie Ducks, our special care,
’ Is busy ruggin’ at his hair.
T. O. (a passenger).
We rise and be with God alway.—'
NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.
In issuing tlie First Number of the Eagle Herald, tbe Editors
take tbe opportunity of returning their wannest thanks for the
numerous contributions sent them, and the aid they have received
from those gentlemen who so - kindly volunteered to transcribe for
them.
A number of valuable hints and communications have unavoidably
been omitted in the present number, but they shall appear in our
next.
A number of Advertisements of articles lost, goods for sale, &c.,
which appeared in this and following numbers, not being of any
EDs. E. H.
interest now, are not published.-
The Cagle Herald.
No. if.—March 16th, 1853.
We have the happiness of recording that the passen-
gers generally continue to enjoy excellent health, a
blessing calling for gratitude in every situation, but,
perhaps, in none more so than that in which we find
ourselves at present. In our isolated and constrained
.state —cut off from intercourse with all the world, yet
forced to he the near neighbours of all on hoard—it
were frightful to contemplate our position, were a
virulent contagious disease appearing amongst us.
Health may fail despite every precaution, and disease
scatter death, unchecked by the utmost resource of
human skill ; but where the man who never injured his
own health, or where the nation that has done all it
might do to promote the health of the community ?
For the state of health we enjoy much is due to the
carefulness of nearly all on hoard to observe proper
precaution. We have reason to congratulate ourselves
upon having, as the companions of our voyage, such a
body of respectable emigrants, among whom it is
evident that .cleanliness is not a dress assumed merely
for the voyage.
Do we feel thankful for the comforts we enjoy, for
health continued ? Let us evince our gratitude by a
careful and unflagging perseverance in the use of those
moans which experience teaches us conduce so much to
the continuance of both.
Cultivating a cheerful and obliging disposition, which
does so much in smoothing the sharp angularities of
every day life, and promoting our own and others com-
fort, let us not neglect the regular exercise of more
common, but no less necessary duties.
In our present high latitudes, and indeed during the
voyage, health, comfort, and pleasure were promoted,
did the sun never catch us a-bed, but up, washed,
dressed, and on deck to “ hail. the smiling morn.”
Let us be careful to preserve cleanliness of person,
and see that every part of the ship with which we are
connected, is properly cleaned and aired. This will be
best done by every one doing his own duty, and not by
inquisitorial attention to the affairs of others.
In connection with this, we hope we do not overstep
Though now we hear no pastor’s voice,
On ocean’s ever trackless way,
There is a monitor within
Reminds us ’tis that blessed day.
Then let us, while on earth below,
To thee all sacred homage pay,
That when this world revolves no more.


our bounds, when we state, that in several parts of the
ship the Surgeon does not appear so often as ho is
welcome.
From experience, we can speak of the prompt and
careful attention of the Surgeon to any calls for his
assistance. With pleasure we hear testimony to the
readiness with which he followed us to carry relief to
the sick, and hope to the despairing. But more than
this is necessary. Should he not be often and regularly
in every part of the ship, and should not he, or his
assistant, see fumigation efficiently and regularly per-
formed ?
The attention of our seaman-like Captain to this and
every department of his duties, calls for our hearty and
grateful acknowledgments.
W. G. M.
TOBACCO—EXPLANATION.
We have much pleasure in informing our readers that immediately
after our last publication, Captain Boyce waited upon and informed
ns that he hud made inquiry regarding the sale of tobacco complained
of in the Herald , and had found that, through inadvertence, light
weight had on several instances been given.
After leaving Liverpool, a quantity of tobacco, lie explained, put
up in pound packages, which had been unsold during the return
voyage, had been first sold; and that when it was all disposed of,
•the new stock, also put up in packages, was given out as pounds,
without being weighed.
Captain Boyce expressed regret at this having occurred, but said
he would take care it should not do so again; “Indeed,” he said,
“ were I a passenger, I would stand up for my sixteen ounces with any
one.”
This is but another instance of the prompt attention paid by our
worthy Captain to the wants of passengers.
So smokers may now enjoy themselves without having the delicious
aroma (?) of “ the dear weed” embittered with the recollection that
it costs them more than they expected.
T\r n t r
W. G. M.
EAGLE DISCUSSION SOCIETY.
In our last we suggested that the poop, with its awning extended,
would be an admirable place for the weekly meeting of “The Eagle
Discussion Society.” We are now enabled to .announce that the
Captain, with hia usual liberality, has granted his permission, and
the first discussion, subject, “Ought capital punishments to be
abolished,” will take place on Thursday, at 4p. m.
The discussion will be opened in the negative, by a gentleman in
the intermediate cabin, who will be followed in the affirmative, by a
gentleman of the first or second cabin.
W. G. M.
A WORD OF ADVICE AND ENCOURAGEMENT.
[We have much pleasure in presenting to our fellow voyagers, the
following hints from the pen of a lady, whose intelligence and ex-
perience eminently qualify lier for giving cither advice or encourage-
ment.—Ed.]
To persons proceeding to our Colony, one word or rather hint
upon its state may not, it strike me, be altogether out of place, and '
it is earnestly hoped, will be received in the same kind spirit with
which it is given. From my own experience, I can fionly assert,
that all who go with a determination to be industrious, will find an
ample field. There are, in that Colony, very many kind and
warm hearted people, who are always ready to lend their aid to the
industrious, honest, straightforward person, and with perseverance
it is next to impossible not to get on. Yes, and well too. But let mo
assure you, my passenger friends, that idleness, pleasures, and
inebriety, are not tolerated by the respectable classes in Melbourne.
You will find, on landing many, many obstacles to contend with, such
as a total want of hdme comforts—a want of houses—a want of ser-
vants, &c., &c. Surmount them all. You can do so, simply by using
forbearance, and in the end you will bo amply rewarded. Be not
daunted. Call up all your courage, and when you are assured there
is ample employment for all who will work, you may take comfort,
and enter your new land with light hearts and happy feelings. The
climate, although lovely, is not so good as not to require care, owing to
the very sudden changes; the morning’sometimes being excessively
hot —the evening of the same day may be, and often is, extremely
cold. It is particularly recommended to delicate persons to avoid the
night air.
Wishing all on board the “Kagle,” who arc journeying in search
of wealth in the new land, every success, I am,
A FELLOW PASSENGER. T.
March 12th, 1853.
EXTRACT FROM “MY OWN LIFE.”
It was about two bells in the first watch on the 23rd of December,
1846, when, lighting a cigar, I strolled upon deck to enjoy a little
fresh air before “turning in.” The night was dark and cold, and
the wind, which, during the day had been very unsteady, now settled
down in the N. W. quarter, and blew in short fitful gusts, whilst the
dense masses of black vapour hurried from one quarter of the
Heavens to another, like the dreaded messengers of some fearful
calamity, or, as they afterwards proved to be, indicators of an ap-
proaching galo. On deck, everything was in readiness for shortening
sail, which, from the frequent and anxious glances of the officer of
the watch towards the straining spars, was momentarily expected.
Meanwhile the steward below, by means of towels, sand bags, and
various other superfluous articles (pressed into the service for the
occasion), was busily employed in what he called preparing for a
“ dirty night.” Such was’the aspect of affairs on board the good
ship , bound from the Mediterranean to England, in
which I had taken my passage, under the vain hope of reaching
London by the 18 th of December, but instead of which was doomed
to realise Dibdin’s song of the “ Bay of Biscay” in the very place
itself. “We shall have a dirty night of it” said I, walking aft to
the mate, who was one of those rough, but not unworthy, diamonds
of the true Neptune school. “Wc shall have a d a sight more
wind than wc know what to do with, and that before long, too,” was
the reply, and with a voice that would have done honor to the
boatswain of any of her Majesty’s linc-of-battle ships, intimated to
the watch on deck his intention of shortening sail, and walked
forward for that purpose. Being thus deprived of the mate’s laconic
replies, I turned to the man at the wheel as a source of information,
and soon opened a conversation upon that never-failing topic, the
“ compass/* “ I know’d wc should have a breeze to-night” said he,
after satisfying my query as regards the ship’s head. “I never
sec’d them devils yet, but what we had a night of it.” To what do
you allude, said I? “ Why them Mother Carey’s chickens, bad luck
to them, squeaking and skitting at a fellow as if they were so jolly
pleased to see him in a fix.” Such was the conversation which the
sudden appearance of the Captain abruptly terminated.
The wind by this time had so increased, as to render it necessary
to reef the top-sails, and so rapid was the progress of the gale, that
within one hour from the time wc commenced shortening sail, the
ship was hove to under a close-reefed topsail and a reefed spanker.
At about one bell in the middle watch, it blew a perfect hurricane,
when the main-topsail was blown away, and the ship falling off in
the trough of the sea, became a prey to the merciless fury of the
contending elements. Tarpaulins and deal boards wore then lashed
in the main and mizen rigging, but alike proved ineffectual, and in
spite of the most strenuous exertions, the shin lay like a log on the
mighty waters of the never-to-be-forgotten Bay of Biscay. About
four bells in the middle watch, a sea struck her just abaft the port
fore chains, hove her on her beam ends, and carried away bulwarks,
staunchcons, boats, galley, lee quarter (with about two planks below
the covering board) skylight, binnacle, and every thing that could
possibly be detached from the main body of the wreck* The Cap-
tain then ordered the masts to he cut away, which was speedily done,
hut without effect. The well was then sounded, and to the un-
speakable horror of every one on board, it was found there were
seven feet of water in the hold. Not a moment was to be lost: the
pumps were manned and worked vigorously until day break (and
such a dawn as few ever witnessed H when a jury mast was rigged,
and signals of distress were hoisted thereupon, hoping that assistance
might be at hand (but alas! no outstretched arm appeared), and wo
again applied ourselves to the pumps. At noon, we were fairly
knocked up, and as there was one boat left that might rescue eight
persons from a watery grave, we determined to draw lots for the last,
though slender chance of life. Twenty pieces of ropeyarn were cut,
eight long and twelve short, and placed by the Captain (unseen
by any one), an inch apart, through a crack in the cabin table, and
in the presence of all, each person separately drew one, commencing
with the oldest. It was soon decided who were to go, and all
hands immediately* proceeded to launch the tiny craft, and in
a short time she shoved off. The few short minutes imme-
diately preceding, and subsequent to, the departure of that little
craft, I never shall forget; it was passed in silence (but what
a silence, like the few calm moments that await the bursting
of a hurricane), the terror stricken countenances pale as death,
the parched bloodless lips, the straining, bloodshot eyes, all
too plainly shewed the agony of mind of those who had to re-
main.—Then, good reader, was the time to test the value of religion
and the strength of moral courage.—Then did the still small voice
within upbraid with sins of omission as well as commission.—lheu
did the thoughts of being compelled to render an account of all our
actions, whether good or evil, stand boldly before us, until every man
quailed beneath the stern yet never failing thought of retributive jus-
