

THE PLACE OF
THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINAL
IN RECENT
ANTHROPOLOGICAL RESEARCH.
BY
W. RAMSAY SMITH, D.Sc., M. B., C.M., F.R.S. (Edin.),
Permanent Head of the Department of Public Health
of South Australia.
Read before the Australasian Association for the Advancement of
Science, at Adelaide, January, 1907.
Adelaide :
C. E. BRISTOW, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORTH TERRACE,
1907.




THE PLACE OF
THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINAL
IN RECENT
ANTHROPOLOGICAL RESEARCH.
BY
W. RAMSAY SMITH, D.Sc., M. B., C.M., F.R.S. (Edin.),
Permanent Head of the Department of Public Health
of South Australia.
Head before the Australasian Association for the Advancement of
Science, at Adelaide, January, 1907.
gkbxlaifrf:
C. E. BRISTOW, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORTH TERRACE,
igo?.




THE PLACE OF THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINAL IN
RECENT ANTHROPOLOGICAL RESEARCH.
BY W. RAMSAY SMITH, D.Sc., M. B., C.M., F.R.S. (EDIN.),
Permanent Head of tlie Department of Public Health of
South Australia.
“ Anthropology, be it observed, is tar irom oemg a sc-ence of luxury. At this
very moment it is leading to most important results, and is throwing new light
upon all the sciences bearing upon man. Naturalists, physicians, men of letters,
artists, philosophers, lawyers, diplomatists, travellers, archaeologists, and linguists
are all carrying the material wherewith to build the edifice. To those who apply
themselves closely it is a somewhat arduous task, but to the great majority it is
a recreation.’*-
TOPINARD.
It goes without saying that all of us here are interested in anthro-
pology. It is a matter, therefore, within our common knowledge that
at the present time the greatest interest is being concentrated on, and
the largest amount of study is being devoted to, the Australian ab-
original. The particular points that are calling for study and research,
and the position and importance of these in the science of anthropology,
may not, however, be so well known. I will endeavor, therefore, to
set forth briefly the place of the Australian aboriginal in recent research
in anthropology, and to outline what has been done, wdiat is being done,
and what still requires to be done in order to settle problems that are
calling for solution. As almost every part of the anatomy of the ab-
original is being examined and re-examined with the view of discovering
keys that will open up the secrets of human origin and racial affinities,
I will try to indicate to scientific workers how they may aid by observa-
tions ; and I also desire to show the general public how they may help
by collecting materials for the investigators. Avoiding generalities,
then, let us proceed to the details of practical work.
Some years ago it became known, in connection with certain criminal
trials in Adelaide, that I had more than a general interest in skulls,
and Mr. A. C. Thomas, now the Crown Law Clerk, presented me with
a specimen. On account of the abnormality it showed in dentition, I
sent it, along with another skull, to an anthropologist who was likely
to make good use of the evidence it afforded —I mean my former teacher,
Sir William Turner. I need hardly remind you that it was he who was


entrusted with the task of describing the Challenger collection of oste-
ology, and that the investigations he made and the results he published
then and since then have become landmarks in the fields of anthropologi-
cal research and models for future investigation. It will be evident
that any opinions or inquiries coming from such an investigator are
entitled to the highest respect and consideration.
In the end of July, 1899, he wrote me as follows : —“ The two
Australian crania, which you wrote about in March last, reached me
last week, and I am much indebted to you for presenting them to the
Museum. The male, with the supernumerary teeth, is especially
interesting. I have one from Gippsland with a supplementary tooth
behind the left upper wisdom, and another from New South Wales
with a supernumerary tooth lying in the palatal plate of the left superior
maxilla. The presence of three supernumeraries in one skull is, however,
very remarkable, and I know of no similar instance. The female skull
shows an extreme degree of prognathism for a human skull, and is
valuable on that account. Anything that you can send illustrating
the osteology of the Australian will be very acceptable : long bones,
vertebrae, sacrum, and innominate bones more especially. I shall be
glad to be made the custodian of such specimens as you may be able
to send.”
The description of the Morambro skull, which is the one referred
to above, was published in the Journal of Anatomy and Physiology, vol.
xxxiv., and in that account the two other skulls also mentioned in the
letter are referred to as having been described by the author in his
Challenger Report, vol. xxix., 1884.
Quite recently Dr. R. S. Rogers, of Adelaide, whose name is men-
tioned in the Challenger Report just referred to, in connection with an
“ especially interesting ” skull from Milang, gave me an aboriginal
skull which he found at Henley Beach. It possesses two extra upper
teeth. On the left side (Figs. 1 and 2) there is a completely-formed
full-sized fourth molar, which has not erupted. On the right side (Pig.
3) a supernumerary molar tooth projects on the facial aspect of the
superior maxilla, about the level of the third molar.
I do not find any instance of a supernumerary molar tooth erupting
in such a position. Ordinary molars sometimes do. Duckworth
(Morphology and Anthropology, p. 279) reports a skull from the Soudan
with the third upper left molar similarly placed, also a skull from the
Punjaub, an Australian skull in Dr. Haddon’s possession, the skull of
an orang-utan in the Amsterdam collection, and a prehistoric skull
from Jamaica in which the third upper right molar has emerged on the
buccal aspect of the maxilla.
On the occurrence of supernumerary molars, Turner says ; “ From
the series of specimens which I have recorded it is obvious that the upper
jaw is much more frequently the seat of supernumerary teeth than is


the mandible.” Thompson says (The American Text-book of Operative
Dentistry, p. 48) : “ Fourth molars sometimes appear as supernumerary
teeth, and are either fused to the upper third molar in a variety of un-
couth forms or erupt separately as mere peg-shaped teeth between the
buccal faces of the second and third molars, or at the distal aspect of
the latter tooth. The fourth molar rarely appears as a full molar,
except in some of the large-toothed races, as negroes, Australians, &c.,
and then usually in the lower jaw. Among the negroes in Africa
the fourth molar is sometimes found in full form as a typical molar.”
It will be evident, from recent investigations, that these statements
require revision.*
It is remarkable that among the skulls of all races in the Challenger
collection, the Cambridge Anthropological Museum, and the Edinburgh
University Museum, the only recorded instances of supernumerary
molars occur among Australian aboriginals ; and, of a total of seven
extra teeth enumerated, South Australia contributes five—a goodly
share. I have to add another. In a skull recently brought from the
Coorong there is a single socket for a tooth behind the third left molar
(Fig. 4). Unfortunately, the tooth itself has dropped out, so that it is
impossible to say anything regarding the number of its cusps.
Another condition that has been attracting attention is the occur-
rence of “ dental rudiments ” —usually small masses of dentine. These
are found most often between the last premolar and the first molar,
and generally on the lingual margin ; but I have noted the occurrence
on the buccal margin in the skull of a kanaka. After long search, I
am now able to record their occurrence in the upper jaw of a full-grown
aboriginal which Dr. Rogers brought me two or three days ago from
the Pinnaroo district. On the left side, between the last premolar and
the first molar, and chiefly on the lingual aspect, there is a dental
rudiment (Fig. 5) possessing the characters of a peg-like tooth, the
crown being 5 mm. in diameter and the tooth projecting 6.5 mm.
beyond the alveolus. On the right side, between the buccal root of
the last premolar and the corresponding root of the first molar, is a
small rudiment, 7 mm. long and 3 mm. in diameter (Fig. 6). It
reaches only to the level of the necks of the adjacent teeth, and would
probably have been invisible during life. This case possesses an ad-
ditional interest, since on the one side the rudiment has the character
* Since this was written, the Secretary to this Section, Mr. Gill, the unlabelled
and unadvertised repository of so much information on anthropological subjects,
has brought under my notice a very interesting communication made to the Odonto-
logical Society of Great Britain by Mr. J. R. Mummery, in 1870. During an ex-
tensive examination of the skulls of the African races, Mr. Mummery found six
cases of extra fourth molars in the upper jaw, two of the cases showing a molar
on each side of the jaw. He says, “Itis a remarkable circumstance that I met
with no example of a supplementary tooth in the lower jaw ; but the third molar
is frequently larger than the second.”


of a mere ovoid, or slightly flattened mass of dentine ; whereas on the
other it is a true miniature tooth. These two specimens, are among the
most important, if not actually the most important, “ rudiments ” as
yet found in the human subject.
In this connection I may quote from a description I sent to Sir
William Turner in December, 1902, of an aboriginal skull found at
Glenelg. “On the left maxilla there is a tooth socket which may have
belonged to an extra permanent tooth or a persistent milk-molar. A
large socket on the right maxilla, corresponding in position, has an
evident appearance of being separate. I have seen similar appearances
in other aboriginal skulls in connection with the first molar tooth ; but
I cannot determine whether the socket in question ever contains a
separate tooth or is merely the socket for one fang of a premolar, the
two other fangs of which occupy a normal position in the maxilla. I
have not seen such a socket in connection with any other tooth.”
In August, 1905, I sent a skull of a young kanaka from New Cale-
donia to Professor Cunningham, asking him to look carefully at the
dentition. He wrote : “ The dentition of the skull of the kanaka
girl is peculiar. The second premolar socket (the tooth is gone) is
enormous, and has all the appearance of a molar socket; indeed, on
the right side it shows three compartments for fangs. Still, it must be
a premolar, I should think. I shall look more closely into the matter.”
Another skull of a kanaka which I received lately from New Cale-
donia shows on the left side a pit-like depression internal to the second
bicuspid, which was either shed early or else was abnormal as regards
its roots (Fig. 7). On the right side there is a similar, but less marked,
condition. One wonders whether these pits can be the altered sockets
for milk molars that have not been followed by premolars.
These large sockets are remarkable as occurring in the positions
where dental rudiments are commonest.
Duckworth adopts the view that these particular dental rudiments
are aborted third premolars. As he points out (Studies in Anthropology,
p. 22), the racial occurrence of these rudiments is peculiar. They are
commonest in New Britain natives, Australian aboriginals, and African
negroes. One hundred Peruvian skulls showed only two instances ;
50 European skulls only one instance ; and 300 skulls of Egyptians
showed none. Among orang-utans and gorillas specimens were very
common.
On this subject of supernumerary teeth it may be well to remind
you that Hunter was of opinion that they were always incisors and
canines, and that Owen stated that he had never seen a supernumerary
premolar or molar.
The interest connected with these extra premolar or molar teeth
lies in their approximating to the dentition of the New World monkeys,
which have an extra premolar. This interest is further increased by


the fact that a question has now arisen as to what constitutes a pre-
molar. The view that a premolar is a tooth that takes the place of a
milk molar is being questioned.*
Most workers in the anthropological field say no more about the
significance of abnormalities of dentition than what I have mentioned.
It would be wrong, however, to lead one to suppose that the subject
of teeth in the aboriginal is connected solely with man’s affinities with
the monkeys and apes. It goes really much further. It raises questions
about the origin of heterodont teeth and the formation of the cusps of
the premolars and molars.
Works on dentistry —I speak of the best and the recognised standard
works—give clear and precise and plausible descriptions of the method
in which bicuspid and molar teeth are built up from the primitive
simple conical forms by aggregation or fusion. Many give no hint or
suggestion that there may be any other theory on the subject. It
should be mentioned, however, that there is a good deal of evidence
in favor of the view that the primitive molar of the mammals was a
single simple cone, and that the present forms have arisen by successive
additions of cusps to this cone. Some teeth that I have described in
a communication to the Journal of Anatomy and Physiology, written
at Professor Watson’s instigation, show very instructive relations
between cusps and those peculiar structures known as enamel tumors,
which have been aptly described by Salter as “ submerged cusps ” ;
and it is very interesting to find that one of the finest of these specimens
is the tooth of a kanaka that I brought from New Caledonia.
In another specimen described in the same communication the
cingules of two fused central incisors have developed a cusp-like growth,
strongly suggestive of the cusp-accretion theory, while the form of the
roots of a canine seems to yield strong support to the fusion-of-cones
theory.
I must refer in this connection to some extraordinary milk teeth
in a young aboriginal subject. The milk molars beyond the crowns
are ballooned to an enormous extent, and an examination of the fangs
and the portions that are becoming fangs gives rise to a question as
to whether the roots of these milk molars are not being developed by
a process of plication of a primary simple tube.
♦After this was written I availed myself of Dr. Stirling’s kind permission to
examine the series of aboriginal skulls in the South Australian Museum. In one
of them there is an extra lateral incisor tooth in the left maxilla. The two laterals
on this side are small and peg-like (Fig. 8). This condition bears upon the subject
of which incisor has been lost in man, a question discussed by Turner, Albrecht,
Wilson, Gadow, Elliott Smith, Windle, and Edwards. Windle holds that the
loss of the incisors is consequent upon the contraction of the anterior part of the
jaw. He is inclined to believe that the decrease in size exhibited by the jaws of
the modem English as compared with Australians, negroes, and ancient British
is exhibited in perhaps the most marked manner in the incisive region. The
examination of even a few aboriginal skulls is sufficient to expose this error.


An observation bearing on the structure of the teeth may be
mentioned here. The lower jaw of an aboriginal from the Coorong
had been exposed to sunlight and great heat, with the result that the
teeth are “ weathered ” and split up into what may be termed their
component parts. A “ part,” often, though not invariably, is seen
to consist of a root and its directly superimposed cusp.
In a paper sent to the Royal Society of Edinburgh I have dealt
with some aspects of the dentition of aboriginals. I may record one
observation here, however, since it illustrates a statement made by
Burchard (Dental Pathology and Therapeutics, 2nd Edn., p. 230) to the
effect that “ An excessive growth of hair upon the face and body has
also been associated in some cases with a deficiency in number and
alteration in form of the teeth. In other cases no abnormality was
noticeable. In some cases the hair and other dermal structures may
be normal and the teeth be quite deficient in number.” Other instances
have been noted by Topinard (Anthropology, p. 162), who refers in this
connection to the influence of heredity.
Dr. Rogers was good enough to give me an opportunity of examining
an aboriginal patient of his in hospital, and he pointed out the excessive
growth of hair on the body. I found the manhs front teeth were crowded
together, and that an incisor was wanting. He stated that his mother
and aunts showed a similar condition, but not his father. (Figs. 9 and
10 are photographs of casts of the lower jaw made for me by Dr. Crank.)
The upper jaw of an infant presents an interesting condition.
The two maxillae have been split asunder, and the remains of the
maxillo-premaxillary sutures are perceptible, thus making evident an
abnormal condition of dentition. This consists in the presence of
a single cavity in each premaxillae, between the canine socket and the
intermaxillary suture. The cavities are similar, and each contains a
single large developing incisor, which has split transversely in such a
way as to give the appearance of one chisel-like incisor behind another.
An examination of the root shows the true nature of the condition.
On the right side, on the lingual border, there is an appearance that
suggests that there had been two milk incisors in the premaxillae. It
would be difficult to say what the condition had been on the left side.
On both sides the temporary molars have dropped out, and the bicuspids
are seen deeply embedded in the bone (Fig. 11).
In the lower jaw the sockets of the two canines and four incisors
are seen in front of the first milk molars, which are still present. The
left lateral incisor socket is small. On the right side a permanent tooth
is seen emerging in a position occupying the places of the former canine
and lateral incisor. On the left side the jaw has been broken across,
and shows a tooth in a corresponding position very deep down in the
jaw—evidently a canine. Between this and the posterior surface of
the bone is a large tooth cavity, which communicates with the socket


of the lateral incisor. Further examination would involve trephining
the bone, which I am loth to do until others have had an opportunity
of examining it in its present condition.
In a specimen from an old adult subject there is a gap on the right
side, where the canine ought to be and probably was. Above the
lateral incisor, and projecting through the bone, is an apparently full-
sized tooth (Fig. 12). There is also another tooth embedded in this
maxilla and projecting on one side into the anterior part of the antrum
and on the other into the inferior meatus. The rest of the teeth
are normal. There would thus appear to be two extra incisors in this
right maxilla. The left seems to be normal.
When examining a broken skull of a South Australian aboriginal
that I received some years ago, I found a peculiarity in the dentition.
On the left side the second and third molars would seem to have dis-
appeared some time before death. The first molar is turned inwards
(Fig. 13), so that the labial surface of the crown is horizontal, and this
surface has become worn smooth against the teeth of the lower jaw.
There is a similar dislocation of the corresponding tooth on the right
side, but to a very much less extent, and the molar behind it is not at
all displaced. All the teeth remaining in the jaw are much worn.
On this subject Duckworth says (Morphology and Anthropology,
p. 372) ; “ There remains for notice a peculiar condition of the teeth
most frequently observed in natives of the Chatham Islands (Mori-ori)
and in Maories ; also, but less commonly, in Eskimo. The molar teeth
are dislocated and inflected inwards, so that instead of the normal
upper surface the labial side of the crown comes into use. The signifi-
cance and causation of the condition are quite obscure, but it would
appear to be related to the nature of the diet of the natives among
whom it obtains.”* These remarks probably require to be revised.
Dr. Crank, of this city, informs me that the most extreme instances
he has seen have been in the white subject.f
The relative sizes of the various molars, and the number of cusps
these teeth bear in different races, have formed the subject of extensive
research in England, France, and Germany. Much of this has been
directed to Malays, Melanesians, and Polynesians, but the Australian
aboriginal has been, comparatively speaking, neglected in this particular.
The same requires to be said regarding the study of the shape of the
alveolar border of the jaws.
* This condition is referred to by Mummery in the communication mentioned
above, p. 36.
t There are a good many examples of this condition in the South Australian
Museum collection of aboriginal skulls, and most, though not all, of the specimens
showing this peculiarity came from one locality near Adelaide. The condition
is often associated with abscess of the buccal roots. Some specimens in my
possession show that the lingual root remains in its normal position, while the
buccal roots project in such a way that their proximal portions form wide angles
with the lingual root (Fig. 14).


Some remarks may be expected regarding the meaning of such
abnormalities of dentition as have been mentioned. To show what is
taught, and sometimes accepted, I may quote from a recent work on
dentistry. The author writes as follows ( The American Text-hook of
Operative Dentistry, p. 50); “ Under the second head, Reversion to Primi-
tive Types, we have a variety of interesting phenomena in the form of
parts of the human teeth, which seem to be a zoological legacy. These
consist of conspicuous features which reappear and seem to recall
forms of the teeth observed in some of the lower animal orders, es-
pecially the quadrumana and insectivora. Among these features may
be mentioned the curved upper central incisor, with the prominent
cingule on the lingual-buccal ridge, making a notch which recalls the
incisors of the moles ; the prominent cingule on the lingual face of the
lateral incisor, which is not uncommon, and recalls the form found in
the insectivora and some of the quadrumana ; the extra-long, curved
canine, with extra-large median ridges, which recalls the large forms
of this tooth in the baboons and in the carnivora ; the double root
sometimes found in this tooth is also a reversion to the insectivorous
type ; the three-rooted bicuspid is a quadrumanous reversion; the
upper tricuspid molar is a primitive typal form, leading back to the
lemurs and beyond them to the early typal mammals found in fossil
formations ; the notched and grooved incisor recalls the divided in-
cisor of the Oaleopithecus ; the double-rooted lower incisors and canines
recall insectivorous forms ; the unicuspid lower first bicuspid is an
insectivorous type, and is often quite marked in man ; the fifth cusp
on the lower second molar is a quadrumanous reversion ; the wrinkled
surface of the lower third molar is like that of the orang. There are
other features that might be named, illustrating the workings of the
law of atavism, by which parts once lost in evolution may reappear and
be reproduced.”
This may suggest extensive culture, or reading, on the part of the
author ; but the statements arc loose and unscientific. It is one thing
for certain features in man’s dentition to recall forms of teeth observed
in some of the lower animal orders ; it is quite another to affirm that
one condition is a reversion to the insectivorous type and another con-
dition a quadrumanous reversion. An abnormal turnip or potato may
“ recall ” the features of some famous politician. What follows ?
These are not instances of atavism. Evidence does not show that man
was ever either an insectivore or a quadrumanous being any more than
he was a galeopithecus or a carnivore, an amphibian or a fish. An
eye does not grow an ear, nor an ear an eye ; monkey or ape did not
evolve man, nor did man evolve monkey or ape. But as an eye and an
ear were and are evolved from something that was neither eye nor ear,
so man, monkey, and ape were evolved from some ancestral form that
was neither man, monkey, nor ape. No doubt there are in existence
certain species or varieties of plants and animals that have been derived


from existing forms by modification ; but such species or varieties are
comparatively few. Man, monkeys, and apes have the appearances of
terminal forms. The history of the common ancestor has either been
rubbed out or exists undiscovered in some part of the palimpsest.
When we begin to trace man’s origin we must think, not in varieties
merely, but in orders and classes. Some variations or abnormalities,
therefore, will have a limited significance : they will be interesting
when compared with conditions found among other races of people.
Other variations or abnormalities will have a more extended bearing,
and will be found to raise questions of the origin and affinities not only
of man, but of mammals —if not of vertebrates generally.
I fear I have been degenerating into generalisations, instead of
keeping to the facts of inquiry ; but a digression was inevitable sooner
or later, and having occurred at this stage it may be of some assistance
in passing in review other features of aboriginal structure.
One important character of the skull has not been much studied
lately : I mean the conditions shown at the pterion as regards the
occurrence of an epipteric bone, or a fronto-squamous suture. These
conditions I have found very common in specimens recently examined,
much more common than I have anywhere found described. In some
series about 50 per cent, of specimens examined show a fronto-squamous
suture. Broca, many years ago, described the normal human arrange-
ment ( i.e ., the spheno-parietal articulation) as pterion en H ; and the
normal simian arrangement {i.e., the fronto-squamous suture) as
pterion retourni ; and the condition in which the temporal and sphenoid
only touch as pterion en K. Hartmann {Anthropoid Apes, 1885, pp.
63, 111) discusses this subject at some length from the point of view
of the frontal process of the squamous portion of the temporal bone,
and refers to discussions regarding its appearance and racial significance.
Duckworth {Morphology and Anthropology, p. 222) mentions this as an
anthropoid condition, and figures it in a typical aboriginal skull, as do
a good many other authors. He says it occurs in about 17 per cent,
of cases. I believe this statement requires revision, as do also some
other statements, e.g., that grooves on the frontal bone are rare, that
the glenoid fossa is shallow, and the styloid process very short.
One skull shows very good examples of incomplete orbits. The
spheno-maxillary fissures are very large, as are also the sphenoidal
fissures (Figs. 15, 16, 17). In”one case the occipital bone of an ab-
original child’s skull presents a rare abnormality. The occipital (Fig.
18) is somewhat distorted by exposure to the weather ; but it is quite
evident, in spite of this, that there had been an extra bone at its superior
angle, which is openly bifid.* The mode in which the right parietal—
* In an adult aboriginal skull in the South Australian Museum (No. 61), a
triangular bone is interposed between the parietals and the occipital.


which was the only other bone found—articulates with this occipital
shows that there was a large single or double interparietal bone extend-
ing forwards as far as to the frontal bone.
On reviewing the facts regarding supernumerary teeth, dental
masses, tooth pits, dental tumors, size of teeth, number and position
of cusps, milk and permanent dentitions, &c., it will be evident that
the interpretation of anomalies is a subject for the expert, and that the
Australian aboriginal at present is proving to be by far the most im-
portant and most abundant source of information. Not everyone,
however, can say what is normal or abnormal, trivial or important,
commonplace or unique, in any particular skull; and the moral, there-
fore, is—Bring everything in the way of teeth and skulls under the
notice of the anthropological expert.
It is scarcely necessary to remind, you that anthropology does not
mean merely skulls, but embraces all the structures and takes cognisance
of all the functions of the body. Although it has been stated that parts
of the skeleton other than the skull furnish but few materials for charac-
terising races, this statement may require modification in the near future.
Several features presented by the long bones are of interest, and the
more important may be referred to in some detail.
The Humerus. —The angle of torsion of this bone in the Australian
aboriginal, as given by Broca, is very small; in fact the average is
least of the hominidae, and is less than in the gorilla. The conclusions
to be deduced from this fact are not evident, for the nature of the con-
dition is obscure, the parts affected are doubtful, and much has to be
learned regarding the variations which the bone shows at various ages
in the same subject.
Turner, in his Challenger Report (vol. xvi.,p. 89), notes the occur-
rence of an intercondyloid (super-trochlear) foramen in both humeri
of a Queensland aboriginal. I can find no other case in literature ;
but I have noted this condition recently in about half a dozen specimens,
one being the humerus of an infant (Fig. 19), in which the condition
was very well marked. Ido not ask you to believe that these are the
only cases that have been observed, any more than I wish you to under-
stand that they are the only cases that have occurred. But what Ido
wish you to note regarding this subject, and numerous other similar
conditions, is that modern text-books do not mention them as occurring
in the aboriginal. A vast amount of observation has never been re-
corded, and many records appear never to have been seen by authors.
The text-books, be it noted, which profess to give general statements
of what is known and recognised, are the reflex of the teaching of pro-
fessors and lecturers on the*subject, and they are greatly deficient, and
often wrong.
Obliquity of the Forearm in Extension. —A good many years ago I had
noted that the obliquity is sometimes very great in whites, especially


among women. Recently I have noticed in the male aboriginal that
the arm in extension may be almost perfectly straight. The significance
of this obliquity is altogether obscure. In speaking of the analogical
condition in the lower limb {The Lancet, March 11th, 1893), I said :
“ Normal knock-knee in women is said to be due to the greater width
of the pelvis. Let it be granted that the pelvis is wider in women, as
it is granted that women possess ovaries. How does width of pelvis
explain knock-knee ? Does width of pelvis explain the greater degree
of knock-elbow in women ? ” Little has been done in connection with
this subject. Photographs published by Klaatsch give some materials
for study.
Size of the Interosseous Space. —There are few observations on this,
and one cannot say that there are any results.
Femur. —In connection with this bone there are many points of
inquiry ; but very little has been settled. The chief conditions of im-
portance are the curvature of the shaft, the angle which the neck forms
with the shaft, the amount of torsion of the shaft, the occasional presence
of a third trochanter, and the condition of platymeria.
This last-mentioned modification, when occurring at the upper
portion of the femur, is often associated with the presence of great
development of the gluteal ridge forming the “ third trochanter.” I
have failed to find any reference to it in literature as occurring in the
Australian aboriginal; but I have found the condition distinct and not
uncommon in several aboriginal skeletons from the Coorong. In one
skeleton the index was 70.9 in both femora; in another it was 72.9
in an odd femur. It occurs in young subjects as well as in old, and
usually in both femora. The view that “ age (i.e., maturity) appears
a necessary factor in the production of the character ” is certainly
incorrect. The condition is often associated with platyonemia.
In order to show how cautious one must be in drawing inferences,
I may refer to the condition of bulging of the popliteal surface of the
femur so very greatly marked in the Trinil femur found by Dubois in
Java. The left femur of an Australian aboriginal described by Hep-
burn showed an almost exact reproduction of this abnormality. Any
value that may have attached to this condition was very much dis-
counted, however, by the nearly normal condition of the right femur
of the same subject. You require to be careful in science : you never
know when you will stumble on the tragedy of “ a deduction murdered
by a fact.”
Tibia. —Here, too, several points have to be considered—especially
platyonemia and retroversion of the head of the bone. But little that
is definite has been done.
The subject of platyonemia* demands some remarks. This con-
dition has been discussed in detail by Manouvrier, who considers that
* This term is an unfortunate one, and gives rise to misunderstanding. It
is wronglyjldefined in Gould’s Dictionary of Medicine.


it is associated with the attainment of maturity. Duckworth (Mor-
phology and Anthropology, p. 313, et seq.) discusses the subject at some
length. He says, “ The condition was undoubtedly common in some
prehistoric races of Western Europe and Egypt. In modern times it
occurs in a pronounced degree in rickety tibise and in the tibiae of certain
ill-fed and badly nourished Australian aboriginal tribes (c/. the des-
cription of the “ boomerang ’’-tibia by Messrs. Spencer and Gillen,
The Natives of Central Australia). Pruner-Bey attributed all platyc-
nemic cases to Rachitis (Rickets).” Then Duckworth goes on to state
the views of Broca and of Manouvrier and of Charles, and to criticise
them. The lowest index he himself has found, i.e., the greatest amount
of platycnemia, was in a mori-ori skeleton at Cambridge, and amounted
to 60. lam able to record an index of 57 in the left tibia of a young
subject from the Coorong, in whose skeleton there is no evidence what-
soever of rickets or any other disease. In another skeleton the index
was 57.1 on the right side and 51.3 on the left; in a third it was 65.7
on the right and 62.8 on the left. In an odd tibia it was 54.2; in
another, 57.8. This gives, for six tibise from one locality, an average
of 58.1, which shows a very much greater degree of platycnemia than in
any known race, the nearest being an average of three tibiae of the
Mori-oris, which amounted to 68.*
It appears to me that this subject offers a field of fruitful study
in connection with the functions of the lower extremity, and on account
of the possibility of its yielding racial characters. I have to point out
that the ridge that constitutes the condition of platycnemia does not
correspond with the oblique line of the tibia, nor with the longitudinal
ridge that separates the surfaces of origin of the flexor longus digitorum
and tibialis posticus muscles. In one well-marked case the platycnemio
ridge passed from its origin—about 2 cm. from the fibular articular
surface —downwards and inwards, as a well-defined continuous border,
to the posterior portion of the internal malleolus. The true inner
border of the tibia was marked only in the upper half of the" shaft.
The commonly-accepted view ( Quain’s Anatomy, Osteology, p. 127 ;
Macalister, A Text-hook of Human Anatomy, p. 182) that the condition
is due to prominence of the posterior longitudinal ridge is certainly
incorrect. The bulk of the growth is sometimes external and sometimes
internal to the arterial foramen.
In the discussion regarding the relation of this condition to the
function of the tibialis posticus muscle, no one appears to have noticed
the peculiar fashion in which the blackfellow uses his toes, bending the
knee, and passing them behind the body to the opposite hand—an act
specially involving the use of this muscle.
Another point has been overlooked, viz., the relation of one platyc-
nemic condition to the subject of retroversion of the head of the tibia.
♦ See footnote on p. 15.


In some cases I have examined of well-marked retroversion, the con-
dition of platyonemia has been unusually well-defined, and the ad-
ditional material is seen to be arranged like a pilaster supporting the
head of the tibia and the superimposed weight, much more directly
than would be possible were there no platycnemio condition. From
this point of view “ platycnemia ” would be synonymous with “ pi-
lastered tibia.”*
An observation made by Topinard gives special interest to this
condition. He says that a condition of the femur and the fibula (both
of which I have found in the aboriginal) and the condition of platyc-
nemia are peculiarities that belonged to one and the same race in Western
Europe, and that it is remarkable that they are rarely met with in sub-
jects showing perforation of the olecranon cavity. “ The two races
that have bequeathed to us the two varieties are therefore distinct.” It
is to be noted that Manouvrier, on the contrary, claims that all the
conditions referred to are found associated in the same skeletons.
As regards retroversion of the head of the tibia, this is a condition
that I have found very strongly marked in several skeletons. Theories
to explain it involve a discussion of the state of the knee-joint in walking,
and, as I have shown in the Journal of Anatomy and Physiology, vol.
xxv., this subject demands a far greater amount of investigation than
it has yet received, the ordinary teaching on the matter being incon-
sistent with the facts.
There are other points of interest connected with the tibia, for
example, the facet on the anterior surface of the lower extremity, which
I have found to be often present.
The subject oi the proportions of the upper and lower limbs, and of
their various component parts, is one of much interest; but the measure-
ments, having been computed on a very few specimens, are restricted
in their value.
* I find that Dr. Stirling, in the Report of the Work oj the Horn Scientific Ex-
pedition, vol. 2, p. 187, gives measurements of a left tibia from Alice Springs and
of two from the South-East, the indices being 73.7, 69.4, and 57.9 respectively.
This gives an average of 67. Dr. Stirling discusses the condition in the body of
the work, pp. 19 el seq., and p. 153, where he records observations of his own and
others by Professor Watson. I find no other references than these to platycnemia
in the Australian aboriginal. Australian, and especially South Australian, an-
thropological work and specimens are not unknown in Cambridge. It seems
surprising, therefore, that the results of the Horn Expedition, published in 1898,
should not find a place or a reference in University works published at the Cam-
bridge University Press in 1904, and designed to be used as University text-books
on the subject. What is true of English communications would appear to be even
more applicable to German researches. Dr. Hermann Klaatsch informs me that
many points dealt with in this present paper have been the subject of research by
him and others, and that the German literature on the subject is very extensive
indeed. His own publications, which he names, are “ Die Entstehung und
Entwictelung des Mensohengesohlechts, 1902 ” ; “ Ueber die \ ariationen des
Menschenskelets. 1902.” This adds to the gravamen of my complaint, and
furnishes additional evidence of the necessity of my present communication.


Relation of Radius to Humerus. —This has received a good deal of
attention. It has recently assumed an important place in anthropology,
and Turner has made a classification of human races, based on the
radio-humeral index.
As in the case of other proportions, worked out by White, Law-
rence, Humphry, and Broca, the results refer principally to the relation
that the human subject, especially the negro, bears to the gorilla,
chimpanzee, and orang. It is only of recent years that racial com-
parisons have been studied, and the chief work on the subject has been
done by Turner, in the Challenger Reports, but, unfortunately, from a
very small amount of material. Some years ago I sent him some ad-
ditional specimens, regarding which he said, “ The limb bones will also
be useful in giving me an opportunity of making further measurements
in my study of the relative length of the long bones in the Australian
natives.” He added, “Is it possible to secure examples of the in-
nominate bones and sacrum so that one can study the configuration
of the pelvis \ ”
The comparative anatomy of the pelvis, so far as it refers to the
various races, is a recent study. Nothing on the subject is found in
Topinard. Most of the work has been done by Turner, Cunningham,
Paterson, and Thomson ; and while the similarity of results to the
results of spine study has to be noted, the great dearth of materials
has to be mentioned with regret. Among 41 specimens recorded as
having been measured, and belonging to races other than white, there is
only one pelvis of an Australian female aboriginal. In response to Sir
William Turner’s request, I have been able to supply to some extent
the deficiency, and in process of doing so I have brought to light some
things in connection with the lumbar vertebrae and the sacrum that
are new and of special interest. To these I may refer briefly.
In his Challenger Report, Sir William Turner notes seven examples
(out of 30 skeletons) of a peculiarity of the fifth lumbar vertebra, viz.,
a solution of continuity of the arch immediately behind the superior
articular processes, sometimes associated with non-union of the spines.
This occurred in a Malay, an Andamanese, a Chinese, two bushmen,
an Esquimo, and a negro. Turner also reports it in a Sandwich Islander.
No abnormality in the lumbar region or sacrum has apparently been
reported in an Australian aboriginal. In 1902 I found in the fifth lumbar
vertebra of an aboriginal a hiatus due to the non-union of the spines.
This vertebra also showed another peculiarity, since it partook of the
characters of a sacral vertebra on its left side and of a lumbar vertebra
on its right (Fig. 20). The fourth lumbar (Fig. 21) presented a con-
dition of its right transverse process apparently new to anatomy.
Another fifth lumbar (Fig. 22) also showed an incomplete arch poste-
riorily.
The condition described by Turner, in which there is a hiatus on
each side immediately behind the superior articular processes, occurs


(Fig. 23) in a very young aboriginal subject, whose remains were found
at Garra, in the Pinnaroo district. Unfortunately, the detached piece
was not found, but it is clear from the condition of the facets of the
first sacral vertebra, which is separate, that the inferior articular pro-
cesses of the fifth lumbar were present.
This is not all. I have been able to demonstrate all variations
of the sacrum from four normal pieces, through four and a half, five,
five and a half, to six. On this subject Sir William Turner wrote to
me in 1903, “ I propose to give the notes on the sacrum to Professor
Cunningham for the Journal oj Anatomy and Physiology. I have seen
the condition found in these specimens in the sacrum of Europeans,
but the very interesting modification in the position of the lumbar
transverse is new to me.” The specimens are described in the Journal
of Anatomy and Physiology, vol. xxxvn., p. 359.
I have to describe two other anomalous conditions in aboriginals
which occur in connection with the sacro-iliac synchondrosis. In one
specimen the part of the ilium that bears the auricular surface is con-
tinued “ backwards ” in such a way as to cover and fit into one of the
digital depressions on the posterior surface of the transverse process
of the second vertebra of the sacrum, with which it forms a synchon-
drosis. In another specimen (Fig. 24) the supernumerary facet on the
sacrum is not in a depression. It is oval in form, its axes being 12 mm.
and 10 mm. respectively, and the margin being 10 mm. from the “ au-
ricular surface.” This is on the right side. On the left side the
diameters are 10 mm. and 5 mm., and the facet is 6 mm. distant. These
facets are on the junction of the transverse process of the first and
second vertebrae.
In two recent skeletons I have found, in the transverse processes
of the lumbar vertebrae, all transitional stages, from the extreme in-
stance mentioned to the ordinary and normal condition. It is some-
what remarkable that in a race in which no such abnormalities had
ever been described we should find not only every known variation
of the sacrum and the lumbar vertebrae, but also some conditions that
have never been recorded in human anatomy. This shows the
importance of examining everything.
The Spine. —As regards the single spinous process in the cervical
vertebrae, said to be a simian feature in the aboriginal, my observations
show that the ordinary bifid form is not common.
The chief interest connected with the spine, considered as a whole,
lies in the curves it exhibits. The largest amount of investigation on
this subject has been done by Professor Cunningham, who has published
an extensive memoir in which he shows that the Australians and Tas-
manians, Andamanese, bushmen, and negroes hold an intermediate
place between the Simiidse and the whites. There is a great want of
suitable materials for this important study—suitable materials meaning
spines of subjects of different ages, especially with the ligaments intact.


Regarding the scapula and the sternum I need say very little, except
that the latter bone sometimes exhibits in the Australian aboriginal a
condition not found in other races : I refer to the articulation of the
third rib, instead of the second, with the place of junction of the manu-
brium with the body of the sternum
I may refer shortly to the subject of pigmentation, to show how
points arise for investigation. Older writers make some reference to
it; but modern works on anthropology appear to ignore the subject.
Professor Cunningham, writing to me regarding the tongue of an
aboriginal which Professor Watson had given me to send to him, said :
“ I notice in the tongue an interesting point, viz., that patches of the
mucous membrane are rather deeply pigmented in the lymphoid region.
Is this common among natives ? ”
While in the Northern Territory I examined a large number of
aboriginals, and found pigmentation very common and very extensively
distributed on and under the tongue, on the palate, and on the inside
of the cheek. On my return I examined some cases here along with
Dr. Rogers, and found similar conditions. Further, we noticed that
young aboriginals—of whom we examined several—showed no trace
of such pigmentation. If this deposit of pigment should be found to
be a late phenomenon in the individual it will prove to be an interesting
observation, and one probably to be correlated with the later develop-
ment of hair on the body, which is secondary to the intra-uterine and
the infantile hairy condition. It does not appear to be generally known
that the newly-born aboriginal is not black, but of a yellowish honey
color, with narrow dark lines on certain parts of the body.
About 25 years ago, if my memory serves me aright, the question
of pigmentation of the skin was investigated in reference to the subject
of living in the tropics, and the investigations served to explode some
physical fallacies due to the wrong inferences regarding radiation and
absorption of heat. An interesting observation on this subject was
made by Dr. Semon, when hunting for the ceratodus and other rare
animals in the Queensland rivers. He says ; “ Another nuisance was
the burning sun upon my bare back, which soon scorched, by its rays
pouring straight down from the zenith. It was not easy to protect
myself against this, for whenever I put on a light jacket this soon got
wet by my going deeper into the water, and brought on a disagreeable
feeling of chill as soon as the slightest wind arose. I therefore gave up
protecting myself against the sun, and soon had the satisfaction of find-
ing that my back and breast got covered by a dark-brown skin, im-
pervious to its attack.”
Another observation, which he made at Amboyna, is worth noting.
He says ; “ When my fishermen were at sea they used to uncover the
upper part of their body, keeping on nothing but the wide sack-like
trousers, reaching below the knees, and worn by the Ambon men instead
of a sarong. As they used to undress completely for diving, I could


observe, while watching their movements below the water, how the
upper portion of their body, which was daily exposed to the glowing
sun, was of a far darker color than the lower. Thus w T e see that the
sun has just the same influence on a brown as on a white skin —a fact
generally hidden from our observation.”
Some amount of study has recently been devoted to the muscles
of expression in different races ; but at the present time there is but
little recorded in this connection regarding the Australian aboriginal.
Cunningham and Klaatsch have both been supplied recently with
materials from South Australia for investigation, so something more
may be looked for.
About eight years ago I found an extra muscle in both hands of
a full-grown male aboriginal. On the right side the muscle arose from
the tendon of the palmaris longus at the level of the annular ligament,
and passed downwards to join the tendon of the abductor minimi digiti.
The nerve supply was derived from the ulnar nerve by a branch which
left the trunk at the level of the pisiform bone, and passed downwards
to enter the muscle at the lower border of the palmaris brevis. The
muscle on the left side was similar in its relations ; but I did not
dissect out the nerve.
This appeared to be an abnormality of that particular body. I
subsequently examined a large number of bodies of aboriginals, but
found no other instance of such a condition as this.
Man is but poorly specialised in body when compared with the
donkey or the deer. Like many other animal forms, he has one
particular and peculiar feature that stands out prominently as a mark
of distinction. The one feature, universally recognised, that marks
man off from all present day forms is his brain. A highly specialised
brain means less necessity for specialisation of other parts of the body.
Teeth and jaws remain generalised because he can cook ; his skin is
smooth because he can provide means of shelter and defence. One
would imagine that classifying features would be found in the develop-
ment of the human brain, or in the brains of adults of the various races.
Here, surely, is a fruitful field of study. What has been done in it 1
Broca may be said to have led the way in the study of the brain
in races. He published his results in 1880. In 1882 Miklouho-Maclay
published the results of an examination of various brains, including the
Australian aboriginal ( Nature , December 21st, 1882, p. 185). In 1888
Rolleston ( Journ. Anthrop. Ins., p. 32) described another Australian
aboriginal brain. Duckworth (Morphology and Anthropology, 1904, p.
423 et seq.) describes four brains of aboriginals in the Cambridge
Anatomical Collection. But what does all this amount to, even if the
descriptions were complete, instead of being merely superficial, as many
of them are ? The whole subject of the evolution of this organ in the
aboriginal is practically untouched.


If the specialisation of brain marks man off from all other animal
forms, it does not follow that the various races, of mankind will be
marked off from each other by cerebral characters ; in fact, analogy
is against such a supposition. The fundamentum divisionis of the
genus is rarely the fundamentum divisionis of the species, in Deniker’s
words : “ The physical peculiarities distinguishing man from the animals
most nearly allied to him in organisation, and those which differentiate
human races one from another, are almost never the same.” At the
same time we shall not be surprised if this statement should prove to
be too exclusive, or not applicable in this particular case.
A word may be said on man’s affinities. It is now regarded as
fairly certain that his nearest relatives are the anthropoid apes, viz.,
the gorilla, orang, gibbon, and chimpanzee. He possesses about 300
structural features in common with the gorilla and chimpanzee that
are not found in any of the lowest monkeys. Turner has pointed out
that the simian features are not all concentrated in any single race. It
has been allowed, however, that the Australian aboriginals have fur-
nished the largest number of ape-like characters. The more one in-
vestigates the truer does this statement prove to be.
Recent advances in science have given two unexpected proofs of
affinity in entirely new fields. The homolytic test puts human blood
and the blood of the apes in the same class, and separates both from
the blood of the lower monkeys. Again, man and the anthropoid apes
are subject to a class of diseases that does not affect any other animals.
Formerly the Australian aboriginal was classed with the American
negro because both possessed flat nose, protruding lips, projecting jaws,
and large-sized teeth. But this is just as if one should put the echidna
and the porcupine in the same order on account of their spines. The
characters mentioned are very variable, not only in the Australian
aboriginals and in the negroes, but in all races, and are just those
characters that change very rapidly in the individual and in the race
on account of changes in habits. Further, these are the characters
that would become especially developed in the apes and lower human
races on account of similarity of food, habits, and surroundings.
Topinard and others had concluded that Australia was originally
inhabited by a race of the Tasmanian type that disappeared before a
taller race that came from—somewhere. Flower and Lydekker (In-
troduction to the Study of Mammals Living and Extinct, 1891, p. 748)
thought the Australians were a cross between two already formed stocks.
Keane still holds that they are a blend of two or at most three different
elements in extremely remote times.
Huxley held that the Australians were a homogeneous group.
Finsoh, from extensive observations, concluded in 1884 that they were
all of one race. Alfred Russel Wallace, in 1893, pointed out the
aboriginal’s resemblances to certain Asiatic races, and concluded that
the Australian aboriginals were really a low Caucasian type.


Dr. Semon, in his work In the Australian Bush, English edition,
1899. p. 237, adopts the theory that the Australians and Dravidians—
primitive inhabitants of India—have sprung from a common branch
of the human race, and that the Caucasians have undoubtedly sprung
from the Dravidians. This makes the Australian aboriginal more
nearly allied to us than the comparatively civilised Malays, Mongols,
or Negroes. Speaking popularly, according to this view the Australian
aboriginal, racially, would be the uncle of the Caucasian.
Lydekker, in 1898, abandoned the two-race theory, and reached
the same conclusion as Wallace. Most anthropologists now accept the
one-race theory. The most recent writer on this subject is Professor
Gregory, who, in The Dead Heart of Australia, p. 176, says he accepts
this view and abandons the position he took up in 1903 in The Geography
of Victoria.
This view certainly enhances the interest in the aboriginal, and
brings the subject of the ethnology and anthropology of the black
nearer home to us. Some writers give the Australian even greater
importance. Stratz has taken him as a central unit, a prototype,
around which he groups all the rest of the races of men ; and another
writer, Schoetensack, holds that all the races of men were evolved in
the Australian continent.
To touch upon the evidence for these theories would lead us into
such subjects as language and folk-lore, customs, tools, weapons,
religious ideas, &c. Such a digression is beyond my purpose. The
scope of this communication does not embrace the origin or affinities
of man ; therefore do not expect any extensive statement of facts or
theories on the subject. I have said something recently and elsewhere
on certain points of aboriginal anthropology and customs.
I would refer here to only one thing more, viz., the character of the
aboriginal. People have been so long accustomed to hear him spoken
of as the lowest type of race that they have interpreted this to mean
that he is the essence of everything that is bad. We could overlook
accounts of the “ Indians ” of this country or the “ natives of New
Holland,” as they were termed a hundred years ago or more ; but
recent descriptions of an equally untrue and absurd character are
spread by people who should know better. We read of mental degrada-
tion, the zero of all anthropological analysis, the lowest of savages, no
natural affections, live burial of children, wooing by club inducements,
the lowest races in the scale of humanity, untrainable savages, cruel,
ungrateful. I cannot close this paper without saying that I am sure
that you who know the aboriginals have found them, as I have, fond
of their children, kind to the aged and infirm, generous, grateful, apt
to learn, good at mechanical work, equal in ability to white school
children with whom they are educated, of unimpeachable honesty in
things entrusted to them, cheerful under difficulties, of unruffled good


temper —even in free, romping fights, and sometimes displaying re-
markable shrewdness and a keen sense of the humorous or the ridiculous.
I am not sure whether football is a recognised test of civilisation ; but
if cricket is any criterion the blackfellow has a strong claim to be civilis-
able. There are exceptions ; of course there are. You find some
aboriginals with bad mental traits, just as you find some miserably-fed
individuals or groups among “ pieces of anatomy ” that are the finest,
the supplest, the most lithesome, and of the best carriage in the whole
range of creation. I think Mrs. Gunn, in The Little Black Princess,
has given a truer picture of the Australian aboriginal than is to be
found in the latest half dozen books professing to deal scientifically
with the subject.
Do not find fault with me if I make no authentic statement, or
even any statement at all, regarding the origin and racial affinities of
the Australian aboriginal. My task is really to show what place he
occupies in recent research. You will agree with me that it is an im-
portant place. You will also allow that the position of the aboriginal
among the races of the world cannot finally be decided without a very
great deal of research in anthropology. The people forming the great
majority to whom the science is a recreation might surely unite in an
effort to supply materials to those workers who apply themselves
closely to what is an arduous and sometimes, unfortunately, an ex-
pensive task. I hope we shall hear no more about whole series of
beautiful and rare photographic plates meeting their destiny in the
melting-down furnaces of the glassworks, or accumulations of aboriginal
skeletons being ground down for superphosphates.
In the universal “ grab-all ” for door-mats be graciously pleased
to pay some respect to the altar cloths of the anthropologists.
Perhaps I ought to. say, in conclusion, that the preparation of this
communication has been to me a relaxation —a pleasant recreation, a
labor of love, or something of that sort. It has not been any of these,
and I have no reason for concealing the truth about the matter. I
undertook to write the paper because I was asked to do so, and because
I thought it required to be done ; not because I was infatuated with
the subject. It has entailed much work on me, and a great deal of
inconvenience on others —particularly on Dr. Rogers, who, I think,
deserves to be regarded as joint author. It has taken time and energy
which could be ill spared, and which should have been devoted to other
ends with other aims. If, however, by anything I have said I have
succeeded in making some people repentant over lost opportunities,
and resolved to do something to help Australia—and especially South
Australia—to take her proper place in anthropological research, then
I am content.


PLATES.


For assistance in preparing these illustrations I am much indebted
to Mr. A. Vaughan, the Government Photo.-Lithographer; Mr. W. T.
Lingvvood Smith, Photographer to the Detective Department; and Miss
Maude F. Prosser, of the School of Design, Adelaide. With the
exception of Fig. 8, which is a South Australian Museum specimen, for
which I am under obligation to Dr. K. C. Stirling, all the specimens are
from my own collections.


Fig. 1. —4, a fourth molar.
Fig. 2.—4, a fourth molar.




Fig. 3.— t, supernumerary tooth.
Fig. 4 .—t p, tooth pit.




Fig. 5.— d.r., dental rudiment.
Fig. 6.— d.r., dental rudiment.
Fig. 7.




Fig. 8 —i, left incisors.
Fig. 9.




Fig. 10.
Fig. 11




Fig. 12.
Fig. 13.
Fig. 14.




Fig. 15.
Fig. 16.—m., malar; sm.f., spheno-
maxillary fissure; f.o., foramen
ovale.
Fig. 17.— m., malar; sm.f., spheno-
maxillary fissure; f.o., foramen
ovale.




Fig. 18.




Fig. 19.




Fig. 20.




Fig. 21.
Fig. 22.




Fig. 23.
Fig. 24.






