

THICK THHKKTKNCK.
THE NEW DEMOCRACY
Labor Army Manifesto to Workers
and Citizens
By Will Craig
(author of “No More Poverty”)
The author of "The New Evangel” having kindly
offered to allow the advocates of the Labor Army
principle to state their case In this book, we gladly
and gratefully accept the offer, and desire to affirm
the main principles already laid down in “No More
Poverty” and “The Workless Home and the Workers’
Army” (published in 1927). But we deem it advisable
to use this opportunity to revise and restate our posi-
tion in the light of present-day problems in Australia.
We do so without assuming the role of leaders, but
certainly as teachers, without undue dogmatism or
egotism, and in the spirit of true democracy, a form
of society yet to be realised, and which we regard as
possible, although difficult of achievement.
Civilisation an Evil.
We realise that we must get down to fundamentals,
and scorn to gloss over first principles. Thus, we will
not hesitate to challenge all existing laws and institu-
tions, nor to conceal our hatred of civilisation. By
civilisation we mean that form of social life which is
based on slavery, on government, on legal and political
systems. All of these we regard as the means whereby
the ruling class imposed its will on the subject class;
hence we regard the State, parliaments, laws, law
courts, lawyers, legislators and judges, as things in-
herently evil, and Incompatible with true democracy.
Democracy has been defined as government of the
people, by the people, and for the people. This really
is a negation of government; for all governments are
based on slavery or exploitation; therefore they are
immoral and unjust. The moral foundation of the
Labor Army philosophy we teach to our fellow Aus-
tralians is that Democracy means free citizenship, and
an end to States, parliaments, law, legislation, and all
the relics of civilisation which now retard our progress
to the ideal of a Commonwealth of workers and citizens.


The I'Tuure in the Distance.
This ideal, of course, is “the future in the distance,''
but without this ideal, this social myth, if you like,
there can be no true movement towards the Common-
wealth. One of the vices of civilisation is this lack of
an ideal; civilisation is humanity debauched by love of
money, the lust tor trade and commerce as a means
of making material wealth; it has brought countless
evils upon mankind, including the last Great War,
and is the cause of the present world debacle, the like
of which was never known in human history. Hence
we declare that Australian workers and citizens of
peace and goodwill, who accept the principle of human
brotherhood, and realise that human life must have
or be given a moral purpose and a social aim, must
challenge the very foundations of existing society, and
denounce its laws, customs, morality and religion.
That is our moral attitude to civilisation and its in“'i-
tutions—the attitude of direct challenge. We seek a
new form of society suitable tor a New World as
re-made by new thought and the science of the day.
All that is desirable in the thought of the past will
endure because of its lasting quality; but all that is
inconsistent with the Spirit of the Age, the spirit of
change and reconstruction, of reform and innovation,
must needs pass away. We declare that the world is
in a state of ferment, or real revolution, and that the
attitude of all lovers of humanity must be bent in the
direction of social movement towards the New Democ-
racy, the principles of which we sketch in the following
paragraphs.
Hepresentat ive Governmen t.
It is being clearly demonstrated by the march of
events that our existing democracy is a farce, as Mr.
Scullin declared before he became Prime Minister.
Labor thinkers favor industrial democracy, but have
done next to nothing to advance or define it. Thus
we find that the movement of the workers, generally
called the Labor Movement, is really only a political
party, with all the vices and limitations of a political
party. Much sentimental nonsense is uttered about
this movement on the platform and in the Labor Press,
but this only serves to expose the rottenness in its
bones. It is not denied that the rank and file of the
workers are animated by ideals of justice and show
at times a spirit of self-sacrifice, but there can be no
doubt that the prevalent vice of civilisation and its


utter luck of ideals has permeated the Labor Movement,
which is corrupted with materialsm and politicalism.
If mere “political action” could win Labor's goal,
suiely it ought to have been reached after a lifetime
of this strategy; but we see, since Federation, and the
expenditure of some two hundred millions sterling in
legislation and its accompaniments, a state of affairs
in Australia which is in itself the worst verdict that
could be passed on civilisation. Australia had at one
time a clean slate; could have written a lesson for
itself and the world thereon; instead of which it
followed the example of the civilised nations, and now
it shares in the universal debacle of a civilisation rotten
to the core: against which Nature has revolted; which
Nature declares in unmistakable terms must be radi
cally altered on penalty of sharing the fate of all civil-
isations based on human slavery and exploitation. Thus
we assert that civilisation is opposed to natural law;
and that the New Democracy must be based on natural
law, and not on the laws made by the ruling classes
of past ages in their own interest, which have corrupted
and debauched mankind and led to the diseased social
life called civilisation. As opposed to this we set up
before our fellow-workers and citizens the ideal of
Socialisation, a society obeying natural law, eschewing
government and all its evils; and based on common
aims in industry and the utmost freedom of citizens
compatible with a socialised life lived in common.
Mental Slavery.
The failure of the sham democracy of our generation
is due to the ignorance of the masses. This ignorance
is one of the worst effects of civilisation, which imposes
on its victims a mental slavery infinitely worse than
the physical slavery it has imposed on the workers.
True democracy is a very high ideal; it is no paradox
to say that far from meaning a dead level of dulness
and ignorance, it means the greatest common denom-
inator and not the lowest. In other words, the true
democrat must be a man or woman not only able to
vote, but able to rule, to give effect to social law and
to interpret the Social Contract; to act as a judge
along with his fellow-citizens. We see as our ideal a
community so far advanced in social life that the laws
and politics of to-day will appear absurd and oppres-
sive; also a dreadful waste of human life. It is neces-
sary for a community to have such an ideal before it


can become real; even 1£ it is too high for humanity
to reach, the effort to reach it surely will lead humanity
out of the bog of civilisation in which they .now
flounder. Civilisation has reached its saturation point;
it is suffering from excess development; it'.cannot find
work for its slaves; it is unwilling to feed them. If
the slaves of an effete civilisation were willing to starve
all would be well for the ruling class; but while they
are far too docile, and allow starvation to rob them
of their manhood, the slaves show some tendency to
fight; and the advocates of civilisation, its Scribes of
the Press and its Pharisees of the legislature and the
law court and the pulpit, do lip service to humanity,
and put forward charity and political and financial
nostrums as a means of curing the disease of civilisa-
tion. But civilisation cannot be cured; its days are
numbered: the death rattle is already in its throat and
it hastens to dissolution. May it rest in peace!
Machinery of Democracy Obsolete.
Let us look at this civilisation a little more closely.
We are concerned chiefly with Australia, which has
repeated all the evils of a civilisation based on human
servitude and degradation. Hence we have huge, un-
gainly cities, with slums, law courts, thieves, business
houses and commercial barracks and factories, poverty,
vice and crime of all kinds —-the Inevitable effects of
civilisation. We have, too, legislatures in every one
of our States; based on those of the feudal era; and
we have political parties with various delusive names,
each of which is full of zeal for the welfare of Aus-
tralia, and claims to be able to legislate so that the
ideals of democracy will be achieved. But the fact
remains that the legislators of this alleged Common-
wealth are merely tinkering with the pots and pans of
a moribund feudalism and a capitalism which has begun
to live on its principal. That is to say, mankind has
made such progress in science, and the methods of
production, that our methods of legislation are out or
date; they do not meet the needs of the day. Society
is based on competition; and whereas by co-operation
it would be easy to feed, clothe and house all the
people of Australia on a fair standard with some four
or five hours of labor well directed, it is impossible
to do it under the present system, in spite of the fact
that production is carried on now at a rate tar greater
than ever before, and the basic needs of the community.


in all probability, .could be - provided by six months’-
work each year, if every able-bodied worker labored for
six or seven hours under a system of planned and
socialised economy having for its object the feeding,
clothing, and housing of the people, with such medical
and nursing services, and other needs as are necessary
to maintain socialised life at a high standard of fitness,
physically, mentally and morally.
We who advocate these methods of socialisation arc
dubbed “shoddy doctrinaires’’ by the Scribes of the
I’ress and the Pharisees of politics; but they them-
selves have nothing to offer but financial nostrums or
shoddy laws, already choking the very life out of
Australians. Professors of political economy who live
an easy genteel life on the toil of the workers,
lecture on this subject; but, like other advocates, their
voice is one crying in the wilderness. There is much
cry and little wool; and the patchwork laws passed
by shoddy legislatures to provide work or sustenance
are pitiable and laughable, yet withal tragic, for they
speak only too eloquently of the last act in the tragedy
of civilisation:
For the phty is the tragedy Alan.
And its hero the conqueror worm.'
The Wage System.
One of. the vilest and most insidious engines of
civilisation in its capitalist form is the wage system.
In its modern form this is .a most cunning instrument
of human oppression and slavery. It is no figure of
speech to say that the wage-earner is a wage-slave.
He is not only physically a slave, tied to his job or a
machine, but he is mentally a slave. He believes in
the wage system. Hence the rise of arbitration, and
the existence of labor unions all intensely interested in
the wage system; also politicians, whose very career
is bound up with the wage system, and have no real
desire to see it abolished. Wages are paid by those
who employ labor for work done; nothing seems fairer
or more natural. The Australian workers are so used
to the system that at heart they fancy anybody who
condemns it is a crank or worse—perhaps even a
“paranoiac”—for there are many mandarins of Official
Labor with a smattering of philosophy who are unable
to reply to their critics, and get even with them by
calling their sanity in question. The result is that an
immense amount of time is taken up in the fixation of


wages; in arguments about the living wage, wages
nominal and wages real; wages high and wages low;
the purchasing power of the workers; also In determin-
ing the basic wage, which is the accepted standard, and
may be termed the fodder wage, the principle which
reduces human labor to the level- of the horse, and
determines what is necessary to keep him physically fit
for his work and his rank in society. So long as a
worker can do his job he is satisfactory to his em-
ployer; and so long as he can vote he serves the purpose
of a political party; therefore there is no organisation
at present interested in his proper education, and this
is done by a few enthusiasts willing to brave the scorn
of the herd and the sneers of official mandarins who
have an eye on the marble halls of Canberra as a
fitting end to a career not too successful from any
point of view.
The wage system is a gigantic fraud; it is the means
of economic exploitation. It makes the political power
of the workers more nominal than real; for while the
workers can enforce legislation to fix wages they cannot
oblige employers of labor to find work, and without
work the worker gets no wages. All of which seems
quite in order, so thoroughly has civilisation done its
work in rendering mankind unable to understand the
machinery of society and the cunning with which it is
worked by those who take a toll of the labor of their
fellow-men.
The wage system is a slave system; hence we find at
the present day the wage slaves tumbling over each
other to get work. Work cannot be got. What is the
reason? The reason is that work has served its
purpose; it has produced the goods that the masters
of the workers need in order to make fortunes; in other
words, the goods produced are more numerous than can
be sold. It is as if the people of Melbourne or Sydney,
on setting out one morning to go to work by train or
tram or ferry boat, were told that there were no tickets
available. Most of them, being creatures of habit,
would stay at home, and lose their day’s pay; for to
travel without a ticket is to break the law, and to do
that is very, very wrong. Civilisation teaches respect
for the law; and the result is a mass of starving, hope-
less humanity, many of whom are physically fit, but
all of whom are mentally and morally imbecile, who
shrink from putting forth their hands and taking their
share of the needs of life. And this is the state of


things that our Scribes and Pharisees boast of as the
perfect civilisation —the triumph of Law and Order!
Organised lunacy can go no further. Yea, more, it is
sanctified by the derelicts and humbugs who enter the
pulpit and prate of the will of God, and condemn the
irreligious and immoral Bolshevik as an evil creature!
An Immoral Society.
It will be supposed that we are wicked people
engaged in subversive propaganda; but we do not lie
down under such treatment. We condemn the morality
as well as the laws of civilisation, and we set up the
new morality and a new social religion in place of the
old traditions which are now the byword and scorn of
thinking folk. Thus we say that the morality which
condemned an unwed mother and forced her on to the
streets was a vile and Inhuman morality, utterly op-
posed to natural law. And we say that any society
which is not based on the common and equal right of
all its members, be they what they are, to life and
liberty, is immoral and unjust and irrational. It may-
be said that in advocating socialisation we put forward
a counsel of perfection; but we say that if the Aus-
tralian people really and truly held the ideal of a
moralised and socialised Commonwealth it would be
possible to abolish all the vices and crimes of civilisa-
tion, and to free society from the tetters now imposed
upon it by the State, with its ridiculous law courts and
parliaments, its barbarous prisons and living tombs
of asylums for its victims.
A New Constitution.
We are told by the legal and political directors of
this Commonwealth (so-called) that the Constitution
blocks the way. We answer that in a true Democracy
all power belongs to the people, and is derived from
the people. Therefore the moment the people decide
that the Constitution is a mockery and a delusion, it
ceases to exist. It has no more reality than the
equator; the same remark applies to the statute books,
the laws, precedents, customs, conventions of civilisa-
tion handed down to us from the feudal and the capi-
talist eras. These things are only mental realities;
they are binding and valid only so long as the people
recognise them. Let the people decide to retain their
power in their own hands; refuse to give it to so-called
“representatives”; and they will rise out of civilised law


into socialised freedom. The object of law Is not
freedom; it is to conserve the rights of property or
the privileges of the ruling castes; it was made for
this purpose; and all the machinery of law-making and
law-administration was invented thousands of years ago
by the ruling class for the purpose of keeping the
working class in subjection. This is no rhetoric or
figure of speech; it is a fact of science; and until it is
clearly realised and acted upon, the people living in
civilised States will be serfs and subject peoples, how-
ever much they may prate about their rights and
liberties, and their devotion to ballot boxes.
These things being so, we say that the machinery
of political Democracy is of no use to a socialised
people. A community of workers and citizens who
desire to be above all law but the laws of Nature;
and to regulate their own lives and labors; to make
their own Social Contract, to be their own judges and
jury; and to free life from the shackles of civilisation,
will seek not to perpetuate the old constitutions and
laws and statute books and the existing mania for
legislation; but to make these things unnecessary by
simplifying life; laying down a Social Contract which
will be the basis of social law and replace all other
laws, save those clearly belonging to Nature; founding
a Commonwealth whose constitution shall be derived
from natural and not man-made law; which will make
every soul born within the Commonwealth a worker
and a citizen; and make the first and prime object of
the Commonwealth the production of the People’s Live-
lihood by means of a Labor Army organised for the
purpose, in which every citizen, male or female, shall
be liable to serve; and which will form the training
school for every citizen for vocation and culture and
the duties of citizenship. In this great school of labor
the future citizen will be taught not to value money,
nor to compete with his fellows for its possession, but
taught that life is not a mere business of buying and
selling; that it is a high and noble calling, and should
be dedicated to the community. That would mean
destroying at its root the upas tree of civilisation,
which blasts and withers all around it. In place of it
the tree of Socialisation would grow up and cover the
world with its branches, like the tabled tree of Igdrasil.
Keconstniction.
Thus far we have been engaged in the work of
destructive criticism, generally held in disrepute, but


very necessary, and never more so than In our own
days. We proceed to advocate ways and means of
realising Socialisation, if not in our time, then in days
to come, when our children, let us hope, will be
mentally strong enough to shake off the hypnotic
influence of law and politics as invented by the tyrants
>f the past. This is an age of challenge; an age of
reconstruction; and, like the poet, we say;
My life shall he a challenge, not a truce.
The leading principle of the Labor Army philosophy
is the right to work and the duty to eat. Eating being
conditional on working in a society which recognises
natural law, we declare that the Commonwealth must
be constituted so as to provide, first and foremost, the
basic needs of citizens, on a fixed standard. These
basic needs may be set out as:
Food, Clothes, Housing, Medical and .Nursing Services,
Tools, Transport and Education.
Without these things a socialised life, based on
natural law and morality, is impossible; and with them,
aided by science and improved production rendered
possible by efficient labor, the Australian people can live
a life of health, wealth and happiness. Their laboi
need not be heavy nor too long; for a socialised people
will work not for the sake of working, nor to make
money or a fortune, but as a means of providing the
needs of life and keeping body and mind properly
occupied. That done, they will begin to live; that is
to say, they will take no thought for the morrow;
what they shall eat, or drink, or wear, for all these
things will be provided by a community that does not
leave them to chance, or to speculating traders whose
motive is profit. In other words, the political economy
of Jesus, at present derided openly or implicitly by the
Scribes and Pharisees of a perverted civilisation, will
be seen to be highly practicable. Obedience to natural
law, the law of labor, will bring the natural reward
in peace and plenty. It is the prostitution of labor to
unworthy ends that has created civilisation and all its
horrors, and makes it necessary every few hundred
years for Nature to rise in revolt against civilisation,
and make a new effort to create a human society that
will obey her inexorable laws. That is how we read
history; the truth of these words is no mere theory
that arises in our minds; it springs from that source


of all impulses-—the deep soul of man; it is the ever-
springing urge of the Life Force: “Urge and urge and
urge, always the procreant urge of the world.” The
same urge that begets human beings and re-peoples
the earth, will create, in due time, the New World of
our dreams.
These basic needs, as set out above, must be the
right of all souls within the Commonwealth, and sup
plied, unconditionally and in kind, to them as required,
on the standard fixed by the Commonwealth. When
we say unconditionally, we reserve, of course, the
right to a certain measure of compulsion consistent
with natural law; that is, we advocate that each citizen,
if called upon, shall serve a term in the ranks of the
Labor Army, in return for which he shall have the
status of a free citizen, and receive, for life, the basic
needs without payment.
Such a revolutionary principle is, of course, difficult
to apply in its totality; but as a preliminary we seek
to have it accepted by workers and citizens. Workers
are those who derive their living from manual labor,
and may belong to unions; citizens are those who do
their duty as such, or seek to do it; and recognise the
claims of their poorer and weaker brethren to life and
the needs of life. The representative men of our times,
having failed, It is for workers and citizens to step
into the breach. We do not blame the legislators alto-
gether, while we decry them and seek their abolition;
it is not the men, but the machinery that is at fault.
The existing machinery of political democracy is quite
useless and out of date; more so than a stage coach
would be for modern transport: yet the working class,
kept deliberately in ignorance by interested people,
many of whom know better, cling to it with a pathetic
insistence. It is as if a man were to make a journey
from east to west of this continent in a caravan, when
he has a modern railway at his disposal. It is the
vested interests of the ruling class, also of ambitious
members of the laboring class, which keeps up this
political constitution and its never-ending law-making,
and keeps the people of Australia in mental slavery to
feudalism and capitalism; and dooms many of the
useful workers to want, suicide, and utter destitution:
also driving many to prison for asserting their manhood
and helping themselves.


I’alliatives.
Amongst the many palliatives at present before the
people are: Social Credit, Free Bread, and certain
economic solutions propounded by professors of political
economy, which may be regarded in much the same
light as ordinary legislation, an allopathic treatment
whereby a disease is cured at the risk of causing
another. None the less it is advisable that any
theoretic solution of the economic problem be
seriously considered, even if it be at best a
partial remedy. In the last analysis it will be
found that nothing short of the thesis that civil-
isation is an evil,' its foundations utterly immoral,
unjust and unnatural, will stand the test. This, of
course, is so contrary’ to tradition, to the code of
morality taught and practised, the code that calmly
looks on at the starvation of human beings as an un-
fortunate by-product of civilisation, that it will be
resisted even by those who are the victims of a vicious
civilisation. Thus the Labor unions make little of
poverty as a social phenomenon; it is only at certain
times, such as those we live in now, that destitution
proves the rottenness of “political action,” and the
mental poverty of its professors and practicians.
The Fraud of Finance.
it is possible that finance is one of the avenues of
approach to a socialised society. But the Labor Army
philosophy holds that money is one of the prime evils
of civilisation; that it is not a convenience as a means
of exchange; that it is a nuisance to mankind, and the
means of a cunning and specious exploitation; and that
a socialised society will have little, if any, use for it.
At the present lime such a bold and wise expedient as
the abolition of money would not be possible in a
civilised community; hence it becomes necessary to
deal with social credit as a means of easing the
present intolerable position.
It is clear to all students of social science, whether
they claim to be masters of finance or not, that the
financial system of civilised society is largely hocus
pocus. First of all, it is based in most, countries on
what is called the gold standard; yet the bulk of the
world’s business is done by means of paper money.
In the last analysis goods are really not sold, they are
exchanged: and money is supposed to be the means of
exchange. In reality this is not so; any more than


it is the case that capital made the Bank of England
or built the city of London. Australia, tor instance,
grows wool and wheat; these, after the non-productive
industry of law-making, are its staple industries. Wool
and wheat can be exported; Australian legislation, un-
fortunately, is not in demand on the world’s markets.
Australian wool and wheat are sold, of course, nomin-
ally for money; in reality for machinery and other
goods which we do not ourselves produce. Thus it can
he seen that if, money being abolished as a stupid and
useless thing, the relative values of exports and imports
were established; and a debit and credit account kept
between countries that carried on commerce with each
other, money would become obsolete. Its use is kept
going because it enables the lords of finance to domin-
ate industry and rule the world. Australia is a huge
borrower; most of our boasted social, legislation has
been carried on with loan capital. But capital is only
a figure of speech for human labor. Australian rail-
ways were not built by capital, but by human labor.
That means that the money borrowed by Australia to
make railways went to pay wages to workers; workers
in Britain, where the rails were made; and workers
in Australia, where the rails were laid. If Britain and
Australia were free countries, with free workers, there
would be no need of money to pay them; they would
he paid in goods and services; that is to say, they
would have the right tor life to basic needs. Therefore
i here would be no need to pay them wages, and no
need to pay interest on needless borrowed capital. This
has to be paid for; and that means that labor is
perpetually working for people who live on interest.
This, too, applies more and more to what the Scribes
of the Press are fond of calling “Capital,” meaning the
capitalist. The capitalist, as a rule, is only an employer
of labor, using- borrowed money; he, too, is in pawn
to the money-lender, who rules the roost in our para-
doxical civilisation. In a sane system of industry, the
workers would have a surety of life and of labor; they
would have a real status as citizens, and be able to
work under conditions of their own choosing, without
wages. Wages are tokens of servitude. Under Social-
isation they would be workers in the Labor Army for
a certain term; during which they would be fed, clothed,
housed and educated; and thereafter they would be-
come free citizens, with all the rights and duties and
privileges of such. Within the Commonwealth of in


clustry money or capital would be practically unknown;
but there would be real wealth In the shape of usable
goods, machinery—plant, railways, buildings, docks,
warehouses, and the like; in fact, the new Common-
wealth would be based on industry; and there wou.d
be no such thing as a National Debt. Instead there
might be a National Credit, but it would not be assessed
at so much ‘‘wealth per head” of the population, as
is the case now. Probably the wealth of the new Com-
monwealth would be accounted as representing so many
souls in the Labor Army—strong, healthy, self-reliant
and self-regulating workers, male and female, well
trained in body, mind and spirit—who would look back
with mingled horror and pity at our diseased civilisa-
tion and its follies and inhumanity.
But we must not run the risk of being called
Utopians by the “scientific” social reformers. Keeping
on solid earth, what is there in this scheme of social
credit? It is as plain as a pikestaff that Australia has
no need to borrow money for public works when she
has the labor and has the means of maintaining that
labor. Even if money be indispensable under the
present insane system of social life, it could be made
here. There is no need to borrow it. For every great
undertaking of a reproductive character, the Common-
wealth could issue notes that would be social tender:
and the thing is done. Inflation! says the critics of
social credit. . Not so; the money issued represents the
added value of the undertaking or new service; and
provides the community with the means of paying for
it, or using it. The scarcity of money is artificially
fostered by money lords, because money follows that
well-known “economic law” of supply and demand
which is so marked a feature of a civilisation which
flouts the laws of Nature and is now suffering the
penalty. Money being scarce, those with money can
sell the use of it at their own price; hence it comes
that we in Australia are saddled with an enormous
debt, which is a millstone round our necks, and will
be even a heavier millstone round the necks of oui
children, unless they send it and civilisation along with
it to the bottomless pit, whence they came.
By all means let social credit be tried out; the resuh
will be all to the good, we believe. Even if it does
not do all its advocates claim for it, we cannot bo any
worse off than we are, and we shall have the know
ledge gained by experience.


Free Bread.
As for Free Bread, advocated zealously and ably by
Harry E. Langridge, this being an integral part of
l.abor Army philosophy, enlists our ready support. It
could be made universal, general, and a charge on
the Commonwealth Treasury. Bread would be dis-
tributed just as letters are, without the nuisance of
finding cash for it. The educational effect of this
reform would be immense, and would lead in time to
such reforms as free transport of goods and tree travel-
ling on all communally-owned means of transport.
This, in turn, would solve the problem of motor com-
petition now felt so much by the railways; also do
away with the worry of making railways pay. The
community, under a sane system of economy, would not
expect to make railways “pay” in a purely financial
sense. It would suffice if they served their purpose,
and people could travel on them at will; also send
their goods by rail without being taxed for so doing.
As a palliative to meet present contingencies, free
meals should.be given where necessary to school chil-
dren, on the application of school committees; there
should be, also, communal dining rooms established in
all the large centres of population, where unemployed
people could get free meals on production of a ticket.
It would be at once apparent that there is no shortage
of food in the country; and that it is only the stupid
habit of selling it, rather than distributing it for the
benefit of the people, as under a socialised system of
economy, that makes destitution inevitable and a direct
effect of our boasted, but diabolical civilisation.
Workers’ and Citizens’ Unions.
As a means of ushering in the New Democracy we
advocate direct action by workers and citizens. The
former can use their unions to create as far as possible
a monopoly of labor, and making a point of securing
control of the industries that handle basic needs; also
using propaganda and education in the principles of
the New Democracy, which will dispense with law and
politics as practised, abolish the money economy so far
as industry is concerned, and inaugurate a new morality
and a natural and social religion. The citizens should
work in co-operation with the Labor unions, challenging
all the existing Institutions, which should be boycotted
and opposed by active and passive resistance. Law
courts and legislatures, in particular, should be defied,
and the Constitution treated as if it did not exist. The


moral ground for such tactics is summed up in the
phrase: No obedience to laws we did not make or
ratify; no recognition of a Constitution not approved
by tne living generation. This would lead to a Social
Contract, to replace the existing legal and political
State-craft and tyranny, whereby Labor is mocked by .
the purely political means of juggling with the laws,
and the status of Labor is In nowise altered. The
New Democracy is one in which
The citizen Is always the Head and Ideal,
And governor, mayor and whatnot are agents for pay.
So long as the old Democracy lags superfluous on
the stage, the workers will be a subject class, with
the privilege of voting for a “Labor” Government com-
posed of people who live on the toil of the workers,
and who desire to get as far away from manual labor
as possible; who live the life of the ruling caste, and
rather like it; and have shown that any quarrel they
had with civilisation was chiefly a persona! one. When
they were bottom dogs they kept on growling; now they
are in the seats of the mighty the scene is changed, and
their psychology likewise. It is idle to expect more
of human nature; but it is foolish not to learn by
experience.
Experience should have taught the workers of Aus-
tralia that “political action” is no real remedy for
wage slavery; and that so long as the existing hell-
begotten civilisation lasts, they will be the subject class,
hewers of wood and drawers of water, and law-
observers. but not citizens. Free Citizens in the New
Democracy will be guardians of the peace. Interpreters
of the Social Contract, judges and jury, head and
front of the Commonwealth, the only governors and
prime ministers.
The Dawn Appears.
To sum up; We believe that the world is under-
going a deep change in its outlook; that the very
nature of society is being changed, and that the pre-
datory civilisation of to-day is bound in the nature of
things to give way to Socialisation sooner or later.
The alternative is another period of barbarism; and
that, surely, would be a lesser evil than the civilisation
that cannot find work or bread tor its slaves, and would
let them starve if they would do so without fuss. Not
to revolt against such a civilisation, even at the risk
of losing one’s life here on earth, is to be a coward and a
slave. The impulse that resists Civilisation to-day is an


impulse that springs from the soul of man; it is nothing
less than a divine revelation of the possibilities of human
life that man must follow, at his peril. In the long roll of
years that marks man’s martyrdom on the earth, one
thing constant appears amidst all the mutations; and
that is the doom of all civilisations. All of them were
based on human slavery; and Nature will not approve
of this; hence the revolutions of the past and the
present, in which Nature rebelled against society as
constituted, and the sins of mankind were washed out
in a swift tidal wave of blood. Let us hope, and pray
and work for the Social Revolution under the Southern
Cross, which may be achieved without bloodshed, if
the workers and the citizens of this embryo Common-
wealth rise to the height of their destiny, and reach
out for the prize of the high calling amongst the
nations —the first Commonwealth of the New World.
Civilisation and its vile laws and morals must be abol-
ished: and Socialisation, armed with the tools of
Science and bearing the lamp of Faith, lead mankind
up the heights foreseen by the prophets and seers of
the Past!
All the Past we leave behind.
We debouch upon a newer world, mightier world,
varied world,
Presh and strong the world we seize, world of labor
and the march,
Pioneers, O Pioneers!
LABOR, LORD OP ALL.
“As if in truth there were no God of Labor; as if
Godlike Labor and brutal Mammonism were convertible
terms. A serious, most earnest Mammonism, grown
Midas-eared; an unearnest Dilletanteism, earnest about
nothing, grinning with inarticulate, incredulous, in-
credible jargon about all things, as the enchanted
Dilettanti do by the Dead Sea. It is mournful enough
for the present hour; were there not an endless hope
in it withal. Giant Labor, truest emblem there is of
God, the world worker, Demiurges and Eternal Maker;
noble Labor, which is yet to be King of this Earth,
and sit on the highest throne —staggering hitherto like
a blind irrational giant .... Labor must become a
seeing, rational giant, with a soul in the body of him,
and take his place on the throne of things, leaving his
Mammonism and several other adjuncts on the lower
steps of said throne."—Thomas Carlyle.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by The
Rnskin Press Pty. Ltd., Russell St.. Melbourne.
