

.


dll commtmuutione to he addressed to
AGENT GENERAL FOR QUEENSLAND.






THE EMIGRANT;
'sk jftelwgs, mi
AN APPEAL TO THE
WORKING MILLIONS OF MY FELLOW-COUNTRYMEN.
GEORGE RANDALL
LONDOIN:
PRINTED BY
Ev PITMAN M, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.G.


TO THE WORKING MILLIONS OP MY
FELLOW- COUNTRYMEN.
THE FOLLOWING LINES ARE RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED
THE AUTHOE.


ST.Hilygr^
PREFACE.
In giving these few pages to the public, I wish it to be under-
stood that they contain merely the expression, though very
inadequate, of the thoughts and feelings of the author, who,
after long and careful consideration of the whole subject, in
all its bearings, its lights, and its shades, had made tip his mind
to make one of the English colonies his future home.
I have withheld it from publication for some time, thinking
it would serve no useful purpose, and persons seeking inform-
ation on the subject would consult nothing but “ Practical
Guides/' and Handbooks; but as all the recent and reliable
information from the colonies represents them to be on the
whole in a very flourishing condition; and the most urgent
want of them all being emigration to their shores (for the
want of which their immense resources remain undeveloped,
and their progress arrested), and as hundreds are starving here,
and thousands are but little better off—while pauperism con-
tinues on the increase, and our towns swarm with ragged and
uneducated children, prostitutes, and beggars; in spite of
“homes,” “ midnight meetings,” “ institutions,” and the efforts
of the benevolent: I thought, if this feeble expression of the
feelings that animate me in leaving my native land and seek-
ing a distant home, would be the means of inducing any of my
fellow-countrymen to do the same, thereby leaving more room
for those that must and those that will stay ; it might do some
little good.
It may be as well before going farther, if I state that I am
totally disinterested : that I come forward as the advocate of
no particular colony, and that what I have said, or may say,
results from a deep conviction that emigration confers great
and lasting benefits upon all parties concerned. Should any
words of mine show the least partiality, it must be attributed
to this, that I have set my face toward one of the colonies of
the Southern hemisphere. This should lead no one to infer
that I under-estimate the advantages and claims of the other
colonies to the notice of the emigrant. They all demand his
attention : it is for him to weigh and compare the advantages
of each, and choose for himself.
The emigrant's mission is, in my estimation, a great and
glorious one, but to be successful it wants undertaking in the


right and true spirit. The subject has been fully and ably
written upon by men of experience and ability. It is an old
subject, but it is one that must always continue to be of great
interest, and will always demand the serious attention of a
country so over-populated as this is. My object in the follow-
ing lines has been already partly stated ; it is also to arouse
the mind and direct the attention if possible to the subject,
feebng certain that if once interested, it will not rest until it
has been thoroughly mooted and studied.
A recent writer observes:—“ There are probably few of
the more intelligent and energetic inhabitants of the British
islands, depending for a livelihood on their own exertions, who
have not at some time in their lives had the subject of emi-
gration in their thoughts.” I appeal to such men, to leave a
land “ where competition is so intense that the applicant for
employment is a suppliant and not a negotiator.” They may be
doing well to-day, but I ask them to think of to-morrow : they
may have bread enough now in their young days, but I appeal
to them to look to the future, to the generation to come ; for it
is in the future more than in the present that the effects of
judicious and well-timed emigration will be seen and felt.
It is a common thing to hear people say that, “If you aro
getting a living here, if you are doing at all well, the colonies
should not be thought about; they are for people to go to who
cannot live here.” And yet I have many times heard almost
in the same breath that, “ It’s no use sending starving and
penniless people to the colonies ; they want men of energy and
capital, to create a demand for labour.” We know that, but
according to ,what they say, no one would go; though it is
readily admitted on all hands that we are too thick here, and
that the extensive emigration from this country for years past
has proved a great blessing, and conferred upon it great and
material benefits; while no Englishman can look without a
feeling of pride upon the magnificent colonial empire which
“ the emigrants,” principally from these shores, have been
mainly instrumental in founding ; and whose rapidly growing
interests are daily demanding and receiving more and more
attention.
I appeal to my countrymen, to look to the subject, to consider
it for the sake of their children; and I am answered that,
“They have, up to the present, obtained a living here —their
children may do the same.” Without pausing to say one
word upon the selfishness of such an answer, too frequently
'heard, I will make bold to assert that it is an impossibility !
Unless great numbers of people continue to leave this country,
its population will go on increasing, and consequently compe-


tition will become more and more keen and intense, making
the means of obtaining a livelihood more difficult: therefore
your children cannot have the same chance that you have had.
I appeal to you,my brothers, fellow-workers in this great hive
of human industry, to come out, “ where o’er boundless plains
and pastures new,” the rich and untouched stores of nature’s
wealth await and invite you. Let us leave the old hive : we
are too crowded in it for all to be comfortable ; there is plenty
in it, but it is beyond our reach, we cannot often obtain it.
We may obtain a share sufficient for ourselves, but we are
sickened by the spectacle of want and starvation grovelling on
the floor of the hive, while above us the great bees are luxuri-
ating in plenty, and have to spare.
We are not drones : the entrance is still open —let us go
out. Let us leave it to those who have plenty, who are in no
fear of knowing what it is to want when the cold winter days
of life come on. Let us leave it to those who have not the
means, to those who have not the inclination, or, having both,
lack the spirit and pluck necessary to encounter the change
and come out.
As to those persons who, from ignorance or short-sighted-
ness set up their dolorous cries ; anti-emigrationists, who will
neither listen to reason, nor be convinced by facts; people who
are ever ready to pounce upon a colony, that for a time, through
the mismanagement of its Government, or any other cause may
be placed in some embarrassment, —they will not remember
that every nation and government must have their first lessons
in the use of money, and the best way to spend it j but hold it
up to us as an example of the colonies in general and a warning
of what we may expect to find, declaring that such colony
cannot recover j and that after all they are best off who remain
in “ dear Old England.” By this, they only show their entire
ignorance of colonial history, which records, in the career of
almost every colony, similar embarrassments j but from which
they have sprung with astounding elasticity, and are now
bidding fair, ere long, to make themselves numbered among
the foremost nations of the earth.
Let us leave these “ croakers ” and decriers of emigration
to themselves j let ns leave “ imbecility, prejudice, and conceit
to compare notes and profit by example.”
I might say something more on this subject, but I have
already said much more than I intended, or ought perhaps,
here.
, In concluding these desultory remarks, therefore, I will only
add that the few extracts I have given by way of notes I have
met with principally since the lines to which they refer were


written. They might have been mnltipliod to almost any
extent. And should any one feel, disposed to jndge the follow-
ing lines, as a poem, they will, I hope, bear in mind that it
comes from one Who possesses-but few of those advantages
which education tod Continued cultivation bestow; and has
had but scant time, and been placed in anything but favour-
able circumstances for Courting the Muses. I trust the earnest-
ness I feel, and with Which I (have endeavoured to treat the
subject, will in some degree compensate for a more correct
diction and polished stylo; remembering it comes from one who
is himself an intending who, though no giant,
feels a giant’s strength, nerving his arm and animating his
heart at the prospect (though humble) .that lies before Mm in
one of the English colonies.
Gr. E.
Loudon, September, 1867.


THE -EMIGRANT.
“ Set thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father’s house,
unto a land that I will show thee: and I will make of thee a great nation, and bless
thee.”— Gen. xii. 1, 2.
“ The increase of mankind may he in a limited spot, as in the case of our own
country, and is Eventually productive of over-population with its natural concomi-
tants of degradation and misery to the masses. The multiplication of mankind
has no limit but the world itself, and is productive of prosperity and additional
happiness to all. The emigrant then is the agent of Providence in carrying out its
greatest work.”— G.B.Earp.
“ What man o’er some old thought would pore and pore,
Shut like a book between its covers thin,
For every fool to leave his dog’s-ears in,
When solitude is his, and God for ever more,
Just for the opening of a paltry door ? ”
— J, 11. Lowell,
I am going, I am going to a land beyond the sea,
And I ask my fellow-countrymen, “ Will any follow me ? ”
l am going, not for wealth, not to toil for glittering gold;
That' at be&t is but a canker—a destroyer of the soul.
No; my heart is longing for a home—my own, my own, and free, —
And I feel that I shall gain it in the land beyond the sea.
It is not because I’ve ceased to love the land that gave me birth,
For I deem it to be fairer than the fairest land on earth.
It is not because I see no beauty in its quiet vales,
In its shining silver rivers, in its* fruitful blooming dales.
No; I lave them all as dearly as the poets who have sung
In every age their praises. They are known in every tongue,
Tes'; I love to see the hills and fields when covered o’er with snow,
.And feel the frosty wind that o’er my native hills doth blow;
And I love to see the myriad buds come bursting out in spring,
And hear *the .songs of all the birds that make our woodlands ring ;
And I love to mount the hill, and look across the stretching plain,
When the summer sun is shining on a sea of waving grain.
And I love to wander in the fields, when, autumn days have come,
When leavds have fallen on the ground, to watch the setting sun
Casting 6vef old familiar scenes -his mellow parting rays :
Then lingering memory linked to fancy, flies to other days.


For all are lovely, all are dear, all are very dear to me,
But I leave them all to gain a home—my own—beyond the sea! 1
And think not, 0 fellow-countrymen, I lightly prize the land
"Where of old our fathers fought so bold, with head and heart and
hand:
Fought for freedom, fought for laws—“ Magna Charta,” “ Bill of
Bights
Giving many glorious martyrs, seeing many ghastly sights—
Sights of noble patriots dying, sinking into bloody graves ;
Pouring out their precious blood that “ Britons never should be
slaves!”
.Leaving names behind immortal—names that set our hearts a-glow,
"With a love and; admiration only true-horn Britons know!
Ours are these, and will be ever, Milton, Sidney, Hampden—all: a
j)Oes it matter where we go to, if still ours those names we call?
No. "We go to help to build distant empires B that shall be
Counterparts of our dear Fatherland, our Britain fair and free!
Laws and Customs, institutions, language—all shall be the same, 4
Making every comer of the globe redound to Britain’s fame:
Spreading over all the world the freedom that our fathers gained :
Making known in distant lands the deeds that made this isle so
famed.
Oh, we cease not to be Britons, though we far from Britain go,
If our hearts with emulation at such names and deeds will glow !
Oh, we cease not to be Britons, though upon another shore.
We may go to live and work and die, we shall but love it more !
Oh, we cease not to be Britons, though to other lands we stray,
Though wide oceans roll between us, and our night may be your
day.
Though we go to live beneath a colder or a warmer sky,
There’s the Same great God above us, and the same bright sun on
high.
And, think not, 0 fellow-countrymen, that I no longer see
The beauties of our fatherland, our Britain fair and free.
Fair and sunny are her summers, fresh and pleasant are her springs,
Bracing are her winter days, and mellow shades her autumn brings.
Pleasant are her hills and valleys, and her fields and meadows green,
AH through life to be remembered —here is many a lovely scene,
Graven deeply in the mind and heart, and in the memory too;
And that in our dreams at night will come, as faithful and as true
As though we still were gazing on them as in other days,
Ere we thought of going there: bh how far the fancy strays!
There is beauty, there is loveliness to charm the poet’s eye ;
There’s the broad expanse of heaven, and a cloudless summer sky;
There are rivers, gushing torrents, winding through the silent glen ;
There are beauties undiscovered, and as yet unknown to men:


Sloping mountains covered over with a verdure ever green,
And the trees fantastic growing, forming many a lovely scene.
There the orange-tree, the fig-tree, and the stately plantain grow ;
And over all the land the scent of many spices blow.
Over head the eagle soaring, rising upward to the sky,
And in the sunlight flashing past goes many a spangled fly.
And at night the heavens are filled with stars, and Stately rides the
moon ;
"While around discordant noises make an unfamiliar tune.
And the morn in splendour rises, for a warmer sun will shine,
And the glowing East will tell us, “we are in another clime! ”
"Where the land they till is fruitful, bringing forth a hundred-fold,
And in rocks and rivers hidden, lies that precious metal —gold. 5
Where the land they till is theirs; they are undisputed lords. 6
"Where are ye whose hearts respond not to the feeling this affords ?
Yet, I know, in spite of all these things, my heart will long and sigh
At times to see my native land and its fhmiliar sky;
"Will long to see once more the fields where I was wont to roam,
And sigh to see once more my dear, my old, my native home.
Britain, with its smiling hamlets studded over all the land;
And its towers and time-worn castles scattered with a lavish hand;
Stately abbeys, noble minsters, that were reared in ages past,
And that seem the ages to defy, for ever seem to last.
Mansions in their lovely parks of woodland, hill, and stream, and
glade,
And where art is lavished to adorn the beauties nature’s made.
See its village greens, its wayside inns, with sign-boards up in air ;
See its orchards and its cottages, with little gardens fair ;
See its cultivated fields, and see its smiling, winding lanes ;
See its many busy cities, and its rustic village fanes;
Whose bells will peal on Sabbath-days to all the country round;
Oh joyous are our English bells —I love to hear them sound.
And on that day the villagers with reverent feelings go
To hear the words which tell of “ Peace! good-will to men below ! ”
Oh we shall hear those village bells, although in distant climes,
The distance will but make them sound in more enchanting chimes ;
Awaking memories, oh what memories ! in the wanderer’s breast,
Of friends he loves, of land he’s left, and where his fathers rest.
Here, beneath the shadow of these walls in peaceful rest doth lie
The dust of many that we loved, now gone beyond the sky;
Generations sleeping here, on their own dear English soil,
They are “ resting from their labour,” —gone beyond the world’s
~ turmoil!
Here we stay, we love to linger, for we love the time-worn walls;
But a brighter future beacons, in the mighty distance calls.


And my heart is longing for a home—my own, my own, and free,
And I feel that I shall gain it in the land beyond the sea !
“Can you gain no home in England?” Yes; but look at yonder
smoke
Rising from your mighty cities; listen to the falling stroke—
Stroke of many hammers falling ; listen to the noise and roar
Of machinery ever going, factories growing more and more.
See the overflowing markets ; every pathway, high or low,
Leading to the desk, the workshop, to the loom, and to the plough.
See the strife and see the tumult; listen to the noise and din,
Eor this is the competition we shall have to enter in.
“We may enter in and conquer.” Tes, I know that many will:
But how many human lives it takes, one purse with gold to fill!
Do the great and wealthy think or know how struggling millions
strive
To keep the lamp within them burning—to keep it just alive ? ” 7
See the stunted forms and pallid faces, void of healthy bloom :
Oh the shadow of their early graves, o’er Britain spreads a gloom.
Doubtless you will call me “ coward,” that I shrink before the
strife;
That I enter not these surging, swaying ranks of human life.
I might enter in, and struggling hard, the prize perchance might
gain,
But with health for ever lost to me, its glory sure would wane.
I might enter in and conquer, but the penalty to pay
Would he that in the silent grave my bones would early lay.
Is it this affrights me p this that makes me turn to you my back ?
No ; it is the thought of generations coming onward in the track
That we are treading—that we find already crowded o’er
With competitors and rivals, still increasing more and more.
There is something glorious in this strife, and in the prize we view.
Dull of hope, there’s many enter in, but conquer, oh how few!
How many in the struggle sink, and never more will rise,
Will never reach the longed-for goal, or grasp the fought-for prize!
There is something noble in this strife, and glorious in the sight
Of a spirit bravely bearing up, however dark the night;
Till triumphantly emerging to the glowing light of day.
But how many, faint and weary, fall and die upon the way!
Hearts and brains have they as gocd perchance, but not the
strength to bear
The strain that is demanded on the road that leads them there.
So I long for room, —for freedom—whereto strive and where to toil,
And where doing which the hard-earned gains from none I shall
despoil.
And there is room, and there is freedom, there is virgin soil to till;
There to gain an independence, all that’s w r anted is—the will!
There is health 9 and there’s enjoyment; there is plenty for us all.
Who will follow ? who is going ? who will answer to the call ? 10


Call for labour —call for arms and brains, and energies to work—
Call that gives you independence, if these things you will not shirk.
“Be content.” It is a blessing, but if all would rest content,
"Would there be a link connecting c< ntinent to continent ?
Would the things have been accomplished which have startled man
to view ?
Would Columbus have succeeded, searching for a world then new ?
No. I fear me ye that say it envy but the glowing breast
That you call the “discontented” “rolling stone that will not rest!”
Better to be “ discontented,” better far that we should “ roll ”
To every corner of the world, and on from pole to pole,
Than to sit us down “ contented ” with a lot that ive should spurn.
But I know there are some spirits that for freedom do not yearn :
There are spirits, slavish spirits, who will prate of “ England dear,”
Saying, “ I will never leave it while I gain a living here; ”
And they talk of “many comforts,” and of “ sights they here may
see,”
Thinking they alone admire and love our Britain fair and free!
Eree! but is it freedom when your toil brings not its rightful gains,
And a hungry, starving family cry aloud with hunger-pains ?
When your cupboard, though not empty, yields but small and scant
supply,
When health is flying from the cheek, and brightness from the eye? 11
When, with head and arms, in willingness to work, you none can
find,
And the sight of those you love but adds a pang more to the mind?
When their cheeks grow dally thinner: you find work, and hard you
strive,
And you earn a scanty pittance which will keep you just alive ; 12
Is it freedom when you cannot help them falling thus away ?
And your children work and toil for bread, when they should be at
play,
Have to enter in the great world, have to leave a parent’s roof;
And their young and tender frames must struggle, hearts be put to
proof:
And beneath a stranger they must toil to win their daily bread.
Is there nothing in all this that you —you true-born Britons dread?
Oh is it but for this we strive, for this our fathers bled ?
Men, my brothers, where’s your spirits, can they be no higher led ?
When beneath the iron heel of Want you’re crushed, and cannot rise,
And in sad tormenting vividness before your aching eyes,
Memory pictures brighter days and hopes, for ever gone and fled ;
And you know you’re working out your life-blood, just to earn your
bread.
Oft you falter, sick at heart, worn out with this ceaseless strife,
And with want and care’s oppression, you grow weary of your life.
Brothers, let your spirits sink not—Hope may falter, shall not set
While the ckcean bears a sail upon it! Go. We’ll conquer yet!


Bid the Star of Hope arise once more, the clouds shall pass away
That Despair has cast upon you: he has had—shall end his day.
The land of promise dawns before us : dying hopes again shall rise,
Dark despair and want shall vanish; we will gain the longed-for
prize !
Gain —what well I know is dear to all —a home, your own and free,
Then does it matter, if your own , if it is beyond the sea ? 13
Here your hearts grow sick and weary, after struggling on for years,
And how many seek that demon Drink, to hide, to drown their
cares ?
But increasing more their misery ; carrying downward as they go,
Self and all that once was loved and dear to deep distress and woe.
Many a noble soul has perished, gone to ruin, gone to hell;
And because he sunk, and saw no hope to rise from where he’d fell,
Saw his brothers with more cunning in the world’s great strife
succeed,
Pass him by : “too busy—had not time,” —the fallen one to heed.
So he sunk (no hope was there to animate the lingering spark)
Downward, lower—lower, downward, to an abyss deep and dark!
O ye worldlings with your pockets filled with Mammon’s wor-
shipped gold,
Do you never fancy you can hear the cry of some lost soul
That you might have helped —have saved ? “ They were drunkards
worse and worse.”
Aye ! but still more tight, at that sad sight, you grasped your god,
the Purse!
“ Had we given—had we helped them, they would but have sought
more drink.”
So you make your peace with all the world, and conscience too, you
think.
’ Tis as well if you are happy. You are welcome to your gains,
If you thus can pass your brother by, so heedless of his pains !
Though some one from out among you, passing by, to him will say—
“ This you should do, or should not do and pass upon his way.
And another, “ Persevere, work, be steady, you will then succeed:”
Aye ; perhaps he may, but barely so, with many mouths to feed.
Cease your preaching : it is useless ; he is down and cannot rise,
Though I doubt not he will rise as high as you do in the skies !
You will smile, so self-complacent, conscious of your money’s
power.
Well! smile on: the banquet waits you: revel in your halls—an
hour ;
Por this life at best is but a shadow—but a little day ;
And who will know the rich from poor when we all have passed
away ?
Bevel, heedless of the misery in the land, yea, at your very door
Pass, saying—“ It always was so : will be : God’s universal law ! ”


Brothers, as you prize your freedom, yea, by your forefathers’ graves,
Never drink, but work and hope on ever: never be ye slaves.
Let all those who will god Mammon worship, ye are men though
poor,
If ye are not the slaves of self: and for right and freedom war !
Oh how many of you entered in with hope and promise fair,
With reliance on your own stout hearts —“ You never would despair;
You would conquer, you would win! ” You have tried and found
it vain,
Found that perseverance, —what you longed for —here will seldom
Then come brothers, come to where there is more room and
space,
Where there is more chance for all to win who enter in the race. 14
Oh come out, and leave this land of ours to all who’d rather stay
And toil and starve, than move one jot from their “ dear, old home
away.”
Aye, “ dear home ” it is, for all possessing Mammon’s potent gold,
But mockery sad to thousands, shivering, homeless in the cold.
And “ dear home” it is for all who own fair fields and acres broad;
But are not other lands as dear as this to one great G-od ?
And does not His ever-watchful eye keep guard upon them all—
Stretch not His wings o’er all the world, shall we unnoticed fall ?
Here are homes I know in plenty, that with wealth and splendour
shine ;
And wretched, over-crowded hovels, haunts of vice and sin and
crime, — 15
Haunts where death is always lurking, and where foul example
stands.
Ever waiting, ever ready on their victims to lay hands.
Yet* our country’s “ highly favoured!” yes,’tis favoured for the
few—
For the great and wealthy of the land, but not for me and you.
The world resounds with Britain’s praises: Britain foremost in the
race,
First among the world’s great peoples, stands she in the highest place,
And we sound “ Old England’s ” praises, boast her mighty, great,
and free!
True ; but in her very centre, starving hundreds do we see ;
Surely this should rouse you, brothers; oh to think some future day
Thus your children may be standing, and at workhouse doors may
pray
For the bread they might be winning—winning in fair honour’s
sight;
Helping to build up an empire, that shall be the future’s light. 16
What to you is England’s greatness, what to you her power and
might ?
In the midst of Plenty living, toiling, hungered in its sight. 17


Where your children know no childhood, but must enter in the
strife
So young and early, that they know no day of childish life.
Te that boast of England’s greatness, cease your boasting while
there be
Thousands little more than infants —slaves ! where loud you boast
“ all free! ” 18
Thousands who through life’s stern battle never once can turn the
ray
Of one happy childhood hour, upon life’s dim and chequered way.
Then come out, my brothers, come to where there is more room and
space,
Where there is more chance for all to win, who enter in the race.
Trials and troubles we shall meet with, ’tis the lot of man below,
To have shade as well as sunshine: and no matter where we go.
But the thought of those to follow in this over-crowded track,
Is enough to urge us forward —forward ! looking not once back.
Come out, ye men that strive and toil for but starvation’s wage;
Come out, and leave the scenes that well might shame this boasted
age; 19
Come out, and bring your children, from that stifling, crowded street,
Where all day long the sun’s scarce seen, nought heard but tread-
ing feet.
Bring them out where they at least may see the blessed, blessed sun,
And breathe the fresh free air that G-od has made for every one !
And come out, ye men that till the soil, that tread behind the plough,
Where you’ll be men, and not machines, as you are treated now;
Come out, ye men whose spirits rise above your present state,
Who sicken at the poor’s distress—will fawn not to the great;
Who feel your souls within you rise, to something nobler far
Than stooping here to those you feel and know no better are !
Whose only power is in their purse, which you are made to feel,
Is useless to be fought against: too oft ’tis “ starve or kneel!”
Oh, ye that love fair Freedom’s form, and boast ye have a soul
Above the cankering lust of gain, the gnawing curse of gold ;
Come out where you may feel your manhood —a glorious manhood
rise
Untrammelled, free! with fearless front—God’s gift—man’s highest
prize!
Come out, ye men, and leave your crowded, noisy, busy towns ;
Come out where room and freedom is, and God’s free air abounds ;
Where o’er boundless plains and pastures new in countless numbers
go.
Flocks and herds, and herdsmen riding swiftly to and fro :
Far and near resounds with shouting, and the cracking of their whips;
Oh there is a glorious freedom there, oh let us to the ships,
That are lying here in waiting : let them spread their flapping sails,
I am going, I am going, fair and seaward blow the gales.
Bid farewell to mother England; it may be for ever-more,


For we go to gain a home —our own —upon a distant shore.
Well I know I shall not leave it without shedding bitter tears,
But new hopes are rising in me, and they overcome my fears.
While my soul, it feels uplifted! and I feel me borne along
With a trust and dauntless courage that I felt not in the throng.
Faith is burning strong within me, and I feel my spirit glow,
At the prospect of the future; and there’s truth in this, I know-
Though we go to live beneath a colder or a warmer sky ;
There’s the same great G-od above us, and the same bright sun
high.




NOTES.
I.—“ But I leave them all to gain a home—my own—beyond the sea ! ”
“ They go, be it remembered, to create a happy home for their declining years—
a heritage for their children. They will look with pride and satisfaction on the rich
fields, the orchards and gardens which their industry and enterprise may have
planted. And as they count their flocks and herds, survey their busy homesteads,
or glance at the fruit of their success (remembering that had they lingered on in
England from want of energy to break their bonds, they might have become care-
worn, anxious men, with poverty staring them in the face, and families destined to
struggle on in difficulties) — ...”
2. —“ Ours are these and will be ever, Milton, Sidney, Hampden — all."
“ Let them remember that by becoming colonists they do not cease to be British ;
that Shakspeare and Milton, Bacon and Newton, are still their poets and philoso-
phers ; that the glorious page of British history—Cressy, Poictiers, the smitten
Armada, Trafalgar, Waterloo, is still their history.”— C. Hursthouse, on Emigra-
tion.
3.—“ We go to help to build distant empires
“ Some day, perhaps, when the men of this generation are in their graves, when
their sons, led astray by the Will-o’-the-wisp which they call ‘ progress,’ have gone
utterly to the bad, and ruined themselves and their country, there will rise up some-
where, like a bright meteor, some young and vigorous organization which will take
the place of England, as Carthage took the place of Tyre, and Rome of Carthage.
In the battle of the future we find no land in either hemisphere which has a fairer
prospect of pre-eminence than that island state, the latest of Anglo-Saxon creations,
which in the southern hemisphere takes the place of Great Britain in the north —
which, like her, is endowed with natural gifts, which by themselves, entitle her to a
wide-spread influence and dominion, with an equable climate, with fertile fields,
with universal wealth in abundance, with plains, rivers, mountains, and harbours,
and lakes, to invite commerce, to foster the breed of men, and make a country wor-
thy to be loved, to be fought for, to die for.”— Standard; on New Zealand.
“ What will the next twenty-seven years not accomplish ? The Australian Colo-
nies now number about 1,250,000 people. It is not too much to expect that in
twenty-seven years they will number ovef 5,000,000, with • corresponding develop-
ments,’ to use the fashionable expression of wealth and intelligence. Cold, indeed,
must be the temperament that does not warm with the contemplation of such a
future. Gentlemen ‘ bom in the old country ’ may be pardoned for sighing for ‘ the
sweet, shady side of Pall Mall,’ but their sons will be proud (and some of their sons’
fathers, too) of identifying themselves with the progress of a future empire.”—
Melbourne Times, 1862.
“Colonies are infant states—empires in embryo.”— Earp.
4. —“ Laws and customs, institutions, language—all shall be the same,"
“In realities an English Colony is only a more distant English county. Take
New Zealand for instance : we go there, are loyal to the same Queen, protected by
the same laws, comforted by the same religion, we hear the same language, witness
the same social habits, the people we see around us are our countrymen.”— C.
'Hursthouse.


The following I quote from a Review on “ Victoria and Australian Gold Fields
—“ The English character, English laws, manners, and usages, English loyalty,
enterprise, industry, and perseverance flourish there as they flourish here. Of the
million of people who have found their way to the antipodes, the immense majority
are of British breed; and, reared in Britain, have only transferred to a new scene
those characteristics which make the Anglo-Saxon race unique amongst nations.
Australia is as English as if Britain were to take another rise out of the main.”
Or again:—“ Her imports and exports are larger by far than those of any other
British dependency; her vast pastoral resources are comparatively undeveloped;
her soil is affluent in gold and other precious metals ; her cities, though reared but
yesterday, are large, well populated, and adorned from end to end with noble public
building's . . . and finally, her population is active, industrious, self-reliant, in
mode and manner, government and religion, even more English than the English.”
—-Southern Lights and Shadows, by F. Fowler.
5.—“ And in rocks and rivers hidden, lies that precious metal — gold."
The quantity of gold sent to this country from Australia since its first discovery
there, amounts to something so astounding as to be almost incredible; still, nearly
every mail reports the discovery of a new gold field, and nearly every ship brings its
thousands of ounces.
6. —“ Where the land they till is theirs; they are undisputed lords."
“ With an improved land code, dealing fairly with town and country, the wealthy
pastoral occupant and the striving agriculturist,—but with especial regard to the
raising of that peasantry which experience equally with poetry teaches us is “ a
country’s pride,”.—Australia would attract the surplus population of Europe to her
shores, and rapidly become one of the noblest monuments of Saxon rule and enter-
prise, and one of the greatesfmarvels of modem progressive civilization.” —Southern
Lights.
7. —“ To keep the lamp within them burning—to keep it just alive."
I quote the following from a Medical Report on “ Preventible Death.”—“Prac-
tically, too, it must he reckoned that, even with the high civilization of this
country, and with its unequalled system of poor law relief, privation still exists as a
cause of premature death. Among the surgical cases treated at hospitals and dis-
pensaries, diseases from insufficient nourishment form a very considerable part.
Children especially suffer from this cause, and many of their so-called scrofulous
ailments arp, in fact, mere starvation disorders, which a few weeks of better feeding
can cure; and, besides the direct stint of food, and that indirect stint which consists
in the use of damaged and adulterated provisions, there are other kinds of privation
practically inseparable from poverty. It must have scanty house room; and this —
at least till the mean* of ventilating poof dwellings are thoroughly popularised—is
an increased liability to disease. It must have scanty clothing and scanty fuel, and
with little other protection than habit, must encounter inclemencies of weather. It
must have a weight of care in its daily straggle for subsistence ; it must have little
of the variety and pleasurable excitement which are good for mind and body. Few
tasks can be more difficult than to estimate the diffusion of poverty, as distinguished
from pauperism, in different parts of England; and I have no means of determining
whether poverty, in this sense, be one of the local conditions to which any prevent-
ible disease at all closely proportions itself.”
B.—“ There is room and there is freedom
“ Here you experience a buoyancy of spirits and a freedom from care unknown
among theffiusy haunts of a crowded population. Here you have to contend with
no jarring interests—no underhanded rivalry. You may live as you choose. You
are ‘ monarch of all you survey.’ Here the freedom of the savage and the comforts


of civilization are conjoined. The patriarchal simplicity of life is restored. Here
solitude invites to meditation, and rural exercise sweetens enjoyment. Here may
be found that lodge in a vast wilderness, after which prophets and poets and lovers
have sighed. ‘ Beatus ille, qui procul negotiis,’ exclaims every settler who is
capable of appreciating the beauties of nature, —and especially that greatest of all
beauties—his cattle, sheep, and horses, increasing around him, and holding out to
him the reasonable prospect of leaving his children, if not in affluence, at least be-
yond the fear of want.” —Ten Tears in Australia.
9.—“ There is health
It is needless for me to say one word upon the general healthiness of the English
colonies, some of which even surpass the mother country in this important par-
ticular. Every one the least acquainted with the subject knows this. But perhaps
above all, it is owing to the great proportion of the colonists being engaged in out-
door, healthy, manly occupations in the free, fresh air of Heaven, instead of being
shut up in houses, offices, workshops, and factories, that contributes toward raising
the health rate of the colonies.
10. —“ Who will follow ? who is going t who will answer to the call ? ”
The constant want of all the colonies is a steady and continuous stream of emi-
gration of different classes to their shores. A recent number of the Melbourne
Argus calls upon the mother country to send Victoria annually 40,000, or 50,000
men and women, to eat the superabundant supplies of food, cultivate its land, multi-
ply the number of its industries, etc. This, be it remembered, is the “ call ”of but
one colony, and that as thickly peopled as any. There remain the other great
Australian colonies—New South Wales, South and Western Australia, and Queens-
land, with their immense and almost boundless extents of territory; and New
Zealand, a country as large as Great Britain and Ireland; while South Africa and
Canada, although older colonies, remain (comparatively speaking) as yet unpeopled.
All await the hand of man to develop their immense resources, to come and enrich
himself from their treasures : —pastoral, agricultural, or mineral. All contain within
themselves that which will support in plenty and comfort millions of the human
race.
11.—“ When health is flying from the cheek, and brightness from the eye.'
See Note 7.
12. —" And you earn a scanty pittance which will keep yiWjust alive."
It will not be disputed, I think, that there are thousands of men in this country,
sober, hardworking, and industrious —bnt having a large family—whose earnings
will scarcely command a sufficiency of (Be common necessaries of life. Children,
in cases like this, are Acre often a curse than a blessing.
13.—“ Then does it matter, if your own, if it is beyond the sea ? ”
In this country how few there are, compared with the millions that inhabit it,
possessing a home really and truly—in every sense of the word —their own: in any
of the colonies, if a man lias this object at heart, he need not be a giant in strength
or intellect to obtain it. Patience and perseverance will soon place within his
reach this priceless boon ; a prize worth fighting for.
14.—“ Where there is more chance for all to win who enter in the race.”
It is admitted on all hands that there is more chance for a man to succeed in
a new and averagely populated country than in a densely populated one, where, to
succeed, a man has to contend against and outstrip thousands.


15.—“ Wretched, over-crowded hovels, haunts of vice and sin and crime£
“ The great moral blot on this country is pauperism and its squalid offspring,
engendered crime. Did time permit, we might see how a wise system of pauper
emigration would convert this costly curse into a wealthy blessing.”— Hursthouse.
16.—“ Helping to build tip an empire that shall he the future’s light."
“Are there none to come forward now—are there none with the ambition to leave
behind them the undying fame that through all time will wait on those who have
the far-sightedness to conceive, and the courage to create, an empire more vast and
imperishable than any which ever inspired the dreams of the wildest heroes of the
past—by peaceful means to construct that for which the blood of countless thou-
sands of human creatures has been wasted ? ” —Great Britain and her Colonies.
“ In a few more years Anglo-Saxon emigration will root the language of Shak-
speare and Milton over half the earth ; that the emigrant’s plough, rather than the
warrior’s sword, has made us first of nations; and that if ours be the empire on
which the sun never sets, ’tis mainly to emigration we owe the boast.” — Hurst-
house.
17.—“ In the miMst of Plenty living, toiling, hungered in its sight."
An excellent article in a recent number of Lloyd’s Newspaper upon tlfe distress
at the East end of London and the Docks, bears out the painful truth of this line in
a remarkable manner. I quote the following words from it: —
“ Yet, can there be a more scandalous spectacle than the richest docks in the
world, baited by the most ragged townships in the world ? It is upon pauper backs
that the riches of the Indies are carried from shipboard. It is by hungry men that
the great food supplies of the east are oast into our granaries. Let the severemoral-
ist think of this. The man who has not broken his fast is called to stack the gold-
en grain. He who has not a pinch of sugar for the sick wife is set to roll the
hogshead. He who is faint is busy landing wine all day. The cruelty of these pre-
dicaments is acute. Shall we lay a heavy hand upon our palefaced brother when he
trips ? He has hungered from his cradle.” f
And I might add, living and working within sight of the ships that are con-
tinually carrying thousands of hopeful people to lands of plenty, they remain
chained as it were to the spot. Willing to go, they are doomed through their help-
lessness and poverty to stay. In truth, “ they are down and cannot rise.” In cases
ot this kind it becomes the duty of a Government to come forward with its assist-
ance.
18.—“ Thousands little more than infants — slaves! where loud you boast
■ ‘all free!'"
If any reader shojjld feel disposed this, or think I have in the least
exaggerated the subject, I beg them to recall to mind, that “Which they can hardly
have forgotten, the revelation made by Lord Shaftesbury at the Social Science
Congress held last year at Manchester—the revelation that nearly one million and
a half of women and young persons were still under the cruel slavery of oppressive
trades. I need not quote the words used on the occasion, they made too deep an
impression, I trust, to be forgotten.
19. —“ Come out,, and leave the scenes that well might shame this boasted age."
Such revelations as those made by Lord Shaftesbury, and already alluded to, and
by the Commissioners appointed to report on the Agricultural Gang system, are a
disgrace to an age and country that boasts its advanced civilization, its broad
Christianity and enlightenment


1508
00247600
