

/ '
' . ■>.: , «*rjs?®^ v, 3^4a
Slit Jains’
v; ->p./ S -t3» V- ■''•- ■ <"* l C
•■v . . yJy’-£- , :<<&.‘'-i~f S'-. -'.:••• A
GUIDE TO ARCHERY:
. .. . A . *
BY A LATB MEMBER O W A V ‘.
. . -r :
■
>, 'c , vA
TOXOPHOLITE CLUB IN ENGLAND; '


*'!: .■
. !
! ■ ”.
—t .*
With feelings of profound respect, the Editor of this lit
brochure begs to dedicate her humble effort in the cause of
Archery to its distinguished Patron in Victoria,
His Excellency Sir Henry Hackly, K.C.8.,
. Ac., <£&, and in doing so trusts that she
has not presumed too far on His
, Excellency’s encouragement of
her work by his having
become a Subscriber
■ 'i •' ' , ~
■ • to it.
' • ■
•• , .-m3


• '• - 1 f
■sc? 0 '- ' w .
, \ V -w r
■> ’
GUID2^O-AE'CHEET.
;i>T,
“ And what eye hath e’er seen v ‘ i *
Such a sweet maiden queen
As Marion, the pride of the Forester’s green ?”
This being intended as a help to Members of
the Archery Clubs of the colony, and not a history v
of Archery, the compiler refrains from entering
on the many interesting facts illustrative 1 of. its
antiquity, and early uses in warfare ; rather 'con-
fining the subject to its later uses, as an elegant.
and healthful amusement, revived about the close
of the last century, and since then "gradually 4
becoming more patronised and practised, *’even-
*
amongst the most refined of the aristocracy -that
. .. .
proud England can boast There are few more*
;
* mm


pleasing country amusements than Archery, am
especially for ladies, and very few sights mor
delightful to witness than a competitive meeting
a well ordered club; every member gracefully
contending for the coveted prize, coveted not for
its intrinsic worth, though that is often consider
able, but for the laudable ambition each feels to h
first in a trial of skill and grace. Skill and
are twin sisters in the art of Archery, and to call
them forth, energy and practice are alone required
We hail with pleasure the new-born desire -tj
promote this delightful pastime in the land of
adoption, and foresee a rapid advancement in th
art, notwithstanding that the time is gone by wl
excellence in it was royally rewarded by the h<
of knighthood.* ~
Having said this much by way of prelimi
v :
• . ti
, * Charles the Second conferred the honor of knight:
on a man for excelling the celebrated Archer, Sir Wil
•‘Wood.
' r&A


we proceed to the object of this little work, namely,
a f e w practical simple hints for young toxopho-
lites.f
The ordinary mark at which to shoot is called a
target, + on its face are painted four circles and a
g o ld centre, a small black spot in the centre of the
rnld is called the bull’s eye ; the inner circle is
broader than the others, and of dark red, the next
is blue, the third black, and the outer circle
white, bordered with green. For practice, two
of these targets are provided, placed opposite to
each other, and fixed slopingly on an iron tripod
driven firmly into the ground, at such distances
from the standing mark as may be agreed on ; the
v.
- ’
• x ,
f The modem name for Archers, from the Greek toxon, .
aadphilo.
• .. ‘
+ An accepted word, though hardly bearing the-■meaning of
tarje, which, is better translated buckler; the word butts was V
formerly used, from- the French hut, a mark, aim or object, but
is now only applied to the raised mound on which & target 14
sometimes placed. i
yi : V ; —,■-
;•:?.; 'i ■ ;/J?& ... ■£


jMfo
,y
M
The party fill shook in turn at one of the t
targets, then walk up to it, gather their arroi
and shoot back in the same way to the other,
doing from target to target in rotation.
A marker should be'placed at each target,
vided with an arranged card, having a pin
pended to it for pricking the marks.
gold, red, blue, black*- outer white (the mai
does not countj7 the two last, total, va
The value of each hit is increased as it re
nearly approaches the centre; one in the £
counts for nine, one in the red for seven, one in!
4
standing mark is usually a flat-stone laid in, tin
ground, but any other mark may be used.
The distance at which ladies shoot varies from
thirty yards to one hundred ; gentlemen, proper-
tionably more.
The card is divided into eight columns, eac
having its proper heading thus : —The first contaix
the names of the players, and the five nexk;


blue for five; one in tlie black for three y- and
one in the white for one; the green margin
does not count for any A Hits on the edge of a.
circle are generally reckoned as falling on the outer
circle; the value of a hit in the bull’s eye is
| usually pre-arranged, as is also the decision for
i victory, whether by computation, or whether by
the hit nearest the centre. An ordinary mode at a
j match is to have two prizes, the first to be awarded.
1 to the former, the second to the latter.. When
! there are several prizes they are respectively
I awarded according to merit, and much amuse-
ment is often afforded by presenting the gentle-
man who has proved most deficient with a wooden
j spoon! ’ • ‘
In selecting a how the fair Archer must.be Care-
ful not to choose one so much above her
as to prevent her using it with ease. • I
Of the two kinds of bows in backed


wood, both its full length, and carefully jo-
together. The height of a lady’s bow is usually
five feet; a gentleman chooses one of his own
height, and of the standard weight of fifty pounds,,
while that of a lady does not exceed thirty
pounds, and may be much less. The strength of the.
bow is calculated by its weight, and this is known ■
by suspending a weight to the bow-string when the -
bow is strung, and drawing the string to the
length of an arrow from the bow.
The weight of the arrow should be proportione
toi the power of the bow, and its length two fe<
for a five feet bow; the nock, or horn-cased en
should exactly, but., not tightly, fit the striiu
| placing uppermost the colored feather called ti
'»/ **. 'ijj
; j coct feather, or if the three feathers are the sam
.?• color that on the horn side of the nock is calle
m ■ i -a
M the cock feather, and must be placed uppermost. ra
A very necessary adjunct is the arm-brace whic
lis , made of stout polished leather, - sometime
.. ' |
.
:W >


wadded and sometimes lined with India-rubber,
it is buckled on the left or bow arm just above the
wrist to protect it from the rebound of the string,
the right hand is protected by the shooting-glove,
which consists of three finger stalls of strong but
pliable leather, back slips, and a cross strap
buttoned round the wrist, over an ordinary glove.
The quiver is not now worn in target-shooting,
but is placed a few yards aside, with a reserve of
arrows, while two .or three are carried in a small
pouch attached to a belt worn round the waist; to
the right side of the belt is suspended the tassel for
wiping the heads of such arrows as may unfor-
tunately have entered the ground, and to the middle • ; v .
of the belt is suspended the grease-pot, containing a | 0
composition wherewith to anoint occasionally the., %
' i|'- • JjC'
bracer and the finger-stalls. This is not so generally t £
worn by ladies as by gentlemen, but from Some
considerable experience, we would recommend.^
.. f! * .y
every lady to be provided with one rather than be
'f -j, • ■ :c-
-—.— ■■■ - ■■■' ' ■" '' ■**.l':’
-


dependent on her gentlemen friends, and perhap!
thereby sometimes neglect what is a great assist
ance to the free use of her bow and arrow. , .
• iThe hmo-string when purchased has a loop or ey’<
on one end, and a noose is made at the other tt
fasten the string to the end of the bow at tin
shorter branch, for the- velvet-covered handle is nol
' „>•
placed on the centre, but below-it, to shorten anc
give greater strength to the lower branch;:eac!
end is provided - with a horn, tip, ' in which: an
hes to receive the bow-string. nbn
Stringing the bow is a matter of some difficult
he unpractised, it is done as follows:—The bpv
: " should be taken in the right hand, exactly in tlu
T centre of the velvet-covered handle, the arm: rest
I''»in| against"«the side, the . right, foot.
| advanced and turned inwards, and the- shorte
fj - | branch of the bow placed on the ground against it
; Should the foot not have strength sufficients
resist the pressure without sliding, it may be p'


with the outside against a fence or some other
fixed object; the left foot advanced, the. upper
branch of the ■ bow taken in the left hand, the *
centre of the wrist placed just below the eye-of’the j*
string, with the end of the thumb upon one edge,:
and a knuckle of the fore-finger on the other, below
the string rather than- on it; the other three fingers ’
to be extended lest they should', get hurt ;by ithefe
string; the bow is then to be smartly pulled, up by.
the right hand, while the left: wrists presses it&f_
downwards,, at the same-time gliding up-the string
so as to bring the eye into the nock prepared? fo£ ;
*
its reception, and
Archer may remove the left handy but; not
The proper distance of the-string from the centre .
of a five-feet bow, is five inches, and not, more than
six for the largest bows. To unstring- a bow the
position is the- same as for- stringing it; but- the
left wrist must be placed sufficiently near the top
for the fore-finger to reach round the horn, and, the
r—-<* . ,


finger tip inseited in the ,eye of the string, whicfriS
'git removes when the stiing is sufficiently slackened!!
same means that were used to place it. '
TVhen perfectly strung, the bow is held horizon*#
tally with the left hand, the string being upper-p
; most; the arrow is held »t the middle and brought^
|| along under the bow with the right hand to the. -
the fore-finger of-which receives it at the pile^
or (head, and the right hand is removed to the**’
nock, bringing the arrow to the middle of the|i:
• •'f ~~ t •*' vSi
,' strihsf where sewing silk has been wound round to-**fc
r . ■
, >prevent wear from friction ; the right hand is theul|
‘‘removed and placed round the bow ; two or three
fingers, but not the thumb, are used to draw up M
'the string and discharge the arrow.
The importance of attitude in shooting is not +
simply as regards appearance ; much of the success
depends on it, and we would therefore give a few ;
practical hints on the subject to our fair friends, .
thus :—Stand sideways towards the mark (the left "
I . i


* \<tk
side forwards), tie face only turned to the mark > j
the heels a few inches apart, to give firmness- to -*
the position; the head brought a little downwards h
by slightly curving the neck, • while- the person ?'
is held erect, but without stiffness; the bow totbe %
S'’ -.v
held easy, the arm to the wrist quite straight, and S
st* - • 5
the wrist bent inwards; both anna act aimnl-
taneously, the left raising the bow, while the right •
begins to draw the string,’thus drawing with it the ;'
arrow towards the ear, and when aboutq|hree-part3',
drawn, aim is taken, observing well that the pile -'
appears to the right of the mark ; the arrow is then -
drawn to its head and immediately loosened, | §
Taking aim. is another part of the art requiring ;
attention ; practice fs the best guide, but a word
may be said to advise coolness, a due observation of
the degree, and point of the wind, and an exercise of
judgment in calculating on its effect on the flying
arrow; as also marking the degree of elevation or de-
pression necessary in raising the bow, to insure the
‘


not passing over the target or falling ah(
of it.
L .f «.*S :
V
-•I-To draw an arrow from the ground, or from the
it be taken close to the file and
drawn carefully as it entered, that is, straight,
.doyn wards, sloping, otherwise the act of
drajwing it out is very likely to break it.
Some clubs adopt a uniform costume, but this is
idf by*-any means general .and..may not. always
»e to the members ; the present ordi-
laipr style, of dress .admits of :a lady being.moat
andv.; becomingly "! attired; without- ar
of • singularity £$ the hat. especially
it. should be looped .-up frdm the. right-side;
trimmed sleeves would also be found
Icelandieven the criiuJine might be
from the graces; of its fair wearers, - f


|
Green is considered tlie Archer’s - color'- par
excellence. t ,
In compiling this simple guide to Archery, we
have endeavoured to be as brief as was consistent
■ ■ £
with the hints to be conveyed by it; desiring but
to add our iota towards rendering more general,! a'l
pastime at once elegant and exhilirating, and to be \
fully appreciated only by those who have takerr a \
part in its enjoyments.
We consider the promoters of present -
promising Clubs of Victoria to have conferred?, a *
lasting benefit on their fellow citizens, and tHat
they are entitled not only to the best wishes, out
also to the hearty co-operation of every one. anxious
to see rational and healthful amusements estab-
lished in this young community.
“ Let us, then, go on cheerfully in the use pf v al
such means as are open to us.” ~T> .. ; ‘-
. •
■ ■:
SXJBA.iI PKES3 OP W. PAXEPAX A.ND CO"., MELBOXTKJVEV
.■ J u


f II P7<? N
C-f*c&(s u y
A)
