

THE TRUE PRINCIPLE
■ POPULATION:
THE LAND LAWS.
TRADE PROFITS, WAGES, EMPLOYMENT,
“ It is honourable to break bad laws, and such law-breaking history lores
and God blesses.” — Emerson.
“ The landlords of more than 52,000,000 of acres might meet together
in the Free Trade Hall of Manchester.”— Arthur Arnold, M.P.
“ The diseases of society can, no more than corporal maladies, be pre-
vented or cured without being spoken of in plain language.”— John
Stuart Mill.
SYDNEY: Published by J. Dunne, Eiley-street, and at Qeorge-stresi
Markets on Saturdays.


‘‘During the 30 years which immediately fol-
lowed the division of the enormons estates of the old
French noblesse among the people a great increase of
population took place. But the rapidity of that in-
crease was soon lessened, and a generation has now
grown up, which, having been born in improved cir-
cumstances, has acquired the habits and tastes of
prosperity, and upon them the spirit of thrift operates
most conspicuously in keeping the increase of population
within the increase of national wealth?' I —Kvy’s “ Free-
trade in Land," p. 181.
“ ]STo existing state of agricultural economy has
so beneficial an effect on the industry, the intelligence,
the frugality, and prudence of the population, nor
tends, on the whole, so mueh to discourage an improvi-
dent increase of their numbers, as peasant properties.”
—J. S. Mill’s “ Principles of Political Economy .”
Yol. I. Book 11., c. vii.
“ Surely it is better to have 35 millions of human
beings leading useful and intelligent lives, rather than
40 millions struggling painfully for a bare subsistence.”
—Lord Derby''s speech at Rochdale , January 3rd, 1879.
“ If there are two farmers competing for every
holding, . . the owner of that holding will be mas-
ter of the situation. If, on the other hand, two land-
lords are running after the same tenant, that tenant
will be in the position to make his own terms. You
will spoil your oivn and each other's chances by being too
thick on the ground. . . . It is a simple question
of figures. Keep down your numbers , and you will keep
down your rents. That is disinterested advice from a
landlord, but it is truth whoever says it.”— Lord
Derby's speech at the Lancashire Farmers' Chib , June
14th, 1879.


lowet
Fren<
popu]
creas
grow
cuins
prosj;
most
withi'i
trade
so be
the f
tends
dent
—J.
Yol
r fol-
l old
se of
b in-
now
. cir-
s of
rates
atisn
Free-
r has
3nce,
rovi-
ies.”
my.-" 1
u Surely it is better to have 35 millions of human
beings leading useful and intelligent lives, rather than
40 millions struggling painfullyfor a bare subsistence.”
—Lord Derby's speech at Rochdale , January 3rd, 1879.
“ If there are two farmers competing for every
holding, , . the owner of that holding will be mas-
ter of the situation. If, on the other hand, two land-
lords are running after the same tenant, that tenant
will be in the position to make his own terms. You
will spoil your oivn and each other's chances by being too
thick on the ground. . . . It is a simple question
of figures. Keep down your numbers , and you will keep
down your rents. That is disinterested advice from a
landlord, but it is truth whoever says it.”— Lord
Derby's speech at the Lancashire Farmers' Chib , June
14th, 1879.




In publishing this little pamphlet I send it forth with
a hope of stimulating inquiries to an important social
problem, which occupies all the great minds of the
day. All political questions are gradually becoming
social questions, all social questions religious questions,
and till we free the latter there will be little hope for
the former. All works here referred to will mostly be
found in the Free Public Library, the School of Arts
or any lending library. All booksellers’ profits arising
from the sale will be devoted to bringing out similar
pamphlets. J. DUNNE.
No man shall make me believe our ancestors were a rude
and beggarly race when I read an Act of Parliament passed in
the reign of Edward IV. regulating the dresses of the different
ranks of the people, and forbidding the labourers to wear coats of
cloth that cost more than two shillings a yard (being equal to
forty shillings of our present money), and fordidding their wives
and daughters to wear sashes or girdles trimmed with gold or
lace. Nor shall any man persuade me that it was a rude and
beggarly state of things in which (in the reign of Edward III.)
an Act was passed regulating the wages of labour, and ordering
that a woman for weeding in the cornfields should receive a penny
a day, while a quart of red wine was sold for a penny and a pair
of men’s shoes for twopence.— William Cobbett.
The man who has nothing to boast of but his illustrious an-
cestors is like a potato. The only good thing belonging to him
is under ground. —Sir F. Overlmry.
“In France, where the law not only allows but-actually, to a certain
extent, forces the subdivision of property, the increase of population is less
than that of almost any other country in Europe.” — J. Kay, Q.C.
“ Law we sometimes call the wisdom of our ancestors ; but this is a
strange imposition. It was as frequently the dictate of their passion, of
timidity, jealousy, a monopolising spirit, and a lust of power that knew n®
bounds.” — Godwin,
“ You might just as well expect a man to lift himself up in a basket as
ask the lawyers by themselves to reform the law. It is you —the public —
who must lift up the basket, with the lawyers in it.” —Sir William Vernon
Harcourt, M.P., Leeds, 1871.
When will thou save the people—
O, Lord of Mercy, when ?
Not thrones or kings, but nations ;
Not Queens or Lords, but men.
r * m- (a7U


The True Principle of Population.
The population question, and the important bearing of excess
of population upon trade profits, wages, employment, price of
food, and rents, being, from thoughtlessness and prejudice, »o
little understood, and “consequently misrepresented, a brief f»ut
plain statement of the matter and its connection
with a reform of the Land Laws, we think, may be useful at the
present time, if it only stimulate the people to further investi-
gation of this important subject.
The true principle of population as advocated by the Rev.
T. R. Malthus, Professor of History and Political Economy at
Hailsbury College (born 1766, died 1834), and publicly sup-
ported or admitted by most writers on political economy, and
some of the greatest minds of the age, including such as J. S.
Mill, Professor Fawcett, Drs. Darwin and Huxley, Lord
Macaulay, Lord Derby, and Lord Chief Justice Cockburn, &c.,
—is cotnained in the following words :—“ There is a tendency in
all organised beings to increase faster than the means of subsist-
ence.”
This proposition is either true or not true. If true, the
Malthusian is right and the anti-Malthusian is wrong. That the
proposition is true, we believe can be and has been demon-
strated. The proof of the truth rests, not on speculation, or tho
mere assertion of authority, like some things received as abso-
lutely true, and to a disbelief of which penalties both legal and
even social are even now attached, but upon evidence supported
by reliable statistics.
This proof depends on the known facts that population can
and will double itself under favourabbe circumstances—such as
ought to exist in a right state of society—in 25 years or less, and
still retain the tendency to do so perpetually; and that food has
no i«uch tendency to increase in the same ratio, nor can the land
in the most favourable circumstances possible be made to pro-
duce food in the same ratio for any length of time, because there
is no conceivable limit to the increase of population except
that caused by want of the means of subsistence, whilst there is
a limit to the produce of the land which is pretty well understood,
and can be calculated approximately.


The ratio as laid down by Malthas is as follows:—Popu-
lation has a tendency to increase in a geometrical ratio, but food
only in arithmetical ratio. Put in figures they stand thus —
Population 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 &c.
Food '. 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 &e.
It is not intended that this ratio is to be taken as infallibly
and absolutely correct as regards the proportinate increase of
the food to population, but it is approximately so for old
countries, which is the main point in dispute, and upon the truth
of which the value of the argument depends; the balance of
evidence and argument being rather against than for the stated
increase of food, because the increase of the produce of the land
could not be perpetually progressive, being necessarily limited*;
and as population increases, the area of cultivatable land must
necessarily diminish for obvious reasons.
The necessary effect of these two rates of increase cannot be
better described than in Mr. Malthus’s own words in regard to
a given space, viz., this island. He says, “ Let us call the popu-
lation of this island 11,000,000 (in 1806), and suppose the present
produce equal to the easy support of such a number. In the
first 25 years the population would be 22 millions, and the food,
being also doubled, the means of subsistence would be equal to
this increase. In the next 25 years the population would be 44
millions, aud the means of subsistence only equal to the support
of 33 millions. In the next period the population would be 88
millions, and the means of subsistence only equal to the support
of half that number. And at the conclusion of the first century
the population would be 176 millions, and the means of subsist-
ence only equal to the support of 55 millions, leaving a popula-
tion of 1 z i millions totally unprovided for.”
After showing that mankind has the power under favour-
able circumstances, i.e., plenty of food, good sanitary conditions,
and freedom from war, to double its numbers in some 25 years,
Mr. Malthus shows that the way in which population is checked
or prevented fivm increasing at this ratio in various countries, is
either through late marriages and chastity, vice prostitution, and
the prevention of children being born;.or by poverty, great
towns, excesses, plagues, famines, and war.
This plain treatment of facts, we think, cannot be success-
full y disputed, for the principal involved is precisely the same
as that which it is universally admitted prevails, and must be
* “ Where full employment and the means of subsistence are abundant,
population increases in geometrical progression, and therefore, in a far more
rapid proportion than the increased productiveness of the soil, which, after a
certain point, is stationary.” —The Landed Interest (p. , by J. Caird,
C. 8., F.R.S.


obeyed in order to ensure success in all commercial under-
takings, viz., the principle of supply and demand, or income aud
expenditure.
. The wants of any particular country represent the demand
or expenditure, and the wealth produced by the same country as
represented by the supply of income. Therefore, it should be
selfevident to all, being a matter of principle, and, as Lord
Derby says,* “of figures,” and not mere opinion, that if the
wants of the population, or expenditure, increase in a greater
ratio than the income, supply, or means of subsistence, the
nation, like a house of business, or an individual, must be
getting poorer, and the same proportion of incease of population
or expenditure over wealth or income continue, poverty must be
the inevitable result.
To illustrate this principle, suppose a married couple in
1870 to have had one child, and their earnings 365. per week,
which would be 12s. per head. .
In 1879 the family has increased by three children, making
six persons iu all—their earnings remain the same ?i not even
diminished these bad times—their average per head will be 6s.
instead of 12s. Now supposing we allow ss. per head per week
for food, the family of three would spend 15s. out of 86s. for the
necessaries of life, leaving 21s. for rent, manufactured goods,
and sundries The family of six would require 30s. for food,
leaving 6s; for rent, manufactured goods, and sundries. The
smaller faihily would thus have 15s. more per week to spend on
the comforts of life and providing for the future than the larger
family. This is an important matter.
To further illustrate this, suppose we take the population
of the United Kingdom at 31 millions, as in 1870, and 34
millions in 1880, fand compare their relative advantages, the
national income, it is assumed, being the same; any variation
would simply make the comparison more favourable or unfa-
vourable, and not affect the principle ; it may help to throw
some light on the connection between the increase of population
and the trade.
Taking £3 per week as the average income per family of
five in 1870, as the basis for the argument, and allowing ssj per
head per week for food, the following results are obtained :
* Speech at Liverpool, June 14th, 1879.
t Herren Behm and Wagner’s estimate of the population of Great
Britain and Ireland makes the number 34,517,000 for 1879.—See “Die
Bevolkerung der Erde


Population. Families. Per week.
31,000,000 = 0,200,000 at £3 = £967,000,000
Amount required for food for 31 mil-
lions at os. per week each = £403,500,000
1880.
Population. Families. Per week.
34,0050,000=6,800,000 at £2 14s. B£d.= £967,000,000
Amount required for food for 34 mil-
lions at ss. per week = £442,000,000
Consequently, the extra amount required to be spent in food
(obtained from foreign countries) for 34 millions over that re-
quired for 31 millions, will be £39,01*0,000 sterling, if they live
as well and food is not advanced in price in consequence of the
increased demand, thereby depriving our own industries of the
benefits which would arise from the expenditure of this afnount
upon our home manufactures.
It is thus apparent that the increase of population from
1870 to 1880, notwithstanding emigration—supposing the agre-
gate income of the nation to be equal to that of 1870, which is
more than doubtful—has diminished the purchasing power of the
people, as regards rents, manufactured goods, and sundries by
£39,000,000, in consequence of the extra amount required for food
alone, without taking into account “ the drink,” which would be
about £ 13,000 000 more, or a total of £52,000,000, which is
equal to £1,000,000 per week, oi- £142,857 2s. 10£d. per day.
We maintain, also, that a proper understanding of the popula-
ion question will have an important bearing upon the present
state of our unjust land laws, as it is calculated to stimulate all
genuine patriots, lowers of justice, and philanthropists to exert
themselves to procure such a thorough reform of these laws as
will remove all restrictions injurious to the community at large,
and secure perfectly “free trade in land,” or “free land,” the
effect of which will undoubtedly be to bring into more profitable
cultivation a much greater proportion of ihe land, thereby creat-
ing a greater amount of employment for our increasing and
needy population; at the same time it would greatly tend to in-
crease the productiveness of the soil, in consequence of a much
larger number of persons being more directly interested in the
land from the fact that the number of real owners* would be in-
* Barely one-fourth of the land has now any real owners, the other
three-fourths being in the hands of mere life tenants —the land being en-
tailed, and settled upon descendants, many of whom are yet unborn.


creased, and the condition of ownership would largely depend
upon the land being made more remunerative than at present—
the proprietor retaining possession of it only on the same prin-
ciple as a merchant or tradesman retains possession of his goods,
i.e., it would come into the market for the public good immedi-
ately he failed to meet his engagements.
The ultimate result of this would be an increase of employ-
ment and a much larger production of food at home* rendering
us less dependent upon foreign countries for the necessaries of
life. At the same time the aggregate wealth of the nation would
be increased, and more equally distributed than it now is—a
consummation ardently to be desired —producing in its turn a
correspondingly beneficial effect upon our manufacturing in-
dustries.
Such being the result, which may reasonably be expected
to follow a thorough reform of our feudal land laws, every
Englishman, Irishman, and Scotchman who lives by the “ sw r eat
of his brow” is directly and personally interested in assisting to
bring about this desirable change.
We think it shonld be apparent to all who really think that
there is an intimate connection between the population question
and the Land Laws greatly affecting the welfare of the commu-
nity, and also that the principles advocated by Mr. Malthus, of
limiting the population! in proportion to the means of subsist-
ence, would produce a similar effect upon the general welfare of
the people to that which would result for a time from the in-
creased productiveness of the soil in consequence of a thorough
reform of our Land Laws, because the former would lessen the
demand in proportion to the supply, and the latter would increase
the supply for a time , in proportion to the demand.
The late Thos. Saddler Esq., M.P., wrote “ two ponderous
volumes” for the purpose of refuting Malthus, and the task he
set himself in order to accomplish this object was to prove
“ That the fecundity of the human race diminishes in proportion
as the density of the population increases,” and so, according to
Mr. Saddler, an equilibrium is maintained between supply and
demand; but in this he miserably failed, as Lord Macaulay
clearly shows in two articles, entitled “ Saddler’s Refutation
Refuted,” and published in his “Reviews, Essays, and Poems,”
(Ward and Lock’s edition), in which he proves pretty plainly
Malthus to be correct by argument founded upon Statistics of
Slavery in the Southern States of America, &c., where the black
Food to the value of £110,000,000 is imported annually,
t “ A division of property by a law of succession different in principle
from the feudal it the true check upon over-population." —Notes of a Tra-
veller, page 340, by S. Laing,


population could only increase by natural procreation, unassisted
by immigration ia any way, and this not under the most favour-
able circumstances.
This principle of population, then, being so conclusively
■established and admitted by the great minds of the age, we
think, deserves serious attention, in order to prevent the great
evils which must inevitably follow" (as the result of the necessary
connection between cause and effect) from the continued dispro-
portionate increase of population and'tke means of subsistence.
To say, as many do, that this increase is not an evil became
it is the result of natural law, is to deny that hydrophobia, in-
sanity, pestilence, diseases in general, famines, earthquakes, &c.,
are evils, because they are equally, if not “more so,” the result
of natural law, and if the goodness of God is impeached in the
one case it is said) so it is in the other. It is universally ad-
mitted that evils do exist, and how the recognition of the exist-
ence of one more evil can impeach the goodness of God, and the
already admitted existence of other evils not impeach His good-
ness, will, we think, tax the ingenuity of those special pleaders'
who affirm it to prove, and will require more knowledge and
wisdom than they can command, with all their assumption of
superiority.
This subject, we repeat, is an important one, deserving (and
it must sooner or later claim) the most serious attention of man-
kind. The question will probably arise in most thoughtful
minds, “ is it wise to postpone the consideration of it until the
evil assumes such proportions as to pieclude the possibility of
any further delay?”
Ought we not then to act on the principle that “ prevention
is bettor than cure,” or shall we quietly sit down in the belief
that “the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself,”
for “sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof? ” We do not
act so in other matters, or savings banks and provident institu-
tions generally, lightning conductors, ironclad vessels, &c., would
have no place amongst us.
Inattention to the principle involved in the words forethought,
foresight , and prevention has led to most disastrous results in the
past, both national and individual, and will undoubtedly do so
again.
The Daily Telegraph .of January, 1879, says;—“ Scores of
destitute men and women, usually of advanced age, u terly
homeless, die from cold tncl hunger in the streets of London
every year.”


Note. —Summary of the chief effects of excess of popula-
tion :
1. —Excessive competition,—which causes
2. —A decrease of profits in trade, and
3. —A reduction of wages, which leads to combinations, and
4. —Trades Unions to keep up prices and wages above th e
natural level, resulting from the economic law of s up-
ply and demand.
5. —Diminution of the area of cultivatable land.
6. —lncrease of rents, and
7. —Advance in the price of food, causing
8. —Diminution of the purchasing power of the people
the final result being—
9.—Poverty, with all its attendant evils.
NOTES ON THE LAND, TAXATION, &c
The total extent of the United Kingdom is 76,300,000 acres.
More than three-fourths of this is held by persons who are
only nominal, not real owners, having merely a life interest in
consequence of the land being entailed, and in many cases-
settled upon descendants yet unborn.
70 persons own in Scotland 9,400,000 acres.
874 „ ~ England 9,267,000 „
744 „ ~ Ireland 9,612,0.10 ~
9,612,000 „
1688 persons own
28,279,000
If, instead of taking the counties separately, we take the
United Kingdom as a whole, we find that 30,u64,000 acres of
laud are held by only 977 persons ; but these 977 figure in the
blue books as 2,391 “ owners of land,” e.g., the Duke of Devon-
shire having property in 14 counties, is counted as 14 “ owners
of land,” the Duke of Buccleuch as 12, and so with others.
One person owns 1,358,000 acres
A second.., „ 431,000 „
A third „ 424,000 „
A fourth ~ „ 873,000 ~
A fifth „ 306,000 „
And 12 persons hold 4,440,767 acres.


Population of United Kingdom . . .
38,000,000
Income
19
91 • - •
£79,760,000
Expenditure
9}
91 ...
£82,400,000
Surplus
V
1) • • •
Deficit
99 * * *
£2,640,000
Tax per head
99
99 * * *
£2 7s. Id.
Population of United States
48.000,000
Income
£51,489,000
Expenditure
91
£47,400;000
Surplus
11
£4,089,000
Tire Hon. Lyulph Stanley calculates that much more than
2.000. acres have been cleared of hundreds of thousands of
sheep, and depopulated in order to make room for deer.
“ Trustworthy statistics show that the decrease of popula-
tion in the Highlands has been no less than 13,633 during the
last ten years.” —Liverpool Mercury, Sep. 14th, 1880,
The exact number of landowners is not known, in conse-
quence of the imperfect parliamentary returns, but the number
of owners of four-fifths of the soil must be much less than
10.000.
The landlords of more than 52,000,000 of arres might
assemble at one time in the Free Trade Hall of Manchester.
A comparison of the taxation in the United Kingdom and United
States of A merica.
A comparison of the taxation in United Kingdom and
United States of America, 1877-8 :
Deficit ~ •
Tax per head ~ £1 Is. 6d.
The taxation of the United States of America is consequently
less than half that of the United Kingdom.
By the Act 4, William 111., c. 1, a tax of 4s. in the pound
was imposed upon “the true yearly value” of all real property,
but in 1697 the landed interest succeeded in getting the greater
portion of this burden transferred to personal property, so that
this land tax, nominally 4s. in the pound, produced in 1875-6
only £1,109,971, instead of £40,000,0(10, which it would do if
levied “ according to the true yearly value” as originally in-
tended, and thus relieve our industries.


The population is increasing at about 350,000 per annum,
or nearly 1000 per day.* Emigration is about 100,000 per an-
num. An increase of population or an increase of taxation
without a proportionate increase of wealth, makes a nation so
much poorer.
Jersey, with an area of 28.717 acres, 20,623 of which are
cultivated, has a population of 56,627,f with agricultural hold-
ings averaging nine acres each, and land laws very much like
the French, employs nearly 14,0“0 persons on the land, raises
37£ bushels of wheat per acre, instead of 28 as in England,
exports 30,000 tons of potatoes annually, 63,000 cwts. of raw
fruit, besides cattle, butter, &c.
Although laud and rents are much higher than in England,
the people are better off and free from beggars.
This is pretty strong evidence in favour of reform of our
feudal law’s and the adoption of a system’of “ Free Trade in
Land.”
A further proof of the advantage of the Jersey land laws,
may be seen in the fact that a plot of land of the value of .£5OO
may he transferred at a cost of about 2°l in a short time, instead
of as many more pounds and some months as is frequently the
case in I ngland.
A case occurred in .England in December, 1877, in which a
poor man who purchased 3 acres of glebe land and«£ls per
annum of tithe rent charge had to pay £ll7 9s. 2d. for legal
expenses.
If further proof of a reform of our feudal laws is needed,
abundant evidence is at hand.
■The reader is referred to the following publications for fuller
information : “ Free Trade in Land,” by J. Kay, Q.C. ;Free
Land,” by A. Arnold,' M.F. ; “The banded Inteiest,” by J.
Caird, C. 8., F.R.8.; “Notes of a Traveller,” bySamuel I.aing;
“ 3he Principles of Population,” by Rev. T. R. Vialthus; “The
Financial Reform Almanac;” “The Contemporary Review” for
July, 1880; Macaulay’s Essays and Reviews (Ward & Lock’s
edition); “The Principles of Political Economy,” by J. S. Mill,
M.P, - r “The Population Question,” by Dr. Drysdale; Mrs.
Fawmett’s “ Tales in Political Economy,” and Professor Fawcett’s
“Manual of Political Economy.”
* Garbs Landed Interest.
t Four times the density of the United Kingdom.


THE VITAL QUESTION.
The labour question is the first question to be settled
in civilised society. On it all other questions and
conditions depend. Personal liberty. What is it
without bread ? Eepublican Government. What is
it worth to a man without the means to live ? Eeli-
gion. What is it wmrth to a man too hungry or
weary to pray, or reflect, or aspire ? Education.
What is it worth to a man obliged to support a family
of six on a dollar and 50 cents, a day. How much
are libraries, colleges, common schools, churches, ser-
mons, religious literature, constitutions, laws, courts,
or personal right, worth to the mass of the toilers of
the world, or to their children ? What is a Sunday-
school tract worth to a boy T with bare feet and back
in winter and an empty stomach all the year round ?
How much is the ballot box worth to the man whose
necessities compel him to sell his vote to the highest
bidder, or vote as his employer dictates, and not as he
himself would wish ? What are railroads worth to a
man compelled to foot it because he cannot buy a
ticket ? What are all machinery and labour-saving
devices worth to a man whose hours of toil are not
diminished and whose pay is not increased ? How
much better are republican institutions than despotic
governments if the actual condition of the masses are
no better under the former than under the latter.—
F, 'ee Press.
Whether there be one God or three—no God or two thousand
—children should have enough to eat, and their skin should be
washed clean. It is not I who say that. Every mother’s heart
under the sun says it, if she has one. —John Buskin.
A man steals five shillings for a starving family, off with
him to gaol. The Rothschilds and Erasseys are benefactors of
society. They “ accumulate” the fruits of other men’s labour.
It may seem strange that any men should dare to ask a
just God’s assistance in wringing their oread from the sweat of
other men’s faces. —President Liocoln,


CHANTS FOR SOCIALISTS.
THE VOICE OF TOIL.
I heard men saying, leave hope and praying-*
All days shall be as all have been;
To-day and to-morrow bring fear and sorrow,
The never-ending toil between.
When earth was younger, ’midst toil and hunger
In hope we strove and our heads were strong *
Then great men led us, with words they fed us,
And bade us right the earthly wrong.
Go read in story their deeds and glory,
Their names amidst the nameless dead ;
Turn then from lying to us slow dying
In ihat good world to which they led,
Where fast and faster our iron master,
The thing we made, for ever drives,
Bid us grind treasure and fashion pleasure
For other hopes and other lives.
Where home is a hovel and dull we grovel*
Forgetting that the world is fair,
Where no babe we cherish lest its very soul perish*
Where our mirth is crime, our love a snare.
Who now shall lead us, what God shall heed us*
As we live in the hell our hands have won ?
For us are no rulers, hut fools and befoolers,
The great are fallen, the wise are gone.
I heard a man saying, leave tears and praying*
The sharp knife heedeth not the sheep ;
Are we not stronger than the rich and the wronger.
When they break over our dreams* and sleep 1
Come, shoulder to shoulder, ere the world grows older ;
Help lies in nought but thee and me.
Hope is before us, the long years that bore us,
Bore leaders more than man may be.
Let dead hearts tarry, and trade and marry,
And trembling nurse their dreams of mirth,
While we the living our lives are giving
To bring the bright new world to birth.
Come shoulder to shoulder, ere the world grows older
The cause spread over land and sea;
Jiowthe world shaketh, and fear aw ikoth,
And there’s joy at last for thee and me.
Wm. Morris.


OLD RHYMES REPRINTED.
THE FACTORY GIRL’S LAST DAY.
”Twas on a winters morning,
The weather wet and wild,
Three hours before the dawning
The father roused his child ;
Her daily morsel bringing,
The darksome room he paced,
And cried “ The bell is ringing
My hapless darling, haste ! ”
M Father, I’m up, but weary,
I scarce can reach the door,
And long the way and dreary —
Oh, carry me once more ;
To help us no mother;
And you have no employ;
They killed my little brother—
Like him I’ll work and die.”
Her wasted form seemed uothiug—
The load was at his heart;
The sufferer he kept soothing
Till at the mill they part.
The overlooker met her
As to her frame she crept,
And with a thong he beat her
And cursed her as she wept.
Alas ! what hours of horror,
Made up her latest day;
In toil and pain and sorrow
They slowly passed away,
It seemed as she grew weaker
The threads the oftener broke,
The rapid wheels ran quicker,
And heavier fell the stroke.
The sun had long descended,
But night made no repose;
Tier day began and ended
As cruel tyrants chose.
At length her little neighbour
Her halfpenny she paid
To take her last hour’s labour
While by her frame she laid.


. „ vjR " ' 1 •
r. *
> <
1 I'
i |
v i
i is • •! *
i
At fast the engine ceasing,
The captives h r o wards rushed ;
She thought iier tr ogth increasing—
’ ’Twas liope her f ■ chits flushed.
She left, hut oft s' tarried;
She fell, and r< so no more,
Till, by her Comrades carried,
She reached her father’s door:
AH night with tortured feeling
lie watched his speechless child,
While close beside her kneeling,
She knew him not, nor smiled.
Again the factory’s ringing
Her last perceptions tried,
When, from her straw bed springing
“’Ti,s time!” she shrieked, and died.
That night a chariot passed her
While on the ground she lay.
The daughters of her master
An evening visit pay ;
Their tender hearts are sighing
As negro wrongs are told,
While the while slaves lay dying
Who gained their father’s gold.
\\ JJ-Va gaiuuu iaiuci o
Michael Thomas Sadler.
The narrow and impossible policy of each for himself leads
d;re»t to the tomb. —George Sand.
Misery is the actual problem which occupies all lofty minds
ad all generous souls. —Christian of Sweden.
THE FOLLOWING- ADVERTISEMENT
HAS BEEN REFUSED ’
By the S. M. Herald, Evening News, & Daily Telegraph ; ♦
Circulate Everywhere. Now Realdy.
THE TRUE PRINCIPLE OF POPULATION.
Only 3d.
“ The diseases of society can, no more than corporal maladies, be cured
without, being spoken about in plain language.”— J. S. Mill.
The above may be had from the undersigned, 28 Eiley-sttreet, and on
Sat urdays at George-street Markets.
J. DUNNE,
Colonel Ingersoll’s Famous Lectures and all other kinds of Freethought
Literature always in stock. When ordering, send stamps or P. 0.0.
10BD & O’BIEN, Printers, Park-st., Sydney.
• ’ -A
