

BRITISH MEDICAL AID
IN SPAIN


All profits on the sale of this booklet
are to be devoted to the Fund of
the Spanish Medical Aid


The story of
THE BRITISH MEDICAL AID UNIT
in SPAIN
Issued for SPANISH MEDICAL AID COMMITTEE ,
24 New Oxford Street, W.C.i
Published by THE NEWS CHRONICLE, Bouverie Street, E.Cy


Leaving Victoria Station , August 23, 1936


Free thought and
radical collection
bequeathed to the
National Library of Australia
by
Harry Hastings Pearce


Foreword by Viscount Churchill
Last August when a few of us decided that something
must he done to give medical aid to sufferers in the
Spanish Civil War, there were pessimists who told us
ihat we would never get enough support because the
people of Britain were not sufficiently interested in what
was happening in Spain. It did not take long to prove
that these pessimists were wrong.
Within three days £ t,500 had been raised, mostly in
small donations coming from all over the country, and
before a fortnight had elapsed preparations were com-
plete lor sending the Ist Ambulance Unit to Spain.
This was but the beginning of a magnificent response.
It has enabled us to send out ten ambulances and nearly
fifty persons including skilled doctors and nurses.
We are continually receiving requests for drugs,
surgical instruments and medical supplies of all kinds,
but naturally the amount of help we are able to give
depends entirely on the amount of money we receive.
It is necessary that the How of contributions be kept
up steadily. We are anxious to have sympathisers pledge
themselves to make regular weekly or monthly subscrip-
tions, though of course we shall always welcome
donations from those who simply give us what they can
when they can.
Remember—the work of all members of the Unit is
voluntary and every penny you give goes to help the
people of Spain.
CHURCHILL




Eye Witness Account
This account of 24 hours with the Medical Aid
Unit at Grahen on the Aragon front was written for
this pamphlet by a woman journalist who has been
touring Spain as an eye-witness of the Civil War.
With not a light showing, the train crawled cautiously
through the night on its way from Barcelona to the village
behind the lines on the Huesca front where the British
Medical Aid Unit is established.
The village station was dark, too, for the place was
well within bombing range, but a question shouted to
dimly seen figures in curious Spanish capes brought us
the answer that this place was Granen and the “ Hospital
Ingles ” not far away.
Hoisting my knapsack, I stumbled and slithered up
the muddy road—these roads in the Spanish countryside
are pretty bad, they must have a severe effect on the
ambulance tyres and springs ! —until I came to a massive
door which was presently opened by the sentry on duty.
Across a courtyard and up a stone staircase to a great
bare hall. Its gloomy shadows were filled with all sorts
of people —men of the Loyalist Militia, old peasant
women with bundles of treasured possessions, groups of
frightened little children (those most pathetic refugees of
civil war), and finally the ambulance unit members, men
in khaki shirts and shorts, girls in blue overalls and
nurses in white. The Hospital Ingles is a typical


Two members of the Unit
There are ten ambulances in operation


old Spanish farm-house, that rambles about in a confusing fashion
and is by no means the most suitable of premises for a hospital—
but it was the best that could be granted in this district.
Up again to one of the staff dormitories —a loft with mattresses
and stretchers lying on the floor—and, after leaving my knapsack,
downstairs to a terrace and along a dark winding passage.
At last I emerged into a brightly-lit room with a long trestle
table running down the centre —-the dining room. A boisterous
crowd welcomed me in several languages—mainly English, of course,
but also Spanish, French, and German.
“ What’s the news in Barcelona ?”...“ Is it true about the
Soviet Note ?”...“ Are they going to stop non-intervention at
last ?”...“ What is France going to do about it ? ” —and so on,
till bed-time, when with candles, we followed the winding corridors
again.
I asked if I could have a wash. Loud laughter! Water has to
be fetched from four miles away. And that is only one of the diffi-
culties that are being faced and overcome by the people at Granen
with real English ingenuity, as I was to discover next day.
Before getting to sleep I had my first experience of the Unit at
work.
i a.m. . . .
The telephone bell screams through the silence.
A call for the ambulance.
Two men and a nurse are detailed for duty. Off they go.
“ Well, cheerio.”
“ Cheerio.”
It means another night’s sleep gone, and it may mean death . . .
Lurching over the cobbles of the courtyard, the ambulance tears
off on its errand of mercy.
Every night last week the ambulances were summoned into the
mountains along roads that are little more than cow tracks—only
acrobatic driving can get a car through. There is really no front
line here, for the forces fight in scattered groups, so that it is very
easy to run into enemy country. The danger of this is all the greater
for the English drivers because they do not know much Spanish.
The Hospital Ingles is an old farm-house


As a rule, they pick up a Spanish guide at the base from which the
call was sent, but several times when there has been no-one avail-
able, they have gone with nothing more to guide them probably
than a garbled name, and have taken the risk of being shot down
in the dark by the patrols, who are naturally jumpy and who might
not understand the driver’s two words of Spanish, “ Ambulancia
Inglesa,” his only answer to a challenge.
Once when aeroplanes started machine-gunning down the street
the men crawled under their ambulance, but then, remembering the
danger of a bullet in the petrol tank, they scuttled for a house. After
a while, growing accustomed to the rattle of the guns, they decided
to go on.
In the outskirts of the town, they saw a terrible sight: over the
hill and down the road came a long line of Loyalists supporting and
carrying wounded, while every two minutes rebel ’planes zoomed
dowm and swept them with machine-guns. Trenches that are little
more than scoops in the ground are no defence against machine-
gunning from the air. No human being could stand up under this
rain of fire, and the troops were forced to retire temporarily. With
the first lull, however, though their ammunition was running low,
they flowed back in a great wave.
As the ambulance drew up to the wounded, each man waved
them on: “ 1 can get along ; there’s a worse one further back . .
Another story I heard that night was about the wounding of
Margot Miller, an Australian girl serving as a nurse.
Within a mile or so of the outskirts of Huesca a fierce battle was
going on. Nurse Miller was with a party sent out by the Hospital
for first aid dressings. (Men who are only slightly injured often
refuse to leave the line so that the unit must treat them on the spot.)
She was running to the help of a wounded militia man, when
suddenly a machine-gun opened fire and she was wounded in the
legs. Nevertheless, she managed to stumble to shelter in a ditch.
From the front line, 60 yards ahead, a group of Loyalists came
running to her aid with a stretcher, so they had to carry her at a
run’ for about 200 yards—under rebel fire.
Trenches are no defence against machine-gunning from the air


Fortunately, Nurse Miller’s wounds were not serious, and she is
back at duty once more.
I was told of a very charming sequel to the incident.
An Andalusian member of the loyal militia, on hearing that the
Australian girl had shed blood on the battlefield of Spanish democ-
racy, vowed that when peace is restored he will plant a rose bush
on the spot where she “ who came to Spain to aid her brothers, the
heroes of the people,” was wounded.
Every now and then comes a story like this with its grace and
chivalry to relieve the horrors of war.
When morning came, I was able to get a better conception of
the work being done at Grauen.
And what a glorious morning it was. The village lies in an open
plain with great mountains bounding it all round—such solemn and
peaceful mountains that war seems very far off.
But there is war and very near, right here in quiet Grauen.
There are not many wounded this morning, but there arc dozens
more refugees.
For all who seek its aid, the British hospital is ready to do what
it can.
There are many sad sights to be seen in Grauen, but the saddest
of all, I think, is the suffering of the little children and of the old
people.
If you could have seen one little girl who arrived that morning
from a village in the mountains. . . “ She is the best dancer in all the
village ” her mother said proudly.
But little Juanita’s feet that morning were not for dancing. They
were swollen and bleeding from her long trek barefoot away from
the home that was threatened by war.
Only seriously wounded men are detained long here, for it is
what is called an evacuation hospital. After the men have their
wounds dressed, they are sent off daily by train to the base hospitals.
There are only 25 beds or, at a pinch with the use of stretchers, 40.
And some even of the severe cases cannot be properly treated here
because the equipment needed is lacking-—X-ray for instance.
Little Juanita’s feet were not for dancing


Wounded being evacuated from Graven
The Unit’s ambulances have travelled 15,000 miles to and from the Front


Then, though miracles have been done in renovating the old
house, it is not, as I have said, the place you would choose in peace-
time for a hospital.
First of all, it had to be cleaned very thoroughly, and that was
no easy job when water had to be fetched by cart from the river four
miles away. There is a well in the garden, but it is contaminated
and cannot be used.
Even the river water is muddy and often leaves a film on instru-
ments boiled in it, so that they have to be wiped clean and sterilized
once more in alcohol. That boiling has to be done on kerosene
stoves.
The electric light is so dim that operations are performed by
paraffin lamp. But that electric light system, dim as it is, has
behind it an interesting story of resourcefulness in difficulty.
It was fixed up by a London taxi-driver.
On the morning of the 4th September, Harry Forster was busily
engaged in picking-up and dropping his fares in the streets of
London. The same day he left London for Barcelona, having
previously volunteered for service as a driver with the Unit.
His worth was not fully realised until he had arrived at Granen.
He started by being an ambulance driver. Soon he became a
mechanic. As a driver, he continually brought wounded men back
from the front lines, often under shell fire, to the hospital. Then
he was promoted to be Quartermaster of the Unit and in that post
he soon achieved success, for he was a skilled craftsman.
He fixed up heating stoves for the sterilizers, made reflectors for
the lights in the operating theatres. Working on live wire, for there
was no main fuse, he overhauled and extended the lighting supply
to the whole hospital. He found the best spot in the river for
drawing water and arranged for its disinfection. He built a common
room for the Unit out of wood and canvas and made all the furniture
for it, principally out of wood which he salvaged from wrecked
houses in the neighbourhood. He made beds, chairs, and tables.
He made a washing machine for the laundry. He completely over-
hauled the equipment for the ambulances. In addition to all these
duties, he did his full share as an orderly in the wards.
Four miles for clean water


Forster’s ingenuity made the place much more livable in, but
it is still a bit rough and ready. The dormitories are stone-floored
rooms and there are no beds, no sheets, and no pillows. Members
of the Unit sleep either on mattresses on the floor or on stretchers
which are, however, likely to be requisitioned in case of emergency.
For warmth they depend on sleeping bags, of which there arc never
sufficient. Clothes and personal property are kept in rucksacks or
on the floor beside the beds.
The peace did not last long that morning in Grafien.
There had been a heavy rebel attack up the line and 50 cases
(23 stretcher, 25 walking) had to be examined. All had to be
evacuated, if possible, within three hours.
Each patient had to be given an anti-tetanus injection, if he had
not previously had one. Quick decisions had to be made: who
should be given temporary dressings, who must be held for opera-
tion. The two operating rooms could scarcely handle the rush.
Each man as his dressing was completed would give the People’s
Front Salute and murmur “ Muchos gracias.” Then they were
taken to the courtyard to await evacuation.
But here is one who is unable to give the salute or whisper his
thanks—a fair-haired German boy, an exile from the Nazi terror
lighting to save another land from Fascism, is brought in with a
very bad head wound. We have not the proper instruments to
perform the needed operation. He is young and strong, and if he
reaches the main hospital at the base in a few hours he may survive
—but there arc so many wounded to-day that the train will be
delayed . . .
About four o’clock in the afternoon a few of us got free enough
from work to begin eating lunch. Suddenly through yells and
shouts came the roar of planes, the staccato coughing of machine-
guns. We made a wild dash over the fields. A loyal ’plane had been
forced down in combat with three rebel bombers. We brought back
the pilot, who was slightly injured. A lew minutes later, from
another part of the district, another pilot was brought in ; this man
was severely wounded.
Fifty cases had to be examined that morning


During all this excitement operations proceeded quietly and
efficiently in the theatres.
Odd cases drifted in during the afternoon and a second evacua-
tion train had to be ordered.
One of our patients towards evening was a Moor, taken prisoner
from the rebels. This meant trouble, for some of the people in the
village started grumbling when they heard that a rebel Moor was
going to be treated with the same care and attention as their own
wounded. Feelings run high in war, and it was difficult to convince
the grumblers that a hospital cannot and ought not to bar anyone
who is suffering. It is true, of course, that the Spanish Medical Aid
has the support of the National Council of Labour in Britain and
of the International Federation of Trade Unions in Europe : it is
situated behind the loyal lines and its main purpose is to assist the
democratic forces.
But here was a human being in agony. He had been thrown
from his horse four days before and had lain in the open ever since.
His leg was broken and had an open wound, which was gangrened.
How could we refuse to help him ? An immediate operation was
necessary. While preparations were being made for it, more
villagers arrived to protest at the Moor being treated. But there
also arrived a message from the Divisional Commander of the Loyal
Militia: “ Give Moorish prisoner all possible care and attention."
That silenced the critics and soon afterwards the operation
amputation of the leg —was performed.
This does not exhaust the story of a day’s activity at Grafien.
An important side of the hospital's work is the general practice
carried on among the villagers, for the village doctor went off at
the start of the rebellion to join Franco’s forces. That day, for
instance, treatment was given to the victims of a motor accident,
and an operation was performed on a woman whose peritoneum
was torn during childbirth. Dr. Saxton of the B.M.U. visits several
patients in the village every morning, the majority being pneumonia
and rheumatic cases, which are bound in the nature of things to
become more numerous as winter approaches.
'Fhe chill in the evening breeze that night showed, indeed, that
winter, the third combatant in this dreadful war, was not far off.
“ Give Moorish prisoner all possible care and attention . . . ”


WHO’S WHO OF THE UNIT
From all parts of the country —from Scotland and Lancashire
as well as the London area —and from all trades and occupations —
doctors, clerks, medical students, and one taxi-driver —came the
members of the Unit. Here are their names :
First Unit (left London August 23, 1936) :
Administrator; K. Sinclair-Loutit, London, W.C.i. Doctors: A. A.
Khan, London, N.W.3., Ruth Prothero, London Lock Hospital, London, W. 2. ;
Randall Sollcnberger, London, VV. Nurses: Margot Miller, Parliament Hill,
N.W.3. (wounded on duty) ; Thora Silverthorne, Hammersmith Hospital,
VV.I2 ; Jean Woodifield, Hampstead, N.W.3. ; Rose Davson, London, VV.g. ;
D. E. Bell, South Hampstead, N.W.3. ; Nurse Bird, London, S.W.i. Secretary :
Aileen Palmer, London, VV.G. Dressers : Archibald L. Cochrane, Portman
square, W. ; Leonard J. Le Vann, Edinburgh ; Arnold Kallen, Glasgow.
Drivers : Charles Hunt, Harlesden ; Charles James Hurling, Greenford ;
Alexander Wheeler Wainman, Shipton-under-W'ychwood ; Frank L. Farr,
London, N. 4 ; Leslie Preger, Victoria Park, Manchester ; Harry Forster, London,
VV.g. Quartermasters: Emmanuel Julius, London, W.t. (joined Loyal Militia
and was killed in action); Hugh O’Donnell, Edgware, Middlesex ; William
Belcher, Camden Town, N.W'.i.
Reinforcements of First Unit :
Doctors: Reginald Somes Saxton, Reading ; Max Langer, Vienna VIII.
Nurses : Mary Elizabeth Slater, Preston, Lancs. ; Alice Garton, Gloucester ;
Susannah Allan Sutor, Monte Carlo ; Annie Cargill Murray, Edinburgh ;
Elsie Aspinall, Wembley ; Gwendolen Mary E. Williams, Stoke-on-Trent.
Orderlies: Keith Howard Andrews, Kilburn, NAV.6. ; Clare Jones, Edmonton.
Drivers: Charles George Franklin Bing, Ilford ; Thomas Reginald Perry-Poole,
Reading ; Gordon Davidson, S.W.i 1.
Second Unit:
Quartermaster; Captain James Robert White, Whitehall, Belfast, Ireland.
Assistants: Dennis Edgar Prout, London, 5.E.15 ; Mrs. de Urquidi, London,
S.W. Drivers: H. A. Verstage, London, 5.E.23 ; George Arthur Byland,
London, 5.E.22 ; Thomas Alfred Steward, Tottenham, N. 17 ; Jack Stone,
London, N. 4 ; Patrick Hill, London, N.W. 1.
Of the 44 persons whose names are given above, ten have either
returned to England or gone to serve in hospitals in other parts ol
Spain. All, however, have given splendid service to the Medical
Aid Unit.
The 34 who remain require our constant support.


The Formation of the Unit and the story of its
organisation
The Spanish Medical Aid Cinninillee is Jonned
Given less llian 24 hours' notice, doctors, medical
students and nurses, and a lew other interested persons,
met in London on Saturday, August Blit to consider the
urgent problem oh providing medical help in Spain. At
this meeting the Spanish Medical Aid Committee was
Ibrmcd. Two days later the work of preparing a unit to
go to the war (routs was commenced.
The President of the Committee was the Rt. Hon.
Christopher Addison, M.D., F.R.C.S. ; Viscount
Churchill, Viscountess Hastings and Professor J. R.
Matrack were elected joint Treasurers, with Dr. H. 15.
Morgan as Chairman, and Dr. Charles Brook ol the
London County Council as Secretary. Dr. Somerville
Hastings is Vice-Chairman.
Besides interviewing those who had volunteered Tor
service and arranging lor the purchase ol the necessary
equipment, the Committee had to face probably its most
important task that of raising hinds.
The Public Response
But the great fight that the people of Spain were
making to save democracy had gripped the Imagination
of the British public. From all classes, in fact from all
parlies, came oilers of help. On August 14th, at a
memorable meeting at the Friends’ House, £5OO was
raised.


This response encouraged the Committee to make even bolder
plans. It was decided to form a large unit capable of establishing
and maintaining a clearing station or small field hospital.
Only a fortnight after the first meeting was called the Unit left
London on the first stage of its journey to Spain.
It consisted of four doctors, five administrative and quartermaster
staff, six nurses, and five dressers and orderlies. Later, six additional
drivers were added. For all these volunteers, uniforms, kit, camp
equipment and—unhappy commentary on the bestiality of modern
war—thirty gas masks (costing £4 each) had to be provided. Thus
was swallowed the first £5OO.
Then there were the medical supplies.
Surgical equipment, to provide for the establishment of a base
hospital and for the performance of two major operations simultane-
ously, was purchased most economically for £5OO. 2,000 doses of
anti-tetanus serum had to be acquired, at a cost of nearly jT 2OO.
Anaesthetics and antiseptics, of which there was a desperate shortage
in Spain, had to be bought.
The French help nn the work
The Unit halted in Paris, where various formalities had to be
gone through, three new lorries bought, material overhauled and
supplemented. The whole of the equipment, as well as rations for
the Unit were packed in these motor vehicles, which were specially
constructed so that they could be transformed at short notice into
mobile field ambulances.
Much oflhc burden of this work fell to Viscount Churchill and
Mr. Sinclair-Loutit, the administrator, but they were helped con-
siderably by French sympathisers. How anxious the French were
to help can be illustrated by one incident: when the Unit’s baggage
arrived at Paris, the station porters, giving the Popular Front salute,
refused the legal charges.
But even with such co-operation, these few days in Paris were
charged with worry and anxiety. Passports had to be seen to
and Customs arrangements made, there were comings and
goings from the embassies ; in fact, some members of the Unit
worked 20 hours a day, and one night they had no sleep at all.
The Unit leaves for Spain
But by Friday August 28th almost everything was ready, and
watched by large crowds, four ambulances, fully equipped and
staffed, each with two drivers, left on their long journey to the
stricken fields of Spain.


The remaining personnel left Paris by train on the following
day, arriving in Barcelona on Sunday evening. The ambulances—
after one had been involved in an accident, and the two drivers
treated in hospital—reached Barcelona on the Wednesday. Spanish
workers assembled in the streets gave them an enthusiastic welcome.
Now began the real work of the Unit. The medical and nursing
staff visited hospitals, homes for refugee children, barracks, factories
and so on—being much impressed by the way the Government had
met the emergencies of the situation —and then, on Thursday
September 3rd, leading officers of the party were conducted to the
Aragon front.
Here they met military chiefs, visited villages along the line,
and finally decided to establish a hospital in a farm house at the
village of Grafien, 18 kilometres behind the Huesca section of the
front. The advantage of Granen was that it lies at the railhead
for Barcelona and Lerida, and at the junction of many roads from
sectors of the fighting lines.
The farm house could not be said to be ideal for the purpose.
It was old, dilapidated and insanitary, but as it was the only likely
accommodation available, an advance party was sent to clean it
and convert it so far as possible to its new use and to instal about
25 beds. They had not been there more than a few hours when
thirty wounded men arrived for treatment.
The first patients treated on the Aragon Front
Working at all hours, showing self-sacrificing devotion and at
times real heroism, the Unit’s staff set about their task of lessening
the toll of war. During their first month they treated 811 patients,
and their ambulances were constantly under fire on their many
journeys to the Front. After the wounded had been treated at
Granen they were evacuated to the station and placed in hospital
trains for Barcelona and Sarinona.
It was a tremendous task, but the Unit tackled it magnificently.
Their urgent appeals for further help were answered by the despatch
of three more ambulances, while three doctors, eight trained nurses
and orderlies and six skilled drivers were added to the personnel.
Large quantities of surgical equipment were also sent.
In its work at the Front, the Unit is helped by local committees.
But it must be remembered that the Spanish Government is sorely
pressed, and its own resources are limited. More, and yet more
help, is needed from sympathisers in this country: medical supplies
are urgently required.


The Unit at work on the Aragon Front


The Archbishop of York
wishes the unit God speed
I had heard with very great interest and sympathy of the
formation of the Spanish Medical Aid Committee , and should
like to say how warmly I approve its aims. I trust it will
obtain the support which it needs for its work of mercy.
WILLIAM EBOR


What you can do to help
The Unit tends the wounded on both sides.
The staff do not ask a man’s politics before
they give him care and attention. Voluntarily,
without asking a penny in return, the Unit is
aiding a whole people who in this crisis of
history are desperately in need. The more
help it gets, the more it can help.
As the war goes on, more drugs, dressings,
antiseptics, anaesthetics, and so on will be
needed. New ambulances must replace those
worn out by arduous service on the rough
country roads. And a new ambulance will
cost £BOO.
In addition to all the other needs of the
hospital, ample supplies of blankets and warm
woollen clothing must be sent out for the staff
itself and for distribution among the men,
women and children, who are suffering in
Spain.


And for all this money is needed. To maintain the
Unit in its present state of efficiency costs £5OO a month.
And every penny contributed is spent on easing the
sufferings of Spain. By the end of November about
£5,000 had been expended on vital necessaries. The
costs of administration are negligible, and not one penny
has been wasted.
Listen ! You have never known before how much
£i can do.
-£i will keep two operating tables at work for a
whole hour at Granen —two operating tables, with the
services of doctors, nurses, orderlies and attendants.
The wounded wait. Doctors, nurses orderlies,
attendants are ready to give their devoted service. The
wounded wait —wait for us to do our smaller part.
In one hour many lives can be saved, many men
made whole who would otherwise be crippled. Lives
and limbes of heroes in our keeping —for £ i . . .
We search about for what we can do so that the
wounded may wait no longer. One thing is open to us ;
it is to give —to give until it hurts.
Will you pledge to subscribe a regular sum every
week or every month ?
To those who can afford it we appeal for an hour’s
support every week.
But every minute helps. Buy your minute if you
can give no more than 4d., but make it a minute every
week !
Every penny helps to save a human life in the great
struggle of the Spanish people for democratic liberty.


The wounded wait


Give until it hurts ...
To the Treasurer,
SPANISH MEDICAL AID COMMITTEE,
24, New Oxford Street, W.C.i.
I am enclosing
in support of Medical Aid in Spain
Cheque/P.O, for
S s. d.
I further pledge myself to subscribe
regularly every week to the Fund the sum of
£ s._d.
Signature
Address
Date


