

ROYAL
GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
OF AUSTRALASIA,
QUEENSLAND.
The Murawarri and Other Australian
Languages
By R H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
>utridge Print, Brisbane.
Associe. etranger. Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris.


I’lfe llffoal sieogra|il|ical Sorieltt of
QUEENSLAND
fH IS Society has been established in Brisbane for the last eighteen years. The
Society was instituted with the view of promoting the interests of Geographical
Science, of encouraging exploration in Australasia, and of furthering the study of
Physical and Commercial Geography.
While these objects cannot fail to commend themselves to the scientific and com-
mercial classes of the community, and to many persons engaged in extending pastoral
and mining enterprise into distant parts of the Continent, of which comparatively
little is known, the great educational advantages to be derived from the establishment
of this Society will be no less apparent, to all intelligent colonists.
Any lady or gentleman may become an Ordinary Member, subject to election.
Subscription, £1 Is. per annum, due on the Ist July in each year.
Life Membership! £lO 10s.
The usual Entrance Fee will not be charged during: the session
1902-1903.
Members’ Privileges
To receive the Society’s Diploma.
The right to be present at, and to introduce two friends to, all meetings of the
Society.
The privileges of admissioiylo the meetings of the Royal Geographical Society,
London, and of the use, for the purpose of reference, of the Map Room and Library.
To be allowed to purchase copies of all the publications of the Royal Geographical
Society, London, on special terms.
Membership of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society when in North Britain
without payment of additional fee, and the privilege of purchasing The Scottish Geo-
graphical Magazine on special terms.
Entree to the Evening Meetings, Library, &c., of the Sydney, Melbourne, and
Adelaide'Centres of the Society.
To have access to the Library and other public rooms of the Society.
To receive a copy of the Society’s official publications.
Diplomas of Fellowship.
Section IV, Clause 3, Constitution and Rules :
The Council may confer the Diploma of Fellowship upon such eminent persons
as have rendered valuable services to geographical science ; on persons of distinguished
scientific attainments ; on those who have promoted the objects of the Society ; and
on Honorary and Honorary Corresponding Members of the Society, without the pay-
ment of diploma fees. On Ordinary Members, on payment of a nominal diploma fee,
subject to the following conditions, namely:— (a) Upon written application: Those
who have compounded for life membership and are deemed worthy of the distinction
by the Council, (b) Upon written application: Those who are not in arrears with
their annual subscriptions, and are, upon the recommendation of the Council, approved
by the Society at an ordinary monthly meeting. Of the honorary class the number
of Fellows shall not exceed ten. Each Diploma, after being approved by the Council,
shall be signed by the President and by the Hon. Secretary of the Society. Members
who receive the diplomas shall have the privilege of designating themselves “Fellows”
of the Society, and may use the initials F.R.GS.A.Q. after their names as long as
they continue to be members of the Society.
Ladies or gentlemen who wish to become Members of this Society may do so by
handing in or posting their names to the Hon. Secbetary, at the Booms, Brisbane, or
to any Member of the Society who will arrange for their nomination.


THE MURAWARRI AND OTHER AUSTRALIAN
LANGUAGES.


THE MURAWARRI AND OTHER AUSTRALIAN
LANGUAGES*
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
Associe. etranger. Soc. d'Anthrop. de Paris.
This Society last year published a brief article contributed by me
on the Thoorga and Yookumbill Languages, 1 two of the native tongues
of New South Wales. On the present occasion it is intended to furnish
the principal elements of the language spoken by the Murawarri, a
large tribe occupying a region of Southern Queensland, from the
Warrego River to the Culgoa, Adjoining the Murawarri on the north
are other tribes speaking dialects of the same language and reaching
into Queensland for hundreds of miles. The grammar and vocabulary
of two other native tongues of Queensland —"The Yualeai Language,
and “ The Pikumbil Language ” —were contributed by me to the Royal
Society of New South Wales. 2
I have incorporated with this paper particulars of the grammatical
constitution of the Burranbinya and Tharumba languages of New
South Wales, and the Wuttyabullak language of Victoria. A mystic
language is also referred to.
The information given in this article was carefully gathered 'by
myself, without the assistance of any person, in the camps of the
several native tribes whose languages are herein dealt with—a task
involving considerable expenditure of time, labour, and money.
Through the medium of this Journal, I have now contributed the
outlines of the grammar of six Australian languages—Thoorga, Yoo
kumbill, Murawarri, Burranbinya, Tharumba, and Wuttyabullak.
The Thoorga language shows the grammatical structure of all the
native tongues along the coast of New South Wales from the Hawkes-
bury River to Cape Howe, and onward along the Victorian coast to
Gape Patterson, including the whole of Gippsland 3 The Yookumbill
represents the rules of speech from the Murray River, through the
* Read before the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland, Bth
December, 1902.
1 Queensland Geographical Journal, vol. xvii., pp. 49-73.
2 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wiles, vol. xxxvi., pp. 137-145, and pp. 179-190.
3 See my “ Aboriginal Languages of Victoria,” Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol.
xxxvi, pp. 71-106.
Reprinted from the Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia, Queensland, Vol. XVIII.


centre of New South Wales, into Queensland, at least as far as
Maranoa and Mary rivers. The Murawarri type of language extends
away up the W T arrego, Paroo, and other rivers a great distance. The
Burranbinya is one of the dialects of the Darling River tribes. The
Tharumba is spoken on the south-east coast of New South Wales. The
Wuttyabullak is representative of the native speech over nearly the
whole of Western Victoria. Languages of similar grammatical con-
stitution have also been observed by me in South Australia.
It will, therefore, be observed that I have, practically, dealt with
all the aboriginal languages of Victoria, nearly the whole of New South
Wales, and a large region of South-eastern Queensland All this work
has been the result of my own individual investigations —every word
in the grammars and vocabularies having been noted down by me from
the lips of the aboriginal speakers.
It is extremely gratifying to see that your Society is assisting me
in my endeavour to preserve, before it is too late, some grammatical
records of the speech of the Australian aborigines. The large amount
of information thus collected and published will no doubt prove of
immense value to philologists by enabling them to compare the native
languages with each other, and also with the speech of the tribes of
Polynesia and elsewhere.
The system of spelling adopted is that recommended by the Royal
Geographical Society, London, with the following qualifications :
As far as possible vowels are unmarked, but in order to prevent
ambiguity of pronunciation, in some instances the long sound of a, e,
and u are indicated thus, a, e, ii. In a few cases the short sound of u
is shown thus, u.
Gr is always hard. R has a rough trilled sound, as in hurrah J
W always commences a syllable or word. Y at the beginning of a
word or syllable has its ordinary consonant value.
The sound of the Spanish nis frequent; at the beginning of a word
or syllable I have represented it by ny, but when terminating a word
the Spanish letter is used.
Ng at the commencement of a word or syllable has a peculiar nasal
sound. At the end of a syllable it has the sound of ng in “ wing.”
Dh is pronounced nearly as th in “ that,” with a slight sound of d
preceding it. Nil has likewise nearly the sound of th in “ that,” with
the initial sound of the n.
T is interchangeable with d, p with b, and g with k, in most words
■where these letters occur.
Ty and dy at the beginning of a word or syllable have nearly the
sound of j. At the end of a word ty or dy is pronounced nearly as
tch in watch or hitch, omitting the final hissing sound.


THE MURAWARRI LANGUAGE.
In the Murawarri language, among all the parts of speech subject
to inflection, there are two forms of the first person of the dual and
plural —one of which includes, and the other excludes—the person
addressed. I am the first author to report this peculiarity in any
of the native languages of Queensland. It may be stated that I was
likewise the first to draw attention to its existence in the aboriginal
languages of New South Wales and Victoria. 1
Nouns.
Number. —There are three numbers, singular, dual, and plural.
Gula, a kangaroo. Gulabural, a pair of kangaroos. Guladhunna,
several kangaroos.
Gender. —Mugin, a woman. Men, a man. Among animals sex
is distinguished by words signifying “ male ” and “ female,” thus,
giindal dhungur, a male dog; giindal guni, a female dog.
Case. —Nominative: Wagan, a crow. Kinni, a yamstick. Mulli,
a boomerang. Wungga, a bird’s nest. Ngura, a camp.
Nominative Agent: Guladyu ngunna wirrunga, a kangaroo me
scratched.
Instrumental: Mendyu wagan mullinyu bundhara, a man a crow
with a boomerang hit.
Genitive : Mugingu kinni, a woman’s yamstick.
The genitive case of some nouns is represented by an affix corres-
ponding to the person and number required:
Ist Person —My camp (camp my), Nguradhi
2nd Person—Thy camp (camp thy), Nguranu
3rd Person—His camp (camp his), Nguralugu
And so on for all the numbers and persons. 2 .
Accusative : This is the same as the nominative.
Dative : Dhan yanna. nguranggu, Come to the camp.
Ablative : Dhirri yanna ngurango, Go from the camp.
Adjectives.
Adjectives are placed after the nouns they qualify, and are simi-
larly declined for number and case. They are compared by saying,
Thurda nhu, Kittyu niingga, large this, small that. Superiority is
expressed by thurdaburra, very large.
Pronouns.
Pronouns have number, person, and case, as exemplified in this
table. There are inclusive and exclusive forms for the dual and
plural of the first person :
1 Journ. Eoy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxv., p. 127; Ibid, xxxvi., p. 72.
2 See also my “ Wongaibon Language,” spoken by the Lachlan Kiver and other
tribes. Journ. Itoy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. xxxvi., pp. 147-154.


Nominative.
SINGULAR.
Possessive.
Objective.
1st Person
Ngadbu
Ngundi
Ngunna
2nd ,,
Ngindu
Ingga
Bunga
3rd
Yallunggo
Ngumbuga
DUAL.
Bunba
p ( Ngulli Ngulliga Ngullinya
1st ± er s° n | Ngullinyumbo Ngulligilunna Ngullinyanumba
2nd ,, Nula
Nulaga Nulana
3rd „ Yallubural Bulaga Burannha
PLUKAL.
i + p ( Nginna Nginnaga Ngurrana
Ist 1 erson j Ngi nna( jy U ] a Nginnagadyula Ngurranadyula
2nd „ Nura Nuraga Nurana
3rd ~ Yalladliunna Dliurraga Dhurrana
The foregoing full forms of the pronouns are employed chiefly in
answering questions. In ordinary conversation the natives use the
pronominal suffixes illustrated under the heading of “ Verbs.”
Who, ngannga ? What, minya ? This, nhu. That, nhurana. These
interrogatives and demonstratives take inflexion for number and
person. They also vary according to the position of the object referred
to. The demonstrative pronouns in their various forms supply the
place of the definite article.
Verbs.
Verbs have the singular, dual, and plural numbers, the usual
persons and tenses. The chief moods are the indicative, imperative,
and conditional. Number and person are indicated, as in the Thoorga, 1
by pronominal particles added on to the verb stem; as in the following
•conjugation of the verb, bundhera, to beat:
Indicative Mood—present tense.
I Ist Person I beat Bundhiyu
Singular ' 2nd ~ Thou beatest Bundhindu
I 3rd ~ He beats Bundliibu
Bundhibu
( p j We inch beat Bundliili
j s exson IWe excl. beat Bundhilinumba
ual •••‘j2nd ~ You beat Bundhinula
( 3rd ~ They beat Bundhibula
( p i We inch beat Bundhina
p J s erson jWe exc j p ea t Bundhinadyula
lural ... < 2 n( j You beat Bundhinura
( 3rd ~ They beat Bundhira
PAST TENSE.
( Ist Person I beat Bundliaranyu
Singular 2nd ~ Tliou beatedst Bundharandu
( 3rd ~ He beat Bundharabu
1 Queensland Geographical Journal, vol. xvii., pp. 49-73.


FUTURE TENSE.
( Ist Person I will beat Bunggunyu
Singular j 2nd ~ Thou wilt beat Bunggundu
r 3rd ~ He will beat Bunggubu
It is thought unnecessary to exhibit the dual and plural numbers
of the past and future tenses.
Imperative Mood.
Positive Beat Bungga
Negative Beat not Wulla bungga
Conditional Mood.
I may beat Wullawurri bunggunyu
Reflexive.
Present I am beating myself Bundherriyu
Past I was beating myself Bundherriaiyu
Future I will beat myself Bundheriiguyu
The inflexion continues through all the persons.
Reciprocal.
, ( Pres. We incl. are beating each other Bumbullali
Dual jr u t. \y e i nc p w iH beat each other Bumbullaguli
p j Pres. We inch are beating each other Bumbullana
Plur. | \\r e w jp ijgat eac h other Bumbullaguna
Indiyu appears to serve) the purpose of the English auxiliary verb,.
I am. If we take an adjective or adverb as a predicate, we get the
following illustration in present, past, and future of the first persom
singular:
Present I am well
Past I was well
Murrin indiyu (well am I)
Murrin indayu
Future I will be well Murrin inguyu
This form applies to all the persons and numbers.
Adverbs.
Yes, kaila. No, wulla. Here, nunggo. Tliere, ngurra. Now,
kunyegaila. By and bye, kunye. Yesterday, giinda. To-morrow,
burda. Long ago, muttyagaila. Perhaps, wullawurri. Slowly, mmPgi.
Quickly, kurdugurdu. Where (singular), dhirrungga? Where (dual),
dhirrambula? Where (plural), dhirradhunna ? How many, minyun-
gara.
Prepositions.
In front, kurbu. Behind, billungga. In rear, durungga. Inside,
mugungga. Outside, bullungga. Beside, gurgungga. Between,
dhunnungga. Down, burrungga. Up, gunda. Over or across, gur-
rundha. This side of, nhubaran. The other side of, gowurrigurrundha.'
Through, gaimyu. Towards, dhai. Away from, dliirra.
Many prepositions can be inflected for number and person, as in
the Thoorga language :—Behind me, billunggadhiga. Behind thee..


billunggabunga. Behind him, billunggabuga. Behind us, billungga-
ngurriga, and so on.
Numerals.
One, yaman. Two; kubbo. Several, murabirri.
See the Vocabulary at the end of this paper.
THE BURRANBINYA LANGUAGE.
The territory of the Burranbinya tribe is situated on the Darling
River, New South Wales, extending from above Brewarrina down-
wards to about Bourke, comprising the lower portions of the Bokhara,
Bogan, and Culgoa rivers, for some distance above their respective
junctions with the Darling.
Nouns.
Nouns have number, gender, and case:
Number. —Kuranyi, an opossum. Kuranyigulli, a couple of opos-
sums. Kuranyigalga, several opossums.
Gender. —Bullu, a man. Men collectively are called murrin. Thum-
muga, a woman'. Bullubullu, a young boy. T'hummagubbalu, a young
girl. Kirridya, a child of either sex.
The gender of animals is distinguished by the words dhulatya, male,
and ngummagara, female, ]}laced after the name of the animal; thus,
mirri dhulatya, a male dog; mirri ngummagara, a female dog.
Case. —To form the cases, nouns take additions by means of post-
fixes:
Nominative'—Thunta, kangaroo l . Murli, a boomerang. Kaia, a
yamstick.
Causative—Bullulu kuranyi burralaru, a man an opossum killed.
Thuntallu lanu mara, a kangaroo me scratched.
Genitive—Bulluwu murli, a man's boomerang. T'hummagawu kaia,
a woman’s yamstick.
The other cases are omitted to economise space.
Pronouns.
Pronouns are inflected for number, person, and case, and contain
two forms of the dual and plural in the first person. The following is
an example in the singular number:
Nominative. Possessive. Objective.
{lst Person Ngutthu Ngunnu Lanu
2nd ~ Hinta Ingga Luggunni
3rd ~ Nuanara Ngurrani Larunni
Although there are numerous differences in the vocabulary, the
grammatical rules governing the other parts of speech in this language
are the same as in the Murawarri, and are, therefore, omitted on the-
present occasion, for want of space.
Numerals. —One, muggu; two, bulagar; several, wulliwal.


THE THARUMBA LANGUAGE.
The Tharumba language is spoken on the coast of New South
Wales, between the Shoalhaven River and Ulladulla, reaching inland
to the Dividing Range. This tongue is a dialect of the Thoorga,
spoken to the south of Ulladulla, the grammatical structure of which
was explained by me last year. 1 South of the Thoorga is the Dyirringan
tribe, whose speech I have also dealt with. 2 The T'hurrawal-speaking
people adjoin the Tharumba on the north.
The initiation ceremonies of the Tharumba and other tribes men-
tioned consist of the Bunan and the Kudsha, which have both been
fully described by me elsewhere.? The social organisation of these
tribes, and their intermarrying laws have also been already explained
by me.*
Nouns.
Number and gender are substantially the same as in the Thoorga
language.
Case. —The principal cases are the nominative, causative, instru-
mental, genitive, accusative, dative, and oblative.
Nominative —Yuin, a man. Wangga.n, a woman. Mirriga, a dog.
Warrangan, a boomerang. Gaga, a yamstick.
Causative 1 —Mirrigandi gurawara buddhal, a dog an opossum bit.
Wanggandi wurran baiilla, a woman a child beat. Gurauri dyirra
thunnan, an opossum leaves eats. Yuindyi warrigulla dhubbagal, a
man a mullet caught.,
Instrumental —This case takes the same suffix as the causative.
Yuindyi wagura bingala, warrangandyi, a man at a crow threw a
boomerang.
Genitive —The proprietor and the property are both declined, but
the suffix to' the former differs from, that of the latter:
Yuingu warranganyu, a man’s boomerang.
Wanggangu gaganyu, a woman’s yamstick.
I was the first, author to report this declension of the name of the
possessor as well as that of the article possessed, among the languages
•of the aboriginal tribes of New South Wales, 5 and also in those of
Victoria. 6
1 “ The Thoorga Language,” Queensland Geographical Journal, xvii., pp. 49-61-
Tvith Vocabulary.
2 “ The Dyirringan Language,” Journ. Roy. Soc., N. S. Wales, xxxvi., pp. 160,
3 “ The Bunan Ceremony of N. S. Wales,” American Anthropologist, ix., pp.
-327-344, plate vi.
4 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxiv., pp. 263, 264.
5 “ The Thurrawal Language,” Journ. Roy. Soc.. N. S. Wales, xxxv., p. 131.
“ The Gundungurra Language,” Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., xl., p. 143.
6 “ The Aboriginal Languages of Victoria,” Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, xxxvi.»
p. 78, 87, and 94.


Every object over which ownership can be exerted is subject to
inflection for number and person :
i Ist Person Warrangandlia Boomerang my
Singular 2nd ~ Warranganngu Boomerang thy
( 3rd ~ Warrangannyu Boomerang his
And so on through the dual and plural. If a couple or several articles
be claimed, an infix is inserted between the noun root and the posses-
sive suffix, thus:—Warranganburrandha, boomerangs both mine.
Warranganburragandha, boomerangs several mine.
Dative'—This is the same as the genitive.
Ablative—Thuganda, from a camp. Barnda, from a fire.
The accusative is the same as the nominative.
Adjectives.
Adjectives follow the nouns they qualify, and take similar declen-
sions for number and case:
Yuin birraga, man large.
Yuindyi birragandyi wurran baiilla, a large man beat a child.
Yuingu birragangu warranganvq, a large man’s boomerang, and so
on for the other cases.
There are euphonic modifications of the suffixes in all the cases of
nouns and adjectives, depending upon the termination of the word
declined.
For the comparison of adjectives, and the inflexion of some of them
as intransitive verbs, see my “ Thoorga Language.”
Pronouns.
The following are the nominative and possessive pronouns
1 Ngaiga
Thou Indiga
He Dyeliandyulla
We, inch Ngaiawungul
We, excl. Ngaiawungulla
You Indiwu
Mine Ngaiaganguli
Thine Indiganguli
His Dyellungundiwuli
Ours, inch Ngaiawunguli
Ours, excl. Neaiawungulanguli
Yours Indiwuli
They Dyellandyullawurra Theirs Dyellandyawurrawuli
We, inch Ngaiawanyi
We, excl. Ngaiawanyaga
You Indiwunhu
Ours, inch Ngaiawunyungnli
Ours, excl. Ngaiawunyunganguli
Yours Indiwunhunguli
They Dyellandyullawurraga Theirs Dyellandyawurraganguli
The objective pronouns, me, thee, him, etc., are not found separ-
ately, like the nominative and possessive, but consist of pronominal
suffixes to verbs and other parts of speech:
A kangaroo scratched me Burrui garrulingga
A kangaroo scratched thee Burrui garrulunyi
A kangaroo scratched him Burrui garrula
There is a causative form of the nominative pronouns:


Ngaiagandyi, I (did it). Indigandyi, thou (didst it). Other forms
are : Ngaiagamiddyi, myself. Ngaiagabali, I also. Ngaiagandyingundi,
from me. Ngaiagandyina, with me. Yennaira ngurndi ngaiagan, go
away from me. Yennauwulura dhainggu ngaiaganggu, come towards
me.
Interrogatives—Who, wunnungga. Who (did it), wunnunggalla.
Whom belonging to, wunnunggawuli. Who for, -wunnunggalula.
What, minna. What for, or why, minnaua. What is the matter,
minnamun.
Demonstratives —This, near, nyinya. That near you, nyiinya. Dyin,
that. Dyinalibura, that, farther. Dyinginda, that yonder. Dyin-
nadha, that person. Nyindyiwal, this other one. Dyindyi, over here.
Nyidyila, anything this side of the person addressed. Wurridya, some-
thing beyond the person addressed. Nyullun, anything below the
speaker. Dyulliinga, something on a higher level than the speaker.
Ngaiina, over there.
Most of the demonstratives are likewise used as pronouns of the
third person, and are inflected accordingly, as: Nyindyiwurra, these
two. Nyindyiwurraga, all these.
A native will often indicate the location of a thing by giving its
compass bearing from a tree, waterhole, rock, or other known point.
Verbs.
All that has been said respecting this part of speech in my “Thoorga
Language 1 ” is substantially applicable to the Tharumba< verbs. The-
following additional particulars, which are common to both dialects,
may now be supplied :
I am quite well
Jummagangarilaga
J ummagangabullaga
I was quite well
I will be quite well Jummaganguringa
Nyamundyaliang, we, dual, exchange or barter.
Warrangan yunullaga thugandha, I have a boomerang at my camp.
Yangawamiigiin yubbunda, I will sing for thee a song.
Waddhana baiuga, it is doubtful whether I will beat.
Wunnungulla gurrugandhullingga, who called me.
Verbs take inflection for the same number as the object noun
I saw a dog Mirriga thambamulaga
I saw a couple of dogs Mirrigamburra tliambamulagul
I saw several dogs Mirrigamburraga thambamulagin
Adverbs.
Yes, ngawe. No, thuggail. To-day, nhauai. Yesterday, bugia.
To-morrow, buradya. There, dyindyiladyi. Here, nyindyi. When
used predicatively, nyindyi and its variants, can be inflected for tense,.
1 Queensland Geographical Journal, vol. xvii., pp. 49-73.


as well as for number and person, thus: —Nyindyiaga, here am I.
Nyindyiwulaga, here was I. Nyindyiwabulaga, here will I be.
The natives can also say:—Yuin nyindyiwula, a man is here.
Yuin nyindyiwala, a man was here. Yuin nyindyiwuna, a man will
be here. For other examples of present, past, and future forms of
“here,” and “there,” see my “ Thurrawal Language.” 1 The adverbs
■“ here,” “ there,”' “ yonder,” and their modifications, are also frequently
used as demonstratives, and then take the same declensions as the
nouns they qualify.
Yugunbunyerruga, how shall I do it?
Wingululla wagura nyin baiilla, which of you (dual) killed the
-crow ?
Wingulal murrul, which is first?
Some adverbs admit of inflection for number, person, and tense, and
ought therefore to be included among the verbs, but I will show some
•of them in this place in order to keep all the adverbs together:
Present Where am I
Waddungabaga
Waddungaluga
Past Where was I'
Future Where will I be Waddunguga
See my “ Thoorga Language ” for other examples of adverbs.
Prepositions.
The examples of prepositions in my “ Thoorga Language,” and their
declension for number and person, are nearly the same in the Tharum-
ba, and will not be further referred to here.
The exclamations, conjunctions, and numerals are likewise almost
identical with the Thoorga. But many of the words in every part of
speech are quite different; some are more or less dissimilar, whilst
others are so nearly alike in both dialects that their meaning can be
recognized at once.
THE WUTTYABULLAK LANGUAGE.
This language is spoken in the county of Borung and surrounding
country, in the western part of Victoria. It is distinguished by having
four numbers^—singular, dual, trial, and plural. 2 The nouns, preposi-
tions, adverbs, etc., in addition to the verbs and pronouns, take in-
flexion for number and person. In all parts of speech subject to
conjugation and inflexion there is a double form of the first person in
the dual, trial, and plural.
Westward of the 145th meridian of longitude, and southward of
the 35th parallel of latitude, all the Victorian tongues have! the same
grammatical structure as the Wuttyabullak, although more or less
diverse in vocabulary. The same type of speech, with its trial number,
extends onwards into South Australia.
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S.W., vol. xxxv., p. 140.
2 See also my “ Thaguwurru Language.” Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. W ales, vol.
xxxvi., pp. 86.90.


Within the geographical limits indicated, the people are divided
into two phratries, called Gurgity and Gamaty, with their feminine
equivalents, Gurgitygurk and Gamatygurk. The men of one phratry
marry the women of the other, and the offspring take the phratry of
their mother. For particulars respecting these phratries, and a com-
prehensive list of totems, the reader is referred to an article I con-
tributed to the Anthropological Society 1 , at Washington, U.S.A., in
1898.
Nouns.
Number. —Nouns have the singular, dual, trial, and plural. Wille,
an opossum. Willebule, a pair of opossums. Willebarakullik, three
opossums. Willebarak, several opossums.
Gender. —Guli, a man. Bumbanggo, a woman. Bupup, a boy.
Wartibibumbanggo, a girl. The sex of animals is denoted by adding
the words mamu and babu, thus: —Gure babu, a female kangaroo.
Gure mamu, a male kangaroo.
Case. —The cases are indicated by inflexions:
The nominative merely names the thing spoken of, and is without
inflexion, as, guli, a man; der, a spear.
The causative, or nominative-agent, represents the subject doing
some act, as, guliu gure dhakkin, a man a kangaroo struck.
Possessive—The owner and the property are both inflected, as in
the Thoorga language : Guliga deruk, a man’s spear.
Accusative—This is the same as the simple nominative.
Instrumental—When an instrument is used in the performance of
any action, it takes the same inflexion as the causative: Deru gure
yungginan, a spear at a kangaroo threw I.
The other cases will be passed over.
Personal property of any description can be declined by possessive
suffixes to the noun, as : My spear, derek. Thy spear, derin. His
spear, deruk, and so on through all the numbers and persons.
Adjectives.
Adjectives follow the nouns they qualify, and take the same de-
clensions for number and case. They arei compared as in the T'hoorga
and Murawarri languages.
Pronouns.
There are two forms of the first person of the dual, trial, and
plural —one- in which the person or persons addressed are included with
the speaker, and another in which they are exclusive of the speaker : —-
{lst Person I Wallungek
2nd ~ Thou \Vallungin
3rd ~ He Wallunyuk
1 “ The Victorian Aborigines: their Initiation Ceremonies and Divisional
Systems,” American Anthropologist, vol. xi., pp. 325-343, with map of Victoria,
plate v.


( . , -r, (We inclusive Wallungul
J s eison j \v e exclusive Wallungulluk
Dual ...< 2 nd „ You Wallungula
( 3rd ~ They Wallungbulla
r „ (We inclusive Wallungurrakullik
Vst eison jWe exclusive Wallungandakullik
Irial ... < 2 n d ~ You Wallunguddakullik
(_3rd ~ They Wallungennakullik
{ 1 -p (We inclusive Wallungurrak
J Ist ierson j We exclusive Wallungandak
Plural < 2n( p ( You Wallunguddak
( 3rd ~ They Wallungennak
The possessive pronouns are : —Wallungangek, mine. Wallungan-
gin, thine. Wallunganguk, his, and so on through all the numoers and
persons. The language contains many demonstratives and interroga-
tives, besides objective forms of the pronoun, which are all inflected
for number and person.
Verbs.
I
Verbs have the same numbers and persons, with inclusive and ex-
elusive forms, as the pronouns.
Indicative Mood —present tense.
( Ist Person I throw Yunggan
Singular 2nd ~ Thou tbrowest Yunggar
( 3rd ~ He throws Yungga
( Ist Person I We incL tliroW Yunggangul
•pv J kt e 1 (We excl. throw Yunggangullung
UAL '"l2nd ~ You throw Yungawul
( 3rd ~ They throw Yunggabulla
, p )We inch throw Yunggangukullik
st Peison -j e ex(J p t| irow Yunggandakullik
2nd ~ You throw Yunggawatkullik
3rd ~ They throw Yungganatykullik
( i«t j We incL throw Yunggangu
p ) e son |We excl. throw Yunggandak
L i 2nd ~ You throw Yunggawat
{3rd ~ They throw Yungganaty
Past tense—l threw, yungginan.
Future tense—l will throw, yungginyan.
Imperative mood—Throw ! yunggak.
Conditional mood —Perhaps I will throw, windyabaga yungginyan..
A substitute for the verb “ to be ” can be exemplified by taking an.
adjective or other suitable word as a predicate:
{lst Person lam well Mullanda delgaia
2nd ~ Thou art well Mullar delgaia
3rd ~ He is well Mullu delgaia
Fast Ist Person I was well Mullandagaty delgaia
Future Ist Person I will be well Mullandanga delgaia


There are also reflexive and reciprocal forms of the verb, as in the
Tyattyalla Language 1 , which space will not permit me to detail.
Prepositions.
Several prepositions can be inflected for number and person :
{lst Person At my back Warmadliak
2nd ~ At thy back Warmadhangin
3rd ~ At his back Warmadlianyuk
This inflexion continues through all the persons and numbers.
Adverbs, Interjections, and Conjunctions.
These are similar in character to the identical parts of speech in
the Thoorga and Murawarri tongues, and some of them are capable of
inflexion in the same way.
It may be as well to state that all the languages of Eastern Victoria,
known as Gippsland, are the same in grammatical structure as the
Thoorga and Tharumba, but the vocabularies are different. The gram-
mar and vocabulary of two additional aboriginal tongues of Western
Victoria, “ The Yota-yota Language ” and “ The Bureba Language,”
were contributed by me to the Royal Society of New South Wales. 2
♦ A Mystic or Secret Language.
Before concluding this brief article on the speech of the Australian
aborigines, I wish to refer to a secret language, used by the men at the
■ceremonies of initiation, but which is never spoken in the presence of
women, or in the presence of those youths who have not yet entered
-upon the prescribed course of instruction. Whilst the novitiates %re
away in the bush in charge of the elders of the tribe, they are taught
a mystic name for surrounding objects, animals, parts of the human
body, and short phrases of general utility. This language varies in
■different communities.
I was the first author to draw attention to this mystic tongue, 3 and
during the past year I contributed to the Royal Society of New South
'Wales some short vocabularies of the secret languages of the Kurnu 4
-and other tribes. I consider my discovery of this secret form of speech
•of great linguistic importance, and recommend the reader to peruse the
vocabularies referred to.
In an article on “Aboriginal Songs at Initiation Ceremonies” 5
printed by this Society last year, I published several sacred songs in
this secret tongue—the first songs of the kind ever set to music.
1 See my “ Aboriginal Languages of Victoria,’ ’Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, vol.
xxxvi., pp. 71-106.
2 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. xxxvi., pp. 167-175, and pp. 179-190.
3 lnternat. d’Anthrop. et d’Archeol. ptohistoriques, Compte Rendu, 12 mc
Session, p. 494.
4 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxvi., pp. 157-160.
5 Queensland Geographical Journal, vol. xvii., pp. 61-63.


Vocabulary of Murawarri Words.
The following vocabulary contains about, two hundred and seventy
words in the Murawarri language, with their English equivalents.
Every word has been noted down carefully by myself from the lips of
old men and women in the native camps.
The Family.
A man, Main
W 7 ife, Nubabuga
Husband, Girrinbirra
Clever man, Kubi
Small boy, Dharda.
Old woman, Burraka
Girl, Gutheraguni
Elder sister, Mudyabubbur
Elder brother, Mudyabauin
Younger sister, Gidyuguira
Younger brother, Gidyumo'-an Child ol either sex, Guthera
Father, Buddhun
Mother, Kaia.
Father of family, | Gutheraira
Mother of family, I
Family, Gutheragulgera
Woman, Mogin
The Human Body.
Head, Bumbo
Forehead, Ngulu
Fat, Thunde
Ankle, Burrunggal
Skin, Dhundhu
Hair of head, Bumbo
Beard, Yerran
Back, Biila
Eye, Mil
Armpit, Burran
Elbow, Gubu
Bone, Mungga
Penis, Dhun
Nose, Nguru
Neck, Ngundul
Ear, Binna
Mouth, Dha
Lips, Dha
Teeith, Tirra
Belly, Dhugu
Erection, Thandharaiu
Sexual desire, Nuddhuh
Testicles, Burnin
Semen, Burdin
Vulva., Kinni
Njnnphae, Dhillin
Urine, Kiwa
Tongue, Thallun
Checks, Ngumun
Shoulder, Bunggul
Arm, Murngu
Excrement, Guna
Hand, Murra
Thigh. Thurra
Knee, T'hin-gal
Foot, Dhinna
Blood, Goan
Copulation, Thandhirra
Masturbation, Guddhu-guddhum-
badhurri
Venereal, Kauaira
Natural Objects.
Sun, Dhuri
Moon, Gian
Stars, Mirrih
Small hill, Gumbugun
Open plain, Bulla
Scrubby place, Mirdi
A live coal, Giirniin
Thunder, Yandibu
Lightning, Wung-in
Pleiades, Kumbul-Kumbul
Venus, Tharda
Hill, Bulguru


Rain, Burdu
Fire, Wi
Rainbow, Gurierrina
Hut, Gurli
Dew, Dhulle
Camp, Ngura
Fog, Guguma
Smoke, T'huran
Frost, Murnda
Food, animal, Widyi
Hail, Mugari
Food, vegetable, Munnu
Water, Ngubba
Day, Gundargunda
Still water, Burdulngubba
Night, Yurin
Running water, Nguruwrurru
Morning, Burrulla
Ground, Me
Grass, Yaui
Mud, Millin
Leaves of trees, Yirral
A stone, Buggul
Eggs, Kubbn
Sand, Kurrawir or dhirri
Honey, Wean
Darkness, Yurin
Pathway, Kai
Heat, Burriu
Shadow of tree, Kuliguli
Cold, Murndamiu
Shadow of man, Kummunggurra
Tears, Ngulgun
Red ochre, Gudhi
Perspiration, Niindur
Pipe clay, Muggiindhurra
Animals.—
-Mammals.
Wild dog, Yugi
Padamelon, Duggun
Dog, Gundul
Bandicoot, Geala
Opossum, Kugai
Kangaroo, Gula
Kangaroo-rat, Boi, or bilba
Porcupine, Kuggara
Native-cat, Burbur
Water-rat, Widdyi-ngubba *
Animals.-
—Birds.
Natural Objects— Continued
Large fish-hawk, Kwiadhuna
Peewee, Burandalla
Common magpie, Gulbu
Curlew, Wilu
Crane, Gurraga
Small crane, Budhul
Galah, Grilla
Crow, Wagun
Laughing jackass*, Kuguburra
Native companion, Gururu
Black duck, Gundungal
Swan, Burrema
Emu, Ngurun
Pelican, T'hulaida
Eaglehawk, Kurra
Cod, Gudu
Black bream, Bunngulla
Yellow-belly, Kawira
Animals. —Fishes.
Bony bream, Pirngi
Cat-fish, Thunggur
All small fish, Kidyeraguya
Animals.— Reptiles.
Death-adder, Kundage
Black snake, Bumburra
Water snake, Baiara
Turtle, Waiamba
Ground iguana, Buma
Shingle-back, Birrira
Carpet snake, Kummul
Brown snake, Kan
Tree iguana, Wurrui


Blow-fly, Mugun
Louse. Muni
Nit of louse, Thinnil
Jumper-ant, Burbi-burbi
Bulldog-ant, Burnmgga
Centipede, Dhuliri
Grasshopper, Bunda-bunda
Any leaning tree, Bundhirri
Any dead tree, Bungiii
Any large tree), Bungil
Sandalwood, Buddhar
Whitewood, Burbul
Myall, Maial
Tomahawk, Wugganhurra
Koolamin, Gulgo
Spear shield, Burgu
Boomerang, Murli
Net bag, Munda
Yamstick, Gunnai
Alive, Kurrin
Dead, Bullibu
Large, T'harda
Small, Kittyu
Tall or long, Burndurra.
Low or short, Urdagamba
Good, Murrin
Bad, Yuralmurra
Thirsty, Burriu-ngubba
Hungry, Kundulmiu
Jealous, Burdhegulindu
Full, Tugu
Quick, Kurdugurdu
Slow, Iba
Blind, Nundun
Deaf, Mugu-binna.
Strong, Murrin
Afraid, Kurraiu
Animals. —Invertebrates.
Shrimp, Tliunul
Common ant, Burra
Mosquito, Born
Scorpion, Guna
Mussel, Thungunna
Crayfish, Mamura
Trees and Plants
Beefwod, Mumbo
Coolaba, Buggura
Gum tree, Guraua
Pine, Bailin
Brigalow, Kulbai
Weapons,, Etc.
Hunting club, Muru
Fish net, Rule
Spear, Gulia
Adjectives.
Right, Kaila
Wrong, Yural
Tired, Mullu
Lean, Munggabulgan
Cold, Mundamiu
Warm, Burri-burriu
Angry, Kuridyurriu
Sleepy, Yumburu
Glad, Murrinyindaiu
Sorry, Millanyurungi
Fighting club, Maimuru
Fighting boomerang, Widdyanur-
Blunt, as an edge, Mugu
Sharp, as an edge, Tirraira
Fat, Thunde
Greedy, Wallungundibungunna
Sick, Marriu
Stinking, Bugabuddhibu
Pregnant, Tuguira


Die, Bullindyira
Eat, Thaddhira
Drink, Ngubba-thaddhira
Sleep, Ngunandhira
Stand, Thinnandhira
Sit, Nia
Talk, Yan
Tell, Thurgurra
Walk, Yandhira
Run, Thunggira
Bring, Thanganga
Take, Mara
Point at, Thumburra
Fill, Kaimburra
Stamp on, Nurrunggunya
Make, Thunnulgu
Break, Dhudhia
Strike or beat, Bundhira
Arise, Dhurria
Fall down, Wurra
Observe, Naga
Hear, Binnambi
Sing, Yiinggi
Weep, Wun-gebu
Cook, as food, Mulguyu
Steal, Ngurba
Request, Ngua
Verbs.
Blow with breath, Bumbira
Climb, Gula
Conceal, Nunbi
Jump, Burbi
Laugh, Kinda
Scratch, Wirrungurra
Forget, Binnayualgui
Send, Dinnamara
Shine, Bullanbi
Suck a wound, Bindyaui
Swim, Banggi
Search for, Wurrawa
Spit, Kanggul
Smell, Buddhe
Throw, Kurrawirra
Hit by throwing, Bungirra
Whistle, Kui
Pretend, Middyin
Kiss, Mudhil
Vomit, Muralli
Dance, Burbiddyera-Kirrira, li
erally to jump about
Dive, Kaindyera
Chop (with axe) Burira
Sting, Bingga
Suck, as a child, Ngummadha-
dhira
