

THE
MEADMORE-MODEL
ENGINEERING
CO.
v SCALE MODELS'"
OF ALL VARIETIES
PRICE 2/6


The
Meadmore Model
Engineering Company
“Drive Your Own Locomotive!”
(Telephone:
TP 1723
(Telegrams
Meadmore, Burroood. Uic.
Corner Boundary Road and Morey Street,
Buncoed, Uic. [Opp Burroood Boys’ Home]


ADDITIONS AND RECTIFICATIONS.
Page 16.—An additional “Model Engineer” 1/- Handbook will-be
available, dealing with Time-Table Running, etc., entitled,
“WORKING MODEL RAILWAYS.”
The title of W. J. Bassett-Lowke’s 4/6 book is “THE MODEL
RAILWAY HANDBOOK.”
Page 17.—Henry Greenly’s works, “Model Railways” and “Model
Electric Locomotives and Railways,” are 8/6 each.
Page 27.—SQUARE TAR WAGON. The words “OR ROUND OIL
TANK WAGON” should be struck out.
Page 28.—The Leeds Model Covered Goods Wagon, at 8/-, is 1J inch
gauge. Gauge is always measured INSIDE, BETWEEN the rails.
Page 37. —COUNTRY STATION at 47/6 is 34, not 43 inches, long.
Page 43. —All prices are PER BOGIE.
Page 44—MODEL STATION ACCESSORIES include a Weighing
Machine, not mentioned in the printed matter.
Page 50. —No. 604/3 should read PER BOGIE instead of EACH SET.
Page 57.—Price of Finished Engine, 1 in. x 1 in., is £l2/12/-.
Page 61. —“Simplex” Machined Set, £l/9/6, should read £l/19/6.
Page 65. —The list of castings and sundries given is, of course, only
a TYPICAL list, as the parts supplied naturally vary with each
particular engine set.
Page 66—Add STUART SPIRIT BURNERS for Horizontal and
Marine Boilers:—Single burner vaporising lamp, 10/6; Duplex
vaporising lamp, 16/6.
Page 70. —The Machined Set for the Petrol Motor includes finished
carburettor and firing gear with iridium points. Drilling and
tapping all holes in the machined set is £1 extra.
Page 76. —REAL SPRING BUFFERS. Prices quoted are for round
heads. Oval-headed spring buffers are 6d. each extra in each
gauge.
Price 77. —Drawing No. Ll 5 should read H 6.
Drawing No. Lll, 4-4-0, should read 4-6-0.
Drawings No. Lll and El2O, 2/- each, should read 2/6 each.
Page 78.—Prices of Locomotive Drawings do not include tenders.
Tender drawings are 1/6 each for IS in. gauge.
Page 79.—Prices of Locomotive Drawings do not include tenders.
Tender drawings are 2/- each for 2i in. gauge.
Drawings No. JR3OO now consist of 10, not 13 sheets. Separate
drawings may be purchased from these sets. Prices on applica-
tion.
NOTE.—We have other fittings for engines and boilers as well
as those listed, and can supply all fittings in larger sizes if required.


Realism in Miniature.
Introduction
II N presenting this booklet, we desire to invite your attention to
the fact that the Models illustrated and described herein are
built accurately to the design of their prototypes by experienced
engineers, and are all-British in character.
Our object is to introduce to you Models which are such an exact
reproduction of the huge machines of which they are miniatures, that
•only an expert can distinguish, from an untouched photograph, whether
it is a Model or “The Real Thing.” They are thoroughly sound in
every way, absolutely safe and guaranteed. These Models combine
two essential characteristics. On the one hand, fidelity in externa!
appearance to a definite prototype, and on the other, a real ability to
WORK.
We have secured the sole agency for introducing the famous
working scale models manufactured by the principal model makers of
the world. The firms we represent make engineering models for the
British Admiralty and the principal railway companies of England.
The importation of these Models is unique in the history of the
Commonwealth. Their construction is a science in itself, for not only
must the individual parts be accurate, but the character surrounding
the Model must be like unto the original when the whole reproduction
has been completed.
3
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
‘.Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys' Home, Melb., Vic.


Hitherto, tinplate toys (resembling nothing on earth in the loco-
motive line) have been offered for sale in Australia. Usually their
mechanism was of the kind that propelled the engine once or twice
around its circle of tin rails, and whose mainspring broke at every
fourth winding or so. Our aim is to eradicate such unsatisfactory
types and to offer you Working Scale Model Steam, Electric and
Clockwork Locomotives of real educational value. From an instructive
and realistic viewpoint our Models are unapproachable. The faithful
reproduction of a wealth of detail has caused the very look of them
to thrill even grown men, while they are fine powerful Models, capable
of hauling heavy loads for long periods with ease.
We invite you to compare our Models with the previous type of
so-called “Models,” which have but a very short lease of life, even in
the hands of a careful user. Being built of steel, brass and copper,
our Models are not toys, but are sound, practical machines, faithfully
reproducing all the character of the originals. The Models are built
by skilled craftsmen, who are as enthusiastic model engineers as the
ultimate proud owners of the iron steeds they build. With craftsmen
who love their work, best results obtain (when the necessary practical
experience is also present) so while our Models may be more expensive
than tinplate toys, our clients can rest assured they have been built
TO LAST, and are perfect in every detail.
“All works of taste must bear a price in proportion to the
skill, taste, time, expense and risk attending their manufacture.
Those things called dear are, when JUSTLY estimated, the
cheapest.”—,
John Ruskin.
None are too old to fall under the spell!
4
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Harwood* opp. Harwood Hoys* Home, Melb., Vic.


Our Model Works are equipped with every requisite for the
accurate construction and repair of all classes of Models, from
passenger-carrying locomotives down to the smallest detail of model
railway equipment, and clients can be assured that our lengthy and
varied experience is always at their service. We are at all times able
to bring the most expert knowledge to bear in all descriptions of
model engineering work, both in design and manufacture, and we
solicit inquiries in any special problem connected therewith.
We have pioneered the importation into Australia of solid brass
vignol or flat-bottomed rail, which is the most perfect model railway
track yet invented. This model rail will withstand the weight of an
adult jumping on it without doing it the slightest harm. It is im-
mensely superior to tinplate rail and the so-called “rustless” steel rail,
as it is not only very strong, but it is also a splendid conductor of
electricity. It is therefore equally suitable for steam, clockwork, or
electric locomotives. This track should always be used for a permanent
model railway out of doors, and is infinitely preferable for indoor use,
as on this track the engines run better and faster, pull heavier loads,
and do not so easily jump the rails. Points, crossovers, etc, can be
supplied in this solid brass rail, which in appearance or service cannot
be surpassed.
As in the case of full-size railways, the track used on model rail-
ways is most important. The small scale permanent way manufactured
by our English principals is perfectly straight and free from twists,
and is easily bent to form curves. The points and crossovers are
accurately made in jigs, and all parts liable to breakage are brazed
together. The movable switch is pivoted, consequently the switch
rails are not always in stress, and the points can be moved from long
distances with minimum effort. These points will last a lifetime without
Oiling Up the Limited Mail.
5
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Ed. and Morey St., Burwiiod. ogp. Bjrwood Boys’ Home, Melh., Vic.


failure, and we can honestly claim that nothing approaching them has
ever been seen here.
Model railway owners have been familiar for many years with
the printed tinplate rolling stock. There has always been a demand
for a wooden waggon that would more accurately represent its proto-
type, and which would run smoothly and without rattle. We are able
to offer you waggons which are in every sense best-class scale models.
The bodies are of hardwood, lined out to represent planking and other
details. The wheels are turned cast iron, forced on to steel axles
running in anti-friction axle-boxes. Scale hooks and chains are fitted,
springs, buffers and truss rods. These Models are THE REAL THING
in miniature, and are thoroughly recommended as smooth, quiet-running
vehicles.
We feel justified in claiming that our corridor, dining, and Pullman
cars are the last word in scale model coaches. The construction of
these Models closely follows actual practice, and all materials used are
carefully selected for the purpose. The bodies, underframes, etc., are
of hardwood, interlocked and pinned together, while the windows are
properly glazed with thin glass. The painting and lettering is of the
highest order, and their appearance attains a very high standard of
fidelity to the full-size coaches.
Our signals are perfect in every detail, and represent the latest
standard railway companies practices. All patterns are fitted with
proper transparent colored spectacles, side crank-rods, and weights.
The manner in which these signals perform their various functions is
most realistic, and leaves nothing to be desired.
The Fascination of Model Railways.
6
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Bnrwood Boys' Home, Melb., Vic.


We are in a position to supply electrically-operated colored light
signals, which represent the very latest practice of the railway com-
panies. These hooded signals add tremendously to the fascination of
the night working of model railways. They are pre-eminently suited
to the popular 1 4 inch gauge model railwayman. As in the original,
the lights are sharp and clear, the hoods making their message distinct
even in the face of brightest sunshine. At present we can only supply
single signals fitted with red and green lights, but shortly we hope to
be in a position to supoly bracket signals, signal box switch gear and
point motors, which will add still further fascination to this phase of
model railway working.
On a model railway, signalling is an essential feature if absolute
realism is desired. The completeness and accuracy with which the
line is signalled depends upon the ideas of the owner, but we feel
confident that our finished models and parts will enable the most
elaborate scheme to be realised.
We shall be pleased to give special quotations for a large number
of signals ordered at the same time and to give advice as to the signal-
ling of our clients’ lines.
There are probably but few of us who could deny having ex-
perienced (in early years) a burning desire to be an engine-driver.
These longings were stirred by the sight of the engineer of some mighty
modern locomotive, hand on regulator and eyes all attention on the
steel road ahead of him, taking a crack express with its precious freight
out of the terminus on a non-stop run of a hundred miles or more.
Or it may be we have stood on the platform of a wayside station,
expectant as the first note of the Limited was heard in the far distance,
and then how we thrilled as the majestic mass of burnished iron and
Impatient to be off.
7
ME ADM ORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Harwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melh., Vic.


steel thundered by—some five hundred tons of locomotive and train—
at more than a mile a minute—and in little more than a moment,
vanished from sight and hearing.
At such a time, perhaps one’s uppermost feeling is of pride—
pride in the consciousness that the huge machine is under the complete
and absolute control of ONE MAN. And if the wish to be an engine-
driver is not quite so strong “in boys of larger growth,” nearly everyone
has wished for a ride on the footplate of an express engine. There is
something infinitely attractive about the steam locomotive—an attrac-
tion, indeed, which in the case of most of us does not grow less as
the years advance. This, if the greatest, is but one of the many-sided
fascination of the railway.
All the features which help to make for fascination in the full-
size railway are capable of reproduction in miniature. Herein lies the
peculiar attraction of running model locomotives and the operation of
a miniature railway, which we believe to be the finest of all hobbies.
We succumb to the fascination of the model railway in various ways.
In some cases it is the locomotive which appeals, and in others the
completeness of the whole system, with its miniature express, passenger
and goods trains, fully signalled stations, marshalling yards, and all
the other paraphernalia of railway operation, which may be worked
out on a small scale.
So the wooden or tin engine of the earliest days, trailing on a
string behind its tireless owner, gives place as the years go by to the
scale model, correct in every external detail. Our models are something
definitely educational, encourage powers of observation, present oppor-
tunities for experiment, and bring out the best qualities of initiative and
resource. For the mechanically-minded man or boy a model railway
is the finest combined amusement and education it would be possible
to conceive.
A Realistic 1¼ in. Gauge Model Railway.
8
Comer Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Bnrwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home, Melb., Vic-


Choosing the right gauge for a miniature railway is a vital matter.
The chief considerations in making the choice are the amount of space
you have available for laying the railway and the price you are willing
to pay for its equipment. Space regulates gauge; gauge limits size,
and size governs cost.
To enable the goods we sell to come within the reach of those
who only wish to spend a moderate amount on their hobby, and also
to meet the demand of the model railway owner or model engineer
for the very best, we have a range of models surpassing anything
previously seen in this country.
We stock various qualities of Models of all kinds, marine,
stationary and locomotive engines, carriages, goods waggons, signals,
turntables, bridges, stations, engine sheds, signal boxes, etc., etc.,
steamers, yachts, battleships, boilers, dynamos, motors, centrifugal
pumps, engine and boiler fittings, working drawings, machined parts and
castings, bolts, nuts, screws, rivets, etc., etc.
We desire also to invite your attention to our sets of machined
parts for building model steam marine and stationary engines. To
the model engineer who desires an interesting and instructive course
of engineering construction in his evenings, we most strongly recom-
mend these sets of machined parts. The sets have been made up by
our English principals for the convenience of clients who wish to
assemble their own engines without having to purchase a lathe or
expensive tools. Drawings are complete with each set, together with
all screws and sundries. The parts are so arranged that an amateur
cannot fail to successfully build a practical working model. The only
work necessary to complete the model can be executed with simple
An Electrically Operated Model Railway.
9
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Bur wood Boys* Home, Melb.. Vic,


hand tools. The building of a model engine from these sets of parts
will be found a most fascinating pastime, and on completing his work
the builder will have gained a very considerable knowledge of the
working of a steam engine, and will possess a really efficient model.
Clockwork as the source of motion may at first thought seem
somewhat dull. You may possibly conjure up visions of the weird four-
wheeled machines exhibited in the average toy-shop window, of which
the leading external feature appears to be a massive key, projecting
permanently from a point somewhere in the middle of the boiler. But
such examples of so-called modelling as these belong properly to two
or three decades ago. Our miniature locomotives have powerful spring
motor mechanisms which are capable of driving the engines for very
considerable distances. They are fitted with governors giving two
speeds, and preventing the mechanism from racing when fully wound,
and they can be started, stopped and reversed from the track, without
being touched by hand. Among the great advantages of clockwork
mechanisms is that they are always instantly ready for use. Further,
the perfect regularity resulting from the use of clockwork makes it
possible, with a “stud” of clockwork locomotives, to run a miniature
train service accurately to a time-table, adding considerable interest to
the working of the railway, and added educational value, as compared
with the mere haphazard running of trains.
All the advantages of clockwork propulsion are at the command
of the model railway owner who uses electricity as his prime mover.
By the use of suitable electric reversing switches, the locomotive may
be started or stopped and reversed at any point of its journey, and
with the aid of specially designed couplings, all the work of shunting
and marshalling may be smartly carried out in a most realistic way.
The locomotives themselves are precisely the same in design as the
clockwork engines just previously referred to, with the sole exception
that an electric motor replaces the clockwork motor. Current is picked
up from an electrically charged centre rail. For the benefit of the
A Model Steam Passenger Train.
10
MI-.ADMOKK MODKL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Kd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home. Melh., Vie.


nervous it may be added that the construction of these electric loco-
motives and equipment precludes absolutely any risk of fire or shock.
These engines can be thoroughly relied upon for constant running
over many years.
But in all probability, it is the steam locomotive that makes the
greatest appeal. It is natural that it should be so, because it is the
nearest possible approach to the original. Steam is supreme in the
realism it imparts to the model line, as without the familiar “beat” of
the engine, a model railway is but half complete. There is something
indefinably thrilling about the preparation for running—the filling of
the boiler, the attention to the fire, oiling up, the tense waiting till a
clear blast from the whistle, or the pressure gauge in the cab denotes
that steam “is up,” and then, the opening of the regulator. The thrill
of seeing your locomotive start away under her own steam is something
which must be felt to be appreciated.
Our model steam locomotives fall into two main divisions. The
smaller and less expensive are designed for clients who wish to operate
an indoor or out-of-doors model line which reproduces in miniature all
the characteristics of the full-size railway, and where hauling capacity,
non-stop records on a given amount of water and fuel, and such
achievements may be studied. The thrill of the steam-driven model
only reaches its maximum expression when it sets out to pull its owner
and his friends, and this is possible with our larger locomotives. We
guarantee our 2\ in. gauge locomotives to haul two children, and
our 5 in. gauge locomotives will haul several adults with perfect ease
and safety. These garden railway locomotives will all work satis-
factorily in any weather. Nature may be pressed into service to provide
Interest your son in engineering.
11
MEADMOKE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey SI Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home, Melb., VkT


cuttings and embankments, tunnelling and bridging may be indulged
in with realistic and spectacular effect; indeed, there is no reason why
a miniature railway should not be made attractive and quite an
interesting acquisition to any garden.
Owing to the increased cost and value of the larger sizes of steam
locomotive, on which the owner rides, it is impossible, under present
conditions, to stock innumerable types, but we will be pleased to quote
for any type of outdoor model steam locomotive in any gauge up to
15 inches. It will be understood that our 15 inch gauge locomotives
(one-quarter full size) are powerful machines, capable of speeds up
to 35 miles per hour, and of hauling loads up to 20 tons, so we can
certainly claim to provide for every conceivable requirement of the
model railway enthusiast and to cater for every possible range of his
means.
A glance at the specifications given herein will convince you of
our claims as to the excellence of our models and of the sturdiness
of their construction. The boilers of the steam models are guaranteed
absolutely safe to more than three times their working pressure, and
every locomotive sold by us will be thoroughly tested before despatch,
and will be periodically examined free of charge for our clients. Our
engines will serve your son and HIS son and will work all the time if
cared for.
There is nothing to compare with a model railway for keeping
your son in his own home or grounds. It will provide him and his
friends with endless entertainment and amusement of a healthy kind,
while it will teach him as no books can, the principles of the locomotive.
If you become the proud possessor of a garden railway, you will
His heart’s desire.
12
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic.


experience an educational relaxation of a new and novel kind, and it
will undoubtedly be the envy and admiration of all.
Only the extra special quality of our productions and stocks of
English models, coupled with the unequalled service which we give to
all our clients, gives us the confidence that this unique and extensive
catalogue of mode! engineering goods will be greatly appreciated by
all lovers of realistic reproductions in miniature. It is, of course,
impossible for us to give in this catalogue a range of the entire field
of model engineering goods, but as time proceeds extensions will be
made so as to make our catalogue the most comprehensive that has
ever been attempted.
We have made special arrangements to ensure the most rapid
execution of our customers’ requirements. Our business manager and
our mechanical engineers are enthusiastic model railwayman, and clients
can rely on courteous and sympathetic service. Every enquiry for
information or advice will receive our prompt and careful attention,
as we are sincere in our earnest desire to be of real service to you.
Faithfully yours.
13
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic.


Our CTerms, and Hou? to Order
PRICES quoted herein are NET CASH and do not include postage or
freight. To save delay, please remit sufficient to cover expenses,
any balance being invariably returned.
CASH WITH ORDER.—Owing to the small margin of profit on the
goods listed herein, we find it necessary to adhere strictly to the
“CASH WITH ORDER” system.
HOW TO REMlT.—Australia, by cheque, money order, postal notes,
and small amounts by stamps. New Zealand, by money order.
Postal notes and stamps not acceptable from outside Australia.
PACKING. —All goods are packed with great care, and when too heavy
for Parcels Post, are sent per rail, and any claim for damage
must be made direct to the carriers. We obtain a receipt for
every package we deliver to the Post Office or Railways, and
in no case can we accept any claim for loss or damage.
GUARANTEE.—The Company guarantees that all precautions that are
usual and reasonable have been taken to ensure excellence of
materials and workmanship in engines sold by it. Electrical
apparatus, accessories, etc., are mostly covered by the guarantees
of the respective manufacturers.
MODELS MADE TO ORDER OR SPECIALLY IMPORTED.—A de-
posit of 50% is required on these. Balance to be paid on delivery.
REPAIRS.—Clients sending Models for repairs or alterations, are re-
quested to send same carriage paid, and to put full name and
address inside parcel, otherwise we cannot be held responsible for
loss or delay.
ILLUSTRATIONS in this Catalogue are mostly taken direct from the
Models, but owing to continuous changes and improvements in
design, we cannot guarantee all Models to be identical with the
illustrations.
WHEN ORDERING GOODS, give full particulars, respecting numbers,
prices, etc. If any doubt, give number of page as well.
SUBSTITUTIONS.—Our range of Models being so large, and the
variety so great, if it should so happen that we are out of stock,
clients will greatly oblige by indicating whether we may substitute
the nearest to the article selected.
QUESTIONS of a technical nature should be sent on a separate slip.
This will enable us to deal promptly with correspondence. The
courtesy of enclosing a stamp for reply will be appreciated.
GOODS NOT LlSTED.—Prices for Model Goods not listed herein will
be quoted for on application.
14
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Harwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home, Mclh'. Vic.


Scale Model Sheets
SHOWING THE GROWTH OF L.N.E.R. LOCOMOTIVES DURING
ONE HUNDRED YEARS
A set of model parts to scale has been recently issued by The
Locomotive Publishing Company of England to illustrate the develop-
ment of the steam locomotive during the past century.
The sheets are of thin cardboard, and arranged to be cut out to
make models of the two locomotives—the London and North-Eastern
Railway Company’s “FLYING SCOTSMAN, 1924,” and the Stockton
and Darlington Railway Company’s “LOCOMOTION, 1825.”
The models are in the correct scale and colors, and make a splendid
comparison.
Price for the double set, 1/6.
A companion set of model parts to scale, showing the growth of
the L.N.E.R. PASSENGER CARRIAGES during 100 years, has been
issued, also by The Locmotive Publishing Company.
Price for this double set, 1/6.
Locomotive Charts
Sectional scale drawings in relief, showing all details, have been
issued by The Locomotive Publishing Company, England. These re-
markable colored charts measure 22 inches by 34 inches, and show
-absolutely every part numbered and named. Price, each, 3/-.
The following engines are included in the series;—
15
MEADMORE MODEL CO.
Corner Boundary Road and Morey Street, Burwood, Opposite Burwood Boys* Home


Model Engineer Handbooks
A. unique series of inexpensive handbooks on models and kindred
subjects. Each has been written by an expert in his section, and
contains practical information in a concise and readable form. Well
illustrated with line drawings, etc.
SOLDERING, BRAZING, and the Joining of Metals. Price, 17-
SMALL ACCUMULATORS;: How to make and use them. Price, 17-
MODEL BOILER MAKING: Contains the latest information on the
design and construction of all types of boilers. Price, 17-
METAL WORKING TOOLS AND THEIR USES; A handy hand-
book Price, 17-
SMALL ELECTRIC MOTORS: How to make and use them. Price, 17-
MILLING IN SMALL LATHES: How to do it successfully. Price, 17-
MECHANICAL DRAWING: Every model engineer should be able to
both read and make mechanical drawings. Learn how. Price, 17-
MODEL STEAM ENGINES: By Henry Greenly. Well illustrated. A
book for all who make or possess model steam engines. Price, 17-
THE LOCOMOTIVE: A well illustrated book which thoroughly ex-
plains the principles of loco construction and design. Price, 17-
MODEL STEAMER BUILDING: Contains full instructions for build-
ing hulls, model steamers, torpedo destroyers, paddle steamers,
and various deck fittings Price, 17-
MODEL STEAM TURBINES; How to design and build them. The
turbine has a lot to recommend it. Read why Price, 17-
MACHINERY FOR MODEL STEAMERS: Construction of engines,
boilers, etc Price, 17-
A book that should be read by all intending purchasers of model
locomotives, etc. By W. J. BassettLowke, M.lnst.L.E. It is a hand-
book containing 130 pages and over 200 illustrations.
Contents:
Chapter I.—Choice of scale and gauge of railway. Chapter ll.
Clockwork locomotives. Chapter lll.—The design and construction of
steam locomotive models. Chapter IV. —The steam locomotive (con-
tinued). Chapter V.—Electric locomotives. Chapter Vl.—Practical
hints on manipulating model locomotives. Chapter Vll.—Tinplate
rails; standard rail dimensions. Chapter VIII.—“Lowko” track.
Chapter IX.—Scale model permanent way. Chapter X.—Railway
planning. Chapter XI. —Model signals and signalling. Chapter XII.—
Model rolling stock. Chapter Xlll.—Model railway buildings and
accessories.
Price, 4/6.
16
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic,


Useful Gift Books
By HENRY GREENLY
England’s Foremost Model Engineer.
MODEL ENGINERING: The finest published work of its kind. A
complete guide to model workshop practice. Beautifully illus-
trated with 85 actual photographs and 724 line drawings. It
deals thoroughly with various processes and engineering move-
ments. Constructional details are given of a 1 in. x 1 in. vertical
high-speed steam engine, a high-speed compound condensing
engine and coil boiler, a J in. scale model steam locomotive and
various steam and electric working models. Price, 12/6-
MODEL RAILWAYS: A thoroughly practical work, containing 39it
photographs, diagrams and working drawings. This book deals
exhaustively with the planning of indoor and outdoor model
railways, including public miniature railways, points and cross-
ings, interlocking signals, bridges, station buildings, locomotive
sheds and model rolling stock.
MODEL STEAM LOCOMOTIVES: The contents of this book deal
with the choice of scale and type in addition to details of the
design and construction. Every portion of model locomotives is
thoroughly dealt with—Frames, Axle-boxes, Springs, Crank-axles,
Bogies, Valve Gearing, Cylinders, Reversing, Boiler Construction-
Fittings, etc. 376 photographs, diagrams and working drawings.
Price, 8/6.
MODEL ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES AND RAILWAYS: The book
for those interested in electric locomotives. Gives various types,
explains working principles, deals thoroughly with the design of
electric motors for traction purposes, and the transmission of
power +o the wheels. Overhead bows, track bonding, controls
and equipment are all fully dealt with. 326 photographs, dia-
grams, and working drawings.
17
MKAPMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic.


Shunting Tank Locomotive
m
For many years the Atlas Locomotive Works, Bristol (Eng.) have
"been turning out locomotives for light work similar to our model.
The short wheelbase is favored more than any other in the design of
English shunting locomotives, as they will traverse sharp curves with
remarkable ease. Owing to limitation of space, we cannot illustrate
and give full specifications of all the shunting locomotives stocked by
ns, but we give below an abridged description of each type, with
power units and prices.
CLOCKWORK.—Reversing from cab or track. Sturdily constructed for hard wear.
If in. gauge. in. long .. .. .. .. . . PRICE £0 17 6
ELECTRlC.—Reversing by hand or automatically from track. Good value. If In.
gauge. 6f in. long .. .. .. , . ~ . . .. . . PRICE £l5 0
CLOCKWORK. —Six coupled wheels. Brake and reverse operated from cab or auto-
matically from track. Tremendously powerful governed motor. Two-speed gear.
Will haul 20 cars. A wonder loco.
If in. gauge, 9 in. long .. .. PRICE £2 17 6
If in. gauge, 12 in. long PRICE £5 17 6
STEAM.—lllustrated above. Slide valve cylinders. Reverses from track or cab.
Vaporising spirit lamp. Lubricator in smoke-box, the door of which is made
to open. A Bassett-Lowke built locomotive.
If in. gauge. 8 in. long PRICE £3 7 6
If in. gauge. 10| in. long PRICE £6 17 6
18
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
■Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home, Melh., Vic.


Scale Model Clockwork or Electric
4-4-0 Express Locomotive and Tender
On her trials the subject of our model worked a train of over
400 tons weight from Euston to Crewe (England) at an average speed
of over 60 miles per hour. These fine engines still take their turns
on the best trains with the more powerful 4-6-0 class locomotives,
and acquit themselves very creditably. Model railway owners who
require a really first-class locomotive with good outlines will find'
this engine answers their requirements. It follows the type and wheel
arrangement of a locomotive famous for the hard work it has done.
The model can be supplied powered by clockwork or electricity. These
English models are made by Bassett-Lowke Ltd.
FRAMES.—Pressed from lithographed steel plate.
TENDER. —Standard pattern, running on six scale wheels.
CLOCKWORK.—First quality, four-coupled, powerful clockwork mechanism, fitted 1
with governors, reversing motion, and brake operated from rail or cab. In
addition to this, the mechanism is completely automatic, and in conjunction
with the special starting and brake rail, the locomotive can be started, stopped -
or reversed, WITHOUT BEING TOUCHED BY HAND.
ELECTRlC.—Permanent magnet motor. Can be automatically reversed from the
track. Special alloy magnet of almost everlasting permanency. Solidly built
up commutator. Bronze bearings. Voltage, 4 to 8.
We can supply a complete model express train set, consisting of
a clockwork express locomotive and tender described above, two
eight-wheeled (bogie) passenger carriages, complete oval railway
4 ft. by 6 ft. 6 in,, including special starting brake and reverse rail,
1| in. gauge, in attractive box, for £4/12/6.
Other high-grade clockwork train sets, 35/- and 72/6.
SPECIFICATION:
PRICES OF LOCOMOTIVES:
No. 61/4710/0. Clockwork. 1J in. gauge. Length, 15 inches
No. 61/BL/O. Electric, in. gauge. Length. 15 inches
No. 61/4710/1. Clockwork, 1| in. gauge. Length, 22 inches
No. 61/BL/l. Electric, If in. gauge. Length, 22 inches
£2 2 O'
£2 17 6
P 6 6 O’
£7 17 G
19
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Harwood, opp. Bar wood Boys’ Home, Melb., Vic.


Steam Model Contractors' or Light
Railway Locomotive
iw
Mi
r
k.
This is without a doubt the finest steam model locomotive pro-
curable at the price. The frames are steel plate. The fixed double-
action cylinders have stainless steel piston valves. The connecting
and coupling rods are brass, nickel-plated. The strong brass boiler
is fired by a vaporising spirit lamp with capacity for long run. A
safety valve and steam whistle are fitted. The steam displacement
lubricator is in the smoke-box. The small model has slip eccentric
reversing gear, while the li in. gauge model has Stephenson’s link
motion reversing gear. Sold elsewhere at double our prices.
Ko. 6460/0. Ii in. gauge. 14 s n. long PRICE £3 12 6
No. 6460/1. If in. gauge. 19| in. long .. .. .. PRICE £7 10 0
In addition to the above remarkably low-priced steam locomotives,
we can supply a complete model steam train set, consisting of power-
ful locomotive (oscillating cylinders), tender, two carriages, and brake
van, eight curved and four straight rails, 1J in. gauge, length of
complete train 33| in. Packed in attractive box. Price, £4/17/6.
We can supply a complete set of Castings, Parts, Screws, etc.,
for the construction of an inside single-cylindered 0-4-0 type 1| inch
gauge, internally fired steam locomotive, incorporating finished
coupling rods, finished crankshaft, finished wheels, finished eccentric
and strap, and finished axle bushes, boiler, tube, and plate material.
Full instructions and working drawings Price, £3 17 6
20
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home, Melb., Vic.


Steam Model
4-4-0 Type Express Locomotive
If
otk
«
1 v-
This is a steam model locomotive which we can thoroughly
recommend for those whose space is limited, and who require a
serviceable steam locomotive of express type with good hauling
capacity and scale appearance for a moderate outlay.
The model is conceived on massive lines, and has a general family
likeness to many of the 4-4-0 locomotives of recent times on British
railways. Enthusiasts who require a really efficient express engine,
capable of traversing short radius curves with ease, will welcome the
introduction of this cheap steam model express locomotive.
SPECIFICATION:
FRAMES.—Of steel plate, with foot-plating, splashers and buffer beams of similar
material.
WHEELS.—ScaIe model, cast iron, mounted on steel axles.
BOILER.—Brass, with large water capacity for long run. Vaporising spirit lamp
and steam superheater.
CYLINDERS AND MOTION.—Standard piston valve cylinders, reversing by lever
in the cab. Steam exhausted through chimney. Thoroughly efficient lubrication
system employed.
FITTINGS.—Safety valve, handrails, vacuum brake pipe, try cock, buffers, head-
lamps, etc. Bell whistle, water-gauge and regulator in in. gauge model.
TENDER.—Of standard pattern, on six scale wheels.
PRICES:
No. 61/250/0. in. gauge. I4J in. long £4 17 6
No. E 4021. If in. gauge 22 in. long. Internally fired. A powerful and
handsome model £l2 12 0
NOTE.—We can also supply steam models of the “Atlantic” 4-4-2
type express locomotive. These models can be reversed from the
track or cab, and are internally-fired, powerful machines.
No. CE/4020. inch gauge. 16£ inches long PRICE £7 7 0
No. CE/4021. 1| inch gauge. 24 inches long PRICE £l4 14 0
21
Corner Boundary Road and Morey Street, Burwood, Opposite Burwood Boys' Home


Electric Scale Model 4-4-2 Type
*
I J ■
The above locomotive is admirably suited for working the short
distance suburban services of a miniature railway. These handsome
engines have never been surpassed for symmetry of outline among
British tank locomotive designs. British models made by Bassett-
Lowke Ltd.
Goods Locomotive and Tender
■Ms*aak
The model is actually far superior to the illustration (no photo-
graph of the model being available at time of going to press) and'
has been copied by British manufacturers from the famous six-coupled
fast goods locomotives of the Caledonian Railway. All the outstanding,
features of this very serviceable class have been faithfully repro-
duced.
SPECIFICATION OF EITHER MODEL:
FRAMES.—Best quality tinned steel plate. Footplate, Splashers, Buffer-beams, etc.-,,
of similar material.
WHEELS.—Turned cast iron on steel axles and securely fastened. Dull nickel treads..
MOTOR.—Permanent magnet. Automatic reversing. Solidly built up commutator.
Special alloy magnet of almost everlasting permanency. Standard winding for
6-10 volts.
DETAILS. —Steps, handrails, brake pipes, lamps, etc. The goods locomotive has a
six-wheeled tender fitted with spring coupling to locomotive, die-cast tender
axle-boxes, springs, water-tank fillers, etc., etc.
PRICES:
No. 2/BL/O. Tank Locomotive. 11 in. gauge. Length. 11 inches .. .. £5 12 6
No. 2/BL/l. Tank Locomotive. TJ in. gauge. Length, 35£ inches .. £ll 11 0,
No. LO/358. Goods Locomotive. in. gauge. Length, 15 inches .. .. £7 12 6
NOTE.—We can also supply either model powered by clockwork.
22
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St.. Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic..


Scale Model Steam or Electric
2-6-0 “Mogul” Mixed Traffic
Locomotive and Tender
3
m
m
mm
Hundreds of these striking locomotives are now at work in
England on almost every variety of train, express and slow passenger,
and fast and slow freight alike. On the express passenger runs they
have shown themselves capable of speeds up to 77 miles per hour,
while in the haulage of heavy express goods trains they have estab-
lished a world’s record for fast freight train operation. These are
English-built models by Bassett-Lowke Ltd., and can be supplied
powered by electricity or steam, at the same price.
SPECIFICATION:
FRAMES.—Tinned steel plate. Foot-plate, buffer-beams, etc., of similar material.
WHEELS. —Modern locomotive design with proper crescent-shaped balance weights.
Made in cast iron with turned treads and tyres, finished in dull nickel. Wheels
secured to steel axles by lock-nuts.
TENDER.—Fitted with 6 scale wheels, finished dull nickel. Cast dummy springs
to axle-boxes.
ELECTRIC MODEL.—Specially designed motor with permanent magnet of almost
everlasting permanency. Commutator of built-up type. Bronze bearings. Motor
geared to driving axles by four-threaded worm. Voltage 8 to 10.
STEAM MODEL. —Solid brass boiler with copper steam pipes. Tested to 45 lbs.
per sq. in. Vaporising spirit lamp Fixed double-action cylinders with stainless
steel piston valves. Greenly-Walschaert valve gear. Reversing gear operated
from cab. Regulator handle protrudes through cab roof. Steam is exhausted
into chimney.. Safety valve and long-handle steam whistle. Automatic steam
cylinder lubricator in smoke-box. The whole of the smoke-box slides off.
exposing lubricator.
No. 6670/0. in. gauge. Length, 18 inches. Steam or electric .. .. £7 17 6
No. 6670/1. 1| in. gauge. Length, 25 inches. Steam or electric .. .. £lB 18 0
NOTE.—We can also supply the li in. gauge model by
clockwork.
23
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home, Melb., Vic.


Scale Model Steam or Electric
4-6-2 “Pacific” Express Locomotive
mm
• a
'■W '
r
0
We are justly proud of this remarkably accurate reproduction
in miniature of England’s latest giant “Pacific” express locomotive.
We claim that these models, which can be supplied powered by either
steam or electricity, represent unparalleled value. The spectacular
performance of these models should ensure them a deservdly popular
reception among model railway enthusiasts.
SPECIFICATION:
FRAMES.—SteeI plate. Superstructures of similar material.
WHEELS—Cast iron, mounted on steel axles. Heavily nickel-plated connecting and
coupling rods.
TENDER—DoubIe bogie, eight-wheeled, with dull nickel treads.
FlTTlNGS—Headlamps, vacuum brake pipes, steps, handrails, spring buffers, etc.
ELECTRlC—Permanent magnet motor, automatically reversing, -with laminated tri-
polar armature. Substantial carbon brushes, solidly built-up commutator.
Adjustable current collectors. Standard winding for 8 volts.
STEAM.—SoIid brass boiler, INTERNALLY FIRED by vaporising spirit lamp,. Fitted
with steam superheater, try-cock, steam whistle, etc. Steam is exhausted Into
chimney. Fixed double-action cylinders with stainless steel piston valves.
Steam displacement lubricator in very accessible position adds to appearance
of loco. Reversing gear operated from lever in cab or automatically from the
track. An efficient safety valve is fitted, and the If in. gauge model has a
water gauge in the cab.
No, BW/1. Steam or electric, li inch gauge, 20 in. long .. PRICE £ll 11 0
No. BW/2. Steam or electric. 1} in. gauge. 26 J in. long .. PRICE £lB 18 9
24
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home, Melb., Vie.


High Pressure, Internally Fired
Steam Locomotives
For those who seek the greatest realism in their model railway,
the internally-fired, high-pressure model offers the nearest approach
to its prototype. Not one] of the English manufacturers will guarantee
their 2J in. gauge engines to haul a human load. The locomotives
we manufacture for 21 in. gauge are not only cheaper than the
English-built engines, but are actually superior thereto, as we
guarantee every locomotive to haul a human load.
High working pressures may safely be maintained with all our
2J and 5 in. gauge locomotives. The boilers are constructed of strong
seamless copper tube with cast gunmetal ends, securely brazed in on
the 2| in. gauge locos., thus forming an almost indestructible cylinder,
while on the 5 in. gauge locos., the boilers are well rivetted and
stayed. All our boilers are guaranteed safe to more than three times
their working pressure. The fire in every case is enclosed, so cannot
blow out even in a gale, when the locomotives are used in exposed
positions, and on garden railways where nature may be pressed into
service to provide cuttings and embankments, and tunnelling and
bridging may be indulged in with realistic and spectacular effect.
SPECIFICATION:
FRAMES. —Planished steel plate. Superstructures of similar material.
WHEELS.—Turned cast iron on steel axles. Spring borne.
CYLINDERS. —Gunmetal, double-acting, with slide valves. The bores are finished
by special machinery, ensuring- absolute parallelism. Connecting and coupling
rods are fluted.
BOILERS.—SoIid-drawn copper, water-tube type, brazed throughout, with super-
heater, tested to 200 lbs. per sq. in., and guaranteed. Firing by kerosene
(L.B.S.C. pattern) silent primus, the fuel being carried in the bunker of the
tank engines, or in the tender of the other locomotives.
FlTTlNGS.—Regulator, pressure gauge, water gauge, steam blower, safety valve,
check valve, and hand feed pump in tender. Reversing gear operated from cab.
NOTE. —The 5 inch gauge locomotives have copper fire-tube
boilers, and are fitted with a first quality injector. Modifications or
additions can be made to suit customers’ own requirements at a
corresponding reduction or increase in price.
WE GUARANTEE OUR 2\ INCH GAUGE LOCOS. TO HAUL TWO
CHILDREN, AND OUR 5 INCH GAUGE LOCOS. TO HAUL A
QUARTER OF A TON.
We are prepared to model any locomotive in the world for any
gauge from 2i in. unwards. Every locomotive is thoroughly tested
before despatch and clients can rely on courteous and sympathetic
service. Prices follow overleaf for several types and sizes of these
extraordinarily efficient locomotives. Prices for other types and sizes
on application.
25
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home, Melb., Vic.


0-6-0 Goods Locomotive
4
a
m
rii
it
&S*
\v
The main idea in designing this locomotive has been to obtain,
the greatest possible hauling power for its size, and at the same time
to keep the price low for a first-class model. It will climb steep
gradients, traverse sharp curves, is of bold design for hard work,
and at the price is unequalled.
2i inch gauge. Length 2 ft. 2 in. Oil fired PRICE £35 0 0
6 inch gauge. Length 4 ft. 2 in. Coal fired PRICE £75 0 0>
We can supply the above loco cheaper in tank engine form if desired.
4-4-2 “ Atlantic” Express Locomotive
-
Jam
it
inch grange. Length 2 ft. 6 in. Cfii fired £4s 0 0
5 inch gauge. Length 4 ft. 6 in. Coal fired PRICE £95 0 O'
4-6-2 Pacific Express Locomotive
Similar to the latest Victorian Express Loco S3OO.
2| inch gauge. Length 2 ft. 9 in. Oil fired PRICE f«5 0 0-
5 inch gauge. Length 5 ft. 1 in. Coal fired PRICE £135 0 0
26
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St.. C-irwood, opp. Barwoocl Boys’ Home. Melb., Vic..


Scale Model Goods Rolling Stock
We offer in these pages a complete range of hand-made first-
quality wagons, constructed of selected hardwood, with metal strap-
pings, corner plates, etc. Cast iron wheels are fitted on steel axles
running in anti-friction metal axle-boxes. Buffers are of solid brass,
and three-link couplings are fitted-. In addition to these high-grade
wagons we can supply the Leeds Model Co.’s wooden open wagon in
11 in. gauge, which has lithographed sides, anti-friction metal wheels,
and axle-guards, white metal buffers and single link couplings. It is
a very big improvement over tinplate toy wagons. The 2i inch
gauge wagons have spring buffers and are spring borne.
HIGH OR LOW-SIDED
OPEN WAGONS.
Essential wagons on any model
railway.
If in. g. Leeds model, low-sided 5/
If in. g., Ist grade mod. low-sided 9/6
If in. g., Ist grade high-sided 12/6
l| in. g., Ist grade low-sided 13/6
If in. g., Ist grade, high-sided 17/6
2J in. g., Ist grade, low-sided 29/6
2f in. g., Ist grade, high-sided 37/6
I .Li . liit 1* - 1..1 1 »
CO
SQUARE TAR WAGON, OR
ROUND OIL TANK WAGON.
Distinctive models, with white
lettering, filler, tie-bars, etc.
U in. g., Ist grade model .. .. 14/-
If in. g., Ist grade model .. .. 19/
2J in. g., Ist grade model . . .. 45/
LIME OR CEMENT WAGON.
A model which cannot be
excelled. Attractively finished.
If in. g., Ist grade model .. .. 14/6
If in. g., Ist £rade mode! .. . . 19/6
2f in. g., Ist grade model .. . . 46/6
OIL TANK WAGON.
A valuable addition to the range
of goods rolling stock on any
model railway system.
If in. g., Ist grade model .. .. 14/6
If in. g., Ist grade model .. .. 19/6
2f in. g., Ist grade model . . . . 49/6
27


SCALE MODEL GOODS ROLLING STOCK (in Wood) continued-
It is presumed the reader has perused the remarks on the previous
page as to the construction of these vehicles. Of the wagons illus-
trated on this page, in addition to the first quality wagons, we can
supply the Leeds Model Co.’s Covered Goods Wagon and Goods Brake
Van at remarkably low prices for wooden rolling stock. Like the
Leeds Open Wagon on previous page, these two cheap vehicles are as
light as tinplate toys, while at the same time they are strong and
extremely light-running wagons.
i
flail
jWlwi
u w
1 *
■
CATTLE WAGON.
A favorite model with enthusiasts,
and an accurate reproduction of the
original.
1£ in. gauge, Ist grade model . . . . 16/-
in. gauge, Ist grade model .. .. 22/6
2| in. gauge, Ist grade model .. .. 52/6
COVERED GOODS OR BOX
WAGON.
A really striking wagon, quite up
to the highest standard of model
work.
1 in. gauge, Leeds model 8/-
li in. gauge, Ist grade model . . . . 16/-
1| in. gauge, Ist grade model .. . . 22/6
2i in. gauge, Ist grade model . . . . 52/6
REFRIGERATOR VANS AND
GUNPOWDER VANS.
We illustrate the white refrigera-
tor van as used for perishable fast
goods traffic. Gunpowder vans are
finished “danger” red.
1$ in. gauge, Ist grade model *.. .. 16/-
1| i*i. gauge, Ist grade model .. .. 22/6
2J in .gauge, Ist grade model . . .. 52/6
GOODS BRAKE VANS.
This model is complete in every
respect. The detail included is re-
markable. All models fitted with
running boards, stove chimney and
projecting guard’s lookout.
Prices for six-wheeled vans on
application.
11 in. gauge. 4 wheel Leeds model .. 11/6
1 i in. gauge, 4 wheel, Ist grade mod. 18/-
1J in. gauge, 4 wheel, Ist grade mod. 25/-
2i in. gauge, 4 wheel. Ist grade mod. 60/-
28
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Bur wood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic.


Scale Model Goods Rolling Stock
One or two of these wagons are a necessity on any model railway,,
and are interesting additions to the rolling stock. Constructed of best
quality seasoned hardwood, hand-painted and lettered, with real metal
strappings on which bolt-heads are raised. Mounted on fully com-
pensated brass frame bogies with cast iron wheels on steel axles.
Brass buffers and three-link couplings. Very attractive appearance
when attached to a fast freight.
men
c \i’ \( ri
bocii:
OI'KN \Co\
r,o(, n;
on. w
WBk
BPs|pss
iLJ_i_LJ.
O
>i \i;
\ \ n
i; \n.
nocii’.
\(.ov
nidi
( M’M ITY
COV Kill®
OK I’.ov
nodi;
\\ \(iON
HIGH CAPACITY OPEN BOGIE WAGON I 1J i n . gauge,
BOGIE OIL WAGON I If in. gauge,
BAK AND RAIL BOGIE WAGON 2| in. gauge,
HIGH CAPACITY BOX BOGIE WAGON :J in. gauge
This model is fitted with four doors to I If in. gauge
slide open. j 2i in. gauge
either wagon
either wagon
either wagon
22/8
32/8
63/-
35/-
45/-
75/-
29
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. ami Morey St., Hurwood. opp. Bnrwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic-


Scale Model Wooden Rolling Stock
II
111
All our carriages are scale models, being as realistic as possible,
■and far better than mere tinplate toys. The above Leeds Model Co.’s
carriage is of wooden construction, with lock-jointed corners and
internal-strengthening pieces, lithographed sides, ends and sole-bars
securely glued in position and varnished to ensure permanency.
Torpedo ventilators are now fitted to the roofs, the bogies have cast
Mansell pattern wheels running in anti-friction metal axle-boxes.
Running boards are fitted, also trus rods, accumulator boxes, oval-
headed buffers and single-link, non-locking couplings. The absence
of rattle and easy running qualities of these wooden coaches are
most noticeable. Torpedo ventilators are now fitted.
No. CO/136. 1| in. gauge only. Length 12J in. Carriage .. .. PRICE 12/6
No. CO/137. li in. gauge only. Length 12J in. Brake Van .. .. PRICE 12/6
Separate Bogies, as fitted to above each 3/6
Bassett-Lowke’s Steel Plate Cars
L-mmmJlL
These vehicles consist of first-class corridor passenger cars and
brake vans. The illustration shows the corridor side of one of the
former, each side being different. The compartment side has 5 doors
and 12 windows. Coloring, same as Australian railways. The door
and window mouldings are embossed to shape. The bogies have
equalised frames and cast Mansell-pattern wheels. Fittings include
gas cylinders or accumulator boxes, under-frame stays, oval-headed
buffers and vestibule corridor connections. These carriages run with
great smoothness over the roughest track. The 1| in. gauge carriages
have seats inside, separate compartments, and doors are made to open.
No. 60/0. 1J in. gauge. Length 13 in. Carriage or Brake Van.. PRICE 23/8
No. 60/1. 1| in. gauge. Length 18 In. Carriage or Brake Van .. PRICE 35/-
Page Thirty


Bassett-Lowke’s Steel Plate
Dining Car
T
No model railway owner who desires realism in the working of
his line can afford to be without a restaurant car as part of his
equipment. This model is of the same construction as those just
described, and except for being slightly shortened to allow the car
to negotiate sharp curves, it is a perfect reproduction to scale.
Colored in keeping with Australian railways, this fine model is carried
on six-wheel bogies.
No. 94/0. I i in. gauge. Length 14 in PRICE, 25/-
No. 94/1. If in. gauge. Length, 21 in PRICE. 35/-
Ssparate Bogies, as fitted to above models—lf in. gauge . , . . PRICE, each 5/*»
If in. gauge . . .. PRICE, each 8/&
Bassett-Lowke’s Steel Plate
Automatic Mail Van
mmmm
■tm
The automatic exchange of mails by express postal trains travel-
ling at speed is a very effective operation on a model railway. The
above van is an accurate model with bag standard and folding net
complete, while the ground apparatus ,which may be fixed wherever
required on the line, is also complete with high vertical standard on
which the mail bags are hung, and the net into which bags are
delivered. As the mail van approathes the ground apparatus at
speed, the van net is automatically extended, collects the bag on the
ground standard, and at the same time delivers its own bag into the
ground net; after which the folding net on the van closes in exactly
the same way as if it were manipulated by a sorter inside the van.
No. 95/0 If inch gauge. Length 12f in PRICE S?/#
If inch gauge. Length 16f in PRICE 52/£
Mail bags are supplied with the above automatic P.O. mail van.
Ground apparatus is illustrated and priced elsewhere in this catalogue.
31
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home, Melb., Vk>


Best Quality “Millbro” Hand Made
Model Wood Pullman Cars, Passenger
Carriages and Dining Saloons
t* : < i » c »■
J.S.ia.SaiS
iMa* ■wsu
These are essentially high-class productions. The seasoned hard-
wood bodies of these models are constructed by a special interlocking
process. They have sunk wooden panels, glass doors and windows,
and mahogany-finished interiors. Exteriors are finished in best pos-
sible coach style, lined in proper colors. Vestibule corridor connec-
tions of real leather are fitted, ventilators, accumulator boxes, under-
frame stays, footboards, oval-headed buffers, etc. Compensated brass
frame bogies are fitted which have cast iron Mansell pattern wheels
secured to steel axles running in gunmetal axle-boxes with springs
cast in relief. These vehicles run smoothly and quietly over the
roughest track with minimum locomotive power, and are, without a
doubt, the finest value ever offered to the public.
PULLMAN CABS
on four-wheel bogies
PASSENGER COACHES
AND BRAKE VANS
on four-wheel bogies
DINING SALOONS
on six-wheel bogies
32
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Bnrwood, opp. Bur'voiid Boys* Home, Mflb., Vic.


FLAT BOTTOMED YIGNOL
SECTION RAIL POINTS.
CROSSOVERS, ETC.
Recognising the demand for a solid brass flat-
bottomed model rail, which will last indefinitely
out-of-doors, and which correctly represents Aus-
tralian practice, while at the same time is a
splendid conductor of electricity, we are stocking
two sizes of an English-made rail, the smaller
suitable for 1J in. and 1| in. gauges, and the
larger for 2J in. gauge and upwards. The larger
of the two sections is suitable for passenger
carrying
RAIL, for in. and 1:1 in. gauge, per 3 ft. .. 1/6
RAIL, for 2| in. gauge and upwards, per 3 ft. .. 1/9
SLEEPERS, 1.1 in. gauge, per 100 57-
SLEEPERS, l : j in. gauge, per 100 6/
SLEEPERS, 21 in. gauge, per 100 7/6
BRASS FISHPLATES, for any gauge, per pair .... 3d.
READY LAID RAILWAY, on battens. 3 ft. straight 6/-
READY LAID RAILWAY, on battern, 3 ft. curved 7/6
READY LAID CENTRE RAIL, for electricity. 3ft. extra 2/6
DIAMOND CROSSING.
I i in. or II in. gauge .. 17/6. 2J in. gauge .. 19/6
POINTS FOR RIGHT OR LEFT-HAND
TURNOUT.
The undermentioned points, etc., are the ONLY
points, etc., to be had in this rail. We make
these to order, so can supply any radius required.
II in. or II in. gauge .. 22/6. 21 in. gauge .. 25/-
H in. or 1J in. gauge 27/6. 2i in. gauge ..30/-
TRAILING OR PACING CROSSOVERS.
Ti in. or II in. gauge . . 45/-. 21 in. gauge .. 50/-
II in. or II in. gauge .. 75/-. 21 in. gauge .. 80/-
11 in. or II in. gauge . . 95/-. 21 in. gauge .. 105/-
NOTE.—Our charge for laying brass centre
rail to any of the above points, crossovers, etc.,
is approximately one-third extra. All above
prices are for solid brass rails well laid on black,
wood sleepers. Locomotives and rolling stock
will negotiate these points, crossovers, etc., at
speed
PARALLEL POINTS.
DOUBLE JUNCTIONS.
SCISSORS CROSSING OR DOUBLE
CROSSOVER.
33
MKAPMOHE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vie.


Prices and Particulars of Bull-Head
Section Rail, etc.
RAIL—
Rustless Steel, for If in. gauge, per yard 7d.
Rustless Steel, for If in. gauge, per yard Bd.
Solid Brass, for If in. gauge, per yard 1/-
Solid Brass, for If in. gauge, per yard .. 1/6
CHAIRS—
Spring Steel, for If in. gauge, per dozen sd.
Spring Steel, for If in. gauge, per dozen 6d.
CHECK RAIL CHAIRS—
Spring Steel, for If in. gauge, per dozen
1/6
SLIDE CHAIRS—
(For Points), for If in. gauge, per pair 3d.
(For Points), for If in. gauge, per pair 4d.
FISH PLATES—
Brass, for If in. gauge, per pair 3d.
Spring Steel, for If in. gauge, per pair 3d.
HOLDING-DOWN SPIKES—
Correct shaped heads for holding down chairs to sleepers. Per packet .. 6d.
SLEEPERS—
Special care is taken to ensure uniform size, especially thickness, which is very
important.
If in. gauge, per 100, 5/-; 50 for 2/9; 12 in. gauge, per 100, 6/-; 50 for 3/3
READY LAID—
Prices for ready-laid track, straight or curved, points, crossovers,
etc., are identical with our prices for ready-laid flat-bottomed brass
Vignol Rail, illustrated and described on previous page.
NOTE.—This model bull-head section rail is suitable for 14 in.,
1| in., and 2 in. gauge railways, the small section being used for 14
in. gauge, and the large section for 1| in. and 2 in. gauge. For 24 in.
gauge we recommend our flat bottomed brass Vignol Section Model
Rail, which is suitable for passenger carrying.
BOXED SETS OF TRACK PARTS—
To build 12 feet of track, 14 in. or li in. gauge, in 18 in. lengths.
Packed in neat box. Each contains 72 sleepers, 8 pairs of battens,
8 pairs of 18 in. rails, 16 pairs fishplates, 144 chairs, and 1 packet of
spikes.
Price per box for If in. gauge, rustless steel 16/6
Price per box for If in. gauge, rustless steel 19/-
34
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Bur wood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home, Melb., Vic.


Station Lamps, Yard Lamps Signals
STATION OR STREET LAMP (Type “A”).
A neat and attractive model Station Lamp, which adds consider-
ably to the appearance of any model station. It can also be used
effectively for decorating the surroundings of the model line, as it is
an exact reproduction of the well-known street lamp used all over the
country.
Height 3| in., U in. gauge Price 2/9
With Electric Bulb and Wire . - Price T/6
Height 8 in. To burn oil (several types) Price 5/-
STATION YARD LAMP (Type “11").
This is another useful accessory. Arc lamps are common to many
terminal station “yards” to facilitate shunting operations.
Height 3i in., for li in. gauge Price 1/-
Height 4J in., for If in. gauge Price 1/6
Height 13 in. To light with small candle Price 6/-
SOMERSAULT AND ORDINARY SIGNALS (Types “C” and “D”).
The spectacular effects obtained by well-made signals mark a
good model railway. These signals are scale models, and are in
every way superior to any others seen in Australia.
Somersault Signal, Single arm (Type C), 7i in. high .. .. each 4/6
Somersault Bracket Signal, Two arms (Type C), 8) in. high .. each 8/6
Ordinary Signal, Single arm (Type D), 7i in. high .. . . each 4/-
Ordinary Bracket Signal, Two arms (Type D), 8i in. high .. each 7/6
Three Arm Bracket Signals and 4 Arm Gantries to order.
35
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Bfurwood Boys' Home, Melb., Vic.


Scale Model Signal Cabins
Vr
■
yTinUgJg
f
rnmm
Sm
m
A very fine model, and one which needs little description, as the
illustration is taken direct from the actual model. It is constructed
of seasoned wood, and is fitted with glazed windows. Sides are of
embossed brickwood, slate roof, staircase door and landing, with
chimney surmounting the roof. Trade advertisements are all faith-
fully reproduced. A floor is fitted and the aperture in same accom-
modates the lever frame when this is fitted. The front wall is cut
away at the. foot to allow for the rods and connections to the signals
and points. The rear portion of the roof lifts off in one piece to admit
the controlling hand of the model signalman.
Cabin No. 4/6, accommodation 4or 6 Lever Frame Price 23/6
Cabin No, 8/12, accommodating Bor 12 Lever Frame .. .. Price 34/6
SIGNAL FRAMES AND LEVERS.
We will be pleased to quote for lever-frames.
Color Light Signals
These signals are the last word in 1J in. gauge
realism. As in the original, the lights are sharp and
clear, the hoods making their message distinct in
face of the brightest sunshine. Post and hood of
turned brass. Best tubular pea lamps, 3| volt. With
careful use the globes will last for years, hut in
case of accident, new globes can be fitted in a few
moments. Spare globes, 1/3 each. Suitable for
1J in. and 1| in. gauges. Price, each, 8/6.
SEMAPHORE SIGNALS (not illustrated).
Electrically operated arm and lights, for li in.
and 11 in. gauges. Price, each, 22/6.
I
Hi I"
36
Corner Boundary Ed. and Morey St., Burwood. opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic.


Model Railway Stations and Scenery
mm.
- • B
sm*
SPECIFICATIONS AND PRICES:
Wayside Station, built of tinplate, with tiled roofs, seat inside,
miniature advertisements and fence. 131 in 67-
Country Station, built of tinplate, with, tiled roofs, seat inside,
miniature advertisements and fence. 21 i in 9/9
Modern Railway Station, built of tinplate, tiled roof, doors to
open, name-boards, miniature advertisements, lamps and
seats on platform. Full-length fence. 485 in 31/6
Wayside Station, built of WOOD, embossed to represent brick-
work and slate roof. Asphalte platform. Glazed windows,
wood fence and miniature advertisements. 24 in 29/6
Country Station, built of WOOD embossed to represent brick-
and slate roof. Asphalte platform. Glazed windows, wood
wood fence and miniature advertisements. 43 in 47/6
The above stations are suitable for 1| in. gauge railways.
We will be glad to quote for any type of station for any gauge.
The picturesque side of indoor model railways is often sadly
neglected, yet suitable backgrounds add vastly to the realism. Wall-
paper frieze makes a cheap and effective background. Put up tem-
porarily or permanently, it is much to be preferred to bare walls or
out-of-scale background caused by windows, doors, etc. Our “Corn-
field Scene’’ shows a verdant valley with cornfield and waving poppies,
and in the distance the peaks of mountains lend an air of beauty to
the scene. Our “Lake Scenery” shown below is also very effective.
In each case the picture repeats about every 31 in. When joined
together in short lengths, the monotony of one long repeating scene
is thus broken Price per yard, either design, 9d.
37
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwnod, opp. Barwood Boys’ Home, Meljb., Vie.


Model Locomotive Sheds
M
These Engine Sheds are built substantially of seasoned wood,,
embossed to represent brickwork with slate roof, fitted with chimneys
and smoke cowls. Glazed windows are fitted, also miniature adver-
tisements and hinged doors. An engine shed is a necessary building
on any model railway, as it not only adds realism to the line, but
enables the locomotive to be stored away from all dust without
removing it from the track. The track is ready laid inside the shed.
li in. gauge, for one loco., 20J in. x 5 in. x 8 in. high .. Price 45/-
l| in. gauge, for two locos., 20| in. x 9 in. x 8 in. high .. Price 60/-
l| in. gauge, for one loco., 26 in. x 6J in. x II in. high .. Price 6*5/-
l| in. gauge, for two locos., 26 in. x 12 in. x 11 in. high .. Price 90/-
Engine Sheds for 2| in. gauge to order. Prices on application.
Model Level Crossing Gates
* i
These junctions of road and railway constitute a feature of
railway practice too prominent to be overlooked. From the model
railway engineers’ point of view these crossings provide a novel and
picturesque addition to his system. The gates are painted white, and
when closed to road traffic the red disc at “Danger” is quite coni
spicuous. The ramps, which also form supports for the gates, are
ballasted up to harmonise with the approaching roadway, which on
the correct model continues on both sides of the level crossing. These
gates are suitable for single or double line model railways.
U in. gauge, Single Road Price 16/6
3£ in. gauge. Double Road Price 23/6
If in. gauge. Single Road Price 19/6
1| in. gauge. Double Road Price 27/6
38
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Bnrwood, opp. Harwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic.


Model Goods Shed
The controlling of a railway company’s goods traffic is by .no
means a small matter, but this branch of railways working is apt to
be overlooked by “passenger train” enthusiasts. The model goods
shed above is a typical example of many of the sheds in use. The
large doors are made to slide open on both sides of the building.
For If inch gauge Model Railways Price 35/-
For If inch gauge Model Railways Price 55/-
Model Locomotive Turntable
■
iiiiiiiiiii
■MHi
There is probably no model railway accessory more in request
than a turntable, yet this is one of the most difficult models to design
and make satisfactorily so that it will turn locomotives from the
smallest tank engine to the huge express locomotives, and at the same
time to cost not more than a reasonable price. The model above has
been designed so that no pit or well is required. The ends are sup-
ported by flanged wheels running on a single circular piece of rail,
and track is ready laid on the turntable, which has a locking bolt
and lever similar to the original. This model is really a first-class
article.
For If inch gauge Locomotives
For If inch gauge Locomotives
For inch gauge Locomotives
Price 2 2 0
Price £3 3 0
Price £5 5 0
39
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys' Home, Melb., Vic.


Scale Model Tunnel Mouths
i .
i H
a
sm
The architectural beauty —or otherwise —of the tunnel mouth
matters little to the average traveller, but to the proud possessor of
a Model Railway this feature is of paramount importance. Built up
from “Brickwood,” and relieved by imitation stone piers and coping,
also faced to represent stone, this tunnel mouth adds a novel and
pleasing interest to the line. By stretching laths in any irregular
shape from one mouth to the other, and covering with stiff paper,
colored to give a scenic effect, a most realistic tunnel can be built.
Bridges, any type, for any gauge, quoted on application.
40
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic,


Clockwork Mechanisms for Model
Locomotives
The mechanisms described below contain the latest improvements
and are exceedingly powerful. The main frames, gear spindles, etc.,
are of best quality mild steel. The springs are the finest quality
obtainable, and will withstand very hard usage. They are strongly
built throughout. The control is fully automatic, and enables the
locomotive to be reversed, stopped or started from the track or cab.
A most efficient governor is fitted which performs its functions
admirably. Steel plate coupling rods, nickel-plated.
The amount of care and attention which should always be giver
to clockwork mechanisms needs to be emphasised. Half the troubles
•experienced are due to inattention and misuse. Oil the gears before
■each run, using best quality machine oil. Thick oil or grease should
on no account be used, as this tends to clog the mechanism. When
winding, it is well to ascertain beforehand the number of turns re-
quired, the knowledge of which will prevent over-winding. After each
run the spring should be allowed to run down, thereby relieving the
tension and preserving the strength. Locos, fitted with clockwork
mechanisms should not be pushed along the track when the spring
is run down. This practice may result in slipping the inner end of
the spring off the arbor.
No. 199/T. —First-class four-coupled clockwork mechanism, fitted with
governor, reversing and brake from cab or track, for H inch
gauge locomotives Price £1 11 6
For 1| inch gauge locomotives Price £4 14 6
No. 284/0. —First-class six-coupled clockwork mechanism, fitted with
governor, reversing and brake from cab or track, for 1J inch
gauge locomotives Price £2 9 6
For 1® inch gauge locomotives Price £6 12 6
The above mechanisms are made by Bassett-Lowke Ltd. and
The Leeds Model Co. Ltd.
41
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home, Melb., Vic.


Electric Mechanisms for Model
Locomotives
These mechanisms are imported from Bassett-Lowke Ltd. and;
The Leeds Model Co. Ltd., and are the very finest obtainable. It has
been generally recognised among model engineers that the permanent
magnet motor is by far the best form of motor for electric model
locomotives, and during the past twelve months our English principals
have concentrated upon producing what they consider the finest design
of electric mechanism yet offered to model railway builders. The
magnet is of a recently discovered special steel alloy with almost,
everlasting permanency, and is exceptionally powerful. This is a very
important point, as a powerful field is necessary in small motors
if a good starting effort is to be obtained. All magnets are tested,
and have to lift and hold a certain weight before they are passed for
assembly. There is little need to enter here a detailed description of
the entire construction of these splendid motors, as every possible
care has been taken by the manufacturers to ensure that they will give
every satisfaction and long life.
No. 1454/0, 6-8 volt, four-coupled type, consumption 1 amp., for
li inch gauge locomotives Price £1 19 6^
No. 1453/0, 6-8 volt, six-coupled type, consumption 1 amp., for li
inch gauge locomotives Price £2 17 6
No. 1454/1, 8-10 volt, four-coupled type, consumption 2.75 amps., for
13 inch gauge locomotives Price £4 17 6
No. 1463/1, 8-10 volt, six-coupled type, consumption 2.75 amps., for
13 inch gauge locomotives . . Price £6 17 6-
42
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Road and Morey Street, Burwood, Opposite Burwood Boys* Home'


wnlw
«
«i
3SC*' *ikL * mmm 'mm *ma*> **^
va #w»
I
irf
.*P
ir
»*
'V “^n
■
Sr
®gS5
MODEL LOCO
PAPERWEIGHTS
Make ideal sifts, as
they are unique minia-
tures of the huge
machines they represent.
120th actual size. Oxi-
dised finish. Each, 10/6.
Model Railway
Station Staff
Made throughout in
white - metal. Station-
master, Guard, 2 Porters,
2 Ladies. 2 Gentlemen, 1
Boy, 1 Girl, 4 pieces of
Luggage, 1 Barrow, in
box.
Price, 3/6.
Passenger Carriage
Bogies.
L.M.G., best quality,
with rubbing plates.
4 wheel. If in. g. 4/6
4 wheel, l| in. g. 6/-
6 wheel, in. g. 6/-
6 wheel, l| in. g. 8/6
Millbro, equalised, with
rubbing plates:—■
4 wheel, 1J in. g. 6/6
4 wheel, 1| in. g. 8/6
4 wheel, 2\ in. g. 12/6
6 wheel, in. g. 11/6
6 wheel, 1| in. g. 13/5
6 wheel, 2£ in. g. 18/-
High Capacity
Wagon Bogies.
Millbro, equalised, with
rubbing plates:—
li in. gauge .. .. 6/-
1| in. gauge .. .. 8/-
2\ in. gauge .. .. 12/
Diamond frame. L.M.C.,
with rubbing plates:—
li in. gauge .. .. 4/6
1| in. gauge . . ~ 6/
Diamond frame, Bassett-
Lowke make:—
2J in. gauge, equalised,
each 12/-
NOTE. Prices for
complete sets of castings
and screws for construct-
ing Bassett-Lowke Bogies
given elsewhere in this
catalogue.
43
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Bnrwood, opp. Bur wood Boys’ Home, Melb., Vic.


I
I
Bf.
TRAIN DYNAMO.
This little dummy dynamo is an
accurate reproduction of the dynamo
used for lighting carriages. Split
pulley for axle. Price, complete
with instructions, 4/-.
MODEL STATION
ACCESSORIES.
The set consists of Pillar Box,
Platform Ticket Machine, Sweet
Machine, Nestle’s Chocolate Machine
and Nameplate Machine. Accu-
rately made in white metal, and
full of detail. Suits and 1| in.
gauge. Price, 5/-.
NEWSPAPER KIOSK.
This model, soundly constructed
of wood, will surprise the station-
master at the picturesque touch it
adds to his railway. Painted In
appropriate colors. Prices
in. gauge, height 3 in., diam.
in 4/-
1| in. gauge, height 4| in,, diam.
11 in 5/-
TELEPHONE BOOTH.
This model is made of wood with
glazed windows, finished bright red
and complete with 2 insulators on
roof and dummy phone inside.
Prices
l,i in. gauge, in. high, | in.
square 5/-
1{ in. gauge, in. high, in.
square 6/-
GOODS AND PASSENGER
LUGGAGE.
Passenger Luggage (illustrated),
consisting of 12 pieces of assorted
trunks, painted and finished in
correct colors. Price, 4/-.
Mode! Goods Train Merchandise,
comprising 12 pieces, Piano Case,
Barrels, Orates, Boxes, etc., all
realistically finished. Price, 4/-.
MINIATURE
ADVERTISEMENTS
Are one of those small items
which help to make a model rail-
way complete. Each tablet is an
exact copy of its original, but re-
duced to suit li in.. If in., and
21 in. gauges. The tablets are
lithographed tinplate, and each is
punched with 4 holes. Price of
packet of over 20 advertisements,
3/6.
HYDRAULIC
BUFFER STOPS.
These are models of the latest
hydraulic buffer stops in use at the
principal railway stations. They
are enamelled lead color, and are
fitted with nickel-plated spring
buffers. Prices—
]£ inch gauge 7/6
If inch gauge 10/6
44
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.


Model Railway
Accessories
WATCHMAN’S HUT.
This is an excellent model built of wood.
Black finish and complete with seat. Suits
both li in. and If in. gauge.
PRICES—Hut and Brazier 7/u
Brazier only 5/g
Hut only 2/
PLATELAYER’S HUT.
Neatly made in wood, finished dead black.
Useful to coyer any electrical appliance
fitted to the side of the line.
PRICES—Ij in. gauge 5/_
11 or 2 in. gauge 7/6
COAL ORDER OFFICE.
Built of wood with glass windows. Should
be found in all well-equipped goods yards.
It adds greatly to the realistic effect. Can
be used for superintendent’s, etc., office,
PRICES—I| in. gauge .. '7/6
li or 2 in. gauge 12/6
MODEL WATER TOWER.
A picturesque addition to any model rail-
way. The steam model locomotive requires
water, and the jug often employed for fill-
ing up is hardly realistic practice. This
model tower is fitted with flexible connec-
tion, brass nozzle and water valve operated
by a chain from ground level. Suits 1| in.,
and lj in. gauge.
PRICE .. 10/6.
STATION OVERBRIDGE.
A remarkable reproduction in miniature
of which the illustration gives but a poor
idea. Built of wood, this modern structure
should prove very popular with “model
railwayacs.” Width overall, 12i in.
PRICE, 25/-.
FIRE BUCKETS AND RACKS.
Give a striking splash of realism to any
model station. Buckets finished fire brigade
red with movable handles. Brackets black.
PRlCES—Buckets each 4d.
Brackets each 2d.
45
MEADMQRE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Bonndary Rd. and Morey St.. Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ HomlTMeU):"' Vic.


y
3/5^
IX
IV
e/3
Q
•CD
□
LO
Model Railway
Accessories
Small and large AWNING BRACK-
ETS, for supporting overhanging roofs
of all kinds. Neatly cast and fitted with
lugs for fixing. Two fixed to post also
make an island canopy. Large B/5;
Small B/6. Prices: Small, 2 in., 4|d.
each; large, 3 in., 9d. each.
SEATS FOR MODEL STATIONS.
A useful ornament for any station,
whether an important terminus or a
wayside halt. B/12, price 1/6.
WINDOW FRAMES.
Die cast in white metal. Useful for
waiting rooms, buffets, etc. Bored with
three holes for fixing. Left half of
picture suggests suitable surrounding.
Recess provided at back for clear cellu-
loid. Painted chocolate color.
Windows, B/l Price, each, 1/-
Clear celluloid cut to shape, Price, 3d.
DOORS.
These are a very good model, the
panels being recessed and moulding
raised. The name-plate is raised and a
knob is fitted. The colors are chocolate,
panels cream and knob black. Price, 1/-.
BOOKING OFFICE WINDOWS, com-
plete to the ridges over which the clerk
slides your change. B/2- Price, each, 9d.
BOOKING OFFICE BARRIER.
These are neat castings, and can be
recommended as just the thing to keep
the crowd in order. A hole is provided
in each foot for fixing. B/4. Price, sd.
Note.—The above Station Fittings are
painted.
A FEW SUNDRIES FOR BUILDERS
OF U in. GAUGE LOCOS.
Footsteps.—Full of detail and easily
fixed. Tender type, left and right hand.
No. LO/5. Price, each, 7d.
Locomotive Cylinders (not illustrated)
dummy, each set consisting of one pair
of outside cylinders complete with piston
rods, crossheads, connecting rods, etc.
Price, per set, 17/6.
Dummy Cylinder-head Casting (not
illustrated). For use on clockwork and
electric models of inside cylindered loco-
motives. Price, 1/-.
46
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St.. Bnrwood, opp. Bnrwood Boys’ Home. Melh.. Vie.


MODEL SUNDRIES FOR BUILDERS
Angle Stanchions, for bracing wagon ends, etc.
Made in metal with bolt-heads embossed. R. and
L. hand. No. A/l, each 2d.
Dummy Side Door Hinges.—Add the last touch
of realism to all high-sided wagons. Very
effective. No. A/2, each, lid.
Strip Ironwork.—Very strong and not too stiff.
All .these articles are carefully made and very
effective. No. A/3. Sold in 9 inch lengths.
Price, per length, 4d.
Corner Plates.—Very neat, and like the other
parts have bolt-heads realistically reproduced.
No. A/4. Price, 2d.
NOTE.—The above range of fittings are scale model for
li in. gauge.
Axle Guards.—White metal. Springs, hangers
and axle-boxes cast in position. All holes drilled.
Fine design. No. A/6. Prices, li in. gauge, each
4d.; If in. gauge, each 6d.
See WHEELS section of catalogue for Brass Axleguards.
Buffers. Couplings, and IRON WHEELS in ail gauges.
. .Buffers.—Non-spring, li in. gauge, each 4d.;
11 in. gauge, each 6d. Spring Buffers (brass),
li in. gauge, each 1/-; li in. gauge, each 1/6-
Couplings (3 link) special Gedges type hook.
Links cannot jump off during shunting. Complete
with drawbar plate. Prices, li in. gauge, each
6d.; 1| in. gauge, each Bd.
u
A/l " A /2
A/3 A/4
P/6
A/7
*/9<3G>
Mansell Pattern Carriage Wheels on Axles
(white metal), 2 wheels on axle for li in. gauge,
lOd. For If in. gauge, 1/-.
Spoked Wagon Wheels on Axles (white metal),
2 wheels on axle for li in. gauge, Bd. For 1| in.
gauge, lOd.
NOTE.—See WHEELS section of catalogue for IRON
WHEELS, either as rough castings, separate machined
wheels, or ready fitted to axles for IJ, I|, and 2J in. gauges.
w
Point Lever.—Will operate points in parallel
with or at right angles to the box casting. Of
sound construction. Points rigidly locked eithei
way, eliminating risk of derailments. Much
better than illustration. The base is drilled ready
for screwing down to sleepers. Price, 5/-. Second
grade Point Levers can be supplied at 3/6.
Wrw/
* Tm/l
Hand Brake Wheels.—A very necessary fitting
for modern high capacity wagons. No. WO/23.
Price, each, 4d.
w
Ring Plates.—A very useful fitting on many
vehicles. Little details like these add realism to
the model. No. WO/25. Price, each, 6d.
47


Model Railway Accessories
1J in. GAUGE TRACK FITTINGS, etc.
TW/2.—Forked ends for connecting rodding to
cranks. Complete with split pin. Price, ea. 6d.
TW/3.—Rodding, screwed both ends, 3 ft. length, 9d.
TW '4a.—Couplings for point rods, screwed, each 4d.
TW/5. —Point rod guides. Smooth slide assured.
Price, per doz., 2/-.
GB/1. —Ground Disc Lamps. Made throughout of
white metal and correctly painted. Price, ea. 2/-
TW/I.—Point cranks. Being of good substantial
design, these will give long service. Finish, red
with black crank. Price, each, 9d.
SCALE MODEL TELEGRAPH POSTS.
These accessories should be welcomed by all model
railway owners, as they are the real thing in minia-
ture, and cheaper than anything previously offered.
The construction is wood posts, white insulators, rain
cap, and fitted on metal base, which is bored with
two holes for fixing screws. Price, each, 1/6.
GROUND NET AND APPARATUS, for operating
our spectacular automatic model mail vans.
Prices:
li in. gauge, ordinary track, 8/6; electric, 13/6
11 in. gauge, ordinary track, 12/6; electric, 17/6
t~/4« O-r—j~a
t ~/* JSL JL,
fSa./.
Sgi
FURTHER SUNDRIES FOR BUILDERS OF li in.
GAUGE LOCOS.
LOCOMOTIVE WHISTLES (dummy), with screwed
shank and nut for fixing. Bell or organ-pipe, r—gr
Price, 6d. (Not illustrated.)
LOCOMOTIVE BOGIES AND PONY TRUCKS
Fitted with turned cast iron wheels. Prices—
Bogie, 7/6; Pony Truck, 5/-. (Not illustrated.)
LOCOMOTIVE FOOTSTEPS. Narrow or wide type.
Pull of detail and easily fixed. LO/3. Price,
each, 6d.
q
d:
j
—7
J
LOCOMOTIVE ROSS “POP” TYPE SAFETY
VALVES. Dummy, for 1| in. gauge locos.
LO/22. Price, 1/-.
48
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO,
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic.


SUNDRIES FOR BUILDERS OF U in. GAUGE
LOCOS, ETC. (continued).
Tender Type Axle Boxes and Springs.—This
realistic die casting adds materially to the finish of
a model. LO/18. Price, each, 1/-.
Vacuum Brake Pipes.—Accurate in detail. Adds
the finishing touch to every model locomotive.
LO/93. Price, each, 9d.
Single Link Couplings.—Designed to prevent
buffer interlocking on sharp curves. LO/16. Price,
per pair, Bd.
Locomotive Lifting Jack.—Solid metal working
screw and swivel cap. Red and black finish. A most
engaging accessory, without which no model loco-
motive should leave its shed. BD/1. Price, each, 1/6.
Locomotive Headlamps.—Correct shape, painted
dead black. Complete with handle and provided
with a slot for bracket. Price, each, 6d. Side and
Tail Lamps, same price.
Lineside Fencing (in parts, painted). Adds just
that touch of realism the model railway needs. Very
simple to erect. Price, per foot run, 1/-.
Special Chain.—Useful for signal connections,
timber trucks, etc. Small, 1/- per ft.; large, 6d.
per ft.
Locomotive Chimney.—Cast in white metal and
fitted with screwed shank and nut for fixing. LO/20.
Price, each, 1/-.
Locomotive Steam Dome.—Similar construction as
chimneys. LO/21. Price, each, 1/-.
Water Tank Fillers (manholes).—Very neat die
castings, for saddle tanks or tenders. LO/2. Price,
each, 1/-,
Handrail Knobs.—Fitted with screwed-in shanks.
LO/13. Price, each, 4d.
49
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Barwood, opp. Bearwood Boys* Home, MeUb., Vic.


Bassett-Lowke Ltd.
Sets of Parts and Castings for Bogies
For 2i inch Gauge
Scale Model Diamond-frame Bogies.—These are of similar con-
struction to the undermentioned patterns, but are made to the North
Eastern .Railway’s standard dimensions. These are made to a special
design to enable them to run well on a roughly-laid track without the
use of springs, and in use they have proved themselves most effective,,
and are very popular among those who construct their own wagons.
No. 509/3.—Four-wheel. Castings and parts .. Price, 6/- per bogie
Finished bogies Price, 15/- per bogie
Scale Model Bogies for High Capacity Wagons.—These bogies are
of similar construction to our new design passenger coaches and are
models of the well-known pressed steel bogies used for high capacity
and other eight-wheel vehicles. The patterns have been carefully
constructed, and the frames consist of three castings only, secured by
two screws. A pivot plate and bogie pin are included.
No. 504/3. —Four-wheel. Castings and parts .. Price, 8/-per bogie-
Finished bogies Price, 17/6 per bogie
New Design Scale Model Passenger Carriage Bogies.—These new
series of bogies are introduced to meet the demand for a standard
article that is solid and w r ell proportioned, and at the same time in-
expensive to construct. The design represents the standard style and
pattern bogie used by all the leading railway companies of the world.
The patterns have been made with great care, and the finished bogies
are very realistic in appearance.
No. 601/3. —Four-wheel castings and parts .... Price, 12/-per bogie
Finished bogies Price, 21/- per bogie
Scale Model Passenger Carriage Bogies.—These models are made
from drawings supplied by the company, and are correct in design
and detail. The frames, etc., are made of good gunmetal castings
■well screwed together. All types of our bogies are fitted with turned
cast-iron wheels forced into steel axles. They run in anti-friction
metal boxes, supported by real laminated springs.
No. 641/3.—Four-wheel. Castings and parts .. Price, 16/-per bogie
No. 604/3. —Six-wheel. Castings and parts . . Price, 27/- each set
Finished bogies, double above prices.
NOTE.—AII above bogies are i in. scale.
50
MEADMORE MODEL JffiGINEEBING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic..


Scale Model Coastal Steamer
pne
This model ship is the outcome of a demand for a working model
which possesses all the characteristics of a high-class exhibition glass
case model, such as Bassett-Lowke habitually make for the great
shipping companies of the world. We have no hesitation in stating that
for quality, appearance and general value, this boat is unequalled.
The power unit is a spring motor of the best quality, so pro-
portioned that one winding will give the boat quite a lengthy run at
a scale speed. The hull is hand carved, and is fitted with a lead keel
for stability. Deck fittings are finished in gilt and silver plate. The
general finish of the model leaves nothing to be desired, the hull, deck
houses, etc., being hand-painted throughout.
The model is sent out in its own carrying case, made of seasoned
wood, finished smooth outside and mahogany stained. A brass handle
is fitted for carrying, and the hinged lid is secured with two brass
snap locks. This model steamer has, been described as “almost too
good to put in water.” Length of steamer, 30 inches. Complete with
case. Price, £l5.
We can also supply other Bassett-Lowke models, including their
Model Steam Yachts, Model Cargo Boats, Model Tug Boats, Model
.Naval Pinnaces and Battleships, at approximately the same price as
the Bassett-Lowke Steamer described above.
Scale Model Ordnance For Model
Warships
m
We will be pleased to quote for the supply of anything in the
nature of Model Fittings for exhibition or working model steamers
(clockwork, steam, or electric), motor boats, warships, yachts, etc.
Prices and particulars on application.
51


The Steam Launch “Henley”
SSiis
-jplPgiiM
The Smartest Model Boat Ever Produced.
Length, 24 in. Beam, 4i in. Displacement, 2h lbs.
Weight ready for running, 3 lbs.
A splendid sea-boat, practically unsinkable. The steering is par-
ticularly good, and she is very fast. The mahogany hull is not dug
out of the solid, but is built up by a special method, making an
extremely light and strong boat.
The machinery is the famous “Stuart” Double-acting Engine and
“Stuart” Marine Boiler, fired by a spirit lamp which will not blow out
even in a gale of wind.
This racing steam launch is superbly finished throughout, and
will be a delight to every owner.
SPECIFICATION:
Hull. —Finest Honduras mahogany, enamelled white and sea green.
Stem deck and inside varnished. Name in gold on bow and stern.
Weight, 1 lb.
Engine.—Vertical double-action oscillating, fully described elsewhere
in this catalogue.
Boiler.—Marine type, solid drawn copper drum with brazed copper
ends. Sheet steel casing. Fitted with safety valve and polished
copper funnel. Good lamp.
Propeller.—Cast gunmetal, two-bladed, 11 in. diam., 2 in. pitch.
Shaft.—Fitted with flexible coupling to engine.
Rudder.—Polished brass, compensated type. Rudder post has adjust-
able friction control.
Spray Hood.—Polished aluminium.
Price, complete with instructions for running, £3/3/-.
52
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic.


Steam Engine
Stuart-Tumer
Double Action
Oscillating
The
Build your own engine for driving boats, Meccano and all kinds
of machinery. Guaranteed perfectly safe. Fully machined, it only
requires a screwdriver to build it.
The “S.T.” Oscillating Engine is made with as much care as is
bestowed on the larger engines made by Stuart-Turner Ltd. It is
absolutely guaranteed to work when built.
The engine has a cast gunmetal cylinder, double-acting, 7/16 inch
bore by 7/16 inch stroke. The standard is of gunmetal, and the
crankshaft and crank disc and pin is turned from solid steel. The
heavy flywheel is provided with a pulley, and every part is made to
fine limit gauges. The engine can be reversed by fitting the steam
pipe to what was previously the exhaust hole.
Complete set of parts for building the engine Price, 8/6
Finished engine, fitted with steam and exhaust pipes . . Price, 12/6
H. A. D. writes: - Bth January. I£’2B.
“I purchased one of your S.T. Steam Engines on the 28lh February, 1924, and
it has been working regularly ever since. I find her a very powerful little engine,
capable of humming round at a terrific speed. I have put her to the most severe
tests, and she has performed them all to my satisfaction. In my opinion, she is
the last word in good design and workmanship.”
S. E. E. writes:— 23rd September, 1927.
“I think the S.T. Plant must be the most powerful engine on the market for its
size; for I had an engine of Continental make some time ago, which would only
drive the very simplest of models, and will hardly move the one I have just built,
and which the S.T. drives very fast.”
H. J. writes :
“The S.T. Engine, which was purchased about 22 months ago. has run splendidly
and is in perfect order. It drives all the models that I make, and I think the engine
very good value.”
53
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home, Meib., Vic,


Double Acting
Piston-Valve
Steam Engine
No. W 255.
Marine Type, J inch bore x I inch stroke.
W255.—A particularly powerful power unit for model steamers up to
2 feet long. Complete with cast standard, heavy brass disc wheel
and steam pipe. Price, ready for fitting into model boat, 19/6
W2S2.—SIMPLE MARINE ENGINE, 5/16 in. bore x I in. stroke,
oscillating single-acting cylinder, cast standard, crank and solid
brass disc flywheel. Price, ready for fitting into model boat, 6/6
W2S4.—SIMPLE MARINE ENGINE, 7/16 in. bore, by i in. stroke,
oscillating single-acting cylinder, cast standard, crank and solid
brass disc wheel. Price, ready for fitting into model boat, 8/6
CYLINDERS, oscillating type, complete with steam block, spring and
crank, heavily nickel-plated .single-acting, 5/16 in. bore x 7/16 in.
stroke Price, 4/6
CYLINDERS, oscillating type, complete with steam block, spring and
crank, heavily nickel-plated, single-acting, 7/16 in. bore x 7/16 in.
stroke Price, 5/6
HORIZONTAL DOUBLE-ACTING OSCILLATING STEAM ENGINE
made throughout in gunmetal. Solid cast base-plate, disc crank,
large spoked flywheel, pulley, packed piston, and detachable
cylinder heads, i\ in. bore x I in. stroke. Very powerful. Price, 18/6
We have a large assortment of Single and Cylinder Piston
Valve Cylinders, single and double-acting, fitted with steam and
exhaust pipes ,lubricators, crankshafts, etc. Prices and particulars on
application.
54
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, MeLb., Vic.


Model Vertical Steam “Donkey”
Engines
*
ti
*
We can supply a wide range of
these fine Model Steam Engines,
all fitted with solid brass boilers,
at popular prices:—
No. 127/1 —8| in. high, oscillating
cylinder, safety valve and steam
whistle 5/3
No. 127/2—lo| in. high, similar to
above 7/6
No. 138/I—B| in. high, slide valve
cylinder, safety valve and steam
whistle .. . 9/9*
No. 138/2—lol in. high ,similar to
above 12/-
No. 132/o—9l in. high, slide valve,
reversing, safety valve, whistle,
lubricator 15/-
No. 132/I—lol in. high, similar to
above 18/-
The above steam engines can all
be supplied in larger sizes and with
additional fittings at correspond-
ingly increased prices. See or write
us for further particulars re these.
A.ny engine demonstrated for cus-
tomers. We can also supply model
horizontal steam engines at prices
ranging from 9/9 upwards, as well
as steam farm and traction engines
and steam operated electric lighting
plants. We have a variety of
working models for these steam
engines to drive such as printing
presses, fountains, dredges, etc.
The “Vulcan” Vertical Steam Engine illustrated above is a bold
and well-proportioned engine, and embodies all the features the model
enthusiast can possibly desire. The specification of this high-class
engine is as follows:—Blue oxidised solid brass central flue boiler
mounted on cast iron base. Vaporising spirit lamp. Strong, double-
acting slide valve cylinder. Webb pattern crank running on long
bearings. Nickelled flywheel and pulley-wheel. Water gauge with
cocks and,, safety-guard. Lever safety valve, starting tap, filling plug,
bell whistle, blow-off cock, cylinder lubricator in steam-pipe, etc., etc.
No. 13/I—lll in. high, boiler 2i in. x 4 in Price 72/-
No. 13/2 —13 in. high, boiler 2| in. x4| in Price 85/6
No. 13/2J —13 in. high, with feed pump, governor, etc., Price 99/6
No. 13/4 —161 in. high, with feed pump, governor, etc., Price 195/-
55
MEADMORfe MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., JENrwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic.


rt«^
&
*
fei
The
“Stuart*
Vertical
High-
Speed
Steam
Engines.
The reputation of these “Stuart” Vertical High Speed Steam
Engines is world wide. They are recognised as the standard design
lor model and small power purposes, are realistic in external appear-
ance, and true to engineering practice in details. Machined castings,
materials, screws etc., are supplied for building these fine engines,
together with full instructions and working drawings. The No. 10
£ H !i , )O ’,T by , * “>• str oke may be entirely built without a lathe- A
nand-dnll and a few taps and files being the only tools required. This
set has been made up MACHINED to suit the amateur engineer,
ine No._ 7, 1 in. x 1 in. engine set is not machined, but is well suited
tor beginners, as a very small lathe only is required. The use of
cast iron in models gives them a very realistic appearance, and it
will be round that the special iron used is very soft and can be
polished as easily as brass.
We give below a typical list of castings and parts:
Cast Iron.—Cylinder with steam ports cast in, 1 bottom, 1 cover,
comWnpd \ fl a V t 1 C °7- r ’ I standard, 1 sole plate and bed
combined, 1 flywheel, 1 eccentric sheave.
-1 ea f h . P iston aml valve glands, 1 crosshead, 1 con-
nectmg rod, 1 eccentric strap with rod, 4 main bearing brasses 1
slide valve, 1 each steam and exhaust flanges, I valve rod guide.
Steel.—l crank shaft.
Sundries.—l each piston and valve rods, 1 steel front column
1 piece steel for foot, 2 guide plates, sheet steel for lagging 1 finished
all %’ f, h ” d h /f, SS v , a!ve s P ilKlle head > 1 sh eet drawings showing
all parts full size fully dimensioned.
Prices for all Stuart Engine Sets follow overleaf.
56


The
“Stuart”
Vertical
High-
Speed
Steam
Engines
WMSm
You can build
No 10 from
Machined Parts
without a Lathe
The illustration is of Engine No. 7, 1 in. x 1 in. Its general design
and construction is common to the whole of the series
listed hereunder,
FINISHED ENGINE, i in. x } in., £4/19/6.
No. 10—MACHINED SET of Castings, Parts, Screws, Bolts, Nuts,
| in. x 2 in. Studs, full instructions and working drawings, in-
cluding box bed, machined and drilled, with bolts, Price, £2/5/-
No. 7—COMPLETE SET of Unmachined Castings, Parts, Bolts, Nuts,
I in. x 1 in. Studs, Screws, and fully dimensioned working
drawings Price, £l/17/6
No. 4 —COMPLETE SET of unmachined Castings, Parts, Bolts, Nuts,
II in. x 1.1 in. Studs, Screws, and fully dimensioned Working
Drawing Price, £2/17/6
No. Sa—COMPLETE SET of unmachined Castings, Parts, Bolts, Nuts,
21 in. x 2 in. Studs, Screws, fully dimensioned working drawing.
Price, £5/17/6
NOTE.—For steam canoes, No. 5a is an ideal engine, and if fitted
with slip eccentric reversing gear, will be found very economical and
extremely efficient.
BEST QUALITY IRON FLY WHEELS AND DISC WHEELS.
Fly Wheels, straight spokes.
3 in. diameter x 1 in. face, 1 lb. packed. Casting, 2/-; finished, 4/6
81 in. diameter x 1 in. face, | lb. packed. Casting, 3/-; finished, 6/-
3 in. diameter x 1 in. face, 1 lb. packed. Casting ,4/-; finished, 8/-
41 in. diameter x 2 in. face, 2 lb. packed. Casting, 5/-; finished, 10/-
5 in. diameter x 11 in. face, 21 lb. packed. Casting, 6/-; finished, 12/6
Disc Wheels, for launch or direct coupled sets.
11 in. diameter x 1 in. face, 1 lb. packed. Casting, 2/-; finished, 4/6
2i in. diameter x 3 in. face, 1 lb. packed. Casting, 3/6; finished, 5/6
3J in. diameter x 1 in, face, 21 lb. packed. Casting, 5/6; finished, 7/6
57
MEADMORE MODEL, ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood. opp. Bnrwood Boys’ Home, Melb., Vic.


Stuart-Turner “Progress” Sets
The “Progress” Sets of Model Engine Castings are intended for
those who have the use of a small lathe. The progressive character
of the design is perfectly thought out, from both an educational and
constructional point of view.
The castings are the best of their respective materials, and the
sets are complete with all screws, shafts, rods, drawings and instruc-
tions. The most difficult part of the work—THE BORING AND FAC-
ING OF THE CYLINDERS—is already accomplished. Of course,
being of small dimensions, clients must not expect these engines to
be capable of accumulator charging, lathe driving, etc. Other sets
are supplied for such purposes. They are, however, sufficiently
powerful to drive the “Stuart” dynamo and light one lamp.
All bolts are included, cylinders are bored and faced, and the
shaft, piston and valve rods, studs, etc., are screwed, thus no stocks
and dies are required. A handbook is supplied with each set, giving
minute detailed drawings and sketches. The sets are intended for the
student in steam engine practice.
•OSCILLATING VERTICAL ENGINE SET, * in. bore by 3 in. stroke,
in best gunmetal, and disc wheel in iron, with crank, piston rods,
all studs, bolts and nuts Price, 15/-
•OSCILLATING HORIZONTAL ENGINE SET, i in. bore by 3 in.
stroke. All castings in best gunmetal, and box bed and flywheel
in iron, complete with crank, piston rods, and all studs, nuts and
bolts Price, 17/6
NOTE.—The above two engines are the simplest form of double-
acting steam engine, and the student should build either of these with
a view to learning the peculiarities of the method of steam distribu-
tion. The sets are immensely superior to any oscillating engine sets
previously seen on the Australian market.
58
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood. opp. Burwood Boys* Home. Melb» t Vic,


Stuart-Turner “Progress” Sets
SLIDE VALVE, VERTICAL OK LAUNCH ENGINE SET.—A very
pretty model of a Single Cylinder Launch Engine, similar to the
“Simplex,” excepting that cast standards are used instead of the
steel columns used in the “Simplex.” i in. bore by 3 in. stroke.
All castings in best gunmetal, except the disc flywheel, which is
in iron. The set is capable of being polished throughout, so
should appeal to model makers for exhibition purposes. The set
is complete with crank, piston rods and all studs, nuts and bolts.
Price, 19/6
SLIDE VALVE, HORIZONTAL ENGINE SET.—A realistic model of
a short stroke, high-speed horizontal engine. The construction:
entails no serious difficulties, and jdie novel method of casting an
extension on the box bed forms a simple means of attaching the
cylinder, which when completely overhung (as is usual in this
type) is difficult for beginners to tackle. 1 in. bore by 3 in. stroke.
The box-bed and sole-plate are cast together in finely moulded
soft cast iron. The flywheel is cast in similar material. The
remaining castings are in best gunmetal. The set is complete
with bright steel guide bars, crank and piston rods, all studs,
bolts and nuts Price, 19/6,
SLIDE VALVE, HORIZONTAL MILL ENGINE SET.—A model of a
very popular and well-known type, as used for driving mills.
The bore is 5 in. Stroke, 1 in. The soleplate and flywheel are
in best soft cast iron. The remainder of the castings are in best
gunmetal. These engines are usually placed on the engine room
floor, a pit being made for the flywheel, so a box bed is not
supplied with the set, which includes crank and piston rods, studs,
bolts and nuts Price, 19/6.
59
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Boxwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic,.


Stuart-Turner Model Horizontal
Engines
A perfect model engine that can be built without tools.
<4
w
i in. bore by il in. stroke.
A model of a typical mil! engine such as was in use during the
last century in the big cotton and other mills in the North of England.
It is the handsomest type of engine ever built.
The model has a bed 8t in. long, a beautifully moulded casting,
stove enamelled. The flywheel, 4 in. diameter, has enamelled spokes
and turned and polished rim, and the disc crank has a highly polished
surface. The cylinder is a gunmetal casting completely machined,
and the covers, glands, slide bars and all other parts are finished ready
for assembling. Every piece is accurately machined to fine limit
gauges with the same care and precision as are taken in forming the
parts of a magneto or other instrument of the same kind.
Very clear instructions illustrated with complete drawings are
sent with each set, and will enable any one not previously conversant
•with engineering to successfully build the model; a small spanner,
pliers and screwdriver are sufficient. Every part is guaranteed. A
spanner is provided with each set.
Price of complete set, with all bolts, nuts and studs .... £2 6 0
Price of finished engine, tested under steam £4 19 6
SET OP UNMACHINED CASTINGS AND PARTS FOR STUART
No. 9 HORIZONTAL STEAM ENGINE, GOVERNORS AND
PUMP.
1J in. bore by 11 in. stroke.
Cast Iron.—Cylinder with steam ports cast in, 2 covers, 1 piston,
1 valve chest, 1 cover, 1 sole plate, 1 box bed, 1 eccentric sheave.
1 flywheel.
Gunmetal.—l piston gland, 1 valve gland, 1 valve rod guide, 4 main
bearing brasses, 2 connecting rod brasses, 1 steam flange, 1 valve
nut, 1 exhaust flange, 2 eccentric straps, 1 slide valve.
Steel.—l crank shaft, 1 connecting rod. 1 crosshead (cored out).
Steel Bar.—2 guide plates, 1 piston rod, 1 valve rod, 1 eccentric rod,
1 piece steel for lagging, 1 hard brass for valve rod head.
Drawings.—Full size working drawing showing every detail.
Price of complete set, including all studs, nuts, bolts, screws, pump,
and governor castings, etc £4 12 6
60


The “Stuart” Simplex Model
Launch Engine
A g in. bore x g in. stroke Model Power Boat Engine of world-wide
reputation.
The engine has been entirely re-designed and new patterns and
drawings prepared. It has a bored crosshead guide cast on to the
bottom cover, ensuring perfect alignment and obviating the difficult
work of fitting the crosshead used with a flat file. Piston and valve
rods have screwed glands, and the crankshaft and crankpin diameters
are slightly increased.
The original “Simplex” launch engine has been extraordinarily
successful in power boat races, and many records have been held by
boats engined with it. The new design will be found to develop more
power and to be equal to the most exacting demands.
Fully machined set of castings and parts, complete with all bolts,
studs and nuts, lagging for cylinder, all holes accurately drilled
and tapped, instructions and drawings (no lathe required).
Price, £l9 6
FINISHED ENGINE, tested under steam
Price, £3 15 0
FINISHED ENGINE (similar design and size) our own make
Price, £2 19 6
61
Corner Bonndary Road and Morey Street, Burwood, Opposite Burwood Boys' Home


Stuart Enclosed Ball Bearing
High Speed Engine
. 3-.
C\ I
a
'- r
This engine is I in. bore by | in .stroke. It has an aluminium
crankcase, and is specially designed to give the utmost efficiency for
heaviest duty and continuous running.
Owing to its absolute reliability, it is eminently suitable for
racing model boats, direct-coupled electric generating plants, and’
pumping plants. It will appeal to the racing expert who must have
the best engine money can buy, and equally to the beginner, who
wants a simple engine, easy to build.
The enclosed aluminium crankcase means lightness, cleanliness
and perfect lubrication, while its graceful lines make this the most
handsome engine on the market. The crankshaft is balanced and the
crank pin is of large diameter to reduce wear, and made hollow for
lightness. We have run this engine at 4,000 revs, per minute, and
after the most severe tests can discover no signs of wear.
Each part is made of materia] best suited to its work. The ball-
bearing give practically everlasting wear, and ensures that increase
of power, due to increase of pressure and speed, is not absorbed in
friction. Being in one piece, perfect alignment of cylinder, guides and
crankshaft are ensured.
Fully machined set of castings and parts, for building the engine only,
with all bolts, nuts and screws, full instructions and drawings..
Price, £2 5 0
Small machined box-bed and 4 bolts, for engine only. Price, £0 3 6
FINISHED ENGINE, tested under steam Price, £4 10 0
The COMPLETE PUMPING PLANT, as illustrated above, £6 15 0
Rough castings for the centrifugal pump Price, £0 10 0
The centrifugal pump, finished Price, £1 10 0
Cast iron BEDPLATE of the pumping set, with bolts . . £0 15 0
Gunmetal BEDPLATE, for engine and lighting dynamo ...0 15 0
Cast iron BEDPLATE, for engine and direct-current dynamo 0 15 0
62
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys' Home, Melb., Vic.-


Stuart “Star” Ultra Lightweight
Steam Engine
<
This new engine is a wonderful achievement of modern methods
of production. All moving parts are made as light as possible, con-
sistent with strength, and all bearing surfaces are exceptionally large.
Twin cylinders, single acting, | in. bore x I in. stroke. Die cast
aluminium body with hard brass cylinder liners. Hard brass feather-
weight pistons and forged double-throw crankshaft. Rustless steel
piston valve driven by a banjo eccentric rod. The length of this
rod eliminates side thrust and wear on the valve. The very fine
limits to which this engine is built necessitate perfect lubrication, so
the Stuart Displacement Lubricator is fitted as standard. Proper
cylinder oil must be used. This is a cheap and excellent engine for
boats up to 42 in. long.
FINISHED ENGINE only, complete with lubricator . . Price, 45/-
THE STAR DIRECT-COUPLED LIGHTING PLANT, incorporating
the Stuart Alternating Current Dynamo, as illustrated, capable
of long, continuous runs Price, £4/10/-
Dynamos
The Stuart Alternating Current Dynamo is the only efficient
miniature lighting dynamo approaching good construction or design.
A lamp can be made to glow by merely twisting the armature spindle
between the fingers. Output:—At 2,500 r.p.m., two 4-volt lamps; at
3,000 r.p-m., four _4-volt lamps, and at 6,000 r.p.m., eight 4-volt lamps.
The armature spindle is of silver steel, and the bearings (imitation
ring oiled) are long and of best gunmetal. The current is collected
from two slip rings by spring brushes, and led to the terminals.
Price, £1 11 6.
The Stuart Bottone Direct Current Dynamo is the only small D.C.
dynamo of thoroughly sound design, mechanically and electrically, on
the market. It is an open protected two-pole shunt-wound dynamo,
with ten section armature, ball bearings, self-lubricating copper gauze
brushes in radial adjustable holders, and former wound field coils.
No. I—Output1—Output at 3000 r.p.m., 25 watts, 8 volt .. .. Price, £4 17 6
No. 2—Output at 3500 r.p.m., 40 watts, 10 volts . . . Price, £4 17 6
Weight, about 9 lbs.
63
‘Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys' Home, Melb., Vic.


“Stuart” Type Twin Cylinder
Launch Engine
mm
Gunmetal cylinders, 1 in. bore x I in. stroke.
The above twin cylinder launch engine is of our own make, and
has been specially designed for model torpedo boats, steamers, battle-
ships and launches, from 4 feet 6 inches to 6 feet long.
This is a very fine model, and one we can confidently recommend
as being unobtainable at the price anywhere, if indeed such a model
can be obtained elsewhere in Victoria.
The engine is fitted with double action slide valve cylinders, and
is an extremely powerful unit.
FINISHED ENGINE, tested under steam
With reversing gear
Price, £l6 16 0
Price, £l9 19 0
64
meapmore model ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boandary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys? Home, Melb., Vic.


Compound Launch, Pinnace and
Ferry Engines
Owing to the intricate and highly specialised work entailed in
the production of these remarkable examples of model engineering,
we are unable to stock innumerable sizes and types. We are, how-
ever, prepared to quote for and build any size of compound or triple
expansion marine engine, with or without reversing gear. We are also
prepared to supply sets of castings and parts for constructing these
engines as under:—
TWIN CYLINDER LAUNCH ENGINE, 1 in. bore x I in. stroke,
for model torpedo boats, etc., up to 6 ft. long . . Price, £3/3/-
COMPOUND LAUNCH ENGINE, 2 in. and li in. bore x I in. stroke.
COMPOUND PINNACE ENGINE, 1J in. and li in. bore x 1 in. stroke,
with reversing gear Price, £6/6/-
C9MPOUND ENGINE, li in. and 2| in. bore x li in. stroke.
TRIPLE EXPANSION ENGINE, 2 in., li in., and 12 in. bore x 1 in.
Below we give a typical list of the castings, etc:—
Parts include:—l cylinder casting, 2 valve chests, 2 valves, 2 covers,
2 cylinder covers, 2 cylinder bottoms, 2 crossheads, 2 eccentric
sheaves, 2 eccentric straps and rods, 2 connecting rods, 1 sole
plate, 3 bearing caps, 4 steam and exhaust tee flanges, 1 slide bar
bracket, 4 glands, 2 pistons, all in best gunmetal.
Sundries.—l steel crank, 1 cast iron disc wheel, 5 steel columns, 2
slide bars, 2 sheets steel for lagging, 2 each German silver piston
and valve rods, 2 finished piston rings, steam and exhaust pipes,
hard brass for valve rod heads, 1 sheet full size fully dimensioned
working drawing, and all Studs, Nuts, Bolts and Screws.
Price, £3/3/-
Price, £9/9/-
stroke, with reversing gear
Price, £9/9/-
65
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home, Melb., Vic


Stuart Propellers
Of Modern Design and Highest Efficiency.
m
These Model Propellers are the outcome of lengthy experience in
this class of work, efficiency being obtained by correct pitching, fine-
ness of blades and excellence of finish. These propellers may be
There is no necessity to illustrate this famous Stuart Blow-Lamp,
which can be supplied with the burner and container arranged in any
position relative to each other, or with other sizes of container.
The Blow-Lamp is exactly what has long been desired by model
steamboat enthusiasts, and can be used with equal success for firing
any type of boiler. Intensely hot. Does not blow out. Burns paraffin.
Container keeps cool. Burns for twenty-five minutes with one charge.
Flame easily regulated.
Price, 30, -
66
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home, Melb., Vic«.


High Class Boilers for Model Boats
BOILER of simple but strong- design for small steam-boats, oscillating
cylinder engines, etc. Brass boiler, 4 in. x 11 in,, fitted with
iron furnace base, union steam cock, safety valve, and spirit lamp.
Height, 3i inches Price, 9/6
STUART MARINE BOILER, 5i in. long, 2i in. wide, 31 in. high (to
top of casing). Solid drawn copper drum, 1| in. diameter, with
brazed copper ends. Sheet steel casing. Fitted with safety valve,
polished copper funnel, superheating steam pipe and safe spirit
lamp, which even if upset will not spill the spirit. Price, 15/-
BASSETT-LOWKE WATER-TUBE BOILER, 81 in. long, 31 in. wide,
3| in. to top of casing. Barrel measures 8 in. long by 1| in. dia-
meter, and is fitted with two inclined water tubes. Planished steel
casing surmounted by one funnel. Fittings include safety valve,
steam cock with steam pipe, and blow-off cock. A plain spirit lamp
is provided with reservoir and drip feed Price, £3/10/-
CENTRE FLUE LAUNCH BOILERS (our own make), fitted with five
5/1 6in. cross water tubes, safety valve, water gauge, and steam
stop valve. Tested to 200 lbs. per sq. in. Guaranteed satisfactory
in every way Price, £5/17/6
BASSETT-LOWKE WATER-TUBE MARINE BOILER, as illustrated,
with a barrel 8 in. x 2 in. diameter, and four inclined water-tubes,
steam pressure gauge, water gduge, safety valve, steam cock,
lamp and reservoir with drip feed. Steel casing measures 10 in.
x3| in. wide by 4 in. high. Complete with two funnels. £6/6/-
STUART MARINE BOILER, No. 495, 71 in. long, 5 in. wide, 4| in.
to top of casing. Boiler proper consists of two solid drawn copper
drums with 14 \ in. copper water-tubes and steam superheater.
Complete with steam pressure gauge, steam cock, safety valve
and duplex spirit burner Price, £6/10/-
Or with Stuart Marine Blow-lamp Price, £7/10/-
NOTE.—As a matter of interest we tested one of the cheapest
of the above described boilers to destruction. It did not burst till a
pressure of 520 pounds per square inch was indicated!
67
MEADMOKE MODEL. ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Harwood, opp. Bur wood Boys’ Home, Melb., Vic.


Vertical
Copper
Multi-
Tubular
Boilers
■
mm
■■
■i
Vertical
Steel
Centre
Flue
Boilers
The shells of these boilers are made of best mild steel or copper,
whichever is preferred by the customer- We shall be pleased to braze
customers’ own boilers for them, and on receipt of boiler, will quote.
It is essential for successful brazing that the parts should be perfectly
clean, and the surfaces to be brazed coated with borax before rivetting
together. Joints cannot be brazed unless they are a good fit. It is
quite impossible to braze a boiler on which soft solder has. been used.
Generally speaking, we only build boilers to order, but we usually
have one or more boilers in stock for inspection and sale. The multi-
tubular boilers are necessarily more costly than the centre flue boilers,
as there is a good deal more work in the manufacture of the former
type. The following are the approximate prices of various types of
boilers:—
Vertical Water-Tube Centre Flue Boiler, 3 in. diameter x 6 in. barrel,
3 in. firebox, 6 in. chimney, complete with eight water circulating
tubes, high-efficiency spirit burner, safety valve, test cock, steam
stop valve and steam pipe Price, £4
Similar to above, but with 4 in. dia. x 8 in. barrel. Price, £5 10 0
Similar to above, but with 5 in. dia. x 10 in. barrel. Price, £7
V.C.F., without water-tubes, 3 in. dia. x 6 in. barrel. Price, £3 10 0
V.C.F., without water-tubes, 4 in. dia. x 8 in. barrel. Price, £5
V.C.F., without water-tubes, 5 in. dia. x 10 in. barrel. Price, £6 10 0
Vertical Fire Tube Boiler, 5 in. dia. x 10 in. barrel. Price, £8
NOTE.—Any fittings required will be supplied at catalogue
prices, plus a small charge for fixing.
68
MEADMOEE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Road and Morey Street, Burwood, Opposite Burwood Boys* Home


MODEL BABCOCK & WILCOX TYPE
WATER-TUBE BOILERS
msmm
T
* .<•
mm
The success of the Water-Tube Steam Generator in both real and
model practice is an accomplished fact. The model illustrated is based
on the well-known “Babcock & Wilcox’’ type, as used in central power
stations. We can offer several varieties by Stuart-Turner Ltd. and
Bassett-Lowke Ltd.
STUART BOILER No. 500, specially designed for steaming the mill
engine, Progress and other small engines of similar cylinder
capacity. Brazed copper drum, 8i in. long x2| in. diameter, with
two water circulating tubes and superheater, cast iron front and
back plates, chimney, two side plates, asbestos lined, two test
cocks and one plug, safety valve, steam cock and pipe. Complete
with spirit burner, high efficiency Price, 70/-
STUART BOILER No. 501, specially designed for steaming the 8.8.
and No. 10 high speed engines and others of same capacity.
Brazed copper drum, 8 in. long x2l in. diameter, with four water-
circulating tubes and superheater. Same construction as No. 500
boiler, but fitted with water gauge Price, £5/10/-
STUART BOILER No. 504, will steam continuously at full power all
engines with cylinders up to 1 in. x 1 in., and should be installed
when the No. 10 or 8.8. engines are used for driving the Stuart
Bottone Direct Current Dynamo. Brazed copper drum 10 in. long
x 3| in. diameter, with seven water circulating tubes and super-
heater. Similar construction to above boilers, but fitted with
screw-down steam valve, water gauge Price, £7/10/-
BASSETT-LOWKE BOILER No. 1 (illustrated). Similar construction
to Stuart boilers. Brazed copper drum 6J in. long x 21 in. dia-
meter, with three water circulating tubes, spirit burner, pressure
gauge, syphon pipe, filler, water gauge, adjustable safety valve,
union steam valve and superheater Price, £6
BASSETT-LOWKB BOILER No. 2. Similar to above, but with drum
8| in. long x 3 in. diameter, and five circulating water tubes.
Same fittings as above, only larger, of course. Price, £7/10/-
NOTE.—Additional fittings at list prices for any of the above
boilers plus a small extra charge for fitting.
69
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Bar wood, opp. Bur wood Boys* Home, Melb.. Vic.


Petrol “Lightweight” Engine
Three-Port, Two-Stroke.
11 in. bore x li in. stroke. Height, 81 in.
Overall length, 6 in. Weight, 51 lbs., including flywheel.
Finished Engine, £l4 as illustrated.
With our great experience of small two-stroke engines, we can
confidently recommend this engine as a thoroughly reliable and very
Aluminium. —Cylinder and body, cylinder head, crankcase door, port
cover, bottom cover.
Cast Iron. —Flywheel, piston, two crank balance weights.
Steel Stamping. —Crankshaft.
Gunmetal —Three carburettor castings, one contact breaker casting,
two bearing bushes, connecting rod, exhaust pipe flange.
Sundries. —All studs, nuts and bolts, and steel tube for cylinder liner,
fibre, two finished piston rings, finished carburettor float, etc.
powerful unit, remarkably flexible
and easily controlled by the
throttle. It is specially suitable
for racing motor craft and for
driving a dynamo. Ignition is by
plain make and break with iridium
points. It is capable of speeds up
to 3,500 r.p.m. We have such
complete confidence in the good re-
sults to be obtained, that we have
arranged to supply completely
machined sets of castings, so that
the engine can be built without a
lathe. This is the only set of fully
machined petrol engine castings on
the market.
List of Parts and Castings
PRICE, COMPLETE WITH DRAWING, £4/4/-.
MACHINED SET, complete with Drawing, £lO/10/-.
70
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rci. and Morey St., Burwoud, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Mill).. Vic.


Standard Parts and Castings
FOR MODEL LOCOMOTIVES 2| in. Gauge, “Half-inch” (17/32 in.)
Scale.
The production of this perfect system of locomotive building
results, as do most commercial successes, from an ideal brain com-
bination. Henry Greenly, the father of the model world, with his
fresh brain of extraordinary ingenuity, is the designer and also the
originator of the whole system of standard locomotive building parts,
in conjunction with the Jackson-Eigby Engineering Co. Ltd., a firm
of lathe and tool engineers, whose whole working environment is that
of split thousands of an inch. The aim of the standardisation of the
parts is to allow any type of locomotive to be built with the least
difficulty. For instance, one crosshead suits all two-bar designs; the
main axle box is common to all coupled axles. Bogies and pony
trucks are standard fitments.
A great feature is cylinders and castings of the modern piston
valve type. These are the only cylinders suitable for outside
Walschaert’s valve motion. The two features of greatest significance
to a model engineer are that foresight in design provides for simple
methods of assembling to secure the essentials of accuracy, and that
Mr, Greenly has kept well in mind that the builder of a locomotive
is riot always an experienced engineer.
PARTS CAN BE SUPPLIED SEPARATELY OR IN SETS.
Outside piston
valve cylinders.
Suitable for Wal-
schaert’s gear.
The actual cylin-
ders themselves
are superior to
the illustration,
which was made
100
prior to certain improvements. 11-16 in. bore by 1 1-16 in. stroke.
Of soft grey iron, easily machined.
TWO CYLINDERS, finished, complete, 59/6. Cast
AXLE-DRIVEN FEED PUMP (L.B.S.C. pattern). F
ECCENTRIC, to drive above Feed Pump. Finished
MAIN AXLE-BOXES, with Hornstays, Springs and
BUFFER PLANKS—
(a) With Guard Irons Casting, 1/6.
(b) Rear, without Guard Irons . . Casting, 1/3.
(c) Tender (for outside frames) Casting, 1/3.
BOGIE PIN STRETCHER Casting, 1/3.
BOGIE STRETCHER Casting, 1/3.
71
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Ed. and Morey St.. Burwood, opp. Bnrwood Boys” Home, Meib., Vic.


Standard Parts and Castings (continued).
EQUALISERS . . Castings, per pair, 1/6. Finished, per pair,
BOGIE FRAMES (Loco), finished and slotted . . .. per pair,
BOGIE AXLE-BOXES (Loco), finished, per set of four . .
COMPLETE SET OF F,OGIE CASTINGS AND PARTS (for
Loco)
FINISHED BOGIE, complete (for Loco)
COMPLETE SET OF CASTINGS AND PARTS FOR TENDER
BOGIE
FINISHED BOGIE, complete (for tender)
BOGIE SIDE FRAMES .. Castings, per pair, 3/6. Finished,
BOGIE END FRAMES . . Castings, per pair, 1/3. Finished,
BOGIE EQUALISERS . . Castings, per pair, 1/6. Finished,
BOGIE MIDDLE STRETCHER, Castings, each, 2/-. Finished,
BOGIE PIVOT STRETCHER (M.F.)
Castings, each, 2/6. Finished,
BOGIE AXLE-BOXES (four off) . . Castings, 1/6. Finished,
TENDER FRAMES, steel, pierced and slotted (6-wheel), pair
TENDER FRAMES, finished, with buffer planks, etc., etc. ..
TENDER HORNS AND SPRINGS, Castings, 1/6. Finished,
BUFFERS . . Castings and Parts, per 4, 3/-. Finished, each
MAIN FRAME STRETCHER . . Casting, lOd. Finished, each
STANDARD REAR FRAME .. Casting, 7/6. Machined, each,
REAR FRAME, finished, complete with Pony Truck, Steps, etc.,
PONY TRUCK, for trailing end .. . . Castings, 4/6. Finished,
TRAILING FRAME, Castings (per set of 3), 7/6. Finished,
with radial axles, wheels, etc
PONY TRUCK, for leading 2-6-0 and 2-8-0, or for trailing end
of Tank Loco Castings, 4/6. Finished,
CONNECTING RODS, steel, for Pacific or Atlantic . . per pair
COUPLING RODS—
Atlantic per pair
Pacific (with intermediate joint) .. per set
CRANK PINS (silversteel) per pair
CROSSHEADS (two-har type), solid steel, with gudgeon, each
SLIDE BARS, supplied in finished state only per pair
OUTSIDE MOTION PLATE (two-bar type)
Castings, per pair, 2/-. Finished,
WALSCHAERT’S VALVE GEAR FRAME—
Castings (4), 4/6. Finished, set,
G.N.R. WALSCHAERT’S BRACKET—
Castings, R.H. & L.H., pair, 6/-. Finished, with pivots,
Complete Set, all pins and links for Walschaert’s Gear . . £6 <
LOCO MAIN FRAMES, steel, with axle-box slots and drilled
for fittings .. .. “Atlantic” type, 21/-; “Pacific” type,
3/6
3/6
3/-
17/6
32/6
21/-
47/6
17/6
3/-
3/6
5/-
5/6
7/6
15/-
25/-
4/6
3/-
2/6
15/-
42/-
15/6
25/6
15/6
15/-
15/-
35/-
1/3
5/-
2/6
5/-
8/6
16/6
; o
22/6
72
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic*


Standard Parts and Castings (continued).
SPLASHERS, Castings each, 1/6. Finished, each 3/
REVERSE LEVER FOR CAB—
Casting of standard with parts
Casting of standard only
Finished complete
CAB SIDES AND FRONTS (castings only), front, 4/-; sides, ea.
STEPS (Tender or Loco), castings each
DRAW-HOOK AND SHACKLE, steel, finished
TENDER TO ENGINE COUPLING, finished
BLAST PIPE UNIT, with nozzle, finished
Y STEAM BLOCK, for front tube-plate, 4/-. With Unions
THROAT PLATE CASTING (solid fuel OR water-tube), Price,
FIREBOX TUBE PLATE CASTING
SMOKE BOX TUBE PLATE CASTING
BOILER END
BACK PLATE
GIRDER STAYS, set of two
BOILER MATERIAL, Solid Fuel Boiler-
Copper Tube, cut and turned 4-6-2, 12/6; 4-4-2,
Firetubes, slotted and scr’d 4-6-2, 17/6; 4-4-2,
BOILER MOUNTINGS—
CHIMNEY Casting, 2/-; Finished,
DOME Casting, 2/6; Finished,
SAFETY VALVE CASING . . .. Casting, 1/-; Finished,
INNER DOME AND SEATING . . Casting, 2/9; Finished,
PETTICOAT PIPE Casting, 2/-; Finished,
SMOKEBOX DOOR AND FRONT RING—
English, casting
American, casting
Stay-type Cross Bar, casting
English or American type, with hinged door and fastenings,
finished complete
Smokebox, turned and bored to fit
Smokebox, complete with door, chimney, etc.
SADDLE—
Sides, per pair Castings, 1/6; Finished,
Ends, per pair Castings, 1/6; Finished,
Complete saddle sides and ends fitted and machined to suit
frames and smoke-box
3/-
1/6
8/6
5/-
1/6
5/-
2/6
5/6
9/9
6/-
4/6
5/-
4/-
5/6
2/6
10/6
12/6
4/6
5/6
5/6
6/6
4/6
4/6
5/-
1/3
13/-
5/-
26/6
3/6
5/-
10/6
NOTE.—Wheels are listed overleaf, then follow drawings and
fittings. The latter can be supplied in finished state only. Particulars
and prices of submerged feed pumps and lubricators of special design
on application.
73
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic>


Scale Model Locomotive Wheels
£
I
i
m
*
i
m
Si
ft
\
m
We tabulate our Scale Model Wheels for Locomotives, Carriages
and Goods Wagons in a manner calculated to reduce the trouble of
choosing the size and scale of any wheel our customers may require.
We would point out to those who do not already know that although
Model Wheels may be of the same diameter, any difference in scale
alters the character of the casting considerably. For instance, there
may be only I in. difference in diameter between a i in. scale and
a 1 in. scale wheel, but the latter would weigh double the former
wheel.
The Iron Castings are of the finest grey iron, free from those
annoying “hard places” found so frequently in many castings. The
Brass and Gunmetal castings are of the best quality and machine
readily. AJI our wheel castings are of Bassett-Lowke Ltd. manu-
facture, and are cleaner and far superior to any wheel castings pre-
viously offered for sale in Australia. All small cast iron wheels are
specially annealed. The above illustration was made direct from a
group of these wheels, the spokes of which were absolutely untouched.
We invite comparison of our wheel castings, as we guarantee them
to be unapproachable for fineness and freedom from blemish.
74
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home, Melb., Vic.


Scale Model Locomotive Wheels
IN SOFT IRON
No. 0. (If in. Gauge) Wheels ;
Prices of 1 in., If in., 2 in., etc., scale Wheels
on Application
NOTE. B. Bogia Whsel. T. —Tender and Trailing Wheel. D Driving Wheel
C. Coupled Wheel. S.B.W. Square Balance Weights
C B,W. Crescent Balance Weights
We Stock both Inside and Outside Driving and Coupled Wheels
75
meadmore model engineering CO,
Corner Boundary Kd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home, MeLb., Vic,


WHEEL CASTINGS (continued).
Larger sizes quoted on application.
FINISHED “MANSELL” CARRIAGE WHEELS ON AXLES
(Cast Iron).
One pair of wheels on steel axle for li in. gauge .. . . Price 1/6
One pair of wheels on steel axle for 11 in. gauge . . .. Price 2/6
One pair of wheels on steel axle for 2| in. gauge . . . . Price 3/6
FINISHED SPOKED WAGON WHEELS ON STEEL AXLES
(Cast Iron).
One pair of wheels on steel axle for 1| in. gauge .. .. Price 1/3
One pair of wheels on steel axle for 11 in. gauge . . .. Price 2/3
One pair of wheels on steel axle for 2| in. gauge . . . . Price 3/6
FINISHED AXLE GUARDS WITH SPRINGS, HANGERS AND
AXLE-BOXES (Brass).
li in. gauge, 6d .each; 1| in. gauge, 9d. each; 2i in. gauge, 1/3 each
FINISHED BUFFERS (non-locking; oval heads),
Non-Spring, li in. g., sd. ea.; 11 in. g., 7d. ea.; 2| in. g., not supplied
Real spring, li in. g., 1/- ea.; 1| in. g., 1/6 ea.; 21 in. g-, 2/6 each
FINISHED THREE-LINK COUPLINGS.
li in. gauge, 6d. each; 12 in. gauge, Bd. each; 21 in. gauge, 1/6 each
76
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home, Melb.. Vic.


Drawings for Model Engineers
The following drawings have been compiled with the view of
assisting model engineers in their work, and may be relied upon for
accuracy. These diagrams are all drawn to full size for small gauge
locomotives, etc., and have been prepared from official information
supplied by the various railway companies concerned. The prices
include tenders where necessary.
77
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood. opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic.


Drawings for Model Engineers
NOTE.—Drawings of all locomotives and vehicles not listed in
these pages can be prepared for practically any gauge. Our stocks
of drawings are continually being added to, and we solicit your
enquiries concerning drawings not listed.
78
MEADMQRE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood. opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb.. Vic.


Drawings for Model Engineers
Drawing Per
(Suitable also for I in. scale 31 in. gauge model.)
GNR 1442 ATLANTIC EXPRESS LOCOMO-
TIVE. Twelve sheets of Working
Drawings for 2 in. scale EXPRESS
LOCO 4-4-2 91 in. 42/-
(Suitable also for 1 in. scale 4| in. gauge model.)
DESIGNS FOR MODEL SHIPS.
Designs are full size for the 60 c.m. class (23.6 in. long), but can be
enlarged.
1. LINER. Four funnel Trans-Atlantic type.
2. CROSS CHANNEL PACKET. Double funnel.
3. STEAM YACHT. Very graceful lines.
7. STEAM MACHINERY SET. Full details of Machinery, Boiler
and Burner.
10. WARSHJP. Typical of most recent boats.
IS. TUG BOAT. A handsome and powerful model.
Any design, 5/- each.
NOTE. —Drawings of any locomotive or vehicle not listed in these
pages can be prepared for any of these gauges;—lJ in., 12 in., 2 in.,-
21 in., 31 in., 31 in., 7i in. and 9s in. Our stocks of drawings are
continually being added to, and we solicit your enquiries re drawings
not listed herein.
79
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Kd. and Morey St. t Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic.


Materials For Model Engineers
RUSTLESS STEEL GROUND ROD, for Piston Valves, etc.—
Diam. in inches i 5/32 3/16 7/32 | 5/16
Price per foot 1/3 1/6 1/9 2/6 3/- 4/6
ROUND RODS. Prices are per foot length.
HEXAGONAL RODS—
Ditto for Boiler Barrels. All prices are per foot.
NOTE.—We can supply the above-mentioned sizes of copper tuba
in any lengths required. Prices are for 1 ft. or more. If shorter
pieces are required, an extra charge of 25 per cent, will be made for
cutting and waste.
SILVER OR BRAZING SOLDER
Best quality only stocked. Per oz., 6/6.
“LOWED” JOINTING MATERIAL
After extensive experimenting, Bassett-Lowke Ltd. have evolved
a splendid jointing material, which behaves equally well under wet,
dry, or superheated steam up to 300 lbs. pressure. When unvulcanised
it is very pliable, and will embed itself into any rough or irregular
surface, and under steam vulcanises into a perfectly firm joint.
Price, per square foot, 1-64 in. thick, 2/-.
BRASS, COPPER, AND PLANISHED SHEET STEEL to order only.
80
MEADMQRE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
corner joummaiy ivu. ana morey St., mrwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic»


Model Engineers’ Best Bright Steel
Screws, Bolts and Nuts, etc.
T
The articles here listed are all of English manufacture, and are
guaranteed superior in quality and appearance to any previously seen
here. They are dead accurate, with perfectly formed Whitworth
threads, the heads having a fine degree of polished finish. Hexagon
boltheads and nuts are model engineer standard.
Prices are per dozen.
Snaphead, for Boiler-making, Girders, etc.
81
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Road and Morey Street, Burwood, Opposite Burwood Boys* Home


Model Fittings
WATER GAUGES.
With three cocks and complete with bushings for sweating into
boiler Nos. 120/1, 2, 3.
With clearing cock and bushings for boiler Nos. 122/1, 2.
Without cock, but with bushings for boiler No. 123/1.
With clearing cock and pad pieces. Admits of long glass in small
diameter boilers Nos. F9l/1 and 2.
“LOWKO” INJECTORS.
Self-regulating, reliable and automatic. Cannot get out of order,
as they contain no moving cones. Can be taken apart, cleaned, and
assembled by an amateur in a few moments. Nos. 1500/1 and 2.
“LOWKO” SPECIAL CHECK VALVES.
We do not guarantee our injectors to work efficiently unless this
valve is used. Nos. 1514/1 and 2.
LOCOMOTIVE BELL WHISTLE No. 116.
Complete with bushing and short handle, or long handle as illus-
trated with No. 117.
LOCOMOTIVE STARTING VALVE.
Can be fixed from outside of boiler. No stuffing box required.
German silver handle.
HAND FORCE PUMP.
Made of gunmetal and mounted on gunmetal base. The trunk
connections are of steel. I in. plunger, | in. stroke. Fitted with two
coned unions for 3-16 in. pipe. Invaluable for boiler testing and
feeding.
MARINE PATTERN SAFETY VALVE.
Suitable for model launch boilers. Adjustment for wide range
of pressure can be made.
STEAM PRESSURE GAUGES.
Made with the greatest care. Beautifully finished. These gauges
may be relied upon to give excellent service under all conditions.
Page Eighty-two
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.


For Engines & Boilers
No. 110/1, for I in. diameter gauge . . . . 6/-
110/2, for 1 in. diameter gauge 7/6
110/3, for 11 in. diameter gauge .. . . 9/9
No. 113/1, for | in. diameter gauge . . . . 3/-
/2, for 1 in. diameter gauge . . .. 3/3
/3, for 1| in. diameter gauge .. . . 3/6
No. 117/0, 4 in. diameter bell 3/9
/2, i in. diameter bell 6/-
Low Pressure Whistle, I in. bell 2/6
Low Pressure Whistle, large bell 5/6
No. 123/0, 1 in. high 6/6
/I, U in. high 7/6
/2, 1| in. high 8/6
/3, 1| in. high 9/6
No. 132/1, 11/16 in. high 5/6
/2, 2 in. high 6/9
3, I in. high 8/6
/4, 2 in. high 12/6
Low pressure Safety Valve 2/6
No. 133/1, 3/16 in. bore, height from boiler,
14 in 8/6
No. 133/2, 1 in. bore, height from boiler,
11 in 10/-
No. 150/1, small size 3/6
/2, medium size 5/-
/3, large size 7/6
No. 151/1 (illustrated half size) 6/-
/2, larger size 9/6
No. 152/1, i in. scale 3/-
All other sizes on application.
I in., 5/32 in., 3/16 in., 2d. each; 7/32 in. ana
4 in., 3d. each; 9/32 in., 5/16 in. and I in.,
6d. each.
3/16 in. to I in. scale 6d. each
a in. to 1 in. scale Bd. each
83


Model Fittings
PRESSURE GAUGE SYPHONS.
With cock and bushing for boiler. No. 110. Gauge screws into
top of syphon direct.
Cheaper pattern, without cock. No. 113. Not illustrated.
ORGAN PIPE WHISTLES.
Complete with hushing for sweating into boiler. Long handle to
project through cab or short handle as illustrated with No. 116.
CYLINDER LUBRICATORS.
Efficient lubrication of steam engine cylinders and other moving
parts is essential for good performance and conduces to long life.
This special lubricator has two cocks and a hollow chamber for oil.
SAFETY VALVES (for high pressures).
Very efficient “Pop” Valves, suitable for high pressures. Set to
blow off at 60 lbs. and supplied complete with bushing for boiler.
ADJUSTABLE SPRING SAFETY VALVES.
This pattern valve is specially suitable for model boats, vertical
boilers, etc., where a compact and easily adjustable valve for high
pressures is required. Complete with bushing.
BLOW OFF COCK (also makes a good blower cock).
This simple yet efficient blow-off cock is a pattern recommended
by “The Model Engineer.”
DISPLACEMENT LUBRICATOR.
This excellent fitting supplies a long felt want for an automatic
lubricator for model locos.
EXPRESS TYPE LOCOMOTIVE BUFFERS.
Built of gunmetal with enclosed spring.
RUSTLESS STEEL BALLS (for pumps, safety and check valves.
Glass hard and will wear indefinitely.
HANDRAIL KNOBS.
Turned from solid rod in brass.
84
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vie,


For Engines and
Boilers
No. 120/1
/2
/3
No. 122/1
/2
No. 123/1
No. F9l/1
/2
5/32 in. glass .
3/16 in. glass .
1/4 in. glass .
5/32 in. glass .
3/16 in. glass .
5/32 in. glass .
5/32 in. glass .
3/16 in. glass .
13/6
15/9
18/9
7/6
11/3
3/9
10/6
12/9
No. 1, for locos up to :1 in. scale.
Will deliver 1,1 pints per minute-
Suits 3/16 in. pipe £l/13/6
No. 2, for locos up to 11 in. scale. Will
deliver 3 pints per minute. Suits 5/16
in. pipe £l/19/6
No. 1514/1 3/16 in. pipe .. .. 14/6
/2 5/16 in. pipe .. .. 16/6
No. 116/1 5/16 in. diam bell .7/-
/2 7/16 in. diam. bell 10/6
Low Pressure Whistle.
Small, 3/6; large, 6/6
No. 1468/2 i in. scale
/4 'i in. scale
10/6
15/6
No. 145/1, as illustrated . . .. £l/2/6
/2, with i in. plunger .. £2/12/6
729/1, most powerful . . .. £l/7/6
/2, with | in. plunger .. £2/17/6
No. 147, screwed i in., gas thread,
diameter of flange, 13/16 in.
Height, 21 in 13/6
No. P5O/1, 2 in. dial, 100 lbs. .. 12/6
/2, 1 in. dial, 120 lbs. .. 13/6
/3, 1J in. dial, 150 lbs. . . 17/6
Second grade, 5/-, 8/6 and 10/6.
85
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.


Model Fittings
SINGLE UNION COCKS.
With ground coned union and boiler bush.
HEXAGON UNION COCKS.
Similar to above, but with female hexagon, for same size tube as
lining of union.
DOUBLE UNION COCKS.
With two ground coned unions.
STEAM UNION.
With ground coned joints.
STEAM UNION.
With hexagon male end. Very useful union for making connec-
tions to boilers, tanks, etc.
LOOSE UNION.
Consisting of nut, ring and threaded pipe.
ELBOWS.
Threaded inside.
MALE AND FEMALE ELBOWS.
Threaded.
TEE PIECES.
Threaded inside.
BRASS SOCKETS.
To suit brass and copper tube. Threaded.
OIL CUPS.
Plain, for bearings.
OIL CUPS.
With screw lid and hexagon base.
FILLING PLUGS.
Similar to illustration, but with hexagon head and bushing for
sweating into boiler.
PUSH-IN FILLING PLUGS (not illustrated).
For water and spirit tanks. They are a nice push-in fit. Made
with shoulder for soldering into tanks.
86
Corner Boundary Rd. and~Morey St», Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic.


For Engines and Boilers
No. 200/1, for I in. tube 3/9
/2, for 5/32 in. tube 4/6
A 3, for 3/16 in. tube 5/3
No. 202/1, for J in. tubes 3/9
/2, for 5/32 in. tube 4/6
/3, for 3/16 in. tubes 5/3
No. 203/1, for 1 in. tube 4/6
/2, for 5/32 in. tube 6/-
/3, for 3/16 in. tube 6/9
No. 220/1, for 1 in. tube 1/6
/2, for 5/32 in. tube 2/-
/3, for 3/16 in. tube 2/3
No. 222/1, for i in. tube 2/-
/2, for 5/32 in. tube 2/6
A 3, for 3/16 in. tube 3/9
No. 223/1, for I in. tub" 9d.
/2, for 5/32 in. tube 1/-
/3, for 3/16 in. tube 1/-
No. 230/1, for i in. tube 2/-
/2, for 5/32 in. tube 2/-
/3, for 3/16 in. tube 2/3
No. 232/1, for J in. tube 2/3
/2, for 5/32 in. tube 2/3
/3, for 3/16 in. tube 2/6
No. 233/1, for I in. tube 2/3
/2, for 5/32 in. tube 2/3
/3, for 3/16 in. tube 2/6
No. 235/1, for J in. tube sd.
/2, for 5/32 in. tube sd.
/3, for 3/16 in. tube 6d.
No. 183/1, 3/16 in. diameter Bd.
/2, I in. diameter lOd.
/3, 5/16 in. diameter 1/-
No. 184/1, i in. diameter 1/3
/3, I in. diameter 2/-
No. 210/1, I in. thread 2/-
/3, I in. thread 3/-
No. 212/2, i in. thread 3/-
87
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys’ Home, Mclb., Vie.


Model Fittings
STEAM STOP VALVES, STEAM WHEEL VALVES.
Full diameter steam way. Perfect models of the best steam
practice. Pressed fibre wheels are fitted, which are perfectly cool to
handle. The stop valve (illustrated) is provided with ground union,
and the wheel valve (not illustrated) is provided with two ground
coned unions, enabling valve to be interposed in steam way.
ANGLE NEEDLE VALVE.
Complete with coned union, as illustrated, and fitted with bushing
for sweating into boiler. A pressed fibre wheel is fitted.
CYLINDER DRAIN COCKS AND BENT NOSE COCKS.
Either type can be used as a boiler petcock.
VERTICAL HAND FORCE PUMP.
Very useful for fitting in tender of model locomotive or in small
tank for feeding water into any type of model boiler.
NEW ANGLE VALVE.
Specially designed for use as a small locomotive regulator, or in
cramped positions where the other forms of valve are unsuitable. The
body is machined from good sound gunmetal castings, and the plugs
are well fitted and ground in.
CHECK VALVE.
With cock, ground coned union and boiler bush. Thoroughly re-
liable and will not leak.
CHEAP PATTERN CHECK VALVE.
Without cock, but with ground coned union and bush for sweating
into boiler.
LUBRICATOR.
With cock and screw cap.
BOILER PETCOCK OR TRY COCK.
Specially designed for very small boilers. It is of the screw
down type and does not leak.
88
Corner Boundary Ed. and Morey St., Burwood, opp. Bnrwood Boya* Home, Melb., Vie.


For Engines and Boilers
If the Angle Valve (illustrated) is desired,
•specify No. 154. If straight-through type is
wanted, specify No. 153. Either type same price-
No. 153/2, for 5/32 in. pipe 9/-
or A 3, for ,3/16 in. pipe 107-
No. 154/4, for I in. pipe 117-
No. 174/1, for J in. pipe 8/6
174/2, for 5/32 in. pipe A. . 9/9
174/3, for 3/16 in. pipe . 10/6
No. 196/0; 7/32 in. body . . .. 3/-
/l, 1 in. body 3/6
/2, 5/16 in. body 47-
No. 723/2, | in., with J in. union 10/6
Other sizes on application.
No. 772/1, outside thread, i in. diameter.
Inside thread for 1 in. pipe 6/9
No. 772/3, outside thread, 5/16 in. dia-
meter. Inside thread for 3/16 in. pipe 9/9
No. 163/1, for i in. pipe 7/-
/2, for 5/32 in. pipe 8/6
/3, for 3/16 in- pipe 107-
No. 166/1, for I in. pipe 3/-
/2, for 5/82 in. pipe 4/-
/3, for 8/16 in. pipe 57-
No. 182/1, J in. diameter 3/6
/2, 5/16 in. diameter 4/6
/3, I in. diameter 5/6
/5, I in. diameter 7/6
No. 190, made in one size only 1/6
The handsome appearance and moderate price
should commend it.
89
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St.. Burwood, opp. Burwood Boys* Home, Melb.. Vic-


The Stuart
Displacement
Lubricator
No. 185
Price, 8/6.
The perfect Lubricator for steam engine cylinders of any size from
I in. x I in. up to 2 in. x 2 in.
The principle on which the Stuart Displacement Lubricator works
is as follows: —
It is attached to the steam chest or, preferably, the steam pipe.
Steam passes the horizontal screw down valve and, condensing on the
surface of the oil, sinks to the bottom. The displaced oil passes out
through the valve and mixes with the steam, lubricating slide valve,
piston, and piston and valve rod glands. The amount of oil is regu-
lated by the screw down valve.
The lubricator is emptied of water by closing the screw down
valve, opening the knurled valve at the bottom and removing the top
cover. It can then be refilled. This can be done whilst the engine
is running-
Use good cylinder oil and do not fill above the crossbar. The
lubricator holds sufficient oil to last one to two hours.
Do not use a spanner. Every joint is steam tight if the fingers
only are used.
This fitting will be a revelation to those who have only used an
ordinary lubricator. Full power and speed are maintained continu-
ously; wear is reduced to a minimum, and every drop of oil is used
to full advantage.
For model electric light plants it is a necessity. Model power
boat owners will be astonished at the results obtained by fitting it.
Our principals, Messrs. Stuart-Turner Ltd., have taken the
greatest care in, designing and manufacturing so that a really reliable
fitting should be produced. It is thoroughly in keeping with sound
steam engine practice.
CYLINDER OIL.
Always use good steam cylinder oil for the cylinder or cylinders
of your model, whether it is a marine engine, stationary engine or
locomotive. Other oils are useless at the temperature of steam.
Knowing the difficulty of obtaining reliable oil, we have arranged to
supply a first grade oil suitable for steam up to 125 lbs. pressure.
1/6 per tin.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
J. L. Anderson & Sons Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.
MEADMORE MODEL ENGINEERING CO.
Corner Boundary Rd. and Morey St.. Burwoad, opp. Harwood Boys* Home, Melb., Vic.
