

THE
LIFE OF HANDEL
A SKETCH,
COMPILED BY
Urafessor of Sliisit.
MELBOURNE :
JOSEPH WILKIE, 15 COLLINS STREET EAST,




THE
LIFE OF HANDEL
A SKETCH,
COMPILED BY
professor of Music.
MELBOURNE:
JOSEPH WILKIE, 15 COLLINS STREET EAST,
PRINTED BY
CLARSON, SHALLARD, & CO., 94 BOURKE STREET EAST.




LIFE OF HANDEL.
George Frederic Handel* tvas bom at Halle, on the Saale, Germany, on the
23rd of February, 1685. His father, a surgeon, and sixty-three years old when
this son, the issue of a second marriage, was born, determined to make a lawyer
of him; but nature had resolved to make him a composer; and the struggle
between nature and the father commenced almost at the very cradle of the future
composer of The Messiah. All possible means were taken by the father to oppose
the inclinations of the son. But the precautions taken to stifle the instincts of
the child, served only to fortify, by concentrating them. Young Handel found
means to procure a clavichord, or dumb spinet, and to conceal it in a garret, whither
he went to play, when all the household were asleep.
When about seven years old, his father paid a vdsit to a son by his former mar-
riage, who was then valet to the Duke of Saxe-Weissenfels. Handel asked for
permission to accompany his father, and, on being refused, did not insist, but
watched for the moment when the coach set off, and followed it on foot. His
father saw him, stopped the coach, and scolded him, when the boy, _as if not
hearing the scolding, recommenced his application, and at last had his request
granted. During his stay at the Duke’s residence, he could not forbear touching
every harpsichord he met with; and one day he contrived to gain admission to
the organ gallery of the chapel, and to play while the Duke was within hearing.
Attracted by the unusual style in Avhich the organ was played, the Duke made
inquiries, and on the trembling little artist being brought before him, he en-
couraged him, and soon won his secret from him. The Duke then spoke to his
father, and represented to him that it was a sort of crime against humanity to
stifle so much genius at its birth. Young Handel fastened his eyes upon his
powerful protector, without losing a word of the argument —never did he forget
it; and for ever aftemvards he regarded the Duke as his benefactor, for having
given such good advice to his father.
Old Handel, on his return to Halle, placed him under F. Zackau, the organist
of the cathedral, a musician of considerable ability. Zackau carefully instructed
Handel in thorough bass, and then laid before him German and Italian music,
sacred and profane, vocal and instrumental compositions of different schools, of
different styles, and by the best masters. They analyzed everything together.
Little Handel also learned to play on the harpsichord, organ, violin, and hautboy.
At length his worthy master confessed, honestly but proudly, that his pupil
knew more than himself, and advised that he should be sent to Berlin, where he
might still more improve by studying other models. Handel, therefore, in 1696,
went to Berlin, where the Italian opera was flourishing, under the direction of
Bononcini and Attilio, afterwards his rivals in London. He distinguished himself
in Berlin as a musician of such great talents, that the Elector of Brandenburg pro-
posed to take him into his service, and send him to Italy to complete his studies ;
but his father did not think it wise to chain the prospects of his son to the Court
of Berlin; and, as in those days it was not prudent to oppose a prince on his own
territory, Handel was brought back somewhat hurriedly to his native town.
The father of our composer died shortly after the return from Berlin, leaving
him poor; and it became necessary to provide for his existence as well as his
* Works consulted by the compiler :
Life of Handel. By Y. Schoolcher.
A General History of Music. By C. Burney.
Universal Lexicon der Tonkunst. By F. S. Gassner.


renown. Halle was too small to contain him, and he went to Hamburg in July,
1703.
Almost the first acquaintance he made there, was Mattheson, a composer, singer,
and actor, who conducted him to his father’s house, where young Handel was
received with kindness and hospitality. At first, Handel only played a ripieno
violin in the opera orchestra; but his superior talents were soon discovered, and
he and Mattheson appointed directors of the opera.
Handel and Mattheson became intimate friends, until the occurrence of the
following adventureMattheson had composed an opera called Cleopatra , which
was performed in December, 1704, in which Handel played the harpsichord, and
he himself acted the part of Anthony. Mattheson, upon the death of Anthony,
which happened early in the piece, wanted to preside at the harpsichord, in the
character of composer; but Handel refused to give up this post to him. This
occasioned so violent a quarrel between them, that on going out of the opera-house
a duel ensued, and nothing but a large metal button on Handel’s coat, on which
his antagonist’s weapon broke, saved a life that soon proved of such inestimable
value. Thanks to a few friends, a speedy reconciliation took place, and they
became afterwards greater friends than ever.
Shortly after this, Handel’s first opera, Almira , was brought out, on the Bth of
January, 1705, with the utmost success ; it ran thirty nights uninterruptedly. He
next produced his operas of Nero, Florinda, and Daphne.
Having now, by his operas, acquired sufficient means, he resolved to indulge his
desire of seeing Italy.
It was at Hamburg that he received from his mother, in spite of her poverty, a
sum of money, in the belief tbat he had not enough for his needs ; but he sent
the money back again to his good mother, adding to it a present from himself.
Handel first went to Florence (July, 1706), where he was welcomed in the most
flattering manner by the Grand Duke, for whom he composed the opera Roderigo.
He next proceeded to Yenice (1707), where he brought out his Aggripii\a with
unbounded applause ; there he also made the acquaintance of Scarlatti, Gasparini,
and Lotti. Quitting Yenice, Handel visited Rome in April 1707, where he was
hospitably entertained and greatly caressed by the Cardinals Ottoboni and
Parnphili.
At Rome he again met Scarlatti, who was thought to be the best player on the
harpsichord and the organ in all Italy, and Cardinal Ottoboni persuaded them to
compete with each other. Upon the harpsichord the victory was doubtful, but
upon the organ Scarlatti himself confessed the superiority of his antagonist. The
oratorios II Trionfo del Tempo and La Resurreczione he composed in Rome. From
Rome Handel went, in 1708, to Naples, composed there his Italian serenata Acts
Galatea e Polifemo, and then paid a second visit to Florence, Yenice, and Rome,
in search of employment; but not finding any that suited him (for he was a
Lutheran), he left Italy with the intention to settle in Germany, and, first of all,
went to Hanover about the autumn of 1709. The Elector of Hanover to
retain him as his chapel-master, at a salary of 1500 ducats ; but Handel, having
met, at the court, some British noblemen, who had pressed him to visit England,
and, being persuaded by them to undertake that journey, he did not wish to en-
gage himself, except upon the condition of being allowed to accomplish it. This
condition was accepted. He paid a visit to his mother, who was now blind, and
to his good old master Zackau, and arrived in London at the close of 1710.
The fashionable world of London was at that time greatly interested in Italian
operas.
The poet Aaron Hill, then director of the Haymarket Theatre, looked upon the
arrival of Handel as a God-send. He made an English libretto out of Tasso’s
Jerusalem Delivered, which Handel set to music, whilst Giacomo Rossi translated
it into Italian. Rossi was quite unable to keep pace with the composer, and the
manner in which he asks pardon for the defects of his poem is rather humorous :
“ The Signor Handel,” says he, “ the Orpheus of our age, in setting to music this
lay from Parnassus, has scarcely given me time enough to write it, and I have
beheld, to my great astonishment, an entire opera harmonized to the last degree of
perfection, in the short space of a fortnight, by this sublime genius. I pray you
then,” &c. The first representation of this opera, Rinaldo, took place on the 24th
of February, 1711, with immense success.


Walsh, the publisher, was said to have gained £l5OO by the publication of
Rinaldo, which drew from Handel this complaint:—“ My dear sir, as it is only
right, that we should be upon an equal footing, you shall compose the next opera,
and I will sell it.”
After staying about seven months in London, Handel returned to his post, pro-
mising to return soon. His stay at Hanover was not long. The place was too
small for that mighty genius, and he could not forget the triumphs of London;
so he demanded a fresh leave of absence, and reappeared in England in January,
1712. He produced his operas Pastor Fido and Theseus, and when the peace of
Utrecht was concluded in 1713, was selected by Queen Anne to write the music
for the solemn thanksgiving. The Te Deum and Jubilate, which he composed for
that occasion are still distinguished by the name Utrecht. As a reward for this
service the Queen settled upon him a pension for life of £2OO per annum. His
promise to return to Hanover was now either forgotten, or its fulfilment delayed ;
so that, when the Elector of Hanover, now George 1., came over in 1714, Handel,
conscious how ill he had deserved at his hands, did not dare to present himself at
court. However, his noble friend, Kilmansegge, with others of the nobility,
having contrived that he should meet the king, during a royal exclusion on the
Thames, with a band of wind-instruments, playing the Water-music, written for
this occasion, the composer was restored to favor, and had his pension doubled.
Handel was afterwards appointed music-master to the daughters of the Prince of
Wales, and for this he received a third pension of £2OO.
He was now permanently settled in England, and his reputation stood unrivalled,
At about 1717 he paid another visit to Germany, where he wrote the oratorio,
The Passion. The two next years, 1718-1720, he spent with James, first Duke of
Chandos, at whose noble seat at Cannons he composed many anthems, the serenata
Acis and Galatea in English, and the oratorio of Esther.
While Handel was thus engaged at Cannons, the nobility established the Royal
Academy of Music, for the purpose of having Italian operas performed. Bononcini
and Attilio, from Berlin, and Handel were invited to compose the operas. The
latter was commissioned to engage the singers, and with this view Handel went to
Dresden, whence he brought Signor Senesino and Signora Durastanti, besides
some others.
Handel’s opera, Radamisto, produced 1720, had a success almost unparalleled;
but he had to contend with two formidable rivals. However by the superior
grandeur and excellence of his compositions, he distanced them soon altogether,
and held unrivalled possession of the stage.
This victory gained by Handel over his rivals only served, as is usual in such
cases, to excite all the more vehemently the cabal, which was arising among a
party of the nobility against him, and in favor of Bononcini. Handel was not
much of a courtier; he was jealous of his independence, proud and always digni-
fied, and many noble lords failed to obtain from him the submission which they
expected. The wit of the party, which created this rivalry, continued to keep it
alive. Swift, who admired nothing, and who had no ear, wrote an epigram upon
the subject, which was set as “ a cheerful glee for four voices
Some say that Signor Bononcini,
Compared to Handel, is a ninny:
Whilst others say, that to him, Handel
Is hardly fit to hold a candle.
Strange that such difference should be
’Twixt Tweedledum and Tweedledee.
But on the other side, Henry Carey sung Handel’s praise in the following
verses:—
TO ME. GEOKGE FREDEEIC HANDEL.
The envy and the wonder of mankind
Must terminate, hut never .can thy lays ;
For when, absorbed in elemental flame,
This world shall vanish, Music will exist.
Then their sweet strains, to native skies returning,
Shall breathe in songs of seraphims and angels,
Commixt and lost in harmony eternal
That fills all Heaven !
In 1723 Handel produced one of his best operas, Ottone , which Burney selects


as the flower of the composer’s dramatic works; and another biographer relates
that an eminent master, who was not on good terms with Handel, said of an air
in Ottone “ That great bear was certainly inspired when he wrote that song. In
Ottone the celebrated Signora Cuzzoni made her first appearance ; she was engaged
at the enormous salary of £2,000 per season. At a rehearsal of this opera, one ot
Handel’s violent exhibitions of temper nearly ended tragically. Signora Luzzom
had declared that she would not sing the air “ Falsa imagine.” The ruling spirit
of the great man had already been irritated by some symptoms of insubordination,
and this declaration carried him quite beyond bounds. He flew at the rebel,
savin", “ I always knew you were a very devil, but I shall now let yoii know that
lam Beelzebub, the prince of devils and seizing her with one hand, he ran to
the window, and swore that if she did not sing the air immediately, he would
throw her into the street. She was afraid, and sang it forthwith. In this very
air she had afterwards great success,
The season of 1723 was adorned by two other operas by Handel, Julius Ccesar
and Flavius. The first, sparkling with beauties, often reappeared upon the stage,
and at one of its performances, a piece of the machinery tumbled down irom the
roof of the theatre upon the stage, just as Senesino had chanted forth these words,
“ Cesare non seppe mai, che sia timore,” (Caesar does not know what fear is).
The poor hero was so frightened, that he trembled, lost his voice, and tell crymg.
Every tyrant, or tyrannical minister, is just such a Caesar as Senesino.
In 1727 George II succeeded his father, and Handel composed the Coronation
Anthems. Some other operas followed; but neither the genius of the principal
composer, nor the merit of the artists was sufficient to attract the public, ihe
theatre became more and more neglected, consequently the promoters of the
society closed their theatre in June, 1728, and the Italian company dispersed over
the continent. , , , , , , , ~ . ,
At this very time Gay’s Beggar’s Opera had been brought out, and the whole
toAvn rushed to admire it, which caused people to say that “ it made Gay rich and
Handel now was worth £IO,OOO, which he had saved out of the piofits of his
works In spite of the indifference which the public had been manifesting, and
the enormous loss which had been incurred in the face of a subscription supported
by the entire aristocracy, he made arrangements with the proprietor of the Hay-
market Theatre to bring out operas there, in partnership, for three years; and
he went to Italy to engage singers. After his return he produced opera alter
opera, with but partial success, although he had the special protection of the
king and a portion of the nobility. When thus suffering, both as artist and as
manager, a circumstance, quite independent of his own free will, brought him a
moment’s respite. . _ .
Handel had never thought of offering his oratorio Esther to the public; but
some parties, having obtained a copy of the score, caused it to be executed, though
still in a private manner. The success of this performance determined a specu-
lator to have it publicly performed, and this provocation induced Handel to revise
Esther, and perform it fork's benefit. He produced it on the stage, without action,
on the 2nd of May, 1732, with complete success. In a similar style he produced
Acis and Galatea. . „
The year 1732 is, therefore, the date of a great event in the history of music.
Hitherto England only knew oratorios by name. It was the first time that the
public had heard a work of that nature, and it showed itself immediately sensible
of its excellence. It was tbe applause accorded to Esther that induced Handel to
compose other oratorios; and here, therefore, is the source of the magnificent
works, which will be his glory, and contribute to that of Great Britain, to the
Cn On thcTll'th of March, 1733, he produced the oratorio Deborah, in which he
developed that distinctive character of modern oratorios, the preponderance of
choruses; and he also greatly augmented the accompaniment. Prejudice will
take advantage of everything, and those powerful choral combinations which he
invented, were accused of excess and violence; he was reproached with having
exaggerated the orchestra, whilst he, on the other side, complained of want ot
means to express his conceptions. ,
About this time there was nothing left unturned against him by his opponents ;


and, to make things worse, he unfortunately became involved in a quarrel with
Senesino and Cuzzoni, which threw the whole body of his former patrons into
parties, the greater part of the nobility siding with the singers. But still Handel
He next, in July, 1733, gave some performances at Oxford, at a “ Public Act of
the University.” The oratorio Athalia, which he there produced, was the cause
of the diploma of a doctor of music being offered to him; but he refused it. On
being asked one day why he did not take his degree, he replied, ‘ Yat de dyfil I
trow my money away for dat wich de blockhead wish ? Ino want.
After his return from Oxford he again went to the continent, to engage singers ;
and on his return began the season, in 1734, alone, without assistance, and at his
own risk. When the nobility (who had established an opera in opposition to his)
saw him assume this attitude, they became still more vehemently irritated against
him ; the few friends who had remained on his side abandoned him, the spirit of
their order became mixed up in the matter, and between that order and him,
therefore, there was open war. Whoever refused to renounce him had no hope
of any favor from the aristocracy, and as it became fashionable to despise Handel,
every upstart took care to do so.
In January, 1736, he produced Alexander's Feast with the greatest success; but
still it could neither redeem the losses of the past, nor stay the ruin which was
coming on. After successive defeats his resources became exhausted. he had
spent the last penny of his L" 10, () 00, he had contracted debts, he was obliged to
confess himself vanquished, to close his theatre (1737), and (what vyas more
grievous to so honest a man) to suspend his payments. But the fallen giant had
at least the consolation of seeing his enemies wounded to death. General indif-
ference compelled them also to quit the field of battle, having sustained a loss of
£12,000. . ~ . ,
The struggle, to which Handel had succumbed, not only ruined him, but so
much agitation and such excessive labor had undermined his iron constitution,
and also affected him to such a degree that his mental faculties were temporarily
disturbed. At the same time he had an attack of paralysis, and was with the
greatest difficulty persuaded to go to the waters of Aix-la-Ghapelle, vyhere he was
restored in less than six weeks. On his arrival in London he immediately set to
work again; he had debts to pay, and he scarcely gave himself time to breathe.
At the death of Queen Caroline he wrote the Funeral Anthem. (Nov. 1737.)
The success of his operas was but poor, and at this very time the vindictive
husband of the Signora Strada threatened to arrest him for debt. At this crisis
his friends persuaded him to invoke the gratitude of the public, by giving a con-
cert for his own benefit; this he did. It being known that his misfortunes were
unmerited, and as his courage and character were in high esteem, the appeal of
the great artist was not in vain. The nett receipts amounted to £BOO.
One uncommon tribute of respect was paid to him by Mr. Tyers, proprietor of
Yauxhall, who placed a marble statue of him, by Roubilliac, in the gardens.
This statue has since become the property of the Sacred Harmonic Society, and
stands in Exeter Hall. . .
Among the number of Handel’s faithful admirers, it is only just to include
George 11. His majesty attended regularly all the oratorios which were deserted
by the whole court, and often by the town.
Burney relates a witty saying of Lord Chesterfield’s upon this point, “What,
my lord,” said some one to him, as he was coming out of Covent Garden one even-
ing in the middle of the performance, “is there not an oratorio?” “Yes,” he
replied, “ they are now performing; but I thought it best to retire, lest I should
disturb the king in his privacies.”
Having nothing more to do for the Italian opera in 1738, Handel began the
oratorio of Saul on the 3rd of July, and finished it on the 27th of September four-
days afterwards, on the Ist of October, he commenced Israel in Egypt , and finished
it in twenty-seven days. . . .
In the history of the arts there are accidents which will remain incomprehensi-
ble, and one of these is to be found in the fact, that, Israel in Egypt , the hercules of
oratorios, was despised by its contemporaries. On the 22nd of November, 1739,
Handel produced St. Cecilia’s Day; on the 27th of February, 1740, L’ Allegro , II
Penseroso, and II Moderate; but L’ Allegro could no more move the people of those
days than it could the “ seas and woods.”


Although having sustained heavy losses, Handel gave a performance for the
benefit of his brethren in distress, on the 14th of March, 1741.
The league which was banded against him was so powerful, that his efforts to
win fortune back were entirely thrown away. Even his finest English works did
not escape this fatal destiny. In spite of his courage and activity, both of which
were immense, and indefatigable as was his genius, he could not retrieve himself
from ruin. The position was a cruel one.
For a long time he had been wished for in Ireland, he might, therefore, expect
to find there a public more enlightened, or at any rate, more favorably disposed than
that of London, and he resolved to make the journey. He set out about the 4th
of November, 1741, but was stayed by contrary winds at Chester. Wishing to
employ this delay in trying over some pieces of his new oratorio, The Messiah, he
sought for some one who could read music at sight, and a house-painter, named
Janson, was indicated to him as one of the best musicians attached to the cathe-
dral. A meeting took place, but poor Janson managed so badly that the irascible
composer became purple with anger, and, after swearing, as was his wont, in four
or five languages at a time, cried out, “You scoundrel! tit you not tell me dat
you could sing at soite?” “Yes, sir,” replied the good fellow, “but not at first
sight.” Handel, upon this, burst out laughing, and the rehearsal proceeded no
further. He was well received in Dublin, and his concerts brought him in a great
deal, both of honor, of pleasure, and also of money. On the 13th of April, 1742,
The Messiah was performed for the first time, for the benefit of the city prison, with
the utmost success.
It is a curious matter of detail of those times, that at every important perfor-
mance, the advertisement states that “ no ladies will be admitted with hats, and
they are particularly requested to come without feathers, and very small hoops, if
any.” It seems as if these fashionable follies were chronic, for a similar announce-
ment by the Philharmonic Society, apropos of crinolines, would not be out of place
at the present time.
After a sojourn of nine months Handel returned from Ireland, on the 13th of
August, leaving to that noble country the glory of having worthily appreciated
all his masterpieces, and of having recommenced his fortune. The Messiah
had been composed in twenty-three days! Handel was then fifty-six years
old. As if The Messiah were to illustrate all the best qualities of Handel,
that masterpiece of the artist, which gave the most to the poor during his life,
is, of the productions of the human mind, that which has most contributed to
all kinds of charities. Truly does it deserve the touching eulogy, that “It has fed
the hungry, clothed the naked, and fostered the orphan.”
Arrived again in London, he first produced Samson, and afterwards The Messiah,
but not one of the London journals says a word about it. What an age for the
arts ! One fact, however, is related by Dr. Beattie in a letter; he says, “ When
Handel’s Messiah was first performed the audience was exceedingly struck and
affected by the music in general; but when the chorus struck up, ‘ For the Lord
God omnipotent,’ in the hallelujah, they were so transported, that they, altogether,
with the king, started up and remained standing till the chorus ended.” It is
from this circumstance that the custom has arisen of rising during the perforrnanee
of this piece. This “ homage,” as Macfarren well says, is as honorable to the
English public as it is worthy of the immortal composer. Handel’s next produc-
tions were, Semele, Dettingen Te Deum and Anthem, Joseph, Hercules, and Belshazzar ;
but the success was far from brilliant.
The faction of the nobility still preserved its inconceivable fury against him.
He had chosen the Lent season for his performances, because, all the theatres being
then closed and all kinds of pleasure interdicted, he had a better chance of attrac-
ting an audience. But some of the great lords violated even the severity of Lent,
and invited the fashionable world to their festivities in order to beguile them from
the temptation of attending the oratorios.
This unworthy war, waged against a single man by a powerful class, was only
too successful; he was a second time compelled to suspend his payments about
1745.
He composed, 1746, An Occasional Oratorio, to pay his debts. Judas Maccabceus
was the next, and it had a success which has never deserted it. In the year 1747
he produced Alexander Bcelus and Joshua; in 1748, Solomon, Susannah, and the


Fireworks Music : the last with, the greatest success. Next he gave, 1749, Theodora.
There are several amusing anecdotes about this Theodora, which Handel seems
to have loved as a mother does a weakly son. Burney says, “His Theodora was
so unfortunately neglected that he was glad to give orders for admission to any
professors who did not perform. Two of these gentlemen, having afterwards
applied to Handel for an order to hear The Messiah, he cried out, ‘ Oh, your sar-
vant, meine herren, you are tamnaple tainty, you would not co to Teodora ; der
was room enough to tance dere when dat was performed.’ ”
At the second performance he treated the matter with witty pleasantry: “ A
gentleman who was on intimate terms with Mr. Handel, imagining it to he a los-
ing night was willing to avoid speaking to him that evening; but he, observing
him at some distance, went up to him and said, ‘ Will you be here next Friday
night? I will play it to you.’ ” But on another occasion he was not so tractable,
for, upon hearing that a person of note from the city had undertaken to engage
for all the boxes if it was represented again, “Heis a fool,’’ replied Handel; “the
Jews will not come to it as to Judas Maccabseus, because it is a Christian story;
and the ladies will not come because it is a virtuous one.” When he said that he
must have been thinking of the soirees and halls which the great ladies gave in
order to deprive him of his audiences.
The oratorio of Jephtha Handel composed in 1751, and it was at this period that
his eyes began to he affected with a gutta serena, which sunk his spirits to a state of
the deepest despondence, and terminated in total blindness. When the event was
decided his mind seems to have recovered its tone, and he sent for his pupil,
Christopher Smith, who was in France at that time, to assist him in the perform-
ance of his oratorios.
He continued his performances to nearly the last day of his life, deriving con-
siderable pecuniary advantage from them, for, though still opposed by most of
the nobility, the large mass of the people actively supported him now.
Annually he gave The Messiah for the benefit of the Foundling Hospital.
To see him, however, whose works had so often charmed an admiring audience,
led to the organ and then led to make his obeisance, or when his own composition,
“Total eclipse! No Sun, no Moon!
All dark amidst the blaze of noon !
O glorious Light! No cheering ray,
To glad my eyes with welcome day;
Why thus deprived thy prime decree ?
Sun, Moon, and Stars, are dark to me."
was performed, it is difficult to determine whether he himself or the spectators
were most affected.
The last oratorio he attended was the Messiah, on the 6th of April, 1759, and,
after returning home from this performance he went to bed, never to rise again.
He expired on Good Friday, the 13th of April, 1759, aged seventy-four years, one
month, and twenty-one days. He was buried in Poet’s Corner, Westminster
Abbey, where a monument is erected to his memory.
The public had become more and more attracted to the performances of this
great master, and the seasons, from 1750-1759, must have been very profitable, to
have enabled him to amass £20,000. He bequeathed £lOOO to the Royal Society
of Musicians.
Handel was in person a large and very portly man; his gait, which was ever
sauntering, was rather ungraceful. His features were finely marked, and the
general east of his countenance, placid, bespeaking dignity, tempered with bene-
volence, and every quality of the heart that has a tendency to beget confidence
and ensure esteem.
Handel was extremely witty. Once, at a concert, Dubourg, the excellent violin
player, having a Coda ad libitum to play, wandered about in different keys so long
that he seemed quite bewildered, and to have forgotten his original key. Even-
tually he recollected himself, came to the shake, and concluded, whereupon
Handel, with his usual coolness, cried out, loud enough to be heard by the audi-
ence, “ You are welcome at home, Mr. Dubourg.”
Once a singer reproached him with accompanying him badly, and finished by
saying, that if he persisted in that manner he would jump upon his harpsichord
and smash it to pieces. “ O,” replied Handel, “let me know when you will do


that, and I will advertise it, for I am sure more people will come to see you jump
than to hear you sing.”
Handel was impetuous, rough, and peremptory in his manner and conversation,
hut totally devoid of ill nature or malevolence : indeed, there was an original
humor and pleasantry in his most lively sallies of anger and impatience, which
with his broken English, were extremely risible.
In spite of his disposition for merriment he was very proud, and very reserved
towards every body, the little as well as the great.
His generosity, benevolence, and charity, were particularly prominent.
He possessed a noble spirit of independence which was never known to forsake
him. But there is, unhappily, a great defect to be set against the noble qualities
of Handel. He was of an excessively violent temper ; and for the slightest reasons
he became fearfully enraged. Bushby relates a scene of violence, which, by its
excess, is comic:—“Handel had such a remarkable irritability of nerve that he
could not bear to hear the tuning of instruments, and therefore, this was always
done before he arrived at the theatre. A musical wag, determined to extract some
mirth from his irascibility of temper, stole into the orchestra one night, when the
Prince of Wales was to be present, and untuned the instruments. On the arrival
of the Prince, Handel gave the signal to begin, con spirito ; but such was the hor-
rible discord that the enraged master started up from his seat, and, having over-
turned a double bass which stood in his way, he seized a drum, which he threw with
such violence at the leader of the band that he lost his full -bottomed wig in the
effort. Without replacing it he advanced to the foot of the orchestra, breathing
vengeance, but so choked with passion that utterance was denied him. In this
ridiculous attitude he stood, staring and stamping for some moments, amidst the
general convulsion of laughter; nor could he be prevailed upon to resume his seat
until the Prince went in person, and with much difficulty appeased his wrath.
Handel was a gourmand , and this is the vulnerable point upon which not even
his friends have attempted to defend him.
One day, being obliged to dine at a tavern, he ordered enough for three, and
being impatient at the delay, he asked why they did not serve up ? “We will
do so,” replied the host “as soon as the company arrives.’ “ Den prmg up te
tinner prestissimo,” replied Handel, “I am de gombany.”
He lived very retired and never married.
Whatever touched his musical sense excited him to the utmost. On being ques-
tioned as to his ideas and feelings when composing the Hallelujah chorus, he
replied in his imperfect English, “ I did think I did see all heaven before me, and
the great God himself.” .
It is said, that a friend, calling upon him when he composed, “ He was despised
and rejected of men,” found him absolutely sobbing.
Handel is the giant of the art. Every competent judge who contemplates
the grandeur, beauty, science, variety, and number of his productions, will feel
for him that admiration, which the great masters after him, have expressed.
“He is the father of us all,” exclaimed the patriarchal Haydn. “Handel, sard
the dramatic Mozart, “ knows better, than any one of us all, what of pro-
ducing effect; when he chooses he can strike like a thunderbolt. The lyrical
Beethoven called him “The monarch of the musical kingdom. He was the
greatest composer that ever lived,” said he to Moscheles. “ I would uncover my
head, and kneel before his tomb.” Beethoven was on the point of death, when
one of his friends sent him, as a present, forty volumes by Handel. He ordered
that they should be brought into his chamber, gazed upon them with a reanimated
eye, and then pointing to them with his finger, he pronounced these words,
“ There is the truth.”
CLARSON, SHALLARD, & Co,, PRINTERS, 94 BOUBKE STREET EAST.




MR. CHARLES ELSASSER,
f IlfiMtl if Httsii u
Begs to announce that he continues to give Lessons in
the Theory of Music, in Singing, on the Pianoforte,
and Harmonium.
48 STEPHEN STREET,
BETWEEN COLLINS & LITTLE COLLINS STEEETS.
S{wfe |kims mib Rliioit Maxtjmist,
15 COLLINS STREET EAST,
MELBOURNE.
NOVELLO’S CHEAP ORATORIOS AND MASSES,
{ln Cloth or Paper Covers).
mmm wm mmmmmm mw ®i«,
c®|w# ititbii, ipn, tu
‘ Wesleyan Psalmist,’ Baxter’s ( Harmonia Sacra,’ (Scores & Parts).
HULLAHS PART MUSIC.
THE ‘ORPHEUS’ COLLECTION OE PART-SONGS.
Dlotello's €*ict inHc, UtmnUs, &c.
poptulair ojpbeaSj m ¥®(sal scqjrie & wuphofip wmm a
MOORE’S MELODIES, NEATLY BOUND,
PIANOFORTES BY ALL THE EMINENT MAKERS,
*• Prepared for this Climate.
SECOND-HAND INSTRUMENTS TAKEN IN EXCHANGE.
Clarson, Shallard, & Co., Music and General Printers, 94 Bourke St. Eas'
