

roit^i


FRANCE
C
I.
You've seen the sights of other
lands. Now see the wonders of your own
Sit
M
s
0
/pR
ice
Get mounted on the
INDIAN
Motocycle
and see A ustralia
Write for literature
RHODES MOTOR CYCLE CO. PTY. LTD
109-113 Russell Street, Melbourne


Introduction
THE object in re-publishing the souvenir issue of THE VOICE OF THE
BATTALION is to provide, at the request of a number of the boys, a lasting
literary and photographic memento for those who have had the honor to belong
to the 23rd, and a memorial to those who have fallen in its ranks. Even
although it may not be altogether pictorially complete, inasmuch as it is impos-
sible to include every member of the unit, it contains a brief account of our
doings, covering the whole period of service for the Empire, written jointly by Col.
G. H. Knox, C.M.G., Col. W. Brazenor, D.5.0., and others. The photographs are a
faithful reproduction of the subjects named, and taken in the field, as men are "while
at war." The original blocks were engraved in England. With the exception of the
cover the book is a reproduction of the work of our own little printing plant on the
battlefront.
THE EDITOR.


OUR HONOUR LIST
V.C.:
Pte. Robt. Mactier.
C.M.G.:
Lieut.-Col. G. H. Knox.
D.5.0.:
Lieut.-Col. W. K. Fethers, Lieut.-Col. W. Brazenor, Major W. M. Trew Lieut P T
Smith. Member of M.E. Order of British Empire: Capt. Barnes
M.C.:
Major Mclntyre, Major R. F. Smith, Major Pedler; Capts. P. G. Parkes (and Bar),
McGregor Dunn Bazeley, Farrell, Hinchliffe, Pascoe; Lieuts. Pearce, C. D. Fethers
Gordon, Maddrell, Robertson, Brewster; C.S.M. R. Louttit; Capts. R. Moss, W. A. Mar-
Lieuts. F. J. Jenkins, J. A. Wiltshire, T. E. Lowe, S. Hodgson. W Summers
r" u' S lh , ott ' G ' W ' Griffin > H - G - Holland, L. G. Short, L. Addison, W. R." Finlayson'
C. B. Hislop. J '
D.C.M.:
Lieut. R. M. Guthbertson; 2nd Lieuts. Tremaine, Grieve, E. Cavanagh; Sgts. Boal
Osborne, Russell, Robertson; Cpls. Bell, Cavanagh; Srgts. N. C. Hill, V. Dixon
G. Warren, T. A Dykes, J. A. McClure, F. Heinz, E. G. Harris; Cpls. Hutchinson!
Ryan; Pte. A. Moore.
M.M.:
Lieuts. N. Rattray, L. Painter; 2nd Lieuts. C. Smith, F. Jenkins, F. Kirkwood, J. L.
Scales; C.S.M. Gabriel; Sgts F E Bradshaw, R. Crow, C. Appleyard, W. J. Graham,
1. Heath, R. Pitts, V. Dixon, S. R. Bagnall, H. Burnell, Payne, G. Breen, C. Wright;
Cpls H. Pettit (and Bar), N. Coe, F. Lane, Kew Ming, W. Ellis, W Shields Pnfk
T. Hynes, O. Johnson, C. Hatt, H. Spotswood, E. Trent, G. O'Connor- L-Cnls Cd'
Milne, P. Fitzgerald, S. W. Routley, A. E. Trent, G. O'Connor; L.-Cn'ls C Milnp
F'u S V W " Routle Y> A - Rix > F - Dedman, H. Brereton; Ptes P Smith Nut'
tall, McCheyne, Louden, Underwood, Edwards, L. Foley, Brown, Jackson Hooner
Higgins, Farndon, Rekes, McPhee, Hargreaves, Greig, Hearne, Simmons, G H Parker'
Engel, Thomas, Yams, Moar, Harrip, Byrne, Davey, Breen, Lowen, Lyon Bell'
Harrop, Leviston, Toppm Capon, Morley, Gray, Lillico, McCorm.ack, Godfrey'
Hopper, Cornell, Quill; Sgts. Booth, Jacques, G. Stewart, W. Stevens, D McDonald'
A. Brown; C.S.M A Bertuch; Cpls. M. Elder, Miller, Burke, C. G. McCoombe
A. S. Ellems, J. A. Schmidt, D Gorrie; L.-Cpls. J. Petrie, Cubbins, Martindale Re'
Hampstead, Donoghue, S. Plunkett, H. G. Taylor, W. T. Carter, H. Yeomans J.' h'
Morton, H. C. Green; Dvr. W. A. Martin; Ptes. G. M. Cunningham, G. Winter E B
Oelson, E. J. YVilson, E. Auty, McLarty, J. Quinn, F. Matthews, O'Meara, Dynes' A*
Thompson C Uttmg, Featherstone, Baker, Nicholls, A. Adam, J. D. Harvey P. H j'
S. B. Hancock, G. E. Barnard, W. Dafter, A. Langley, M. J. Martin C A
Young T. Delahtunty, R. Comb, G. Vanevery, H. T. Hodson, J. Mackie, A. F. Brakey
R. Mclntyre, J. Lacey.
M.S.M.:
R.Q.M.S. Geo. Grant, Sergt. H. Cockburn, Sergt. J. Enticknapp
BELGIAN CROIX DE GUERRE:
Major D. Beith; Sergt. C. J. Gardner; Ptes. T. McGuiness, P. L. Nitsche
Sergt. C. J. Gardiner; Ptes. T. McGuiness, P. L. Nitsche.
MEDAL MILITAIRE:
Sgt. Homewood.


HISTORY OF THE BATTALION.
THE 23rd Battalion was formed
as a Unit of the 6th Bri-
gade in Broadmeadows Camp,
Victoria, in March, 1915. The
men were marched out of the
Depot in dungarees to their'
new Battalion lines, and up till Bth May,
1915, spent their time in equipping, cloth-
ing, and becoming- acquainted with the ele-
ments of discipline and drill. The original
seven officers were Lt.-Col.
Morton, C.0.; Maj. (now
Lt.-Col) G. H. Knox,
C.M.G., Second in Com-
mand; Lt. (later Major)
E. Brind. Adjt. (since kill-
ed at Pozieres); Capt.
(afterwards Major) M.
Baird, O.C. "A" Coy.
(later invalided from Lem-
nos, and now Minister
of Education, Victoria),;
Capt. (now Major) Mat-
thews, O.C. "B" Coy.;
Capt. (now Lieut.-Col.)
W. Brazenor, D.5.0., O.C.
"C" Coy.; Lt. (later Capt.)
Kennedy, O.C. "D" Coy.
(since killed).
From the very first the
Battn. was known as one
that stood out for strict
discipline, good work, and
a splendid feeling of com-
radeship amongst all
ranks. A Band was
formed from the first, and
proved very efficient.
Wet and trying condi-
tions were experienced in
the Broadmeadows Camp,
and no one was sorry to
seven deaths, not all, however, from the
23rd Battn., as the 24th were on board as
well. Lt.-Col. G. Morton was O.C. troop 3.
His health broke down badly at Colombo,
and although he recovered somewhat, the
heat seemed to very much affect his health,
as he really never again took an active
part with the Battalion. Colombo was a
pleasant break, and Alexandria reached
about 20th June. At this port the
Battalion entrained for
Cairo, and went into camp
at Heliopolis. Then fol-
lowed ten weeks of hard
work and training. The
sth and 7th Brigades ar-
rived, and eventually the
whole were formed into
2nd Division. The wea-
ther during these months
was exceedingly hot, but
the men suffered very
little. During this train-
ing- period Majoy Knox
was promoted Lt.-Colonel,
and to command, Col. Mor-
ton having to resign on ac-
count of ill-health. Capt.
Baird was promoted Ma-
jor, and second in com-
mand, and Lt. Beith took
command of "A" Com-
pany. Towards the end of
August, 1915, the Brigade
had orders to move to
Gallipoli. The band, tents
and mess gear were left
behind, also our transport,
except ammunition mules.
These came as far as Lem-
nos, and afterwards went
to Salonica, where they
embark, which we did at Port Melbourne, on
the troopship "Euripides" (Capt. Douglas,
R.N.R., Commander), on the morning of the
Bth May, 1915.
The long voyage to Egypt was devoid of
any particular event. The ports called at
were Albany, Colombo Suez, Port Said,
and finally Alexandria. Very hot weather
was experienced, resulting in a good deal
of sickness, and, unfortunately, six or
ORIGINAL OFFICERS.


eventually took part in the retreat.
The Battalion detrained at Alexan-
dria and embarked, less one company, on
the "Haverfoi'd," "B" Coy. embarking on
the ill-fated "Southland." At ten o'clock
on the morning of September 2nd we
sighted the Southland, and knew at once
she was in trouble. She was down at the
head, and her boats were pulling away. A
hospital ship and some torpedo boats were
standing by and picking up those in the
water, as some of the life-boats had over-
turned. The "Haverford" soon came up to
the scene. We were all anxious about our
comrades of the 21st Battn., and especially
our "B" Company. We were soon to learn
that there had been casualties from the ex-
plosion, as well as some men drowned. The
whole Brigade was also to mourn the loss
of Colonel Linton, our Brigadier. The
life-boat he was in overturned, and the
Brigadier died on a French torpedo boat
after a long immersion in the water. The
Gaverford's boats were soon out picking up
survivors. The behaviour of all ranks was
splendid, and no praise would be too great
for the men of our gallant "B" Coy.—their
troopship had been shattered by the explo-
sion; they had sustained heavy casualties,
and, in face of all this, their spirits were
wonderful. The greatest credit was due to
Capt. (now Major) Matthews for his sol-
dierly bearing, good leadership, and disre-
gard of personal danger. After picking up
all possible, the "Haverford" was ordered
to proceed. Just as the engines had
started, the submarine guard reported that
a torpedo was fired at us and just missed
our stern. Lemnos was reached a few
hours later, and we anchored in Mudros
harbour. It was the boys' first real brush
with the enemy, and the results proved that
our Battalion was made up of men of the
right stuff. To those who were there the
whole incident will ever remain very clear
in memory. The Battalion, less "B" Coy.,
after a couple of days' stay, transferred to
a very small steamer and proceeded to
Anzae. "B" Coy. had to be re-fitted, and
joined us some days later. On the night of
its landing at Anzac the Battalion camped
in Rest Gully, and next day drafts from
cadi Company were sent into Lone Pine,
and within four days the Battalion as a
whole took over the whole Pine trenches,
the defence of which was to be its duty
until the evacuation. Forty-eight hours in
and forty-eight hours out was the routine,
the 23rd and 24th alternately relieving each
other, and being reinforced by a squadron
of the 13th Light Horse Regiment. Un-
doubtedly Lone Pine was a place of honour.
It had been taken at great cost, and held at
The great night took them suddenly
At Pozieres and the Pine;
They fell with Brind and Kennedy,
And by the Siegfried line.
But while a hand can hold a pen
Or hu - an heart be stirred,
There'll be great honor to the men
Who made the Twenty-Third.
—C.E.W.B.
great cost. The defence of it could be de-
scribed as an active one—or an offensive
defensive. Improving the trenches, digging
dug-outs, and general consolidation was the
order, togetner with mining forward to the
Turk, and meeting his operations by coun-
ter tunnelling. The bombing and sniping
were continuous. There were no Stokes'
mortars and Mills' grenades in those days.
The bombs were the old match heads, jam-
tin or cricket-ball type. During September
the enemy was particularly lively; in Octo-
ber he was quiet, and again livened up in
November. On the 29th, during the relief
of the trenches, he opened up an intense
bombardment on Lone Pine, and maintained
it for four hours, leaving the trenches com-
pletely smashed, and inflicting casualties up
to two hundred of two companies of the
23rd, two companies of the 24th, and one
squadron of the 13th Light Horse. It was
a red-letter day in the early history of the
Battalion. Although since, in Prance, it
has gone through many greater battles, it
is doubtful whether it has experienced a
more destructive and intense concentration
of artillery fire. It was afterwards leamt
that the enemy had massed about five thou-
sand men to attack and retake Lone Pine
after this bombardment, but the attack did
not develop. After the losses sustained on
this occasion, the Battalion had always to
be reinforced by details from other unit*
to make up a safe garrison strength for
Lone Pine.
On 17th December, 1915, the Battalion
withdrew for the last time from the Pine,
and took over the "Pimple" and Plateau
sap trenches, and it was from there the final
evacuation took place two days later. On
the evening of the 18th December, about
half the Battalion proceeded to Lemnos,
under Major Baird. On the night of 19th,
divided into separate parties, the remainder
withdrew from the trenches held and
Brown's Dip, the last party reaching the
beach at about 1.30 a.m. on the night of
19th-20th December. Thus the 23rd took
part in the famous withdrawal from Anzac,
and were amongst the very last to actually
get away. The total Battalion muster at
the subsequent roll call on Lemnos next day
was only 540, and as the total strength of
the unit, with its three original reinforce-
ments, would be 1240, this shows the An-
zac casualties from all sources at 700.
Many of these men, of course, eventually
joined up again. On the morning of 20th
December the Battalion went under can-
vas near Sarpi, Lemnos, and remained there
refitting and training until 7th January,
1916, when it embarked for Egypt. Alex-
andria was reached a few days later, and
the men at once entrained for Tel-el-Kebir,


— — —— —
COL. G H. KNOX. C.M.G. COL. W. BRAZENOR. D.S.O.


where the whole Army Corps went into
camp and vigorous training. It was here
we picked up an additional eight hundred
men to bring our strength up again. Thus
we arrived back in Egypt, having taken a
part in that glorious failure—the Gallipoli
Campaign, beginning, as it did, with the
landing on 25th April, 1915, and ending with
the evacuation as described above. The
23rd can proudly include the names of An-
zac and Lone Pine in their colours. They
left Gallipoli a remnant only of the unit
that landed there four months earlier.
Whatever actions the Battalion has since
been through, it will always honour those
originals who fought at Lone Pine, and
especially those who still remain there,
lying in the little cemetery in Brown's Dip.
At the time of writing, 19th February, 1918,
how many of the old officers and men re-
main ? They can almost be counted on the
fingers of one's hands.
. At the end of January, 1916, the Battalion
moved out to Sinai Peninsula and took up
a defensive line, fifteen miles east of the
Suez Canal, between, and in the rear of the
two strong points known as the "Sphinx"
and the "Hogsback." The small hill, which
was made into a strong defensive position,
was known as the "Yuulong Hill." Two
montrs were spent most pleasantly prepar-
ing for the Turkish attack, which did not
develop. One Company was always on out-
post duty, while the other three were dig-
ging trenches and erecting barb-wire en-
tanglements. The weather was perfect. A
boxing stadium was erected and used con-
tinually. The band was taken out also; in
fact, it was the only unit in the Division
with a band so far out in the desert. Early
in March we received orders to go into
camp at Moasca, with the rest of the 2nd
Division. The march back to the Canal was
splendidly carried out. Camel transport
failed to turn up, and each man had to
carry two blankets, a waterproof sheet, as
well as his usual gear. Starting at six
a.m. we arrived at Moasca at six p.m., over
fifteen miles of desert. Two weeks were
spent in camp at that place when orders
were received to proceed to France. Again
we embarked at Alexandria, and arrived at
Marseilles towards the end of March, 1916.
A three days' train journey took us to
Aire, and we went into our first billets at
Wittes, a pretty village some twenty miles
behind the line. Soon the unit was to be
fighting again, and within a week or so
found ourselves relieving the 15th and 16th
Royal Scots in the Fleurbaix sector. The
enemy were quiet there, and our casualties
small. We were relieved by the 24th Bat-
talion, and from then on took it in turn to
and from the trenches, and on the relief
went into billets in Fleurbaix. The Bri-
gade soon went into reserve, and the 23rd
were billeted at Fort Rompu, on the Rue
de la lt was here the first leave for
England was granted. At this stage the
Battalion completed its first year from Aus-
tralia, and the sixteenth month of its
existence. In that short time, however,
many changes had taken place, and the
total casualties from all causes would
nearly touch, the thousand mark. Major
Baird had been invalided to Australia, and
his place as second in command was taken
by Major Matthews, who in turn was trans-
ferred to the 22nd Battalion. Major (now
Lieut.-Col.) W. Brazenor, D.5.0., was next
appointed to the position. While in billets
at Fleurbaix Lt.-Col. Knox was injured by
a fall from his horse, and invalided to
England, when Major Brazenor took over
temporary command.
It was thought that Col. Knox's injury
would not incapacitate him for long, but
time proved otherwise, and a C.O. respected
and esteemed by all ranks was lost to the
Battalion for all time. The senior Major
in the Brigade, Major W. K. Fethers, who
had intermittently commanded the 24th,
assumed command. Six weeks were spent
at Fort Rcmpu, and utilised in building the
second and third lines of defence to the
Armentieres sector, which included Bois
Grenier, Rue de Bois salient, and the Lille
salient. This meant night work, and con-
tinued for the few weeks, by which time
excellent trenches, machine gun positions,
ana miles of barbed wire entanglements
had been completed. On 10th June the
Brigade relieved the 7th Brigade, the 23rd
Battalion relieving the 26th, the sector in-
cluding the famous Rue de Bois salient.
After the first experience in Fleurbaix the
Battalion had become quite used to the
breastwork lines, which differed from the
splendid dug-out trenches which we were
enabled to dig in Gallipoli, but impossible
m this country. While in this sector an
active defensive policy was waged, includ-
ing night intense artillery fire on enemy
strong points, trenches, and lines of ap-
proach. Our patrols, under Lieut (later
Capt.) Cull, did excellent work in maintain-
ing command of No Man's Land. During
this period a Brigade Raiding Party was in
active training, each Battalion being equally
represented, On the night of 19th June the
raid eventuated. The party contained about
two hundred, and was the strongest party
which up to that time had raided the Bosch
lines. Adequate artillery and trench mor-
tar bombardment preceded the entry, pend-
ing which our men were lying in a ditch in
No Man's Land. The raid was a complete
success, about eighty of the enemy were
killed, and identification and information se-
cured from the seven prisoners who were
brought back. Our casualties were slight
(about fifteen). It was in this operation
that the courage of the men was particu-
larly brought out The 14th Battalion car-
ried out a raid, and in returning some of
their men lost direction, and became en-
tangled in our wire. A number of our men
from "A" Coy., in spite of the dawn light
and heavy rifle and machine gun fire, moved
out from the trenches into No Man's
Land and rescued them, most of whom


• • ; , v . — _ -
v,'." ■ .■••-, _ ■..•■ ,. ,- . '. • ■'• . '».. ■■ --- :. . ■-*>.' - v •; -• ■ r ;>r'- ■'• • .
_.. ■ ».' i - '-■'•• ■ I 1
"HEADQUARTERS" COMPANY.


~ • ■ "T ~~~~~ ' !
** Mb
■were wounded. Brigadier-
General Monash sent a very
appreciative letter of the
rescue, and Sgt. Bradshaw,
Ptes. Nuttall, McCheyne and
Smith received Military
Medals in recognition of their
courageous work. Inter-
Battalion reliefs took place
between the 22nd and 23rd,
the Battalion finally handing
ever to the 3rd New Zealand
Infantry Brigade on 3rd
July. Lieut.-Col. Pethers
had been evacuated whilst on
this front. Major W. Braze-
nor acting in his stead. Be-
fore moving from the area
Col. Fethers returned. It
was felt by all ranks that the
activity in the line was a
prelude to greater events,
and when it was seen by
papers that a great offensive
had begun on the Somme, no
one was surprised when it
was rumored that that place
was our immediate destina-
tion, and for once rumor was
correct. The Battalion im-
mediately marched to Steen-
werc, two days being spent in
re-organising and equipping;
and then began the journey
to the Somme area. From
Steenwerc the Battalion
marched to Renescure, a
pretty little village a few
kilometres from St. Omer.
From there another march
was undertaken to the en-
entraining station, Wizernes,
one night being spent at
Henringhem. The Battalion
detrained at Saleaux, and a
night march to our billets at
Ailly sur Somme was uncom-
fortably long and tedious by
the circuitous route which
had to be taken to avoid
Cavalry Divisions and Royal
Field Artillery, which were
moving on the main road to-
wards Albert. The Battalion
spent a few pleasant days at
Ailly sur Somme, training.
As the weather was hot the
Somme River was availed of
to the utmost for bathing
purposes. On 18th July or-
ders to move were received,
and the unit proceeded to Al-
bert, billeting en route, even-
tually arriving at Brickfields,
north-west of Albert, on 25th
July. Sister Battalions re-
lieved the 2nd Brigade at
Pozieres, and orders were is-
sued for the 23rd Battalion
to attack, in conjunction with
the 7th and sth Brigades, the
Pozieres Ridge. Owing to
the strong opposition by the
enemy, Thiepval had not at
that time fallen, in conse-
quence of which the Battalion
took over a right angled sys-
tem of trenches from the
2nd Brigade, the eastern
front facing the Windmill
and Courcelette. and the nor-
thern Mouquet Farm. Owing
to this corner abutting into
the enemy system, their con-
centration was very heavy,
and was responsible for a
great many casualties. The
attack developed on the night
of 28th-29th July, and the
lads did splendidly in this
unique operation, securing its
objectives. "D" Coy., left
flank (under Capt. Kennedy),
"C" Coy., centre (under Capt.
CAPTAIN KENNEDY, Made the great sacrifice at Pozieres, France.


T ■ ■ ; ■ • •
*" ~^
GROUP OF OFFICERS—23rd Battalion.


— • I
n
i
M
Smith), and "B" Coy., right flank
(Major Brind), with "A" Coy. (Capt.
Beith) in support, carried out the opera-
tion in a series of waves. Owing to our
right battalion failing to secure its objec-
tive, it was thought that the 23rd would
have to withdraw, but with the greatest
tenacity and courage the position was
CAPT. F. DUNN, M.C.One-time Adjutant. Bullecourt claimed him
saveu, "B" Coy. swinging back and forming
a defensive flank. Our casualties in this
attack were heavy, losing' in officers Major
E. T. Brind, Capt. A. H. Kennedy (wounded
and captured, and who died later in Ger-
many), Lieut. R. G. Raws, Lieut, N.
McDonald, Capt. F. Ward, and the number
of wounded casualties amongst our N.C.O.'s
was particularly severe. It was in this
operation that Capt. Smith and Lieut
Pearce received their Military Crosses.
Lieut.-Col. W. K. Fethers had been relieved
by the second in command. Major W.i Bra-
zenor again came up to take over; and
within half-an-hour Col. Fethers was
wounded. His service with the Battalion,
though short, had been meritorious, and he
received his D.S.O. Col. Fethers did not
return to the unit, his services being utilised
to replace an A. and I. Staff Officer from
Australia, and he returned home in Decem-
ber, 1916, the Battalion again coming under
the command of Major W. Brazenor.
Glorious work had been done by all units
of the 2nd Division, and after thirteen days'
occupation in this intense battle zone, the
Division was relieved by the 4th, the Bat-
talion moving out to Berteaucort, where
ten days was spent in re-organising, equip-
ping and training, alter which we again
moved back to take over the Pozieres sec-
tor, the 23rd relieving the Ist Battalion,
under Col. Keen. It was this battalion
that "C" Coy. relieved at Lone Pine, on
their arrival at Galiipoli. The Battalion
was in occupation of the sector facing
Courcelette, and during the six days, by a
series of small operations, secured enemy
ground on the forward slope, the valley of
which is famous in Canadian military an-
nals, and named by them "Death Valley"
during their capture of Courcelette. Upon
our relief we began to move north to Bel-
gium, to take over the Ypres sector. We
entrained at Doullens on sth September, de-
training at Proven (near Poperhinge), and
marched to a camp near Dickebush. Major
Brazenor received his temp. Lieut.-Colonel




I
rank on 2nd September, 1916, and this was
confirmed at a later date. The Battalion
went into a quiet sector at Ypres, its right
hank.resting on Sanctuary Wood, and left
on the Menin road, close to Hooge. The
inter-Battalion reliefs were between the
22nd and 23rd, the reserve battalion billet-
ing m the Convent sector in Ypres town
square Instructions were received that
the Battalion would again move to the
bom me area, and we trekked to St. Omer
via Steenvoorde, Winnezeele, Arncke, and
Bayinghem, entraining at St. Omer on 24th
October, :1916, and billeting- at Villers sous
uli i- * wo da y s - From this village the
Battalion, was bussed by the. French Army
motor buses to Buire, thence relieving the
olst Battalion, in the Flers sector. Bad
weather preceded the relief, and the
trenches |vere taken over knee deep in mud.
Great hardships were experienced whilst in
this sector for eighteen days. Casualties
were heavy from shell-fire, whilst exposure
accounted for much sickness and trench
feet. The 21st, 22nd and 23rd performed
the garrison work here, and it was during
this period that the great Somme offensive
came to ah end, weather conditions inter-
vening, making- it almost impossible to
move over the sea of mud and water-filled
shell-holes. The Battalion stuck it out well,
valuable work and reconaissance ensuing
during their tours of duty. On being re-
lieved by a Ist Division Lancashire Bat-
talion, the 23rd moved back to Dernancourt,
and thence to Flesselles. The strenuous-
ness of the period told severely on all
ranks, but the magnificent spirit soon
threw off the weariness. On 28th Novem-
ber the move was made to last-named vil-
lage, where the C.O. (Col. W. .Brazenor)
was evacuated with illness, and Major M.
Smith took command. Active training and
general recuperation filled a period of
about three weks. The 19th December saw
us again on the forward move, and the
trench position was taken on Xmas Eve,
atter a halt at Mametz Wood en route.
Gmchy was the scene of operations, and
work ot great importance was done in the
shape of preparing the various ways for the
spring offensive that was to follow The
weather was typically winter, and trench
MAJOR BLADIN. Did duty on the Peninsula, Belgium,
and Fiance. Finally at Harefield Hospital.
, thfc mam causes of evacuation,
casualties being light. On New Year's Eve
an intense bombardment was opened by our
guns, but no infantry action eventuated. A
Rlbe T nt during January, and a
strengthening by reinforcements, prepared
i nrW n * aS t0 P rove the longest period
AttL 1 tl" e 7 * ex P er lenced in France.
At the latter end of the first month of 1917
!JPP™ ached the shell-shattered
aiea beyond Albert, the work being neither
strenuous or serious—fatigues, cable-lay-
ing, and jobs of this description, the reliefs
coming regularly and often. Bombing of
billets was one of the enemy's favorite
pastimes, and on one occasion it was the
Icott's g ßelnM tU - ne f Ju have evacuated
bcotts Redoubt just the night before a
raider got a direct hit on a hut, which ac-
counted for about twelve members of an-
other battalion This period was possibly
the coldest and snowiest of our frigid ex-
periences. Early in March came the first
Durst of sunshine through sullen clouds
iqic A , bung overhead since before Xmas,
+vo - • * a bnef occu Pation of Le Sars,
training for an attack was carried out, but
TeV U P n f !? is time the news reached
us ot the first of a series of evacuations by
donej nel A y ' t {l e ." h oP-over" was aban-
doned. Another shock came when the boys
got a stand to" order at 10.30 one night
while m reserve at Villa Camp, and they
were immediately marched into Gun Pit
Lane, near Martmpuich, only to return the
following afternoon, on hearing that the
enemy had fallen back considerably. Pos-
sibly one of the most interesting and ex-
citing events in the battalion history was
the long chase that began with the Huns'
evacuation of Le Sars, and continued
thi ough Warlencourt, across the boasted
impregnable Butte and Le Coup Goule, be-
tween two sectors held by other Brigades,
on to Bapaume, where we just snatched the
laurels of first entry into the burning town
fiom another battalion by a narrow mar-


".u. ■ " . .
* - - il : ; -" "-■'-
"B" COMPANY.


' 1
mm wl
UK^
lS^
TWO OF OUR ADJUTANTS: LIEUTS. MADDRELL & ELLIOTT, M.C.'s,
gin. Spring was approaching by this time,
and conditions were fairly good. From Ba-
paume we carried on through Favrielle,
Vaux, and one or two smaller villages,
with a feeling of regret at seeing the re-
treating Hun hosts moving out ahead all
the way. After about the ninth day of a
fighting march we came to a standstill at
Noreil, nad encountered a German rear-
guard action, on what appeared to be on
the very eve of their departure. German
reinforcements were rushed up per train,
and we suffered the first set-back and seri-
ous casualties for the period. A long trail
back from the scene of action entitled us
to two days' rest underground, then back
through Le Sars, Martinpuich, Mametz
Wood, to Becourt, for a snowy Easter. Out-
numbers were here swelled by some N.S.W.
reinforcements, and a hurried departure
was ordered to Birdwood Trench in serious
preparation for the big spring event (Bulle-
court). This, toughest of all propositions
since Pozieres, was tackled on May 3rd, the
6th Brigade forming the centre pivot, with
a British Division on our left, and the sth
Brigade on the right flank. It was there
the Battalion distinguished itself by its dash
and determination to break the famous
Seigfried line. The feat was accomplished,
and for a time the* boys hung on to the
position with a tenacity that neither out-
severe losses, the enemy's artillery or in-
fantry could break. The work of the offi-
cers and men throughout was splendid, and
the behaviour of the reinforcements, who
had joined up the day previous, showed
they were made of good material. To many
it was their first and last fight. Bombing
parties played an important role, and
often it was a matter of man to man. A
number of honors were earned and
awarded, in which the Transport partici-
pated. Capt. Farrell received the M.C., and
two of the drivers M.M.s for carrying am-
munition under heavy shell-fire. Major
Trew was awarded the D.S.O. Innumerable
unrecorded acts of gallantry were perform-
ed, particularly by the stretcher bearers,
and a British officer, on one occasion, was
heard to remark that the 6th Brigade was
"magnificent indeed." The price in human
toll was heavy, and many of our best offi-
cers and men were included. A long rest
at Warloy was indulged in later, and with
delightful weather, was much appreciated.
We again moved into the Bapaume area,
under canvas, where six pleasant weeks of
summer were spent in reserve. After that


•C" COMPANY.


.
?»W' A
delightful period of further rest, orders for
a move tt Flanders were received, and on
22nd July, 1917, we broke camp and march-
ed via Llgny, Thilloy, Butte de Warlen-
court, Pozieres, to Aveluy. To those who
had been in the hard fighting at Pozieres,
and took part in the advance on Bapaume,
the area was full of interest, the men re-
calling their deeds and doings, pointing out
historical spots en route. The greatest of
these are the two fine monuments erected to
the very gallant lads of the Ist and 2nd
Divisions, and which are situated at Pozieres.
A few days were spent at Aveluy (a small
village on the Ancre, about a mile north of
Albert), and thence by train to Arques.
Splendid billets were found at Bandringhem,
and during our stay the Battalion became
very popular with the villagers, as was evi-
denced by the genuine feelings of regret
when we departed. It was stated in the
Field Marshal's despatches, for 1917, our
role was to immediately take part in the
proposed offensive at Ypres. However, ow-
ing to continual bad weather, this was post-
poned, and we had pleasant training for
about six weeks. It was during this period
(29/8/17) that the 2nd Division were re-
viewed by Sir Douglas Haig. It was a
magnificent and stirring spectacle to wit-
ness. The three Brigades (about 10,000
men) gave the General Salute, and the turn
out and steadiness of all ranks whilst the
SHRAPNEL GULLY CEMETERY Lone Pine, Gallipoli.
Field Marshal rode round and inspected the
Battalions was excellent. He conveyed his
appreciation of the troops' splendid bearing.
On 12th September, our trek to the Bel-
gian battlefields commenced, via Ebbling-
hem, Steenvoorde, thence to Dominion
Camp, at Reninghelst. It was whilst at the
latter village that the third battle of
Ypres commenced. On the night of 21st-
22nd September the Battalion took up the
newly-captured position at Polygon and
Glencourse Woods. Here the Battalion
maintained the line, pending the renewal of
the advance. On relief we again moved
into reserve. Our next entry into the line
was at Zonnebeke, on the night of lst-2nd
October, and on the 4th the Brigade at-
tacked and captured Broodseinde Ridge. It
was on this date that the Germans were
formed up to attack our position, but our
movement anticipated that of the enemy
by a few minutes. However, this did not
affect the aggressiveness of our attack, nor
prevent the splendid achievement of cap-
turing the Ridge, and the point which
marked the apex of the whole Ypres battle.
On 9th October the Fifty Army commenced
their offensive on our north, and although
the 2nd (our) Army had completed its
main offensive action, we were at the junc-
tion of the two armies, and a further attack
H.M.S. BEIn MCCHREE.
A vessel that helped in the rescue at the
Dardanelles.
was demanded of our Brigade. By this
time the troops were very exhausted, and
weather conditions had become exceedingly
bad. The Brigade carried out the attack
with its limited strength, capturing and
consolidating forward of Broodseinde Ceme-
tery, on the Roulers-Zonnebeke-Ypres road.
It was here we lost four sterling officers in
Lieuts. Brewster, Frost, Ethell, Moore, who
were killed while courageously carrying on
cool and determined, 'midst heavy shell fire,
and a number of our most efficient N.C.O.'s
and men. After a most trying time in this
intense battle, the Battalion was relieved
by the 4th Division, and moved out to


' • . i|
i ' ■ ' f
*
* J .xMMi
***** ■*" ,r ~ *
, : _ _1 - - - - — " " S ~
t
"D" COMPANY.


~ •- *-.*• - ' y
f , - V "* ■ ,V;. ' . . .
%■:- ••>.. *",,.. f ■'*•:• ■• 'y."-,-. V
. ' - ■ ' ' •- •'
; vl "... .. * - " ' - v- - •
.. .. . •- ■■
■' .-~V .• -
■:y ... -r s? '• ■ '* ■, - - : ! . '
- • tc.-.f**' >. *•. • ££M
Steenvoorde area to reorganise and equip.
Whilst here decorations were presented by
General Birdwood. Again the front line at
Molonoarolsthoek was taken over on the
7th November, and after an uneventful four
days' tour we were relieved by the West
Yorks.
Comparatively easy times followed, with
a spell of tent life at Patricia camp, under
the shadow of Poperinghe. Thence to
Locre, where the Battalion won laurels in
athletics and at football, these sports being
introduced as a part of the routine, and
welcomed enthusiastically by the hoys.
Their whole-souled entry into the spirit of
the competitions secured them both the
Brigade sports trophy and the football cup,
won by four points from the 24th Battalion,
in a never-to-be-forgotten match. Moving
a little further forward brought us to Can-
teen Corner, where fatigue and other neces-
sary work formed part of our duty. By
this time Yuletide was approaching, and a
happy suggestion to festivise, prompted by
a favorable situation was carried into effect.
A series of Xmas dinners was arranged,
each Company carrying out its function in
its own particular way,' with a musical pro-
gramme and a menu of its own, "printed
on the premises." It was a week of jollity,
opened by H.Q., and completed by Trans-
port, with good things galore. There was
not a Company officer who did not enthuse
in some way, and not a man who did not
feel that it was his very own "dejeuner de
luxe." Xmas, 1917, will ever remain a
pleasant memory. Anotner occupation of a
sector was carried out after Romarin was
reached, with the famous Catacombs as a
support line—the heart of Ploegstreete—
and between this point and Neuve Eglise
we lingered for weeks, until the welcome
word arrived that a spell away from it all
had been ordered, and one Monday after-
noon saw us entrained for Quesques, pro-
bably the most peacefully pretty village in
France. Four or five weeks recuperation
brought us up to concert pitch. There it
was the photos were taken and plans com-
pleted for this production. Many absent
ones re-joined while our caravan was rested,
so that on March 3rd, the date of our re-
entry into Belgium, after training from
SPORTING TROPHIES.
Brigade Cup, 1917.
Brigade Football Cup, 1918.
Brigade Football Cup, 1919.
Brigade Cup, 1918.
Brigade Cup, 1919.
Lottinghem, we were full strength both
physically and numerically. Back to Can-
teen Corner for one night, and then in and
out between the familiar Catacombs and the
old front line for almost a month. Much
preparation had been carried out by us for
the expected German offensive in this area,
but circumstances compelled the whole Divi-
sion to move to another front. A few days
were occupied in travelling per motor lorry,
train and foot. Eventually the Battalion
arrived close to scenes of conquest of but
twelve months ago, where the enemy fought
fiercely to gain most ambitious objectives.
23rd BATTALION IN CAMP ON DESERT.


• ■ • •' ; ■'
.
> ' . v . - " ■ . - .
■
"" ' ~2 f , S g.,
■ ' v •' . r . ■■' ' "Sv ' ■"$: :■ " '-.'-A • '•> ' v''
...... ",^K.?**"' i r rf |
THE BATTALION BAND (Sorg't. W. Wilson, B.M )


r— _
t <>
t
A short rest at Warloy after our trip
from the northern battlefields and then, on
April 13th, patrol fighting around Morlan-
TRENCHES AT LONE PINE, GALLIPOLI.
court, but not until a deal of organising
work had been carried out and material for
building of shelters had been found. The
casualties were not great, but among those
deeply regretted were Lieut. Ross and
Sergts. Foote and Ellis. About this time
we got our first glimpse of some of "The
boys of the U.5.A.," who were having their
initial "spin" in this area.
Relief came on May 4th, and a week or
two was pleasantly spent at Pont Noyelles,
where the original edition of this souvenir
REST GULLY GALLIPOLI
was finished and distributed, and a dinner
given to celebrate the completion of one
thousand days' active service by the Bat-


*> "%--''j -f..„/■>/ ' I - .
■' a^jfW s i JB£t I -
"*
m
- .. ;/'' ' " ' .;' - - ,;. ■/ .
THE BOYS OF THE TRANSPORT.


BBfeis ll'i »w* % >
1 >; ■..» ..... .
t<«Mll> T A X II 1 " %. "-•"
"BROWN'S DIP."
talion. Many toasts were honored, and,
with the band at its top form, the Bth of
May was "a night of nights."
Forward again; this time in the vicinity
of Ribamont-Mericourt reserve and support
lines. In and out, as occasion demanded,
relieved by a little distraction in the shape
of a sports and swimming carnival at Bon-
nay, on one of France's numerous lagoons.
Fair weather favored us, but perhaps Fritz
D.S.O. An act of base treachery was com-
mitted by a Hun officer, who, after surren-
dering, shot three of our fellows, including
Corp. W. Flynn, of "B" Coy. Needless to
say, he soon paid the penalty of his crime
at the hands of Lieut. "Jack" Wiltshire.
It was only _ a small show in comparison,
but for brilliant execution it almost ranks
with greater things, such as Bulleeourt,
Brood Seinde, or even Pozieres.
Villers-Bretonneux sector, preparatory to
what is known as the "Hamel Stunt. By
this tihe we had become closely associated
with the "Yanks," inasmuch as about 300
of them were attached to the Battalion.
Our casualties among both officers and
men were fairly heavy, and many were the
guns captured and the decorations to fol-
low. Another short rest at Blangy-Tron-
ville, and then a move into line at Monu-
Lieut. W. Sumners, M.C., Accidently Killed.
was never more active with bombs and
shells than he was during this period. We
lost R.S.M. Wilby, who was killed by a shell
while riding back to supports.
The 18th May saw the Battalion's entry
into the line at Ville-Sur-Ancre, and the
25th the capture of the village in magnifi-
cent style, our quota to the Brigade num-
bering 30, ostensibly for mopping up. Major
Bateman (now Lt.-Col.) was in charge, and
it was here that Lieut. P. J. Smith won his
On the first day of June a portion was
given us at Buire. Raids were the order
—and successful—until relieved on the 15th,
and a rest ordered along the banks of the
river at Bussy. The Battalion again held
sports, and Brigade an aquatic carnival at
Querrieu. One or two of Fritz's big ones
fell in the lake during the day, but other-
wise we were not disturbed.
The glorious fourth July came, and with
it an order to take up a portion in the
23rd Battalion's Rest at Lone Pine Gallipoli
ment Wood, until on August 3rd, another
place was allotted to us, prior to a sup-
porting job during the never-to-be-forgotten
advance commencing on August Bth. The
excitement and cheering was great as the
news filtered back of the prisoners captured,
the tanks' great success, and the triumph
of the Cavalry, particularly the Canadians
and a few of our own Light Horse. Minor
operations at Herbeville kept us occupied
until we were sent to recuperate in the


mi
U • .
I
»*.'• •' m
, ~~ m
i»
■■■■■. "C- : ■■■■■ ..■ ■; : '.:■ /'■!■;. : . '■ , i-v -
""v : ;- :: - -. ,:; " ' ■ ....
/V.. .: ■ ..
• ' • . . ..
.
'"•w
" - '' " ;
CAPT. H. J. ORR, M.O.
CAPT. T. PASCOE, M.C.,
LIEUTS. TORODE and ROXBOROUGH
LIEUT. "SNOWY" DODGSHUN.


' \y. * . ... , , •, . . .. - . .
*- .V:llwBljoW
handsome and illustrious Vecquemont
Chateau on August 20th. A further fall-
back of the enemy was the cause of our
rest being cut short, and away we went
again on the 24th at a moment's notice, per
medium of motor 'buses, to follow Fritz in
his retreat to Peronne.
"The capture of Mt. St. Quentin on Sep-
tember Ist will rank as the finest single
feat of the war." Thus Corps Headquarters
in a despatch to all Units interested. And
in this our beloved Regiment played a gal-
lant part—losing heavily 'tis true, but car-
rying on against what was considered the
cream of the German army. It was a
unique event, and the advance up the long
slope had to be carried out under shell and
a withering machine-gun fire. Here it was
Pte. Robt. Mactier, in an extraordinary act
of personal bravery, won the V.C., for
which he gave his life. The line was held
until the night of September 4th-sth, when
a backward move was made towards Cappy,
on the Canal, adjacent to the great gun with
which the Hun shelled Amiens, until it was
captured by the Ist Division. A series of
sports meetings took place, culminating in
the 2nd Division's big carnival and band
contest, held in the presence of General
Birdwood and staff. Our band figured 7th
in the event, the 24th winning the trophy.
This well-earned respite finished on the
27th, when in the hours of darkness the
Battalion marched to Lemonsoil, and the
following night to Tuncourt.
On the 3rd October we took up portion
of the reserve line at Beaurevoir, and later
made a successful attack on the left of
Montbrehain, not far from the supposed
German body-reducing plant in the Belli-
court tunnel, part of the famous Hinder-
burg line. Here many American troops re-
ceived their baptism of fire, and suffered
severely while waiting on the tape.
After a most eventful six months the
Battalion was relieved for the last time on
the 6th and 7th October by fresh American
troops, and on the Bth we entrained from
Roisel for St. Vast, and thence to Vaux,
near Amiens, where we celebrated the sign-
ing of the Armistice on November 11th.
This ended our active career, and from now
nothing was left but to pass the time as
pleasantly as possible, pending our return
to Australia. A long train jaunt, and a
longer march through stricken towns and
villages, brought us to the peaceful Na-
Hnnes-Haies-Marcinelle, and the warm-
hearted Belgian people, enjoying our leisure
in sports, dances and entertainments, but
unfortunately marred by the death through
accident of Lieut. Wally Summers, whose
funeral was an impressive ceremony, at-
tended by all the leading civilian resi-
dents of the village. Educational faci-
lities were afforded and availed of
by many, and leave was liberally granted
to Paris and Brussels. Christmas saw us
celebrating our third and last Yule Tide
feast, but this time under Peace conditions,
and with the proud feeling of having ful-
filled a national duty, and upheld our Bat-
talion motto—
"FORWARD—UNDETERRED."
MAJOR D. BEITH, Leading.


- — —jl
I—
: :' • . -j
ft i ' ;
.W
I HBi
•: ,- • -'
THE TRANSPORT HORSES.


MM
.' '
< ■ ■
•'; J ~ V*MBp81Wm»^;,
_ s - ■. . || wKXjKM 1 " 4 *" 4 "' 4
CAPTS. T. FARRELL, M.C., F. ROSSITER,
LIEUT. R. CUTHBERTSON, M.C.
CAPT. HINCHLIFFE, M.C.
PTE. "SNATCH" MATTHEWS, M.M.


' • ' , *
■ u'
- ' %
SERGT. C. RAMSDALE
(As an Entertainer.)
Hut Ville-Sur-Ancre, where Lieut. Smith's
D.S.O. was v/on.
"Little Tich," the Transport Mascot.


*" M%'■'- 'n tJjlfc''*kw\-MJi
' f
J® S^lrkli
- w> v /" Jfc
__ 1 "' ...?afy^%^#
i iik v, ,***
>V*jh* n JBWBI
JttMm
| Jjllfr,''' c TRthim
'' BS^B
iilBIII IBiii
S.M. "JACK" CUi (Killed While
Packing-up for "Blighty.")
LIEUT. "JIMMY" SMITH, D.S.O.
LIEUT. EVANS.


'.; -• : - "*
- ||KjL.^^®pp
■ & ■» H&JMF
hsi IjL ▼vi
SJRVIVORS OF THE "SOUTHLAND." TORPEDOED IN THE DARDANELLES.


' ,
■M. ; " " - , ■
• ' • ' ■ ■ .•■•':
y #
•f ' if."
: ■ '■ : '
. ■ ' " " . '■ " ' '
After Mt. St. Quentin.
A Comrade's Grave, Charleroi.


KB J»C5MBY^:«S% Y A' -" : - -I JSJF'T ! PHB
F BM
* —- — .,. J 1 • ' • J IBM8BB
'rmSggm J| • «BBB|
One of the several
battlefield Printing
Offices of the 23rd
Battalion, and the
plant used in the
original production
of this Souvenir.
This place was de-
molished by the Hun
in the big advance
of 1918.


. ' "" ~ '" . *'
i lif < r.V
'* * » •
g pjl, |> 7 _;. U * * .'
-~..f T
23rd BATTALION MARCH.
indly composed by Miss Una Bourne, at die request of Miss Doris Carter.


Australians! CAN YOU AFFORD IT?
The State and Commonwealth Debts amount to £707,773,525.
This is Greater than the Total Pre-war Debt of Britain.
Yet Australia has spent £100,000,000 in Drink since the War started.
This enormous sum would
1. Build over 20 Transcontinental Railways, or
2. Pay the Invalid and Old Age Pensions in Australia for 25 years, or
3. Build 200,000 Five-roomed Houses at a cost of £500 each.
\
The Strength of Empire Movement
is out to
Stop this Riot of Criminal Extravagance
Lend a Hand! Send Donations to 27 Swanston Street, Melbourne


xWJi
Joi'v/ /
i-
Strength
nduranee
The Outstanding
features of
BERSOUGD All
TYRES are
< <«»
BERGOUGNAN hESTSJ TYRES
are the most carefully made tyres in the world: that is why they give
so much extra mileage and satisfaction. Price have lately been reduced.
Write for Revised Price List.
BERGOUGNAN TYRE CO., 96 FLINDER L s IS^ ELBOURNE
Chandler Sc. Lee, Printers, si Bourke Street, Melbourne.
