

Australian Health Society,
MELBOURNE.
THE EMUNCTORIES
BY THE REW DR. BROMBY.
A LECTURE
Delivered for the Australian Health Society, at the
Y.M.C.A. Hall, 18 th September, 1882.
Copies of this Tract may be obtained, gratis, at the Society’s Office,
41 Collins Street East.
Melbourne:
M'CARRON, BIRD & CO., PRINTERS, 37 FLINDERS LANE WEST.
MDCCCXXXIII.




MELBOURNE.
THE EMUNCTORIES
BY THE REW. DR. BROMBY.
A LECTURE
Delivered for the Australian Health Society, at the
Y.M.C.A. Hall, 18th September, 1882.
Copies of this Tract may be obtained, gratis, at the Society’s Office,
41 Collins Street East.
Jftclbourue:
M'Carron, bird & co., printers, 37 flinders lane west.
MDCCCXXXIII.


COUNCIL FOR THE TEAR 1882-83.
■jpwsiifttt:
His Honour Mb. JUSTICE HIGINBOTHAM.
Dia-JJrTsiiiTitts:
Mrs. JOHN WEBSTER. ) PROFESSOR ELKINGTON.
gioucnmj treasurer:
WILLIAM CRELLIN, 12 Market Buildings, William Street.
Jfjouontrii ,Secretani:
Mrs. G. W. SELBY, 14 Avoca Street, South Yarra.
ICtbtatriitu;
Mrs. DUERDIN.
Mug. F. WILKINSON.
Miss ISABELLA NIVEN.
Miss A, C. MOON.
Dr. JAS. JAMIESON.
LLOYD TAYLER.
A, SUTHERLAND, SLA.
THOMAS miODRIBIi, 51. A.
JAMES GILL.
F. J. GLADMAN, B.Sc., B.A.
J. 11. HAYDON.
Da. P. MOLONEY.
Da. J. P. RYAN.
C. K. BLACKETT.
\V. M. FEIION,
(Stcrctiirij:
J. G. BURROWS, Stanley Street, Richmond.
OBJECTS OF THE SOCIETY.
1. To create an educated public opinion with regard to sanitary matters
in general, by the aid of the Platform, the Press, and other suitable means.
2. To induce and assist people by personal influence, example, and
■encouragement, to live in accordance with recognised laws, whereby health
is maintained and disease prevented.
3. To seek the removal of all noxious influences deleterious to the public
health, and to influence and facilitate legislation in that direction.
Members are requested to ensure for the Publications of the
Australian Health Society the ividest circulation possible.
Subscriptions received by any of the above Officers.
The Council- will gladly receive Suggestions on any Subject
CONNECTED WITH THE OBJECTS OP THE SOCIETY.


THE EMUNCTORIES.
The lecture which I am about to deliver being a popular one,
although on a scientific subject, it will be mj duty to explain what-
ever scientific terms I may have occasion to employ.
The first word of this order to which I come is the title of the
lecture itself, the Emunctories. To the definition of this term,
therefore, I address myself in the first instance. The primary
meaning of the word “ emunctory” is a pockethandkerchief, and
is derived from a Latin word “emungere,” which signifies “to blow
the nose.” The use of a pockethandkerchief I regard as a token
of far-advanced civilisation. I can adduce many proofs of this.
In my long experience as a schoolmaster it would continually
happen that a youth coming from a bucolic neighbourhood, instead
of having recourse to a handkerchief in wintry weather, would in
preference go on a long time sniftering his nose, and in such cases
I did not consider it beneath the dignity of my position to point
out a more excellent way. That is my first proof. Again, in the
commencement of my professional life in the West of England,
just fifty years ago, the Recorder of Bristol was a distinguished
lawyer, named Sir Charles Wetherell. He was an eccentric
character, and among his other eccentricities wore no braces, and
the shirt was generally seen peeping out between the vest and the
continuation, and upon this portion of his shirt he was oc-
casionally seen to wipe his nose. This shows again that a man
may be far advanced in civilisation and yet not have reached
Biat highest mark—the use of a pockethandkerchief. The
Romans were very particular in the discharge of this duty, and
heir term to express a man of refinement was emuncti naris —a man
cf a well-wiped nose. It would appear that in this respect the
Romans had taken precedence of even the polished Greek. Eor
when we turn to the Greek Testament to see by what words were
expressed those handkerchiefs and aprons which were brought from
m body of Paul at Ephesus whereby to heal the sick, we discover
mm to he Latin terms in Greek letters: the handkerchief is a
sudarium, —a pretty strong proof that the Greeks had borrowed the


invention from the Romans. The polite French of this present
day call a pockethandkerchief mouchoir, and this again is a Latin
word—indeed, it is this very word emunctory somewhat corrupted.
Wc have first emunctoire and then mouchoir. But we Anglo-
Saxons must, at a very late period, have invented the art for our-
selves—at least we should judge.so if we are to draw any
conclusion from the curious name by which we call it. For just
analyse the term “pockethandkerchief.” At the end of it there
is “chef,” a head ; then “kerchief,” i.e. a couvre chef, a cover for
the head. These kerchiefs were originally square bits of linen,
which women in many parts of France still wear upon their heads.
Then we have handkerchiefs. We men borrowed these kerchiefs,
these bits of linen from the heads of our wives, to carry them on
court days and great state occasions in our hands, to be used in
the presence of Royalty; and at last it was thought expedient
that on all occasions without exception we should have this
useful article in our pockets. Thus did we get a pockethandkei--
chief. But, that so simple a contrivance for keeping the nose
clean should have so ponderously complex a name as pocket-
handkerchief is a strong proof of the difficulty that must have
been experienced in introducing the article itself.
Such, then, is an emunctory, whether in the shape of hand-
kerchief or napkin or towel. But I would observe next that
these simple inventions of ours ar-e applicable only to the ex-
ternal parts of the body, whether to that most prominent feature
of the face the nose, or whether to hands or feet, or the external
surface ; whereas no man ought to bo content with cleansing the
outside of cap or platter, or of that bigger earthen vessel in which
he is tabernacled, but the inside also. But how is he to get at
the inside! That indeed would have been an impossibility, had
not nature herself provided the necessary apparatus. But, in
point of fact, there are myriads of little pockethandkerchiefs
located in every part of our internal system, and always ready
to do their work, without our exercising any will of our own-
Of course we have a will of our own, but the number otj
voluntary actions of which we are capable are as nothing com-
pared with those numberless involuntary actions which go oJ
incessantly, by night as well as by day, from the cradle to the
grave, in the interior of our animal framework. |
When we feel hungry we begin, no doubt, by exercising
voluntary action—we go to the cupboard; we bring thence tli-i
bread and cheese, and after masticating the same, we force tK
well-chewed morsel to the back of the mouth. All this is doneWj
voluntary muscles, hut there our volition ends. We don’t evef:
swallow by voluntary action ; we only stimulate the nerves
deglutition by tire pressure of the food at the back of the mouth'


which makes the swallow act of itself, in the same way that we
stimulate the sneezing apparatus by a pinch of snuff, and then
the sneezing apparatus sneezes of itself.
Well, then, this voluntary work -having been performed, the
food now finds itself in the alimentary canal; but even yet (we
must remember that) although inside the body, it is still outside
the system. How completely the alimentary canal is outside the
system may be best understood by considering the case of some of
the lowest animals. You can take a polyp (e.g.) and turn it
inside out, like the fingers of a glove; and in a short time that
inner membrane which was the stomach, whose duty it was to
absorb the food, makes a very good external skin, and that
which was the skin learns how to perform all the functions of
an alimentary canal. True, more highly organised animals
cannot so be treated ; but for all that, their alimentary canals,
although permanently inside the body, are outside the system.
When, then, the food has been properly digested and elaborated
in the stomach, and has passed into the intestines, it solicits
admission into the system through those innumerable little
vessels called lacteals, which are distributed over the whole
surface of the smaller intestines, and absorb the fluid portion of
the food, which is now called chyle , while they reject the coarser
particles. It is with the chyle only we have to deal, for that only
enters into the system.
Well, then, this nutritive matter having been subjected to
several previous tests, the eye having scanned it before it entered
the mouth, the nose having pronounced it savoury, and the palate
having approved of it; and further, it having been purged of its
grosser particles at the time it was absorbed by the lacteals, it is
all poured into a single large tube, called the thoracic duct, which
conveys it into one of the big veins (sub-clavian) in the upper part
of the chest close to the backbone. And now being in the full
stream of the systemic circulation it can be carried to every part of
the body wherever it is wanted to supply the continual waste the
constant wear and tear which is always going on in every portion
°f the corporeal system.
But now the question arises, has this chyle, this elaborated
alimentary matter, been perfectly purified? Was every deleterious
substance eliminated at the several ordeals through which it had
t 0 Pass? Certainly not. Unless the lacteals had admitted other
substances than those which were strictly alimentary, there would
have been hut little scope for the medical practitioner. It is by
admission of what may bo termed foreign substances into the
Ood, that the physician is enabled to produce any of the
cneScial effects which he contemplates. But then that same
unreasoning facility on the part of tho lacteals of admitting the


drags which the physician prescribes, admits also a great many
other things which he doesn’t prescribe. Some of these
deleterious matters, from the use of bad food, or impure water,
may get into the blood, whether we will or no; and there are
many others, not positively deleterious in moderate quantities,
although not alimentary, which we voluntarily imbibe ; and these
in then- cumulative effect may become poisonous, and the fruitful
causes of disease.
I will speak of these by-and-by, for the present I will go on with
the emunctories in their more ordinary operation. I say ordinary
operation, for even supposing that no foreign substances had been
absorbed by the lacteals but only simple nutritive matter, yet the
blood would need cleansing—would need the aid of emunctories,
just as much as the nose would need the aid of a handkerchief on
a frosty morning. For there is reason to conclude that in the
reparation of the constant waste of the body by every muscular
movement, nay by every effort of our volition and odr thought, and
by all the wear of its internal machinery, which is perpetually going
on of itself, some corpuscles of the blood are destroyed and left
floating there dead; and if dead then requiring also to be decently
buried. Now, when I employ the word dead of these corpuscles
I am not using figurative speech, for these corpuscles of the blood
have a real life of their own; it may be an unconscious life, but it
is a real life, and they are endowed with instincts to do certain
work in a certain fashion, just in the same way that insects like
bees and ants instinctively do certain work and only in a certain
way. These living corpuscles are fed by the aliments we imbibe,
and when their life is over —for every minute they die by
thousands —their dead bodies must be conveyed away.
This, then, is a constant cause of deterioration in the purity of the
blood, irrespective of any poisonous substances which may have
been imbibed by the lacteals. Judging then by the many other
examples of ingenuity so obviously displayed in the structure of
the animal fabric, we might feel quite sure that there would be
means provided for the removal of noxious substances from the
blood and for keeping it pure. And so there are. There are every-
where throughout the whole of the animal system means and
appliances constantly at work pumping away all deleterious
matter from. out of the great circulation. These then are
the real emungents of the system, and it will be necessary to
speak of them more in detail. At an earlier stage of anatomical
investigation it was customary to call the liver and the kidneys
the two great emunctories of the animal system ; _ the former
carrying off the waste matter which had no ammonia in it, i.e., no
nitrogen, the latter carrying off the waste ammoniacal products.
But the term emunctory, as applied to these two great organs, has


now been generally given up; because, in point of fact, the
emimction or cleansing of the system is by no means limited to
these organs only, but is going on all over the system, and is per-
formed by exceedingly minute organisms distributed everywhere.
These little organisms have sometimes been called the excretories,
because they separate excrementitious matter from the blood. But
even the term excretory is found unsuitable, and for this reason—
that there are hardly any organs which are purely excretory, tho
products of their elaboration being subsequently applied to beneficial
uses in the animal economy, and not deserving the title of excre-
mentitious. It is thought better, therefore, to give them no distinc-
tive name, but to classify them indiscriminately with the secretory
organs, and this throws upon me the duty of explaining what
these secretory organs are. The word secretion in this technical
sense means careful separation of things which have got mixed up.
If by accident you had dropped into a box of black beads a few
white ones, which you wished to keep separate, you would have
to pick them out again one by one. This, in technical phraseology,
would be secreting them. And this is the very work which the
secretory organs perform in separating various substances from the
blood. ■ But they can do their work on an immeasurably smaller
scale than we can with the senses which we possess. If wo were
hy mistake to pour a few drops of milk into a glass of water, we
could never with our fingers pick out the particles of milk again ;
but the secretory organs can. Nay, they do even a great deal
more ; for they not only separate particles from the blood, but
they elaborate them into products of very various attributes, and
destined to very various uses. They build them up into com-
pounds of different chemical and different economical properties.
In themselves these working organs are exceedingly minute;
but as those which do the same kind of work are usually grouped
together in masses, called glands, they present to the eye the
appearance of an appreciable bulk. Thus we speak of the liver as
a single organ employed in secreting bile, and the salivary glands
0 the mouth, as secreting saliva; but the work is really done in
very minute detail by innumerable living atomies invisible to the
®aked eye. I say living atomies, for they really have an individual
1e - They aro animalcules with distinct animal instincts. Yon
may take, as a good illustration of what I mean, a hive of
Working bees. Each bee has an individual existence and an
mdividual instinct. They all work separately, yet all with a
conunon object. They collect the sugary juices from all the flowers
P the surrounding fields; but they not only collect or secrete these
Juices from the flowers, but they elaborate them—they work them
Iff* mto definite substances, which we call honey and beeswax.
°w, very similar is the work done in tho glands of the animal


body. Eacli little member of this community called a gland is
doing something towards a common result, in much the same way
that each bee in a hive does something for the common good.
Perhaps you are disposed to put the question—how do these
glandular animalcules execute their wonderful work 1 You will
have to wait long for your answer, for no mortal man can say.
Such vital processes are among the ultimate facts of nature —
indisputable but unexplainable. Men may talk very learnedly
about cellular tissue and fibrous tissue and all that (and very
interesting such researches are), but the wisest cannot explain
what that vital power is which with a sort of instinct enables
little corpuscles of matter to build up vast structures, and some-
times highly organised fabrics. Some of them will build up a
blade of grass and others will build up a huge oak ; but how they
do it no man can tell. So neither can we explain why the cellules
in the various glands should secrete such very different substances
from the same blood, whether to be utilised subsequently in
building up the animal fabric, or whether to be merely thrown
away as excreinentitious matter.
I have likened a gland to a hive of bees, but against such a
similitude an objection may be raised that bees have a large
amount of intelligent perception; they can see and hear and feel
like ourselves, whereas the constituent cellules of the glands are
blind and senseless. But I answer that that is no objection to
their having a life of their own and powerful instincts of their
own. Por on descending the scale of animal life we constantly
see that the power of instinct actually increases, while the powers of
intelligence are diminishing. As one example we may take those
gregarious zoophytes, sometimes called coral insects. They have
no sense of sight or hearing or taste or smell as as far we can tell,
and yet they all work together instinctively in producing a definite
result. How very beautiful are some specimens of their workman-
ship. Such apparently is the instinctive action of those living
molecules, which are sometimes fixedly associated together, as in
the glands, and sometimes are left free to move, as is the case with
the corpuscles of the blood. They are units possessed of life and
possessed of a marvellous instinct. Their life is in the lowest
possible state of organisation, but their instincts are as powerful
and discriminative as those of the ant or of the bee. They work
out results harmoniously together. They build up our bodies for
us whether we will or no, and when we are full grown they keep
our several functions going. All we have got to do is to supply
them with aliment and not to obstruct their operations by foolish
interference, except occasionally perhaps to help them with a little
stimulus when from any cause they are too feeble to do their work
vigorously. But as a general rule the less wo interfere with them
the better.


I now proceed to bring before your notice an example or two
of secretory glands. As one of the simplest we may take the
sudorific glands, which are distributed over the whole surface
of the outer skin. They are perpetually employed in
secreting an oleaginous sort of fluid which lubricates the skin,
keeping it soft and pliant and preventing it from cracking. Thus
far, then, we might say that these glands were not of the
emunctory order, but commissioned to provide an emollient unguent
for the use of the skin. This unguent is called the insensible
perspiration, and is always gently going on when the body is not
under any extraordinary stimulus. But when from great exertion,
or in very hot weather, the temperature of the blood rises too
high for sanitary conditions, then the sudorific glands are stimu-
lated to more energetic action, the perspiration becomes profuse,
and the consequent evaporation keeps the surface cool. These,
then, are normal processes, with definite objects of a beneficial
character. But beside these very important services they thus
render, these same glands are called upon to do strictly emunctory
work; for when the blood is overcharged with certain saline
substances in solution (and by overcharged I mean, of course, that
these salts are in greater proportion than is compatible with
perfect health), then these same organs eliminate them from the
blood, and dispose of them on the external surface of the body as
excrementitious matter. Hence it sometimes happens, in morbid
conditions of the blood, that the perspiration acquires an un-
pleasant odour, and then it is highly necessary to see carefully to
frequent ablutions of the person. But even in ordinary states of
the system, it should be remembered that the sudorific glands are
always doing more or less some emunctory work, removing little
superfluities and discharging their duty in keeping up that steady
equilibrium which we call perfect health. And under all
circumstances the whole surface of the skin should undergo
periodic ablutions, even though it be but by a moistened flannel.
In the case of the lower animals, which do not go into the
■water, they will often be seen using a dry bath; some
of them rolling in the dust as horses are often seen doing,
others half burying themselves in the sand as sparrows and barn-
door fowls frequently do. In the case of sheep, which cannot
indulge in a roll and whose fleeces would be an obstacle to any
beneficial effect if they could, nature has provided a succedaneum
m the shape of ticks. These curious animals live within the wool,
an d being provided each with a little scraper, they do for the
surface of the skin of the sheep very much what the application of
s °ap and water does for us. But in the case of civilised man it
has always been considered derogatory to his dignity to bo
indebted to parasitic insects for his continual cleanliness. "We
prefer to scrape ourselves.


So imioli then for the sudorific glands. They are among the
most obvious, because the most external examples of those
processes which are perpetually going on everywhere throughout
the whole animal system. Another very obvious secretion of
an external order is the wax of the ear. This, as far as we
can see, is not excrementitious, hut is a beneficent provision
of the Creator to warn off by its bitterness minute in-
sects which might creep in unawares (e.g., during sleep),
and might occasion much pain or even do much mischief.
At the same time it is not improbable that these glands in the ear
may occasionally be employed in eliminating morbid matter from
the region of the head, so frequently ai-e all the organs of the body
called upon to do double duty; indeed, in morbid conditions of the
body a superabundance of this secretion is sometimes observable.
If secreted in too small quantities it indurates, and if not syringed
out, impedes the hearing. Nature herself often suggests this by a
tickling sensation— e.g., you will sometimes see a dog put his hind
foot in his ear and give it a hearty shake, thus mechanically
assisting nature in dislodging any little pellets of hardened wax.
So much for the secretory organs of the exterior.- Let us now
take a hasty glance into the interior of the animal system.
I have already said that in the blood there are floating
innumerable living corpuscles. The word corpuscle means a
little body; and very properly are they called bodies, because as
I have explained before when speaking of the glands, each has a
life and instinct of its own. They are all living bodies and all
incessantly doing work. Bees and ants are only at work by day;
but these creatures are at work by night as well as by day.
Whether fixed to one locality as the glandular cellules are fixed,
or whether free to move as the corpuscles of the blood are free to
move, they are ever actively at work; the fixed ones, viz, those
in the glands, resembling more the polyps and the sponges in
the realm of nature, the corpuscles of the blood resembling more
the bees which fly through the air. But although alive, they, like
all other living things, are subject to death; indeed they surrender
their lives in the very discharge of the duty for which they were
born. Their dead bodies if left in the blood would (as I have said)
soon pollute it, and highly necessary is it that provision should be
made for carrying them away. The vessels employed in this duty
go by the name of tho lymphatics, so named because the fluid they
contain is not coloured red, as is the fluid which circulates in the
arteries and tho veins, but is a colourless lymph. Although there-
fore they ramify throughout the whole system, they are not so
obvious as are the arteries and the veins. Should you, however,
by any accident poison (say your hand) by soma venomous matter
getting into a wound, you would very soon be able to trace tho


whole course of these lymphatics up the arm by their inflamed
redness, the redness being occasioned by the blood coming to their
relief. The direction of these lymphatics is mainly to the liver,
for there they deliver their cargo; the liver being as important
a goal for the lymphatic system as the heart is for the venous.
The liver on receiving these raw materials converts them into bile;
and this bile passing through certain duets is poured into the
receptacle of the digested food immediately on its leaving the
stomach. It may excite a momentary surprise in us, that this
bile, which apparently is fecal matter drawn out of the system,
should be mixed with the food just as it comes fresh from the
digestive organs—defiling it apparently at the very time when it
is prepared to be absorbed into the blood. There is, however,
r'eason to believe that upon the principle of similia similibus, i.e.,
that like things have an affinity for their like, this bile lends its
aid in disengaging the fecal particles of food, carrying them forward
along with itself down the canal, leaving the finer particles only
to be absorbed by the lacteals. At the, same time it should be
remembered that the bile is not strictly animal matter, i.e.,
that it does not contain that principal characteristic of animal
matter, nitrogen. The nitrogen compounds, which in their
decomposing state are far more pernicious (if left within the system),
are carried off by the kidneys.
As my lecture is not a medical one, I need not particularise all
the various organs which are employed in conveying away either
waste products or superfluities from the blood. My duty is rather
to speak of the means of keeping the body in health. Now,
nothing is more certain than that the most important prerequisite
for health is that all our vessels should be kept clean, or, at all
events, free from decaying animal matter. And, as I observed at
the commencement of my lecture, these numerous emnnetories,
distributed throughout the interior of our system, are provided for
the express purpose of preserving it pure—pure in those intimate
parts of our structure which are beyond our own reach. It is
very necessary, therefore, that these emunotories should be main-
tained in a condition of normal efficiency; but bow is this to be done?
If these inner organs will not do their duty, how are we to get at
them for the purpose of making them do it? The task is a very
delicate one. It may be very true that these organs are our
servants, and many of them do very servile work—nay, scavengers'
work—but they are servants not to be trifled with. To discipline,
indeed, they are amenable, but if treated with violence, or abused,
they rebel, or are stupefied into listless inactivity. But how are
we to communicate with them? or how issue to them any admoni-
tions at all? What language do they understand? Strange as it
May appear, they can be communicated with, although they all


speak different languages. These languages we have been compelled
to learn by very close study, in order to signify to them our
wants. These languages generally go by the name of specifics.
It is a most curious fact that certain minerals and vegetables,
when absorbed into the system, stimulate the different glands of
. the body, some in one way and some in another. And medical
science consists in knowing these effects. A morbid condition of
the body will generally depend upon the blood being overcharged
with matter which ought to be purged away, and the emunctories
must be stimulated to do it. But sometimes, also, it will happen
that the emunctories, in their own voluntary efforts to drain off
foreign matter from the blood, will be excited to too great violence.
They may be doing the right thing, but with such intemperate
haste as to imperil the integrity of the animal fabric. In all
such cases the skilled physician is the proper person to have
recourse to. It is unwise to neglect premonitory symptoms of
disorder; but it is still more unwise, nay, even dangerous, ig-
norantly to prescribe for oneself—tampering with poisons, which
might possibly produce most mischievous effects on the delicate
organisms of the body. It is only the well-informed and ex-
perienced physician who can be relied on to prescribe the
proper medicines. But for all that, it is quite true that a man
may really become his own best physician. It was a saying of
the Roman emperor Tiberius that a man must be a physician
or a fool by the time he is thirty; not, however, by pre-
scribing drugs for himself, but by so adjusting his habits of food
and sleep and cleanliness and bodily exercise as to require no
drugs. But to do this is no easy task, for it requires not only
a careful observation of what habits ai-e most conducive to health,
but also a firm and courageous exercise of self-control, so as to adhere
rigidly to the dictates of experience and observation. On this
account it not unfrequently happens that persons of an originally
weak constitution live long and healthy lives, from having early
seen the necessity and acquired the habit of self-control. I have
heard my own father say (and he was entitled to speak on the
subject, for he lived to see his ninety-seventh year) that as a youth
he was so delicate that his friends did not expect him to live to
his thirtieth year, and yet he lived a long life of activity, and
retained all his faculties to the last. I adduce his case because he
always attributed his health and longevity to the firmness with
which he practised the lessons which his early delicacy had
taught him,
What makes a large degree of cautious observation necessary in
the matter of food is that at our ordinary meals we ingurgitate
not aliment only for our sustenance, but many other things for
our delectation. On most dinner tables will be seen, beside


beef, mutton, potatoes, and bread, condiments of various sorts;
and very generally also there will come in beer, wine, spirits,
tea and coffee; to say nothing of tobacco, which, though not
imbibed, contrives in some fashion to find its way into the
blood.
Now all these things, innocent as most of them look, and indeed
innocent as they are within certain undefined limits, are yet fraught
with elements of danger. They stimulate various organs of our
body in different degrees according to our peculiar idiosyncrasies;
they stimulate them pleasurably, but in stimulating are very
liable to strain them.
True, there is an elasticity in the animal constitution which
enables it to bear a strain, but, like as in the case of the overdrawn
how, if the strain be too great or too long-continued, permanent
injury will ensue, or it may take much time and care to enable the
restorative powers of nature to repair the mischief.
I would, therefore, warn all my heavers to be very cautious in the
use of stimulants, especially those which are regarded as the most
innocent, such as tea and coffee, for although in a general way
they appear to do no harm, yet the effect cannot be calculated on
beforehand. For it would seem that every one of us, man or
woman, has some peculiarity of organisation which exposes ns to be
affected differently by the same ingredient. This peculiarity of
constitution it is which we designate idiosyncrasy.
Justin thesame manner, therefore, as the physician, in administer-
ing his doses, goes tentatively to work, giving smallerquantities at first
till he can ascertain what his patient will bear, so in our domestic
refreshments, it is equally necessary to learn our own idiosyncrasies
tentatively; for it will often happen that a man may fall into a
morbid condition of body by the cumulative effect of his daily
beverages, and that the best remedy he could possibly adopt
would be, not the imbibition of counteractive drugs, but the
abstinence from, or at least greater moderation in, his ordinary
indulgences. Especially would I warn mothers not to permit
to children in the nursery the use of either spiced food, i.e. food
seasoned with such things as nutmeg and pepper, or of such
beverages as tea and coffee.
There is just one other topic 1 wish to remark upon. In scien-
tific works on food you will often meet with an analysis of the
nutritive qualities of the several kinds; and the conclusion drawn
is that the most nutritive are the most desirable to feed upon, in
order to secure the most perfect health. I have no hesitation in
saying that the conclusion is an erroneous one. There might be
some truth in it if men were always on the eve of starvation for
want of nutriment, or if his digestive powers were so feeble that
they were just capable of supplying the inevitable waste; but the


actual fact is that such cases are exceedingly rare. The great
majority of diseases owe their origin not to deficiency of nutri-
ment, but to its overplus. The blood in consequence becomes
overloaded with alimentary matter, and the emunctories, although
working night and day, cannot carry it all off. The corpuscles of
the blood are multiplied to an inordinate extent, and the more
delicate blood vessels are almost ready to burst with the plethora
of the fluid within them. So that it often happens that the
heartiest and most robust man is in the greatest danger of his life.
If he escape apoplexy, then nature comes to his relief in the
shape (say) of gout. And that gout is not so much a disease as a
beneficent provision to relieve the system from excess of nutriment
is proved by an analysis of the chalkstones (so called) which are
deposited at the points of the gouty man’s toes. They are found
to consist of the ingredients which enter into the constitution of
his animal food. As for rheumatism, it is only another form of
gout. Thus, also, it happens that the most hearty youths are the
most liable to break a blood vessel on the lungs, and to go off in a
galloping consumption. The time of life at which this usually
happens goes to prove the same point; for it will generally be
found that the greatest danger is just at the time when the body
ceases to grow. Up to that time the body has needed abundance
of food, but now, rather suddenly, it does not need by any means
so much. Unless, therefore, the amount be correspondingly reduced,
or the superfluity worked off by strong bodily exercise, morbid
action of some sort will supervene, simply because the energies of the
emunctory organs are overtaxed. The diseased action which will
ensue will not be the same in every individual, but will vary
according to his idiosyncrasy. One constitution may be strong
enough to throw the superfluity to the surface in the shape of
pimples, boils, and grog-blossoms. This is far the safest method,
but not always the most ornamental. Sometimes this plethora will
indicate itself by bleedings of the nose, or by profuse perspiration;
but bleeding, although it certainly affords present relief, im-
poverishes the blood, and is liable to superinduce dropsy. Profuse
perspiration is at all times dangerous, because it may be suddenly
checked. Par better to have temporary recourse to fasting and to
slops.
But, again, if these superfluities of which I am speaking should
be conjoined with more poisonous ingredients, obtained (suppose)
from tea or tobacco or the habitual use of certain specific medicines,
then a simple boil may be angered into a carbuncle, or cumulative
poison may even corrode the tissues and the bones. Neuralgic pains
seem due to the presence of some of these innocent poisons in
excess. An overcharged venous system is ever liable to congestion,
and should congestion result in the internal rupture of any blood


vessel, there is always considerable peril. True, the lymphatics
immediately set to work to convey away the extravasated blood (as
we see a black eye regain its colour in a few days), but if this
result is not speedily achieved, one of two effects follows. (1.) If the
extravasated corpuscles meet with a thin living membrane, they
retain their vitality and begin to build up solid animal tissues in
the wrong place, tubercles it may be or hard tumours; but if on
the other hand the blood corpuscles should die, they begin to decay,
and nothing is more corrosive to neighbouring tissues than decaying
blood. As bleeding gums, unless carefully rinsed, destroy the teeth,
so do internal hemorrhages destroy any structures, whether bones or
tissues, which lie long in their proximity.
But it is time, my friends, that I should be drawing my remarks to
a close. You must remember that I have been speaking of normal
and tolerably robust constitutions. lam quite ready to admit that
there are weaklier constitutions, which need the careful oversight of
the skilled physician, into whose province I do not presume to
intrude. What lam recommending is that everyone should take
upon himself to be his own physician thus far—that he should con-
tinually bear in mind that at almost every meal we take we are
presented with stimulants of one kind or another, whether in the
shape of condiments or beverages; and that all these are really
specifics—acting to be sure mildly as a general rule and beneficially,
but in some constitutions operating with unlooked-for vehemence,
and producing in their cumulative effect a degree of disturbance,
which very much interferes with the comfort of life.
Especially would I put my younger friends upon their guard in
this respect, lest they should become more or less slaves to any
creature comfort, however seemingly innocent—whether tea or
coffee or tobacco or beer.
Another admonition there is, which I would give to all. When
feeling a little out of sorts, do not rush at once to the doctor; but
try negative conclusions, and see whether by leaving off this or
that indulgence will not make all the difference. A little less
sleep will sometimes produce a marvellous change. I knew a
barrister of good practice in the West of England, who was
troubled for years with a running sore in his ankle, and nothing
which was prescribed him would do him any good. But he
suddenly took to rising at six in the morning instead of eight; and
the sore healed up almost immediately'. In the same way it often
happens that an invalid, whose case has baffled ordinary remedies,
has been restored to health by a sea-voyage—being thus rescued,
!t would appear, from servitude to some habit, which did not
suit his constitution. If you say that it is not every one who
can afford the time and the money to go on a voyage in search of
health, you must remember, my friends, that to get up two hours


before breakfast, and to take a brisk walk through the morning air
upon the strength of a glass of cold water, would be to some men as
powerful an alterative as to take a voyage round the world.
. I will conclude my lecture with reference to a Scripture case.
When Daniel, in his earliest youth, had been carried captive to
Babylon, he and three other youths were, from their comely
looks, set apart to be trained as personal servants to stand before
the king. With the view of making them plump and well-liking,
they were ordered to have meat and wine from the king’s own
table. But Daniel, who did not wish to be defiled with tlio
king’s meat—a menu which would in all probability include pork
sausages—begged Ashpenaz, the chief-chamberlain, to let them be
served with plainer food. “ Daren’t do it,” said Ashpenaz. He
feared the king would see their faces worse-liking than the
others, and he might be dealt with in much the same way as
Pharaoh, King of Egypt, treated his chief-baker. Daniel then
made friends with Melzar, the under-chamberlain, and succeeded
in persuading him to try the very experiment which I am now
recommending—“ Let us (Daniel said) have nothing but pulse
and water for ten days, and then compare us with those who
have eaten of the king’s meat.” The good-natured Melzar, at
the risk of his head, ventured to comply, and at the end of ten
days Daniel and his companions were found to be “fairer and
better in flesh ” than all the others.
Hire! &Co., Printers, Flinders Lane West, Melbourne.




