

v^B^B^B^^^: *B |
Be ■' I
HH \mC^I
P Ifi i
V jyiZffl V - i I
4' - 9 I
Bv
\ BH .^BBb
W _ fiMLv . <& «h«^
B p B. k \A ' f^B
'
■
ffA*M • * B9 tPUr- HlflB MB^B
I r u *X1
m
r IB
B ■ ■ I H H


-
I 'S > ]
,
K
H 1


.
N


\ i i
i*
■


The Invisible Island


BY ALEXANDER MACDONALD
Illustrated by Eminent Artists.
Crown Bvo. Cloth extra. Olivine edges.
The Invisible Island: A Story of the Far North of Queensland.
5 J.
Through the Heart of Tibet: A Tale of a Secret Mission to
Lhasa. 6s.
" A rattling story."— British Weekly.
The Hidden Nugget: A Story of the Australian Goldfields.
3r. 6d.
"It is a most breezy story."— School Guardian.
The White Trail: A Story of the Early Days of Klondike. 6s.
"Will find a ready favour with boys."— Scotsman.
The Island Traders: A Tale of the South Seas. 35. 6d.
"The story is replete with excitement."— Teachers' Aid.
The Pearl Seekers: A Story of Adventure in the Southern Seas.
6s.
"This is the kind of story boys will want to read at a sitting."— Schoolmaster.
The Quest of the Black Opals: A Story of Adventure in the
Heart of Australia. SJ.5J.
" Distinctly above the level of the bulk of books of adventure. Morning Post.
The Lost Explorers: A Story of the Trackless Desert. 6s.
"As splendid and as vivid a narrative as any boy could wish to rca«b
—Daily Graphic.
LONDON: BLACK IE & SON, LIMITED, 50 OLD BAILEY, E.C.


■■■ . I
'


i '~**wA r. _" •
,— —... 1*
, *■
I
■ 1 J8
. - ■ H J
C 2U4
"IT WAS A LARGE BUTTON FASHIONED OF GOLD"


The Invisible Island
A Story of the Far North
of Queensland
ALEXANDER MACDONALD, F.R.G.S.
Author of " Through the Heart of Tibet" " The Hidden Nugget"
"The White Trail" "The Island Traders"
"The Pearl Seekers" &c.
ILLUSTRATED BY CHARLES M. SHELDON
BLACKIE AND SON LIMITED
LONDON GLASGOW AND BOMBAY


.
.


MQ-2Q-k
Contents
I. THE GOLD BUTTON 9
11. BY MINER'S RIGHT 27
111. QUONG LEE, THE MYSTERIOUS CHINAMAN - - - 49
IV. ELDORADO CAMP 71
V. MACKAY'S PLAGUE 93
VI. THE ADVANCE BEGINS 115
VII. THE ADVENTURES OF A NIGHT 137
VIII. THE ISLAND IS RE-DISCOVERED 161
IX. PRISONERS 183
X. RUN TO EARTH 205
XI. THE SLEEPING CAMP 226
XII. WHERE IS MACKAY? 247
XIII. THE CORROBORREE 268
XIV. EDMUND STRIKES GOLD 290
XV. THE SECRET OF THE CAVE 312
XVI. THE TREASURE IS RESTORED ------ 336


'


Illustrations
" IT WAS A LARGE BUTTON FASHIONED OF GOLD "
Frontispiece 16
"DAMPER JACK RUSHED INTO THE GALLEY" - - - 77
CAPTURED BY THE ABORIGINES - 190
" 4 THIS IS A PLAN OF THE ISLAND EDMUND REPLIED - 229
44 THEY BOUNDED AT THE WAVERING RING OF EMU
DANCERS " 289
THE DISCOVERY OF THE TREASURE 333


♦
a


CHAPTER I
The Gold Button
THROUGH the dank, shimmering heat haze the island
loomed in ghostly outline. The adventurer rested a brief
space to survey the scene and then passed on again, and
each moment the shadowy shores grew more distinct.
The island was one of the many unknown timber-clad
mudbanks in the south-west of the Gulf of Carpentaria.
It lay only five miles from the mainland, but well con-
cealed in the heart of the misty vapour, that continually
surrounded its sombre and silent coast. What lay behind
that veil Big Mackay was now to discover. With swift
strokes he propelled his improvised bark canoe forward
towards the beach, and soon he stood upon the steaming
land. The trees grew down to the water's edge and were
thickly interwoven with clinging vegetation, which formed
an almost impassable barrier to farther progress. The
trees themselves were mostly palms of the usual tropical
Australian varieties, but tall cedars, ti trees, and blood-
woods were also conspicuous, and gaunt, spreading man-
groves flung their gnarled roots along the banks and over
the channels of any small water-carrying indentations in
the land. Over all hung the fever-laden mist—hot, sti-
fling, and evil-smelling.
Not a sound startled the deadly stillness, not a sign of


life was visible. Surely this pestilential land was not the
haunt of man?
Mackay stood on the narrow strip of beach and gazed
around. So far as he knew, his was the first human foot
to tread the forbidding shore. Calmly and methodically
he filled his pipe and lit it; then, as if the tobacco whiffs
had brought him sudden inspiration, he lifted his rifle and
a small prospector's pick from the canoe and started in-
land. Well he knew how to force a passage through the
dense network of dingers by bursting the tendrils apart
with the momentum of his body. Stinging plants seemed
not to worry him, and the nauseant odour emanating
from some of the trees he brushed against only made
him force through with greater vigour.
Suddenly he noticed that the ground was sloping up-
wards immediately ahead, and this fact seemed to please
him greatly. "It isn't a mudbank entirely after all," he
muttered, pausing to wipe the perspiration from his face.
"This is a new piece of land I've discovered, for although
it may be known to some sailors, none of them would ever
imagine it was anything but a deposit of silt brought down
by the northern Australian rivers, and certainly no ship
has ever visited the place to see what it was like; for there
isna water deep enough to float a big matchbox any-
where within three miles o' the shore line." He pulled
vigorously at his pipe while contemplating his surround-
ings; then, determining his course, he plunged forward
once more into the undergrowths. This time he found
himself rising, slowly at first, then abruptly, until he was
scaling a steep rock face, upon which grew only nettle
trees and long, fibrous flowering plants he had never seen
before. But these tough growths afforded excellent foot-
hold, and, with his rifle slung across his back and pick


stuck in his belt, he hauled himself up hand over hand
to the summit, where, blinded with perspiration and ex-
hausted with his labours, he threw himself down and
rested.
Soon he sat up, wondering vaguely what had happened.
His pipe had gone out, although it was still in his mouth;
so, lighting it again, he tried to realize the changes which
had taken place. First of all, the mist had gone, and the
vertical sun was beating down upon him with tropical
intensity. But surely he had just awakened from a dream.
Where was the mangrove-fringed mudbank? Where was
the germ-infested forest he had negotiated? In fact, where
was he himself? He stood up and surveyed his environ-
ment, and his astonishment grew greater. He was stand-
ing on the highest point of a ridge; behind him was
nothing that he could see, for his view was shut off in
that direction by an impenetrable cloud, formed of billows
of snowy mist. Around him on all other sides stretched
a magnificent panorama of rich, smiling land, dotted with
timber clumps and intersected with promising valleys,
through which fairly large streams flowed. This vista
of pleasant land extended as far as he could see, with
here and there a range of peaks jutting above the normal
level, as if to lend variety to the scene. Near the spot
where he stood some kangaroos hopped about playfully,
totally regardless of his presence, and on a plain a little
way to his left a herd of buffaloes disported themselves.
As he looked a large turkey rose from the ground beside
him, where it had been feeding on grass seeds, and lazily
flew off to the nearest trees, whence, disturbed by its
arrival and angry at its intrusion, hundreds of gaily
plumaged parrots arose screaming into the air. Pigeons
of the "squatter" variety, plump as chickens fed for the


market, and too heavy for flight, ran away from his
vicinity, and some curious - looking quadrupeds, some-
what resembling rabbits, eyed him inquisitively from be-
hind some boulders on his right.
Mackay rubbed his eyes and looked again. There was
no change in the general aspect of things, but a great
many more birds and animals, some of which he knew,
and others of a species unknown to him, had awakened
to activity, evidently just aware that a strange biped had
come uninvited among them.
Mechanically the puzzled Scot raised his rifle: "I'll
soon see if you fellows are real, or merely creatures
conjured up by my sun-stricken imagination," he mut-
tered. " I'm hungry anyway, an' I dinna think there is
any room for imagination about that." But the rabbit-
like creatures at which he had levelled his weapon did
not move; they sat up on their hind legs, with ears erect,
and eyes staring at their would-be slayer as if mesmerized.
Mackay's finger trembled on the trigger for a moment as
he glanced along the barrel. He never missed anything;
ammunition was always too scarce to allow of waste, and
he had handled the rifle all his life.
But this time the object of his aim escaped. " No, I
canna do it," the holder of the rifle spoke, lowering his
weapon. " I canna shoot a harmless wee animal like
that when it looks at me so innocently. It may be imagi-
nation, or I may be dreaming, but I'll no' be the first to
bring death into this bonny land." He sat down and
recalled the events of the day in an endeavour to see if
his mind were wandering or not; but he did not relight
his pipe—it was empty.
"At sunrise this morning I was camped on Blue Gum
Creek, on the Gulf o' Carpentaria—at least I think I was,"


he mused. "I had been told by King Henry, the abori-
ginal I doctored somewhere on the Roper River when he
was gey near peggin' oot, that a big country lay oot behind
the clouds, opposite Blue Gum Creek, an' I had decided
to see if he had been talking scripturally, or as a matter
o' fact. Well, at sunrise I launched the bark boatie I had
built the night before, and after pushing it through mud
an' sand for some miles I reached the mist cloud right
enough, and found land in its heart. But it was a land
of pestilence, in which was no sound, and the shadow
o' death hung over it. I broke through the forest fringe,
climbed a rock, an' found myself here. That all seems
connected enough. I'm not mad at all. King Henry was
speaking the truth; but he didna say the land beyond the
clouds was anything like the size it is. Maybe he didna
ken, of course; for the aborigines would never dare pass
through the mist, an' the higher land lying beyond the
vapoury beach would not be known. Ah, well! I'm here
anyway, an' here I'll stay until I have added considerably
to my knowledge o' geography. The air is as pure here
as on the top o' the Grampians in Scotland, notwith-
standing that awful veil which, I suppose, surrounds the
island. I'll prospect around a bit an' see what the place
is made o'."
Mackay, now satisfied with the conclusions he had
reached, walked over to the outcropping reef, behind
which the rabbit-like animals had been watching him.
They were now nibbling the grass near, sublimely indif-
ferent to his movements. Evidently man was a creature
they had not previously had reason to fear.
"This reef looks vera promising," Mackay remarked
as he stood on a detached boulder. " I wadna be vera
much surprised to find it highly auriferous." He broke


off a fragment with his pick and scanned the fraction criti-
cally. " It's funny stuff," he went on; "I don't think I
ever saw anything just exactly like it before, although
that wonderfully rich formation we found in New Guinea
wasna vera unlike this. I'll follow it up a bit an' see
what it leads to." He put the piece of stone in his shirt
pocket and walked along the line of reef, breaking off a
piece occasionally for inspection, and usually, after a
puzzled scrutiny, adding the specimen to those already
in his pocket.
So engrossed was he in his work that he hardly noticed
he was descending into a gorge, until the reef he was
following was suddenly cut in two by a swiftly flowing
creek. Brought to a halt on its banks, Mackay gazed
about him. He was in a ravine, and the rocks on either
side were bare of vegetation of any kind. The banks of
the creek, however, were overgrown with long coarse
grass, and lower down, where the gorge widened into a
gently sloping valley, he could see that dense patches
of timber flanked the waterway. "It strikes one vera
forcibly," the Scot soliloquized, "that my first duty
should be to get back to civilization and report that this
island is not the mudbank those people who may know
of its existence must think it is. Afterwards I'll get a
ship and come back, an' maybe build a bungalow on it,
where I can retire in my old age. I've got a long way
to go, though, before I can reach any habitation o' man.
Burketown, in Queensland, is the nearest place; but I
dinna like the country between here an' there, for the
aborigines are vera unreasonable in their dealings wi' white
men. Port Darwin or Pine Creek, in South Australia,
might be easier reached, although farther distant, because
I know the Roper River track vera well, an' I could get


horses from Smith's cattle station on the way. But I
must see what kind o' country is on the other side o'
this creek; often a watercourse is the dividing line,
geographically, between two formations."
He carefully brushed aside a large black snake which
lay basking in the sun, and entered the water. The
current ran very swiftly, but he knew well how to cross
a mountain torrent, and, wading and swimming diagon-
ally with the stream, he soon reached the opposite bank.
" It's a good thing a man doesna need to worry about
wet clothes in this part o' the world," he remarked as
he shook himself. " Hullo, what's this?" He gingerly
turned over with his foot a long, serpent-like creature
which was wriggling slowly into a hole in the bank.
"You're no' a snake, my good fellow, an' ye needna
think you can cheat me into believing you are," Mackay
said, addressing the reptile. "As a matter o' fact,
you're no' even a hibernating eel; you're only a big
specimen o' the edible worm, an' I've seen any amount
o' your kind among the South Pacific islands." He
stepped over the three feet of twisting life, and resumed
his tracing of the reef. However, he did not go far, for
the outcrop ran straight into the hillside, and no signs
of any likely mineral-bearing rocks were anywhere near.
This was disappointing, after so much trouble had been
taken and so many promising indications seen, but Mackay
did not waste energy in lamenting his bad fortune. In-
stead, he sat down and refilled his pipe and lit it. After
all, if the reef he had been following were mineral-bearing,
there was enough of it on the other side of the creek for
all practical purposes, and if it were barren, as most prob-
ably was the case, then it didn't matter although it dissolved
into the air as well as disappeared in the walls of the


gorge. He smoked a while in thoughtful silence, and his
eyes roamed around. Finally his gaze narrowed down
to his immediate vicinity, and almost at once he uttered
an exclamation of surprise. He was looking at a glitter-
ing object only a few feet distant from where he sat, and
his instinct told him it was gold.
Without moving, he began to ponder audibly as to the
meaning of the presence of a piece of gold, for from its
regular shape he could see it was not a chance nugget,
but a carefully designed piece of metal, which had already
passed through the hands and the arts of man.
"This is vera strange," Mackay muttered. "In fact
it is beyond my poor comprehension. If this is a desert
island, how did that piece o' ornamented gold get here?
If this, on the other hand, is a highly popular seaside
resort, then where is the population? How did they come
here? What do they call the place? Why does the Aus-
tralian Commonwealth Government know nothing about
its valuable Gulf property? And Oh, I give it up!"
He arose and picked up the cause of his wonderment.
It was a large button fashioned of gold, and on its outer
surface a sinuous dragon was delicately and perfectly in-
scribed. Clearly the ornament was of Chinese origin.
Mackay turned it over and over in his hand, and then
transferred it to his pocket with his other specimens.
" For want o' better evidence," he said, "I must assume
that some Chinaman fleeing down this way in a patent
dirigible balloon, or, wha kens, a new-fangled aeroplane,
dropped this. Maybe his coat got caught in the machinery,
an' this button got hauled from its place. Ah well, I'll
just see if he dropped any more! Gold is vera heavy, an'
maybe he had more buttons on his yellow jacket than he
could conveniently carry in this hot climate."
( 0 204 )


But there were no further signs of Chinese lavishness,
nor could Mackay find any traces of human habitation
during an hour's very careful search extending well down
into the valley. He came back to where he had found the
button, and devoted another hour to thought while he
smoked. Then, hungry and still puzzled, he climbed the
steep side of the ravine opposite to that which he had
come down. About six feet from the top he reached a
ledge, and opening out on it was a hole in the rocks large
enough to allow of a man's entrance. Mackay was of an
enquiring turn of mind, and he promptly crawled into the
hole. " Any port in a storm," he muttered. " This shelter
could at least keep the rain off a fellow at a pinch, an' if
there are no residents here already, I'll leave proofs inside
that Jim Mackay spent part o' a week-end on this island.
Hullo, the place is expanding! Maybe this is the back
entrance into that fellow Kubla Khan's palace." He stood
erect and lit a match, and straightway received another
surprise. He was in an apartment the size of a large
room, and on the middle of the floor were several half-
burnt logs, remnants of a fire which certainly had not
been kindled by spontaneous combustion. Snakes wriggled
about the floor, and a couple of dingoes ran past the daring
intruder towards the mouth of the cave. The light went
out, but with the aid of other matches the exploration of
the place was resumed. There was nothing more to be seen
except a small hole in one corner of the apartment wherein
sprawled a litter of young dingoes, evidently the progeny
of the two he had startled from their lair on entering.
"Well, well!" murmured the explorer philosophically,
as he completed his survey. " I've heard o' Robinson
Crusoe's feelings when he ran across tracks in the sand,
an' I can imagine what many a man since his time has
(0 204 ) 2


felt when he found proofs that he wasna the first fellow
to discover something he thought to be new; but this
adventure o' my ain has some original points that makes
it very deserving o' special notice. The fleeing-machine
theory is exploded in the first place, and it seems so is the
Chinaman idea; for the man who built that fire was a
black fellow, as is easily proved by the way the logs have
been laid. But these aborigines of Australia don't wear
golden buttons on their dress suits; in fact, clothes are a
superfluous commodity on the Gulf shores.
"Who then kindled this fire? and who is looking for a
lost button? If I were a Sherlock Holmes kind o' man
I should say that one or more aborigines were at the fire
business, an' that they were cooking a shipwrecked Celes-
tial whom they had caught. They couldna eat the button,
an', as it was of no value to them, they threw it over the
ledge outside, and it landed where I found it, which all
goes to show that this is no place for Jim Mackay; for
if the heathens come back they'll eat him too, an' that's
no' on his programme."
He crawled back through the entrance and pulled him-
self to the top of the cliff. The sun shone down with
blistering heat. Ahead, sloping gently downwards, lay
a land of beautiful green-foliaged trees, and beyond that
the sparkling waters of the Gulf of Carpentaria stretched
northwards until they were lost in the blue of the horizon.
A slight film of mist obscured the lower part of the island,
but it seemed to be dissipating, and soon Mackay could
see the beach. " I'll cross the island," he said to himself.
"The north side is a much more friendly shore than that
facing the mainland of Australia, an' there doesna seem
to be such a forbidding wall round it. I wonder, though,
why ships haven't come here from the north side; the


island could easily be seen from that quarter. Ah! King
Henry told me that the water on that side was so shallow
that no ship could come within many miles of the land,
and —great Scotland! there is a steamer lying out there
now."
Mackay rubbed his eyes and looked again. Yes, the
vessel was there right enough, a steamer of about three
thousand tons, and not unlike one of the Australian
coasters, although he had never heard of any trading
vessel coming farther west in the Gulf than Burketown,
on the Albert River, while certainly the most only came
round to the Norman River with supplies for Normanton
and the Croydon goldfields hinterland.
" My senses must be leaving me," he muttered feebly.
"How could a steamer float in three feet o' water; an'
what is it doing out there anyway? By Jupiter, I'll put
my senses to the test again. If that is a steamer, it must
be bound somewhere, and if I get on board I'll reach some
port sooner than I can walk. If it is only a mirage, I'll
find out soon enough." Quickly forming his plans, he
rushed back to the cave and deposited therein his rifle
and ammunition and his pick; then, after fixing the posi-
tion of the place in his mind by noting the various promi-
nent objects around, he started down towards the beach
on the far side of the island. He had left proof of his
having been in possession, for his name was on his
rifle.
Down through the dense forest of acacia, pandanus
palms, cedars, bloodwood, and "quinine" trees he rushed,
trampling over many crawling creatures, and startling
into frightened activity numerous other living things—
bipeds, quadrupeds, and centipedes. He was filled with
the idea that he could get to Thursday Island or Port


Darwin in a couple of days or so, if he could only reach
the vessel anchored or stranded half a mile from shore.
He keenly desired a spell in civilized parts, for he had been
a long time wandering among the wilds of the far north,
where the only human beings he had seen were aborigines
of a particularly low type. Besides, he had located some
good copper and silver "shows", and wanted to get into
touch with people who might be inclined to raise the money
to work them. That he was hungry was also an incentive
to speed; for well he knew that passengers on board
Australian coasters fared well so far as food was con-
cerned.
At length he burst through the moist vapour cloud
hanging round the beach, and found himself in the warm
water of the great Gulf. Half a mile out the steamer still
swung lazily on the motionless expanse, but whether it
was mud or water she rested on was unknown to Mackay;
nor just then did he care much.
Knowing that he could swim the distance, if the sharks
did not interfere, he ran straight ahead, the shallow water
rising in geysers all around him. But his swimming
powers were not called for, the water was too shallow,
and he was within a hundred yards of the steamer before
it really impeded his progress.
By this time he had come to the conclusion that the
vessel had mistaken its course, and, having grounded, was
waiting for some shifting in the muddy bed to effect its
escape into deeper water. He floundered on, knowing
that when the waters piled up with the first shoreward
breeze, as was usual along the head of the Gulf, there
would be a sufficient rise to enable it to float, and there
were already indications that a wind was working down
from the open sea. Just then he sank in about six


fathoms; but, bobbing to the surface again, he, to his
surprise, found land still under his feet. "Jupiter!" he
spluttered: "I thought the bottom had dropped oot o'
the Gulf that time. I wonder who dug that hole, an'
what purpose it serves? Whew, I don't like the taste
o' Carpentaria! I must have swallowed a pailful. He
staggered forward without delay, and almost immediately
was again immersed. When he came up he gasped for a
moment, then spoke a few words in a very feeling manner
concerning his opinion of the ocean in general and the
Gulf of Carpentaria in particular. Before he had said all
that was in his mind he found himself on the shallows
once more, and then he continued until within a few feet
of the vessel's bowsprit. He now saw that it was anchored
in deep water, and, giving up trying to account for the
sudden falling away of the shallow ledge, he plunged into
the depths and swam to the steamer's side. The name
was partly hidden by a tarpaulin cover, but he could see
that it began with "V" and ended with " E ".
A rope ladder hung invitingly near, its end trailing in
the water; so, catching hold of this means of help, he
climbed rapidly to the deck, somewhat puzzled because
apparently no one had observed his approach.
"Here I am anyway, an' here I'll stay," he remarked
as he stepped off the ladder. " I have money enough to
pay my passage to the nearest port, an' I can then see
about replenishing my exchequer. Hullo! the ship is like
the island; it's deserted! I canna be dreaming, surely?
An' I hope I'm no going mad "
A blow on the head from behind knocked him headlong
to the deck, and mysterious islands, shallow waters, gold
buttons, caves, and everything else became mixed up in
his mind for one brief instant. Dimly in that flash of time


he saw several white men standing 1 over him, then all be-
came blank.
When he recovered consciousness he lay still for some
time trying to think. He knew he had been struck down
by some people on the ship, and he did not wish them to
know he had recovered until he had seen them, and esti-
mated his chances of success were he to spring upon them
suddenly. He regretted now that his revolver was useless,
owing to its having been in the water, but he fancied that
he could still give a good account of himself. He almost
smiled as he thought of the feelings of his treacherous
attackers, doubtless some low-down traders, when he
came to life again; but as he felt very much exhausted
he decided to " play possum" for a bit yet, and wait until
he heard some of the sailors go away. He would then
give those who remained some return for their treatment
of him. But how quiet everything was! Perhaps every-
one had already gone? And how soft and comfortable the
deck was. After all he was quite content to lie where he
was for a long time, if no person would give him another
tap on the head. What brutes they were too! They
could not be British sailors! No, nor of any civilized
country. He had met all kinds of foreigners in his
wanderings, and they had all been decent fellows. The
crew of the ship must be Asiatics. Then what were they
doing off the Australian coast? Ah! smuggling opium
of course; that was the whole solution of everything. He
had stumbled across them while carrying out their illegal
work, and to save themselves they had dealt so harshly
with him. However, he was better now; he would ex-
plain that he was not concerned with what they did, and
ask them to land him at Thursday Island or some other


port. He opened his eyes. He was alone. But some-
thing was wrong. How came it about that there was a
roof over his head? Where was the ship's rigging? He
had seen the funnel as he fell; it was a squat black one;
where had it gone? And the deck on which he had
fallen? Why, it had disappeared too! What had hap-
pened? Where was he? He sat upright and glared
around. A gasp of bewilderment escaped him. He was
in bed in a clean little room, and through the windows on
two sides blew a delightfully cool breeze. An elderly,
pleasant-faced lady in nurse's attire arose from a corner
and came to his side.
"Where am I? What has happened?" Mackay asked
curiously.
"Please don't get excited," the nurse answered. "I
am so glad to see you have recovered. You are in the
hospital, of course, and will be quite able to leave very
soon."
" I should think so," said Mackay grimly.
" But why am I in the hospital? How did I get here,
and what hospital am I in? I was on a ship in the Gulf
when the fellow knocked me out."
"Please don't talk, Mr. Mackay; the doctor said I
wasn't to allow you to ask questions until he saw you
again. You are in Port Darwin hospital. Two men
brought you here who said they found you far out in the
bush towards the Roper River. You were unconscious
when they found you, and have been so until this moment.
It must have been a nasty throw your horse gave you?"
Mackay sat up in bed and looked at the nurse. "You
seem to ken me," he said sharply. "Are you quite sure
I am Jim Mackay?"
"Oh yes, everyone here knows you very well! You


were the finder of the Red Gum Creek goldfields, you
know; and who in Port Darwin doesn't know that?"
" That's vera true," mused Mackay, nodding. " I re-
member the Red Gum fields all right. Can you tell me
what I did after that?"
"Oh dear no, Mr. Mackay! How could a nurse in
the hospital know all your doings? I only know what
I have heard from miners and drovers who have passed
through my hands professionally. But I do know that
six months ago you set out from here to prospect the
Roper River country, intending to follow it to its mouth.
Drover Charlie of Cunnamulla told me that from the Gulf
you intended to go overland to Croydon, and from there
strike across the peninsula to Chillagoe, where you had
some friends."
"Yes, all that is quite correct," admitted Mackay. " I
set out from Port Darwin to examine the Roper River
country, an' I meant to cross from the Gulf to the eastern
seaboard of North Queensland through Croydon an' Chil-
lagoe. But I didna get past the Gulf. I was there only
a few minutes ago, it seems to me; an' it wasna a fall
frae a horse that gave me this broken head: it was a blow
from an iron bar on the deck o' a steamer I boarded "
"You mustn't say another word," the nurse interrupted.
"Here comes the doctor, and he will be very angry if he
knows you have been allowed to talk." She turned to
meet the flannel-suited young man who had at that mo-
ment entered the room, and Mackay looked him up and
down critically.
" Hullo, old man !" the doctor cried cheerily. " Feeling
all right now?"
" Man, Tarn, that's a fine suit you're wearing," was the
invalid's answer. "You look quite a dandy in it."


" And you look quite a dandy in bed, Mac. However
did you allow a nigger to play cricket with your head?"
"Just ca' canny a wee, Doctor. I understood I fell
from a horse, at least the lady beside you told me that."
" That was the supposition of the men who found you
and brought you here, Mac, but I know they didn't guess
correctly. It was a very powerful arm and a heavy club
that gave you that head."
" It was, Tarn; but if you substitute an iron bar for the
club you will be nearer the mark. Who brought me here?"
"Two men who had been out prospecting. They found
you somewhere out back, and carried you to the township."
"Aye. How did they manage to carry me? I'm no'
a featherweight."
"Oh, they relieved each other in holding you in front
of them on their horses!"
" Doctor, do you believe a man could be carried in that
position from the Gulf of Carpentaria an' not know any-
thing o' the journey? It's over three hundred miles, you
know."
"Who is talking about the Gulf of Carpentaria?
You're still wandering, old man; lie down and go to
sleep again "
" What day is this?"
"Monday. You were brought here yesterday, and if
you keep on talking you'll not leave until you are carried
away in a wooden box."
"Just a few words more, Tarn. I was knocked on the
head to-day on board a boat in the Gulf "
"I tell you you were here yesterday, Mac—Sunday, the
fourteenth."
" Oh!" Mackay thought a moment. "It was on Mon-
day, the eighth, that I had my adventure," he went on;


"so it looks as if I had slept a week. Doctor, do you
believe the journey from the Gulf could be done in that
time?"
" Certainly not; but you were not at the Gulf "
" But I was; an' I left proof in a cave there. Bring me
my clothes, Tarn, I'm going to get up. Jim Mackay doesna
take things lying down."
"Man, you're half-dead yet," cried the doctor. "Lie
down. You've had concussion of the brain, and sun-
stroke, and half a dozen other complications besides."
" I've had nothing o' the kind. I've been clubbed on
the head an' then drugged, an' I've been brought here
in a boat. It's all quite clear to me now. The men
who took me here only carried me from the wharf, an'
they were most likely the fellows who did the first trick."
" Mac, lie down!"
" I won't. Did you find a gold button in my shirt
pocket?"
"No, only some quartz specimens; I've got them
safe "
" What boat left the Port last?"
"The Vulture , bound for London with general cargo.
She cleared last night "
"The Vulture? She was about three thousand tons,
with a short black funnel?"
"Yes, but do lie down, Mac; really I'll have to use
force "
" What is the next boat leaving?"
"The Japanese mail steamer; she connects with a
homeward-bound German boat at Singapore "
"Then go and book me a passage to London, Tarn.
I'm going home to have another look at the Vulture an'
the fellows who cracked my head."


CHAPTER II
Miner's Right
THE big liner had started on her long voyage to Australia
and among those who had been seeing off friends at Til-
bury was young Edmund Howard. He had parted with
his dearest friend, and he felt very miserable indeed. He
felt that fate was unkind to him, for he had been im-
bued with the spirit of adventure and yet was compelled
to pass his time almost chained to a desk in the office
of a leading firm of tea importers. True, in time to come,
when he was an old man in fact, he might be sent out
to some place in India or China to look after the interests
of the firm there; but his soul revolted against having to
spend his life in the tea trade, no matter where his lot
happened to be cast. His comrade, Frank Woodward,
had been a bank clerk of great promise, but he had
broken his bonds, and was now en route to the great
land of the Southern Cross to seek his fortune wherever
he could find it. Edmund would have dearly liked to
have gone with him, but he couldn't afford to throw up
a sure appointment for something very much prospective
and problematical. Out in the wild unknown regions of
the earth he felt he could do something really great.
He could find gold or other rare metals, for was not
he a rather advanced student in the mineralogical class


he attended at nights, in preparation for the time when
he might be able to make use of his knowledge? He
did not know that a knowledge of minerals, as acquired
at college, although very useful, was quite a different
matter from finding those minerals in countries where
their manner of occurrence upset all laws laid down re-
garding them. Of course he was only eighteen years
of age, and at that period enthusiasm usually makes
one blind to essential facts.
The liner was now well down the river, and all the
people who had been left on the wharf had departed to
catch the train back to the city, where, in the excite-
ment of their daily avocations, they would probably soon
forget all about those they had seen depart.
Edmund turned to go away too; but noticing another
strange-looking steamer coming up, he delayed to watch
her pass. There was only one other person remaining
of all the throng who ten minutes before had crowded
the place. He was a pleasant-faced man of colonial
appearance and apparently about forty years of age.
Edmund looked at him interestedly, for there was some-
thing about him that told him he was a man of more
than ordinary abilities and experiences. He, too, it
seemed, was watching the approach of the incoming
vessel, and his careful scrutiny was evidence that it was
of some significance to him.
It was a somewhat peculiar-looking vessel of about
three thousand tons weight, and a short, squat, black
funnel stood straight up amidship. Edmund would have
dubbed her a foreigner at once but for the fact that she
was flying the Union Jack over her stern. He could not
then make out her name; but as she stopped, preparatory
to being towed into the docks, he saw that Vulture was


the word spelt upon her bows. The man beside him
apparently was not sure himself as to the vessel's identity
until he saw the name, and Edmund was certain he heard
him mutter some words not very complimentary to the
people on board.
Slowly she was manoeuvred into the docks; but long
before she was berthed it was evident that she carried no
passengers, and that her crew were Asiatics of almost
every description. Edmund had the whole day at his
disposal, having been allowed off from duty by special
permission to see his friend depart; so, being in no hurry
to get back to the dreary city, he continued to watch the
Vulture 1 s progress. The powerfully built man standing
near also waited.
At length the Vulture was safely berthed, and two men,
evidently officers, came on shore to transact the necessary
customs business. There was nothing more to be seen,
so Edmund walked to the station—the special train with
the friends of those on the liner had long ago returned
to the city—and waited for a train. He noticed that
his companion of the afternoon was also waiting for the
same train, and that the two officers of the Vulture
seemed likewise to be bound citywards. In due course
Edmund reached Fenchurch Street Station and went
home, and next morning resumed his duties at the
office.
With the first post came an invoice from a shipping
agent announcing the arrival of a consignment of tea
from China, and Edmund noted with some degree of
interest that it had been brought by the Vulture. He
wondered why such a valuable and easily spoiled com-
modity as tea should have been sent on any steamer
other than the direct mail boat, which as far as he re-


membered had always hitherto carried the tea the firm
imported from China for blending purposes. He ex-
pressed his surprise to the senior clerk, with whom
he was very friendly, and that gentleman explained
matters in one way, but gave Edmund reason for
thought in another. "The agents in China send the
tea in the cheapest way," he told the youth, "having
in view, of course, speedy delivery. This consignment,
I see, from the bill of lading, has been carried at a
ridiculously low rate of freight."
" But that gain cannot mean much, considering the
difference between the Vulture's time and that of the
P. & O. mail," said Edmund, who was very well up in
all things pertaining to ships and ship routes.
"The difference in time is almost in favour of the
Vulture , my boy. The P. & O. mail is not in yet.
The bill of lading for the tea came in yesterday by
the monthly German mail from Shanghai. I don't know
how the Vulture managed to make such a speedy pas-
sage, but our agents out there must have known of
her powers."
" She doesn't look like a boat that could make more
than ten knots," Edmund said. " I saw her arrive yester-
day, and she is more like a coal tramp than anything
else."
"Ah, appearances are often deceptive!" remarked the
senior clerk wisely; "and competition is so keen now
that only the fastest of ships have any chance of obtain-
ing cargo, and even then they have to cut prices. Be-
sides, my boy, as a great secret I may tell you that I
believe our firm has a great interest in the vessel, if we
don't exactly own it."
Edmund went back to his desk, and in the press of


work soon ceased to think about the Vulture and the
speed which lay in her lumbering frame. But, strangely
enough, the man who had noticed its arrival with him
would continually come into his thoughts, and, despite
the amount of work requiring his attention, he often
found himself wondering what sort of man he was and
what interest he had in the Vulture.
In the afternoon Edmund was sent down to the docks
to effect the clearance of the tea, and while there he
noticed the two ship's officers strolling about the sheds,
but he could not see any signs of a crew on the ship
itself. The two men kept moving about in a manner
which suggested to Edmund that they were watching
the Vulture and the people who went on and off during
the process of unloading. He soon completed his busi-
ness and was walking towards the station again, when he
passed the man who had seemed interested in the Vulture
the day before. He was sitting on a barrel gazing reflec-
tively at a "No Smoking" notice, and was in the act of
lighting his needlewood pipe. He nodded to Edmund as
he passed and smiled cheerily, the lad responding with
"Good afternoon".
While waiting on the train he could not help speculat-
ing on the man's business; there was something about his
personality that appealed to his youthful fancy. He was
well dressed, but carelessly, and wore a broad-brimmed
felt hat. His face was one which betokened strength of
purpose, yet somehow Edmund had gathered the impres-
sion that he was softhearted, and of kindly disposition.
"He can't be a dock official," the lad mused, "or he
wouldn't be wearing a colonial hat, nor would he be
smoking inside the sheds. He can't have anything to
do with the Vulture either, for it looked as if he were


keeping out of sight of her officers. He must be some
great detective in disguise Ah! he is going up with
the train too. I'll speak to him if I get the chance."
And fate gave him the chance, for the mysterious man
came into the same carriage when the train drew up at
the station. He was still smoking, and beamed upon
Edmund as he recognized him.
"We are having very fine weather for this time of
year," Edmund ventured boldly, as the train started.
"No' bad; but it's a wee bit cold for my fancy," the
man answered promptly.
"Cold!" ejaculated the boy. "Why, this is one of the
warmest days we've had this summer."
"But I'm used to the tropics, my lad, an' I feel there's
something wrong when the temperature falls under ninety.
I am well aware that it is not really cold to-day, but
it doesna matter, anyway. I'll get out to where the sun
shines straight down before long." The Scottish accent
betrayed the speaker's nationality, but it was by no means
aggressive, indeed to Edmund it had a charm.
"You are very fortunate to be able to travel over the
world as you like," he said. " I wish I could get the
chance to see other parts."
The Scot smiled: "An' you would just be as eager
to get back to London again if you were in some
foreign land. Young people always think that every
country is better than their ain; but it is a delusion, I
can tell you. Britain may be bad, an' you may have to
keep off the grass, an' no' do many a thing you would like
to do, but most other countries are worse "
" It is not civilized countries I should wish to visit,"
said Edmund. "If I had the opportunity I should get
away out to some parts as yet unexplored, or at most


only imperfectly known. There a man would be free
and untrammelled, and he could by his own efforts do
things he could never have the chance of accomplishing
here."
"Now, what on earth could you do in a land only
half-explored, laddie? You could kill mosquitoes, an'
flees, and maybe some snakes; but what good would
that be to you? You might also cut down some trees,
kindle fires, and boil your billy. But what profit would
that mean?"
"But I might also find minerals, sir; Australia, for
instance, is rich in minerals."
" But Australia, my lad, is highly civilized, an' has laws
o' her ain, such as you were rebelling against."
"Oh, but I meant places far from the towns, away in
the middle of the central desert, or up in the back blocks
of Queensland! You see, sir, I have read a lot about those
parts, and I have already half an idea what they are like.
Only yesterday my only chum sailed for Australia."
" Well, supposing you suddenly found yourself dropped
down somewhere in the heart o' Australia, how would you
start to find the minerals you talk so glibly of? How
would you know them, an' how would you live while you
were looking for them?"
" I feel sure I should know most minerals, sir," Edmund
replied. "I have been studying their occurrences at
college; and as for living, surely I could rough it as
well as those pioneers who go out into the world's waste
places? lam strong enough, and really I don't eat very
much at any time."
The big man laughed uproariously, much to Edmund's
discomfiture. "Laddie," he said, after a bit, "do you
think that the men who go where the Government hasn't
(0 204) 3


already constructed roads, or some company built a rail-
way, owe their success to being able to live on little food?
If you do you are vera much mistaken; for out in the bush
the healthy, open-air life gives one an appetite that might
do credit to a young crocodile. But I am interested to
hear you say that you have a knowledge o' minerals.
What profession do you follow in this country?"
" I am only a junior clerk in the office of a tea-importing
firm. I was down at the docks to-day on the firm's busi-
ness; but yesterday, when I saw you first, I was seeing
my chum away to Australia."
"Tea importing!" exclaimed the man. "I saw a lot
of tea come off a boat named the Vulture this forenoon."
"Yes, that was ours. She brought it from China in
almost record time, I believe."
" Did she? Are you sure she came straight from
China?"
"Oh yes, unless she left the water somewhere and
came overland ! The bills of lading only came in with
the mails a few hours ahead of her, so she couldn't have
wasted much time anywhere."
" No, that's a fact." The man became silent, he was
evidently pondering deeply. "An' yet —an' yet," he con-
tinued at length, " it is almost unbelievable."
" What is?" asked the lad. "My desire to go to
Australia or the fact that the Vulture came the shortest
route from China?"
" Neither, I was thinking o' her enormous speed, an'
vondering if she is no' really the fastest boat in the
world."
"What, that old tub?" Edmund laughed. "She
didn't come so very fast after all; she took a day longer
than the mail, and it was not the direct mail at that."


" She came in several days less time than the mail, my
boy. You forget that the boat which brought the last
China mail is now only near Gibraltar—at least I left
her, to come overland, at Genoa three days ago, an' the
mails came in the same train—whereas this boat which
brought your tea is already in port in London, having
passed the mail en route somewhere. I confess I dinna
understand how it was done; but as you have proved
that the boat came from China in record time, I see I've
been dreaming after all, an' that the sooner I wake up
an' get back to the shores o' the Gulf the better it will
be all round."
" I hardly understand you, sir."
" No, you couldna vera well. I've been so long in the
bush that I often think aloud, an'—well—you have just
heard me thinking. I thought the Vulture was an auld
freen' o' mine, but it canna be. I've had to come half-
way round the world to find out that Port Darwin is a
port o' call on the direct route from China to London;
but knowledge is never too dear, an' I'm content."
" You are still talking about things I don't know," said
Edmund in much surprise.
" Aye, I suppose so. The loss o' the golden button is
what knocks me out. Laddie, you'll excuse me, I'm sure.
My thoughts ran a bit ahead, an' I forgot you dinna ken
_ „ 9)
me.
" I am very sorry to see you so troubled, sir; I wish I
could help you." Edmund was sincere in his words.
"Oh, we'll manage yet!" said the other. "We've run
against something mysterious, but we'll get to the bottom
o' it all in good time. Can you shoot straight?"
" I think so," replied Edmund, still puzzled. " I can do
most things that other people can do."


"Yes, you look all right, an' I've little doubt you'll
prove all you look. Can you direct me to a place where
I could get these stones assayed reliably?" The speaker
produced several pieces of quartz from a pocket and
handed them to Edmund.
"Yes, there are several good assayers in London," the
lad replied; "but I think I could assay them for you
myself, if it does not contain elements unknown to me.
Will you allow me to try? I could run a piece through at
home to-night."
"Certainly; find out if it carries any gold, an' you
needna trouble about anything else. I'll be vera much
engaged in private business all day to-morrow, but I'll
look for you at dinner to-morrow night in the Hotel
Victoria. My name is Mackay. I am a gold miner, a
diamond digger, a pearl seeker, an opal hunter, an' a
humble student o' metapheesics. I ken the world well,
an' am vera fond o' music. Now you know me."
"My name is Edmund Howard. I am only a clerk;
I would like to know the world, and I too am fond of
music.
"Are you?" cried the Scot in delight. "Man, I'm
vera pleased to hear you say so. Can you play any
instrument? Can you sing or whistle?"
Edmund laughed as he informed Mackay that he was
not unacquainted with the violin, and that he could both
sing and whistle, and talking of musical subjects they
spent the rest of the journey until the noisy train rattled
into Fenchurch Street Station. Here they shook hands
and parted, both highly pleased with each other. Mackay
hailed a taxicab and drove off to his hotel, after having
reminded Edmund of his appointment the following
evening, and the lad took a short cut through numerous


side streets until he reached the office where he was em-
ployed. He settled down to work at the duties specially
entrusted to him, and soon five o'clock came round, when
business finished for the day. His journey to the docks,
however, had thrown him back somewhat in his regular
work, and he remained behind after the other clerks had
departed, to make matters right. The junior partner of
the firm was still in his room, and he knew that a few
minutes was all that he required.
Just as he was finishing, the outer door opened, and
the two mysterious-looking officers of the Vulture entered.
They were dressed immaculately as befitting men of the
city, but Edmund had no difficulty in recognizing them.
They asked if they could see any leading members of
the firm, and on informing the junior partner of their
request, he came out to hear their business. It was
evidently soon settled, and the men departed, one calling
out as they passed through the door: " To-night, then,
in the Victoria. We must look alive, for that confounded
Mackay may have got his nose into our affairs farther than
we know."
" But, as you left him in Port Darwin, there is little
need to fear him in London," Mr. Brown, the junior
partner, answered; "It is very serious all the same."
" It will be for those who run against us," laughed one
of the men as the door closed. "The stuff is ours, and
we'll have it."
Edmund heard practically all that was said; but it was
only when the name Mackay was mentioned that he paid
any attention to the conversation, and then only because
he could not help hearing it. He closed his desk and
locked it. A thought had struck him which was causing
him some anxiety.


"Ah, Howard," spoke Mr. Brown, "you are surely
industrious to-night!" The junior partner was preparing
to leave the office.
" I was a bit behind, sir, but I am finished now,"
Edmund answered. " I had to go down to Tilbury this
afternoon."
"Ah! of course; you got everything through the
customs all right?"
" Yes, sir; they took the bill of lading as being correct,
and merely checked the number of cases."
"You are a smart lad, Howard, and perhaps you will
get a chance to go abroad very soon. Good-night!"
"Good-night, sir!" Next minute Edmund was hurrying
down the street towards the Bank. His thought had
grown into an idea, and he was bent upon carrying it out.
He entered the Bank Central London Tube Station, and
was soon whirling westwards underground. Changing at
Tottenham Court Road, he ran through the connecting
passages and just caught a train for Charing Cross.
From that terminus it was only a couple of minutes to the
Hotel Victoria, and in less than another minute Edmund
had found Mr. Mackay in the smokeroom, puffing com-
placently, but with a reflective air, at his quaintly carved
needlewood pipe. He recognized Edmund the moment he
had entered the room, and in an instant was advancing to
meet him with outstretched hands.
" I'm vera glad to see you, laddie," the Scot called out.
" I was feeling lonely among so many people, an' it's hours
yet until I've anything to do. But what's the matter?"
" I came to look for you as soon as I could," Edmund
said breathlessly. " I have come to know of something
which I think concerns you."
"Take time, laddie; speak slowly, and don't get ex-


cited," said Mackay. We'll just go an' have something to
eat, an' you can tell me your story at your leisure."
" No; they are coming to this hotel too. If lam right
in my thoughts you must not be seen. They think you
are still in Port Darwin, but they fear you may know more
than they suspect."
"Easy, my lad; who are you talking about? I fear
no man, nor men, on earth. I am in London, too, not
in Port Darwin—though I've been there no' so vera long
ago."
"Yes, I know; that is why I feel sure it is you they
meant. But get away from the place at once for fear
they come."
" Come to my room," Mackay said quietly. " I see you
have something on your mind, an' we may as well get it
assayed—l mean analysed."
He led the way out of the smokeroom, along some
corridors, up a stair, and finally into a bedroom.
"Now, my lad," he then said, "you can talk safely.
This is my room, an' the King o' Britain canna come in
unasked."
" Have you any enemies?" asked Edmund at once. " I
mean people in this country who have reason to fear you."
" Not that I know of, laddie. I've never made an
enemy in my life consciously, but I'll admit there may be
some people who have made themselves the reverse o'
friendly to me. They canna be in this country though,
for I havena been here for many years, an' I canna even
imagine any people who had reason to have a grudge
against me in Britain."
"But they may have come here from other ports "
exclaimed Edmund. "They may have come here on that
ship you were watching, for instance."


Mackay looked strangely at Edmund for some time.
"They might," he said simply, "but the Vulture came
from China, an' when I was wandering in that country's
domains I had another name. All the same, Edmund, I
must say that I thought I had reason to think that the
Vulture carried men in whom I had more than a passing
interest, although she wasna by any means in Chinese
waters when I dreamed I had met her people."
"No, you were in Port Darwin, it seems. But listen
and I'll tell you all I know, and you can then gather
whether it concerns you or not. When I was on the point
of leaving the office, about half an hour ago, two men came
in to see Mr. Brown, the junior partner. I think he was
expecting them too, for it was after hours and he is usually
away early. I didn't pay any attention to what they were
talking about until I heard one say, as near as I can re-
member: 'We must look for that Mackay; he may know
more of our business than we think.' I didn't think this
referred to you at first, for the name is not uncommon, I
believe, in Scotland; but when Mr. Brown answered in
words something like: 'Oh, we needn't fear him in London,
seeing you left him in Port Darwin,' I recollected your
talk in the train and how you had mentioned Port Darwin
in connection with the Vulture , and listened further. Little
more was said, however, beyond arranging to meet here
to-night, and in agreeing that it would be a serious matter
for those who ran against them in any way."
"Just a minute, laddie. What has the Vulture to do
with all this? Who mentioned her name?"
" Why, the men were two of her officers."
"An' what could Mr. Brown of your people have to do
with them?"
" I don't know, at least I can only guess our people


have something to do with that ship; but I thought that
if you were the Mackay mentioned you would be able to
understand enough to know what steps to take to look
after yourself. If you are not, of course "
"Edmund, lam much obliged to you. I believe honestly
I am the man meant, but what I've done to deserve ill-will
from anybody is beyond my comprehension. I've got a
funny kind o' dream in my head, though, which tells me
I've got a big grievance against the men o' the Vulture.
However, now that I've met you, I'll no' count my journey
to the old country lost. I meant to do a wee bit o' detec-
tive work in connection with the Vulture to-morrow, but
I don't know that it is worth while now. We'll get away
back to the wilds, laddie, an' see if we canna make your
fortune."
'' My fortune!" gasped Edmund. "I hardly understand,
Mr. Mackay."
"You surely dinna think I'm vera anxious about
amassing more wealth, laddie?" spoke Mackay reproach-
fully.
" But what have Ito do with that? lam only a clerk
and have no prospects "
" Didn't you say you wanted to go abroad, an' that you
had studied mineralogy?" Mackay said.
"Yes," admitted Edmund, "but—but "
"Then everything is settled; we'll sail on the first con-
venient boat for Sydney, an' Jim Mackay will undertake
that, if the Almighty hasna planned otherwise, you'll have
as much filthy lucre as will be good for you, inside a
year."
"Do you mean you will take me with you?" cried
Edmund.
"An' what for should I no'?" demanded Mackay


44 We'll be mates an' divide the profit. I can find valuable
minerals, but often I pass them by because I havena the
knowledge to tell me what they are. Well, you have that,
an' together we'll go out prospecting an' between us annex
half o' the mineral-bearing land in Australia, if my island
doesna yield enough plunder, or if it itself is only another
spasm o' my dream."
44 Sir," began Edmund, 44 1 cannot say Ido not under-
stand your proposal, although I am lost when you mention
islands, but I fear I cannot accept your kind offer, how-
ever much I should like to avail myself of it. You see, I
know I should be of no use to you, and, indeed, I am sure
I would prove to be only a nuisance. I thank you for
your generous offer, but "
44 If you have stated all your objections, young man,
you may take in hand the work o' finding out the best an'
most suitable steamers sailing for Australia. I expect you
ken more about them than I can learn easily."
Edmund again put forth deprecating objections, but
Mackay overruled them all, and finally the lad and the big
Scot shook hands as 44 mates" in all that might follow,
Mackay's only stipulation being that Edmund's parents
should be agreeable to his going away.
44 An' now that a' that is arranged," said Mackay, light-
ing his pipe, 44 we'll go down an' see if we can find these
people who are so anxious about me. We can ease their
minds on some points no doubt, an' you can take the
opportunity o' telling that Mr. Brown o' yours that you
are henceforth to dispense with him."
44 Is that altogether wise?" asked Edmund thoughtfully.
Already he was taking on responsibility.
44 Well, we have no reason to fear anyone, an' we are
going to act fearless of all people," the big man answered.


" I have a suspicion, to say the least of it, that these men
o' the Vulture an' I have had previous dealings, an' we
may as well have a look at them."
11 But don't you know, sir?" Edmund asked. "Why
should you have only a suspicion?"
"Because my mind is a bit mixed on some things, an'
I hardly know where the actual facts end an' the imagina-
tion part begins."
"Then wouldn't it be wiser to avoid those men, sir?
They are of opinion that you are in Port Darwin, and if
there is any reason why they should fear you, why not
leave them in that belief. If they knew you were here
they doubtless could act to your —I mean our—disad-
vantage. I think we should do our utmost to find out
who they are and all about them without giving them the
chance to know anything about us. As for the people
who employ me, I shall tell Mr. Langland, the senior
partner, to-morrow, that I am going to Australia, and if
I can convince him that I am not acting foolishly he will
not object. All the partners are very nice gentlemen, and
I cannot imagine what Mr. Brown can have to do with
those men who spoke of you."
"I believe you are speaking solid sense, Edmund,"
Mackay said, blowing a cloud of smoke into the air. " I
have often come to grief by no' using discretion. You'll
just do as you suggest with your tea people, an' mean-
while we'll go outside to some decent restaurant an' have
a jolly good feed. But what about your parents; won't
they be anxious about you? You must not cause them
worry, my lad, whatever you do." Mackay spoke rever-
ently. He had also removed his pipe.
"Oh, this is my class night!" Edmund answered. "I
never go home on these nights until it is over. I meant


to take to-night off, however, and experiment with those
samples you gave me."
" I had forgotten about them. I hardly think they are
worth troubling about, because I have only a confused
idea where I got them," Mackay said. "But let's away
now an' I'll try an' explain my strange predicament to
you."
They left the room and descended to the ground floor
by means of the elevator. Edmund had never been in the
great hotel before, and the intricacies of the passages were
as a maze to him. But Mackay seemed to know his way
about as if by instinct, and suddenly he paused outside
a double glass door. " Look in, Edmund, an' see if our
friends are there," he said. "This is the dining-room an'
it's dinner-time."
"Yes," whispered the lad eagerly, "I see them at the
far-away table on the right, just by the band platform.
Mr. Brown is with them, and they are all in evening dress."
Mackay looked in through the swinging doors and shook
his head doubtfully. " I have seen them before," he said,
" but I canna remember under what circumstances. There
is no use in being foolish, however, so we'll dine elsewhere
an' make our plans. Lead the way, partner, to the most
expensive place you know or have heard of. This is an
auspicious occasion, an' we'll celebrate it in a manner
worthy o' ourselves."
And they did, and while they dined, the elder made the
younger acquainted with his experiences during the last
six months, adding: "I've prospected all over the Gulf
country, an' I know many big reefs carrying good gold
among the headwater ranges of the Mitchell River, on the
one side, an' up near the Roper on the other. Of course
the goldfields o' Croydon are in between at the head o' the


Gulf, but as there is a fair population there already we'll
keep clear o' that district."
"But what about your mysterious island, sir?" asked
Edmund. "Isn't it worthy of a visit?"
"That I don't know, laddie. You see I'm no' sure what
is real about it, an' I'm beginning- to think it must all have
been imagined. I've told you the story already, but I'll go
over what seems to me to be the facts again, and you can
form your own opinion: I was wandering on the south-
western shore o' the Gulf o' Carpentaria an' somehow I
discovered an island lying out about five miles from the
mainland. It was surrounded by mist though, and could
not be seen until you were just on it, while the extreme
shallowness o' the water on the sea side o' it would pre-
vent ships approaching its shores even if it could be seen
from far out. Well, I landed on the island, or thought
I did, an' discovered that it wasna' such a bad place as
it had first seemed. After that, I'll admit, things became
a bit mixed. I saw lots o' strange animals—sort o' con-
necting links between the Australian marsupials an' the
animals found in New Guinea. They werena afraid o' me
in the slightest, an' I was following up the reef from which
I chipped the specimens you have, when I found a gold
button o' undoubted Chinese origin. Now, that proved
that some man had already been on the island, an' it
seemed that he was carrying his jewellery with him.
After that I saw a ship lying in the mud on the sea-
ward side, an' I waded out to her, only to be clubbed
on the head when I climbed on deck. That's the whole
story, or dream, or whatever you like to call it. I awoke,
or came to my senses, lying on a bed in Port Darwin,
an the doctor, an old friend, told me I had been brought
there by two prospectors who found me unconscious out


in the bush somewhere. He laughed at my story, for Port
Darwin is a good few hundred miles from where I thought
I had been, an' told me I had imagined the whole affair
while suffering from concussion o' the brain, or something
like that, the result o' a knock-out blow from an aboriginal's
club. Well, to cut the thing short, especially as I've gone
over the yarn to-night already, I didna believe him. I
thought I had been carried to Port Darwin on board the
boat an' kept drugged all the time. Then, hearing that
a steamer answering in description to the one I saw in
my dream had just sailed for London from Port Darwin,
an' keenly anxious to have a wee bit argument with the
fellows who clubbed me, I followed on the Japanese mail
to Singapore, thence home on the German China mail.
I saw the Vulture come in, as you know, an' she came
from China direct an' thus upset all my ideas. Now you
know everything, partner. What do you think of the
business?"
" I think that your story is real, and that the Vulture
is the steamer you boarded. Remember, I heard Mr.
Brown say they left you in Port Darwin."
" But the time, laddie? She couldna leave China, come
down to the Gulf, an' Port Darwin, an' arrive in London
before the mail."
" Nevertheless she must have done so. Perhaps she is
a vessel built for great speed and yet meant to deceive
people with her appearance."
"Then I'll go back to the hotel and have it out with
her officers."
"No, that would only be playing into their hands.
Rather let us go and find out what secret they have
hidden in that strange island of yours. The gold button
suggests hidden treasure."


"I forgot to say I haven't got the button now," said
Mackay hesitatingly. " Its absence is one of the things
that makes me doubtful o' the reality o' my experiences."
" Doubtless they took it from you while you were un-
conscious in their hands," Edmund said. " We'll solve
that island mystery whether we get gold or not, and find
out their game."
" Laddie, your enthusiasm is infectious. I feel ready
for any mad scheme myself, an' if the specimens o' the
reef carry fair gold we'll go an' work it in spite o' a fleet
o' Vultures."
"Then come home with me and see my people and I
will test the specimens at once. I am sure they carry
gold. And you must not be seen by those men, Mr.
Mackay. You'll stay with me."
"All right, partner! I confess that crack on the head
has left me somewhat hazy in my thinking machinery.
You take things in charge until we get to Australia. I'll
surely be all right by that time."
They went home to Edmund's parents' house in a
taxicab, and although taken very much by surprise when
they heard their son's announcement that he had got
the chance to go abroad, and desired their consent to
his accepting it, his father and mother, after a long
discussion with Mackay, at length gave the required as-
sent and immediately became enthusiastic over the lad's
prospects. Mackay had a way with him that few could
resist, and no one ever doubted the genuineness of the
big-hearted Scot.
Before retiring for the night, Edmund assayed the rock
specimens and in great excitement announced that gold
was present. Soon after, he had made the necessary
calculations, and restraining himself as much as pos-


sible, he then informed all that the values worked out
equal to five ounces of gold to the ton of rock.
"Hurrah for Mackay's island!" cried Mr. Howard.
"I wish I could come too."
"You'll see about the boats to-morrow, laddie," said
Mackay quietly. "There are many fortunes in the reef
those stones come from, and the place is ours by right
o' discovery, an' Mining Right No. 45684 in the State
o'Queensland, an' 143 11 in South Australia."


CHAPTER 111
Quong Lee, the Mysterious
Chinaman
"TIME is up, Quong Lee, and we'll wait no longer.
Tell us where to find those stolen gemstones or you'll
be with your ancestors before this match goes out."
The speaker applied a lighted match to a cigar in his
mouth, and with his right hand raised a revolver threaten-
ingly. He was a tall man of fierce aspect, somewhat mili-
tary-like in appearance, and he was addressing a slimly
built Chinaman. A third man, whose general air was
suggestive of the sea, stood on the other side of the
Celestial, toying significantly with a revolver, and a couple
of horses saddled and bridled were also near. The scene
was in the heart of a great belt of ironbark and blood-
wood scrub in the far north of Queensland, and the time
was night.
Quong Lee did not seem to be much perturbed. He
looked from one to the other of the two men, and his
face was absolutely expressionless. Doubtless his cunning
brain was working nevertheless; but his position was cer-
tainly critical.
" Whafo' you wanty killy me?" he asked in childlike
wonderment. "Quong Lee no wanty hult you." Quong:
(0 204 ) 49 4


Lee could talk perfect English, but he had reasons for
hiding that fact just then.
" Doesn't he?" laughed the man who had not yet
spoken. " I suppose he is brimful of good feeling to-
wards us, and would likey vely muchy if we could get
our fingers on the mysterious jewels stolen from the late
Dowager Empress of China "
"Quong Lee no' savvy what you talky about. Whafo'
you keepy him hele. He paid poll taxy all li' "
" And you'll pay more than your poll taxy," interrupted
the first man impatiently. "We've no more time to waste.
Out with your secret or I'll "
"Youl matchy is out, Mistel Thomas," observed the
Chinaman suavely." " Light anodel."
"For the last time, will you tell us?" roared the man
designated as Mr. Thomas
"Oh, plenty time some odel day!" Quong Lee smiled.
"You tink Quong Lee fool. You killy him you nevel
know whele tleasule is hidden. Vely well, shoot away.
He no cale. He laugh at you "
"By thunder, you won't laugh long then," cried Thomas,
"and you will pay your respects to your ancestors minus
your pigtail. Snip it off, Carson Oh! —Cars "
The name died away in his throat. The Chinaman had
suddenly leapt upon him with the agility of a cat, and in a
second the tall, powerful man was writhing on the ground
with the lithe Celestial's sinewy hands fastened round his
throat in a grip which rendered him more formidable than
most people suspected. But he had two men to deal with,
and they had a record perhaps as dark and mysterious
as his own. Assuredly he would have to kill both men
now or be blotted out of existence himself. For a time
it seemed as if the wily Chinaman were to prove the victor.


Carson had rushed at him with levelled revolver, but he
had twisted the now helpless body of Thomas in front
of him as a shield, and, despite Carson's efforts to get
behind, contrived to interpose it between Carson and
himself effectively. He had now wound a scarf round
Thomas's throat, and while throwing the almost strangled
man about with his left hand, he at the same time kept
twisting the two ends in the most advanced style of a
trained Thug. With his right hand, meanwhile, he had
picked up his victim's discarded weapon, and was now
waiting and watching for his chance to drop Carson,
hiding the revolver up his long, loose sleeve until the
precise moment came. His face was like a marble cast.
No expression of fear or any other emotion passed over
it. Evidently Quong Lee had mastered himself as well
as many sciences.
But matters do not always shape themselves as scientists
plan, and Carson upset Quong Lee's little scheme by sud-
denly jumping over his comrade's body straight on top of
the Chinaman. Quong Lee could not afford to wait longer,
so he released his hold and fired at his more active op-
ponent. Revolver work, however, was a science wherein
Quong Lee did not shine. It was much too crude a method
of despatching a man for his tastes, and consequently,
through lack of practice, his shots went wide of their in-
tended mark. Carson knew little of any science beyond
that of navigation, but he could shoot straight—not a very
difficult task at arm's length—and he poured six shots into
Quong Lee's body without halt or hesitation. At the
first shot the Chinaman dropped on his knees, and at
the second he coiled himself up in a heap and lay still,
nor had the following bullets any apparent further effect
upon him.


Carson then stooped over his unconscious comrade and
tore open his shirt at the neck; then running over to
the waiting horses he unhitched a water bag and next
moment was emptying its contents over the face of
Thomas. In time the half-strangled man recovered and
sat up. He grasped the situation very quickly when
he saw the object lying motionless beside him, and as
soon as he could speak he said: "Thanks, Carson, I
had a pretty close call that time, I believe."
"You had," admitted Carson with a laugh. "You'll
never have a closer and not obey it. Our friend here
got his in the shape of six forty-fours from my Colt.
Let us cut off his pigtail and clear out."
" No," said Thomas, rising unsteadily. " That would
show how white men had worked the affair, and the
miners around these parts might make things a bit hot for
us. They don't allow that even a Chinaman can be killed
with impunity in Australia, although his presence is by
no means welcome."
" But he is bound to be found, sooner or later, and then
the miners and his own people will kick up just the same."
" Well, they will think he has been shot by some of his
own secret gang if we leave him his pigtail and draw some
silly designs on his forehead with his own blood. By sun-
rise we'll be far from here, and the rainstorm just at hand
will obliterate our tracks completely."
"All right!" agreed Carson, bending over his victim.
" He was one of the Lotus secret brotherhood in any case,
and doubtless has plenty of enemies among that band of
schemers." He drew a lotus flower on Quong Lee's fore-
head with his finger, using the Chinaman's own blood for
the purpose, and then looked enquiringly at his comrade
for further instructions.


"That will do now," Thomas said, "and the sooner
we get out of here the better it will be for us. The fool
wouldn't part with his secret, so he parted with his life.
At least he is out of our way now, and we can continue
our search for the stolen Imperial Chinese jewellery with-
out his opposition. Leave the beggar lying where he is,
confound him! My neck feels as if there were a rope
round it yet."
"There will be some day," laughed Carson. "But
sufficient for the day is the evil thereof, as some fellow
said before my time."
"Oh, dry up, Carson!" broke in Thomas. "You may
rest assured that when I have to answer for my sins
before an earthly tribunal you will have already passed
beyond this sphere. Let's away at once; we've a lot to
do if we mean to have those jewels."
" Which way are we heading?"
" South at first, back over our tracks, then we'll circle
round after the rain begins and work back to the Gulf.
We must ride in the opposite direction to that camp of
gold miners which is near here."
"And also away from the Chinese camp on the river,"
said Carson. "I shouldn't like to fall into their hands if
they suspected who we were."
Thomas did not answer, but, rubbing his neck tenderly,
he led the way over to the two steeds, and soon both men
were riding through the bush in a southerly direction,
steering by the faint glimmer of some stars in a rapidly
obscuring sky. And the moon shone down spasmodically
from behind dense drifting banks of black clouds. Its
weird light shone on the motionless fronds of the palm
trees and blue gums, and the stillness of a dry parched
land gasping for the expectant rain was over all.


Yet, though nature was silent and inactive just then,
there were scenes of bustle and commotion not far away.
A camp of gold seekers was situated only five miles westerly
on the bank of one of the many small rivers discharging
into the Gulf, and its members were somewhat excited over
some strange rumours of a bushranging gang which had
just reached them through the medium of some friendly
aborigines. On another creek, about eight miles in the op-
posite direction, was a large Chinese settlement of alluvial
miners, few, if any, of whom had entered Australia by the
recognized ports. They, at the moment, were discussing
some matters of importance, news of which had just come
in from the Gulf with one of their own mysterious messen-
gers. There were also other signs of life much nearer the
still body of Quong Lee than Thomas and Carson imagined,
for that part of Australia was beginning to receive some of
the attention it deserved from those who interested them-
selves in its mineral resources. The time had been long
delayed, but it had arrived now.
Rapidly approaching the scene of the tragedy were two
riders, one almost a boy, though nothing but his years was
in keeping with that fact. Edmund had now developed
into a bushman of exceptional skill, and his long ride north
with Mackay from the terminus of the railway, which
stretched into the heart of the country from Townsville
in Queensland, had qualified him in more ways than one
for the life of a self-reliant pioneer. Mackay had taught
him all the arts and crafts of the bush, and a great many
other things which even experienced bushmen did not
know. He could ride well and shoot straight, and the
silent signs in the great lone land, indicative of water,
game, or aborigines, were to him full of eloquence. They
had passed several outcrops which on hasty examination


had shown gold, while silver-lead formations of great rich-
ness were almost hourly crossed. Copper, too, gleaming
blue and green in the dancing sunlight, was often encoun-
tered, and several giant blows of that ore in carbonate
form had proved to be extremely high grade.
Edmund had wished to stop and test the reefs thoroughly,
but Mackay did not seem to favour any delay. Indeed, he
hardly ever gave any mineral formation more than a pass-
ing glance, although he never failed to show some en-
thusiasm when his young companion announced that the
assay returns were more than ordinary. Sometimes, how-
ever, he would remind Edmund that although the "show"
under discussion did yield phenomenal returns, it was still
valueless from a commercial point of view, as distance from
a railway, absence of water, difficulties of transport, and
the almost impossibility of obtaining labour were factors
to be taken into consideration.
And now they were riding across country toward a river
which Mackay said would lead them through some good
prospecting country right down to the Gulf. They had
left the Flinders, Albert, Leichardt, and other rivers far
behind, and were now in comparatively unknown country
beyond Burketown, which township they had left forty
miles to their north when they began to ride westward.
"We must be near that river now, sir," suddenly Ed-
mund said. " I calculate we have travelled the distance
marked on your map."
"We are no' vera far off now," Mackay replied, draw-
ing rein and looking around closely. " I fancy I know
our whereabouts; an' if I'm no' mistaken, the river is
not much more than five miles west. Give your horse
free rein an' follow me. The horses can get through the
scrub better if left to themselves, an' we must strike the


river channel before the rain comes, for we can camp there
if need be."
"Hullo!" Edmund exclaimed; "I believe we have just
crossed tracks. I'll investigate."
Sliding from his saddle, he ran back a few yards and
examined the ground. Yes, even in the clouded moon-
light the tracks were plainly discernible. A number of
horses had passed that way only recently, the broken
lower branches of the timber showing where they had
crashed through, as far, in a line leading south, as could
be seen in the darkness.
"There were four horses," Edmund called out as
Mackay rode back to him, "but two have been tra-
velling south, and two in the same direction, almost, as
we are heading. Can this be a regular track leading
across from the last river, I wonder?"
"No," said Mackay, dismounting and examining the
hoofprints with the aid of a match. "This is no' a de-
fined track o' any kind. You'll observe that the ground
shows no signs of any other traffic, and that that patch
of spear grass has been trodden over by only four
horses, two going each way. The tracks leading south,
too, are fresher, an' that young pandanus palm has
been torn down some time within the last hour, I'm
sure." He lit another match and continued: "And
there were only two horses here; these tracks going
south are the same as those heading in the other di-
rection. There must be a camp near here, laddie. If we
knew exactly where it lay we would make for it, for the
coming storm will make farther progress practically im-
possible. I wish we knew whether the riders were going
to or coming from the camp when they passed last."
Edmund lay flat upon the ground, the better to examine


the imprints. "This hoofmark leading south has been
planted down over the one going north," he said after
several matches had been wasted; "so that seems to
prove that two riders passed this way riding north, and
that, somewhere not far from here, judging from the
freshness of the tracks, they turned and came back
again."
"Right, laddie," agreed Mackay; "and as people don't
ride about aimlessly in this part o' the world, they were
doubtless visiting a camp which has sprung up since I
was here last. We'll go an' see anyway. They must
have been going somewhere."
Mounting their horses again, they rode along the line
of the tracks leading northerly. In any case, these ran
in the general direction in which they wished to travel,
so they were not losing time. But in ten minutes they
reached the end, and to their surprise found that the
horses had simply come to a halt there without any ap-
parent reason, and then started to return over their
tracks. There was no camp in sight, nor any signs
which might give them reason to imagine that human
beings were within many miles. Both men were puzzled;
they could not understand why two riders should come
to an undefined spot in the bush, stand for some time,
and then ride back.
"Perhaps they were wandering prospectors," sug-
gested Edmund, "and only realized here that they had
lost their bearings?" Both had slipped from their
saddles.
"Maybe," said Mackay, "but I doubt it. One of
their horses was hitched up to that tree. I see where
it pulled down the branch with the bridle; and the
other was very impatient too, for the ground is very


much tramped all around. The men who rode them
were doing something here after all, an' I vote we just
see what their object was." He lit a match and searched
for human footmarks, for it was evident from the be-
haviour of the horses that their riders had dismounted.
By the aid of matchlight they followed the betraying
trampled grass until the foottracks broke into a patch
of sand, where the imprint of boots was as plain as if
moulded. "This is funny," the lad remarked. "If I
were a Sherlock Holmes I should now begin to suspect
I had stumbled across something really mysterious.
Those men were wearing sailors' boots, and what could
sailors be doing so far away from a port as this?
And sailors on horseback, too, are a rather odd com-
bination!"
" You speak like a book hero," Mackay put in. " But
all the same I can see we're going to be caught in the
coming storm. Hullo! What is that?" His exclamation
was abrupt and startling, and it was not long before
his comrade saw the reason. The moon had suddenly
emerged from a swiftly scudding cloudbank, and it
shone down through an opening in the treetops upon
an object a few yards away. The footsteps led straight
towards it, and a little way over were the returning
tracks.
A sudden chill of horror permeated the lad's being;
he guessed now what the sailors had been doing, and
why they were travelling back over their own tracks. The
thing huddled up in a patch of light was a man's body,
and it needed no great effort of imagination to picture
the tragedy that had so recently been enacted in that
lone spot in the far north of Australia.
Edmund's first impulse was to mount his horse and get


away as quickly as possible from the gruesome scene, but
Mackay was not of the same mind.
" Laddie," he said, "stand by the horses while I enquire
a wee bit into this affair. It is our duty to act as civilized
beings, and we can at least bury the poor fellow in more
or less Christian fashion. We'll report the case, too, when
we reach any white camp."
Mackay walked towards the motionless body and knelt
over it. Then he gave a start of surprise; the man was
not dead, and he was a Chinaman. In a moment Edmund
was beside him, for he had heard Mackay's exclamation.
The Chinaman was covered with blood from head to foot,
but his heart still had movement. Mackay tore the loose
garments from the body, and Edmund ran for the water
on his horse's neck. After all, a Chinaman was a human
being, and although belonging to a race cordially disliked
throughout Australia, the fact that he was helpless, with
life all but extinct, aroused in Mackay, who was in-
tensely Australian in feeling, the desire to save him if
possible.
" He has been in trouble with some of his own people,"
Mackay observed, as he dug out a bullet from the China-
man's arm with his knife, "but they were unpardonably
ignorant o' the manner o' using a revolver—that is, if
they really wanted to kill the man. I've heard o' the
' Lotus Flower' gang before, too, an' it comprises
some o' the most progressive men in China, an' some o'
the members that I ken could do some vera fine revolver
work." Mackay continued his rough surgery as he spoke,
and Edmund washed the blood away.
"Just hold that ammonia bottle under his nose, laddie,"
Mackay went on. "You canna kill a Chinaman vera
easily, an' when he gets a sniff o' that ammonia you've


been using for your copper tests, he'll either come back
into life or give up the ghost entirely."
Quong Lee came back to life with a shriek—the pungent
fumes had done most effective work.
" Lie still a minute, my man," said Mackay, when he
saw that the Celestial was once more in possession of his
senses; " but first of all let it sink into your brain that
we are your friends. I've been knocked out myself, an'
I know it's no' an easy matter getting the hang o' things
when one comes back to life." He had located and cut
out nearly all the bullets by this time. None were very
deep, and only one was really in a dangerous part.
Edmund, meanwhile, was stanching the wounds with
shreds of his handkerchief and pieces of his shirt.
Luckily the moon shone out for a time, and yielded
light sufficient for the delicate work, otherwise the feeble
matchlight, which was the utmost the two prospectors
had at their command, would have given the Chinaman
a very bad chance indeed.
"I thank you, gentlemen," suddenly the object of their
care remarked. " Quong Lee owes his life to you, and he
will not forget."
Edmund was surprised; the man talked excellent English.
The Chinamen he had met on the journey north, as cooks
and general servants at the various stations they had
passed, and as wandering fossickers, had by no means
such a command of the language.
" Dinna you trouble to speak, my man," said Mackay.
" We'll pull you round if it is in mortal power, but you've
had a vera narrow shave. You must have offended your
people in some special manner, for I was under the impres-
sion that the Lotus Flower Society polished off their victims
with a short crossed silk rope an' a turn o' the wrists?"


The Chinaman struggled to his feet and staggered
wildly. "It was white men who shot me," he gasped,
and fell in a heap again. He endeavoured to speak while
lying on the ground, but Mackay signed to him to desist.
"Don't you worry, old man," the kindly hearted Scot
said. " You're no' dead yet, an' you'll have a chance o'
getting square with your white friends yet. We'll no'
leave you here anyway."
"My name is Quong Lee,"' murmured the prostrate
man. "I am wealthy—will pay you well if you help me
—don't tell white man—plenty money " He paused
from utter weakness and loss of blood.
"We'll see you through, Quong Lee," spoke Mackay
gently; "an' we want neither money nor anything else
in return. But the storm is at hand, and we'll have to
get you into some shelter. Are there any countrymen
of yours anywhere near?"
" Camp of gold miners up creek, eight miles away," the
Celestial answered feebly, "but they are not my friends.
My own people are far, far away, and Quong Lee will not
live to see them again."
"Oh yes, you will!" broke in Edmund. " You are not
dangerously wounded, and with some care you will soon
be all right. We'll not let anyone harm you now; you are
in our charge." But it was high time to act if any pre-
paration was to be made against the impending storm,
and Mackay was well aware of the fact.
"Keep your body slack, my man," he said to Quong
Lee, "an' I'll carry you." He lifted the slim figure in his
powerful arms, and his action was as gentle as a woman's.
" Let your head lean over my shoulder now, old man," he
went on, "and don't worry. You're better than a hun-
dred dead men yet." He carried his burden over to the


horses and placed him across his own saddle. "You
pick a way forward, laddie," he said to Edmund, "an'
look out for any natural formation that will afford any
shelter. The storm is only some minutes away now."
He vaulted up behind the limp Chinaman, and the pro-
cession started.
Before they had reached the timber an extremely vivid
streak of lightning flashed between earth and sky, with
such startling effect that the horses became frantic with
terror, and reared and plunged wildly in endeavours to
break away. But Mackay spoke soothingly to them and
they at once became calm. They knew his voice, and
had grown to have full confidence in his ability to take
them safely through all danger. While the men were
still blinded with the intense brilliancy of the flash, a
terrific clap of thunder burst overhead and reverberated
throughout the black forest of palms and blue gums. It
rumbled angrily away to the south, and for some minutes
a deep silence ensued. Then, with a roar as of mighty
waves breaking upon a coral strand, a gust of wind tore
through the trees and died away again as suddenly as it
had arisen. Some parrots, disturbed in their slumbers,
squawked harshly for a moment, and then fell asleep
again, and one or two prowling animals of the night gave
vent to their fears in strange growlings. But almost
instantly the hush of expectancy settled over the world
of forest life once more. Every living creature knew
what was coming and had made its preparation accord-
ingly. The annual rainy season was due, and for the
next two months the entire Gulf country would be an
impassable bog, in which all signs of life but those of the
frogs, wild ducks, crocodiles, and other amphibious forms
of tropical Australian denizens, would be absent. All


other creatures would sleep or at least suspend their usual
avocations.
Another flash illuminated the heavens, seemingly splitting
the great cloudbanks in two, and then with the thunder-
peal came a rattle as of musketry, as the first of the rain
fell upon the leaves overhead.
"We're done now," cried Mackay to Edmund. "In
five minutes our horses will be sinking to their knees.
When the next flash comes, pick out a piece of rocky or
high land an' we'll camp as best we can."
" Big blow of copper not far," spoke Quong Lee faintly.
" Turn to the left and you'll see it."
" We're no looking for copper, my man," said Mackay.
" We're looking for a place o' shelter."
" Cave in blow, plenty of shelter," murmured the
Chinaman.
" I see it," cried Edmund, as the flash came. " There
is a wall of rock immediately on our left."
The rain broke through, even as he spoke, in one solid
downpour, and in a second they were drenched through
and through. But now they were at the base of the great
pile of detached boulders which reared themselves aloft
from the sandy soil into the tree branches, and already
they were sheltered to some extent from the deluge. The
heavens were ablaze with dazzling zigzag streaks of light,
which followed on each other so quickly that the im-
pression on the senses was as if they were one continual
flash. Near where the storm-bound wanderers stood,
some immense rocks had been piled against each other
by some convulsion of nature in the unknown past, in a
manner which now formed, with the main wall, a "lean-to"
kind of shelter. Next minute the three men and the two
horses were inside, and, while Mackay lifted Quong Lee


from the saddle, Edmund unstrapped the packs of pro-
visions each had been carrying. Mackay then ran outside
and gathered all the fallen timber at the rock foot which
was still dry, and placed their largest billy in a posi-
tion to collect all the rainwater which was now beginning
to trickle down the rocks. Edmund had thrown a blanket
over Quong Lee and hobbled the horses meanwhile, and
now he was ready for further orders.
But he was long past the stage of needing to be told
what to do. He knew the first laws of the bush as well
as any man. He took the bundle of scrub from Mackay's
arms, and while the Scot broke down all the branches
and stumps in the vicinity, and hauled them into the rock
cleft, he set about kindling a fire in a position where the
smoke would find a ready exit. In a very short space of
time a billy of tea was prepared, and the hot fluid did
much to revive Quong Lee. Edmund then went over his
wounds again, and dressed them carefully, after which the
Chinaman himself lit a pipe of opium, and under its nar-
cotic influence at length fell asleep. Mackay had dis-
covered a patch of grass in a partly sheltered place while
hauling in timber for the fire, and he led the horses thither
while Edmund was attending to Quong Lee. Afterwards
the two comrades dined together on hot tea, tinned meat,
and damper, and felt wonderfully well pleased with them-
selves when their meal was finished.
" It's vera pleasant to sit around your own fire an' listen
to the howling storm outside," Mackay observed, lighting
his pipe complacently with a burning log. "We are for-
tunate, Edmund, in having a hole to creep into; for it
wouldna be the height o' comfort out in that illuminated
waterworks display, with all our stores sodden, an' a sick
man on our hands."


" It would not," the lad agreed, putting on another billy
of tea. "But we can't stay here very long either; our
stores will not hold out more than two or three days."
"Quite so, laddie," observed Mackay, blowing a cloud
of smoke into the air; "but we'll no' anticipate trouble.
During a somewhat varied an' more or less useless career
I've discovered that, as the Scriptures say, if I remember
right, ' Sufficient ' "
" Play something on your flute, please," interrupted
Edmund, who had grown to know his companion very
well, and didn't wish the night to be spent in discussing
subjects which he knew would wander with remarkable
ease from Esoteric Buddhism to the art of baking damper
with ashes instead of baking powder, and from the ques-
tion of Original Sin to that of Life on other Planets, or
the use and abuse of phosphates as fertilizing agents.
Mackay looked at Edmund for a moment, and a smile
stole over his visage. " I perceive you dinna want to
assimilate useful knowledge in the meantime," he said.
"Yet it is easily carried an' "
"But think of the amount you have given me to carry
already," entreated the lad, "and think of that poor man
lying there not able to defend himself."
"That's vera true," Mackay said, nodding reflectively,
"but I don't think he would appreciate classical music
either under the present circumstances, so I propose we
just stretch ourselves out an' go to sleep. The horses are
all right, an' I'll awake at once if their bells stop ringing."
"But when do you think we can get away from here,
and what can we do with our helpless burden?" asked the
lad. "He told us there was a camp of his own country-
men not far from here. Couldn't we reach it?"
"We're no' going to try," answered Mackay, putting:
(0 204) 5


out his pipe carefully. "The Chinamen who live up here
are no' just the company which prospectors like. They've
a vera bad habit o' experimenting on a fellow's anatomy
with their knives, an' sometimes they try to find out how
long a white man can live with a silk scarf twisted round
his windpipe an' one o' themselves doing the twisting.
No, Edmund, we'll keep as far away from these backdoor
immigrants as we can."
" But surely even Chinamen must conform to the law of
Australia while in this country?" said Edmund. "Aus-
tralia does not allow such practices, I'm sure?"
"No; but you see Australia doesn't know officially o'
the existence o' most o' these people. They are taxed
pretty severely upon landing at any of the ports; but our
yellow friends up here have come in by the Gulf, or the
backdoor as I call it, an' they have paid no poll tax. In
other words, they've smuggled themselves in, an' I shouldn't
be greatly surprised if some day they swarm south from
here all over Australia an' make it their own country. The
white man canna always have his day, laddie, an' there are
some eminent people who think that the yellow man will
have the next innings on this little globe. There are over
four hundred millions o' them, an' their civilization extends
back unbrokenly for thousands o' years—Hullo! you're
asleep. An' all my useful information is wasted."
Edmund certainly was sublimely indifferent to the his-
tory and problematical future of the Chinese Empire. He
had fallen asleep at the beginning of Mackay's speech; the
heat of the fire, the roar of the falling water outside, and
the soothing intonations of his comrade's voice exercising
a soporific influence. He was also very tired, for they had
been in the saddle since the previous daylight. Mackay
glanced over at Quong Lee to see that he was all right.


A happy smile rested on the Celestial's face; probably he
was wandering in the pleasant fields of opium dreamland.
"Ah well," the Scot soliloquized, "I'll ask you a few
questions in the morning, Mr. Quong Lee; but meanwhile
I'll follow the sensible example set before me." He went
to the entrance and listened for the horses' bells, then,
coming back, he spread out his blanket on the most even
part of the rocky floor not already appropriated, and sat
down thereon. But he had yet one duty to fulfil before he
slept, and he had not forgotten. Reaching over to his
saddle he pulled out a silver-mounted flute, and, softly and
with exquisite skill, played "Tosti's Farewell". There
was no reason why he should have chosen that plaintive
melody as his evening hymn, but Mackay was very much
a creature of impulses, and when he had finished he re-
placed his tiny instrument carefully, stretched himself out,
and fell asleep.
Outside, the lightning flashed and the thunder roared,
and already the hitherto dry watercourses, which inter-
sected the land, were running " bankers " with impetuous
torrents seaward bound. An hour before sunrise, as is
usual in tropical Queensland, the storm ceased for the
time; it had not spent itself, but would work up during
the intense streaming heat of the day to another climax
at sundown. Edmund awoke when the first rays of the
sun shone through a crevice in the rough shelter, and
turned to give Quong Lee any attention he might require.
But that gentleman was not in the place where he had
been left, much to Edmund's surprise, for he knew his
wounds were severe enough to prevent him from having
much desire to wander. Next moment a cry escaped him.
Quong Lee was not in the place at all. He had disap-
peared completely, and deep well-marked footprints in the


soft soaked ground outside showed the route he had taken.
His cry awoke Mackay, who was on his feet instantly.
"He's gone!" cried Edmund, pointing to the vacated
blanket.
"So I see," said Mackay coolly, fumbling for his pipe.
"You can hardly kill a Chinaman; they're like cats "
"But what does it mean?" asked the lad. "Will he
bring a gang here? or has he simply been afraid of us
and made his escape out into that wilderness of water-
sodden clay?"
" I don't think he'll bring a gang here," Mackay an-
swered, "nor do I think he was afraid of us. He has
reasons of his own for clearing out, I've little doubt, an'
he must have a knowledge o' this country which will ma-
terially help him in negotiating that soft ground."
"You seem quite pleased over the matter. He surely
ought to have said he was going, and that we had been
of service to him?"
"Young man, in the words, nearly, o' another man who
had experience o' yellow people, let me remind you that
the ways o' the Chinaman are dark and peculiar. Now
our Chinaman's behaviour, though peculiar, is no' dis-
pleasing to me for several reasons. He would be a big
burden to us while he was suffering from his wounds, an'
he would have been even a bigger source o' trouble when
he had recovered, for we couldna send a living being away
by himself in the country we're approaching, an' what on
earth could we do in our own special business if he were
with us?"
" But he will die, as it is, and "
"An' as he hasna departed like a thief in the night,"
continued Mackay, ignoring the interruption, "an' instead
o' stealing anything has actually left a memento o' his


presence, I conclude that he hopes we'll pardon his manner
o' saying goodbye an' understand that he had special pri-
vate reasons for his actions."
"Then you think he was not ungrateful," asked Ed-
mund, "and that he will survive his wounds?"
" Hand over that wee object he has left on his blanket,
an' I'll see what deductions I can make from it," Mackay
replied. "I see, for one thing, that he has intended that
we should follow his tracks or he would have hidden them
better by keeping close into the rocks here."
"This is an ornamented button!" exclaimed Edmund,
picking up the article left by Quong Lee. "And it is
gold, I'm sure, and there is a Chinese dragon on it. Why,
it is just such a button as you found on the island."
Mackay took the button in his hand. "Ay," he said
thoughtfully. "If it isna the identical button it's one o'
its neighbours. I wonder what it means. Surely I'm no'
beginning to dream again?" He lit his pipe.
"No, you're not," cried Edmund. "But we've stum-
bled across a clue which may lead to much. Our China-
man must have been on your island too, and lost the first
button there."
"I don't think that fully explains everything, laddie.
Quong Lee was left for dead by white men not long before
we found him. Why did they shoot him? an' where are
they now?"
"That is no concern of ours. They were bad men, and
beyond the fact that they are in the vicinity, and we shall
therefore have to keep some watch, we don't need to
trouble about them."
"Maybe you're right," agreed Mackay, "and I fancy
we'll know more about them before long; but kick up
that fire an' boil a billy o' tea while I get in our horses.


We'll then start over Quong Lee's tracks, as I can see
he meant us to do, an' what happens we'll accept philo-
sophically."
Half an hour later they were floundering on horseback
through the soft soil which was everywhere around the
outcrop in which they had found shelter. After travelling
slowly and with great difficulty about a mile, they suddenly
emerged from the scrub upon the rocky banks of a large
creek in full flood. Here the Chinaman's tracks disap-
peared, but a large arrow-shaped mark in the east of the
soft ground pointed down the waterway.
" Our friend has led us safely so far," remarked Mackay,
" an' evidently he now wishes us to go without his guid-
ance down this river. I think we'll go."
They turned their horses' heads down the banks and
rode easily, for the ground was hard.


CHAPTER IV
Eldorado Camp
DAMPER JACK, the cook of Eldorado Camp, arose from his
blanket and stretched himself, a process which required
some doing, as he was six feet four in height.
u I reckon a camp cook hasn't a fair show in this part
of the world," he yawned. " I'll chuck the job an' move
that Ignorant Tommy gets it. He ought to be made to
prove what good all his edication is. Jumping beans! but
the old rain must have been trying to break records last
night; the creek is running a banker." He stepped out
of his tent and walked over to the cooking-galley—a bark
roof, supported on four poles, under which an ant-bed
fireplace had been built. He kicked the embers of the
previous night into spasmodic flames and heaped on some
dry logs. " It's brains, solid brains, that a man needs
for this job," he went on. " Most of the boys would never
have thought of hauling in timber last night, even though
they saw the rain was coming."
He filled a four-gallon kerosene tin with water from a
tank and hung it over the fire to boil. He likewise sus-
pended a large camp oven among the logs and threw in-
side some huge chunks of steak he had evidently prepared
the night before. Then he dug a large brown substance
from a heap of ashes near and set it upon an upturned
71


box. This was a batch of bread—not damper—which
had been baking all night, and when he broke the wood
ashes from its circumference with a shovel it looked all
right.
"Roll up, boys!" he shouted a minute or so later.
" Do you think you are working a sleeping contract?"
He didn't wait for any answer, but walked down to the
swiftly rushing creek and indulged in the luxury of a
bath. He hadn't much clothes to discard, only a pair
of dilapidated trousers and an equally well-worn shirt.
When he got back to the cooking-galley to attend to
the sizzling contents of the camp oven he glared around
angrily; the occupants of the dozen tents were still in-
visible, and it was now a good hour after sunrise.
"Of all the lazy camps I ever struck, this one takes
the damper," he roared. " Get up, you loafers, or I'm
jiggered if you'll get any breakfast!" He hammered on
an empty kerosene tin as he concluded, and thereby made
a most effective noise.
" Here, Damper," growled the inmate of the nearest
tent, " what kind o' insect has bit ye? Shut up, an' let
a fellow sleep."
"Sleep!" yelled the cook in exasperation. "Do you
see where the sun is? Do you think I'm the only man
who's got to work in this blamed camp? Bunyip Bill,
if you don't show a leg in a shake I'll come over and
pulverize you."
"Dear me! what is the cause of this unseemly dis-
turbance?" queried a mild voice from another tent.
" Damper Jack, I am really surprised at you. Can't
you prepare breakfast without taking the whole Gulf
country into your confidence? Tell us when our humble
meal is quite ready, and turn those steaks."


"Ignorant Tommy," retorted the angry one, "if you
give me any more of your cheek, I'll cut you into steak
and fry you. I've been bustling about these last half-
dozen hours, working hard to get some decent tucker
ready, and there's not a man will even get out of his
bunk to eat it. Blow me if I don't stick half a hundred
plugs of gelignite under some of you and blow you out
of bed!"
"Well, what sort o' trouble have you got, anyhow?"
another man asked. " I reckon we are all sorry for
you, and we'll put a bosker tombstone over the place
where we plant you. Get up, Doctor, an' see what bit
o' Damper you've got to cut off: a snake has bitten
him."
" I sincerely trust Doctor may find amputation of
Damper Jack's tongue necessary," put in the voice of
Ignorant Tommy kindly. "It is derogatory to the status
of this encampment of auriferous-treasure seekers that
the peace of a beautiful sabbath morning should be so
rudely broken by the hysterical outbreak of an excep-
tionally unintelligent cook. Go back to your bunk,
Damper Jack. Eldorado Camp rests on the seventh day,
and attends to its sartorial and tonsorial duties."
"Is this Sunday?" gasped the cook. "Burst me,
boys, I didn't know!"
"Of course it is," growled someone, "an' you've spoiled
all our beauty sleeps."
" I am a fat-headed idiot," murmured Damper Jack
ruefully, paying no attention to some unkind remarks
from the others, which generally said that such was also
the opinion of the camp.
"Never you vas mindt, Damper," cried Fat Herman,
a fun-loving, good-natured German. "You can shust


make de breakfast do for dinner, and go back to your
bed again."
" It isn't that," Damper Jack answered sorrowfully;
"but I've gone and wasted a face-wash. I'll have to do
it when I get up again." His anger had now melted
away, and, unheeding the characteristic advice which
issued in streams of eloquence from the tents, he calmly
inarched back to his own canvas home and composed
himself for another couple of hours' slumber. In El-
dorado Camp the men dispensed with an early meal on
Sundays, preferring to lie late and make up for the loss
of breakfast by the most pretentious dinner the entire
camp could evolve.
The population of the camp consisted of twelve men,
twelve horses, and half a dozen dogs. There was also
a large number of temporary inhabitants which, although
not enumerated, made their presence very much felt.
These were snakes, centipedes, ants, tarantulas, mos-
quitoes, hornets, native bees, flies of all kinds, and some
other varieties of life very objectionable in proximity to
white men. The human beings occupied themselves
during the day in "panning" gold from the sands of
the creek, upon the left bank of which the camp was
pitched. They were nearly all hardened wanderers, and
most of them had been together before in New Guinea
and in Western Australia. But now they slept peace-
fully, and the sun climbed up the heavens, and the con-
tents of the camp oven hissed and spluttered over the
fire. Incidentally, too, the water in the kerosene tin was
boiling.
Suddenly two riders appeared round a red sandstone
bluff, and bore down upon the sleeping camp. They were
riding along the hard bank of the channel, and apparently


were much surprised on seeing- the cluster of tents forming
the settlement.
"Just hold on a wee, laddie," said one, drawing rein.
"This is a camp all right, an' it looks as if it were
populated by white fellows; but we dinna ken yet, an'
the Chinese are bad beggars for deceiving people by copy-
ing the white prospector's style o' tent-burlding."
" I don't see anyone about," answered the other. "The
camp appears to be deserted."
"Or sleeping, or watching us," interrupted the first
speaker. " We'll ride on slowly and carefully. Luckily
we can ride faster than they can follow, on this hard
ground, if the owners are obstreperous. By Scotland!
I smell something appetizing, an' I've just remembered
we had only a drink o' tea for breakfast this morning."
"I'm a bit hungry myself," admitted the younger of
the two. " I move we risk things and go right in.
Probably the camp is composed of white gold miners."
"I dinna care now although it is composed o' blue
an' green Red Indians," spoke the other, sniffing the
air. " I canna resist that smell, for my unfailing instinct
tells me it is vera-well-cooked steak, an'—an' it's a long
time since we tasted steak, Edmund."
"It is," laughed the lad. "It didn't grow along the
road we came. But I see the cook's fire now. Shall we
announce ourselves or ride forward quietly? There doesn't
seem to be anyone near the fire."
"We'll leave our horses here an' walk up," said Mac-
kay. "It isn't Chinamen we've to deal with, for they, as
a rule, don t eat steak, an' they never cook it in a camp
oven. We've struck a prospectors' camp, I fancy, but I
don't want my head clubbed again, so we'll be diplomatic
in our movements."


Ten minutes later they were standing beside the fire
surveying their surroundings. "This is an honest mining
camp, Edmund," said the elder. " Only an experienced
bush cook could turn out such a batch of bread, an' only
a white prospector would use a shovel to break off the
ashes." The speaker lifted the lid of the camp oven and
chuckled gleefully. " It's ready," he said. " I never met
with such hospitality before. There's a box o' tea, laddie.
Throw some into that boiling water and we'll dine. That
will be salt an' pepper in those two baking-powder tins
beside the tea chest."
"But hadn't we better ask leave?" suggested Edmund.
"The men may be angry."
" Laddie, it would be showing a great contempt for the
mercies o' Providence if we delayed having breakfast any
longer. I respect your principles all the same, and al-
though I know the boys o' the camp will not cut up rough,
I'll ask their permission for what we are about to do."
He walked out of the galley and cried: "Hullo, mates!"
in a not-over-loud tone of voice.
"If they are all asleep in those tents, they'll not hear
you," said Edmund. "Call louder."
" Who do you think wants them to hear?" his comrade
replied. "You attend to our breakfast preparations while
I conform with the formalities o' bush etiquette." Again
he called out, and a dog barked in reply. "For the third
an' last time, boys, I say " he spoke.
" Howling dingoes! Damper Jack is at it yet," grumbled
someone.
"Let him spout," answered another voice, "I reckon
we'll drown him when we get up."
" Boys, just to spite him, I move none of us show a leg
yet," proposed a third tent dweller. "He's mad because


II FT'NMMTL mj »\ 8 I
~" I
S.'-- • ■&'' * 8 Y *
WFE' -V >.-.&&•. 1
S|| 3HKMWMM|
"DAMPER JACK RUSHED INTO THE GALLEY"




he got up too soon, an' he wants to turn us all out to share
his misery."
"Not an inch will I move until I've finished the bosker
dream I'm having," announced yet another.
It was some minutes before the freely spoken comments
anent Damper Jack's behaviour ceased, probably the cook
himself was the only man who slept through the outcry
against him. Meanwhile the two morning visitors were
fully appreciating the result of the cook's early prepara-
tions, and after half an hour's persistent work each felt
he didn't care though he had to do without another meal
for a week.
" It's wonderful how true some o' the old proverbs turn
out," mused the elder of the two well-satisfied diners, pro-
ducing his pipe and lighting it.
"You are thinking of the early bird and the worm?"
queried Edmund, drinking another mug of tea.
"No; I was pondering over the saying that laziness
shall clothe a man with rags; which, on being freely trans-
lated, means that too much sleep will lose a man his
breakfast "
" Great pigtails! Turn out, boys! Quick and lively! Our
camp is held up!" Damper Jack rushed into the galley,
and seizing a frying-pan brandished it wildly in the air.
Edmund sprang aside nimbly, but his companion retained
his seat on an inverted box and puffed complacently at his
pipe. "Dinna get excited, my man," he said, addressing
the astonished cook. "We're neither income-tax collec-
tors nor commercial travellers, an' we havena dropped
from the moon.—That's right, laddie, he might damage
himself with that useful domestic utensil." Edmund had
caught Jack's upraised arm and wrenched the frying-pan
from his grasp.


"Look alive, boys!" gasped Jack. "I cannot fight
them all, and there's maybe lots more of them." He
caught Edmund in his long arms and swung him off his
feet.
"Oh, Jack," exclaimed the voice of Ignorant Tommy,
" I can see your conscience must be troubling you! Why
can't you allow the camp to rest even if you are afflicted
with insomnia yourself?" The speaker sighed and stepped
from his tent. Jack had replaced Edmund upon the
ground. He was in a manner compelled to do so, for the
calm smoker had suddenly jumped at his throat, and his
grip was like that of a band of steel. But by this time
Ignorant Tommy had taken in the situation, and at his
shout of alarm the men sprang out as one man.
Their camp had been invaded by the bushrangers they
had heard were prowling about the country, but they
would fight for their property to the last. With angry
cries they rushed the galley, but they stopped abruptly.
Ignorant Tommy was shaking hands with one of the
invaders, and to most of them there was something
strangely familiar about the stranger. And there were
only two. They waited an explanation, and very soon
they got it.
"Are you no' ashamed o' yourselves?" began Ignorant
Tommy's friend, addressing the men. "I never thought
that the men who had been mates with me would "
"Mackay!" yelled Bunyip Bill, rushing forward with
outstretched hands.
"It vas!" cried Fat Herman,
" Howling bandicoots!" ejaculated Dandy Charlie. " I
thought you had gone under, old man?"
"Good old Mackay!" chorused several of the others in
delight. Most of the miners seemed to know him.


" Gentlemen," went on Mackay, "I repeat: You ought to
be ashamed o' yourselves."
" We didn't know it was you, Mac," apologized Igno-
rant Tommy, "and Damper Jack has been worrying us
all morning."
" I haven't," put in that individual, "and how was I to
know that the fellows who ate all your breakfasts were
friends? He's got a grip like a crocodile, and that's all I
know about him."
" I didna mean to be rude, Damper Jack," said Mackay
in mollifying tones, "but I feared you were going to be
a wee bit rough with my young comrade, who has come all
the way from the old country to make your acquaintances.
Boys, this is Edmund Howard, an' he's come to stay.
He's true grit right through an' But I'll no let him
have anything to do with you until you rectify your
mistake."
"But, Mac," persisted Ignorant Tommy, "I perceive
you have dined remarkably well after all, and I fail to see
in what respects we owe you an apology for lack of hospi-
tality."
"You were well named Ignorant Tommy, my man,"
interrupted the Scot. "Who talked about your lack of
hospitality? We've fared vera well an' have no com-
plaints. It's your lack o' manners I'm criticizing, an', as
I said already, I'm ashamed of you."
"Explain, Mac," cried the men in chorus. "What's
wrong with our manners?"
"You've been standing here like ballet dancers, or at
least no' much better clothed than aborigines, these last ten
minutes," roared Mackay. "Go an' put some garments
over your damper-grown bones, an' then present your-
selves. What can you expect o' the poor ignorant abo-


rigines when you supposed civilized white men set such an
example?"
"You've got mighty particular, Mac," laughed Uncle
Sam, a stalwart American. " I guess you wouldn't put
in much time changing your pyjamas for reception dress
yourself if it were bushrangers you were receiving."
"An', anyhow, ain't it Sunday?" said Melbourne Mike.
" How can we dress on washing day?" The question was
a poser even to Mackay; but it was soon decided that
washing would be dispensed with that week. The arrival
of such a man as Mackay was an event which required a
day for itself.
Soon the miners were dressed to the Scot's satisfaction,
although he grinned when he saw Little Peter in a pair of
trousers borrowed from Fat Herman. Then came the
formal introduction of Edmund to the camp, an important
ceremony which required every man to be on his best
behaviour. Ignorant Tommy was master of the corro-
borree, as Bunyip Bill put it, he having been delegated
the office by Mackay.
"Gentlemen of Eldorado Camp, please stand to atten-
tion!" he called out.
"We're on top. Fire away!" a young and handsome
individual humorously known as the Disgrace responded,
and the men all signified that they were ready.
" I said stand to attention, Damper Jack. I didn't tell
you to sit down on that hollow log."
" But you're getting that for nothing, boss. I'm throw-
ing the log in," answered Damper Jack.
"Oh, very well!" continued Ignorant Tommy, who
clearly was an acknowledged leader in some things in
camp. " I really have no objections, if that reptile whose
exit you are covering has none."


With a yell, Jack sprang up, and Ignorant Tommy re-
sumed. "This young gentleman who is brought among
us by our most esteemed comrade, Mr. Mackay, is named
Edmund Howard, and the man who invents an appellation
for him of which I do not approve will have to fight three
rounds with—Ginger Bob."
"Blow you, Ignorant Tommy," broke in Damper Jack,
" I don't see any snake!" Jack had been eyeing the log.
"Possibly not," said Tommy, "but you will when you
begin to prepare dinner. It has just crawled into that
flour sack."
''The skulking thing!" roared the cook, seizing a pick
handle and bounding towards the sack indicated. "Now
I know who has been stealing my stores of late, and I
apologize to Fat Herman and the Doctor."
" Leave the creature alone in the meantime," the Doctor
said. " Fat Herman and I will continue to bear the blame
for another ten minutes or so."
" Really, gentlemen," expostulated Ignorant Tommy,
"do you expect me to proceed in the midst of so many
interruptions? What must our young friend think of you
all?"
"Say that the next fellow who speaks will have to
stand up for a round with me," advised Ginger Bob,
hopefully. "My muscles are getting mighty soft. I
ain't had any fun since the racket with the Chinkies."
"You can have some now then," spoke Damper Jack.
"I'll take a couple of rounds out of you now."
The men laughed. Jack had an original way of fight
ing, and his size and length of arm had before out-
stretched the gingery pugilist's skill.
"Come on then," invited the latter at once. "I've a
new trick I want to practise."
( 0 204 ) 6


" You'll practise none o' your ungodly games here,
Ginger Bob," interrupted Mackay wrathfully. "An' if I
hear any more o' your desire for physical exercise I'll
hammer you myself."
" I ain't working against you, Mac," complained the
camp fighter. " I was offering myself on the side of
law and order."
" Proceed with the circus, Mr. Ignorant Tommy," said
the Scot. "Time is precious an' we've a lot to do."
" Step forward each man as his name is announced,
shake hands with our new comrade, and retire as grace-
fully as your ungainly frames permit you," spoke Tommy,
and once more silence was restored.
"The Doctor," he called out, and in response the
clean-shaven, mild-mannered, dilapidated individual who
answered to that designation stepped out, shook hands
with Edmund, and fell back into the circle again, with-
out a word, but with a most kindly smile.
"The New Chum," next announced the introducer, and
a tall, broad-shouldered man of somewhat melancholy, yet
to Edmund, half-familiar appearance responded. He also
shook hands with Mackay as that gentleman came up,
saying:
" I'm vera pleased to know you, New Chum. You are
a new acquaintance to the legion of wanderers, I can
see, but you're made o' the true stuff, an' I hope that
some day you'll be able to look less gloomily upon the
world."
"Thank you, Mr. Mackay. I have found true com-
rades at least, and I don't know that this world has
much more to offer," replied the New Chum. "And
I do smile sometimes, although not much given that
way."


" Uncle Sam," cried Ignorant Tommy.
"On deck, Captain," answered that person, a strongly
built man of any age between thirty and forty. He said
a few words of welcome to Edmund in the terse vernacular
of Montana and gave place to those following him. The
first was the Disgrace, a youth not much older than Ed-
mund, and who, before he could say a word, became the
victim of an admonishing address from Mackay, who ap-
parently knew him well. He only grinned by way of
answer, but winked at Edmund, and his expression spoke
volumes.
" Hurry up! Get a hustle on!" wailed Bunyip Bill.
"There are only a hundred weeks in the year, an' you've
already taken three weeks introducing the fellows who
don't count."
"Stand out, Bunyip Bill," ordered the director of
ceremonies. "And you, Dandy Charlie, Fat Herman,
Damper Jack, Melbourne Mike, Little Peter, and Ginger
Bob. There, you all know each other now, and I hope
you case - hardened ruffians will not tell the lad any
more lies than you can help."
"You needn't look at me when you are speaking to
the whole mob," complained the Disgrace. " I won't
tell our new chum anything that can't be hall-marked
by the crowd, and I'll bet every man in it can give me
points in telling snake yarns. But come with me, Ed-
mund, you can share my tent, and I'll show you round
the place, and put you up to all the ropes of Eldorado
Camp."
The two youths went away together, and Fat Herman
and the New Chum soon followed; they had caught the
Disgrace's signal and were ready for any adventure.
The miners then started to inform Mackay of how


Eldorado Camp had come into existence; but as each
man was giving a different version, and all talked at
once, he was unable to gather more than a few points
in the story. He appealed to the Doctor, but that gentle-
man hadn't said half a dozen words when Damper Jack
began beating a tattoo on an old kerosene tin. When
the others had finished dealing with Jack, the Doctor
was too busy attending to him to say more, and Mackay
turned to Ignorant Tommy for information; but that
gentleman had suddenly become very tired.
"Uncle Sam can give the best descriptive narrative,"
he yawned. " Really I am quite exhausted with so much
talking, and the steaming heat has made me extremely
desirous of some further sleep."
" Ask me, Mac. I'll tell everything in record time,"
said Dandy Charlie. "You needn't think you can get
more out of Tommy; he's played out now."
" Man, I knew Ignorant Tommy's ways before I met
you, Dandy Charlie," said Mackay. "But if you'll give
Uncle Sam a chance to speak, I'll be obliged, for I've
got something to say afterwards myself which will maybe
mean a lot." Ignorant Tommy sat down on a flour sack
and at once fell asleep.
" I guess there ain't much to tell, Mac," began Uncle
Sam. "A lot of us were prospecting over on the Mitchell
Headwaters, where you left us last, when we heard that
some Chinamen had struck it rich over on this side of
the Gulf. Well, we opined that where the Chinkies could
go we could, and we came down to the coast and got
on board an old steam tub which took us to Burketown.
We followed the Chinamen's tracks from there until we
struck this river, and when we found its sands gave us
a pennyweight per pan, you bet we dropped our anchor


slick, and here we've been ever since. The Chinamen
themselves are encamped about ten miles from here, on
another creek, but we have no dealings with them."
" At>least, not often," put in Little Peter, who was a
stickler for absolute fact.
" And the country belongs to Australia, anyhow," added
Melbourne Mike, "and we've all got Mining Rights, which
is more than most of the dirty yellowskins have."
"An' now there's a rush on from Croydon an' the
south," Ginger Bob supplemented, "an' we'll pretty well
have to clear out again, or allow hundreds of silly new
chums to come round us. After that I suppose some fat-
headed M.P. will agitate for a railway, an' then we're done."
" I knew you would all forget the chief part o' the
story," broke in Bunyip Bill. "None o' you told that
we've got bushrangers near us."
" Well, none of us have met them," said Dandy Charlie.
"Time enough to shout when they try to stick us up."
"But we know they're about, all the same," Uncle
Sam said thoughtfully. " I guess our goose is cooked
if we wait till they stick us up. I, for one, should ad-
vise going out and looking for them."
"The same here," put in Ginger Bob. "I reckon I
can tackle any two of them myself, an' a decent fight
would do us all heaps o' good."
"You fellows have become most extraordinary fat-
headed since I was among you last," observed Mackay,
who never hesitated in paying compliments. "How do
you know there are bushrangers about if you haven't
met them? Surely there are no other camps in this part
o' the Gulf country as yet, an' gentlemen o' the bush
canna carry on business successfully if there are no
fools near to provide them with the plunder."


"You're off the trail, Mackay," said Uncle Sam, with
a laugh. "We haven't met them, it is true, but Damper
Jack, the Disgrace, and the Doctor saw some of them
riding like mad through the bush one moonlight night
about a week ago; and even last night Bunyip Bill and
Fat Herman found tracks only a few miles from here,
while out gathering our horses in; and, as you say,
there isn't any other white camp up here."
"Most likely they struck our tracks," said Mackay.
"We camped about five miles from here last night."
"But I don't think you came from the northern territory
of South Australia, old man, unless you passed this camp
and doubled back. These fellows, according to Bunyip
Bill, were riding east."
"An' we were riding west," said Mackay slowly. He
relit his pipe and was silent for some time. Bunyip Bill
and Little Peter had meanwhile gone out and brought the
two waiting horses into the camp yard among the other
steeds, and the camp numbers were now reduced to Uncle
Sam, Melbourne Mike, Ginger Bob, and Dandy Charlie.
"You said there wasn't another white camp near here,"
spoke Mackay, after a bit. " From that, I presume, you
think that the bushranging fellows have been paying all
their attentions to the Chinamen?"
"That's about it, so far," Melbourne Mike answered,
"and I, for one, don't see that we have any reasonable
ground for complaint. The Chinamen are robbing us of
our rights, and some white men are taking what they can
out of them. I should turn honest bushranger myself if
Bunyip Bill and Dandy Charlie would join me. The Dis-
grace says he is one already."
"You needn't worry about what the Disgrace says,"
Mackay laughed. " He'll say he has already discovered


both North and South Poles, if you ask him. But about
these bushrangers? Have you told me all you know con-
cerning them?"
" Pretty well," said Dandy Charlie. "The rest of our
knowledge comes from the Chinamen, and we don't lay
much stress on what they say."
"Of course not," mused Mackay; "an' yet the China-
man is no' the greatest liar in the world, although he's a
gold medallist at prevarication. Well, boys, after some
thought, I am inclined to believe that there are some vera
mysterious white men in the vicinity; but I dinna think
they can be classed in the category o' bushrangers.
They're worse than that. There's a big game 011 about
here that I canna understand, but I know from expe-
rience that there is something on which is deeper than
can be readily fathomed."
" Hold hard there, Mackay," cried Uncle Sam. "What
on earth can be happening up here, in the last part of the
world made, that we don't know. We don't trouble our-
selves about the bushrangers, because we fancy we are
too strong for them, but the Chinamen are a big contract.
We don't like the yellow beggars near us; but they were
here first, and we are not in a position to be able to shift
them. In fact, they could wipe us out, if they tried."
" You are talking straight on the drill top," said Dandy
Charlie. " The Chinamen are the trouble."
" Well, let us ride over and pay them a friendly call
to-day, an' spiflicate them," Ginger Bob suggested. " It's
Sunday anyhow, an' we've knocked off the washing busi-
ness."
" How many Chinamen are there in the camp?" asked
Mackay.
" Oh, about a couple of hundred, I think!" Uncle Sam


answered. " But only a dozen or so have paid their poll
taxes; the rest landed somewhere on the Gulf shores, and
there are more coming into the country the same way
every day. I guess Australia belongs to every other
people but Australians, and I know what Americans would
do if they were troubled in the same way."
" Well, what would they do?" asked Dandy Charlie,
who was always eager to acquire information.
" They would pass a law against the landing of the
beggars, and if that didn't stop them, I guess they would
turn the Montana boys loose on them, and there wouldn't
be enough Chinamen left to work a laundry—and that
might be a pity."
" Possibly," grunted Mackay; "but you should re-
member, Uncle Sam, that I've been in the States, an'
know that the great an' glorious people of America have
their own troubles too, an' that neither the Montana boys
nor the Texan heroes can help them to solve certain pro-
blems that loom large on their horizon. But, as some
great poet said, it's ' the white man's burden ', an' he's got
to carry it; so we'll fight our own battles an' take all
risks, without howling on the Government to come an'
help us. Have you fellows ever seen anything of this
nature before?" Mackay held up to view the gold button
Quong Lee had left behind.
" It's a Chinese affair," said Uncle Sam unconcernedly.
"Were you monkeying in their camp before you came
here?"
" No, my mate and I got this as payment for services
rendered last night to an important Chinaman."
" Mackay is always on the job," cried Ginger Bob.
" I'll bet that's something belonging to the stolen treasure
the Chinkies are always talking about."


"What stolen treasure?" Mackay asked in some sur-
prise, replacing the button in his pocket. " I never heard
of such a thing."
"Then you're out-of-date, old man," Melbourne Mike
laughed. "We hear of nothing else here, unless you can
call bushranger rumours news. The Chinese near here
are mad over some treasure they say was stolen when
the Empress died some time ago. They seem to think
Australia is mixed up in the business."
"Oh!" ejaculated Mackay. "Is there a man among
your yellow friends named Quong Lee?"
"Not that I know of," replied Uncle Sam. "You'd
better ask Ignorant Tommy."
" Bunyip Bill an' Fat Herman were out riding last night
before the rain came on?"
" I reckon so," said Ginger Bob. "We wanted the
horses in, an' it was their turn to get them."
"What are you driving at, Mackay?" Uncle Sam
asked. "You've got something on your chest, I can
see, but you can go nap on the fact that Bunyip Bill
and Fat Herman saw nothing but the two tracks they
told us about."
" Yes, I believe that," Mackay replied. " I know them
too well to imagine for a moment that they would ill-treat
a helpless Chinaman an' leave him; but some people did,
an' now we have arrived at the mystery."
"I'll bet you are wrong, Mackay," cried Damper Jack,
coming forward. " We've arrived at tucker time, an' I
reckon all you lazy loafers have got to turn to an' help
me to get something ready. I'm not going to do all the
grafting in this camp."
" Did you bring the Doctor out with you, Jack?" asked
Ginger Bob casually.


" No, he's in his tent reading a book he found in
Mackay's saddle wallet."
"Then you'd better bring him out, for you'll need him
soon if you don't give less cheek to the gentlemen of
Eldorado Camp." Ginger Bob spoke gently, but Damper
Jack didn't seem to appreciate his words, and it was only
the diplomatic efforts of Mackay and Uncle Sam which
maintained the peace of the camp, Dandy Charlie and
Melbourne Mike being strongly desirous of having it
broken.
Dinner preparations proceeded, however, and all the
men present lent a hand. When things were so well
advanced that a good meal was assured, Dandy Charlie
and Uncle Sam lifted Ignorant Tommy from his resting-
place and carried him gently over to the swollen creek.
They doubtless were sorry for the poor black snake he
was crushing into the flour; but they didn't say so, and
even if they had some sympathy for the reptile, that was
no reason why they should have thrown him into the
tempestuous current. He awoke and swam out about
a hundred feet down the stream, smiling pleasantly.
"A bath is indeed a great luxury in this part of the
world," he remarked, as he came back to the galley;
"but is it not a pity to see so much good fresh water
running to waste, when for nine months of the year we
cannot find sufficient to drink?"
" A bath is vera necessary at times," Mackay agreed,
" but if I were you, Tommy, I should remove my ward-
robe from my person before indulging in an aquatic dis-
play."
" Quite unnecessary, Mr. Mackay, I assure you,"
Ignorant Tommy replied airily. "I shall remain cool
much longer with damp garments around my body."


"You are right, Ignorant Tommy," laughed Dandy
Charlie, "water never harmed any man."
"Then let us hope you will remain in that belief,"
said Tommy, suddenly catching Charlie by the waist
and throwing him into the stream. The action was per-
formed so quickly, and with such ease, that the onlookers
were amazed; they had not imagined that Ignorant
Tommy had so much strength concealed within his
somewhat slender frame. He stood on the bank and
smiled cheerily at his gasping comrade. " I should try
the side stroke if I were you, Dandy Charlie," he advised
in gentle tones. " I think, too, you will find the current
more favourable to your landing if you come closer in
to this bank."
"Oh, shut up," spluttered the swimmer, "and throw
me a piece of soap!"
"I'm thinking," said Mackay coldly, "that you people
are easily amused. I canna see any fun in this disgraceful
Sabbath work.—Melbourne Mike, you sunburnt, corru-
gated-faced gold grubber, if you don't stop laughing I'll
pitch you in beside Dandy Charlie."
"I can't help laughing, Mac," Mike answered. "There's
a big centipede crawling up your back, an' it will bite your
neck in there you've shaken the poor thing off. Why
couldn't you wait an' let it get a decent feed.—Ow!"
Damper Jack had gently insinuated into his hand the
business end of a burning brand, and the resulting struggle
only terminated when both Jack and Mike had rolled into
the water in each other's grip.
"Tell me what to do with the dinner, Jack," Ginger
Bob shouted, running down the bank alongside his drift-
ing comrades. "There ain't any call for it to be spoiled
if you don't want any, or if an old croc' gets you."


The cook's answer was a direful threat as to what would
happen when he got out, at which all laughed. They
knew the ways of Damper Jack.
The men all emerged safely from the water, having
rather enjoyed their enforced bath, and having completely
forgotten the reasons or causes which had brought it about.
The heat of the day was terrific, and already the garments
were steaming.
"We'll have dinner early," Damper Jack announced,
"and then we'll have more fun in the water; it's mighty
cool and pleasing."
"Dear me!" exclaimed Ignorant Tommy. "I wonder
in what trouble the Disgrace has involved himself this
time? I see him running down the creek, and his com-
rades after him. He certainly appears to be in a hurry."
"By Jupiter, they all are!" cried Dandy Charlie.
"They're not chasing him. See, our new mate is along-
side him now, and they're running together, and the New
Chum is behind hauling Fat Herman along."
"Are you running to keep warm?" shouted Ginger Bob
as they came near. "Or have you seen a bunyip?"
"We've seen Chinamen," the Disgrace cried back.
" Hundreds of them, an' they're coming to wipe out El-
dorado Camp."
" Roll up for tucker, boys," Damper Jack yelled, ham-
mering on his kerosene tin gong. "We must feed before
we fight."
"Don't speak without thinking," said Mackay to the
cook. "We canna fecht on Sunday—unless," he added
grimly, "we get much provocation."


CHAPTER V
Mackay's Plague
"WELL, boys," spoke Uncle Sam, when the full strength
of the camp had gathered, "is it fight or flight?"
"Fight, you bet," said Ginger Bob. "We're fourteen
strong and can all pull triggers."
"I back Ginger's proposal," chimed in Bunyip Bill.
"The blamed Chinkies are getting a heap too cheeky."
"You are silent, Mr. Mackay?" said the New Chum.
"What do you think we should do?"
" I don't know yet. You tell the story from your point
of view. We've already heard what the Disgrace had to
say, but his reputation for veracity is like a politician's."
"What does that mean, Ignorant Tommy?" the Dis-
grace asked. The gentleman named seemed to be the
camp's storehouse of knowledge. He smiled sweetly and
answered: " Mr. Mackay asserts that one of your charac-
teristic traits is that of misrepresentation, and that your
past accomplishments in that direction have given you an
amazing notoriety which renders it imprudent to accept all
your statements as unimpeachable."
"Oh!" The Disgrace sank back into the arms of Bun-
yip Bill and was promptly deposited upon the ground,
where he lay gasping and muttering the word "unim-
peachable


your gold, but leave everything else alone except your
rifles. Take them with you; for we canna risk Mr. China-
man not appropriating them. Then you'll slide into the
water here an' hide behind the bank, an', if luck favours us,
we'll play them a bonny trick. The Chinamen will no'
understand what game is being played on them when they
find a deserted camp an' everything in perfect order."
" Even the dinner too?" wailed Damper Jack. "No,
Mackay, I left a good breakfast to-day already, an' I'm not
going to have another accident happen to this stew; it's
the best I've ever made, an' I reckon the boys are mighty
hungry by this time."
" But the beggars will steal everything worth lifting as
well as our dinner, Mac," the Doctor said in mild expostu-
lation. " Surely you do not intend that?"
"The Chinamen will steal nothing, an' they'll leave the
camp in a bigger hurry than they came into it," Mackay
said a trifle impatiently. "Now, lads, don't be silly an'
spoil the fun. Do as I have said an' leave the rest to me."
"But what in thunder are you going to do?" Dandy
Charlie asked; "and where do we come in?"
"I'm going to receive them when they come up," was
the answer. "Believe me, they'll no' harm me."
" I understand Mac's scheme, boys," said the Doctor,
"and it is good. Let's do what we were told at once.
The Chinamen have got up their courage again and are
coming."
"By the Stars and Stripes! I believe I tumble to the
idea too!" exclaimed Uncle Sam. " Hurry, boys!"
And the boys did hurry, and soon they were in the creek,
their heads and loaded rifles only being above the surface.
They could see the camp, but the bank hid them from
ready observation. Mackay was not with them.


On came the invading - Chinese, brandishing long knives
and yelling horribly. The hated white gold-seekers' camp
lay before them, and it held much plunder dear to the hearts
of wandering sons of the Flowery Land. They had old
scores to settle with the white men; and it made no differ-
ence to them that the present camp owners were not those
who had ever molested them, either over on the great Mit-
chell and Palmer Rivers settlements or elsewhere. Down
behind the hard bank the thirteen white men watched the
howling mob approach. They did not know why they
were attacked, but these things often happened in the Gulf
country without any reason, and doubtless the visit of the
Chinamen was one of such events.
"Little Peter," said Uncle Sam, "you get your lead
squirter trained on that fancy fellow to the left of the
crowd, and keep him under cover until he leaves the
camp. The rest of you boys take the man next, corre-
sponding to your own position in this happy home."
"All right, boss!" Damper Jack answered. " I've got
my man covered already. Say when he's to get the
medicine."
"You are not to fire, Jack," the New Chum, who was
next him, explained. "We are simply to guard Mr.
Mackay Hullo, Edmund, you haven't a very good
position. Change places with me, and this root will
support you."
"Oh, I'm all right, thank you!" Edmund responded.
"I had only slipped."
" Keep your eye on my man for a bit, New Chum,"
interrupted Damper Jack. "I've time to go back for the
camp oven. The stew will be overcooked."
"You stay where you are, and shut up," warned Uncle
Sam. "The Chinese are not deaf.''
(c 204 ) 7


" They are into the square now," murmured Ginger Bob.
"How I wish I were among them for a minute or two,
with nothing but my fists and a knife for cutting off their
pigtails!"
" But where is Mackay?" whispered Edmund. "Why
is he waiting alone? Why am I not with him?"
"You'll see all that presently," the Doctor answered.
"Watch now, boys, and don't make a sound."
"Wait till I kill this big snake that lives in the hole
in the bank I'm hanging on to," whispered Melbourne
Mike. "Ah, it's all right now! I've sent him sailing
down the creek."
"And the idiot who says another word will follow the
snake," growled Ginger Bob under his breath.
The Chinese were now within the camp's boundary, but
they had ceased their yells and had come to a halt. There
were no white men! They couldn't be asleep, for they
had made noise enough to arouse even white gold-seekers.
They hadn't fled at their approach either, for the horses
were in the yard behind the camp, and they had left every-
thing behind. Something was wrong.
Cautiously they moved forward, and, splitting into
groups, began inspecting the tents. But no solution of
the mystery presented itself. The camp was deserted,
nothing had been taken away, and even the fire was still
burning under the cooking utensils. Why was the camp
forsaken? Could it be a plague-stricken spot, and had
the men only discovered that terrible fact recently? Prob-
ably these were the thoughts which filled the brains of
the Chinamen. At least they formed the line of thought
which Mackay had intended should appeal to them. The
Chinese were puzzled. They moved slowly and carefully
through the camp, and thirteen men, with deadly Win-


Chester rifles, watched their every movement. They
could shoot with unerring aim, and if the pigtails gave
the slightest sign of having discovered the plot, thirteen
bullets would find their billets. Well, perhaps not thirteen,
for Ginger Bob, the ferocious man of the camp, couldn't
shoot even a scrub turkey, he was so soft-hearted; and
Fat Herman's shooting exploits were often extremely
dangerous to his companions, and seldom troubled the
object of his aim.
But what was Mackay doing? The thought worried
Edmund in a manner his comrades could not have under-
stood. For the first time since they had formed their
strange partnership they were not sharing risks. For the
first time they were separated, and Mackay, the man for
whom he had formed such a strong attachment, was play-
ing a lone hand, the meaning of which Edmund did not
understand. But he did not long remain in ignorance.
Suddenly a low groan sounded out from one of the tents
not yet examined by the Chinese, and at once they all
rushed towards it. Here was someone on whom they
could work off" their grievances, and they could doubtless
make him explain the mystery of the deserted camp.
He did; but not in the way expected.
A shriek of terror, horror, and enlightenment burst from
the Chinese, simultaneously with a low chuckle of delight
from the Doctor. For a moment the Celestials stood
gazing in deadly fear at the object they saw before them
on the crude camp bed. They were paralyzed, but they
knew now why the place had been deserted. Next mo-
ment they broke out into a series of frenzied yells, and
tore away in a headlong rush from the camp. The Thing
they had seen had arisen from the bunk, and was stagger-
ing out among them. It was a miner stricken with the


awful bubonic plague, and the markings on his face were
only too well known among the Chinese—many of whom
had left their pestilential, overcrowded native homes to
escape from its deadly ravages—to leave any doubt.
The half-dressed apparition stumbled out of the tent
and fell in a heap on the ground, uttering meanwhile
some feeble groans. But they were unheard. The raiders
were flying down the creek as if the fiends of the bottom-
less pit were after them. They looked back once or twice
to see if the plague-stricken man were following them; but
they never halted, and soon they were out of sight, round
a bluff far down the stream. The hidden spectators
laughed long and loudly, and Damper Jack and Dandy
Charlie rolled back into the swirling torrent, and were in
a fair way of overtaking the Chinamen before they could
restrain their merriment sufficiently to enable them to
swim to the bank again. Edmund was surprised beyond
powers of expression. He had not yet grasped the mean-
ing of things, and his horror at seeing a doomed man in
the camp was as great as that of the Chinese. And the
unfortunate victim of the terrible plague lay still and
groaned until the last Chinaman had disappeared. Then
he sat up and gazed towards the creek.
"You obstreperous lumps o' humanity," he roared in
no weak voice, "if you dinna stop your laughing this
vera meenit, I'll come over an' infect the whole lot of
you."
"Don't, Mac," wailed Damper Jack, climbing out of
the water; "don't come near, or all the poor crocodiles
will peg out; an', oh, don't go near our tucker, or you'll
give it bubonic too!"
" I'll give you a piece o' my mind, you elongated
damper - slinging cook," bellowed Mackay wrathfully.


"Does your feeble intellect lead you to believe that I'm
acting - the part o' a painted baboon for fun? Come out,
and I'll throw you into the creek."
"No fear!" the cook responded. " I've got the dinner
to attend to, but if you're going to start playing at diving
with me, I reckon I'll get back to my old root."
"You can't come here, Mac; you're dead," said the
Doctor. "You have enough plague on your face to kill
off every man in camp; but it beats me to give it a name.
What kind do you think it is yourself?" The men had
now regained the bank, and were wringing the water
from their garments.
"I call this plague, Mackay's Patent Chinaman Anni-
hilator," the Scot grinned, "an' I've wasted a bottle o'
ink I found in the Doctor's tent, no' to mention some
o' his medicines, in producing it."
He stepped down into the water and washed the stains
from his face and shoulders; then, donning his clothes
again in the Doctor's tent, he rejoined the men in the
bark-roofed erection used as a dining-place. Damper
Jack hustled about and soon had an appetizing meal
spread on the table, and, during its discussion, Mackay
told of his mysterious island and the rich reef he had
found on it. He also described his experiences on the
ship, and his waking up at Port Darwin, so many hun-
dred miles away. An account of his journey home after
the Vulture followed, and of how Edmund and he had
met and resolved to come back to look for the reef; and
then he told of the circumstances attending the finding of
Quong Lee, and the results which led therefrom, up to
their arrival in Eldorado Camp. The men were greatly
interested, and sat still for a long time after dinner, going
over the points in the story which appealed to them.


" I tell you, boys," remarked the Disgrace at length,
"we've got the fun of our lives ahead; but I move that
all the mob doesn't go to hunt up that island. Damper
Jack, and Dandy Charlie, and Ginger Bob, and Melbourne
Mike, and some others "
" Yes, we're quite enough for the job," broke in Damper
Jack gleefully.
" should be left behind," continued the Disgrace
imperturbably. "The New Chum, Edmund, Fat Herman,
and yours truly, and maybe Mackay, are the best fitted
for dangerous work."
He paused abruptly, and ran out of the camp. Dandy
Charlie was bearing down upon him, and the expression
upon his face made it clear to the Disgrace that danger
was impending. However, they were both fleet of foot
and the bank of the creek was an ideal track. Assuredly
they would make up on the Chinamen if they kept on long
enough.
"I think," Ignorant Tommy observed slowly, "there
is a great deal more involved in this case than the mere
finding of the island. Gentlemen, I believe Mac has
stumbled across the secret of the stolen Imperial Chinese
jewels, and I am also of the opinion that our supposed
bushranging friends who held the interview with Quong
Lee are very much interested in the finding of that
treasure."
"But you hav'na told Edmund an' me this yarn o' the
Chinese treasure," put in Mackay. " I don't understand
it."
" Don't you remember the paragraph I read to you
in Sydney as we were passing through that city?" said
Edmund. "Perhaps it may have some truth in it."
" Laddie, I never give any heed to sensational news


items in the papers," Mackay replied; "they are seldom
true. But what was it?"
" Oh, a cabled report to the effect that some state
jewels missing" from the Imperial Palace in Peking" were
supposed to have been taken to Australia, and that the
various port authorities had been asked by the Chinese
Government to keep a strict watch on all vessels trad-
ing- with China and examine every Chinaman who
landed."
"Ha, ha!" laughed Ignorant Tommy, and the rest of
the men joined in. "Did they fancy that Chinamen
having anything to conceal would come into Australia
by the front doors? I am quite sure now that that
mysterious collection of Court jewels is hidden somewhere
up here, and that our neighbours know all about the
affair."
Mackay lit his pipe, sure sign that some thought had
occurred to him which required calm contemplation.
"There's maybe a lot in what you say, Tommy," he
said, as the smoke rings floated over his head, " but
there is some mystery still which defies solution. Allow-
ing for the moment, that some jewels were stolen from the
Chinese Court, an' even taking it for granted that they
were landed secretly in the north of Australia, where does
everything else come in? An' what connection is there
between these allowed facts an' your bushrangers, Quong
Lee an' his enemies, an' my mist-shrouded island, to say
nothing about gold buttons, which seem to be vera plenti-
ful?"
" I think you want to jump to the end of the story
before you turn over the first page," put in the New Chum
quietly. " I confess I know comparatively little about the
ways of Orientals, but it appears to me that we should let


mysteries which do not concern us, alone, and devote our
best efforts to the matters more immediately pressing.
We must, I take it, now do our best to locate that won-
derful island of Mackay's, because we should be foolish
to neglect such a rich reef as he discovered there—that
is, if he desires our services."
"We are all comrades here," Mackay put in. "But
say on, New Chum, you're talking sense."
" And if any mystery must be solved, I should suggest
that the one most directly concerning us is requiring of
our first attention. I think that centres itself in the in-
disputable fact that to-day we were rushed by some China-
men whom we had never harmed, and who therefore must
have had some reason that we don't know of, for daring
to risk their lives by attacking us. Now, to find out the
reasons which governed their actions should be our first
work, it seems to me. Probably the knowledge might
lead us on to other discoveries."
"You're right, New Chum!" cried Bunyip Bill. "I'm
just worrying myself into needing more tucker over that
very question."
" Well, you needn't, Bunyip," chimed in the cook.
"You'll get no more tucker before sundown. So, if
you're hungry, you can go and chew an ant-bed. I'm
not going to put in all Sunday washing up after hungry
heathens like you, especially when Mackay has some
game on."
"Oh, shut up, Damper!" said Little Peter. "We're
talking politics just now, not baking-powderology. I
think the New Chum is talking straight, an' I reckon he
gets my vote."
The little man glared around as if expecting to have to
fight some of the men; but as no one seemed disposed to


challenge him, he gazed moodily up the creek and said no
more.
" I don't see the hang of so much talky-talky," broke
in Uncle Sam. "We've heard all that can be said about
things, so let us act now, if we feel called upon. If not,
let us say so, and let me get away to put a patch on my
trousers."
"You forget," reminded Mackay, "that while I have
enlightened you fellows a lot, you have told us nothing
definite about the state of affairs up here."
" There isn't any, Mac," said Ignorant Tommy, suddenly
rousing himself from a nap. "We have reason to be-
lieve the Chinese are excited over the treasure story you
now know, and there all our knowledge at present ends."
" Vera well," announced Mackay, " we'll adopt the New
Chum's proposal, an' endeavour to find out something
about the yellow men, and the reasons for their venturing
to pay us an unfriendly visit."
" May that reason not be that they think we have killed
or kidnapped Quong Lee?" asked Edmund. "You know
they have been following our tracks until they reached this
camp."
" Talky talky muchee muchee, worky round samee place
again," laughed Uncle Sam. " Come on, Mackay, say
what is uppermost in that big head of yours, and let us
get to work one way or another. We're growing old."
" My word, can't Uncle Sam spout?" murmured Mel-
bourne Mike delightedly. " I never knew he could fling
out chunks of wisdom like Ignorant Tommy,"
" Man, ye dinna ken you are born yet," said Mackay
shortly. " An' like the rest o' the fellows, you're too
obstreperous to comprehend any elucidation."
" Oh," groaned Mike, " I'm dead now! Plant me deep,


boys, and don't let the elucidation plague get me. No
wonder the Disgrace shrivelled up when both Mackay
and Ignorant Tommy turned their bombs of knowledge
on him."
" I'm thinking," went on Mackay, " that, seeing the
Chinese paid us a visit without asking what was our
at-home day, we are justified in returning the compli-
ment, an' maybe the New Chum is right when he says
we may thereby get some useful information."
" All right, let's start now!" said Damper Jack. " All
my cooking is thought out for to-morrow already."
"Yes, vat for ve vait here ven so mooch good fun can
be got from de Chinamen?" Fat Herman got up and
embraced Damper Jack, with the result that both men
were rolling upon the ground next moment, and while
the miners shouted encouragement to the struggling
worthies, and incidentally gave advice which caused the
cook to threaten them all in turn, the Disgrace and Dandy
Charlie strolled into the camp arm-in-arm. These two
last named professed to view with horror the scenes of
strife, and appealed to the more sober-minded of their
comrades to stop the struggle. The Disgrace looked
longingly towards the swollen creek, as he implored
Ginger Bob and Bunyip Bill to lend their aid in bringing
about peace; and he was successful.
" My word, boys, I forgot we were a Sunday-keeping
camp here," suddenly cried Ginger Bob. "It is most un-
pardonable that there should be fighting allowed to-day."
"Well, stop it," advised Uncle Sam wickedly. He
knew his comrades well.
" Come on, then, Bunyip and Dandy Charlie, and some
of you other fellows," Ginger roared in unconcealed de-
light. " Uncle Sam says we've to stop this fight. Some


of you seize Damper Jack, and Edmund and I will attend
to Fat Herman. Throw them in with a bang too; make
them sink to the bottom. We've got to keep Sunday
somehow!"
When Damper Jack and Fat Herman climbed out of the
water, a hundred yards or so down the stream, they sat
down to dry themselves, and plotted deeply how they
could get even with the Disgrace; for they took it as a
matter of course that he was the prime cause of their
ducking.
Not that the wetting mattered—it was a luxury—but
they preferred to take a bath at a more convenient time,
and Fat Herman would have removed his boots first, while
perhaps the cook might have taken a piece of soap with
him. Meanwhile the other members of the camp had
decided upon a plan of campaign which, although not
aggressive in any way, included the surveillance of the
Chinese as a necessity for self-defence. Mackay was
nominated as director-in-chief of the camp's affairs, and
if any man had any grievances against his decisions, he
had merely to state them to Ginger Bob.
" Vera well," said the big Scot when all had been
decided, and Fat Herman and the cook had rejoined
their comrades. "It isn't likely that our Chinese visitors
will come back this way, but we canna cheat the bush-
rangers wi' the same trick, so we'll have to be on vera
careful guard until we know what is happening around
here."
" Let's get away to the Chinese camp now," interrupted
Damper Jack. " I know the track."
He hadn't heard of the penalty for breaking in irrele-
vantly on Mackay's speech, but while Ginger Bob and he
fought it out, Mackay went on:


i 1 We must act discreetly too, if we want to find out
what mystery we've struck, an' for any sake, boys, re-
member that strategy is far more effective than mere
brute strength."
" Of course," said Dandy Charlie, nodding his approval,
"that's what I've often told Ginger Bob."
"Walk into the boys, Mac," spoke Ignorant Tommy.
" I've often tried to inculcate such an idea into their cere-
brums, but without any appreciable results "
"A party will therefore visit them secretly to-night
and gain all the knowledge possible, but it must be a
vera small party, an' it will be under the leadership o'
the New Chum. Edmund, you can go; I've faith in
your powers of discretion. An' Little Peter an' Uncle
Sam, an' maybe another man to act as a special re-
serve. The rest are needed here; for I can see there's
trouble looming ahead in some form we dinna yet under-
stand."
" I'll be the extra man," said Bunyip Bill. " I know
all about Chinamen and "
"No, you won't!" broke in Melbourne Mike. "I
reckon I've the best claim to go if there's any fun to
be had in the business "
"And what about me?" asked the Disgrace. "What
have I done that I should be separated from my special
mates? What right has either Bunyip Bill or Melbourne
Mike to get my job?"
"Well, well," said Mackay, "only one of you can
go, besides those already mentioned, so you can agree
among yourselves who is to be the Chinaman stalker.
My impression is that the most fun will be around
here."
" I reckon I'll resign in your favour, Bunyip," spoke


Mike hurriedly. " I was never much good at hunting
Chinkies, anyway." His comrades looked at him sus-
piciously for a moment, but Mike's face was as open
and honest as a Chinaman's, so Bunyip thanked him
and began to arrange with the other four the method
of operations. The Disgrace stalked out of camp in
the sulks, and did not speak even when Dandy Charlie
passed some unkind remarks anent the cheek of some
kids who thought they should have a finger in every-
thing, Chinamen's pigtails included.
Ginger and the cook had now arrived at a more or
less satisfactory conclusion regarding their differences.
Probably the fact that they were receiving so much
notice from their comrades assisted considerably in bring-
ing about a settlement. At any rate, Damper Jack
quietly set about preparations for supper, and Ginger
very kindly helped him. Meanwhile, the members of the
night expedition, advised by Mackay, discussed their
plans, and Ignorant Tommy, the Doctor, and Fat Herman
retired to their tents for an afternoon nap. Dandy Charlie
and Melbourne Mike began cleaning their rifles sugges-
tively, and the camp dogs entered into a fierce argument
among themselves regarding the possession of some bones
Damper Jack had discarded. And the sun shone down on
the steaming land, and the great rainclouds began to
gather in the east. At night the deluge would begin
again. Suddenly the Disgrace reappeared in camp,
and Uncle Sam seemed to be somewhat worried over
his presence. "Now, look here, youngster," he said,
addressing the Disgrace, "we have no time for non-
sense, remember, so you will get no sympathy if you
try on any of your little games!"
"I want no sympathy from any man," the Disgrace


replied; "nor am I complaining of anything, although
the life you fellows of this camp give me is not good
enough even for a dingo. I only came back to say
what I thought of Bunyip Bill."
"No, you don't," cried Bunyip. "Say it to-morrow,
when I've time to listen to you."
" You're nothing but a dirty, lazy smodger, an' you can
neither cook, track horses, fight, run " The Disgrace
hadn't time to say more, for Bunyip Bill had made a
leap at him, and a race had started which boded ill for
the Disgrace if he were caught.
The New Chum and Edmund saw that Bunyip was
really angry, and ran after the two men to save the
youth from Bunyip's vengeance as much as possible.
Dandy Charlie and Melbourne Mike laughed uproariously,
and Uncle Sam and Mackay went on with their conver-
sation. Little Peter, however, was greatly excited; he
knew the Disgrace had come into camp with the deliberate
intention of angering Bunyip, and he awaited eagerly to
see the result. No man had as yet come off best against
the Disgrace. But it looked as if retribution were to over-
take him this time, for Bunyip Bill flew along the narrow,
hard-beaten pad leading to the horse yard with a speed
that easily proved the Disgrace was wrong in, at least,
one of the assertions against his abilities. And he was
fast overhauling the youthful camp tormentor, who was
running as if under difficulties. The pursuer was almost
upon him; the Disgrace leaped as if with a last effort,
and the same moment Bunyip Bill was lying flat upon
the ground and pouring forth a torrent of language,
strange, weird, and emphatic, with remarkable fluency.
He struggled to regain his feet, but before he could dis-
entangle his boot from the wire loop which had thrown


Mackay's Plague m
him, the Disgrace had jumped on his back and pinned
him down.
"Strategy, Bunyip, is much ahead of brute strength,"
Edmund heard the Disgrace remark pleasantly as the New
Chum and he came up. " You ought to know that by this
time, for you've been with Mackay longer than I've been.
Now, I'm going to the Chinese camp, instead of you,
Bunyip. When you agree, I'll let you up."
"You—you—confounded little mosquito!" spluttered
the prostrate man. " I'll choke the life out of you!"
"That's right, Bunyip," cheerily said the Disgrace.
"That's what Mackay called me to-day, already. Mac-
kay is a bosker at saying things, and I'm glad you've
cottoned on to that fact No, you can't get up; your
foot is caught in the loop I made for it on this pad,
and the more you struggle the tighter it fixes itself.
Strategy is a good thing, Bunyip; it's a pity you don't
know more about it."
"Here, boys, haul the beggar off!" cried Bunyip,
seeing the New Chum and Edmund looking on in
amusement. "He set a trap for me, and I've fallen
into it."
"Quite so, Bunyip," agreed the New Chum pleasantly;
"but this appears to be a private matter between you
two, and we can't very well interfere. Why don't you
make terms?"
"You haul him off, Edmund, and I'll punch him into
a water bag."
"You leave old Mackay's plan to work itself, Edmund,"
cried the Disgrace. "Strategy has worked so far, and
I reckon it's going to make me one of the Chinese
party."
"Let me up, you you "


" No bad words, Bunyip, or I'll tie you down and
leave you. I've got plenty of wire rope."
"Come away, Edmund," the New Chum laughed.
"We are not required here, and they have certain ar-
rangements to make which are of a private and personal
nature."
> "Tell the boys Bunyip sent his love," the Disgrace
cried as they moved off. " He's got a mighty important
engagement on, though, and it's not likely he'll join in
the -expedition to-night."
Bunyip still expostulated, but neither Edmund nor the
New Chum paid any attention, and they returned to
camp and busied themselves attending to their horses,
the New Chum, strangely enough, it seemed to Ed-
mund, also giving some care to the animal which the
Disgrace claimed as his own, while leaving Bunyip Bill's
steed to look after itself with the other horses not re-
quired. Just at supper-time the Disgrace and Bunyip
Bill rolled up and took their places at the long, crudely
constructed table. They said nothing, and looked very
unconcerned about anything.
"Well, you two, have you been visiting the Chinese?"
Uncle Sam asked casually, winking at Mackay, and help-
ing himself to a slice of some edible concoction Damper
Jack had constructed.
"No," answered the Disgrace. "We were only out
for a walk. One gets tired doing nothing on a Sunday.
The rain will come down in buckets to-night."
"Will it really?" said Mackay dryly. "I suppose you
discovered that while out walking?"
"Yes," the Disgrace responded glibly, "and I'm going
with the party to-night instead of Bunyip. He doesn't
want to go because he's got to patch his trousers, and


he's asked me to oblige him by going in his place. Isn't
that so, Bunyip?"
"Yes," spoke Bunyip laconically, reaching for the jam
tin, "but don't worry me with silly questions."
No more was said on the subject by anyone, but all
knew that the Disgrace had again scored. An hour after-
wards, just as the rain burst over the land, the party of
five set out on their secret mission, and a guard of four
other men was entrusted with the watching of the camp.
The expedition rode up the river bank for some miles, as
if bound upon a friendly visit, each man doing his best to
cap the story told by his comrade. The rain poured down
mercilessly, but the spirits of the men rose superior to
discomfort, and with halts only to see that they had not
gone off the track, and to examine footprints in the soft
soil alongside, wherein some Chinamen had floundered
earlier in the day, they forced ahead. At length Little
Peter, who was a most expert bushman, announced that
they had reached the place where their visitors of the
forenoon had struck the river, and that their camp lay
five miles across country, easily rideable, because of the
rocky nature of it.
" Lead on, then, Peter," said the New Chum, who
seemed wonderfully well able to command, and who cer-
tainly did not give Edmund the impression that he was
as new to Australian bush life as his name among his
comrades implied. "We'll ride as close up as possible
and walk the rest."
" It's mighty pleasant riding in the rain," remarked
the Disgrace, in an endeavour to become friendly with
Uncle Sam. "There ain't any pests about, and it's
cool."
"You go and smother yourself," was the uncourteous
(0 204) 8


answer, as Uncle Sam drew his blanket closer around
him.
The Disgrace sighed and fell back alongside Edmund.
"Ain't it funny how some people are never happy unless
they are miserable?" he remarked. "I can't understand
it."
"Neither can I," Edmund said sympathizingly. "I
suppose it's a law of nature."
"What can you know of nature's laws?" asked the
New Chum, riding up. "You are too young to have
had much experience." He spoke harshly.
"I don't know anything," Edmund hastened to reply;
"I was only saying what I knew Mr. Mackay would say
in answer to the same remark."
"Ah well, perhaps you were right in any case!" the
New Chum said, riding on. "Perhaps it is a law of
exacting, inexorable, and immutable nature that some
of us should always be miserable."
" He's a blamed funny fellow that," commented the
Disgrace, as the New Chum passed out of hearing, "but
he's a mighty good fellow, all the same. I reckon he's
got some big trouble on his mind."
"Shut up, you fellows!" cried Little Peter. "The
Chinese camp is just ahead; I see their lights." As he
spoke the glare of a camp fire shone out in front, and
the riders quietly dismounted.


CHAPTER VI
The Advance Begins
NOT a word was spoken, for their plans had been care-
fully arranged. They had come to acquire knowledge,
not to fight, and even the Disgrace was fully alive to
the necessity of their presence being unknown. It had
occurred to Edmund, however, that they had a poor
chance of overhearing any news bearing on the matters
concerning them, because the Chinese would naturally
talk in their own language when among themselves. But
the New Chum was leader, and doubtless the never-erring
Mackay had good reasons for giving him that command.
The rain fell as if from a hosepipe, and occasionally flashes
of lightning lit up the surroundings vividly, and left the
explorers blinded for some seconds. The deep-toned
thunderpeals, too, were awesome to Edmund, and he
marvelled at the utter indifference of his comrades.
Separating a few yards, they approached the fire-lit
zone, picking their footsteps carefully, so as not to sink
in the sodden ground. The horses would stand peacefully
until their return, they knew; and only the duty on hand
occupied their minds. Suddenly they broke into the
cleared ground on which the camp stood, and all lay flat
for a time to take in the various positions. Edmund was
verv much surprised, for the camp was almost exactly the


same as Eldorado Camp and all the other mining camps
Mackay and he had passed during their long ride north.
It was much larger, certainly, but the tents were pitched
in the same manner, and the various arrangements of
bark and anthill erections, serving as stores and cooking
galleys, were almost identical. There were over a score
of tents in the clearing, and beyond lay a somewhat large
river, which seemed to be flowing nearly parallel to the
one on which the white miners' camp was built. The tents
of the Chinese were much smaller than those of the men
of Eldorado Camp, and Edmund knew that each would
shelter several Chinamen, whereas a white man would
have the sole use of his own dwelling place. In the centre
of the clearing a more imposing erection stood out dis-
tinctly in the lightning flashes. It was a large hall-like
structure, built of old tea boxes and packing cases, and
apparently lavishly ornamented with red-and-white paint-
ings descriptive of some weird scene beloved of Chinamen.
It was roofed with galvanized iron, but above its entrance
a tapering tower, made of discarded cases, stretched up-
wards, and round its spiralling sides a dragon-like mon-
strosity of carved and burnt wood clung tenaciously.
Apparently the place was a sacred edifice, and dearly
treasured by the camp members.
"That's the joss-house," whispered the Disgrace in
Edmund's ear. " Likely the beggars are inside now,
sticking pins in Joss for not having helped them to wipe
us out to-day."
Edmund was startled when the Disgrace spoke; he had
not known he was so near. He did not yet know that the
Disgrace could wriggle anywhere as quietly as a snake.
" I can't see any people," he whispered back. "Do you
think they have heard of our coming?"


" Don't know. Maybe they're inventing a new plague
for our benefit now. Hullo! I see a couple of pigtails
sitting by that fire. Come on, Edmund, we'll go and
investigate ourselves; the others can act on their own."
Nothing loath, Edmund crawled after the Disgrace, and
soon gained the protecting shadows of the joss-house.
No sound came from within, and it was therefore evident
that no prayer meeting was being held inside at the mo-
ment. There were no lights in any of the tents, and the
silence was as suspicious as it must have been to the
Chinamen in the other camp. The prowlers crawled up
to a tent; it was open, but the odour so characteristic of
the presence of Celestials pervaded the atmosphere.
"There ain't any Chinkies here," remarked the Disgrace
quite audibly. " I reckon we'd better get the New Chum,
and tell him we're tricked too."
" Shut up, you all-fired fool!" came a voice near them.
"Get up to the fire!"
"That was Little Peter," whispered the Disgrace.
"He's on the same racket as we are. Come on!"
Another tent was visited, but no signs of life were found
within. The Disgrace wanted to strike a match, but
Edmund wouldn't hear of the proposal, and they felt
round the tent instead, expecting every moment to run
their hands across a sleeping Chinaman, or be grasped
in the angry clutches of one. But the camp was deserted
beyond doubt, even as their own had been, and the lads
were puzzled beyond measure. If the Chinamen were
hiding near, why didn't they show themselves now? They
could gain nothing by lurking in the darkness when only
five men were their invaders.
At length the two adventurers found themselves near
the camp fire, and a thrill permeated Edmund's being.


Two pigtailed men were sitting by the fire engaged in
conversation, a bark roof, supported on four corner poles,
shielding them from the rain. Slowly, quietly, and with
great care the two lads crawled nearer until they were
directly behind the two Chinamen, and could hear every
word they said. Yes, hear, but not understand; for the
men rattled on in a jargon of sound utterly meaning-
less to either Edmund or the Disgrace. They sipped
tea as they spoke, and did not seem to mind the storm
outside. Clearly they were unconscious of the fact that
those whom they had reason to fear were near, but
from the manner in which they sometimes paused in
their talk, and assumed a listening attitude, Edmund
fancied that they were expecting visitors, either friendly
or otherwise. For over half an hour the men by the
fire spoke interestedly on some subject, and all the
time the two lads lay just beyond the illumination of
the flickering flashes of the burning timber. They were
doing no good, they knew; but the signal to retire had
not been given, and they were in hopes that something
would yet transpire which would render their uncom-
fortable wait not altogether without good results. They
knew that their own comrades were not far away, and
they wondered why the camp was deserted, except for
the garrulous talkers by the fire.
"What about rushing the beggars and tying them
together by their pigtails?" suggested the Disgrace in a
whisper to Edmund.
"What would be the use?" asked the latter. "We
couldn't make them tell us anything, and we should merely
have given them the knowledge that we were here. I
wonder where the others are?"
"Hullo, the Chinkies hear something•' interrupted the


Disgrace. " See, they have risen to their feet, and they're
not frightened. Maybe it's their mates only getting in
from their trip down our way."
" No, it's only two riders," said Edmund. " I hear
their horses' feet in the soft ground. Who can they
be?"
"Jupiter! It's white men," exclaimed the Disgrace.
" Look at them. They're about as hard looking a couple
as I know; that fellow on the left could act as sandpaper
to Ginger Bob."
"Shut up!" growled a voice from the darkness, and
the Disgrace said no more. Little Peter, at any rate,
was keeping them well in touch.
The riders came forward, and with a cheery " Good
night" to the Chinamen, dismounted and hitched their
steeds to the poles of the erection. The Chinamen grinned
a reply and pointed to the old tea cases by the fire as
seats. Edmund could hardly repress a cry as he saw
the men's faces clearly in the firelight. The visitors were
the two officers of the Vulture whom he had last seen in
London.
"Well, Ah Sin," said one of the men, addressing one
of the Chinamen, "and how do you like this part of
the world? I don't suppose you'd care to go back to
Peking now?"
"My wold, you no catchy Ah Sin back dele again,"
the Chinaman laughed. " Austlalia goody nuffy fo' me,
you bet. Got any cigalettes?"
"Yes, thousands of them, and we've got more than
cigarettes too. We've a hundred yellow blackbirds this
time and they're all landed."
"Wha' you gety outy Quong Lee, and wha' you do
wi' him?" asked the other Celestial, handing tiny cups


of tea to the white men. "You no' speaky muchy muchy
to-night, Calson."
" Quong Lee was a failure, Wun Lung," replied the
man addressed. "He wouldn't tell a word and well
we left him in disgust somewhere out in the bush.
I hope he got drowned in a creek, or that some of his
own special friends among you fellows got him."
"Then you no' know whele the tleasule is?" said Ah
Sin, lighting a cigarette with evident relish.
"Not any more than we knew before," said Carson.
"Isn't that about it, Thomas?"
" Except that Messrs. Wun Lung, Ah Sin, and Com-
pany, have now got to pay us the duty on the new im-
portations," laughed Thomas. "At ten pound a head,
as per list, that works out at a thousand pounds. You
might give us one of your patent cheques for that amount,
Wun Lung, and we'll wish you good night, for this isn't
exactly a health resort for us, you must know."
"You give youl wold you smuggled in a hundled men?"
said Wun Lung, producing a document from some recess
in his garments.
" Here is the bill of lading from the shippers, anyhow,
and you can satisfy yourselves. We're in a hurry to get
on the track of those jewels."
Wun Lung glanced over the paper Carson handed him,
bending over the flames the better to do so. He handed
it to Ah Sin without a word when he had finished, and
when that individual had grunted approval of the con-
tents, Wun Lung took it back and placed it among the
burning logs.
"Here, you yellow sinner, don't burn that!" cried
Thomas. "That's our inventory."
"No mole use between gentlemen," replied the China-


man. "We taky youl wold an' payee allee samee. Hele
is youl cheque; it will be changed fo' gold, ol Bank of
England notes in Shanghai, as you know." Wun Lung
handed Thomas an oblong sheet of paper on which some
Chinese characters were inscribed. He had added some
symbols to the document before handing it over, but
neither Carson nor Thomas even looked at the thing.
Evidently they knew that in business transactions a
Chinaman's word was as good as an Act of Parliament.
"Thanks, gentlemen!" said Thomas. "Itis a pleasure
to deal with you, and I hope you will make full profit out
of the shipment. I must say some of them didn't look
like as if they were worth the risk."
"Oh, you leave that to us! Some no pay, vely good,
they wolk it off in time. No' much gold hele, but China-
men know how to get all, an' we get oul money befo'
they leave."
"Yes, I suppose so," said Carson. "It would cost
them a hundred pounds to come to the country in the
ordinary way, and then they would have to run their
chances of finding lucrative employment. If I were a
Chinaman myself I should certainly become a contributor
to your agency. I needn't ask, I suppose, what your
charges are?"
Both Chinamen smiled. "You liky wolk, we liky
wolk," Ah Sin said. "You no liky pay say you no'
liky. We honest men, an' deal squale wi' old fiends.
No liky they ask too many questions, though."
"We beg pardon," said Thomas. "We didn't mean
to probe into your affairs; but now that the business
part is settled to date, what about the other business?
Have you any knowledge?"
" Bymbye we'll know evelyting," replied Wun Lung


suavely. " Plenty time; no hully; we know the tings
all likely on this island somewhele, and we'll find out
in good time."
"Yes, yes, that's all right in a way," said Carson, "but
where do we come in? We're a bit interested in the busi-
ness, you know, and without our help—well—you know
what would happen?"
"Oh yes, we vely muchy awake to all that!" answered
Ah Sin, smiling as only a Chinaman could. " But we
wolk togedel an' always be good fiends."
"All right, gentlemen, we'll get out of here then,"
spoke Carson. "We don't particularly desire your com-
patriots to find us here, for we know some of their delight-
ful little ways of torturing their particular friends."
" Don't hully, fiends," smiled Ah Sin. " Ou' people will
no' come back long time. They away plospecting to-day."
"That won't wash, Ah Sin," laughed Thomas. "Who
could go prospecting in this weather? Why, all the creeks
are in flood, and you could not get down to the gold."
"Oh, they no' look fo' gold to-day," Ah Sin grinned
pleasantly. "They away to wipe out some white fellows
an' plospect in theil camp when they killy all."
"What!" cried Carson. "White men camped here?
Who are they, and what do they know of our affairs?"
He sprang to his feet in great excitement, but Thomas
pulled him down again.
" Wha' fo' you wolly?" asked Wun Lung in some sur-
prise. " Wha' mattel who white fellows be, ol wha' they
know of anyting? They all dead now. Ghosts no halm
anyone."
Carson laughed. " I forgot," he said, " that we weren't
dealing with apprentices at the killing game. I actually
feared, for the moment, that some white fellows had got


wind of the business and might make trouble. Of course
it doesn't matter about them in the slightest, for Messrs.
Ah Sin and Co. know how to deal with people who inter-
fere with them."
"My wold, we do," both Chinamen laughed; and there
was something to the unseen listeners horribly suggestive
in their manner of expression. But the hint was also of
significance to both Carson and Thomas, and they were
not slow to realize its meaning, although they appeared
only to see a good joke in the words.
"Ah well," said Thomas, " we'll get away now! We're
not just so smart at dodging trees on horseback as we are
at some other things, and it will take us until daylight
to get down to the coast. You'll find the horses in the
usual place, and we'll try to run in another hundred of
contraband on our next trip."
"And meantime attend in your own way to any inter-
fering white fellows who may come along," added Carson.
"I half expected that that silly old bungler, Mackay,
would have got his nose in before this. The next time
there will be no sentimental Quong Lee to save his car-
cass."
"No," the Chinamen agreed. "We'll killy all. Lot
people bettel dead." They spoke in unison; their thoughts
were alike.
The two white men laughed again and rose to their feet.
"Any special message to your friends in China?" Car-
son asked as they walked to their horses. "We'll be there
very soon, you know."
"You gety all on youl cheque," Ah Sin replied. " Goo'
ni'!"
"Good night!" cried the others, riding off into the
drenching darkness.


For a few minutes the Chinamen smoked in silence,
gazing dreamily into the fire. The witnesses were silent
too; each had his own thoughts, and these were as wild as
any dream. Suddenly both Chinamen looked up. Their
faces were almost identical, and the expression of guile-
less simplicity on each rendered the likeness even more
striking.
" Fools!" ejaculated Ah Sin.
" Fools!" exclaimed Wun Lung at the same moment.
" They killy Quong Lee!" said Ah Sin.
"They killy Quong Lee!" spoke Wun Lung, and again
their words were simultaneously uttered.
Another period of silence followed, during which they
smoked complacently.
" No mole use fo' them," Ah Sin jerked out abruptly,
nodding down the river.
"We killy them next tlip," his comrade responded.
Truly they were a pair of innocents. They talked on
for some time in Chinese, and the Disgrace muttered
his disgust at their so doing in language eloquent and
terse. Finally the Chinamen arose, and, lighting a lamp,
proceeded to the joss-house. Next minute their voices
were heard in prayer, for they were religious men in their
own way.
" Now's our chance," muttered the Disgrace. " Come
along, Edmund, and we'll loot the camp."
" No you won't," spoke the New Chum behind them.
"You'll make tracks back to our own camp as fast as
you can ride. You'll get all the excitement you want
before you have time to acquire much more sense."
"Then let me ride after those two beggars who have
gone down the creek."
" Uncle Sam and Little Peter are following them."


" Oh, I'm out of the fun again! Surely we can go in
and steal a joss or two, then, New Chum? Edmund has
never seen a joss, and "
"Not another word," interrupted the New Chum
sternly. "You would ruin everything in a second. Get
over to the horses."
The Disgrace went, and soon the three were galloping
back to their own creek over their old tracks. They could
not see them, but the horses knew, and they had free rein.
About midnight they rode into Eldorado Camp, where
they found their comrades keeping careful guard, but
with all lights out. The New Chum told the story of
their adventures briefly, adding that he had also more to
say if, after discussion, Mackay thought it bearing on
the case. Edmund was bursting with eagerness to tell
of his discoveries, and soon he got the chance, and in-
formed Mackay that the two men whom they had seen
in London in connection with the Vulture , who had left
Quong Lee for dead, and who had been seen that night,
were the same, and that he had heard them practically
admit that they were actually afraid of him.
Here Mackay stopped him. "Go slower, laddie," he
said. "We all canna follow the drift o' things as quick
as you can speak. I gather that you mean to say that
the Vulture was no dream o' mine?"
"No," broke in Edmund impetuously. "You must
have been actually on board the boat, as you have so often
told me. And they struck you down. To-night we heard
that but for the intervention of Quong Lee they would
have killed you at the time."
"But why?" asked Ignorant Tommy.
"Because he had discovered the secret, of course," put
in the Disgrace. " The ship was a smuggler, and was


landing Chinamen on Australian territory by contract with
our old yellowskins of to-night, at so much per head.
It's as plain as Ginger Bob's hair. Old Ah Sin and Wun
Lung, whom the New Chum wouldn't allow Edmund and
me to go for, pay them for each Chinkie landed, and then
make the beggars work for them until they have squared
themselves. Of course they run in opium too, and I
reckon that's not all they do."
"No," said the New Chum. "They were also con-
cerned in the stealing of the Imperial Chinese jewels we
have heard so much of lately. They are in league with
one of the most powerful secret societies of China."
" Hold hard, New Chum," cried the Disgrace, " who
told you all that? I reckon we were closer to the beg-
gars than any of the others, and we never heard that
story."
"You did hear it," said the New Chum, " but probably
you didn't understand it. The two Chinamen are mem-
bers of that society, and they were talking of the stolen
jewels when we arrived. I have a slight knowledge of the
dialect in which they were speaking. I put in some time
in China, you know."
" I guessed that long ago," cried Ginger Bob. "Tell
us, New Chum. We've got into the middle of some
mystery, and I reckon we'll see it through. Tell us all
you know, or guess."
" I would rather talk it over with Mr. Mackay first."
"No," said Mackay; "tell everything right out. The
boys here have a wonderful amount o' common sense,
that most uncommon and most valuable of all senses,
an' they are our comrades, come good or ill."
"Good old Mackay!" shouted Bunyip Bill. "He's
straight clean through."


"Roll up for hot coffee," cried Damper Jack, "and
hang- the Chinamen!"
" What about Uncle Sam and Little Peter?" asked the
Doctor " Shouldn't some of us go out after them?"
" No," said Ignorant Tommy. "They are more than a
match for any half-dozen men outside this camp, and they
would feel insulted if we showed we were anxious about
them."
" Come on with your yarn, New Chum," spoke Mackay.
"We'll hear it and drink Damper Jack's coffee at the
same time. lam beginning to think I could make a vera
good guess what it is myself."
"And if you can talk Chinese," added Ignorant Tommy,
"you are about the most valuable man in the camp;
although why you never before informed us of your
abilities in that direction is a trifle perplexing to
me.
" Hit Ignorant Tommy on the head, somebody," cried
Ginger Bob. "We want to hear the New Chum before
daylight."
"I really haven't much to say that some of you do
not already know," said the New Chum deprecatingly.
"From the conversation of the two Chinamen to-night,
I learned that some British adventurers, acting in co-
operation with the mysterious Chinese society known as
the Lotus-flower Brotherhood, stole some extremely im-
portant jewels, without which the ceremonies attached to
the new Emperor's coronation, or some other function,
cannot go on. I gathered, also, that the Chinese Govern-
ment would give almost any money to have these restored,
and that it was with the intention of replacing them, when
the price offered for their return became large enough,
that the thieves stole them."


" You didn't hear all that to-night, I'll bet, New Chum,"
broke in the Disgrace in surprise.
" I am filling in details which were either known or
obvious to me," the New Chum said. " But please don't
interrupt until I get finished."
" If he does, he'll want no more tucker for a long time,"
put in Ginger Bob, moving up beside the Disgrace.
"Go on, New Chum," said Mackay. "The baubles
were stolen and brought down to Australia in the Chinese-
running ship. I accidentally ran across that vera steamer,
an' got knocked on the head, as you all know. What
comes next, New Chum? I can see you are keeping back
the sensational bit."
" And why don't the people of that mysterious ship give
back the jewels now, and get the reward offered by the
Chinese Government?" asked the Doctor.
Every man turned as he spoke, for he was not given
to an extravagant use of words, although, as Damper
Jack often remarked, "he was mighty good at cutting
chunks out of a fellow".
" They would be only too glad to restore the valuables,
if they could," the New Chum said; "but they cannot.
The jewels have been stolen from them."
" Don't stop, New Chum," implored Bunyip Bill. "The
story is getting O.K. now, I reckon. What happens after
that?"
"To be continued in our next," laughed Ignorant
Tommy. "You've been told everything up to date, and
we have to take the story up now and finish it. We'll
join in the hunt for the missing trinkets, and give them
back, if we find them, to the sorrowing Chinese autho-
rities, receiving in exchange the thanks of over four
hundred million fellow men, and the Order of the Pick


and Shovel, or perhaps that of the Yellow Pyjamas, from
the Emperor. Henceforth we shall be actors in a drama,
boys, and "
" Puncture him, Dandy Charlie; you're nearest," Damper
Jack sang out. "That's right; I reckon we've no time
for long-winded speechifiers in this camp."
"Is that all you know, New Chum?" Mackay asked,
ignoring Ignorant Tommy's appeal for help.
"Yes, except that the treasure has not been taken away
from that mist-shrouded island you told us about. Evi-
dently that is where the smuggled Chinamen are landed,
and a great number are there now, looking for the
treasure."
"Oh! Then the Chinamen themselves don't know
where it is now?" put in the Doctor.
"It seems not," the New Chum answered. "It must
have been stolen yet again, from what I gathered."
" And Quong Lee knows the secret," said Edmund.
"We heard the white men of the Vulture say that they
couldn't make him tell a word. They added that they
had left him somewhere out in the bush, but they didn't
tell they had fired six bullets into him."
" Boys, this is fine!" spoke Melbourne Mike. " We've
struck something good, and we'll have our portraits in the
Australasian , and maybe the Bulletin , some day."
" You can't," said Damper Jack. " You've got nothing
wrong about you that needs any patent pills to cure. I'm
the only man who will be famous, because some fellow
will stick my old face in the papers as the man who slung
about his baking powder."
"True, Damper Jack," laughed Mackay. "Some men
were born great; others, such as good camp cooks, have
greatness thrust upon them. But we'll no' worry about
(0 204)


our future fame in the meantime, nor, if my advice is
taken, will we fash ourselves with the Chinese business.
My young friend and I came out here expressly to look
up that hidden island in the Gulf, and work its auriferous
reefs. We werena vera sure o' its existence at first, but
now we know; and as it will pay you all better than the
sands o' these creeks, I now give you the chance to join
us. You canna work here in peace any longer any-
way."
"Good old Mac!" shouted Ginger Bob in delight. "I
might have known he wouldn't try to dodge trouble if
there were any chance of fun."
"To put the matter briefly and concisely, Mackay,"
observed Ignorant Tommy, now free of Dandy Charlie,
"you invite us, the men of Eldorado Camp, to take part
in the exploitation of a rich reef you have discovered on
some mysterious island. We are supposed to know, how-
ever, that there are complications which might be—er—
rather unpleasant."
" Knock him down again, Charlie," sang out Ginger
Bob. "What do we care for pigtails or sailor bush-
rangers."
"Excuse me, Ginger, you are labouring under a mis-
apprehension, I think," said Ignorant Tommy. "I am
not raising objections, I am merely trying to get Mackay's
ideas."
"An' these are, that we go and work that reef —mine
by right o' discovery. We have nothing to do with affairs
which do not affect our peaceful operations, but if anyone
interferes with us, of course we'll defend our rights as
law-abiding citizens o' the great Australian Common-
wealth."
" Hear, hear!" cried Fat Herman, who had been sleep-


ing under the table for some time. " Dat vas von state-
ment after mine own heart. Let us go und look for de
Chinese treasure, und if people vill interfere mit us, fy
den, shoot dem."
''You're making a mistake, my lad, if you think I said
words to that effect," said Mackay with a grin, "but
I'll excuse you, seeing that I ken we're bound to have
trouble."
" I wish we hadn't let Quong Lee get away," mused
Edmund. "He must know "
"Laddie, laddie!" exclaimed Mackay, "are you actu-
ally letting your mind dwell on the treasure-hunt idea
too? It's the gold reef we're after, not gold buttons."
" I beg pardon, sir. If you have forgiven the men who
clubbed you on the Vulture , of course I must do so too;
but I feel I should like to get even with them."
The Scot walked over and grasped Edmund's hand.
"Thanks, mate," he said. "I havena' forgiven them,
but the squaring o' that account is a private matter that
concerns only the principals. In the eyes o' the law
we're honest gold miners, and as such we must remain.
Strategy, laddie, is far more effective than force o'
numbers."
" I back Mackay's proposal," cried the Disgrace. " I
don't know what it is, but it's good enough for me."
"Blow you, Disgrace, we all back it!" said Bunyip
Bill. "What does it matter what it is?"
" I'm beat if I can see what all the talky-talky is about,"
chimed in Damper Jack. "We're going to get these
Chinese gemstones, or whatever they are, and there's an
end to the matter. While fossicking around for them,
we'll work Mackay's reef, and be millionaires in no time.
I vote for anything old Mac says every time."


"But he didn't say that," insisted Ignorant Tommy
« He said "
"Well, who cares what he said, old knowledge-heap,"
demanded Ginger Bob. "Ain't we, his mates, to back
him?"
"We'll strike camp at daylight," said Mackay tactfully,
"an' work our way slowly to the coast."
"And as we'll likely have our work cut out for to-
morrow," the Doctor added, "those who can be spared
had better turn in. They'll have to stand guard to-morrow
night."
"Then everything is settled, boys?" enquired Ignorant
Tommy. "The whole camp agrees to clear out at day-
light?"
"We can't pack up very well now, can we?" Dandy
Charlie growled. "Some people are always in a hurry,
and I reckon it's only a fair thing that we wait till Little
Peter and Uncle Sam show up."
" Hurrah for the Chinese treasure, Mackay's gold reef,
and the sailor bushrangers!" cried Melbourne Mike. "I
believe we'll capture their ship, and be bold, bad pirates
ourselves."
" First we've got to find that island," said Mackay
dryly. "After we are on its shores we'll know better
what to do. Turn in now, all who can."
Five minutes later the camp, excepting those on guard
in the shelter of the cooking galley, was asleep. Mackay
occupied Uncle Sam's tent, and Edmund shared the Dis-
grace's. All were light-hearted and full of hopes, and not
even the tropical rain could damp their ardour.
At sunrise, as usual, the rain ceased, and the men turned
out with alacrity to the breakfast the cook had already
prepared. Damper Jack seemed to be tireless, and he


certainly was wonderfully resourceful in the art of pro-
viding - an appetizing - meal out of very little.
The men were now anxious about Uncle Sam and Little
Peter, but these individuals rode into camp before break-
fast was over, and, while making - up for lost time at the
table, gave their news.
" We followed our men until about an hour before sun-
rise," Uncle Sam said, "and I can tell you, boys, it was
hard work keeping behind them. They couldn't ride for
split peas, and they tacked all over the country as if they
were navigating a tub at sea. We were often near enough
to hear them talking, but all they were ever worried about,
so far as we heard, was whether or not they would be in
time for lunch somewhere. We left them at the spot
where our creek runs into the Chinamen's. They took
to the water and swam to the opposite bank, and, know-
ing we could pick up their tracks at any time, we turned
ap our own creek, and here we are."
" And here ye'll no' be vera long," said Mackay. " We're
breaking up the camp, and I've little doubt that if you put
us on to these gentlemen's tracks we'll get to where we
want to go much easier and sooner than we could with-
out their guidance. But Ignorant Tommy can tell you
everything while the rest o' us are packing up."
In about two hours Eldorado Camp was no more.
Everything of value, or of use, was packed upon the
horses, and a fire made short work of the camp accumu-
lations left. Following Uncle Sam and Little Peter, the
party made their way down the creek on foot, leading
the horses by their bridles. At noon they reached the
junction of the creeks, and a halt was called, while Damper
Jack, assisted by Dandy Charlie, prepared some lunch.
The party had followed the still traceable tracks of the


Chinamen all the way. These had not been unobserved
by Little Peter and Uncle Sam on their morning journey,
but the significance had only now become apparent. The
Chinese had crossed the water too, and were therefore,
with the two white renegades, following a track, more or
less defined, which must lead to some place unknown to
the members of Eldorado Camp.
After lunch the river was crossed safely, both horses
and men swimming with the current until its circling
eddies carried them to the far bank. Those who had
crossed previously had landed at almost exactly the same
place, as was shown by their tracks, easily discernible to
even Fat Herman, the man least skilled in bush craft.
"Go slow now, lads," Mackay said. "We may walk
into a hornets' nest at any moment; for, by the look o' the
country, I ken we're coming near the shores o' the Gulf."
" Why, of course we are," Ignorant Tommy replied.
"We know this bit of country well; we often come down
here on Sundays to hunt wild pigs. We are only about
fifteen miles from the Gulf shores now."
Mackay seemed somewhat surprised at his comrade's
knowledge of his whereabouts; that part of the world
was not yet officially surveyed, and gold seekers, when
once camped on payable claims, did not usually wander
far from them. He said nothing, however, and the party
went ahead, taking every precaution against suddenly
running into a camp of Chinamen. The land was now
flat, and but sparsely clad with timber. By the river's
bank the ground was hard, but only a few yards off both
men and horses would have sunk over the knees. The
presence of evil-smelling vegetation, too, showed that
they had entered the fever-infested coastal fringe, and,
if more proof were needed, it was readily found in the


water. The river was still a swiftly flowing - stream, but
its impetuous nature had changed into one of sullenness;
it was now on the sea level, and had a certain dignity to
maintain. But stronger proof still was evident—the alli-
gator had taken the place of the crocodile—sure sign that
the salt-water zone had been reached. At five in the
afternoon Mackay called a halt.
"We had better camp here to-night, boys, for the rain
will be on at sundown," he said. "We have just time to
erect some sort of shelter, and maybe we'll send scouts
ahead after dark to spy out the land."
By this time all had grown to accept Mackay's words as
final; so, in a few minutes, some of the men had unloaded
the horses, and others had built a hut of branches and
swung a large tent fly underneath. Damper Jack, mean-
while, as befitting a good camp cook, attended strictly to
his own business, and soon had a fire blazing behind some
anthills. The Doctor had shot a scrub turkey, and Little
Peter had added half a dozen squatter pigeons to the
larder during the afternoon; and Jack, as soon as he
had the necessary hot ashes ready, buried them therein
to be cooked. No time was lost, and half an hour after
sundown the adventurers squatted on the floor of their
shelter and partook of the supper the Gulf country and
an excellent cook had provided for them. No thought
had they of danger, nor would they have acted differently
although they had known a hostile camp was near them.
They were hungry men, and their dinner was the chief
subject of importance just then. The rain had started,
as they knew it would, at sundown, but under their
protecting fly, in front of their blazing fire, heaped high
so that the deluge might not drown it out, they sat
and talked, and quarrelled, and sang. But Mackay was


not the man to neglect ordinary precaution, and after
the talk had spent itself, he suggested that outposts
be thrown out.
"The dogs will warn us of any night visitors," he said,
" but their warning might not give us much time to pre-
pare. I propose, therefore, that those who slept last night
stand guard all round the camp to-night."
"And Edmund and I will go together," cried the Dis-
grace. "We want to distinguish ourselves."
" And if I thought there were any chances of your doing
that," said Mackay, "I should order you to turn in now.
But I don't expect Chinamen would have the nerve to rush
us in the darkness o' a night like this, so we'll no' be
drastic with you. You two can therefore go out about
two hundred yards to the north and do sentry work for
three hours, when I will relieve you myself. The rest o'
you fellows can relieve each other on the east and west
until morning."
Shortly after, the men on duty walked out into the
rainy darkness in pairs. They knew what was expected
of them, and their loaded rifles would do service if
called upon. Edmund and the Disgrace threw empty
flour sacks over their heads and went out also. Theirs
was the position from which danger was likeliest, but
well they knew that Mackay did not anticipate any
trouble during their period of watch or they would not
have been sent. The rain continued to fall, and the
smell of the salt sea was in the air.


CHAPTER VII
The Adventures of a Night
EDMUND and his comrade in a way were lucky. A large
wild fig tree offered them shelter from the rain under
its great spreading branches, about two hundred yards
out from the camp. The pad the party had been follow-
ing passed underneath the tree, and any night visitors
coming from the supposed position of the Chinese camp
would have to pass along it or flounder through the
dense patches of spear grass and soft ground that
flanked the narrow winding way.
" I don't reckon we'll have the luck to catch any
Chinkie," the Disgrace remarked, lighting a match to
show them their immediate surroundings, "but all the
same we'll set our trap. Maybe we'll get something."
He stretched a rope across the track about a foot above
the ground, and Edmund measured off and marked the
place where a man's head should be if he tripped over
the rope. He wished to be sure, for the night was so
dark he could not depend upon seeing should occasion
arise.
"We are fairly comfortable here," he said, when all
their preparations were complete, "but we must take care
that we do not fall asleep. It would never do if Mackay
found us sleeping when he came to relieve us."


"We won't sleep, Edmund," the Disgrace interrupted,
"so you needn't worry about that. I'll tell you how to
prospect for gold, copper, silver, wolfram, and opals,
which are all I know anything about, and you can tell
me of the old country and of the camps there."
But the Disgrace found that he couldn't tell Edmund
much that he didn't already know. Mackay had been
before him, and Edmund's knowledge of mineralogy
had been imparted to him in King's College, London,
whereas the Disgrace's had been acquired haphazardly.
He was greatly interested, however, in the tale his com-
rade told of the old country, and his amazement was
unbounded when he learned that London was about ten
times the size of Sydney or Melbourne. The knowledge,
too, that the people spoke English, the same language
that Australians used, and without any foreign accent, was
surprising indeed, and at length the Disgrace announced
that he would go and see the "poor old place" for him-
self when his funds allowed, if Edmund would return
with him.
They talked on for over an hour, squatting under the
sheltering big-leaved branches of the fig tree, and a few
feet away the earth was soaked with the tropical rains.
They could not see each other, and only the sound of
their voices gave them any indication of their prox-
imity.
"Well, Edmund," remarked the Disgrace, after a long
discussion on the advantages of an adventurer's life, " I
tell you, and you may believe me, that the age when
a fellow like you or me could get any fun out of life
is past. There are too many Mackays and Ignorant
Tommies knocking about now, and they have killed all
that sort of thing. They know too much. How their


brains carry alt the knowledge beats me to know, but
they are always right, and therefore all our chances are
of no use to us."
"Why?" Edmund asked. "Are we not enjoying our-
selves now? And is their knowledge not valuable to us
in more ways than one?"
"You're up the wrong tree, mate," interrupted the
Disgrace. "I was not saying anything against their
knowledge, and I know we'll be the gainers by it. I
was merely telling you that because of their blamed
stuffed-full brain boxes, we'll get no chance of fun or
adventure, and we might as well be in London dodging
thieves and policemen and flying machines and tubes."
(The Disgrace's ideas of London were slightly mixed.)
"Now, if Mackay didn't know so much we should be
having a great time. Instead of squatting here we
should be somewhere near that mob of Chinamen we've
been tracking all day, and playing all sorts of tricks
on them. Who knows but that we might be getting a
lot more information about that hidden island . But
there's no use talking; Mackay has said we must wait
here until relieved, and we'll have to wait. I suppose
he thinks we'll get killed if left to act on our own.
No, Edmund, we're living in the wrong time. Ten or
twenty years ago we could have had plenty of fun on
the Palmer River, but people have got too tame since
then."
"I think you take too gloomy a view of life," said
Edmund, laughing; "you are a pessimist."
"A pessimist!" exclaimed the Disgrace. "Not likely.
I'm an Australian, born in Victoria."
"Yes, I know," Edmund said hurriedly. "I meant
to say your ideas were original "


"Biow me, but I'll bet I hear something coming!
Maybe I was wrong after all."
"Yes, I hear something too," said Edmund. "Don't
utter a sound and we'll soon know what it is, and all
about it."
"My word, we will," muttered the Disgrace. "Be
ready to grip one of them by the throat when he falls."
Evidently he had little doubt as to the nature of the
cause of the sounds they heard.
Certainly some living creatures were approaching; their
advance was heralded by the creaking twigs and grasses
which they crushed under foot on the hard pad. The lads
peered through the darkness and a flash of lightning soon
enabled them to see the nature of the visitors. They were
two Chinamen.
"Our luck is in after all," chuckled the Disgrace.
"When they trip over the rope, Edmund, you take
charge of the fellow on this side and twist your hand-
kerchief round his greasy old throat before he can get
up. Don't be afraid of hurting him. A Chinkie doesn't
feel anything, and that's their own way of working any-
how. I'll handle the other beggar, and they'll never know
what went for them. Do you follow me?"
" Rather. We'll not speak, and perhaps they'll think it
was some of their own people who attacked them."
"More likely they'll think it was the lightning." The
Disgrace grinned.
" I hope old Mackay doesn't turn up before we're
finished. Are you all ready? Not another word then."
The youthful adventurers crouched low among the
scrub, ready to spring out at the proper moment.
Their nerves tingled, but they were not unduly excited.
The Disgrace saw only some fun in the coming struggle,


and as he fancied himself a match for most white men,
he scorned any danger from a Chinkie. Edmund was
more seriously minded. He did not overrate his own
powers, and he had never tried his strength in actual
combat with that of any man. But Mackay's schooling
had been wonderfully effective. He was cool and calcu-
lative. He knew that the night prowlers were on no
good errand, and that it was his duty to do his best to
stop them, and there the matter ended with him. He
would do his duty, and he hoped the results would be
pleasing to Mackay.
On came the Celestials. They were strangely silent,
but probably they could now see the dull, red glow of
the camp fire's dying embers. They were running, as
was usual with their kind when on a journey. They
came abreast of the watchers, and then, simultaneously,
they tripped over the rope and fell headlong to the ground.
Before they could move to regain their feet, two athletic
furies were upon them, pinning them down, and almost
instantly their throats were compressed in a manner well
known among the Chinese and other Orientals. Both
men struggled violently for a few seconds, and the indi-
vidual upon whom the Disgrace was squatting uttered a
torrent of language which sounded somewhat familiar to
the lads. The words died away in a gurgle, however;
the Disgrace wasn't taking useless risks, and very soon
the two youths were sitting astride two unconscious
specimens of the human race.
" We've won the first trick, Edmund," laughed the
Disgrace, untwisting the piece of old linen, which served
him for a handkerchief, from his victim's neck. " What
shall we do with the beggars?"
"It is a pity we hadn't pigtails," spoke Edmund.


"We could then take their clothes and go and see the
Chinamen at home. These fellows are both clean-shaven,
and a touch of dirt in our eyes would make them appear
to be slanted as much as theirs. We might easily escape
detection."
"By gosh, old man, you've struck the very idea!"
cried the Disgrace. " We'll make ourselves up to re-
present these fellows, and go exploring in the Chinese
camp. And not a deserted camp, but right where they
are all gathered straight from China, wherever that is.
I'm not strong on geology."
"Geography, you mean," Edmund corrected. "We'll
go, Disgrace, but we must first tell Mackay. He can
reason out things better than we can."
"Tell Mackay!" exclaimed the Disgrace. "Then it's
all up. He wouldn't hear of it. He's too cautious; he
would be afraid of the risk."
"Well, I cannot go without his consent, Disgrace.
I don't think, however, you know Mackay as well as
I do. He is not really afraid of anything. He is a
Scotsman, and naturally thinks before he acts. He will
not object to our visiting the Chinese, if we can prove
that any good might be derived. Hullo! my man's pig-
tail is only tied on; it has come off in my hand."
"Jumping beans and centipedes! I've got my man's
too! Their pigtails have only been dummies!" ex-
claimed the Disgrace. "They are frauds, Edmund;
they're not Chinkies. They are white men, the same
as we are."
He held aloft the queue of the man upon whom he was
sitting. It had come off with a sharp pull, and clearly
had only been tied on very indifferently. Edmund's
only reply was to turn his man over upon his back.


Then he lit a match and examined his face closely.
There was no doubt about it. He was a white man
masquerading as a Chinaman, as was also his comrade;
but what their purpose was in stealing up upon the
honest miners in the middle of the night was more than
the boys could guess.
"This is where we need Mackay," said Edmund. "He
could reason out the meaning of all this."
" Blamed little reasoning needed," replied the Disgrace.
"They heard the plague story, and didn't believe it, and
were coming back to see for themselves. I suspect they
belong to the bushranging gang we've heard so much
about, and if they are not really in league with the yellow-
skins, they want to get them blamed for anything they
may do."
" I think they belong to that mysterious ship Mackay
and I both know, and have been sent back to spy upon
our camp by the men we saw when spying upon the
abandoned Chinese camp," Edmund said. "The bush-
ranging stories are all bosh, and these renegade white
men, the stealers of the treasure the New Chum knows
so much about, are working with the Chinamen. Why,
haven't we heard already that so much per head is paid
to the people of the Vulture for landing the Chinamen?"
" I haven't the brains, nor the time, nor the desire to
work out all your conundrums in the meantime," the
Disgrace answered. "All I know is that we've caught
two beggars trying to spy upon our camp, and I pro-
pose that we turn the tables now, and take their portable
pigtails and their clothes, and go along to see what the
Chinkies are doing."
"But what about these men? We can't leave them
there.''


"Oh yes, we can! We'll tie them up so that they can't
even wink, and then I'll run back to camp and tell Bunyip
Bill the whole story. He won't give us away."
" I don't like the idea of doing anything without Mr.
Mackay knowing all about it," said Edmund hesitatingly.
" I think we should tell him first."
" Hullo, here he comes now! I hear a man coming
out from the camp. Quick, Edmund! Let us haul these
beggars into the scrub before he sees them, and we'll
explain later that we're not helpless, innocent little
lambs."
In less than a minute the two unconscious men
were pulled off the track and bound securely to the
trunk of the big, wild fig tree with the rope which had
brought about their downfall. By this time the man
coming from the camp was almost abreast of them, and
Edmund was just about to call out, when the Disgrace's
hand touched his warningly, and he remained silent.
The next flash of lightning showed the reason of the
Disgrace's signal. The man was a powerfully built
Chinaman, adorned with an extra long pigtail, and
dressed in the loosely fitting garments affected by the
Chinese in their own country. The lads were on the point
of leaping upon him, when he halted. They could make
out his form, for their eyes had now become accustomed
to the darkness.
" It's Mackay," whispered Edmund. " Look at his
broad shoulders."
"Then what in thunder is his game?" asked the Dis-
grace. "It looks like him, I'll allow "
" Aye, laddies," —the big man spoke to himself, and
his voice put his identity beyond doubt—" I expected
you would make yourselves comfortable and go to sleep.


Youth is vera irresponsible, an' refuses to be worried
concerning more or less problematic dangers. Still, I'm
a bit disappointed in Edmund; I thought he was more
fully alive to the seriousness o' life in this part o' the
world. As for the Disgrace, he would sleep on the top
o' a charge o' dynamite." He passed on, and the listeners
crept out on to the pad.
" Would he?" muttered the Disgrace. "It strikes me,
Mr. James Mackay, Esquire, and J.P., and F.R.G.S,
whatever that means, that you have made a mistake this
time. We are not sleeping, and we can take on as much
responsibility as any man in camp. Why don't you say
something, Edmund? I haven't got a sack full of words,
like Damper Jack or Ginger Bob."
"We don't need to say anything," said Edmund.
"Our course is quite clear now. We'll follow him, and
if he gets into trouble, as seems likely enough, for he
is evidently determined to visit the Chinese camp, we'll
be at hand to help him, and thus prove that we are of
some use. The rain has ceased. Let us away, or we'll
not be able to keep in touch with him."
Quickly the lads robed themselves in the outer garments
of the half-strangled men, and fastened the sham pigtails
to their heads underneath their hats. They then touched
up their eyes with soil-stained fingers, giving them the ap-
pearance of being slanted, and without more delay started
oft' after the broad-shouldered quasi Chinaman. He was
carefully dressed, and had they not known it was Mackay,
there was nothing about him which might have informed
them that he was not what he seemed. He walked ahead
rather slowly for his followers' pleasure. They would have
liked more impetuous movement. But Mackay never took
useless risks, as they well knew, and doubtless was watch-
( C 204 ) 10


ing that he did not fall into any traps set for the benefit of
visitors round the Chinese camp.
Suddenly the long low boom of the surf fell upon the
ears of the trackers, and they knew they could not be
far away now. Almost immediately afterwards the scrub
fell away in front and they were on the beach. The salt
spray from the dark waters of the great gulf blew upon
their faces, but ahead all was invisible. On their right
the tall palms and evil-smelling mangroves marked the
channel of the river they had been following, and they
could hear some amphibious monsters chasing their prey
along the densely clad banks.
But where were the Chinamen? No signs of a camp
could be seen, yet a nauseant odour hung about the air
which showed that much opium had been smoked in the
vicinity. The boys closed up on their leader. They sus-
pected trouble. They could just make out his form in
the darkness, but no more. He, too, it seemed to them,
was surprised, for he moved silently, and planted his feet
upon the shingle with extreme care. As if by means of
magical art a cluster of figures suddenly came into being
round Mackay. Their forms were plainly discernible to
the boys, but not their faces. One of them spoke two
words, and Mackay responded in one, apparently to their
satisfaction, for they disappeared again as abruptly as
they had shown themselves. Next moment the lads knew
everything. They were actually amidst the Chinese. The
Celestials were lying upon the beach under tarpaulin
covers, and those who had intercepted Mackay evidently
were the camp watchers. The young adventurers paused;
they dared not speak, for the huddled-up mob of yellow-
skinned humanity lay all around them. Some were awake
too, as the tiny glow of their opium pipes showed.


" Come on," the Disgrace whispered recklessly. " Mac-
kay has gone on ahead, and I reckon we've got to follow.
Oh, blow it!"
A group of men armed with Winchester rifles had sud-
denly closed round them, silently and grimly. They had
risen from the ground as they had done when Mackay
passed, and one flashed a lantern on the faces of the new
intruders.
''We're up a tree, mate," spoke the Disgrace. " Let's
turn and run "
"Not at all," said Edmund quietly. "Let's bluff the
thing out "
"You back velly soon," broke in one of the Chinamen.
"You findy out evelyting."
" Everything," answered Edmund boldly but laconically."
"You heal anyting 'bout Quong Lee?" persisted the
speaker.
" Nothing," said Edmund.
"Then he dead, an' his blodels will soon know wha'
fo'," went on the man strangely. "But you got to come
an' see Thomas an' Calson now. They no sleepy, until
they heal you got back all li'."
" Great Australia!" the Disgrace muttered. " Goodbye,
old man! I'm sorry I led you into this. Ignorant Tommy
always said I was a fool."
"Shut up!" muttered Edmund savagely. " They think
we are the men whose clothes we're wearing."
"Wha' fo' you no' wanty come?" interrupted the
Chinese leader. "You gety into tlouble, you no' come
along quick and lively."
"We're coming," said the Disgrace, the situation and
its possibilities dawning upon him. "Where are the
bosses?"


Without a word the spokesman of the sentries stepped
ahead, and his comrades sank out of sight again. Prob-
ably none of the men knew what had been said, but
clearly their leader had been in Australia for some time.
His knowledge of English was undoubted. He led the
way over the slumbering forms until he reached a dinghy
up upon the beach.
"They come back," he cried, pausing, and at once a
voice, now well known to Edmund, replied from inside
the boat.
"Well, you needn't tell the whole world; we've heard
you arguing this last half-hour."
"They no' know anyting 'bout Quong Lee. He dead,
fo' I heal his ghost call to-night," cried the Chinaman.
With him, it seemed, the fate of the missing Quong Lee
was of chief importance.
"Hang both you and Quong Lee!" roared another
voice from the boat. "Do you think we are concerned
about what happens to any of you?"
"Well, you precious pair of pigtails," interrupted the
first voice, and Thomas sat upright in the boat. What
have you found out? Are they wiped out with the plague?
and is that confounded Mackay in their camp? Hurry up
with your yarn. I want to get some sleep before morning."
" Mackay is not in the camp," Edmund replied in as
gruff a voice as he could command, and then, realizing
that he had not been detected, he went on boldly, " and we
think the camp must be deserted for good because "
"Yes, yes, that's all right, Smith. Never mind giving
the details of your investigations. How about the plague?"
cried Thomas impatiently.
"Oh, the plague is in the country all right!" Edmund
continued; "but I don't think it is bubonic or "


" Confound you, we are not asking you what you
think," roared Carson, also sitting up. " What is the
plague? Answer that, then go and disinfect yourselves
and turn in. We'll do all the thinking required in this
part of the world."
"Will you?" the Disgrace murmured, as the China-
man retired to his own sleeping place. " I'll bet you'll
need to work overtime with your thinking machinery
before long "
"The disease seems to me to be a sort of yellow
plague," cried Edmund daringly. "It looks as if it
were going to spread all over the Gulf country."
" You are a humorist, Smith, and you don't know
it," Thomas laughed. "Of course there is a yellow
plague beginning to spread up here, and I expect it
will go on spreading until it reaches Sydney and Mel-
bourne. But it will be stamped out completely when
Australia realizes the meaning of the yellow peril. Her
people will drive the Chinamen back into the sea again
and "
"Give us a rest, Thomas," Carson interrupted. "You
are not supposed to be addressing any learned society
in the meantime; and, anyway, Australia and China can
settle their own affairs; our business is to run in as
many yellowskins as Ah Sin and Co. will pay for."
"You forget the treasure, Carson. I'm a bit eager to
handle it."
"You fellows didn't hear anything that might show the
white miners knew about that?" asked Carson, addressing
Edmund.
"No, we only saw two men altogether, and we could
get nothing out of them," the lad answered.
"Ah well, I take it we'll have a free hand after all!"


said Thomas. " Clear out, you two beggars, and get ready
to cross to the island with our own people before daylight."
"All right!" said Edmund promptly; then, with some
hesitation, he hazarded. "But who—that is—how are we
to know our own people?"
"You're becoming very stupid, Smith," growled
Thomas. "How do you think we should know them?
By a lotus flower carried on their foreheads, I suppose.
Get about the business at once; the hundred landed to-day
are paid for, and can go back with Ah Sin's crowd to
pursue their peaceful avocations throughout Australia,
where and how they like. You needn't be very particular
about our own crowd, either; for I half suspect that Quong
Lee, and maybe some others, will not answer to the rollcall."
"All right!" responded Edmund again. He was think-
ing rapidly, and already a daring scheme had entered his
mind. If only he could have consulted with Mackay!
"And, Smith," cried Carson, "if you don't make your-
self into a better Chinaman before daylight, I shouldn't
wonder but you'll run against trouble. Both you and
tongue-tied Mackenzie are merely caricatures of China-
men, and the Lotus-flower Brotherhood may not like
it. And I don't care much for your manners of late;
you are becoming too familiar. It might be good for
you to remember that on shore we are entitled to the
same respect as at sea."
"All right, sir!" said Edmund, quick to grasp the
purport of Carson's speech. "Any other orders?"
" No, we'll superintend ourselves when required. Good-
night!" Carson lay back in the boat again.
"Good night, sir!" said both lads, turning away.
Thomas had already fallen asleep.
The boys picked their steps between the several tar-


paulin covers which had sheltered the Chinamen from
the rain, making for the outside of the fringe of humanity.
Each was thinking deeply in his own way.
"Hullo!" suddenly exclaimed the Disgrace. "We're
being followed. I can just make out a big Chinkie
stalking us. Should we lie low and wait for him, or
cut and run for our own camp?"
" It's maybe Mackay," Edmund said, looking back
through the darkness. "He would be quick to spot us.
No, that isn't he. We're suspected, Disgrace, and we'll
have to do something at once."
"Suppose we tackle him?" the Disgrace suggested.
" He's only a big Chinaman, and there are two of us."
They had reached a cleared space, and were compara-
tively safe from being overheard; at least, so it appeared.
" Perhaps that is our best plan," Edmund agreed slowly.
" It seems we've got to fight in spite of our peaceful in-
clinations. We'll wait until he comes up, and then give
him all he wants."
But they didn't get the chance. Just then half a dozen
men, apparently Chinamen, sprang out on them from the
gloom, and tried the Thug trick upon them. In an instant
the Disgrace and Edmund had thrown their first adver-
saries to the ground, but there were four others dancing
round them in grim silence, while the big Chinaman was
running up also. Edmund straightway flung himself upon
the nearest man, and rained a shower of blows upon his
face, the Disgrace meanwhile devoting his best attention
to another of the attackers. But the odds were too great,
and this was soon evident when violent hands from behind
caught both lads, and threw them upon the ground.
"Shoot, Edmund!" gasped the Disgrace. "We're
trapped anyway."


"I can't," his comrade wailed; "I'm pinioned down."
"Hullo!" exclaimed the Disgrace, "I'm free again!
My man has disappeared." He sprang to his feet and
jumped upon the man holding Edmund upon the ground.
In an instant Edmund, too, had regained a vertical posi-
tion, and again the strange fight was resumed in a silence
most inexplicable. Edmund struck out desperately at any
face which came within his reach, and the Disgrace was
by no means gentle in his treatment of the silent China-
men. But the struggle was surely a burlesque, for now,
although many men seemed engaged in it, the boys never
had much trouble in beating off any opponents who en-
gaged with them. These individuals went down suddenly
without any apparent reason, and both lads at length
realized that it was not always their own prowess which
caused the downfall of the Chinamen. There were now
about a dozen men engaged in the fight, all as silent as
their fellows sleeping around; but they were smashing
each other down with right good will, and apparently
were not more eager to deal with the boys than with any
others. Seeing this, after some time Edmund sang out
to the Disgrace to draw clear of the battle, and soon they
were onlookers instead of chief combatants. Their amaze-
ment was unbounded. The fight was raging more fiercely
than ever, and already several pigtailed warriors were
lying unconscious upon the shingle, their faces upturned
to the cloudy sky. And they would lie until removed.
"Howling snakes!" gasped the Disgrace. "Am I
dreaming, Edmund? Kick me if this isn't a glorious
fight we're looking at. Great Gulf! See how that big
Chinaman handles those other fellows. My word, but
he's a terror!"
"Why, that's the man who was following us," said


Edmund in astonishment, as they beheld the big Celestial
deal out mighty blows which never failed to drop the
recipients to the ground.
"But what's the fighting for?" asked the Disgrace.
"He surely doesn't imagine all those men are sham
Chinkies? My, he can hit like an Australian cricketer!
Hullo, there are two of them, and they are fighting all
the others!"
"And the other man is Mackay!" cried Edmund.
" Come on, Disgrace, let's sail in again. Ten to two is
not fair, and one of the two is our friend."
"Right-o!" answered the Disgrace. "But, remember,
strategy is the word, mate. We'll show old Mackay
we're not the balmy innocents he thinks we are."
The fight now became ten to four, and the instant after
six to four, for both lads had brought their men down by
leaping upon them from behind and planting their knees
in their victims' backs, the while pulling them back-
wards; and simultaneously the two powerful Chinamen—
or, rather, Mackay, and the big almond-eyed son of the
Flowery Land—had each disposed of one of their adver-
saries. One of the remaining six gripped Edmund by
the throat and lifted him off his feet, but Mackay darted
forward just then, and administered a blow on the China-
man's right shoulder that dislocated it, and his grip in-
stantly relaxed, and Edmund was once more free. He
used his freedom at once by catching hold of the pigtail
of the man who was giving the Disgrace a bad time, and
pulling him backwards off his feet. By this time the big
Chinaman had sent two of his compatriots headlong to
the ground, and Mackay had dealt effectively with
another. Edmund promptly felled the man with the dis-
located shoulder, and the Disgrace had knocked the last


man out by leaping on his back and half-strangling him
with a piece of rope. And the silence remained unbroken.
Some of the men were sleeping, but a greater number
were still smoking their opium pipes, and must have
been dimly conscious of the struggle going on amidst
them.
"Run for it, Edmund!" the Disgrace spoke into his
comrade's ear. "I'd rather fight a dozen Chinamen than
have Mackay give us a preaching. Hullo, the big China-
man has cleared out!"
"Don't speak so loudly, Disgrace," advised Edmund.
" There are maybe more than we know playing the role
of sham Chinamen, and some of them may hear and
understand us." The boys moved away.
" Oh, you've been too long with Mackay!" the Disgrace
laughed. " You're just such another as he is; so cautious
that if you were standing over a fired charge of gelignite,
you wouldn't move until the explosion shifted you, because
you couldn't reason out why it was there."
"And yet Mackay has shown himself to-night to be
fairly reckless, and I have not objected to any proposal
of yours, whether reasonable or not."
" Don't cut up rough, old man. I didn't mean to say
you weren't game. I'm a bit of a fool, I know, for Ig-
norant Tommy has told me often enough. Jumping beans!
Mackay has slid away too!"
"Well, you surely didn't expect him to stay here all
night," laughed Edmund. "And it strikes me it is about
time we made ourselves scarce. We are outside the lines
now, and it must be near sunrise."
"But what about our orders to see the beggars started
for the island?"
"The men whom we are impersonating have surely


escaped by this time. They will doubtless see to their
own duties."
''The men that we left tied up to the wild fig tree will
not have escaped, my boy," the Disgrace said. " I know
how to tie a man, and Mackay was my teacher. We'll
find them where we left them when we go back ; that is,
if we do go back."
" What do you mean, Disgrace? Why shouldn't we go
back, and that at once?"
"Well, I don't exactly know, but we're having some
fun where we are, and I am mighty eager to know more
about the doings of this funny camp, and where their
island is, and how they get to it. You see, Edmund, I'm
dead gone on mysteries. I reckon I was cut out for a
detective, although none of our fellows think the same."
"All right! we'll clear out of this crowd of sleeping
beauties, and watch their doings from a safe place. It
is now five o'clock, I see by my watch, and it will be day-
light in an hour. We'll start for camp immediately we
grasp the plans of the Chinamen. We'll be there in time
for breakfast, and before we are missed."
"You're as good a mate as ever I had, Edmund, and
I reckon we'll have some bosker fun together before we
get our hands on that stolen treasure. My word, but
we'll stand no cheek now from Ginger Bob or Damper
Jack. My only trouble is that the whole crowd of our
fellows will track us up at once when they miss us. That
would spoil the whole show, for they can't use strategy
like us."
"Well, I don't care," said Edmund; "Mackay is still
somewhere among these people, for he did not cross over
this way; and while he is in possible danger, I'm going
to be as near him as I can get to share it. I don't know


that we are acting wisely in hanging around here,
but "
"But we'll stay here and risk it," put in the Disgrace.
" It's just on sunrise now, and I reckon we've got to
find out a lot. I think that is a clump of some quinine
scrub looming ahead. Let's go and see if we can hide in
it."
Walking swiftly but carefully, so that they might not
suddenly stumble across sleeping Chinamen, they reached
the edge of the vegetation which lined the beach. All
their conversation had been carried on in a whisper, and
as the scene of the fight had been left about forty yards
behind, they calculated that they were still undetected.
Indeed they worried little on that score, for they now
knew that there were several white men in the camp,
and that, even if heard and seen, little attention would
be paid to them, as evidently it was quite the thing
for the white men, presumably of the Vulture , to mas-
querade as Chinese. Truly it was a strange camp.
But the two intruders gave little thought to the strange-
ness of the situation. They were imbued with the spirit
of adventure, and youthful enthusiasm—often bringing
about success where the carefully calculated plans of
level-headed elders might fail—blinded them to all possibly
unpleasant results. They were proud of themselves, too,
and even Edmund thought he could safely match him-
self against at least half a dozen Chinamen, if put to it.
The Disgrace was of opinion that together they could fight
the entire encampment, if need be, but his comrade was
not so optimistic; Mackay's training had caused him to
view things in a truer perspective. They crouched in the
heart of a clump of dense-leaved scrub and waited. The
ground was dry, and they did not mind the presence of


snakes or other creatures that had made the bowery
shelter their temporary home.
The camp slept on. No alarm was raised. Apparently
no one knew, or cared to tell, of the fight which had
taken place, and only the victims themselves would give
evidence in the morning—if able. Yet the lads were
well aware that several recumbent forms had witnessed
the whole proceedings, for the glow of their opium pipes
showed that they were not yet in the land of pleasant
dreams when the disturbance had occurred. Edmund,
more thoughtful in some matters than the Disgrace,
gave this fact some consideration, but no explanation
presented itself, and as, at the same time, he was also
trying to understand why Mackay had visited the camp,
and how he had come to take part in the fight—he did
not think that the Scot had recognized those whom he had
helped so opportunely—he was soon forced to abandon
the attempt to piece everything together. It was beyond
him. Then there was the big Chinaman who had dealt
so drastically with his own people, and who, Edmund
was sure, had heard their conversation with Carson and
Thomas, the heads of the camp. Why had he acted as
he had done? He wasn't Quong Lee, for the latter was
a slim man of not more than five feet seven in height,
whereas the brilliant fighter was at least five feet eleven,
and built proportionately, just like the New Chum.
"Ah well!" he muttered, then paused abruptly. " What
is the best way to deal with a snake that won't go away?"
he continued later.
" Put your heel on its head and press as heavily as you
can," the Disgrace replied.
" But it is in my pocket now. It is a small fellow, and
very energetic."


" Don't move; I know the beggar! It is death in three
seconds if it bites. My word, we're getting fine sport!
No, no; don't move, I told you! Hold your breath. I'll
have him in a second. There, now you can breathe
again. My word, isn't he a beauty? I'll leave him to
sample some of the Chinkies."
The Disgrace had gently insinuated his hand into the
recess in Edmund's garments serving as a pocket, and,
gripping the exploring reptile by the tail, had pulled it
forth with a jerk.
" There now, poor little wriggler," he exclaimed,
pitching it out through the branches, "go out and ex-
periment as much as you can among the yellowskins.
You ought to know by this time that we belong to the
country as much as you, and that these other people don't."
The snake made no reply, and the Disgrace seemed
somewhat angry at its lack of manners. He was about
to give vent to his opinion on snakes in general when
he became conscious that day was dawning and that the
camp was astir.
"Great centipedes!" he exclaimed abruptly, "I'm
blamed well sure that camp has grown bigger since we
struck it first! I see a man lying not more than twenty
feet from us, and I'll bet my breakfast he wasn't there
an hour ago."
" Can you make that boat out?" asked Edmund. "It
seems to me there are a number of Chinese sleeping quite
near it, and I feel certain we didn't step over them during
the night."
"The mystery is growing deeper, mate. When we
have seen this thing through, I reckon we'll be able to
challenge that fellow Sherlock Holmes. Jumping beans!
Look out there now."


There was reason for his last words. The camp had
suddenly become galvanized into life. The first streaks
of daylight were dissipating the darkness of night, and
in a few minutes the sun would appear above the distant
ranges of the peninsula.
" Lie still and watch," said Edmund. "If we're caught
it's all up with us."
"No blamed fear," answered the Disgrace. " I reckon
it's all up with some of them."
" Look! " interrupted Edmund. " The camp is dividing
itself into two. Why, I can't see the men we knocked out
last night; they've disappeared."
" All the better for us," the Disgrace growled. " Use
your thinking-box now as hard as you can, and see if you
can tumble to what's happening. There is the sun."
The sun shot up behind the crest of the great dividing
range of York Peninsula, far on the east, at that moment,
and it was day. Simultaneously with the light a change,
sudden and incomprehensible, had come over the camp.
It was no longer a sleeping camp. A long row of Chinese
in full native dress was marshalled on the beach, where
only some minutes before all had been as still as the
shells and pebbles. A crowd of Celestials, in more or
less European garb, stood in two lines at the head of
the long, arranged line of humanity, and it soon became
evident that the queue of Chinamen had to pass between
them. And they did, in single file, marching off into the
bush along the track leading up the river, under the
leadership of a couple of the men who had apparently been
inspecting them.
" Howling tomatoes!" gasped the Disgrace. "Those
fellows will run right into our camp."
Wait a minute, said Edmund. "We can easily go


round about and warn the camp in time. There is more
than one expedition starting."
And there was. As the line of Chinese filed through the
double line of their compatriots, some other men, also in
Chinese garb, had pushed the solitary boat off the beach
into the water, and, manned by two of their kind, it was at
once propelled out into the gulf. In another ten minutes
the beach was deserted. The line of Chinamen had passed
through, and their inspectors had fallen in behind and
followed them; but those remaining had marched straight
into the sea after the boat, and already they were about a
hundred yards from the shore! A dense cloud of mist
lay over the waters, but the pigtailed army went straight
ahead. The water was up to their thighs!
" Come on, now," spoke Edmund. "We know all we
need to know, and we must get back to camp before the
shoreward army."
"But Mackay?" cried the Disgrace. "What about
him?"
" If he has not already returned," Edmund answered,
"he is playing some game in which he does not wish
interference. I know him well; let's go."
They went.


CHAPTER VIII
The Island is Re-discovered
" I'LL bet we've got round the Chinkies now, Edmund.
Look out for the pad; it's somewhere near on our left.
We're not far from the camp. My word! won't the
boys open their eyes when they hear our story!" The
Disgrace was in high spirits.
" Perhaps not," Edmund laughed. " Damper Jack may
say nasty things instead. But Ido hope we'll strike that
pad soon. I'm tired jumping from tree to tree like a kan-
garoo, and I know that I'll sink over the knees in this
Gulf-country mud if I don't plant my feet at the tree
bases."
"You just bet you will," said the Disgrace. "I've
known bullocks to stick in this soil until they died on
their feet, and the boys will tell you of many fellows
who got caught in it, and pegged out before they could
pull through to any camp or hard ground. It's my own
idea this jumping along by the trees. I found out that
the ground near the trunk remains hard for a long time
after the country round about is as soft as butter.
We couldn't have got past the Chinkies any other way,
unless we had had a balloon."
" Here's the pad," exclaimed Edmund, interrupting his
comrade's discourse. " I see our fig tree, too, and I see
the men we left near it, but —but "
(C 204) 161 11


He paused and gazed around wonderingly
"But what?" demanded the Disgrace. "What has
struck you now? An idea?"
" But I can't see any signs of our own camp," came the
startling reply. "Our fellows have either gone back to
the old camp or have been wiped out."
"No blamed fear; they haven't gone far away," said
the Disgrace. " I hear the horses' bells over among that
timber by the river. Maybe Bunyip Bill or Little Peter
invented a kind of raft, and they've gone off down the
flood on it to have a look at the Chinese camp. They'll
be back soon, for they would not leave the horses."
"But there are no signs to show that men were ever
camped here," persisted Edmund, as they reached the
site on which the brush shelter had been erected, and
saw the antbed fireplace broken up into unrecognizable
ruins.
" Of course not," cheerfully responded his companion.
"The boys knew better than leave signs which any pros-
pecting Chinkies or others of their kind could read. They'll
have hidden all the gear they didn't take with them. Oh,
they're cute enough, Edmund, and we've missed the fun
again!"
"You're always complaining, Disgrace," said Edmund,
"we had our own share of excitement. And even if our
comrades did make a raft and float down the river, they
couldn't have got away before daylight, and by the time
they reached the sea the Chinamen's landing camp would
be as bare as this place. I'm worried about Mackay,
though. He ought to have arrived by this time."
"Hide, mate, quick!" broke in the Disgrace. "I see
the Chinkies coming, and there are about a couple of
hundred of them. I suppose they are the beggars who


passed through our camp on Sunday, coming back with
the hundred new Chinamen Carson and Thomas smuggled
in."
" We'll get in among that cluster of quinine trees over
there and we'll be all right. They'll not leave the hard
pad to investigate unless they have reason to be sus-
picious, and if they prove troublesome we can run over
soft soil as fast as they can."
In a minute the lads were in the heart of the nearest
patch of so-called quinine scrub. They were not afraid
in the slightest. They had grown so accustomed to
getting into trouble and getting out again, that the
prospect of having two hundred Chinamen pass within
a few yards of them didn't occasion any alarm. True,
they were apparently Chinese themselves, and, even if
discovered, there was no reason why they should be
molested. They were in Australia—their own country
—and they had no quarrrel with the Chinese invaders.
Still, they knew the yellow men were excited over some
matters of which they knew but little, and the presence
of white men was not favourable to their plans. Many
a harmless prospector had met his death among them
over on the Palmer River, as all Australia knew, and
while miners did not give much heed to the proximity
of aborigines while following up some favourable in-
dications of auriferous formations, they always halted
when they saw signs that they were near a Chinese
camp. But Edmund and the Disgrace viewed the ap-
proach of the pigtailed horde with feelings almost in-
different. They had their revolvers ready, though these
weapons would not be of much use against such a mob,
if they were seen, and the Chinese were looking for
trouble. The boys knew this, but the spirit of the


bush had settled over them, and they treated all events
as being in the ordinary day's work.
The Chinese came on with their usual shambling gait,
half-trot and half-canter, if human movements can be
so described; their limbs were flexible, and every muscle
was in action. They bobbed about as if on springs,
but their rate of progress was not far short of eight
miles an hour, which easily explained why Edmund and
the Disgrace had not beaten them by much, although they
had been running as fast as the nature of the country they
had to traverse would permit. The Chinese were in single
file, and the human line extended about two hundred
yards, each man being about a yard apart from his fellow.
Some were big, some were little, some stout, and some
thin, but they all seemed desperately anxious to get to
their journey's end without unnecessary delay. Those
leading were evidently the men who had passed through
Eldorado Camp on the Sunday before. They were dressed
slightly more after the orthodox miner style than were
their newly landed compatriots, actually wearing dongaree
trousers in lieu of the loose silken garments affected by
the others. But their pigtails were equally prominent,
and although some even sported soft flannel shirts, their
almond eyes and general style of movement marked their
nationality at once. Here and there in the long row of
smuggled immigrants were occasionally members of the
old band, and bringing up the rear, as if to prevent any
escape, were about a dozen of the same people. The
importation of the new Chinamen had cost Messrs. Ah Sin,
Wun Lung, & Co. ten pounds per head—doubtless the men
had paid their own passage money apart from that figure—
but that very much awake firm would make considerably
more than their expenses, if not quite the full hundred-


pound poll tax imposed by the Government upon those
entering by the recognized ports, before the contraband
cargo was free of their supervision.
"I say, Edmund," the Disgrace remarked, as the first
of the Celestials filed past, "do you see that fellow half-
way down the line with his head stuck through the bottom
of a flour sack? It makes a mighty good Chinkie's dress,
but I'd like to shy something at him; because if it weren't for
his long pigtail he would just be the twin of Damper Jack."
" He certainly resembles him," Edmund admitted, " but
that fellow next him in the tight-fitting pantaloons would
pass for Fat Herman too, if he hadn't a pigtail."
"Look, Edmund! I see a black Chinaman among the
crowd. I didn't know there were any black Chinkies!"
The Disgrace was greatly interested.
" He'll be a Malay, I suppose," Edmund said, "but he
looks confoundedly like Uncle Sam."
"And by Ignorant Tommy's whiskers—and I would
know them if they were stuck on a barber's pole, or on
a kangaroo—" exclaimed the Disgrace, "that fellow
trotting along with the blanket round him is no more
a Chinaman than we are. He is Ignorant Tommy, I'll
bet my boots. Why, that is my blanket he's wearing!
Howling snakes! I reckon I'll have to see into this."
"Wait a bit," advised Edmund hurriedly, and with
some show of excitement. "There is some game on here
that we don't know. I feel almost certain that that fellow
dressed like a Chinese millionaire, if there are such people
in China, is Dandy Charlie. Just look at him closely."
* Jumping beans, of course it is! What have we
struck, mate? Have all our fellows turned Chinkies?
That is Melbourne Mike behind him. My, what a fine
pigtail he's got!"


" Hullo! I saw one of them slinking into the bush
over there," cried Edmund. " I'm sure it was one of
our fellows. Look! There's Dandy Charlie dodging out
of the rank too. And Fat Herman has disappeared.
Why, all our fellows must be there. They've been play-
ing a deeper game than we have, after all."
"Just wait until we see," said the Disgrace, and his
voice was stern. "If they think they can play pranks
without us being in the know they'll find they're mighty
much mistaken. Pretend you don't know them, Edmund,
and we'll sail out into them like ten cyclones and five willy-
nillies."
" But we may get roughly handled ourselves," reminded
Edmund. " Hadn't we better be more careful?"
"Caution be blowed! Come on now, and give them
what for; the real Chinkies are past." The Disgrace
broke through the scrub, and, rushing out with a yell,
he flung himself upon him who resembled Fat Herman.
The latter was just rising from the ground at the
moment, but he went back again, and, with the Dis-
grace in his arms, rolled over and over in the soft soil.
Edmund had followed the Disgrace, and several pigtailed
men had also rushed to the assistance of their comrade.
They stopped when they saw Edmund, and burst into a
roar of laughter, which was repeated several times as
they surveyed each other. They were certainly weird-
looking Chinamen, and each carried revolvers.
"Where's the Disgrace, boy?" asked he of the black
face. "He and you were together last night."
" That is he," answered Edmund, pointing to one of
the strugglers in the mud. "We saw you passing, and
wanted to trade mark some of you."
Again the men roared in merriment, and some of them


separated the two fighters and raised them to their feet.
During the struggle each had lost his pigtail.
"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Disgrace,"
began one of the men, and his voice proclaimed him as
Ignorant Tommy. "What on earth do you mean by
behaving like an idiot?"
" Oh, is it you, Ignorant Tommy?" spluttered the
Disgrace. " I thought I knew your whiskers. I don't
see that you have any reason to call me an idiot for
defending our camp against Chinamen."
" I wasn't referring to that at all. You were quite
right in tackling Fat Herman, but you should have more
sense by this time than to think you or Edmund could
pass as Chinamen anywhere."
" Well, we did pass," snorted the admonished one, "and
I reckon we are as good yellowskins as you fellows. I
could spot Dandy Charlie and you and all the others
right away. Funny-looking Chinkies you look! And
who ever heard of a black-faced Chinaman? I thought
Uncle Sam knew better."
Uncle Sam pulled off his pigtail and laughed.
"Well, Disgrace," he said, "I admit I laid on the
colour too thickly; but your trouble is that you forgot
to put on any. Your face is pretty well like a nigger's
naturally, but Edmund's is ghastly white, and you should
have seen to that. Why, you are no more like a China-
man than—than Damper Jack or Dandy Charlie," he
continued.
The persons named at once began to cast aspersions on
Uncle Sam's powers of judgment, but the Disgrace didn't
mean to allow his comrade and himself to be pushed out of
the limelight just yet.
" It doesn't matter," he said, breaking in upon the


remarks made by Jack and Charlie. "We did our work,
and the real Chinkies didn't spot us. Have you fellows
done anything - special?"
" Where did you get your clothes?" sang out one of the
men. "We hadn't anything like that get-up in camp."
" We took our clothes from those who were wearing
them," the Disgrace answered, 4 'and then we took their
places too, and went into the Chinese camp, and here,
Edmund, you do the talking, it's not in my line—at least
when I've got to hammer the meaning of what I say into
fat heads."
The men laughed again, but as Edmund rapidly ran
over the chief points of their experiences, they became
silent, and listened intently. They would never have be-
lieved the Disgrace, but with Edmund it was different.
"And you actually collared two sham Chinamen spies
and impersonated them?" said Ignorant Tommy, when
he had finished. "Dear me, it seems incredible!"
"Then come and see them," cried the Disgrace. "I'll
bet they're waiting where we left them."
"But don't let them know it wasn't Chinamen who
attacked them," advised Edmund.
" No, we'll just find them sort o' casually like," re-
sponded one of the men.
"Then change yourselves into British miners again,"
said Uncle Sam, " and we'll see what they have to say
for themselves."
In a few minutes the men were once more typical
miners, having washed their faces, discarded their in-
geniously constructed pigtails, and made all other neces-
sary changes. While effecting the alterations the boys
were informed as to what their comrades had been
doing, and, put briefly, this was to the effect that each


man had suddenly conceived the idea of spying l upon the
Chinese, and had made himself up accordingly. There
was some trouble when he found his fellows also bent
upon the same scheme, but after a general recognition
had taken place, they resolved to act in unison, and had
done so. They had mixed with the Chinese, possessed
themselves of their garments, half-strangled a dozen or
so while lying under the great tarpaulin covers, but had
not been able to gather much information of interest,
because they did not know the language spoken by those
who were not asleep. Realizing that unpleasant dis-
coveries might result if the full hundred of Ah Sin's
immigrants did not put in an appearance, and knowing
that some of them were tied to trees among the scrub,
and could not possibly answer to the rollcall, they had
filled their places as far as possible themselves, and
had come away with the band.
It was by no means an easy task extracting the infor-
mation, for Damper Jack, Fat Herman, and Melbourne
Mike each wished to tell of some personal exploits which
they thought highly important, but which were not so
considered by either Uncle Sam or Ignorant Tommy,
who were the spokesmen. In fact, Damper Jack became
so indignant at the way in which he was slighted, that
Ignorant Tommy looked round for Ginger Bob, to instruct
him to attend to the cook. But Ginger Bob was not pre-
sent, neither were Mackay, the New Chum, Bunyip Bill,
Little Peter, nor the Doctor. The men looked at each
other in dismay. For some time past Edmund had been
troubled over Mackay's non-appearance; for, of course, he
had seen at the first that he was not with the others.
" I know that Bunyip Bill, the Doctor, Little Peter, and
Ginger Bob were with us when we set out last night,"


spoke Dandy Charlie, "but I remember now that I
couldn't place either Mackay or the New Chum."
" Mackay was before you," said Edmund. "We
followed him, as we told you. He was a perfect China-
man."
"And, by thunder, Edmund," the Disgrace cried, "that
other big Chinaman who fought so well was the New
Chum, I'll bet old Tommy's whiskers. He and Mac will
have gone to that mysterious island, and the others have
spotted them and gone too. Oh, why did we not take the
chance we had flung at us?"
"You'll have all the chances you want before long,"
said Uncle Sam. " We're going to the island too, even
if we've to march across the Gulf to get to it. Lead us
up to your prisoners now, and we'll see what they have to
say, and then we'll start after Mackay and his gold reef."
The boys soon led the men to the two bound victims,
taking care to make it appear that they did so by accident.
The prisoners were not in a happy plight; for, stripped of
their Chinese garments, they had lain helpless in the rain-
soaked though warm grass all night. When able to speak,
they informed their rescuers that they were poor miners
making for the Gulf from some goldfields on the borders
of Queensland and South Australia. They had lost their
bearings, and, footsore and weary, had been wandering
aimlessly through the bush when they had been attacked
and robbed by a horde of Chinamen and left, bound, help-
less and starving, in the drenching rain. Damper Jack
was almost crying when they had finished the recital of
their woes; but Uncle Sam and Ignorant Tommy were not
so easily moved.
" Do you mean to tell us you travelled north from those
new goldfields on foot?" asked Uncle Sam.


"We lost our horses crossing some river," one answered
hesitatingly.
"And we're not much good with horses," the other
supplemented. "You see, we were sailors before we
became miners, and we came up here half with the in-
tention of trying our luck at pearl fishing in the shallow
waters of the Gulf."
" Who said the water was shallow?" enquired Ignorant
Tommy mildly.
"Oh, we—that is—we believe it is!" stammered one.
" But we don't know for certain."
" What kind of country is it between here and the South
Australian border?" broke in Dandy Charlie. " I had
some thought of having a look at the new fields."
" Much like this," came the answer, " but the rivers are
very difficult to cross."
" Plenty of grass along the track, I suppose?" continued
Charlie.
" Oh yes, plenty of grass, and any amount of game of
all kinds!"
"They tell me there is a high mountain range between
here and there, with a freshwater lake on the top?"
"Yes, a very high range, but the water on top isn't
very good."
"I suppose not," put in Uncle Sam. "I am told that
the country around these goldfields is nearly always
flooded?"
"Yes, we had to do all our mining from rafts," answered
the other man.
"Wonderful!" commented Dandy Charlie. "Look here,
you pair of new-chum prevaricators, you are about the
poorest specimens at the game I ever knew. Why, even
Pat Herman here could spin a better yarn than you, and


he's got as much imagination as that dead log over there.
The new goldfields fizzled out six months ago; the country
between here and there is a sandy desert; there aren't any
rivers, or mountains, or grass, or anything; and as for
water, it was the fact that one couldn't get a drop of water
inside a couple of hundred miles that forced the poor pro-
spectors to abandon the place."
" Here, go easy, Dandy Charlie," entreated Damper
Jack. " The poor fellows are hungry."
"The poor fellows are frauds, as you well know," said
Uncle Sam sternly. " They never saw a goldfield in their
lives, and "
"And you are speaking a solid fact now, skipper,"
broke in one of the men in question. "We are sailors,
and we don't know anything about this blamed upside-
down country, and don't want to know anything. But we
didn't lie here all night for fun, I can tell you; we were
bailed up by Chinamen, and they'll pay for it, I'll bet a
fiver!"
"No doubt," Ignorant Tommy interrupted; "but we
haven't time to waste with your kind. You'll find a
Chinese camp about twenty miles up the river from here;
you can't miss it, for the tracks of over a hundred of them
who have just passed can be followed, even by sailors.
Meanwhile we'll give you what food we have."
"We don't want to go near any Chinese camp," said
the man who had spoken last. "To tell you straight,
boss, we've had all the dealings we care for with them.
We've just landed a hundred from China, and we want
nothing more to do with the beggars. I expect it was
men of that same camp who went for us."
"You are certainly not going with us," said Uncle
Sam. "We are prospectors, and we are on the move


even now. We don't care how many Chinamen you run
into Australia, so long as you do not run against us;
then we'll kick, and kick hard. You needn't trouble to
make up some more lies. Go while you have the
chance."
"See here, captain," expostulated the man who had
talked of the goldfields, "you've no call to get rusty with
us. We didn't know who you were, and we don't claim
to be George Washingtons. I expect it is really you
people our boss sent us to have a look at, but I can see
there is no reason for us being enemies, for the man he
feared isn't here. He—or, rather, they, for there are two
bosses—fancied that a man named Mackay was among
your crowd, and we were given the job of keeping an eye
on him."
The Disgrace sniggered. "Do you two fellows think
you could handle Mackay?" he asked; and Melbourne
Mike and Dandy Charlie laughed outright at the idea.
"I don't see what the fun is," growled the man who
had been speaking. "We gave Mackay all he wanted
before, and we can do it again."
"With clubs, and half a hundred other,skunks at the
ends of them maybe," said Damper Jack, "but never
yourselves. Why, I could fight you both with my eyes
shut and one hand tied."
"We don't want to fight anyone," interposed the other
man, "we only want to mind our own business."
"Then clear out and set about it!" said Uncle Sam.
" But don't come within a mile of our camp again, or
you'll find several fellows as bad as Mackay waiting on
you, and you'll not be handled with kid gloves. Mackay
is not here, as you see, nor do we know where he is,
although we all know him. When we meet him we'll


tell him of you, and if you leave an address I've little
doubt he will save you a lot of trouble by calling upon
you."
"And I reckon he'll give you a mighty sight more
trouble before you get rid of him again," added Mel-
bourne Mike. "But you better clear out now, or some
of us will do old Mac out of a pleasant job by punching
you right here."
The men addressed said nothing, but their eyes glittered
and the expression on their faces showed that they would
have liked to match themselves against the lot in a stand-
up fight. They were professional pugilists of some renown,
and they certainly were not cowards. They were wise
enough, however, to accept the circumstances philoso-
phically. Perhaps their opportunity would come, and
they would then pay back everything with interest. They
took the food given them sullenly, and went off up the pad,
away from the sea, and soon were lost to sight. Then
the miners gathered in their horses, collected the stores
they had hidden, and moved down towards the beach.
They had not gained much information from the two
men, but some conjectures had now been proved to be
facts, and they were ready to act. Less than an hour's
riding brought them out on the beach, but here they
came to a halt. They couldn't go farther without riding
into the sea, and there were no signs to show which way
the people who had camped there during the night had
gone. A thick mist-cloud hung over the water about four
or five miles out from shore, and all around them dank,
fever - laden vapours were rising from the soaking
ground.
"Well, boys, we've got to make some changes in our
mode of progression now," remarked Ignorant Tommy


as he dismounted. " Mackay's island lies somewhere
near, but we'll need to build an ark of some kind to
reach it."
"But we saw the people walk into the sea," reminded
Edmund.
"Yes, but they weren't really trying to drown them-
selves," Ignorant Tommy answered, "and they couldn't
walk across to New Guinea very well, and the distance
is too much to swim. Doubtless they went into the water
to hide their tracks, and came out again at some point
along the beach."
" We'll set about building a raft, anyhow," put in Uncle
Sam. "We cannot go too far away until Mackay and
the others turn up. Likely they'll be able to make all
things plain."
"But what if they are prisoners?" asked Edmund.
"They couldn't fail to be discovered in daylight, and
surely we are not going to leave them to their fate?"
"By no means, my boy," said Ignorant Tommy kindly,
"but we must take care that we do not defeat our own
ends by being foolish. I can hardly believe that our
comrades are prisoners, but, if they are, then the band
that holds them is far too strong to be attacked openly,
and we must therefore exercise great care."
"Oh, blow all that yarn of yours!" broke in Damper
Jack. "We set out to find the Chinese treasure and to
work Mackay's gold reef. Let's get on with our work at
once, or we'll be hungry again."
"All right!" said Ignorant Tommy, who was nothing
if not diplomatic; "but we can't go sailing without some-
thing to sail in, and as we know we've got to find some
island, we'd better collect bark and build a Mauritania.
Dandy Charlie, you can ride along the beach for ten miles


or so, and see if you can pick up the tracks where the
smugglers landed again. You needn't ride east, because
the river would not allow them to go that way."
Ignorant Tommy reasoned correctly, as all admitted.
Not one doubted that Mackay and the others had fol-
lowed the Chinese runners, and would turn up in time
with a complete knowledge of the mysterious people's
doings. When Dandy Charlie returned, some time in the
afternoon, and reported that he had not cut a single track,
nor had he seen any island, the men became strangely
silent. The raft was almost completed, and the cook was
preparing a combined dinner and supper. All knew that
they were baffled so far, for no men could walk so swiftly
in the water that Dandy Charlie on his famous horse could
not overtake them riding along the hard beach. Uncle
Sam himself had crossed the river and explored the beach
for some miles beyond, but he could find no tracks or
any signs to show that human foot had ever trod the
shores. Yet the tracks leading into the water were plain
enough. Where did they come out?
"We'll wait here to-night on the chance of the boys
turning up," Uncle Sam announced after a long talk with
Ignorant Tommy just at sundown. "If nothing happens
to let us know what to do, we'll ride back at sunrise and
hold up the old Chinese camp, and make Ah Sin and Wun
Lung our prisoners. I guess we can make them tell all
we need to know as to where that island is."
"A pity we didn't hold on to these two beggars this
morning," said Damper Jack. "We might have made
them lead us to their headquarters."
" I'm afraid not, Damper Jack," Ignorant Tommy an-
swered. "They would have led us into a trap, and we
simply must not be caught off our guard if we are to be


of any service to our comrades, let alone finding Mackay's
reef."
The hours passed; the stars of tropical night gradually
became obscured with drifting clouds, and in time the rain
came on again. Mercilessly it poured down, but the men
did not care. They had erected a crude shelter, and their
raft lay on the beach ready to be pushed into the water.
They turned in early, for they did not know when they
would be called to action; they hoped it would be soon.
Fat Herman was on guard outside. One man was enough,
as the sea and the river protected them on all sides but on
that where the dark and sombre bush stretched down to
the beach. And the dogs would watch that side. But
Edmund, for one, did not sleep. He had grown to like
Mackay as part of himself, and he knew that the big Scot
would not stay away without finding means to let him
know all was well, unless something had happened which
had not worked out as he had expected. But where had
the other people gone? He had seen them march into the
sea, but they had not come out again at any point within
a day's journey. "They couldn't have gone straight
ahead," he spoke aloud, "for the nearest land in that
direction is New Guinea, unless that wonderful island of
Mackay's lies out there. Jupiter! Of course it does, and
we haven't seen it because of the mist."
" Slow up, Edmund!" spoke the Disgrace's voice in his
ear; "I've been thinking the same thing this last hour.
The island must lie somewhere out there. We'll see for
ourselves, and let strategy go hang!"
"What do you mean, Disgrace? How can we see for
ourselves?"
" By walking out into the sea until we can't go any
farther; then we'll swim a bit, and, if no island turns up,
(0 204) 12


we'll say we're beat too, and turn back. Get up and
shake yourself, and we'll get away. We were cut out
for explorers."
"But we'll tell the others."
"No fear! They wouldn't let us go if they knew our
plans. We'll play this little game on our own. They
can follow us if we strike anything, and, if we don't, we'll
be back before they know. We'll tell Herman, though,
so that they won't be alarmed should we not get back for
breakfast."
The adventure appealed to Edmund, and without a word
he got up and followed the Disgrace out into the rain.
They told Herman of their beliefs and intentions, with
instructions not to say a word unless they failed to appear
at daylight. He promised to respect their wishes, but
implored to be allowed to go with them. " I vas von
fine schwimmer," he said, " und I can shoot straight if
der trouble comes along. Take me, und I vill vatch over
you like a fader. Ve vill show der pirates dat Britons
don't stand no nonsense. Rule, Britannia!"
"No, Herman," the Disgrace broke in, "we cannot
take you. You are too valuable a man to be allowed
away from camp. Be a father to Dandy Charlie and
Damper Jack, and see that they take their meals re-
gularly. You can join us on our next little trip if you
are good, and don't laugh at Ignorant Tommy."
Fat Herman was a philosopher, and, seeing he couldn't
join the deep-sea trip, he helped the two boys to collect
some food, and saw them off, wading into the water with
them until Edmund insisted on his returning. The water
only reached their knees when they had been travelling
for half an hour, although, owing to the terrific rain, their
upper garments were as wet as if they, too, had been im-


mersed. On they stumbled, cutting their boots on sharp
shell edges, and slipping over smoother pearl-oyster
casings. The water was warm and as still as a millpond,
but the spray which they occasionally splashed over them-
selves was, according to the Disgrace, salter than salt
itself. Fishes of all kinds swam around them, and several
times small seasnakes coiled themselves round their legs,
and doubtless did their best to sting through the leather
leggings. But it was huge jellyfish that impeded their
progress most. These creatures gathered round the ad-
venturers so thickly, that at length it seemed as if the lads
were ploughing through their parachute-like semi-solid
bodies instead of water. But they kept on, with eyes
fixed on the black wall of fog which rose ahead, and
which was just beginning to envelope them in its clammy
folds.
"This is the funniest old sea I ever heard of," the
Disgrace remarked, after they had negotiated several
miles of the shallow water. " Maybe we've found a new
road to China. My! if the water would only freeze here
we could slide over to New Guinea in no time!"
"It strikes me that we can go a good bit of the
way without worrying about its freezing," laughed Ed-
mund." "We must have come about five miles from
shore now."
"About that," the Disgrace agreed, turning his gaze
landwards. "But, I'm blowed if I can see where the
shore is. Look here, Edmund, maybe we're only walking
along the edge of the beach. I haven't seen a star to-
night, and as likely as not we've got slewed! We can't
be going straight ahead through the Gulf of Carpentaria?"
"But we are," responded his comrade. "I've been
keeping my eyes fixed on that dark cloud wall in front


all the time, and we've been travelling straight to it. The
rain has stopped now, though, and we'll see some stars
presently."
"Hullo! I've found something floating past me,"
exclaimed the Disgrace, picking a small object from
the water. "Why, it's a Chinese sandal!" he went on.
"Some beggar has lost it. Full speed ahead, Edmund;
we're coming to something all right, for this sandal never
came here itself."
Next moment the boys were in the heart of a cloud
of hot vapour, which rose from the surface of the water
all around. It almost suffocated them, and its evil smell
made them sick.
"I'm done," gasped the Disgrace. "We've struck a
fever belt."
"We've struck the island," Edmund replied, increasing
his pace, and suddenly floundering in deeper water. "Mac-
kay told me of this, and that smell is from mangroves
I see the land."
He regained his feet and splashed through towards the
wall of timber-clad rocks which had so abruptly burst out
before them. The Disgrace made a gallant effort and
struggled after him, and in another minute both lads were
lying flat upon the land as sick as they had ever been
in their lives. They lay still for some time on a bed
of coarse decaying grass which hung right over into
the water. At length the Disgrace spoke. " I always
thought that Damper Jack would kill us with his cooking
some day," he wailed, "and he's done for us this trip, I
reckon."
"We'll be all right presently," gasped Edmund, "but
we must get out of this. It's the smell that is doing the
mischief."


He paused. Another spasm of sickness had come over
him, and the perspiration stood out in great beads on his
face and hands. The attack passed, and once more the
lad struggled to collect himself. He staggered to his feet
and clutched at some form of clinging vegetation growing
over the face of the great damp wall of rock which rose
immediately in front. The creepers stung horribly, but,
strangely enough, the sharp twinge of physical pain re-
sulting brought him round almost instantly. The poison
of the nettle was an antidote to the fever, which acted
miraculously. He lifted his comrade to his feet with
an effort and steadied him.
"We must get up above this belt," he spoke in his
ear. " There is a ledge overhead which I think we can
reach. Catch hold of these dingers and I'll bear you
up from beneath."
"I'm getting all right," muttered the Disgrace feebly,
experiencing the same sudden relief as he grasped the
tough fibrous plants. "I reckon I'll not want to touch
tucker for a year or two after this, mate. I feel I've
still got more in my interior than "
"I feel the same way," sympathized Edmund, "but it
will pass away. Are you able to climb now?"
The Disgrace's reply was to swing himself up, hand
over hand, among the creepers, and, not feeling in a
mood for wasting breath, Edmund said nothing, but fol-
lowed at his heels. To youths such as they were, or,
rather, were under normal conditions, the work was
fairly easy, the network of clinging vegetation afford-
ing good footholds, and solid, though stinging, hand-
grips. It mattered little to them that the rock rose
vertically. They couldn't see its top,, and they did not
look back at the steaming fever-haunted base by the


water's edge. They gained the ledge Edmund had seen,
and rested a brief space, then, tackling the climb again,
they fought upwards another stage. In time the rock
face itself afforded a foothold, and, taking advantage of
every outjutting ledge, and every hole in the surface,
they toiled on in the darkness towards the summit, not
giving a thought to the matter of coming back.
" I say, Edmund," the Disgrace sang out, after they
had climbed for what seemed a very long time, "do
you think the top has been cut off this mountain?"
"Hardly; but mind your grips, or the bottom will
concern you most. Mackay stood on the highest point,
and if we have to climb to the moon we'll do that too."
" I wonder if this is a Jack-and-the-Beanstalk affair,
mate? Will we meet all sorts of funny people at the
top?"
"Perhaps Chinamen, and Messrs. Thomas and Carson;
but save your wind and go slow when you get near the
top."
" Hullo! I'm on it now. Give me your hand, Edmund,
and I'll give you a haul over that stiff bit. My! we're in
a different world. What a pleasant cool breeze this is.
Now, you're landed. What is our next move?"
" I'm fearfully hungry," said Edmund.
"So am I. I could eat Damper Jack himself," re-
sponded the Disgrace.
" How are we to get back?" continued Edmund. " I've
not the slightest idea where the mainland lies, except that
it is through that cloud somewhere."
"Hang the mainland," said the Disgrace. "We're on
Mackay's island; we'll dine."


CHAPTER IX
Prisoners
THE night was intensely dark, the sky was one great
mass of black drifting clouds, and dank vapours envel-
oped the land on all sides but one. On this side one
solitary twinkling star could be seen lying very low on
the horizon. Whether this beacon of hope shone on the
north, south, east, or west the boys did not know; they
had lost their bearings entirely. But they did not care
much; they had kindled a fire, and, under the influence
of the great burning logs they had heaped thereon, their
scanty garments were drying rapidly.
" I hope the boys will not be anxious about us," said
Edmund, after a long period of silence, during which
each had been consuming the food the thoughtful Fat
Herman had insisted upon their taking with them.
"No fear," the Disgrace answered. "They never
worry where I am concerned, because they know I'm
sure to turn up some time, and when they least expect
me. They'll give me beans about you, though. Ignorant
Tommy and Uncle Sam will cut up rough, I know, because
I've led you astray."
Edmund laughed. " But you didn't lead me astray,
Disgrace," he said. "If we have done anything wrong
it is certainly not your fault, and, at any rate, I think


the fact that we have landed here justifies everything
else. But I thought you said you didn't want to eat
again for a long time?"
"Well, I felt like that down in the deathhole we struck
first, but I'll apologize to Damper Jack when I get the
chance. Not eat! My word, I could eat ten Chinamen!"
" What star is that away over there?" asked Edmund,
throwing some more logs on the fire.
" Puncture me if I know," the Disgrace rejoined. " I
never knew of any star hanging so low. I'll tell you when
I get my optics on the old Southern Cross."
" This is certainly a funny part of the world," Edmund
went on. " I don't suppose anyone could ever find it
except by chance? Mackay told me the water was so
shallow all round the shores that no ship could come
near, even if they did happen to get a glimpse of it when
the awful mist belt lifted."
"Then how in thunder are the Chinkies landed?" asked
the Disgrace. " I reckon this is their dumping place, and
where that treasure of theirs is hidden. In fact, the whole
crowd we saw walk into the sea yesterday morning—or
was it this morning, or last week?—must be here now."
" I'm not going to think any more about the matter,"
Edmund said. " Mackay is here if the gang is here, and
that is enough for me. We'll find our own fellows when
the sun rises, and hunt all over this enchanted, mist-
shrouded island until we run against the other crowd, and
then, I suppose, we'll have as big a fight as ever took
place in Australia "
" I don't know about that," the Disgrace said thought-
fully. "You've never been in Mungana on pay day, or
in a back-block shearing shed down south?"
"No; what is special there?"


"Or in White Cliffs on a Sunday? Or Bourke or
Cunnamulla when the drovers come in?"
"No; I haven't even heard of those places.'
" Then you don't know anything about big fights, mate.
I reckon our little affair with the Chinkies and their bosses
will be a mere peaceful school scrimmage compared with
some battles. I've been in Cloncurry and Georgetown,
and some other mining fields. But, blow me! that's the
funniest star I ever saw, Edmund; I don't reckon it's more
than ten miles away."
" I'm surprised at you, Disgrace," said Edmund.
" Don't you know that the nearest star is millions of
miles distant from the earth, and that, although they
sometimes seem to be near "
"Oh, dry up, mate! Ignorant Tommy often fired all
that into me. But he can't know everything, and when
I saw that he didn't even know how to make a Johnny
cake, I reckoned it up that he didn't know very much after
all. I'll bet my pants, too, that that star over there isn't
much farther away than we could ride in an hour, if there
were a track to it Hullo! what was that? Did you
hear anything?"
Both lads sprang up from the logs on which they had
been sitting, and peered into the darkness. Edmund had
heard something; of that he felt certain. But no further
sound broke the stillness, and after listening intently for
some minutes they resumed their seats by the fire and
Decame quiet and thoughtful. Each knew he had heard
some sound for which he could not account, and the
knowledge depressed him considerably. After a bit the
Disgrace laughed.
"We're getting nervy, old man," he said. "Just
imagine what Ginger Bob or Bunyip Bill would say if


they knew we had gone into a funk because we heard
a snake rustling among the grass, or maybe a dingo
going its rounds hunting for its tucker."
" But there is no grass here," said Edmund, "and
dingoes don't make sounds like the tripping of a man
over a stone. I wish it were daylight, so that we could
see what is round about us."
" I reckon we'll have a good laugh at ourselves then,"
the Disgrace said in tones which showed he did not feel
much inclined to indulge in merriment at the prospect.
" Maybe it was a kangaroo or an emu we heard,
Edmund. If one of these long-legged things ran up
against an outcrop 1 , and fell over it, that would account
for the sound."
"Perhaps; but I understood that most animals could
see so well in the dark that they could easily avoid
stumbling over obstacles," Edmund replied. "But never
mind, Disgrace, I think our nerves are a bit shaky; why
should we worry over sounds? We could have heard
plenty, if we had listened for them, coming here."
" I don't know that we should sit so near the fire,
mate," put in the Disgrace. "We are a fine mark in
the firelight, and can be seen a long way off. Jumping
beans! what was that?"
Something whizzed past their heads and stuck in
the ground just beyond the fire. It was a long spear,
and its free end was vibrating in the air like a thing
endowed with life.
"Howling snakes!" gasped the Disgrace. "We're
done for!"
" Run for it first; we're not dead yet!" was his com-
rade's answer, and with a bound they cleared the firelit
1 The surface of a mineral formation, usually rising as a dyke above the ground.


zone and sped into the darkness beyond, just missing a
fusillade of spears which stuck deep in the ground around
the spot where they had been sitting. They ran blindly
for about a hundred yards and then stopped; a waft of
evil-smelling vapour floated up from beneath; they were
on the verge of the wall of rock, and the fever belt lay
some hundreds of feet below. They were trapped as
neatly as if Mackay and his strategy had been behind
the attackers.
" Run along the ledge, Disgrace," cried Edmund.
"We may find a place where we may slip over and
hide."
"No good; we don't know where we are running.
I'd as soon fight it out with the beggars as breathe any
more of that mangrove-smelling cloud anyway. Let's
turn and charge them; we've got our revolvers."
"All right, where are they? We'll account for some
of them at any rate, and our comrades will avenge
us."
" Lie flat, Edmund. I believe the Chinkies have lost
us. They can't see us, anyhow, and maybe we'll get a
chance to creep through them."
They threw themselves upon the ground, and began to
crawl away from the edge of the precipice. Not a sound
gave any indication as to where their enemies were;
but they could still see their fire glowing brightly about
a hundred yards distant. Their object was to crawl
along the cliff side at a safe distance from the ascending
evil-smelling vapour, and then, when they had located
their foes, to rush at them, and break through them,
or fall in the attempt. Still, they were greatly sur-
prised that the Chinamen had made no uproar, as was
usual with them while fighting, and they didn't under-


stand why they were using spears when firearms would
have been more effective. The answer which presented
itself to both lads was the same.
The white leaders had their men under control, and
had taught them that battles were not won by those
who made the greatest noise; and the men had used
spears simply because their leaders were afraid to trust
them with firearms. They would be too dangerous for
them to handle, were they armed like themselves. The
boys crept along the top of the cliff, back in the direction
they had come, but making a wide detour round their
fire. They could see nothing, hear nothing, but they
could now smell humanity in the vicinity, and of the two
evil odours—that arising from the mangrove swamps and
that of their enemies—Edmund thought he preferred the
former.
" I'm a bit beat over this game, mate," whispered
the Disgrace in Edmund's ear as they wriggled along.
"That is not a Chinaman's smell."
" I'm not concerned on a point requiring so much dis-
crimination," Edmund answered. "It is all the same to
us how they smell, we've got to get through them."
"My, you're game, for an old-country fellow!" said the
Disgrace approvingly. "I never thought people at home
were so used to this kind of thing. Of course our own
New Chum is the gamest man in camp, but "
"Shut up, Disgrace; we're not here to discuss possible
subjects for debating societies. You may take it from me
that the old-country men are as indifferent to danger as
you are, when they are brought face to face with it."
An ear-piercing yell broke off the end of Edmund's
discourse, and a body of men numbering about a hun-
dred rose up from the ground directly in front of the


lads. But they were not Chinamen; they were stark-
naked aborigines.
" Howling centipedes!" exclaimed the Disgrace. "This
is goodbye to that fiver I loaned Ginger Bob to send for
a gramophone. Jump, Edmund, and charge through
them."
The boys were on their feet in an instant, and, rushing
forward at full speed, they discharged their weapons, aim-
lessly, but straight in front. Loud yells in demoniacal dis-
cord greeted them, but they heeded not, and next moment
they had hurled themselves against the ranks of their at-
tackers. But their efforts were of little use; they couldn't
fight a hundred fully-trained warriors, proud of their
strength and ability, and gathered there, doubtless, to hold
some important corroborree 1 in which their prowess would
be called in question.
Edmund struck out blindly with his fists when the
chambers of his two revolvers were empty, but a brawny
aboriginal clubbed him while he was wrestling with an-
other greasy opponent, and he went down instantly, and
became oblivious to all that followed. But what followed
wasn't much; the Disgrace had fought bravely and with
good effect, but he couldn't prevail against such over-
whelming numbers, and almost at the same moment as
Edmund went down, he, too, was rendered unconscious
by a blow from a heavy club wielded by some young
warrior of undoubted strength.
The aborigines resumed their advance, leaving only a
few to guard their prisoners, and some time afterwards
the boys regained their senses. They were lying beside
each other, tied together with fibrous bonds, and a con-
necting tether fastened both to one of their captors, who
1 Religious rite.


squatted near watching them. Darkness still lay over the
land, but many stars were now visible, and from the
position of the Cross both lads knew dawn was approach-
ing. What that would mean for them they did not know;
still, they felt glad that it was aborigines whose prisoners
they were and not Chinamen. The natives would only kill
them, but the latter would torture them first as they had
done many white prospectors before.
Edmund lay still and took in his surroundings. Dawn
was just breaking. There were only half a dozen warriors
guarding them; they were painted all over their bodies in
a series of white stripes, evidently got up to resemble
skeletons. And they certainly looked like skeletons, the
white paint along their ribs accentuating the fact that a
good meal was a thing they did not often enjoy. Edmund
knew nothing of the customs of the aborigines beyond the
few facts Mackay had imparted to him casually while
riding north, but it did not require much wisdom on his
part to know that some important ceremony was at hand.
He wondered why Mackay had not mentioned their pre-
sence on the island, and was pondering vaguely over the
question whether the Chinese knew of them or not, when
the Disgrace rolled half over and whispered:
" Are you 0.K., mate?"
" I'm as good as a dozen dead men yet," Edmund re-
plied in another whisper, " but my head feels as big as
a balloon. How are you feeling?"
" Blamed hungry! You haven't got any bits of damper
in your pocket, I suppose? I'm sure I could break away
if I'd something to eat."
" I'm afraid you'll have to keep on starving," Edmund
replied. 4 'l've nothing, and I don't expect we'll get any-
thing from these painted people. But don't struggle to


SH ( jjj
* 1> / '"^TaSilttf' • wBBPr f^W
■W. flB |r - Mm ' * meff^mMA^lfJH
jc [ ~,
■P ' ® .-,' j ■! ?'f ; " ;
f M
CAPTURED BY THE ABORIGINES




break away, Disgrace. Let's see the thing through; there
must be some fun looming ahead when the natives and the
Chinese meet."
" Hogowodgaga" 1 spoke the native to whom they were
tied, at that moment sitting up and motioning the lads to
crawl nearer.
" Parlez-vous frangais?" said Edmund as politely as
he could under the circumstances, and in keeping with
the fact that French was the only foreign language of
which he had any knowledge.
" Cumbi whitby budgerie ," 2 responded the aboriginal;
and the Disgrace answered:
"We can't, old fellow; we're tied. Be a budgerie
nigger and cut these things."
The native grinned, and some of his companions
laughed outright.
"Where him's pigtail?" asked the first speaker in the
dialect used by English-speaking natives.
"We never had pigtails," the Disgrace replied. " We're
not Chinkies; we're Australians."
"The same as you are," added Edmund.
"What you want here?" next demanded the native,
"an' where your other fellows gone?"
"We don't want anything," the Disgrace hastened to
assure the native. "And we have no connection with any
other firm doing business on this island as yet, although
I expect you'll have to deal with our comrades sooner
or later. We have no quarrel with you people, and I
reckon you're not playing the game in treating us in
this way."
" Hims talk too much," the English-speaking native
1 Come here.
2 I want you. I'm a friend of the white fellow.


interrupted. "Hims wait till warriors come back. They
cut hims up in chops for corroborree. Black fellows
friends of white men who look for yellow stuff, but they
no' friends with yellow man with tail coming out of his
head. Bymbye warriors catch 'em all, an' my word!
God save the King! Won't we have budgerie corro-
borree! Hims know how to do the fire dance?"
"Look here, old hungry bags," exclaimed the Dis-
grace, "you're on the wrong track. We haven't any
tails sticking out of our heads. We're budgerie white
fellows looking for yellow stuff, whether it is on feet or
in the ground. Your people have made a mighty big
mistake if they have taken us for Chinkies."
" Hims talk too much. What for other fellow no
speak?" broke in the native, looking at Edmund.
"Oh, he's too tired!" said the Disgrace. "Cut him
free and he'll talk until you're white in the face."
"Um!" rejoined the other, who probably did not under-
stand more than a fraction of what the Disgrace said.
"You fellows no business here on our devil island. Our
warriors come now; you go through big corroborree,
you all right; you no', you make budgerie tucker for
bunyip."
The Disgrace was about to protest again, when Edmund
said in his ear: "I can free myself at any time now; my
hands can easily slip through the loop, and I have worked
my feet quite slack."
" Keep on pretending you're three-quarters dead, then,"
the Disgrace replied; "I'm beginning to think it might be
a good thing for us to see this thing through. The niggers
don't like the Chinkies, and we might use them on our
side."
" Hims better say less now," the native interrupted.


" Warriors coming, an' no' pleased they no' catch more
fellows with tails. They cut out your tongue you no'
stopy talk."
" I'm a dumb man," muttered the Disgrace with a
shudder. ** I'll never smile again."
It was now broad daylight, but only on one side could
the prisoners command any view. Excepting on this side
the great walls of mist shut off the world, and they had
not the faintest idea in which direction their camp and
comrades lay. Edmund knew that it was on the open
side they had seen the solitary star, but now only a limit-
less expanse of sea, stretching from the gently sloping
shore of the island into nothingness, met his view. Yet,
he started suddenly; on that dreary motionless waste of
waters his excited fancy made out a ship. Surely he was
not dreaming. He couldn't rub his eyes, so he closed
them for a time and looked again. Yes, there it was,
riding securely at anchor about seven or eight miles
distant, which meant, perhaps, only four or five miles
from the shore.
" Look!" he whispered to the Disgrace. "The star we
saw last night was the masthead light of a ship, and I'll
wager anything it is the Vulture."
"It doesn't matter, mate; we're as good as cooked,"
the Disgrace answered. "We made a good try at doing
something special to surprise the boys, but Mackay was
right after all. It's strategy that counts every time, and
we haven't any of that sort of thing. We'll be roasted
to make breakfast for the niggers in less than an hour,
and I owe the storeman in Burketown for this shirt and
pants I'm wearing."
" Don't worry!" Edmund advised. " I believe we'll live
to get that debt squared at any rate. But let us take
(0 204) 13


things coolly, as Mackay would do. We'll wriggle out
of this hole somehow, if we keep our nerves."
" Hims shut hims mouth now if hims no fools," put in
the native who had done all the talking; and the lads,
seeing the wisdom of his remark, obeyed. The warriors,
who had apparently been hunting for more prisoners, now
approached, and great was their surprise at beholding the
two men they had captured during the darkness. Their
captives did not understand what they said, but it was
easily evident that the natives had thought it was Chinese
they had been tracking. Several came over and ran their
greasy hands over the lads' heads, to make certain that
the telltale pigtail was not hidden somewhere, and one
or two lay down beside the prisoners and closely examined
their eyes to see if they could detect the almond-like slant.
The aborigines, in Edmund's opinion, were not so brainless
as he had been led to believe. Much talk was indulged in
before any movement was made, and the native who had
been made responsible for the safe keeping of the pri-
soners discoursed long—and probably learnedly—on some
subject which clearly had close bearing on the case. His
words were listened to with much attention. He seemed
to be of some importance among his people; but, as the
result, the prisoners were laid feet to feet—bound, of
course, with thongs passing from the ankles of one to
those of the other —and raised on long poles and carried
away. How many men helped to carry them the lads did
not know. They couldn't talk now, as their heads were
at the extreme ends of their most uncomfortable litter,
and, as their carriers spoke in their own language, they
learned nothing. Still, they were not handled roughly,
and, realizing this, the poor boys gathered fresh hope.
They were not carried very far. A halt was called as the


warriors began to descend a hill, and the prisoners were
stretched out upon the ground. They could now see all
that was taking place, but they did not wish it to be
known that they could move, and so lay flat, staring at
the sky.
The next part of the programme was somewhat alarm-
ing. Still tied together, feet to feet, they were lowered
over a precipice, the Disgrace head down, and conse-
quently Edmund in a natural position. Luckily the de-
scent was short, for it tried the muscles of Edmund's feet
severely to prevent the thongs slipping off. The natives
were not adepts at binding, but he couldn't very well in-
form them of their shortcomings in that respect. How-
ever, they were landed safely on a ledge of rock and
bundled into a cave, where the warriors soon after
assembled, and began discussing matters which doubt-
less were of great importance to them, but which had no
meaning to the boys. For an hour or more they lay still
and listened to the babel of sounds. They were tired,
hungry, and thirsty; their estimate of their own abilities
had gone down considerably. After some time they con-
trived to twist themselves alongside each other, and then,
regardless of their surroundings, they began to talk.
They had now lost all hope of escape, and they cared
little whether the natives heard and understood them or
not.
"These are Myall blacks," the Disgrace said. "They
are the most ferocious tribe of niggers in Australia, and
at the times of their corroborree they are cannibals. I
reckon we're as good as lost explorers now. I wonder
if the boys will be sorry for us?"
" Perhaps they are nearer us now than we think,"
Edmund answered hopefully. "But I'm awfully worried


about Mackay. I wonder if that English-speaking native
would tell us anything about him?"
"You leave Mackay to attend to his own funeral,
mate," said the Disgrace. "He'll come through a long
way easier than we will. I wish I had learned more about
strategy when I was at school. I can see it's a mighty
fine thing."
"You are a pessimist, Disgrace. We're not dead yet.
Lie over on your side, and I'll bite through some of those
cords on your wrists. I can see they have tied you up
tighter than me, and you must be suffering."
"You just bet I am, mate. My blood has stopped
flowing, and I don't know which end of me is my head,
or if I've got any feet. But you're a bosker, mate;
you don't howl out, and you must be feeling as bad as
I do."
" Oh, I'm all right, Disgrace! They haven't tied me the
right way. I can slip my feet through easily, and I'm
sure I can pull my hands out of this silly loop any time.
Wriggle closer, so that they can't see me using my
teeth."
The warriors gave little heed to their two prisoners, and
talked on excitedly in a language that sounded to Edmund
like a repetition of " urra wurra 00100 wooloo". They
seemed very angry, and, from the way some of them bran-
dished their spears and boomerangs while speaking, the
boys guessed they were planning out some brilliant scheme
of battle with a foe they knew would not be easily van-
quished. While they discussed ways and means, Edmund
used his teeth, and with such good effect that very soon
he had relieved his comrade of the tightly fitting thongs
which bound his wrists. Then both turned as far out of
sight as possible and reloaded their revolvers. They felt


better after that, and began to take fresh interest in their
surroundings.
"If we only had a good feed and a billy of hot tea we'd
be all right," the Disgrace said. " I reckon we'll give
these skeleton people all the corroborree they'll want
before we're finished with them."
But the natives had now come to some conclusion in
regard to their plans, and they began to leave the cave.
The warrior who knew English approached when most
had departed, and, in a manner which showed he was not
unfriendly, sat down beside them.
" How hims feel?" he enquired.
"Rotten!" answered Edmund. "Were thirsty and
hungry, and anxious about our comrades."
" Hims like drink?" said the native, who, if he didn't
know what was said, guessed fairly near the mark. Evi-
dently he had spent the greater part of his life among
white people.
"A drink?" repeated the Disgrace. "My word, give
me a gallon of water, and I'll say you're the finest fellow
I know!"
The native grinned, and went off to the mouth of the
cave, coming back next moment with a water bag filled
with the precious fluid. He placed it to the Disgrace's
mouth, and chuckled with glee as he saw its contents go
down his parched throat. But the Disgrace checked him-
self suddenly. " Give it to my mate," he said to the native.
" I am a skunk; he needs it as badly as I do."
"Plenty more," smiled the painted one. "Have big
drink." He took another water bag from a warrior's
hands, and inserted the outlet in Edmund's mouth, laugh-
ing gaily as he saw how the drink was appreciated.
"You're a mighty budgerie fellow," the Disgrace said


when he had finished, "and if I ever get back to camp
I'll give you the old shirt I was going to let Fat Herman
have."
"And I'll give you something too," put in Edmund, who
thought he ought to say something to show his gratitude.
" Hims no' give something now?" queried the native.
" No' much time afterwards. No' got pipe or baccy hims
don't want? Hims no need smoke after corroborree."
"We don't smoke," said Edmund, "but I'll get you a
pound of tobacco and a pipe from Mackay when I see him,
and give all to you; and if there is anything else you have
a fancy for I'll do my best to get it for you."
" Urn!" said the native doubtfully; " that no' much good
to Dirty Face. You no' likely live after corroborree to-
night."
" Oh, my poor nerves!" exclaimed the Disgrace. " Have
we got more worries in front of us?"
"Tell us all about it," said Edmund. "We'll not blame
you, and we'll leave you everything in our wills."
" Well, my name is Dirty Face. I get good educate
down at Cairns in mission reserve; but I like go on the
walkabout, so run away from mission one day, and bym-
bye meet hims own people out here. We no' quarrel with
white fellows—they budgerie; but Myalls no' like pigtail
men. Well, we come here for corroborree, an' find place
crowded with yellow fellows. We no' like that; this place
belong Myalls before sun an' moon began. We watch an'
watch, an' to-night is big, big corroborree. We catch 'em
all, an' give 'em to devils. My word! You bet!"
" But we've nothing to do with the yellowskins," put in
the Disgrace. "We've a quarrel with them ourselves, and
were tracking them when we came here. Set us free, and
we'll fight for you. We're your friends."


"That all right, but our fellows no' believe that. This
place only used for corroborree. Every man who puts
foot on ghingi 1 land must go through ghingi corroborree.
Myalls no kill hims, but hims must walk through fires
to-night."
"Which is mighty bad for hims," said the Disgrace,
"seeing that hims and heat don't very well agree."
"Oh, hims take plenty pidcherie 2 hims no feel heat!"
observed Dirty Face airily. "No' hurt much if walk
quick."
" But we haven't any pidcherie," wailed the Disgrace,
"and, even if we had, it wouldn't help us much. It acts
differently on white fellows; I tried it on Bunyip Bill
already, and it only made him sick."
" Um, you great talkers! Dirty face must go away
now; hims safe here until warriors come back. My word!
you bet! God save the King! Mighty big corroborree
to-night. You see fun when pigtails walk the fires."
"We'll not be able to enthuse much, I fear," Edmund
laughed. "But where are you going?"
"Warriors go meet big Myall chief. Hims come over
to-day to boss corroborree here, where no white fellow
ever see. My word, we soon kill all yellow fellows!
Dirty face mighty big chief himself, you bet, my word!
He give hims pidcherie to-night, an' hims no' worry
'bout fire test. My word! Goodbye! God save the
King!"
The dusky warrior smiled pleasantly at the lads and
stalked out of the cave, followed by the few natives
who had not already departed. The boys were alone.
"Great Gulf of Carpentaria!" ejaculated the Disgrace.
"Did you follow what he said, Edmund?"
1 Devil. 2 A wonderful drug.


" Yes, fairly well. We have set foot upon ghingi
island, and every human being who does so has to go
through some fiery ordeal which I don't understand. The
aborigines will have their work cut out for them if they
tackle Carson and Thomas and their Chinese gang. I
should like very much to see their fire dance, but I'm
afraid it's too risky."
"But we've got to take principal parts in it, man.
We're the only performers caught as yet."
" I rather fancy we'll cry off, Disgrace. We're not
going to wait here until the performance begins. I am
very hungry myself, and I depend upon your skill to
provide a decent meal. Come on, let's clear out of this.
It's noon, and we haven't even washed our faces yet."
Edmund pulled his feet through the fibrous bonds which
were looped round them, and withdrew his hands from the
improvised shackles on his wrists. In less than a minute
afterwards he had cut the Disgrace free, and they both
stood up and stretched themselves.
"We haven't any time to waste," said Edmund. "I
don't want to walk any fires to-night and I don't suppose
you do; therefore it is time we were a good distance away
from here."
" Right, mate, and it's time we had something to eat
too. We'll get out and see what our luck brings us."
Next moment the lads were on the ledge outside the
cave. A valley lay beneath them through which a stream
trickled, and the afternoon sun beat down upon them
strongly. A silence as of a dead world hung over all.
Where they were they did not know, and as for plans,
they had none, except to get away from their present
uncomfortable position.
"Well, Disgrace, what is our next move?" asked Ed-


mund. "If we climb aloft we might make a rush for the
top of the rocks and slide down into the sea before being
caught."
"I'm too hungry to take the risk," the Disgrace an-
swered before he had completed his sentence. " I see
rabbits or something down below, and I move we get
into that valley. Afterwards, we can do as we think
best."
Edmund was quite of the same mind, and at once
they began the descent to the lower regions. It was a
comparatively simple matter, and soon they were washing
their faces in the waters of the creek which occupied the
bottom of the valley.
They could see no signs of the aborigines, but as
turkeys, pigeons, and other winged game were abun-
dant, and wild pigs, rabbits, and other creatures they
did not know played about, indifferent to their presence,
they did not care. They ran down the creek for some
distance, and then, entering a clump of timber, they halted
to form some plan of operations. The position of the
sun indicated early afternoon, and they had not tasted
food that day. They climbed through the timber until
away from the natural track down the valley. They
knew they were as safe there as anywhere on the
island, because the natives could easily trace them up
no matter where they went, if they so desired. But
the young adventurers had ceased to trouble over un-
pleasant possibilities. They knew that they might fall
into the hands of the Chinese at any moment, but as
they had come to the island expressly to see what these
people were doing, and to help their comrades if in
their keeping, they did not care.
Nevertheless, both lads had come to the conclusion


that, after all, caution and forethought meant more
than daring when dealing with people so much stronger
than themselves. They kindled a fire behind a huge ant-
hill, and very soon had a scrub turkey, which the Dis-
grace shot with his revolver, roasting in the ashes.
While cooking operations were thus proceeding, they
climbed a tall cedar tree so that they might, from its
highest branches, see what the island was like. How-
ever, they could not see much, as the sides of the valley
shut in their view on every hand, excepting the direction
in which the stream flowed. They could trace the course of
the water right down to the sea. It wound its way through
luxuriantly hued timber belts, in an ever-widening valley,
until it burst through upon the gleaming white beach.
Then it merged its vapour-born flood with the tranquil
blue of the ocean, that stretched in an unbroken scin-
tillating mass, until it in turn blended with the horizon.
But what took up the boys' attention most was the
steamer which lay motionless about half a dozen miles
from the shore. A thin wisp of steam hung round its
yellow funnel, and its long hull glistened in the intense
sunlight like a band of fire.
"That's the Vulture all right," spoke Edmund medi-
tatingly, "but I'm sure her hull was not white when I
saw her in London, and I remember distinctly that her
funnel was black."
"Well, paint is fairly cheap in the old country, and
even a Chinaman can rub it on good enough for most pur-
poses," said the Disgrace. " I reckon that ship changes
its colour, and some other things too, most ports it
enters."
"I can hardly grasp the fact that all this is not ima-
gination," said Edmund. "Just think that here we are


on an unknown island, and remember that the twentieth
century has passed its first decade."
"I don't know much about decades," replied Disgrace.
" I suppose you mean that sort of thing old King Cole has
got in Melbourne for selling books in. 1 don't see that we
need worry about them. It doesn't matter much although
we get wet."
"I wasn't talking of arcades, Disgrace. I was merely
trying to express my feelings regarding the strangeness
of our position. We are in serious danger from several
sources; there is a ship out there belonging to civilized
people; it seems natural that we should signal to it in
some way, or make a raft and sail out to it; but we
know that if we did so we should simply be going into
the hands of our enemies. Our much-talked-of civilization
isn't so very much after all, Disgrace."
"That's a fact. The turkey will be nearly ready now;
let's get down and attend to him." The Disgrace was not
very sentimentally inclined at the moment. Probably the
knowledge that dinner was nearly ready was answer-
able. They climbed down, took a long drink at the
stream, and then prepared to dine. They had wasted
too much time already, they thought, and they had yet
to find Mackay and the others, and get back to their
comrades.
The turkey was cooked to perfection, and its feathers
came off clean with the surrounding caked ashes. Even
Damper Jack could not have done better, and he was
a past master in the subtle art of bush cooking. They
dined well, but Edmund thought he would always carry
some salt in future; it made such a difference to food,
and in the adventurous life upon which he had embarked
it was well to be prepared.


"I reckon, Edmund," said the Disgrace, after the meal
was over, "we'll have to go out and capture that steamer.
If it is the smuggling ship, all the Chinese crew and the
white fellows who run it must be on board now, and if
we mean to save the New Chum and Mackay, not to
take into account Ginger Bob, the Doctor, Little Peter,
and Bunyip, who are having the time of their lives, we'll
have to act pretty lively, in case the ship sails away
where we can't very well follow her, seeing we haven't
got our horses."
" Well, we'll make a canoe of bark and go out to
her to-night," said Edmund. "That is, if we can't
walk out as we did coming here. Mackay told me the
water was shallow, except for some holes, all around
the island."
" Howling snakes! I see a mob of Chinamen sneaking
up through the trees," the Disgrace interrupted. "They're
looking for the aborigines, I'll bet. My word, there will
be fun to-night!'


CHAPTER X
Run to Earth
EDMUND knocked down an enormous anthill and threw its
pieces on the fire, and, quickly realizing" that their presence
was not yet known, but might be detected through their
fire, the Disgrace danced upon the embers and crushed
the incombustible substance of the anthill formation in
through the red ashes. In a moment the tell-tale glow
was effectually extinguished, and, permeated with the
thrill of adventure, the boys awaited developments. They
had long ago lost all sense of fear, and they were filled
with satisfaction to know that the Chinese were still on
the island, and that, therefore, their comrades could not
be far away.
There were about fifty men in the crowd, and they were
passing up the creek with the shambling gait—half-run,
half-walk—peculiar to themselves. Several Europeans
were among them, the boys could see. Evidently they
were some of the officers of the Vulture and the leaders
of the Chinese, who doubtless were members of the crew,
or, at any rate, part of the equipment of that mysterious
vessel. What their object was in deliberately running into
the stronghold of the aborigines the watchers could not
guess, but they were determined they would soon find out.
The army of Chinamen passed on, oblivious of their


proximity, and the sun glided slowly down behind the
summit ridges of the valley. Already the mosquitoes
were singing their fiendish evening chorus, and the frogs
were croaking in the banks of the creek.
" Well, Edmund," spoke the Disgrace, as the Celestials
became lost to sight round some rocks beyond the timber
zone, "what is our game? You propose it and I can
propose an amendment, as Ignorant Tommy calls the
thing, if I think differently. Our fellows must be on
this island now, if they came after us when Fat Herman
told them. I reckon to-night will see as big a circus
as any man ever saw, and I'm real sorry we're not so
fresh as we might be. Isn't it funny how a fellow feels
washed out if he doesn't get any sleep for a night?"
" You are wonderfully long-winded, Disgrace," laughed
Edmund. " I'm too tired to say all the things I think,
but I'm chiefly concerned about Mackayr Where can
he be? He wouldn't go out to that ship a second time
if he had an ounce of fight left in him, I know."
" But where in thunder is he, then? With the New
Chum, and Ginger Bob, and Bunyip he could have fought
anything. Why, we have not howled much ourselves, as
yet, and I reckon we've come through as much as any
men could."
" We've only been playing ourselves, Disgrace, so far,
and well you know it. We've got to do something now,
though, and the sooner we set about it the better it will
be for all concerned. Our fellows must be on the island
by this time."
The Disgrace grunted. "Maybe," he said. "But I
reckon you've struck a point that shows strategy is
not always equal to promptness. Ignorant Tommy and
Uncle Sam would think for a week after hearing Fat


Herman's story, before they would allow Dandy Charlie
or Damper Jack to come out here after us. But come
on, we'll follow the Chinkies and take part in the fun.
It will be dark directly, and there's no moon."
"All right! but we'll not be any more foolish than
we can help," Edmund agreed. " We'll follow the
Chinese band and see what happens. Knowledge is
power, every time, and we must know everything."
Without more ado the lads started up stream after the
Chinamen, being careful, however, to keep well out of
sight. They were not now foolishly reckless, and their
sympathies were decidedly with the aborigines. Why the
Chinamen from the Vulture should attack these simple-
minded people they did not know, but they laughed to
themselves as they remembered that the natives were
hunting for the Chinese.
Up the valley the Chinese and their European associates
continued to force their way, until at length they reached
its head. On three sides the rocks rose sheer above them;
and behind them, although they did not know it, two boys
closed the fourth side. And these two lads were fully
alive to their work; they knew what they were doing, and
what the result would be if they were caught by the men
who sported pigtails.
"Hullo!" suddenly exclaimed the Disgrace. "The
beggars are camping! What can they mean? They are
just under the cave where we were held, too. My word,
they'll get a surprise before long!"
"We'll lie here and watch," said Edmund. "They
have some game on, which is much deeper than what
appears to us. It is now sundown, and probably they're
hiding—or think they are—until darkness sets in com-
pletely. I hope the aborigines have seen them."


" You bet they have," the Disgrace said. " A native
can track up a man like a dog after a rabbit, and if he
happens to be a Chinaman, so much the easier is his
work. But, thunder and lightning, Edmund, and rain
and snowstorm, and Parliamentary ructions! aren't we
going to have a bosker time to-night?"
"We are," said Edmund, looking back through the
fast-falling gloom. "And it strikes me that if we come
through it all right we may consider ourselves lucky.
Don't you hear anything?"
" I do, and I smell something too. It's niggers.
They're coming up the creek after the Chinkies, and
we're between them. Bother it, mate, we don't want to
be referees."
" Decidedly not," replied Edmund. " It's a case of
getting up a tree again. I expect we'll be as agile as
monkeys before long. All the same, this kind of ex-
citement is getting monotonous. I wish some of our
friends would do something."
As he spoke, both lads climbed into the leafy branches
of an ironbark tree. They could see much humour in
the situation, but at the moment they couldn't very well
appreciate it. The aborigines were hunting for the
Chinese, and these people were looking for the natives.
Both parties, for some reason or other not apparent to
the boys, were eager to fight, and each evidently thought
it had trapped the other. The possible presence of a
third party did not enter into the calculation of either.
The Chinese had camped at the head of the gully just
underneath the cave the boys knew so well, but which
was now lost to sight in the darkness. Doubtless their
intentions were to do some daring deed under cover of
the night, but it was obvious that they did not know


of the cave. Nor were they aware of the horde behind
them.
The aborigines passed underneath the boys. They were
running in an irregular line which, though apparently
the result of indifference, would have been termed first-
class play by military authorities. They jabbered to each
other as they ran, with sublime disregard to the fact that
they might be overheard. They were following the trail
of the hated yellow men who had desecrated their sacred
place by placing their feet upon its shores, and they had
no doubt as to what would happen when they overtook
their enemies. Their chief had told them to drive the
pigtails back into the sea, and catch enough to furnish
chief actors for the grand corroborree; and they meant
to do so at any cost.
Swiftly the darkness of tropical night fell over the little
valley, and the closeness and general oppressiveness of
the atmosphere heralded the bursting of the rainclouds.
They had been gathering all day, and every night for the
next month they would give back to the earth in rain the
moisture the fierce heat of the sun extracted during the
day. In short, the Gulf rainy season had started.
"What's our programme?" asked the Disgrace, when
the natives had passed out of hearing distance.
" I don't know. There is going to be a fight, but
does it concern us? None of the people are our friends,
and although the natives are not really our enemies, we
know they'll make us walk their fires if they catch us.
We are looking for our own comrades, and I fancy it's
by hanging on the Chinese that we'll find them."
" I wish it weren't so dark," said the Disgrace.
" What's the good of having first seats if you can't
see? I vote we get down on the ground again and
( 0 204) 14


crawl up closer; then, when the Chinkies make a move,
either to run away or anything else, we can slide along
after them and find out where they stay when at home
on shore. Maybe, too, the aborigines will give them
beans, and the fun should be worth seeing."
Edmund had no objection. He knew it was foolhardy
to go any nearer to the opposing parties, but he also
felt that if Mackay and the others were prisoners in the
hands of the Chinese they had a decided interest in the
impending fight, and that their duty was to keep as
close to the Chinamen as possible, irrespective of danger.
They crept up the stream carefully. They did not fear
being overheard by the natives, though they had no desire
to run into an ambush prepared by either party, but great
fat snakes, of varieties unknown to the lads, wriggled
across their path in profusion, and the sensation expe-
rienced when they squelched one of these creatures under
foot was not pleasant.
The natives had now become strangely silent. The
situation was surely unique. The Chinese had built one
or two small fires, on which they were cooking rice and
tea. They were doubtless aware that the aborigines had
some stronghold on the top of the ridges flanking the
valley, and they were getting ready to attack it in their
own way; they were masters of strategy. But while they
were anticipating an easy triumph, the despised aborigines
were stalking them. Then where were the several parties
of white men? The lads laughed to themselves as the
position of things dawned more fully upon them. They
knew that their own comrades were not fools, and they
expected that they were also ready to take a hand in the
many-sided game about to be played.
They could not now see, but they knew the general


configuration of the country, and, crossing the creek, they
got behind some detached boulders at the base of a wall
of rock almost opposite the cave where they had been
imprisoned, and waited. They could see the glimmer of
the Chinamen's fires, and make out occasional forms which
flitted around attending to cooking operations; but of the
aborigines not a sound could be heard, nor was any sign
given of their presence. But the boys knew they had
already surrounded the unsuspecting Celestials, and that
very soon the great valley would resound with the noise
of battle. They had not any fear regarding themselves;
they were long past that stage, and all events now looked
to them as if played upon a stage expressly for their
benefit.
" I wonder when the performance is supposed to start!"
the Disgrace muttered, making himself as comfortable as
his cramped position would allow. Before Edmund could
make any reply the answer came, and, even expecting it
as they had been, the lads were startled with its sudden-
ness.
A yell burst out, and Edmund thought it wonderfully
like that which he had heard at a great football match in
the old country when the favourites had had a goal scored
against them. Another and another followed, if anything
fiercer and shriller than the first, and then the sound of a
fusillade of spears striking the ground. Answering shouts
from the surprised Chinamen, as they ran to seek cover,
blended discordantly with the musical swish of boomerangs
as they flew through the air, and then the scene became
transformed, as if galvanized into life. Half a hundred
flaming torches appeared in a great irregular circle, com-
pletely surrounding the Chinese camp, and only excluding
the hidden watchers because the creek was between them


and the nearest torchbearer. The ring of lights shed a
weird lustre over the enclosed space, and rendered most
things as plain as on a bright, full moonlight night. It
contracted swiftly, becoming more compact as it did so,
until it had formed a regular blazing wall around the
Chinese, now plainly discernible in the middle of the awe-
some ring. The noise was now terrific, for the Chinese,
realizing that the people they had been hunting had come
to them, were fast working themselves up into the neces-
sary excitement before fighting. This "working up"
seemed to consist of emitting yells even more frightsome
than those of the aborigines. They were wonderfully
skilled in the art of war, and at least knew its elementary
principles as well as their enemies. Both parties believed
in imparting terror into the hearts of their opponents
before settling down to more serious work, but it is ex-
tremely unlikely that their vocal efforts would have had
much effect upon a Highland regiment. Still, none shirked
the fight. The natives pressed in closer and closer, with
spears poised on their womerahs 1 , and boomerangs ready
for work at shorter range, and the Chinese huddled to-
gether waiting for their opportunity. It didn't seem to
matter in the slightest that their numbers were being
steadily, if slowly, reduced.
" Great Sydney!" gasped the Disgrace. "The Chinkies
will be wiped out in another minute! But why don't they
charge the niggers ? They could cut through them as
easily as through cheese with their knives. My word, 1
should be in this circus!" The Disgrace was certainly
excited.
Shrieking with wonderfully sustained power, the natives
continued to narrow their circle round the hated pigtails,
1 Spear throwers.


and then the boys saw that at least half of their number
were only torchbearers. They had strange ideas of fight-
ing indeed! Stolidly, in full glare of the smoking lights
whirled in fantastic movements all around them, the
Chinese stood and yelled out a series of ear-splitting
sounds, which probably comprised curses, taunts, and
prayers, all in one. So far that had been their only effort
of defence, and clearly it was proving unavailing. The
boys were greatly surprised, for it was not clear to them
why the Chinese had come out on the warpath after the
aborigines if they were not better prepared for conflict
than they had as yet shown themselves. Still, Edmund
had little doubt of the result; he had recognized the figures
of Carson and Thomas among the Chinese, and he knew
these two were controlling their men for some reason
which, doubtless, would soon be apparent.
And now the natives were so near that they had dis-
carded their spears and taken to their clubs. They had
not reckoned upon so easy a victory, and their courage
was sublime. They closed with their enemies, and the
sound of wooden clubs breaking or being broken on
Chinese skulls was added to the din.
Just then the pent-up floods of the heavens came down,
and a vivid streak of lightning lit up the valley from coast
to mountain top. At the same moment the Chinese threw
themselves prostrate upon the ground, and from their
midst there spat out flashes of fire which for a moment
seemed miniature continuations of the electrical pheno-
mena. But they were something deadlier, as the natives
soon realized, for either each flash, or its accompanying
whip-like bark, was followed instantaneously by the down-
fall of a warrior. They made a combined effort, and yelled
louder than ever, and to the boys it seemed that the


thunderclap, as if ashamed, was trying to pass unnoticed
in the din. While they yelled the heavens still, they plied
their clubs, and the Celestials wriggled among their feet
and tripped them. The natives who fell had a poor
chance of ever rising again; the Chinese make no mis-
take in some things. And the spiteful cracks and flashes
still continued, and the number of the active natives be-
came less accordingly. They paused in wonderment, and
while they did so another half-dozen went down.
"Great Gulf!" exclaimed the Disgrace. "The niggers
don't know they're being shot. Howling snakes! I never
knew the Chinkies could shoot like that. There's half a
dozen of them fighting the mob."
"Those are not Chinkies," Edmund said; "those are
the white officers of the Vulture in Chinese dress again.
I'm wondering if we shouldn't take a hand in this?"
"We haven't time now, but I'd like to get a shot at
the two fellows you know among the Chinkies. Hullo!
The niggers have got enough. They're clearing out!"
"Shut up, Disgrace! Remember we're not merely
spectators in a theatre; we're in great danger ourselves."
"By Jupiter, we are, mate! See, the niggers have
broken away in all directions, and some are crossing the
creek to our side. Hullo! did you hear that? I'll swear
I heard a voice I knew among the A.B.'s still standing.
My word! Look!"
Some of the natives, less superstitious, or endowed with
more sense than the others, had tried to stay the headlong
flight of their comrades from the scene of magic which
they had thought belonged only to the white man. Find-
ing their threats, advice, and curses without effect upon
the fear-stricken members of the band, they had dropped
upon the ground themselves, and, to the utter amazement


of the two watchers, had begun to fire upon the Chinese
marksmen. They set about their business calmly and
leisurely, and apparently gave no thought to the fact that
they were now only three or four against a couple of score
of Chinamen.
And where had they obtained their firearms? Another
mystery had arisen, which for a moment baffied the boys
But only for a moment. The natives had fled, that fact
was evident; and with a yell that easily exceeded the best
efforts of their late opponents the solid mass of Chinese
broke into pursuit, leaving only about six men of their
own side to flash away at the silly niggers, who had
somehow become possessed of revolvers, but, of course,
could not use them, and who had elected to fight the
battle out.
But the mystery was now solved by the spectators.
Their comrades, whom they had left upon the mainland,
were fighting for the aborigines. How they had got
among them was another mystery, and how they had
contrived to be present at the fight with the Chinamen
was a problem too deep to think about. But there was no
room for doubt now. Fat Herman's form, although naked
and black of colour, could not be mistaken, nor could any-
one possibly take Damper Jack for an aboriginal; he was
too tall. But the torchbearers having fled with the others,
the boys could no longer see the forms of the fighters who
had remained to see the thing through on either side,
although the shots were now exchanged with a prompt-
ness indicative of long familiarity with firearms. A flash
of lightning lit up the scene again, and showed six figures
skulking among the boulders on the far side of the creeK,
firing into another body of men lying in a similar position
only a few yards distant. The first men were aborigines


apparently, and the second and larger company China-
men.
"Good old Uncle Sam!" shouted the Disgrace. "Rush
the beggars; they're not Chinkies; we'll attend to the
howling crowd."
"You've done it now," spoke Edmund. "The whole
mob of aborigines and Chinese are crossing the creek
towards us."
" Well, let them come; I reckon it's time we gave some
account of ourselves," began the Disgrace.
"That's the Disgrace" roared Damper Jack's voice
above the babel of sounds. "Where are you, kid?"
" Here, you long-legged nigger," the Disgrace roared
back. "We're both here, enjoying ourselves."
"Is Mackay with you?" shouted Uncle Sam. "Yell
out where you are."
" We are across the creek," the Disgrace began, but he
got no farther.
A big paint-besmeared native leaped out of the dark-
ness upon him with a cry of delight. The lad struck
out at him with his fists; he felt he could not pull a
trigger against any man at such short range. But his
sense of fair play was his undoing. The big warrior
lifted him high in his arms, and dashed him back, head
first, against the rocks. Edmund saw the intention, and
instinctively threw himself between his comrade's body
and the hard wall. The force of the impact sent them
both rolling backwards into a patch of stinging scrub
they had been carefully avoiding, but otherwise they
were unhurt, and the Disgrace's life undoubtedly saved.
But the angry warrior was not satisfied; he had seen
his victims had escaped, and, uttering a yell of demon-
iacal fury, he rushed at the lads again. Luckily he


could not see very distinctly, and Edmund, knowing there
was nothing else for it, aimed at where he calculated
his legs should be, and fired. The man dropped in-
stantly, and screamed out his curses and invocations.
But now a frantic mob of his comrades came up, their
greasy skins steaming and smelling horribly. For a
moment they stood and argued over the fallen man's
body; but that moment was fateful. The shrieking
Chinese had followed them; and now, knowing their foes
were already in full flight, they were as brave as lions,
and eager to avenge their fallen comrades. They threw
themselves upon the aborigines, and bit, and scratched,
and kicked, and plunged their -long knives into every
black body that came in their way. They were thoroughly
roused, and did not take time to fight according to their
own science, which, at least, was bloodless.
And above it all the reports of the revolvers, and an
occasional rifle shot, continued to ring out from the
opposite bank, where the white men were settling their
differences. The boys were smarting all over as they
lay unseen among the stinging scrub. They had become
the centre of the conflict now, and they did not enjoy
the situation. It was utterly impossible for them to
raise their voices above the din. But even if they could
have made their voices heard, it would only have meant
their extermination, for both natives and Chinese were
now beyond all powers of reason, and desired nothing
but blood. And they were getting it. When the natives
realized they were away from the fire - spitting magic,
they set to and fought with great zeal, and the Chinese,
now free from control, acted likewise. Certainly none
shirked the fight, least of all the two boys who were
now in such a forlorn position.


"I say, Disgrace," said Edmund suddenly, " that is
Dirty Face over there fighting with a crowd. Shouldn't
we give him a hand? He was fairly decent with us."
"Of course we will," responded the Disgrace. "I
think I can smell him somewhere, but I cannot see
him."
"He is the nearest man to us, and he'll be knifed in
a second. I'll risk it." Edmund raised his revolver and
shot at the form of a Chinaman, whom he could just
discern was compressing Dirty Face's throat.
The Chinaman dropped, but Dirty Face had still several
foes to deal with, and, clearly, he was not equal to the
task, however willing he was in spirit. A crowd now
closed in on him, and he yelled out at them all the
North Queensland goldfields' expressions he knew, and
swung his club around with all his still available energy.
But he had no chance, and it would have been all over
with him in a minute had not help again come from
the patch of scrub. This time it was a fusillade of shots,
and several of the pigtailed fighters subsided with shrieks
of mingled terror and surprise.
"Run, Dirty Face," cried the Disgrace. "Clear out,
and the Chinkies won't follow."
"My word, you bet, God save the King!" fervently
exclaimed Dirty Face, apparently recognizing the voice
of the speaker. "Dirty Face in mighty big hurry to
git. Dirty Face no' forget hims."
"Then scoot like blazes, now!" shouted the Disgrace,
as both he and Edmund fired another round among the
frantic Celestials, who could not understand why they
were being so treated.
Dirty Face shouted out some words to the natives, and
as if by magic they melted away, without a sound save


the pattering of their bare feet upon the bank of the
creek, to show that they were still in being. The
Celestials muttered to each other in amazement. The
wounded men struggled to their feet and took part in the
excited discussion. The shots could still be heard over
the creek, and exclamations loud and fervent filled the air
to the tune of blows of fists, rifle stocks, and the stum-
bling of men upon the rocky ground. Then Uncle Sam's
voice was heard:
"Let the skunks go, boys," it said; "our fellows are
not with them."
" I'll be blowed if I let one escape until they've told
where Ginger is," sang out the voice of Damper Jack.
" Rule Bridannia! Dat vas de last words of Fat Her-
man. Mine head vas broke, boys; goodbye. Und tell de
Disgrace I died happy, und he can take back his trousers."
"You're no more dying than I am, you fathead," roared
Dandy Charlie. "Get up, and I'll rivet your head to-
gether again. We've allowed the beggars to get through
now, and we'll never corner them again."
The words were heard quite distinctly by the boys,
because everything had now become quiet and still, even
the rain having ceased for a spell. Well the youths
knew what had happened. The officers of the Vulture had
realized that they were fighting men who could handle
revolvers as well, if not better, than themselves, and, as
they could not afford to take risks, had ordered their
Chinese satellites to make for camp if they hadn't al-
ready mastered the natives; and had then rushed for
safety themselves, breaking through the half-dozen men
who had given them such a warm time.
"Blow me for a mutton head!" growled Melbourne
Mike. " I might have punctured a fellow, but I hadn't


the stomach to plug - him, and he has not felt the crack
on the nut I gave him with my rifle."
"Never mind, comrades," said Ignorant Tommy.
"We'll track them up at daylight, and renew our ac-
quaintance. Some of you with good lungs shout out
for the Disgrace to roll up."
"My word! Do you hear that, Edmund?" asked the
individual last mentioned indignantly. "They think
we're just playing some silly game of our own, and I'll
bet you Ignorant Tommy will move we get a spanking
for being bad boys when we go back to them."
"Well, we haven't done much good after all," said
Edmund. "And likely we've caused our comrades a
lot of trouble."
" And we'll cause them more, the lazy beggars. They've
forgotten already that it is not us they're looking for,
but Mackay, the New Chum, Ginger, Little Peter, the
Doctor, and Bunyip Bill. We're well able to look after
ourselves, and they know that. Why haven't they gone
after the fellows they'd cornered, and found out where
they've stored away our people ? And what silly idea had
they in pretending to be aborigines?"
" I'm not good at guessing, Disgrace, but I expect they
had good reasons for all they did. The question before us
now is what are we to do?"
" Roll up, you kids," rang out through the darkness in
Dandy Charlie's stentorian tones; and before the echoes
had died away the Disgrace shouted back:
"Go to blazes, you lazy sleepyheads! We've work to
do. We're tracking the Chinkies, and we'll hang at their
heels until you come up, next year, some time."
" Come here this instant, Disgrace," roared Ignorant
Tommy. "You'll only get into more trouble."


"And we'll get out again, old man. Follow us up in
the morning and don't worry."
A thunderclap drowned the final words, and also
effectually prevented any reply being heard, and before
the deep-toned reverberations had ceased, both lads had
departed, having appropriated—on loan, of course —the
outer clinging garments of two Chinamen, who were
unable to offer much objection at the time, although they
were not really seriously wounded.
"Sprint, Disgrace," cried Edmund. "We must over-
take the Chinese somehow, or our work will be useless.
We'll track them to their headquarters, even if it is out
to the steamer."
"Who won that fight, mate?" the Disgrace enquired,
running alongside. " I'm beat if I could honestly say
whether it were the Chinkies, the aborigines, the white
pirates, or our fellows."
" I have the impression that we were the winners,'
Edmund answered; "but time will show. Can you run
faster? I should like to get closer up to the Chinese
before the next lightning flash."
"Of course I can run faster," grunted the Disgrace;
"but I move we stop where we left most of our turkey
and have another slice of him. A fellow can't go on
for ever hunting niggers and pigtails without having a
feed."
" You're always hungry," Edmund said. "Why didn't
you fill your pockets when you had the chance?"
"Because I hadn't got any pockets at the time, old
man. I've got plenty now, though. The Chinaman who
belongs to this coat must have been in the habit of carry-
ing a year's turkey in them. Hullo, there's something in
one of the pockets now."


"Yes, there's a lot of rice in mine too," said Edmund;
" but we're almost up upon the Chinese."
" But there's more than rice in mine," interrupted the
Disgrace; "there's a chunk of that blamed lost Chinese
treasure. I know by the feel the stuff is gold, and I'll
bet it's in the shape of a button. And there's a roll of
paper in my pocket too. I think, mate, we should look
into this."
But they didn't; the Chinese were travelling so fast—
now led by their white companions, as was evident from
the orders occasionally shouted from the front—that, had
the boys waited any time at all, they could not have over-
taken them again. So they ran on, and the Disgrace did
not get another slice of turkey. They knew that if they
did not follow the Chinese to their shore camp all their
labour would be rendered useless, as the rain would have
obliterated all tracks before morning—a fact which, it
seemed, Ignorant Tommy and the others had not taken
into account. Progress became much easier as the lower
part of the valley was reached, and soon the boys found
themselves running abreast of the rear members of the
straggling band. They could not now afford to speak;
nor could the Chinamen; the latter required all their wind
to carry them along after their athletic leaders.
Lower and lower, through clumps of cedar and pan-
danus palms, the rush continued. Over great transverse
outcrops, doubtless mineral-bearing, and frequently cross-
ing and recrossing the creek, now grown into a large
turbulent river; bursting through patches of quinine trees,
and up to the shoulders often in extremely coarse spear
grass, the strange night flight went on, and the boys
began to wonder if, after all, they were really on an
island. They were so used to the situation by this time


that they saw nothing unusual in their running alongside
the fleeing Chinese and pretending to be members of the
party, nor did they give a thought as to what would
happen should any accident bring about their discovery.
They were on the trail of their lost comrades, and on
that trail they meant to keep until they had found
them.
The rain began to fall again, but it made no difference
to the lads; they were now almost amphibious. Their
bodies were smarting all over with the stings received
in the nettle scrub, but they suffered bravely and in
silence. At length the smell of the salt water became
more and more pronounced, and suddenly the sound of
gently rippling water fell on their ears. An almost im-
perceptible wind had arisen, and the leaves overhead
rustled in soft, sighing sounds, peculiarly weird and
suggestive.
" Go slow now," Edmund whispered to his companion.
" We must be very careful; we have arrived."
" Yes, but where? What side of the blamed island are
we on? And where is north, south, east, or west?"
" Halt!" rang out a command ahead, and the scattered
Chinese ceased their advance and began talking excitedly
to each other as they closed up their ranks.
"Where in thunder have Smith and Mackenzie gone
with the boats?" growled Carson's voice.
" And where, by all that is unholy, is the Vulture her-
self?" spoke Thomas. " I can't see her light."
" I'll keelhaul the beggars when they turn up," went
on Carson. " Probably they're lying dead drunk some-
where. Tell the yellow beggars to look along the shore
a bit. I don't want to stay here all night. I'm tired
and hungry, and "


"Out of temper more than usual, Carson," laughed
Thomas. "You are surely not worrying about our little
misfortune to-night? Remember we couldn't help it, and
we meant to draw the aborigines after us down here,
where we can shell them at daylight. I don't see why
you have got so rusty all at once."
"You'd just be as rusty, Thomas, if you had a bullet
or two in your hide, as I have. Get a light and dig them
out now. I can't wait until we are on board."
" You are surely not so bad as that? You couldn't have
travelled so well if "
" That's right, tell me I only dreamt I was shot, and
that this confounded stiff shoulder is only imagination."
" I've got a bit of a leaden keepsake too, sir," broke
in another man, " and Shanghai Sam and Scottie have
got as much as they can carry. We've missed Bill Brown
and Pat Higgins altogether, too. I expect they've gone
under."
' My head feels the size of ten," said another man.
" And I know Peter the half-caste and Half-hanged
Harry were knocked out, 'cos I saw them go down. I
wish Smith and old Mackenzie would hurry up with the
boats; they ought to have been here long ago."
"Well, well, I can't help matters. See about things
yourselves; I'm done up," answered Carson; and without
another word he collapsed upon the ground.
Ignorant Tommy and the rest of the comrades had
given a good account of themselves.
Thomas gave a few orders in Chinese, which caused
the mob, with many mutterings, to spread along the
beach, evidently in search of boats which ought to have
been waiting near. One of those remaining produced a
torch from somewhere, and in its flickering light Thomas


stripped Carson of his shirt and performed a piece of rude
surgery with his knife, afterwards plugging the bullet
holes with fragments torn off the same garment. Carson
made no sound as the work proceeded, but he must have
suffered terribly, and after the operation had been per-
formed he lay still, breathing heavily. Thomas next
doctored two other men, presumably white, in a similar
manner, and afterwards gave some attention to some
Chinese who were also wounded. The men who stood
round gave vent to their feelings in characteristic fashion,
and swore that they would exterminate the white beggars
who had helped the aborigines. And all the time the two
daring boys crouched in the darkness, listening and watch-
ing. A star shone out in the sky, and they knew daylight
was at hand.
( C 204 )


CHAPTER XI
The Sleeping Camp
"THIS is awful, mate; and I don't see Bunyip Bill or the
boys anywhere; what are we to do now?"
" I wish we were able to fight them straight out," was
Edmund's reply. "If only our own fellows would come we
might tackle the job. If they don't turn up soon, we'll
have to go back for them, or play the game ourselves
again."
"What game, Edmund? Tell us what sort of scheme
it is, and I'll back you right through, even though it
means capturing the ship we saw some days, or years
ago, lying out beyond the island."
"You've struck fairly near the mark, first shot, Dis-
grace. We may have to capture that ship, and it's too
big a contract for us to take on without help."
" Howling snakes! You are the best fellow at getting
ideas I ever knew, and only a new chum too. But go
on, Edmund; talk the thing out, and we'll apply old
Mac's strategy to the business. It may be a mighty
good thing that Ignorant Tommy isn't here with his
wisdom, and Damper Jack with his strength and stupid-
ness. And as for Dandy Charlie and Melbourne Mike,
Charlie is too cheeky and Mike is too fatheaded to be
of much good to us, unless for hard fighting; but, my
word, they're boskers when it comes to that!"


"You've left out Uncle Sam and Fat Herman," said
Edmund as he led the way back from the open beach.
"What's wrong with them?"
"Not much. Uncle Sam is a bit like Mackay; he's
too much inclined to sit down and think when there
isn't any time to think, but you can bet he can put a
hustle on when he has finished thinking. Fat Herman
and I were always pals. He's one of the best fellows
ever made, although he's a German. He can play the
fiddle, too, and some of the boys say he can cook better
than Damper Jack."
"Well, here's a big rock. I expect it's part of the
side of the valley we've come down. Let us climb to
the top and look for a place where we cannot be seen
when the sun rises, and yet be able to see everything
that happens ourselves. We can always signal to our
fellows if they come along."
They scaled the damp wall, making free use of the
stinging-tree scrub which grew everywhere along the
face, and treating with contempt rock snakes, and other
creatures which wriggled, scrambled, and flew out from
their shelters as they approached. It was a long stiff
climb, and one which they would not have undertaken
lightly a few days before. But they were moving in
strenuous times now. They were in the heart of the
much-dreaded Chinese peril, and they would see the
thing through. Besides, they had been forced into the
matter because of their comrades, and the Chinese had
attacked them first.
They reached the top just as the sun was heralding
his approach by the first gloriously hued streaks of light
which he threw over the eastern sky, and by the gorgeous,
translucent tints he cast in advance into the rapidly dis-


sipating clouds of night. It was morning. For the first
time since their adventures began the boys knew their
position, and they noted it well mentally; while down
on the sandy beach, far below them, men ran hither and
thither in excited confusion. Their cries reached the lads'
ears, but they were in Chinese, and therefore meaningless.
They were on an extensive plateau, split into two parts
by the valley they had travelled through during the night.
It sloped upwards towards the southern side until lost
in the clouds of the mist vapour. On the west the land
dissolved off into mist also, and even where the sun broke
through, a rainbow-hued screen seemed to lie like a film
on the verge of the land. Only on the north side was
the view unobscured, and now they knew this was the
seaward side. Far out into the shimmering gulf their
gaze would sweep; it was motionless, lifeless, and con-
tained nothing on which the eye could rest. A steamer
had floated somewhere out there not many hours before,
but it had disappeared.
The Disgrace gathered some scrub and kindled a fire,
and then went off to see if he could catch any of the
many animals that played around fearlessly. He was
hungry, too, and necessity knows little sentiment when
it comes to hungry men looking for something to eat
amidst plenty of game. He had thrown Edmund the
contents of his pocket before setting out, and, while dry-
ing his garments by the cheerful blaze, Edmund had
examined them. The gold button was there sure enough,
one exactly the same as Quong Lee had left, but on
opening the roll of paper, the lad found it was a very
carefully drawn chart. He studied it intently for some
time, and then became so engrossed in it that he forgot
his surroundings, until the Disgrace came back with suf-


"'THIS IS A PLAN OF THE ISLAND,' EDMUND REPLIED"




ficient plunder, in the shape of animals and birds, to last
a week.
"What's struck you, mate?" he enquired, seeing his
comrade's excitement.
"This is a plan of the island," Edmund replied, "and
of the waters surrounding, and it also tells a lot more
of other things. Evidently we're not the first people who
have stolen this piece of paper. See, this is the island;
there is the river we followed, marked right across it.
All the water between the island and the mainland is
marked shallow, and even on the open side too, but
there is a deep-water channel out into the sea on this
side, apparently the continuation of the river's bed, and
just see how carefully it has been drawn."
"Well, we know most of that already. Doesn't it
say where that blamed treasure is hidden?" asked the
Disgrace. " I suppose it's here somewhere or these
beggars down there wouldn't be hanging around."
"Yes, there's a cross marked here too, and the letters
I.J. beside it. What can I.J. stand for?"
" Imperial Jewels, of course. Let's go to the place
marked, at once. You can bet we'll find Mackay and the
crowd there. Little Peter would scent out the place like an
ant after a dead snake." The Disgrace was eager to start.
"I think," Edmund remarked thoughtfully, "you are
jumping to conclusions very suddenly. That cross may
mark where the treasure was hidden by the people who
drew out this paper, but, as we are aware, it was stolen,
or we'll say removed, a second time, and that is why
Messrs. Carson, Thomas, and Company are still on this
island, instead of on the road back for more Chinamen
at ten pounds a head. They are looking for the second
resting place of those Imperial jewels."


"Flapjacks and coffee!" exclaimed the Disgrace.
"Then it was one of the number two fellows who was
wearing this jacket before I fell heir to it? What was
he doing among the first crowd?"
"Perhaps he was one of Quong Lee's men. You re-
member the New Chum said that he had gathered that
the mysterious treasure had been removed even again."
"Oh, give us a chance! How many times have the
gold buttons, or whatever stuff the treasure is, been
stolen altogether?"
" First, from the Imperial palace in Peking by Messrs.
Carson and Thomas, or by those who employed them.
They hid it somewhere, and just about then Mackay first
put in an appearance. Then it seems that some Chinese
stole it, or at least removed it from the place marked
with this cross. Doubtless it was then that this chart,
drawn by our white friends, fell into their hands. But,
judging from all that we happen to know through the
New Chum and other sources, it has been most mys-
teriously removed a third time, and no one apparently
knows where it is."
"Turn over the leaf now and tell us where Mackay
is, what he had for breakfast this morning, and if old
Tom White got in as member for Mullingoodgie. You
might also see if my horse is all right, and whether
the fcnglismen or the Australians won the last cricket
match."
"There is another mark on the chart with some
Chinese symbol beside it," went on Edmund, as the Dis-
grace hastened on breakfast preparations. " I shouldn't
wonder but that that indicates the place to which it was
taken the second time."
"Never mind it, old man. Find the mark which tells


you where it is now, and one which will let us know where
Ginger Bob, Bunyip, and the boys are. It is a bit odd, all
the same," he admitted reflectively, "to find the people
who stole the treasure from the first stealers fighting with
them. How do you explain that, Mr. Ignorant Tommy,
junior?"
"That's easy," said Edmund. "The second stealers
were members of the first stealers' band, with perhaps
some helpers among Ah Sin and Wun Lung's crowd.
They, of course, didn't tell when they removed the
treasure, and now that it has gone again they are as
much interested in finding it as the first party. The
parts played in this comedy by Ah Sin, Wun Lung,
and Quong Lee are not quite clear, but I should fancy
they're the leaders of the second stealers."
"Then who were the third people?" asked the Disgrace,
pausing in the act of throwing more ashes over the break-
fast that was to be. He had suddenly become interested.
" It wasn't us, Disgrace," Edmund laughed, " and that's
all I know. But I half expect Mackay's crowd, or our-
selves, will be the fourth party to have to do with that
funny treasure, which seemingly consists to some extent
of gold buttons."
"Then where do you think Mackay and the other
missing fellows are now?"
"On board the Vulture , to be sure. Where else could
they be?"
"Oh! Then, how in thunder are we to help them?
We're not flying fishes!"
"We'll simply wait here and watch until the boats
these people are expecting come in, and then we'll take
charge of them, and, with or without Uncle Sam and
party, sail out to the Vulture , and trust to chance and


strategy for the rest. But we'll have to be very careful,
Disgrace; and, if the boys don't come in time, we'll have
more to do than we can easily manage. Luckily, most of
the white men down there are feeling pretty bad now. I
expect those who were doctored will soon be in high fever,
for their wounds must be greatly inflamed through their
crude treatment."
" My, Edmund, you talk exactly like Ignorant Tommy!
I could listen to you for a week, if I weren't hungry and
hadn't these things in the ashes to look after."
"Well, I don't think we have much to fear from the
people we followed through the night at any rate," said
Edmund irrelevantly, "and we'll likely have our own boys
to help us before long. But, you won't mind me saying
it, I'm sure, Disgrace, you really ought to wash your face.
It is covered with blood, and sand, and seeds, and other
things."
"Your own isn't much to boast about, old man," the
Disgrace laughed. " One would think you'd actually been
fighting, to look at you; and, as for seeds, they're stuck
all over you like ants on a piece of meat. I reckon we
won't go and lie among spear grass again."
Both lads laughed. They were torn and scratched and
sore in every limb, but that fact was only a trifle not
worthy of consideration with them; they weren't members
of a picnic party. They moved over to a tiny pool in a
basin of rock near, and laved their faces in the clear rain-
water. The sun had not yet shone upon the pool, and the
water was delightfully cool and refreshing.
"My word, mate," remarked the Disgrace, as he lay
down and took a long drink from another receptacle in
the rocks, " I feel half-sorry for those pirate beggars down
on the beach! Most of them are wounded, and they'll not


have much of a good time when the sun gets up a bit. I
wonder why their boats have not been waiting for them?"
"Maybe Mackay and the others have something to do
with that, Disgrace, but we'll know in time, I expect. Let's
get to breakfast."
And very soon they had breakfast, such as it was, with-
out any form of bread, or salt, or hot liquid to wash it
down. Still, they satisfied their hunger, and, withdraw-
ing into the shade of some scrub afterwards, they went
to sleep, knowing that they were safe for an hour or so,
for the Chinese below were stretched out at the rock base,
wrapped in a slumber which was not altogether induced
by opium. They did not seem to fear any attack; they
were waiting only for the boats to come for them. They
slept; their white companions slept, more or less troubled
with their wounds; and overhead the two lads were also
recuperating their much-spent energies.
The sun steadily climbed up the eastern sky, hung in
the zenith, and passed down towards the gloom of cloud-
land fast rising in the west over the Northern Territory
of South Australia. About four o'clock the boys awoke
simultaneously, greatly refreshed, and feeling ready for
anything. They crawled to the edge of the rock and
looked down. Everything was as they had last seen it.
No one moved in the sleeping camp below. They appa-
rently did not expect the boats to put in an appearance
until darkness; indeed, if they came earlier, they could
be seen some hours before reaching the shore by the few
who surely were standing sentry. Still, it was somewhat
strange that no signs of life were in evidence anywhere,
seeing that the Chinese could have had no guarantee that
the natives would not trace them to their present resting
place by the sea.


The lads quickly took in the situation. "What is the
game, Edmund?" the Disgrace asked, helping himself to
the remnants of the breakfast. "The boats will come at
dark, I suppose?"
"I hope so; and, as we must get them then, we must
weaken some of these people below all we can before sun-
down. I wish we could drop some chloroform, or some-
thing of that nature, down on them. But what has
happened to Uncle Sam and Damper Jack and the
rest?"
" I'm blamed if I know. I could have betted anything
they would have tracked us up before this. Damper Jack
must have got into an argument with Ignorant Tommy,
and they are settling the matter, I reckon. All the same,
Uncle Sam, and Dandy Charlie, and Melbourne Mike didn't
need to wait to see fair play, and I'm sure Fat Herman
would have come along himself, no matter what hap-
pened."
"Well, they haven't turned up, so we'll have to act on
our own again," was Edmund's comment, and the Dis-
grace promptly agreed.
They made up their plans carefully, and as coolly as
if they were arranging sports, and as a result decided
to go down among the sleeping Chinese, and, by any
means that offered, remove or otherwise render help-
less all the white men not already past having any
active interest in affairs. Then, when the boats did come
in, they would waylay the men who brought them in the
same way, and thus have the means of going out to the
Vulture. As for the Chinese, they knew they would sleep
on until further orders were given them, and they meant
to see that those orders were never given. What they
were to do when they gained the Vulture's side was not


quite clear, but they calculated that by that time the vessel
would be very short-handed, and thought if they could
climb on board without being perceived, and set their
comrades free, that they could easily do the rest. They
were tackling a large contract, but they were not foolishly
blinded to the dangers attending their work; they were
only youthful in years, and they possessed all the enthu-
siasm of similar clean-minded lads who had not yet seen
twenty years of life. But this enthusiasm was tempered
by experience in their case. Edmund was naturally of a
careful nature that made him look well ahead before he
leaped, but Mackay had instilled in him the virtue of
promptness of action, as well as taught him the advan-
tages of quickness of thought and self-reliance. Unwaver-
ing of purpose was another attribute of the grim yet
kindly Scot, and Edmund had made him his model in all
things.
As for the Disgrace, he was one of the most reckless
individuals the great Austral Land ever produced, and
that is saying a great deal; but nature had gifted him
with wonderful inventive powers as a sort of compensa-
tion. He was fond of calling this strategy, after Mackay's
pet word; and the restraining influences of Uncle Sam
and Ignorant Tommy had not been without effect upon
him. Indeed, so coldly calculative were the boys as they
examined the encampment from above that they had dis-
cussed every possible happening, every move, and its
counter-move on their part, from the moment they would
drop down among the Chinese until sundown, when they
expected and hoped the boats would come. If not, under
cover of the darkness they would draw apart, and make
fresh plans. They still retained the pigtails taken from
Smith and Mackenzie, and, fastening them in position and


donning their Chinese robes, which had been discarded
while they slept, they touched up their eyes with the dark-
stained juices exuding from a tree near, and became
very presentable Chinamen indeed, as far as appearances
went.
They now picked out the part of the rock which offered
the easiest and most hidden means of descent, and were
lucky enough to find a promising passage directly over-
head the canvas fly which had been erected to shelter the
leaders from the broiling sun. Scrub of various kinds
grew out from the rock face all the way, the reason being
apparent when the Disgrace discovered that a perpetual
spring fed a tiny stream which trickled down the rocks
at that point during all seasons. They had thus really
a miniature ravine to descend, which afforded excellent
foothold and an easy gradient, and was at the same time
hidden by the vegetation which grew along its course.
"We're in luck," the Disgrace said, as they surveyed
the slumbering camp; "but wouldn't it be easy just to
pepper the beggars from here with our revolvers? They
would never know what struck them, and "
"It wouldn't do at all," broke in Edmund. "We don't
want to kill anybody, and we couldn't help doing so that
way; and then the rest would just remove to some place
out of our reach, and that would ruin our plans."
"Right oh, boss!" agreed the Disgrace cheerfully.
"We'll play the game like white men, or rather like
what old Mackay would do; but I reckon we've cause
for complaint when we meet Uncle Sam and the boys
again."
Edmund made no reply. His own thoughts were that
their comrades were also embarked upon some scheme,
and he had a fancy that the Disgrace and he ought to


have fallen into line with them instead of playing the
lone hand. Still, Uncle Sam and the boys could easily
do without their aid, and, anyhow, he was Mackay's mate,
and his first duty was to help him at any cost. All the
same, the whereabouts of the three miners caused him
much worrying conjecture, and he had visions of a cor-
roborree, with them as the firewalkers. He dismissed
the thought, and swung over the ledge after the Dis-
grace, and the shade of the leafy scrub was pleasing and
invigorating.
Down they scrambled, swiftly yet carefully, and the
drowsy birds in the foliage blinked at them lazily but
did not move, or even cry out. Snakes lay coiled up,
basking in the full glare of the afternoon sun, and did
not trouble to uncoil themselves as the adventurers came
near. All nature was asleep, and the denizens of the
rock face seemed entirely indifferent to the passage of
the intruding bipeds called men. Soon they reached the
bottom, in the heart of a cluster of quinine trees. The
Chinese still slept, spread all along the base of the rock
on either side of them, and immediately in front, sheltered
by the very clump of timber they had landed in, was the
fly erected to protect the wounded men as much as pos-
sible from the intense sunlight. It at once became ap-
parent to the boys that the smugglers had a depot in
the vicinity, for ropes, ship gear, stores, and other ap-
pliances littered the ground, and there were also several
canvas flies stretched on short upright poles, under which,
in all probability, the chief members of the Vulture's people
slept. These were not so carefully erected, nor in such a
sheltered position, as the first fly, as the beach was bare of
scrub, except at the point where the little stream of fresh
water trickled from the rocks.


The boys pushed aside the brushwood and advanced
silently and with extreme care. Next moment they were
peering into the improvised tent, their revolvers ready
for use, but their scheme—which was against their use, if
possible—uppermost in their minds. On blankets spread
upon the ground two men were lying. One was Carson,
the other Thomas. Carson groaned in his slumbers, show-
ing the pain which followed him even into unconsciousness,
but Thomas lay as one dead to everything.
The boys drew back again.
" We'll take Thomas first," the Disgrace said. "He
is the only dangerous one there. Poor Carson is as nearly
pegged out as he is likely to be before he's hanged."
" All right!" whispered Edmund. " I'll crawl over and
get that coil of rope if you'll see who are in that tent
nearest us and what they are doing."
Without a word the Disgrace most cautiously made his
way through the fronds and along the base of the rock,
on his mission of investigation, and Edmund stepped out
from his hiding place. Nothing stirred anywhere; he
couldn't even hear the Disgrace. A coil of light rope
lay on the open beach between two rows of sleeping
Chinamen, lying face downwards so as to shade their eyes
from the sun. Edmund stepped towards them, quietly
at first, but he trod upon some seaweed in ignorance of
its nature, and the loud report which followed, as its
bulbular formation burst under the pressure, seemed to
him as the discharge of a cannon. He threw himself
flat upon the shingle and waited for the uproar, noting,
as he did so, that the Disgrace had adopted the same plan
of concealment in a rock crevice.
But though the sound echoed and re-echoed for what
seemed an interminable time, there was no response. All


remained as it had been, and the sun still continued to
glide down into the yawning night raincloud.
"By Jupiter," Edmund mused, "these fellows are the
soundest sleepers I ever came across! And yet they can't
have been without sleep so long as we have been, for
they had a full night's rest last Sunday night on the main-
land when the Disgrace and I first saw them. But what
day is this? Dear me, I don't know! I wonder if I am
just dreaming? Ah well, I'll do my work all the same,
dreaming or not dreaming, and whether these beggars
are sleeping or dead."
He rose and walked forward fearlessly, but his eyes
roamed everywhere. He knew he was acting naturally,
and even if seen would not receive much attention, unless
some orders had been given by the leaders that no China-
man was to move. But nothing happened to occasion
him any alarm. The Chinamen slept and snored, and
some even turned in their dreams and drew their jackets
more over their faces. He walked boldly between the
two lines, picked up the coil of rope, and began to re-
trace his steps, wondering, meanwhile, where the depot
was, and if it might not be worth a visit. But suddenly
he stopped and again dropped flat. He saw a man come
out of a tent, or rather a covering piece of calico which
served as a shade. The man looked round as if he had
had his suspicions aroused. He was an unusually tall
Chinaman, and Edmund trembled for the Disgrace's
safety, for he knew the impulsive lad would not think
twice about tackling him. To Edmund's relief the Celes-
tial wandered off up the reef as if for exercise, and, no
other causes for alarm arising, he stood erect again and
walked leisurely towards the scrub. He gained its shelter
just as the Disgrace got back.


"This is a very funny camp," was the latter's first
words. " Every man is as sound asleep as if he could
never want anything to eat again. I thought you had
given us away that time you tramped on one of those
bursting things, but not a man moved anywhere that I
could see, and I can tell you I watched pretty closely.
There are four men in that tent over there and they're
all asleep too. I reckon we've a soft job on. My word,
what would not Damper Jack and Dandy Charlie give to
be here having this fun?"
"In the words of Dirty Face, ' hims talk too much',"
broke in Edmund, smiling. "We are not by any means
finished with our work; in fact, we've not started yet.
Are you ready to begin now?"
"You bet. But watch you don't send off any more
crackers. Even a Chinkie must awake some time."
They pushed through the branches once more, and soon
were close behind the chief tent fly, in which the two
renegade white men rested. Here they paused for a
moment, and the Disgrace formed a loop on one end of
the rope in a manner which showed he had been at a
similar game before. The inmates slept on, Thomas
quietly, and apparently enjoying pleasant dreams, and
Carson moaning and tossing feverishly. Bloodstains
practically covered him from head to foot. A bottle
containing quinine lay on the ground beside him.
" Poor beggar," murmured the Disgrace, who was really
as soft-hearted as a woman. " He'll not hold out long
unless he gets attended to. I'll bet it was Damper Jack
who punctured him in the worst places."
" Shut up!" remonstrated Edmund. "You can doctor
him afterwards yourself, if you feel inclined; I don't."
" Oh, I don't much care after all! He worked for what


he got, and I'll bet he did his best to knock out our fel-
lows, even although he must have known that they weren't
shooting to kill. If they had, he wouldn't be here."
The boys crept forward noiselessly, and soon stood by
the side of the sleeping men. For a moment they gazed
upon their features, and the Disgrace removed a revolver
from Carson's pocket. Thomas didn't seem to have any
weapons, and this fact was very surprising to the in-
truders. But they had no time to waste, and gently and
swiftly the Disgrace slipped the loop he had formed on
his rope over the head and then the shoulders of Thomas,
Edmund assisting him by raising the man sufficiently to
allow the rope to pass under him. Strange to say, the
sleepers did not awake, and very soon Thomas was
trussed up as helplessly as any man ever was, with ropes
binding his hands and feet separately, and other bonds
tying those members to other parts of his anatomy, which,
if he tried to pull free from, would mean the breaking of
his limbs. Clearly the Disgrace knew how to tie a man
effectively, yet none of the thongs were tight enough to
hurt so long as the victim lay still. And he certainly did
not offer any opposition. He slept so soundly that the
boys for a time thought he was dead. But his regular
breathing dispelled that illusion, and they prepared for
the next stage in their proceedings.
" Now for the fun," murmured the Disgrace. " Won't
he say things when he wakes up in our hands?"
" I had forgotten about that," Edmund replied. "We'll
have to gag him as well, or he'll spoil our plans."
One instant more and the great Thomas was helpless
and speechless, the Disgrace having gagged him with
a piece of an old sugar sack, which he tied round his
mouth after inserting as much as he could inside. Then
(0 204) 16


they caught him up between them and carried him away,
the Disgrace leading, bearing up his head, and Edmund
his feet. Up the valley for a couple of hundred yards
they bore the man, and then deposited him among some
scrub where he could not be seen.
" Now, old whiskers," the Disgrace remarked as they
surveyed their victim, "you've been getting things all
your own way up till now, but I reckon the time has
come for you to take a back seat. You see you made
one big mistake when you ran against Edmund and me.
Hullo, the fellow is still sleeping!"
"Of course; he's under the influence of some nar-
cotic. Come on and finish our work," said Edmund
shortly. " We've got to handle all the unwounded
white men the same way, and it's near sundown."
"Then let's start now," said the Disgrace. "We
haven't too much time."
They decided to leave Carson alone. He couldn't harm
them, they reasoned, and without his revolvers he was
at their mercy any time. So, going back to the beach
again, they made for the fly the Disgrace had already
prospected, and under which four men were sleeping,
or at least resting. On the way the Disgrace cut the
remainder of his rope into lengths, and formed loops on
one end of each piece. Edmund untwisted the strands
of some of the lengths to make them thinner and more
flexible cord, for it was clear to them that their supply
of binding material was in danger of running short.
"Now," whispered the Disgrace as they were about to
pass under the fly, " you cover the sleeping beauties with
your revolvers, and don't think twice about puncturing the
man who wakens, or he'll plug us quick and lively. I'll do
the rope trick with each in turn as fast as I can."


Edmund nodded, and next moment the Disgrace had
insinuated a loop under the head of one of the sleepers,
and down over his arms; he made no attempt to pull
it tight, but he deftly hitched the continuation of the
rope round the man's right wrist, and then carried it
across his body and looped the left. A moment more
and the remainder of the rope length was round the
victim's ankles and knotted securely, and another part
of a minute saw him gagged. Edmund had seen several
performances on the stage in the old country, in which
so-called handcuff kings had challenged the world to
bind them in a manner which would prevent them
breaking away, or slipping through, and they invariably
succeeded in making good their boast that no ropes
could hold them. He had thought little of these things
at the time, but it now flashed across his mind, that if
the Disgrace had been there to accept the challenge,
the performers would still be bound unless they had
managed to wriggle to some sharp implement on which
they might cut their bonds. And a simple hitch to a
tree would prevent even that possibility.
In a few minutes the whole four men were bound and
gagged, and the boys looked at each other enquiringly.
The same thought had occurred to both. There was
little use in carrying the men away, as they could
neither move nor cry out where they were.
"Won't they be suffocated?" Edmund asked in a whis-
per, bending over one of the unfortunate men.
"No fear," the Disgrace answered. "They can breathe
through their noses, as they should do. It was a China-
man taught me that gagging trick, and he ought to
know."
"By Jupiter, but this is easier work than we thought


it would be, Disgrace!" said Edmund. "These men are
all drugged so deeply that they may never come out of
their sleep."
" Serve the beggars right, then; they shouldn't try the
Chinkie tricks with opium."
"I don't know that opium is the cause of their sleep,"
Edmund replied thoughtfully. "There's a suspicion of
a strange smell hanging around that certainly is not
opium."
"It doesn't matter, anyhow," said the Disgrace.
"We'd better get on with our special business, for the
sun will be down in half an hour."
They dropped on their knees and crawled to the next
calico shade; but there were no men under it, although
several blankets spread on the ground showed that there
had been occupants at one time. Growing bolder now,
they went on to the next, only to find it vacated also.
They then passed down the lines of sleeping Chinese,
but all were sleeping as if some magic spell had been
laid on them. The boys were by this time somewhat
surprised. Apparently they had dealt with the whole
camp and had encountered absolutely no trouble of any
kind. Several times they had fancied they had seen a
Chinaman moving among the tents and lines, but as
they both took him to be a man of small stature, and
they were quite sure that the man they had seen at
first, from different points, was an extremely tall man,
they came to the conclusion that their imagination was
beginning to play them tricks, and that no moving
creatures were present in the camp of sleepers.
"Anyhow, here come the boats!" exclaimed Edmund
suddenly, gazing seawards. "And there's only one! It
can never take this crowd away."


"No, we'll see to that," the Disgrace answered signifi-
cantly. "Get out of sight until it is near, and prepare
for* the next act of our little play. Luckily it will be
as dark as can be in five or six minutes, and it will
take that craft longer than that to get here."
They drew back into their first shelter, behind the tent
in which slept Carson, and waited. It was as the Dis-
grace had said. Darkness had enveloped the land en-
tirely before the boat with its two occupants was near
the shore. The rowers were white men, the lads could
determine, but that was all. Leaving their shelter, the
two daring adventurers ran down to the water's edge.
They were determined to give no chance, but they were,
despite their efforts to remain calm, just a trifle excited
now. And no wonder; they had had a strenuous day,
and they sorely needed sleep and proper nourishment.
But they were not going to fail now if their utmost
efforts could command success, and they nerved them-
selves to battle with two very - much - awake men of
strength far superior to their own, doubtless, although
they did not fear them much on that account.
The rowers had now lit a lamp and placed it in the
bows of their boat, and the creaking of the rowlocks
seemed loud enough to awake even a Chinaman. Far
out at sea, too, there gleamed the bright lights of a
vessel riding at anchor. She had just come there in
time to send off the boat, the boys knew, and vaguely
they wondered if the morning would see them on board.
"We'll walk into the water a bit," Edmund whispered
in the Disgrace's ear. "We must surprise them before
they land."
"All right!" his comrade responded, and they waded
into the sea to meet the advancing craft.


"Hullo, on shore!" called out one of the rowers.
"Where in blazes are your lights?"
No answer greeted his words, and the echo rang along
the rock face for several seconds.
"Blow me for a Chinkie-runner!" growled the other
man. "Maybe they've cleared out again?"
"No; we saw them before we put off for them. But
there will be old Harry to pay over that blamed fire we
saw the other night, I know. It was our signal, and yet
the boys who answered it have not come back yet. We'll
have to let the Cap. know that he can't monkey too much
with us fellows. We're not his confounded Chinamen."
The boat was near now.
"Ready, Edmund?" whispered the Disgrace.
" Ready," came the answer.
"Hullo!" bellowed one of the men a second time.
"We can't see where to land."
"Now!" cried the Disgrace, and with a bound the two
lads sprang over the gunwale, each making for the throat
of a rower.


CHAPTER XII
Where is Mackay?
WHAT the men at the oars thought at that moment might
be interesting to know, but, beyond two crisp ejaculations
of surprise, they did not express any opinion. They could
not; their throats were held too tightly to allow of
their breathing, let alone making speeches. The oars
slipped from their nerveless hands, and the boat rolled
from gunwale to gunwale, as the struggle went on. In
deep water all would have been drowned, but as the
keel of the craft, owing to the extra weight, was now
resting on the shell - inlaid bottom, it mattered little
whether the boat heeled over or not. The men had been
caught at an enormous disadvantage, but the boys
were not taking any risks, nor showing any mercy on
that account. They were engaged in too serious a trial
of strength. They were fighting for their comrades
against overwhelming odds, although these odds were
certainly becoming less, and they well knew that in the
suddenness of their attack lay their only chance of success.
They had seized the throats of their victims while yet they
were pulling at the oars, and before they had fully realized
the situation the battle was over, as far as they were con-
cerned. Down into the thwarts of the boat they were
backwards borne, and although they kicked, and wriggled,


and groped through the air with their hands, and even
tried to use their teeth on the wrists of the hands en-
circling their windpipes, it was all to no purpose; the
boys had been trained to make the most of any advan-
tage, and they were acting in accordance with that
training.
Soon the struggles of the victims became fainter and
fainter, and at length they lay helpless. The hands had
never relaxed their ironlike grip, and the strength behind
them was equal to more than that of the average fully
developed man. The boat was now upon the beach, still
not a sound had been heard by the boys. They marvelled
greatly, but had no time to make comment. The Disgrace
had already seized one pair of oars, ready for the outward
journey; but Edmund, thinking it better to lighten the
boat of its helpless load, was preparing to haul the men
ashore when the second surprise came.
Springing out of nothing, apparently, a swarm of men
suddenly surrounded the boat, and before the lads had
time to cry out to each other they were seized in clutches
stronger by far than those by which they had gripped the
first rowers. But they struggled valiantly; they were not
the kind to give in at the first reverse; their throats were
free, and that meant a lot. They bit and scratched, and
struck out with all their strength at their adversaries, who
seemingly outnumbered them greatly. But they had no
chance this time; the tables were turned completely.
"Goodbye, old man!" cried the Disgrace. "We're up
a tree now."
"Not yet," returned Edmund. "I've got my shooter
free, and I'm going to use it."
Edmund's revolver flashed in the light of the boat lamp.
He had been set free suddenly.


"You needn't use your popgun, young man," said a
quiet, unemotional voice. "We're your friends."
"Here, come out of it, Disgrace!" roared an extra-
ordinarily tall man who had been most energetic in the
struggle. "Blow me for a nigger, imagine me fighting
you, when I could have squashed you in half a second if
I had known who you were! Come out of the boat this
second, or I'll give you a good hiding!"
"You big, baking-powder-slinging cook," the Disgrace
retorted, his indignation rising rapidly, " I've a good mind
to hammer the life out of you, and you too, Uncle Sam,
and Ignorant Tommy, and Dandy Charlie! Take your
dirty hands off my pal, Melbourne Mike and Fat Herman,
or we'll wipe you all out now!"
"Great Gulf!" ejaculated one man. "What have we
struck, boys? Did anyone mention my handle?"
"Yes, I did, Melbourne Mike," cried the Disgrace;
"and I reckon I'll do more than that if you don't stand
clear at once!"
The Disgrace rose to his feet, and appeared about to
renew the fight; but all the men were now on the beach
awaiting an explanation of how the boys had become
possessed of the Vulture's boat, and Dandy Charlie and
Damper Jack were boiling over with excited curiosity.
Fortunately, Ignorant Tommy was as cool as ever; and
luckily, too, he was looked upon as supreme when matters
of extreme importance had to be discussed. The two lads
stepped out on the beach beside their comrades, and Fat
Herman promptly threw his arms around the Disgrace's
neck and sobbed with delight at once more beholding him.
"Stop your slobbering, you fat old German!" the Dis-
grace roared ungraciously. "Do you think I'm a
sponge?"


" Dat vas onkind of you, Disgrace," said the demon-
strative one reproachfully. " I haf had no sleep, nodink
to eat, und mooch hard vork since I saw you last; und,
Himmel! what fighting we haf had!"
' 1 I didn't mean to be nasty, old man," the Disgrace
said, much mollified. " You just blubber away, and never
mind me. I want to say some things to the boys which
they'll not like."
'' Shut up, Disgrace, or I'll have to ask someone to give
you a spanking!" said Uncle Sam. "It is you who have
caused most of the trouble, and look at the danger you've
led our young recruit into!"
"Oh!" roared the Disgrace. "Uncle Sam, I'll fight
any couple of you myself, and I'll back Edmund to tackle
the rest of you, except Fat Herman, who is the only decent
man among you! Here we've been working, like what no
white men ever worked, in the interests of the crowd, and
all the thanks we get is to be attacked by our own mates,
just as we are about to finish our work! Isn't that so,
Edmund? Speak up, or they'll think they've done every-
thing!"
"Why in thunder did you run away from us last
night?" demanded Dandy Charlie. " Look at the
worry you caused us, and what good did you do any-
how?"
"We tracked the Chinkies to this place, and laid all
their leaders out, and were just going out to capture the
old ship where Mackay and the New Chum are when you
slow-moving fellows appeared. Instead of fighting your
own mates you'd have been a long sight better employed
if you'd turned up earlier and helped us to fight the whole
blamed camp."
"You are a blooming skiter, Disgrace!" broke in


Damper Jack. "We've been here all day, and we've
turned the whole place upside down looking for you."
" Peace, gentlemen, peace!" entreated Ignorant Tommy.
"There is much here that requires explanation. We are
now in the midst of a hostile camp, and we can't afford to
quarrel among ourselves. Edmund, you tell us how you
came to be in that boat."
" We have just captured it, sir," answered the lad, " and
were preparing to pull out to the ship bearing those lights
you see. We've been here all day, and we thought you
would never come."
" Here, go slow, young man!" sang out Damper Jack.
" I can quite imagine you and the Disgrace slinking about
this blamed camp all day, and sticking your noses into all
sorts of places where you might get them bitten off, but
blow me for a kangaroo if I can swallow your yarn about
capturing this boat. We've been waiting here all after-
noon to do that."
"That is so, my young warriors," put in Uncle Sam.
"We tracked you up during the night, and struck this
place soon after daylight. Since then we've been reducing
the active population to some extent, although we couldn't
come across the leaders. We saw this boat approaching,
and with the intention of making it our own we laid in
wait for it, and to our surprise, to put a mild word upon
it, we ran against you. Now, what does the whole thing
mean? Speak out! You needn't be afraid of any people
in this camp."
"We are not, sir," Edmund responded, seeing the Dis-
grace was bursting to show his contempt for the way in
which his comrades had backed them up, and generally
his poor opinion of them.
Of course the Disgrace believed what Uncle Sam or


Ignorant Tommy said, but he had his doubts as to the
extent of their operations among the Chinese. They had
not seen them, and that was strange.
"Hullo, boys!" exclaimed Dandy Charlie suddenly,
"there are two dirty white men lying in the bottom of
this shaft—l mean boat. How did they come there?"
"We'll go for them!" cried Melbourne Mike. "We
don't want any pirates hanging around at our corroborree.
Smash them before they smash you, is my motto."
" But they're knocked out already," said Dandy Charlie,
turning the men over gently.
" Of course they are," put in the Disgrace sarcastically.
"Did you think we were only teaching them to play
cricket? I reckon the beggars put up a better fight than
you did."
"Gentlemen," cried Ignorant Tommy, "please desist
from argumentative discussions in the meantime. We
are here for purposes entirely foreign to debating so-
cieties. I call upon you, Edmund, as being the only cool
and collected man here, to tell your story, and the man
who interrupts, I'll fight him myself."
"Good old Whiskers!" applauded Damper Jack, and
Fat Herman added:
" Dot vos de first bit of sense talked here to-night, and
donner und blitzen, I vas hungry!"
"Shut up, Kaiser!" interjected the Disgrace. "Edmund
is going to give a lecture about how to suck eggs and
bring up kids on condensed milk and bully beef. Give
him a chance."
"Yes, give the kid a chance," echoed the men; and
Damper Jack added some words to the effect that Igno-
rant Tommy wouldn't need to fight any disturber, as he
would have much pleasure in doing that.


Then, in the darkness, on the edge of the sea, Edmund
told his story briefly, but omitting nothing essential to its
proper understanding. He began at the point when the
Disgrace and he left the others on the mainland, and
described their experiences right down to the moment
when they were attacked by their own comrades. The
men remained standing round the boat as he spoke, pay-
ing no attention—beyond throwing some water over them
—to the two unconscious beings inside. They gasped
as Edmund detailed some of their experiences, and Fat
Herman wept unrestrainedly, as he told of their sufferings,
until kicked by the Disgrace into a more unemotional
frame of mind.
"It is indeed wonderful what youthful enthusiasm can
accomplish," Ignorant Tommy said quietly, when Edmund
had finished. "My boys, you have reasoned exactly the
same as we did, but you acted sooner. Perhaps you were
right, but I fear you were just on the reckless side. You
see, we arrived here in plenty of time to take a hand in
the game, and we didn't run any of the risks which you
so thoughtlessly, or rather so lightly, undertook. Cer-
tainly we had some fighting, but we were never really in
serious danger."
"Oh, that's all right," broke in the Disgrace, "but you
wouldn't have arrived here at all if we hadn't led you!
And you're talking too soon, anyhow, for we haven't yet
rescued Ginger Bob, Little Peter, and the others. Suppose
you talk less now, and let Edmund and me get on with
our plans. You can help us if you like."
" I'll spank you, young man, if you don't talk more
respectfully to your elders," interrupted Damper Jack,
who, since the disappearing of Ginger Bob, considered
himself the undoubted fighting man of the company.


"You would spank me!" retorted the Disgrace in fine
derision. "Get out, you old pie -baker, you couldn't
spank butter! Why, I reckon you were the big fellow
we saw dancing about the camp; you never suspected
we were watching you? I could have dropped you as
easy as winking."
" But we saw a little man too," cried Edmund, for
no reason in particular, except that he saw Damper Jack
getting angry, and wished to avoid trouble.
"Yes, we also occasionally caught sight of a slimly
built Chinaman dodging in and among the tents and
sleeping men," interposed Ignorant Tommy hurriedly,
" But we cannot afford to waste any more time here,
boys; we have still much to do. This camp of Chinamen
cannot sleep for ever, and their leaders have, as you know,
escaped us."
" But we attended to them, sir," put in Edmund. " I
told you already what we had done."
"Dear me, Edmund, I beg your pardon! I had hardly
taken in all you said about your dealings with these men.
I remember now you told us you had handled all the white
men you could find, except Carson, who was so sorely
wounded that you didn't trouble about him."
"Yes, sir; the other four white men are in that tent
over there, and we could not find any signs of more white
men anywhere."
" No; we had already removed them," said Uncle Sam.
"They are all tied together up the valley somewhere,
' where the wicked cease from troubling and the weary
are at rest'."
" Then let us get a move on for the Vulture now," cried
the Disgrace impatiently. " I don't believe in so much
talking."


" Nor I," exclaimed a voice from the darkness behind
them. "But you needn't now worry about the Vulture,
gentlemen, although I shall be very glad if you do visit
her. You neglected me because I was helpless, did you?
Well, it so happens that I'm not, and here is proof."
" Carson!" cried both boys in one breath, as they darted
out in the direction of the speaker. But they stopped sud-
denly, a great flare of light shot up from the beach where
Carson had been standing, and a low, rumbling report
shook the solid land. High into the air leaped the great
tongue of flame, blinding momentarily all within its glare.
"Ha, ha!" chuckled Carson, standing on the far side
of the light. "You didn't think it was worth troubling
about me? You idiots, I'm as good as the whole crowd
of you yet, and the Vulture , which is now alarmed, will
now shell you out of existence. See, there is the answering
signal. Her guns are turned on this spot."
" Well, that won't do much good, I reckon," cried
Dandy Charlie. " You're as good as a dead man now."
"Drop your shooter, Charlie," ordered Ignorant Tommy.
" Can't you see the man is mad? He is in a fever. Go
on, some of you fleet-footed youths, catch him, and see
that he doesn't harm himself."
Again the boys bounded forward, but, with a laugh which
rang weirdly on the night air, Carson turned and fled into
the darkness.
"Never mind him, boys; come back!" cried Ignorant
Tommy. But no reply came, and the sound of flying
footsteps became more and more indistinct. The flare
on the shore was now dying down, but there was no
doubt about its having served its purpose. Evidently it
was a barrel of some inflammable substance, placed there
as an emergency signalling apparatus, and the responding


signal from the ship out at sea showed that it had been
understood.
"Come on, men; get back up the valley into a safer
place than this," spoke Uncle Sam. "If they do fire upon
this camp it will be their own people who will suffer,
for these sleeping Chinese will not awake until too late.
Haul these men out of the boat, and draw the boat well
up on the beach, and we'll go."
" But are we not going for a sail?" wailed Damper
Jack. " Haven't we got to peg out our claims on that
blamed barge out there before we can cut out our mates
who are on her?"
" I vote we go out to the old ark right now," chimed
in Melbourne Mike. " The kids have been doing most
of the work so far, and if we hadn't stopped them they
would have been pretty well out to the pirates' den by this
time. What do we fellows need to care for her guns?
Haven't we got our own shooters?"
" I back Melbourne Mike," cried Damper Jack. "It's
about time we had some fun, if for nothing else than to
show the kids a good example."
"Yes, dat vas right," added Fat Herman. "Ve must
show de kids dat ve can do big things too."
Fat Herman's age was almost exactly twenty-one years,
and it is highly probable that the Disgrace would have
caused trouble had he heard his good-natured, warm-
hearted comrade's words.
Kids! Those designated by the title considered them-
selves as being the only men with backbone in the party.
A shout from up the valley, at that moment, told that
these same individuals had run Carson down, and Igno-
rant Tommy at once resumed his seemingly disputed
authority.


"Now, boys," he said, "pick up those men and come
along. We have much to do, and we have no time for
fooling."
"But—but —what about Mackay?" interjected Dandy
Charlie in surprise. "Are we to leave him and all our
other mates in the hands of the dirty Chinkie-runners?"
" Oh, boys, can't you see that we've got the whip
hand of them all by having the leaders in our hands?"
began Ignorant Tommy. "We can easily force the
Vulture's people to make terms now, and "
"Just hold on a minute," Uncle Sam rang out. " The
kids' prisoners are coming round, and we may get some-
thing out of them. Here, Mike, lend a hand; steady that
fellow for a moment while I get his mate out."
"It's all right, boss; I know when I'm beat," gasped
the man whom Uncle Sam had lifted from the boat. " I
don't know you people from old Moses, but I'm not paid
for running against snags, nor for fighting on shore; you
needn't worry about me playing Old Harry among you."
"We don't," said Uncle Sam shortly. "We are not
the kind that worry over matters of no concern."
"And don't think, gentlemen," implored the second
man, as he was lifted from the boat, "that I'm a party
to the guilty ways of the people who employ me. I'm not
much good, I know, but I do my best to lead a straight
life."
"Marvellous!" ejaculated Uncle Sam. "All the same,
you will come with us, and I may as well tell you both
that, the first movement you make to break away from
the positions you will be given, will mean more painful
inconvenience than you have yet suffered "
"Cut it, ' grunted the first man. "Has any man got
a match to spare?"
(C 204 ) j 7


Someone gave him a match, then a line was formed,
and straight through the lines of slumbering Chinamen
the men marched, Dandy Charlie running ahead to
see if the boys required any help.
"Look here, mates," remonstrated the first prisoner,
as the company started up the valley, " I don't under-
stand this business. What quarrel have you fellows got
with us, and who are you? I thought no people knew
this island but our bosses. We are only ordinary sailors,
and if we do run in Chinese, what is that to you if you're
not Government agents?" The man spoke aggrievedly.
"We don't care much though you were Esquimaux-
runners," replied Uncle Sam. "Australia can look after
her affairs well enough herself. But when you interfered
with us you started the ball that will keep on rolling until
your people are exterminated."
" Hear, hear!" cried Damper Jack and Fat Herman.
"Give it to them, Uncle Sam," advised Dandy Charlie.
" Better for them to listen to you than us."
"But we've not run against you," continued the man;
"we know nothing about you, and don't want to. We're
bad men, maybe, but we don't want to fight white men
who leave us alone."
"What have you done with Mackay?" demanded Igno-
rant Tommy.
"Mackay? Oh, that was the fellow we left at Port
Darwin hospital the trip before last! We know nothing
about him, except that he is said to be in this country
now looking for us. You are not his gang, are you?
Because, if you are, you needn't put your spite out on
us. We carried him to the hospital."
"We did," said the second prisoner; "we couldn't
leave a fellow-being in distress "


"Oh, shut up!" interrupted the first speaker. "If I
hadn't pretty well made you, you wouldn't have carried
old Mackay a yard after he was dumped on shore from
that very same boat we came ashore in now. If you've
anything to say, say it straight out. You're a blooming
old fraud, Dickson."
"I'm not a man of war," meekly responded the man
addressed as Dickson, "or I'd call you to account for
your words. But I'll leave you to your own conscience,
Jones "
"We've had enough of that," broke in Ignorant Tommy.
" I may tell you that if our comrades on your ship suffer
the slightest inconvenience, our consciences won't be
troubled to save you from the consequences."
" But your mates are not on board our ship," cried the
man named Jones in surprise. "There is hardly anyone
on board now, and it will take all they can do to handle
her."
"Look here," broke in Uncle Sam; "we don't expect
much of you, of course, and I don't say that we'll be-
lieve a word any of you say, but you are going to be
kept prisoners until we get back our mates. Then, if
nothing has happened to them, you will be allowed to
go free, so long as you get out of our camp. But,
mark you, if any of our fellows are even scratched,
you'll pay for it ten times over."
"Surely!" ejaculated the pious one, whereat his com-
rade kicked him on a tender part.
"That's all very fine," complained Jones, while his
mate roared with pain, "but why should we be held
answerable for your fellows? We never saw them, don't
know anything about them, and don't feel as if we
wanted to."


"Do you mean to tell us that you have no prisoners
on your confounded old ship?" thundered Uncle Sam.
" Remember, although we do not deem ourselves your
judges, we're only men."
" Begging your pardon, sir, that ship out there is
one of the finest pieces of work floating. She isn't old,
and, although I know she is not now held by her right-
ful owners, I can't hear a word said against her without
kicking. And we've no prisoners on board, at least there
were none when we left, though things have been upset
so much that a fellow never knows on board what is
going to happen next. We came ashore, according to
understanding with the skipper, and we've done nothing
wrong except running in Chinkies, and I'm blest if I
see what you fellows need to get your back up about
in that. We're not hurting you even if Australia is not
getting her poll tax. I think you behaved most unreason-
ably towards us."
"Draw in your horses, and we'll see about the un-
reasonableness later," Uncle Sam interrupted with a
laugh. " I somehow believe you when you say you
have no prisoners, because I, myself, never thought
that Mackay could be caught in any trap."
"Mackay!" exclaimed the man named Dickson; "the
ship is not built that could hold that man. We were
glad enough to get rid of him the last time, and since
then we have found out all about his warlike nature."
"You canting old humbug!" roared Jones. " Blow me
tight if I would mind being shot myself, if I thought they
would turn a lead squirter on you too!"
"Oh, Jones," cried Dickson agonizedly, "think what
you are saying!"
" I'm blamed sure that none of us fellows would think


much about what we said to you," remarked Dandy
Charlie. " Shouldn't we let poor Jones go free, Uncle
Sam? He has a bad time with his mate."
"Just what I was thinking," Sam answered. "He's
not fit company for such a person as this Dickson. Clear
out, Jones. You've suffered enough. You're free, and
you've got our sympathy."
"Hear, hear!" cried Damper Jack, Melbourne Mike,
and Fat Herman.
Jones looked round in bewilderment. " I can't get the
hang of you fellows," he spoke slowly. " You ain't bush-
rangers, and you ain't Government people, and you ain't
bad sorts. Now what in blazes are you?"
"Prospectors," answered Ignorant Tommy, "at war
with no people. We seek for gold, and sometimes find
a little; but we fight to the last man, in defence of our
rights and for our comrades."
"And quite right, too," said Jones. "If a man is
your mate, you're a skunk if you won't fight for him."
"Then clear out at once," broke in Uncle Sam. "We'll
waive our quarrel with you."
" Begging your pardon, sir, Preacher Dickson is my
mate, and I don't go without him."
The men stopped. They liked Jones, and his last
words were just what any of themselves would have said.
"Then look here, Jones," said Uncle Sam. "If you
will answer a few questions we'll let you both go."
" Fire away then, Skipper; if your questions don't drag
in my bosses or my mates, I'll answer squarely."
" Fear not, comrade; speak forth; hide nothing," broke
in Dickson.
"You mean, and spare your miserable old carcass, you
blooming old fraud," laughed Dandy Charlie.


"You have already said that our comrades are not
on board your ship?" began Uncle Sam, addressing
Jones.
" Unless they've boarded us during the night and are
lying low, they are not," replied the sailor. " It's you
fellows who have got all our men, though I'm blowed
if I see what you want with them."
"Yes; we took charge of a lot to-night," agreed Uncle
Sam, "but only in self-defence. Have you lost many men
before to-night?"
"Lost many men!" the man exclaimed. "Why we've
lost practically them all. We landed our Chinamen all
right, but our own fellows with the crew have not come
back. Then, when we answered the fire signal to send
ashore, the other night, we got no reply, and neither
our boats nor our men have returned. Every night at
the usual time we have been sending ashore, but no
man has yet come back to tell us the news. Of course
we know there's trouble going on with natives and
others, but we never knew there were white men fight-
ing against us. Still, we get the arranged signals every
night, and I suppose our bosses know what they are
doing. I wish they would send some news out to the
ship though, for we're anxious."
"Have you had no direct communications from the
shore since you landed your cargo?"
"Well, Smith and Mackenzie came back the night
before last with some of the Chinese crew, but that was
all. They had been on special duty too, and could tell
us nothing; in fact, I haven't seen them, for they were
tired out, and would only be on duty to-night after we
left for the shore. I tell you, gentlemen, we've had an
anxious time. What with seeing fire signals on shore


when we know they shouldn't have been shown unless
something- unexpected had happened, and not seeing
them when we were told to look out for them, we've
been upset entirely; and now not a man on board knows
what he's expected to do. But say, skipper, you might
tell us what the whole game is."
" I don't know, gentlemen," Uncle Sam said. " Evi-
dently there are forces at work of which none of us know
anything. Our comrades are missing, and we thought
you had them in your hands."
"We know nothing about them," put in Dickson.
" And, that being so, we have no quarrel with you. You
are both free to do as you please, but I should strongly
advise you to go back to your ship and await results.
Otherwise the people who have been dealing with your
comrades—and I assure you that until to-night we have
not taken serious steps against them —may catch you
too."
"Verily we shall not tarry by the way," said Dickson.
"A rest will do us much good. Come, Jones!"
"Oh, get out, you—you reptile! I hope—by Harry, I
do!—the natives will collar us. If they eat us, I'll not
complain, so long as you feed them too."
Jones didn't pull very well with his comrade seemingly,
although he wouldn't take his freedom without him.
Ignorant Tommy said a few words to the couple calcu-
lated to make them think that Chinese-running wasn't
the honest sport they imagined it to be, seeing that it
invariably meant war between the imported Chinese and
any white prospectors who happened to be in the vicinity;
and then the men left. Their late captors listened until
they heard them on the beach, and soon after the sound
of the boat being pushed into the water reached their


ears. Then they turned aside to where the two boys were
waiting wonderingly with the wounded Carson.
"I was a bit afraid you were going to give us away
at times," Uncle Sam remarked to Ignorant Tommy.
" That's why I had so much to say."
"Thanks!" rejoined Tommy. "You have mentioned
the reason precisely which induced me to speak at times.
I thought you were going to be taken in too easily."
"But what is the result anyhow?" demanded Dandy
Charlie. " Here we've been fighting days and nights for
nothing, on the wrong track."
"Shut up, you blamed fool!" chimed in Melbourne
Mike. "Can't you see Uncle Sam and Tommy have a
lot up their sleeves. We are not on the wrong track,
not by more than one jugful."
" No, I don't think so, Mike," Ignorant Tommy laughed,
"but there are times when it may be wise to pretend that
you think you are. Of course these two men spoke the
truth, but they simply didn't know; and they don't know
that we know anything they don't know."
" Ignorant Tommy, as sure as my handle is Damper
Jack, I'll—l'll " Damper Jack glared around; but, it
being dark, no one saw him.
"Can't any of you broken-down fossickers help me?"
he roared.
"Certainly, Jack. What do you want?" said Uncle
Sam; and Melbourne Mike also intimated his willingness
to render any assistance in his power to give. Fat
Herman had already made tracks for the Disgrace and
Edmund.
"Then, bless you for no-good fat-heads! Tell me what
I'll do to Ignorant Tommy. No, you're too late now.
I've forgotten what I was going to jump on him for."


Ignorant Tommy grinned.
4 'Thanks, Jack!" he said. 44 I'll do as much for you
some day. But I was going to say, when you stopped
me, that these two men will carry back to the ship the
very news we wished to send there, and if our friends
are on board they'll quickly understand."
44 If you fellows mean to argue any longer," came the
Disgrace's voice, 44 Edmund and I are going to clear out
and start a plan of campaign on our own. I'm tired of
your talky-talky allee timee."
44 We're coming!" hastily announced Uncle Sam; and
next moment the party were with the boys round the
unconscious body of Carson. While Ignorant Tommy
attended to him, the others made the boys acquainted
with the story told by Jones, and of how he had been
allowed to escape. All expected to hear the lads burst
out into angry condemnation of their soft-heartedness,
but they were in error.
44 My word! What man among you saw the scheme?"
the Disgrace asked. 44 1 didn't think any of you knew so
much. But what are we going to do with this fellow
and his mate over there?"
44 We'll take charge of Thomas and Carson," said Uncle
Sam, 44 and, as we know the Vulture will not come nearer
now, or send more boats ashore until signalled, we can
allow the other prisoners to look after themselves, and
pray that they won't suffer too much at the hands of the
natives."
44 Why do you two boys seem so well pleased?" asked
Ignorant Tommy, looking up. 44 We haven't found our
comrades yet, and apparently we're farther off the scent
than ever."
44 You said these fellows mentioned that Smith and


Mackenzie, with some of the Chinese crew, had got back
to the ship?" asked Edmund.
"They mentioned that fact," said Uncle Sam. "What
do you see in that?" he spoke strangely.
"Everything," cried the Disgrace, "and only fools,
with pumpkins for heads, couldn't see through the
game."
" Exactly," smiled Uncle Sam; "but we've all grasped
the significance already, Disgrace, so you see we are not
such unmitigated idiots as may have appeared. We'll
now make the leaders secure, and leave the rest to Mac-
kay, the New Chum, and Company. We've got the whip-
hand between us, I think."
" Some people I know are mighty good at talky-talky,"
remarked Damper Jack. " But I would like to know a
little bit more of what we're going to do. D—O, do,
Ignorant Tommy. What are we going to do?"
"In the first place, I am going to ask you, Jack, to
whistle for the friendly aborigines with whom we have
been keeping in touch. They can carry this poor fellow,
also Thomas; and we can tell them about the others,
whom we do not wish to be troubled with, but who must
be watched all the same."
"But what about Mackay?" asked Edmund. "And
what about the other forces at work?"
" Mackay is playing one of his old games," answered
Ignorant Tommy. "I recognized the scheme as soon as
Jones blurted it out. He's all right, depend upon it; and
the rest of the boys are backing him up."
"By the way, boys," broke in Uncle Sam, "what sort
of men, physically, were Smith and Mackenzie?"
"These were the men we captured, don't you remem-
ber? Both were big men, and strong, although we sue-


cessfully impersonated them in the darkness," Edmund
answered. "Do you really believe that "
"I am sure of it, my boy," Uncle Sam replied. "It's
what would enter my mind, but only Mackay and the New
Chum could carry it through. We may rest easy regard-
ing them, but we must see that complications do not arise.
I expect, boys, that your fire on the top of the mist ledge
started the misunderstanding on the Vulture ; it certainly
guided us to the island, for it shone through both mist
and darkness. But we needn't go into that matter now.
Mackay's reef is our object. We'll find it, and set to
work, and await results; but we'll keep our shooters
loaded and our eyes peeled."
" My word, I never knew that Uncle Sam could talk
sense before!" cried the Disgrace in admiration. "Isn't
it wonderful, boys?"
" It's high time you could," growled Damper Jack.
"But, hullo, hero are the niggers!"


CHAPTER XIII
The Corroborree
" I VOTE we camp, boys. We must be nearly across
Australia now, and it's about time we had some tucker
and a sleep."
"You're always growling, Damper Jack," reproached
Dandy Charlie. "The kids have been longer than us
without sleep, and they can't have had much in the way
of tucker."
" Don't you worry about us, Dandy Charlie," sang out
the Disgrace. " Edmund and yours truly knew how to
look after themselves, and we haven't lost the art yet;
though, if we've got to copy the example you wise men
set us, we'll soon not be able to eat even when we're
hungry."
No one made reply. It was about four o'clock in the
morning, and for the last forty-eight hours, at least,
the members of the party, excepting the much-despised
"kids", had had no sleep and very little food. They
were now nearing the head of the valley, and a dozen
aborigines marched in front of them carrying the un-
conscious Carson and the scientifically bound and, for-
tunately, gagged Thomas.
"Come on, boys," cried Uncle Sam, "another half-
hour and we'll be on the highest point of the island,


where we can easily defend ourselves against all comers.
Don't stop here, for this is where we had the fight last
night—or the night before, I'm not sure which—with the
Chinese."
"But I'm sure," cried the Disgrace; "and if you'll go
slow for a bit I'll get a big fat turkey all ready cooked, but
without salt."
" Very well," said Ignorant Tommy. " I suppose it is
quite true that we cannot go on for ever without food or
sleep; we'll make ourselves as secure as we can here, and
rest until sunrise."
As one man the company sat down; everyone was
tired, and no wonder, but they made no complaint.
"Now, Disgrace," said Dandy Charlie, "can you do
anything to keep me in life?"
" If the ants haven't carried it all away, I can," the
Disgrace answered. " Get a fire going, Edmund, and
we'll show these fellows how to look after themselves."
The Disgrace ran off into the bush, and came back with
the remnant of the turkey Edmund and he had cooked the
day before. But his comrades had fallen asleep, and, slip-
ping down beside Edmund, the Disgrace became wrapped
in oblivion too.
To men of healthy mind and body who live in the free,
open air, a few hours' sleep acts wonderfully beneficially,
and when the sun's first rays shone into the valley all
awoke refreshed. There had been but little rain during
the night, a fact which no one had noticed, although they
realized in the morning that it was a very fortunate cir-
cumstance for them. They bathed in the creek and break-
fasted on the Disgrace's turkey, supplemented with other
food they had been carrying, Ignorant Tommy attending
to Carson meanwhile, and doing all that was possible to


make things easier for him. After a consultation Thomas
was released from his bonds and told that he must still
consider himself a prisoner, and that if he strayed more
than ten yards from the nearest member of the party he
would be shot. He cursed fearfully when he could use
his mouth, but Uncle Sam only laughed, and Ignorant
Tommy paid absolutely no attention; but the rest of the
men were almost angry.
" Look here, old man," said Damper Jack, addressing
Thomas. " We've given you a fair hearing, and we find
you can't tell us anything we don't know, or want to hear.
Now, we're not paying our money to listen to a fourth-rate
show, so close down your speaking apparatus or we'll
close it for you."
" You can stake your shirt we will," added Melbourne
Mike. "We never talk that way before the kids our-
selves, and we're blooming well sure we're not going to
allow you to spout out the little you know."
"Yes, Thomas, you had much better shut up," said
Carson, raising himself. " You are only giving your real
nature away to these gentlemen, and really you ought to
know by this time that only vulgar people talk as you are
doing. Be original; if that is beyond you, shut up."
Thomas was mad with rage, and he glared from the
men to his associate and back again.
" Oh, I will wait my time!" he snarled. " I'll get even
with you all yet. I'll "
" Quite so," interrupted Uncle Sam blandly. " But in
the meantime you will remember that ten yards is the
limit of your life. Have something to eat and we'll get
ahead. We've work to do, you know; we're not here
to run in Chinamen, or for fun."
Thomas did not answer, and when the procession started


again he walked ahead alongside the crudely constructed
litter upon which some aborigines were carrying Carson.
The men did not know where they were going, nor why
they were proceeding to any specific place; but Ignorant
Tommy and Uncle Sam were the bosses, and doubtless
they had good reasons for what they did. Up past the
scene of conflict the party forced their way, over boulders
and through patches of most annoying spear grass, and
when the sun's rays were beginning to beat down with
unpleasant effect they reached the head of the valley.
They climbed the steep rocks which closed it in, the
course of the waterway forming a comparatively easy
passage, and when all were safely on the top a halt was
called. In front was a wall of mist which shut out every-
thing, and the air which blew from its direction was evil-
smelling and clammy. This curtain circled round the land
in a great sweep, leaving open only the side that fronted
the sea on the north, and through which the valley was
projected.
"Now, boys," said Ignorant Tommy, "we are back
at the starting-point again, and our work lies before us.
We have to find Mackay's reef, and as we now stand
where he must have stood on first scaling that awful fever
wall behind us, we should soon locate it. But, remember,
there are forces at work here of which we are entirely
ignorant, and we must therefore be extremely careful. I
propose that we build a sort of fort in which we can de-
fend ourselves if attacked by overwhelming numbers of
aborigines, or Chinese, or white men."
" And as that is a fairly big outcrop of a quartz reef
over there, we can use it as one side, and get the building
material for our happy little home from farther up and
down its strike," put in Dandy Charlie. We may as


well use stone, seeing the good timber is too far away,
and we can get plenty of fresh water beside us."
The men saw the force of Dandy Charlie's words, and
at once set to work squaring off a part of the quartz
below where it outcropped over eight feet above the sur-
face. The natives assisted as soon as they grasped the
idea, but as none of them understood more than a few
words of English, and these words were of a nature not
found in the dictionary, Ignorant Tommy had to cease
working himself the better to instruct them. Of course
he knew their dialect; Ignorant Tommy knew everything.
Carson lay on the ground and looked on interestedly,
and Thomas paced round and round in a ten-yards radius,
saying nothing, but doubtless thinking a lot. He knew,
however, that a rifle shot would end his earthly existence
speedily if he made any attempt to escape, for he was not
foolish enough to doubt the shooting powers of any of his
captors. So the erection of the rough fort proceeded,
great detached blocks of rock being rolled into position,
and piled above each other, until a space was enclosed about
twenty feet in length by six feet in breadth, by a massive
wall eight feet high. The men had worked like Trojans
and did not seem to mind the intense heat or the steaming
atmosphere. At noon a halt was called for lunch, which
consisted of rice with condensed milk and hot tea. Game
of all kinds was abundant; but Damper Jack was so en-
grossed in the building of the house that he forgot to
press either biped or quadruped into his service as a meal
for his fellow builders.
" Blow me, boys!" Melbourne Mike exclaimed suddenly,
as he sat and smoked his pipe reflectively and surveyed
the wonderful structure. "There's something about this
shebang of ours that beats me. What is it?"


" Maybe its classical style of archy-teckture is beyond
you, Mike?" Damper Jack suggested. " I prefer the
Greeko-Roman style myself, but I was not the designer
of this palace."
" I was just wondering how we are to get inside the
blamed thing when it is finished. Ah! I've got it now;
we've forgotten to put a door in it."
Melbourne Mike looked round upon his comrades with
the air of a man who had earned undying fame through
an important discovery. But all laughed immoderately.
This was apparently a good joke, though Mike did not
grasp its subtleness until Uncle Sain explained that a
door was not really necessary, and that it would only be
a source of weakness in their stronghold.
"You see, Mike," Sam went on, "we're not likely to
be attacked by flying-machines, and a couple of tent-flies
are good enough to keep us dry. They also provide a
roof of the very latest scientific design, which allows of
thorough ventilation, and has one or two other advan-
tages. I refer to a sliding or portable roof, of course,
and we'll go out and in through it."
"Good old Uncle Sam!" Dandy Charlie cried. "I
knew we were going to be up-to-date, if anything."
"Well, it is now finished, but we have a lot to do
before night. Some of you boys come with me, and
we'll climb down to the fever beach and tie into slings
all the gear we brought over on our raft. The natives
can haul them aloft for us, and our stores and tools will
be safer and more useful in our own house than elsewhere.
Our horses and dogs can be brought over from the main-
land later."
" And if you two youngsters will see about providing
our supper, and some timber upon which to cook it,"
( C 204 ) 18


observed Ignorant Tommy, " those of us not otherwise
engaged will haul in poles to support our roof, and cut
a water channel from that spring over there into our
residence. We may as well have all modern conveniences
in view of the possibility of our wishing to sell the pro-
perty at some future date."
"Oh, give us a rest, Whiskers!" broke in Damper
Jack impatiently. "You've sent Fat Herman off to sleep
already."
" I vas not shleeping," remonstrated the individual
named. " I vas only keeping mine mouth shut to keep
out de flies."
" Let's go, Edmund," said the Disgrace. " This is no
place for us. This is a talky-talky camp."
Damper Jack made some remarks concerning "kids"
in general, but the boys wisely made no reply, much to
the surprise of all; for the Disgrace, as Dandy Charlie
said, " would speak back to a fellow with a Winchester
rifle, and give him cheek too."
But during the afternoon every man worked his utmost,
and that meant a great deal. One man was always left
to guard the prisoners, for well the comrades realized
that their presence was a most valuable asset. By sun-
down everything was completed. The stores, utensils,
and tools had been hauled aloft from the depths of the
mist and deposited inside the walls, timber for cooking
purposes had been collected, a tiny water channel had
been engineered to convey the precious fluid right through
the fort from the spring near by, and the young hunts-
men had laid in a stock of game which had necessitated
Damper Jack's skilled attention all the afternoon to trans-
form into a condition which would "keep". This he did
in most cases by partly roasting them in the ashes, then


transferring them to flour sacks in which he also placed
some charcoal from the same fire. The canvas roof was
also ready to be pulled into position when the rain started,
and every man felt that he didn't care now even if the
whole German army came up against them.
They dined well that night in the outside air, on a
stew which Damper Jack alleged to be a new invention
of his own; but as it was a triumph of art in more
ways than one, no man challenged his statement, al-
though Dandy Charlie did look round to see that a
spare pair of topboots he kept for special occasions
were still in existence. The prisoners were treated
courteously by all, but both knew that that courtesy
would not save them if they attempted to break away.
" You fellows seem prepared to stand a siege," Carson,
who was now very much better, remarked when the meal
was over. " May I ask what people you expect will
attack you?"
"Oh, we're not particular!" Uncle Sam replied dryly.
"We can deal with black, yellow, and white as they come.
But we're not anxious to fight; we're gold miners, you
know, and we only fight in self-defence."
" Ha, ha!" laughed Thomas. "Do you think you can
stand up for any time against our fellows when they miss
us and come to look for us? They'll bring machine guns
with them, and perhaps a field piece."
"We didn't know you had got any fellows left,"
Damper Jack began, "or we should have collared them
too."
A sign from Ignorant Tommy made him pause, and
he turned casually to the Disgrace and asked for a
match.
"That is where you made the mistake," sneered


Thomas. "We have even now a shore party strong
enough to wipe you out; and when our ship gets your
range, I'll guarantee there won't be much left of your
precious tinpot house."
" Oh, well," Ignorant Tommy sighed philosophically,
"we'll not anticipate trouble! I shouldn't advise you,
however, to depend too much on your shore party;
and as for your ship shelling us —well, we've got you
here, and you can stop the circus when it gets too hot
for you. I'm a bit inclined to fear, too, that you haven't
got any ship."
"Dear me, Ignorant Tommy!" Uncle Sam interrupted.
" Are you not forgetting yourself?"
"Just what I was thinking," said the Disgrace; and
Damper Jack and Melbourne Mike also murmured some
words.
"No, gentlemen," Tommy answered. "But you've
spoiled my game now. I was fishing for information as
to our lost friends; but of course that is useless now."
"Are you not all here?" asked Carson with a suddenly
awakened interest. "Are there more of you?"
"There were," answered Tommy, with a sigh that
almost made his comrades laugh; "but, alas! I fear
they have left us. We parted so hurriedly, too."
"I understand matters now," said Carson. "You are
the fellows who were camped up the creek opposite on
the mainland. You needn't be afraid to admit it. I
know more than you think about the business."
"We are not denying it," Ignorant Tommy put in;
"but—but —it isn't pleasant to think that confounded
Chinamen have got in their Thug work upon our poor
helpless comrades." Tommy seemed greatly affected,
and Fat Herman began blubbering. Damper Jack, too,


wrung a tear from his eyes, but the others preserved
silence. They did not yet fully understand what Tommy
was driving at, and they were awaiting developments.
Carson and Thomas roared with laughter.
"You needn't feel bad on that point, exactly," Carson
said. "It is true that, after you cleared out from the
plague-stricken camp, the Chinese settlers on another
river came along, but they weren't having any of your
bubonic plague; not by any means. They left your de-
serted comrades to die naturally, and cleared out, I'll
swear, faster than you did yourselves."
"Poor old Mackay!" groaned Uncle Sam; "to think
that he should go under like that!"
"Mackay?" cried Thomas. "I thought it was him
from what I had heard. By Harry! If he's pegged out
I don't mind anything else. Do you mean that the man
who prospected this country years ago, bearing that
name, was one of the plague victims in your camp?"
"Well, we saw him lying there," said Ignorant Tommy,
but this time even he was unable to work up any signs
of grief. With his comrades, he now knew definitely
that Mackay was not in the hands of the enemy, and in
that case all the others would certainly be with him,
whether on the Vulture as captors, or elsewhere.
" I guess it's about time we got inside our little domi-
cile," broke in Uncle Sam, who now saw the drift of
Ignorant Tommy's sustained conversation. "If these
niggers are bent on carrying through the corroborree
that missed fire these last few nights, owing to unfore-
seen circumstances, we'll be safer inside stone walls to-
night."
" How about your own aborigines?" asked Thomas.
"Won't they turn on you?"


"No, they are something like your Chinese," Uncle
Sam replied. "They know their masters. These natives
were hunting here by chance. They belong to a Northern
Territory tribe who don't like our present corroborree-
holding friends any more than the average Australian
likes the Chinaman. They would have been victimized
last night if they had been spotted; but luckily for them
they fell in with us first, along with one or two members
of the other aborigines who are about tired of the un-
pleasantness of corroborrees of the high orders, to which,
it seems, this island is dedicated."
"Blow my buttons off if Uncle Sam isn't growing as
long-winded as Ignorant Tommy!" growled Damper
Jack. " I don't know what you fellows are going to
do, but as soon as I get things washed up I'm going
to turn in and draw the roof over. There's going to be
a bosker rainstorm to-night, and I reckon it will make
me sleep all the sounder."
"You're mighty long-winded yourself, Damper Jack,"
observed Dandy Charlie kindly; and all added words to
the effect that they were of a similar opinion.
Damper Jack threw down the last of the utensils,
cleaned and ready for the next meal.
"You crowd of no-good, bubonic - plague - stricken
fossickers," he roared, "if it weren't that I'm so blamed
tired I'd hold a corroborree with you right now. I reckon
I'll show you who is long-winded when Uncle Sam starts
blowing his snoring trumpet to-night."
The doughty and doughy cook scrambled over the
wall of the fort and dropped inside, and shortly after his
comrades followed, having previously thrown all their ac-
coutrements and culinary vessels over on top of Damper
Jack. The prisoners were given their quarters, and the


natives theirs at the far end of the erection, and soon
all were sleeping as soundly as though hostile aborigines,
Chinese, and cut-throat white men were thousands of
miles away.
The rain came on, but they were sheltered this time,
and it only lulled them into deeper slumber. About mid-
night, as usual in those latitudes, the sky cleared up and
the young moon shone out. Probably the boys were the
freshest in the party, and it may have been because of
that, or perhaps it was by some instinctive influence,
that Edmund and the Disgrace suddenly awoke. For a
time each lay still, wondering what had roused him,
and vaguely pondering over the cause of fitful flashes of
light that seemed to pervade the apartment occasionally,
as if a reflection of some great fire. Of course there were
many chinks in the walls, for the stones had not been
dressed in any way, or even fitted to the best advantage,
and the flickering flares came through these holes.
"Edmund," suddenly spoke the Disgrace, "are you
sleeping?"
"No; what is the matter?" Edmund responded, sitting
up at once."
"I don't know; but there's something on the move.
We stamped out our fire, didn't we?"
"Yes; but these flickers of light come from some-
thing bigger than a fire in any case. Suppose we get
up and see?"
As he spoke, Edmund arose and stepped gently from
the side of Uncle Sam, and the Disgrace also left his
position and joined Edmund at the front wall. Then
they saw the cause of the reflections, and their first
action was to rouse their comrades.
" It's all right, my lad," Ignorant Tommy spoke, as


Edmund touched him on the arm. "I've been watching
that affair since it started, but as it is now Uncle Sam's
turn to keep a wakeful eye on our prisoners I'll go to
sleep. Don't kick me up unless you need me."
So saying, the imperturbable one turned over and
composed himself to sleep, and Uncle Sam grunted: "All
right, old man. I'll watch now until the boys get up."
But the boys were up in a few seconds, as were also
the prisoners and the natives, Fat Herman alone keep-
ing company with Ignorant Tommy. Each man stationed
himself with his eyes to an aperture, and many and varied
and terse were the comments made.
About a couple of hundred yards distant, just on the
edge of the valley up which they had come that day,
or rather the preceding day, was a huge fire, the flames
of which were shooting upwards in long tongues of bluish
tinge, clearly the result of some substance other than
wood being burned. But that was not all; round it
gyrated a great number of naked aborigines, all stoop-
ing until the upper parts of their painted bodies were
parallel to the ground. One hand rested on the man in
front all round the circle, and the other was raised in
the air and bent forward at the wrist. It was all very
grotesque, yet painfully impressive. The natives re-
sembled an endless ring of huge birds, and in silence
they stalked round and round the weirdly flaming fire,
ever moving the upraised hand in imitation of a bird
pecking at something.
The friendly aborigines inside the fort muttered together
in a terrified manner. Well they knew what was taking
place, and equally well they understood what was to
follow. They had all taken part in lower corroborrees
before, but they were now gazing unlawfully at a rite


in the Bora forbidden to them to behold until they had
been initiated into its mysteries.
The white men, however, were not in the least awe-
stricken. Most of them were as well versed in the
various stages and degrees of the sacred ceremony as
the aboriginal chiefs and priests themselves. True, they
had gained their knowledge in a manner which would
not have appealed to any but the most daring and reck-
less even of Australia's back-block sons. But danger is
the spice of the "Never Never" man's life.
"What were we kicked up for?" growled Damper
Jack in disgust. " It's only the first part of the Emu
Corroborree; and I was dreaming of gold being all around
us, and of how each man was making at least five ounces
a day. I'm going back to finish my dream. I want to
see if we make our rise or not."
" Excuse me, gentlemen," broke in Carson, " I'm not
acquainted with the performance going on in front, but
I'm greatly interested. Do you mind telling me what
comes next?"
"Nothing special," Dandy Charlie answered, as Damper
Jack lay down beside Ignorant Tommy. "The fellows
w r ho don't perform the dance as they have been taught to
do in the lower corroborree are chucked into the fire.
If they come out on the other side they get another
chance to do the trick properly. Nearly always they do
it then; although, by thunder, it was a narrow shave
with me when I went through it the second time, and
I can tell you it doesn't feel O.K. to be roasted."
u And is that the end of the ceremony?" asked Carson
with a shudder.
"You bet your old pants it isn't," laughed Dandy
Charlie. "If there haven't been enough beggars burned


to please the old devil, Billya, Bacyan, or some name
like that, meaning - , of course, the bunyip, the priests go
round and ask conundrums, and those who don't answer
right are—well—l don't exactly know what is done to
them; for Damper Jack and I knocked the old beggar
into the fire himself when he came to us, and broke
away."
" I can tell you," said the Disgrace. " I saw the whole
thing played to a finish down on Cooper's Creek last year.
The fellows who are still left form up and go through
the kangaroo dance, squatting on their legs and jumping
round the fire like kangaroos, with their hands hanging
limp to imitate its fore paws. Then, for those who don't
fall out on that performance, comes the snake affair, in
which they all wriggle round like snakes, and those who
still come out on top, that is the old warriors who know
the performance well, do the fire dance, and you can bet
that finishes off any poor beggar who has no right to be
there. The aborigines don't care what your colour is at
a corroborree. If you are there you must go through, and
if you are a fraud their devils—they have no gods, Mackay
told me—will avenge themselves. He went through the
whole circus, and he knows."
4 'The poor beggars! I'm sorry I led them into this,"
said Carson. "But I suppose they would have been
hanged some day in any case. I'd be happy if I saw
that most wonderful man, Mackay, among them."
•'What are you talking about, Mr. Pirate King?"
asked Melbourne Mike. "You didn't start this affair
in front, and Mackay is playing a game, I'll bet, that
will upset your apple cart even more than the corro-
borree."
"Excuse me, gentlemen," Carson responded, "but I


can't help feeling a bit off colour. Not that I care much
for my own condition; but you see I have just spotted
some of my own most trusted men among those dancers,
and I know they are not built in an asbestos casing, to
stand fire."
"Howling smoke! Do you see white men among the
niggers?" cried Dandy Charlie, seizing his rifle.
"Oh yes, and yellow men too! In fact, the perfor-
mance seems to be carried out chiefly by my men. I
wish I were with them. I feel bad at their having all
the fun, seeing I'm the man who led them into it."
"Stop that cant!" snarled Thomas. "Much you care
whether our mongrel crew go under or not. I'm chiefly
concerned to know what brought about their presence
there. We were all together on the beach."
The Disgrace and Edmund looked at each other. Well
they knew how the victims had been brought there, but
it was not their business to tell. Their own missing
comrades were not among the performers, and that fact
made it all the more clear that they were playing a game
on their own, however daring or desperate it was. They
looked at Uncle Sam for a cue as to whether they should
speak or not; but that gentleman was snoring peacefully,
though not loudly enough to alarm the performing abo-
rigines, so they said nothing.
Round and round circled the emu dancers, their antics
being wonderfully like the actions of those great creatures.
Then suddenly the dancers stopped and a scream of rage
went up from a hundred throats. Impostors had been de-
tected. Quickly there were hauled from the circle a dozen
pigtailed men and seven or eight others. Of course, all
had known before, the nature of these men, but it suited
the priests best to leave their fate in the hands of the unerr-


ing judge of the corroborree. And that judge had decided
now. They had made some mistake which showed they
were not of the initiated, and now they would pay the
penalty. Shrieks of terror burst upon the midnight air
from the throats of beings whom the watchers in the fort
could now see were Chinese, and a group of sailor-like
white men stood defiantly by, awaiting their fate. All
were naked, but the lighter-coloured bodies were not
painted, so that they might be the more readily dis-
tinguished by the administrators of corroborree law.
A crowd of willing warriors closed around the victims,
and as a weird sound wailed out above the cries of the
terror-stricken Celestials, they seized one and pitched him
headlong into the fire. One yell he uttered, and all was
silent. Again the awful discordant wail of the ghingi-
ghingi (devil-devil, a fluted piece of wood, which, when
waving round the head, emits syren-like sounds) was
heard, and another man was hurled into the flames.
Edmund was paralysed. It all seemed like a dream
to him. Hitherto he had been a chief actor in all that
had taken place, but now he was only a helpless looker-
on. Yet something within him rebelled at the sight of
human beings being burned before his eyes, even if they
had lately been his enemies. But he was not alone in
that respect. His comrades were men of the type that
only occasionally is produced by any nation. They were
above petty feelings, and the sacrifice of life, whether
Chinese or Hottentot, was a thing they could not stand
by and see, inactive.
' 4 Great gum trees, boys!" ejaculated Melbourne Mike;
"ain't it time we had a hand in this?"
" I reckon it is," the Disgrace answered grimly. " I'll
drop that medicine man, anyhow."


He fired, and with a yell of pain and astonishment the
chief priest of the corroborree leaped into the air and fell
in a heap upon the ground.
" I only shot him in his left leg," the Disgrace mut-
tered scornfully, 4 'yet he made as much noise about it
as Damper Jack would make if someone had interfered
with his cooking."
Without a moment's hesitation another priest seized
the ghingi-ghingi and swung it round his head with the
energy of a frenzied being. The warriors again began
their weird dance, paying no heed to the fallen man.
Doubtless they thought he was only playing his part in
a superb manner, and to the wailing cry of the great
unseen devil the procession resumed its circular progress.
But a change had taken place in the management, and
that soon was apparent. As the ring of emu-imitating
men ambled round and round, and the ghingi's awful
shrieks rose higher and higher, beings strangely garbed
in the skins and semblance of animals rushed from the
covering darkness beyond the firelit zone, and hurled
themselves upon the performers at various parts of the
ring. The results were always the same. The victims
were forced from their places, and, with time only for a
yell of terror, thrown headlong into the fire. And they
were all Chinamen.
"Boys, we must do something, quick and lively,"
spoke Dandy Charlie. "The white fellows will be the
next beggars to go into the fire, and there is no telling
when the niggers pass on to the next stage. Suppose
we rush them?"
"No blooming fear," answered Melbourne Mike. "We
can pick off the ghingi swingers and soon stop the show
that way. Just watch the way I'll puncture that priest


fellow now. I'll bet, too, I'll only knock his business
arm out of action."
As Mike finished speaking, he fired, and, sure enough,
the ghingi-ghingi-swinging priest uttered a yell of pain,
and, leaping through the ring of emus, disappeared in
the darkness, the ghingi-ghingi meanwhile flying off at
a tangent into the fire. But another strangely garbed
monstrosity at once took his place as master of cere-
monies, and, with another ghingi, resumed operations,
though it was quite evident, from the apprehensive manner
in which he looked over his shoulder from time to time,
that he dreaded the evil, sportive spirit that had already
seized two of its own priests in its grim clutches.
"This game won't work at all," said the Disgrace
abruptly. "We can't shoot them all, and, anyhow, we
have no right to kill beggars for attending to their own
business in their own country. If Mackay were here he
would use strategy."
Bang! went Dandy Charlie's rifle, and the nervous
priest dropped in a heap and kicked, and then sprang up
with a shriek, and bounded through the ring as had done
the wielder of the instrument whom he had succeeded.
The warriors themselves were by this time somewhat
alarmed. They knew the spirit whom they were pro-
pitiating was often inclined to play tricks with them, but
he generally left his own people alone when they provided
other victims who did not know the elementary rites of
the great Bora; and never before had he been in such a
bad mood as to seize upon his own priests. Surely he
was angry at being disturbed. Perhaps the corroborree
had not been well timed. However, there were plenty of
men qualified to swing the ghingi, and there were still
the greater number of pigtailed men to dispose of, not to


mention the white fellows, who should burn well. More
than likely of such nature were their thoughts; but an idea
had also originated in the Disgrace's fertile brain, and he
immediately proceeded to carry it into effect. A fear had
struck Edmund at about the same moment, and nerved
him to recklessness. He had imagined that he had de-
tected Mackay's burly figure among the dancers, and his
reason at once became subservient to his desire to make
certain of the matter, and to share the fate of, if he could
not save, his comrade. Thus it was that when the Dis-
grace turned to him with his scheme he found a ready
listener. Melbourne Mike had sent a bullet through the
arm of the latest ghingi wielder with a wonderfully well-
aimed shot, and Dandy Charlie was waiting to do the
same with his successor when he appeared. Meanwhile
Ignorant Tommy and Fat Herman slept peacefully. Uncle
Sam apparently was doing likewise; but he cheated none.
There was no doubt about Datpper Jack; he snored like
a trombone in action, and in all likelihood was going on
with his interrupted dream. The prisoners and the natives
were spellbound.
"Are you game, Edmund?" said the Disgrace. He evi-
dently didn't seem to think he required to explain.
"This moment," came the prompt answer. "This is
too slow in here, and we are doing nothing."
"All right! get hold of an empty flour sack, and climb
outside. Dandy Charlie and Mike will not give us away,
and they can help us with their rifles if we need help."
And very soon the Disgrace had contrived to gain the
approval of Charlie and Mike, although both these indi-
viduals were dubious at first, and inclined to refer the
matter to Ignorant Tommy and Uncle Sam. These gentle-
men were sleeping, though, and the Disgrace explained


that it would be a pity to awake them for such a trifling
matter. So the two men consented, wishing very much
they could get an excuse for going on the Disgrace's
errand themselves. The lads scrambled over the wall,
and after cutting eyeholes in the flour sacks, pulled them
over their heads and ran over towards the scene of the
corroborree, keeping well in the shadows until they had
got as near as possible without being seen.
By this time the aborigines were almost demoralized,
for other two of their number, most skilled in the mys-
terious rites of the Bora, had fallen, stricken down by
some magic of the unseen devil. They marvelled, but
no satisfactory explanation presented itself, although
clearly something was wrong. A halt was called by the
next presiding naked painted savage, and he spoke long—
and, as far as the boys knew, earnestly—to the warriors,
apparently exhorting them to keep up their courage, and
trust in him. The warriors answered with a feeble shout;
they didn't quite see how the present ghingi man could
prevail where others far more famous than he had failed.
"Great Scot," ejaculated Edmund, "that is Dirty Face
who is in the middle of the ring now! I hope the boys
won't pot him until we get a chance. Come on, Disgrace,
let's rush them now!"
"All right, old man! but I fancied we should give some
of those animal men lying just ahead of us a bit of a fright.
You see, they know all about this corroborree game, and
may cut up rough:"
"Well, let them; we didn't come here for a peaceful
time. Work up your best yells, and we'll break through
and chance everything else. We have no time to lose if
we mean to save Oh, that man is not Mackay!"
" Mackay!" the Disgrace laughed. " Did you imagine


.jK! -. / ' jKSHHfcjWBm'
Jjgf
•■d Jm? :, *M
MM MMBVjk iiflT , i mSB^
JM jmatrJSMk Pf
cj F, '"JKET Mm %j3m » f$ J&B
.j
.JF JflBw
i*- |||F 17 sttMm
< V" ,
i $M3^m,
. ?
» .. "*!*»
■ J* Vj/jj " * iirt^'^SlW
m -:. *5— I
"THEY BOUNDED AT THE WAVERING RING OF EMU DANCERS"




you would find him doing the fire trick? You might cer-
tainly run him to earth among the aborigines, but I'll bet
it would be swinging a ghingi you would find him. He
knows too much for the other game; only silly men would
try the fire test."
"Look; these animal-skinned men are running away!"
broke in Edmund. "They must have got a fright."
"You bet, and the rest will get one in another minute.
Come on, now, yell your loudest, and make yourself as
much a contortionist as you can."
And the boys did both. Yelling like nothing on earth,
they bounded at the wavering ring of emu dancers, and
burst through it into the firelight, firing their revolvers
into the air as they did so. The natives had never seen
apparitions like the white flour-sack-covered objects before,
and their courage failed them. Here were two of their
devils materialized, and among them! Truly some great
mistake had been made by their chiefs and priests! But
theirs not to reason why. They fled.
(0 204)


CHAPTER XIV
Edmund Strikes Gold
"GREAT Julius Mackay!" ejaculated the Disgrace, coming
to a halt beside the fire. "That was an easy piece of
work. Where have the howling beggars gone?" He
pulled the flour sack off his head, and laughed heartily.
" I tell you, Edmund," he continued after a bit, "there's
nothing like strategy. I reckon that good old Mackay,
when he invented it, struck on one of the best things ever
known. Just fancy a mob of corroborree-mad aborigines
running away from two kids like us!"
"But Mackay didn't invent strategy, Disgrace; and
we're shouting too soon. The prisoners have not cleared
out, and we are going to have trouble with them now."
And so it seemed. When the two flour-sack demons
had burst upon the startled natives, and caused them to
fly, the prisoners among the dancers had not seen any-
thing more alarming in the apparitions than in the mon-
strosities which had preceded them, claiming victims.
Therefore they simply dropped upon the ground when the
natives fled, and awaited results, doubtless thinking that
they were now witnessing some new phase of the corro-
borree proceedings. But when the Disgrace removed his
covering, and thus showed himself to be a white man, and
the natives had completely disappeared, it began to dawn
upon some of the white prisoners that an unlooked-for


development had taken place, and a similar idea simul-
taneously came to the Chinese. Here were two of the
troublesome miners, who had caused all their troubles,
delivered into their hands. They had suffered much of
late through them, but they would have revenge now.
So they thought. They arose and closed round threaten-
ingly, and the nature of their position dawned upon the
boys.
"Howling smoke 1 We've done it now," said the
Disgrace. "What's the programme, old man?" The
Disgrace had a habit of getting into trouble, but of late
he had come to leave the getting out again to Edmund,
in whose powers of reasoning and strategy he had im-
plicit faith.
"They are harmless," Edmund answered. "They are
naked and unarmed, and I have still three shots in each
of my revolvers, and you must have some too. We'll
simply charge through them, and if they don't get out of
our way, it's their own fault. Hullo, these two men lead-
ing the mob are our old friends, Smith and Mackenzie! I
thought they had gone on board the Vulture again."
"No, you didn't, mate; you thought that two men re-
presenting them went on board the Vulture , although I'm
beat to know how Mackay and the New Chum knew any-
thing about them. But come on; we'll break through
now. Stand out of the way, Smith and Mackenzie, or
we'll blow holes in your dirty old carcasses!"
The two men addressed jumped back in astonishment.
They did not know that they were confronting the indi-
viduals who had trapped them so neatly on the mainland,
and thereby foiled all their efforts and ruined their work,
as well as being the cause of their present condition, naked
and humiliated,


"Who in blazes are you?" demanded Smith, recovering
himself quickly. " You're going to do the fire dance, any-
how, and "
"You! You're a liar, Smith!" the Disgrace retorted
promptly. "We've saved you from doing it, for which
we're now sorry, but we've still got the whip hand, and,
by Harry, we'll prove it! Come on, Edmund. Shoot the
skunks down!"
" Ca' canny there, laddies?" cried the man named Mac-
kenzie, and at the sound of the Scots dialect Edmund felt
strangely thrilled. "Ye dinna need to use your popguns
recklessly. Despite what ma freend says, we'll no' harm
ye if ye'll listen to reason. Noo, whaur did ye come frae,
and hoo did ye happen to drop here?"
"Look out, Edmund!" the Disgrace cried. "The
beggar is edging up to you! Take that, you blamed
old snake in the grass!" The lad's revolver spoke out
spitefully, and the treacherous Scot subsided with a
bullet in his leg. But the shot was the signal for a
combined rush, and in a moment the boys were strug-
gling amidst a mob of naked, screaming Chinese, and
half a dozen white men, also without any artificial cover-
ing. Right into the sea of faces the boys discharged
their remaining shots; truly they had got a strange
reward for rescuing the corroborree victims. But the
maddened Chinese did not fear all the two boys could
do, and soon both Edmund and the Disgrace went down
under about a dozen yellow men.
" Choke the life out of the brats!" yelled Smith. "The
treasure will be ours yet. Hurry up, you pigtails, and kill
them!"
"Na, na; tak' plenty o' time an' dinna spoil the job,"
put in the Scot.


" Me no likee youl talky," responded a Chinaman who
had his knee on Edmund's chest. "You blame fool!
Wha' fo' you no' killee youlself? You talky talky muchy
muchy, but no do any wolky wolky " A black figure
daubed all over with paint caught the speaker by the
throat just as he was closing his own long-nailed clutches
round Edmund's windpipe. The Chinaman gasped and
kicked, but could not articulate, and by the time his
comrades realized that an aboriginal was still among
them, he was past taking any interest in anything.
"Dirty Face!" shouted the Disgrace. "Clear out!
Our fellows are coming!"
"Hims knows," the aboriginal answered. "That's why
hims come back. My word! You bet! God save the
king! Hims knows now what all white, and dirty-white
pigtail fellows want. Dirty Face come tell his friends.
Hims people got it all right."
"Come on, you yellow vermin!" roared Smith. "Are
you afraid of two kids and a nigger? Squash them!
Jump on them! Where are the beggars? Let me get
my fingers round their throats."
" Ye'll be better wi' some covering round yer ain legs,
ma man," put in his comrade. "Ah! just as I expected;
we've missed the boat again, an' noo the piper is to pay!"
A fusillade of revolver shots broke out behind the mob
of naked men, and with yells far louder than the best
efforts of the aborigines in that direction, the Chinese
scattered and fled in all directions. They had had all the
fighting they wanted, and they were not taking any more
risks. Smith looked round and swore terribly; then, ad-
ministering a kick to the Disgrace, he turned and fled into
the darkness with the other two white men.
" Shoot them down, boys, they're only skunks!" yelled


Dandy Charlie's voice, as the firers of the shots burst into
the light of the fire.
" No; we're not their judges," cried Ignorant Tommy.
" Don't shoot to kill."
" Stand out any half-dozen of you and fight me," roared
Damper Jack; and even Fat Herman added his voice in an
invitation to everyone to show themselves and he would
kill them.
" Yellow man's god's in cave," Dirty Face cried into
the ears of the prostrate lad. "My word; see hims
again; you bet! Auld lang syne!" He too disappeared
into the darkness just as Melbourne Mike, who was the
fleetest of foot of the party, gained the Disgrace's side.
The others sent shot after shot into the shadows in all
directions, but the screams and yells soon died away.
The yellow men and their white comrades could run as
fast as the aborigines, it seemed; though where they
were running to was not apparent. The two adventure-
loving youths rose to their feet as Uncle Sam and Ignorant
Tommy came up.
" Now we're in for far more trouble than the other
fellows could have given us," the Disgrace wailed in
Edmund's ear. "Suppose we cut and run for it too?"
" No; we've done nothing wrong," Edmund gasped.
" We've only been foolish, and—and I can't run any-
way."
"Where are the young mischief-makers?" called out
Uncle Sam. " I knew they were up to no good when
they left the camp."
" Pretend you are hurt, boys," Melbourne Mike whis-
pered. "That will touch Tommy and Sam on the soft
place."
"Give me a knock-out blow on my top, Mike, then,


please," the Disgrace implored. " I'd rather be knocked
out that way than hear all Ignorant Tommy will have to
say. It was all my fault, though, you can tell the boys.
1 led Edmund astray."
" No, you didn't," Edmund cried. " I am as much to
blame as you, and I'll share it."
" Here, Dandy Charlie," shouted Mike; "the kids have
got handled a bit rough; come and give us a hand to cart
them home."
" I'm coming," Charlie answered. " But, Mike, I'd
give my best boots to get in among those crooked white
men with my shooters for a couple of minutes." Next
minute he was bending over the boys anxiously, and
Damper Jack also came running up, breathing slaughter
to every living creature who crossed his path. " Oh,
boys," he wailed, " why did you start on this business
without me with you?"
"Close up, Damper Jack," yawned the Disgrace. "I
reckon we'll get plent)' from Uncle Sam and Ignorant
Tommy. Snakes! Here they are! Screw out a groan,
if you can, Edmund."
" Vere vas dey?" cried another voice, as the two sedate
leaders came up with smoking rifles. " Oh, boys, vas
you dead! Mine big fat self! Vy vas I schleeping ven
you vas in me of need?"
"Don't worry, old man," murmured the Disgrace;
"we'll be all right in no time."
"Are you badly hurt, boys?" Ignorant Tommy asked
kindly, stooping over Edmund.
" Only stunned a bit; but don't blame the Disgrace for
this, sir, I "
"That's all right, my lad. We are proud of you. You
tried to save human life, and have done so at much cost


to yourselves. But the lives you risked your own for were
not worth the brave action."
"Poor old Disgrace!" wailed Damper Jack, dropping
down beside his youthful comrade. "To think he was
in a fight with my trousers on." He felt all over the
garment in question, and brightened up. "And—and
you're mighty lucky, Disgrace; they're not torn at all."
" My poor lad," began Uncle Sam, " it grieves me more
than I can tell to find you brought down at last, and by
the very men you saved from such a horrible fate, too."
" Und dey never told me dey vas going," sobbed Fat
Herman, throwing his arms around the Disgrace's neck,
much to that person's disgust. "You might vas been
dead, und vot den vould Fat Herman do?"
" Come, lads, we'll carry them away," said Ignorant
Tommy. " I'll attend to them myself."
" Look here, Ignorant Tommy and Uncle Sam," broke
in the Disgrace, " I'd rather own up than have to suffer
so much sympathy wasted over me. It's only Edmund
that deserves it; I'm not hurt at all; I was only playing
'possum."
So saying, the Disgrace sprang to his feet, and thereby
frustrated Damper Jack's attempt to remove his much-
prized belt. The cook had often tried to negotiate a deal
for it, but the Disgrace wouldn't part with it.
" I'm not much hurt either," said Edmund, fearing that
he now would receive all the attention; " I'm quite able to
walk myself."
"Well, I'm—l'm jiggered!" Damper Jack ejaculated;
but he didn't specify whether it was his failure to obtain
the coveted belt or his outraged feelings which jiggered
him.
The faces of Uncle Sam and Ignorant Tommy grew


stern. "You irresponsible young idiot," began the former,
addressing the Disgrace, '' did it never strike you that
it was not only yourselves you were running into trouble?
I'll deal with you to-morrow."
"My luck again," muttered the Disgrace. "Oh, why
didn't you knock me out, Mike?"
" I'll do that for you now," volunteered Damper Jack
readily; but as Ignorant Tommy had addressed himself
reprovingly to Edmund, he desisted from carrying his
promise into effect until the learned one had finished.
And Tommy certainly was severe, " I'm ashamed of
you, young man," he concluded. " I'm sure my friend
Mackay never taught you to act without calculating first
the possible results. What good on earth could you two
boys hope to accomplish by breaking up a corroborree?"
"We didn't like to see white men murdered before our
eyes without trying to help them," Edmund answered
humbly.
" And yet the men you undoubtedly did save nearly
exterminated you in return. Why, these were the very
men you yourselves put out of action down on the
beach."
" Some of them, sir; the rest were sleeping, and we left
them alone. But that is why we wished to rescue them;
we thought we were really responsible for their being
captured by the aborigines."
"But you ought to have consulted your comrades,"
observed Uncle Sam. " You might have been killed
without us ever knowing." The company were now
nearing their own camp.
"That's a fact," put in Damper Jack; "and then who
would be wearing my pants, I'd like to know?"
" We are very sorry," said Edmund, tactfully omitting


to mention that Dandy Charlie and Melbourne Mike knew
of their action. " But Mr. Mackay taught me that often
the end justifies the means, and we really have got some
knowledge, which I don't think we could have otherwise
obtained. We know now, for instance, that the men
Smith and Mackenzie did not return to the ship, for we
saw them, and that knowledge makes us almost certain
of where Mackay and the others are. We also know
that all the people here are looking for the lost Chinese
treasure, and that they think we have it hidden some-
where. Another fact, too, which we discovered through
Dirty Face, the most important aboriginal unwounded,
is, that the natives really have the treasure, and that it
is hidden in some cave."
"Jumping snakes, hear the kids!" cried Damper Jack.
"They've found out everything. Let's go back and get
the mysterious treasure now."
"Shut up!" growled Dandy Charlie. "I reckon the
kids are the only men among us."
"My boys, I apologize," broke in Uncle Sam. "Dis-
grace, you are exempted from the lecture to-morrow,
from me at any rate. You are a pair of brave lads,
and you have brains too."
"Thanks, Uncle Sam!" said the Disgrace. "Edmund
has all the brains, but I'm a fair bosker at backing
him up. We'll have that Chinese treasure in no time
and "
" We didn't come here to look for any Chinese treasure,"
interposed Ignorant Tommy. "But I certainly withdraw
all the uncharitable things I said to-night concerning your
lack of reasoning powers. Yes, Edmund, there are times
when the end justifies the means, but the odds were heavily
against such proving the case to-night. However, we'll


say no more about the matter. Perhaps, after all, you
were right. Youth's impetuosity is "
"Oh, dry up, Ignorant Tommy!" roared Melbourne
Mike. " It's almost sunrise, and we want a rest."
Dandy Charlie climbed inside the fort. " Hullo," he
exclaimed, "there's nobody here!"
He spoke truly. Carson and Thomas had gone, and
the friendly natives had also taken their departure.
Soon all the men were inside, gazing at each other
blankly.
" Now that's what I call blamed low down," com-
plained Dandy Charlie. " For the last thing I did was
to hitch the beggars up in a way that would keep
them."
"Oh, the natives would set them free!" Uncle Sam
observed coolly. "Doubtless they have gone off to-
gether."
"You take it mighty cool, Uncle Sam," said Dandy
Charlie. "Come on, Damper, and we'll get on their
back trail at once."
"You are too impatient, Dandy Charlie. They are best
out of our way now; they would only be a great nuisance
to us after this. In the light of the knowledge our young
friends obtained to-night, we know our comrades are on
board the Vulture , and we have merely to locate Mackay's
reef now and wait until they turn up. We have done our
work well. All the bands working around this island are
broken up; Chinese, aborigines, and smugglers. Our
own people will soon be in command of the Vulture,
if they are not already, and we certainly control things
here. Let's mind our own business now and await de-
velopments."
"What a mighty long speech," Damper Jack com-


merited, "but quite sensible! All we have to do now
is to fill our pockets with gold, find that treasure, and
prevent any of the other parties from getting together
again. But see here, Uncle Sam; what in thunder are
we to do with a big steamer, and why should our mates
have worried about it?"
"To render the white pirates helpless. They can't do
much without it."
"But won't it be awkward for Mackay to explain
what he is doing with a ship if a gunboat comes along?
He has no right to it." The Disgrace was the speaker.
"Maybe he has as much right to it as the people
who have been kicked out," Melbourne Mike suggested
oracularly. "Anyhow, if he brings a ship up our
creek, I reckon Damper Jack will get a good cooking
galley."
" But who can navigate the thing?" Damper Jack en-
quired anxiously. "What's the good of shaking a ship
if we can't work it?"
" You are taking too much for granted," said Uncle
Sam. "We don't want to keep the vessel any longer than
is necessary for our self-defence. Should occasion arise,
however, I will navigate the Vulture ; I—l was a sailor
before I came among you boys." Uncle Sam's voice
changed as he spoke the last words. A mood of sad-
ness had suddenly come over him.
"Are you really able to navigate, sir?" asked Edmund.
" I thought that only Mackay could do anything and every-
thing."
" My boy," spoke the American brokenly, and in a way
the men had never heard him speak before, "some years
ago, while entering the Golden Gates to San Francisco
harbour, a steamer ran on the rocks, and many lives were


lost. It was the captain's fault, everyone agreed; but
he was last seen on the bridge as the ship went down,
so people spared his name. But Providence saved him
after all, and he was thrown ashore little the worse of
his experience. He was a coward though, and unable
to face the world which spared him because he was
supposed to have gone down at his post. He smuggled
himself away on a ' Spreckels' liner bound for Sydney,
and—gentlemen, I am that captain."
"Poor old Uncle Sam!" said the soft-hearted cook.
"I guessed all along he had had a bad time before he
struck us."
" But the accident wasn't really your fault, Uncle Sam,"
spoke Ignorant Tommy sympathizingly, "and I happen to
know that boatloads of the people supposed to have been
drowned were landed safely two days after the breaking
up of the —the steamer."
"Ah well! Some day, if the Fates will it, I may go
back and proclaim myself. But the happiest days of my
life have been spent among you fellows, and I had almost
forgotten the past."
" We've all got pasts, Uncle Sam," put in the Disgrace,
"so don't you worry about yours. I reckon we're living
in the present, and the man who says a word against you
has got to fight me."
"And me," cried Damper Jack, Dandy Charlie, and
Melbourne Mike fervently.
"But what past have you, Disgrace?" asked Dandy
Charlie. " I didn't think you'd lived long enough to have
one.
"What business is it of yours what past I have?" the
Disgrace demanded indignantly. "And, anyhow, do you
think I can remember it all at once? I'm not an author,


or a member of Parliament, or " The Disgrace paused
a moment to think.
"That will do, Disgrace," Ignorant Tommy said re-
provingly. "I have no doubt your life has been very
much misspent, but we don't wish to hear details of
your wicked deeds. I may say, Uncle Sam, I knew
your story long ago. The New Chum spotted you too,
first day he joined us; but we had our own pasts to
conceal and we respected your secret. The New Chum's
story I do not know, but I myself, gentlemen—pray be
lenient with me—was one of those people whom the
Disgrace denounced. I was a member of the Queens-
land Parliament "
"Good old M.P.cried Damper Jack; "but you kicked
them out, and came up to this Gulf country."
"No, Damper Jack. Truth, which I now respect more
than any other attribute, obliges me to say that they put
me out. Possibly I deserved it. At any rate lam here,
and here I have found true comradeship, and what better
can life offer?"
"Boys, this is no place for me," said the cook. "I'm
off to get breakfast ready. I don't want to hear any more."
"Well, as for me," began Melbourne Mike, "my people
wanted to make me a parson; but as I hadn't the brains,
they then used their influence to make me a tram driver;
but the blamed tram hadn't any horses, and I couldn't get
the hang of the wheels and levers, so I got the sack. Then
my people thought of putting me into Parliament, which
was the next best thing; but I happened to meet the fellow
who was running against me, one day, and that cooked
my goose. When they found him, he was nearly dead,
and I was well up in Queensland. I've been here ever
• M
since.


"I was a—a —now what in thunder was I? Ah, yes,
I was a lawyer "
" Dandy Charlie, you are a skiter," broke in Damper
Jack from the outside. "You were never anything else
than a no-good boundary rider, and if you hadn't met
me you would never have been up in the Gulf country."
"I vas nodink," said Fat Herman modestly; "but I
like mine friendts, and I vill fight for dem."
" I was only a clerk in a wholesale tea merchant's,"
Edmund informed all apologetically, "and if I hadn't
met Mackay I should never have been here."
"And what has old Mackay done, I should like to
know r ?" demanded the Disgrace. "I reckon he could
give points to us all."
" What he has not done would be more easily told,"
Ignorant Tommy answered. "Nevertheless, he has led
a straight life right through, and I don't think a man
lives who can say that Mackay did him an injury."
"I should think not," said Dandy Charlie. "Mackay
would see to that. They are all dead. Nobody can run
against Mackay."
"Well, what about Ginger Bob?" asked the Dis-
grace. " He's ugly enough to have done something
extra special."
"I don't think he has ever done anything. He was
born on the Charters Towers Goldfield, and has been
chasing the elusive metal ever since. He is about the
softest-hearted man I ever knew." Ignorant Tommy
was again the informant.
"Well, what about Bunyip Bill, the Doctor, and Little
Peter?" Melbourne Mike asked. "Bunyip, for one, must
have a past. And I'll bet my best pair of boots the
Doctor and Little Peter didn't start life up here."


" I don't know that I have any right to say anything
about our absent comrades," Ignorant Tommy again
began; "but I believe they will not find fault with me
for telling a little of what they have told me at various
times, seeing we are all making out how bad we were.
Bunyip Bill has been a wanderer all his life and has
been everywhere. The Doctor at one time was a credit
to a famous old-country university, but broke away be-
cause he was tired of the artificialities of what he termed
an effete civilization. And Little Peter is still a well-
known author of a scientific work dealing with the evolu-
tion of the mind. He preferred true comradeship to the
adoration of London society, and so came out here. That
is all I can tell you, boys, without a breach of trust."
"That leaves only Damper Jack," said Dandy Charlie.
"We haven't heard his story."
"And you're not going to hear it," the cook sang out
from the other side of the wall. " Roll up for hot tea,
boys. It's just on sunrise, and we've a mighty lot to do!"
Damper Jack's words ended the strange discussion, and
soon the entire party were quaffing long draughts of boiling
tea, and consuming extraordinary quantities of cold meat
left over from their last meal. Of course they had salt
with their food, and therefore Edmund went through a
fair share also.
And the sun's welcome rays dispelled the dark night
clouds and showed up the scene of the corroborree in all
its ghastliness. The big fire still burned, but it was now
reduced to embers; and, although the men did not see
them, nor would they go to investigate, they knew that
human bones were among the ashes. There would have
been more but for Edmund and the Disgrace. After
breakfast a plan of procedure was arranged which con-


sisted chiefly of arrangements for locating and working
Mackay's reef, and keeping guard against surprise at the
same time. After every possible happening had been dis-
cussed, Uncle Sam, once more his imperturbable self, said:
"Very well, boys, scatter and see if any of you can
pick up that wonderful reef; but don't get out of touch
with each other, for the aborigines may be hanging round
watching us."
The men walked off in every direction except that of
the precipice descending into the mists; but in less than
half an hour a shout from Edmund drew them together
again. He was standing on the very reef which had pro-
vided them with stones for their house, and even Fat
Herman could see he was excited.
"What's the racket?" asked Dandy Charlie as he ran
up. "You don't need to be worried about snakes."
"I'm not," Edmund replied. "I've found the reef.
This is it, and our house is built of it."
"What!" yelled the men in chorus. "That stuff" gold-
bearing?" Their derision was only equalled by their
disgust.
"Yes, that stuff is gold-bearing," Edmund insisted.
"It is the very same as the specimens Mackay brought
to London, and which I assayed; and right here is where
he or someone else broke pieces off the outcropping reef."
"Dear me!" exclaimed Ignorant Tommy, scanning a
piece of stone Edmund had handed to him while he broke
off some more pieces. " I should never have thought
this quartz to be auriferous."
"Nor anybody else," growled Damper Jack. "What
can a kid know about it, especially one who has never
been on a goldfield in his natural? Blow me, it will soon
be time for me to go and get some tucker ready!"
(c 204 ) 20


" But I know this is gold-bearing," cried Edmund. " I
assayed pieces of this rock in London, and found it very
rich. I know it looks unlikely stuff—although I have
never seen typical rock —for Mackay was puzzled over it;
still, I recognize the material."
" We'll very soon settle that point," exclaimed Dandy
Charlie. " Dolly out some of it, Mike, and I'll wash it
off."
In an instant Melbourne Mike was crushing to powder
several pieces of the suspected substance, and all stood
round watching. Only the Disgrace had faith in Edmund's
assertions; the others thought he had simply made a mis-
take, which in his case was quite natural and excusable.
Soon Melbourne Mike had reduced the stones which
Edmund had broken from the dull, barren-like reef into
a fine powder, and then, deftly, Dandy Charlie manipu-
lated the result in one of Damper Jack's cooking utensils,
for in the excitement no one thought of running to the
camp for a gold-pan. Gently and skilfully Charlie worked,
Ignorant Tommy adding the water, when required, to take
the place of that flushed over the rim with its quota of
light silica. Dandy Charlie was, perhaps, the most expert
"pan " washer in Australia, and that is no mean qualifica-
tion. He speedily threw off, with well-timed and scientific
jerks, the lighter residue, until only a small fraction of the
original contents were left in the pan. With successive
motions he reduced this to almost nothing, and finally,
most adroitly, heaved the remainder over to the other
side of the vessel, and peered eagerly into the corner just
vacated. There was not the slightest sign of the "tail of
gold ", and silently he handed the pan to Ignorant Tommy.
It was too true; not a vestige of the precious metal
was there. Ignorant Tommy threw the slit back into its


original place, and tried the process himself; but when he
finally heaved the heavy sand remaining over to the right
in orthodox fashion, no yellow gleam remained, as would
have been the case if gold had been present. He laid
down the pan with a sigh.
"You are wrong this time, my boy," he said. "There
isn't as much gold in that rock as would stuff my bad
teeth."
Edmund did not speak. His thoughts were more than
mere words could express, for he knew that the stones
Dandy Charlie had treated were exactly the same as those
Mackay had given him; and because of the wealth of auri-
ferous treasure he had found therein, Mackay and he had
set out upon their eventful journey. He knew nothing of
"pan washing" for gold, but evidently Dandy Charlie's
test was sufficient to convince all that the reef was barren,
and Ignorant Tommy's words left no hope.
"But I assayed the specimens," he finally blurted out,
"and I found gold."
" It doesn't matter much, kid, though you found dia-
monds, if we can't get them," said Dandy Charlie, not
unkindly; and Edmund was quick to see the reasonable-
ness of his remark. He sat down almost ready to cry.
He knew that, if he had been mistaken, there was no use
in searching any more for Mackay's reef, for he was quite
convinced the stuff Dandy Charlie had "panned" was the
same as the specimens. The men passed on in silence;
they did not care to make any comment, for they saw
that Edmund felt his mistake keenly. But the Disgrace
lingered.
"Bear up, old man!" he said. "We'll find the reef
yet. Don't worry about that."
"This is the reef, Disgrace," Edmund replied sadly;


" I know the stuff too well. Why, here are pieces Mackay
must have broken off when he was here."
" Can you imagine where the gold has gone then, mate?
Maybe Dandy Charlie has duffered his job?"
"No; I assayed the specimens in the usual way, and
they carried rich gold; otherwise Mackay and I should
never have been here. It is all my fault too."
"Go slow, old man! Can you really put an assay
through?"
"Yes, by the wet process; but what is the use, even
though we had the chemicals? If the gold is not there,
I must have cheated myself, although I cannot understand
how I could do so."
"Well, Dandy Charlie is all right, maybe; but if you
found gold in that stuff once, you can do it again. Come
back to the camp, and we'll make a try. We'll see if
Ignorant Tommy's case of chemicals holds what you
need. He'll never need it anyway."
Without thinking much as to what he was doing,
Edmund went back to the camp with the Disgrace, and
sat down in the shade of the walls, noting with a sigh
that the house was built entirely of the same mysterious
material as had already been proved barren.
" Here is a bottle labelled 'Cyanide of Potassium'," the
Disgrace sang out from inside. "Is that any good to you?"
" No; that is used for copper and silver tests," Edmund
replied. "For gold we require a combination known as
' aqua regia ', which is a mixture of nitric and hydro-
chloric acids. Only that will dissolve gold."
"Just draw up your horses until I break into this other
case," the Disgrace cried, "and keep your eyes on the
move, to see that Ignorant Tommy doesn't come back
in a hurry."


"Why, what are you doing?" cried Edmund, springing
up in alarm. " Don't get us into more trouble, Disgrace."
"Don't you worry, mate; I'll stand the racket. I'm
trying to find, in Ignorant Tommy's case here, means
which will make the end justify them, and, if they don't,
he can throw bricks at himself if he likes."
"Come out, Disgrace! What is the use of causing
more disturbances?"
"Don't know, mate. I'm more concerned to know
what ' H 2 S0 4 ' on a bottle means. It is a colourless stuff,
and Great snakes, it tastes like liquid lightning!"
" H 2 S0 4 is sulphuric acid," Edmund cried back, "and
for any sake don't put it in your mouth, or "
" It's out now. It's no good, I suppose. Is a thing
called 'HCI' any use? I don't want to taste it."
"Yes; that is hydrochloric acid. Look for something
labelled 'HN0 3 ' now."
"I've got it; there's any amount of it here. I'll take
samples of everything out with me."
Next moment the Disgrace was outside, armed with an
assortment of chemicals in bottles that showed Ignorant
Tommy's knowledge of chemistry was not slight. He
had one or two porcelain crucibles with him, too, and at
sight of them all Edmund's old instincts were aroused.
" Crush up some of these broken pieces of stone in
the walls," he said to his comrade, "and we'll soon see
whether they contain gold or not." He had now become
excited, and the Disgrace soon caught the infection.
In a few minutes the stones were pounded fairly well
into powder, and ten grammes weighed off on Ignorant
Tommy's balance. This amount Edmund placed in a
crucible, and, adding some nitric acid, placed it on some
hot ashes scraped from the dying breakfast fire. There


was no action, and they added about three times the
volume of hydrochloric acid, which almost instantly
caused myriads of minute bubbles to appear on the sur-
face. For a time neither of the boys spoke, and the
mixture sizzled merrily on the hot ashes.
" Get an empty bottle, Disgrace—a clear one," Edmund
at length spoke; and promptly the desired article was
placed in his hands. What was emptied in Tommy's
case to provide it, Edmund did not enquire, and the
Disgrace didn't say. Edmund lifted the hot crucible with
the help of his hat to prevent it from burning his fingers,
and decanted its contents into the bottle with some cold
water.
"Now, give me that stannous chloride," he cried;
" that bottle with the crystals."
"Do you mean ' SnCl', with a little 2, then another 2,
followed by 'H 2 0'?"
"Yes, yes; that is the formula for chloride of tin."
Edmund seized the bottle and dissolved a crystal with
some hydrochloric acid and water in another crucible,
the Disgrace watching with breathless interest.
"Now," said Edmund, "I am going to add this
chloride of tin to the stuff in that bottle; if any gold is
present, it will fall to the bottom in a dark purple pre-
cipitate."
" Then, by thunder, it will have to fall mighty quick,
for I see Ignorant Tommy coming, and he's in a hurry
too."
" But the solution must cool a bit first, Disgrace. What
can we do?"
" Oh, don't you worry; go ahead easy! I'll go over and
meet Tommy, and keep him back by asking him questions
on geology and astronomy and other things. He'll fire


out chunks of knowledge bigger than a man's head as
long as I can suffer listening, so don't be any longer than
you can help in giving me the signal."
Ignorant Tommy was certainly surprised when the Dis-
grace waylaid him with a great and suddenly acquired
thirst for information. He had been hurrying to the camp
to see what the lads were doing, for he always suspected
mischief when the Disgrace was not in evidence.
He stopped and carefully explained to the daring one
the whole theory of lode formations, and how their mineral
contents had been deposited in them from their salts in
solution by the precipitating or displacing agency of
carbonic acid gas. The Disgrace listened attentively and
appeared to be drinking in knowledge through the pores
in his skin. In reality, however, he was watching for
Edmund's signal, and he did not understand three words
in sequence that the learned Tommy said. At last he
uttered a yell of delight, and Ignorant Tommy looked sur-
prisedly at him. Edmund was waving his arms frantically.
Then the Disgrace spoke.
" Mr. Ignorant Tommy," he said, " I wouldn't give my
old boots for all your knowledge. You can't even tell
gold when it is before your eyes unless it's labelled for
you. You said there was no gold in this reef, and Edmund
has just found that it's jammed full with it. I hope you'll
find that the end justifies the means too, for we've pretty
well wrecked your medicine chest."


CHAPTER XV
The Secret of the Cave
IT was night again, and the rain was falling in an almost
solid sheet of water. But the happy-go-lucky miners did
not mind the rain in the slightest; they were under their
own roof and well pleased with themselves. Supper was
just over and they were discussing the events of the day,
a candle stuck in the neck of a bottle providing the illumi-
nation. Ignorant Tommy was reclining on his blanket,
smoking a cigar; Uncle Sam was sewing a patch on his
trousers, but taking part in the conversation all the same;
Melbourne Mike and Fat Herman were giving the cook
some assistance in "washing up"; and Dandy Charlie,
the Disgrace, and Edmund were constructing a weird-
looking piece of apparatus with some roughly cut timber.
All were speaking as they worked, and all seemed wonder-
fully light-hearted.
" Well, I reckon we've struck the biggest thing in gold
reefs ever known," Dandy Charlie announced as the result
of his last five minutes' thoughts. " We'll all be fat old
miserable millionaires in no time. Speak up, Ignorant
Tommy; you haven't said a word since supper."
"Can't you see he's thinking?" said the Disgrace.
" I'll bet he's calculating how many drops of rain are
falling on our roof inside a minute."


"You are wrong, Disgrace. I have been figuring out
how many thousand tons of this wonderful reef are in
sight, and I've just arrived at the fact that, as it is six
hundred yards in length to where it enters the hill on
the opposite side of the valley, about ten feet wide, and
outcropping an average height of eight feet, we have at
our hands, without any sinking, one hundred and forty-four
thousand cubic feet of ore, which, allowing thirteen cubic
feet to the ton, means, roughly, eleven thousand and
seventy-seven tons. At five ounces per ton, which our
talented young friend makes the value to be, that means
it contains fifty-five thousand three hundred and eighty-
five ounces of gold, and, as even the Disgrace knows,
that amount, at four sovereigns an ounce, is equal to
two hundred and twenty-one thousand five hundred and
forty pounds in sterling cash."
"Howling snakes!" gasped Melbourne Mike, but
whether his exclamation was drawn out by the know-
ledge of the fortune lying around them, or in wonder-
ment at Ignorant Tommy's powers of calculation, his
comrades never knew, for he said no more.
" And after we scoop in the outcropping part of the
reef, we have still got the lode left running down all
the way to China, for all we know," put in Dandy
Charlie. " How much would that pan out, Ignorant
Tommy?"
" My imagination will not carry me that depth," the
oracle laughed, "but if the gold contents remain as on
the surface, there should be some millions of pounds worth
of gold within possible reach."
" Boys, we'll have to get a new billy when we finger all
that money," said Damper Jack thoughtfully. "The one
we are using for the tea now is pretty well burnt through,


and we can get a new one for eighteen pence if we send to
Brisbane or Sydney for it."
" You are becoming far too extravagant, Damper Jack,"
Uncle Sam spoke, looking up from his work. " How
long do you think our millions will last if we have to
buy a new billy every year? No, there are some things
this camp requires more than a new billy. Do you think
it right that I should be repairing my only trousers with a
broken sack needle?"
" You can pull the string through it more easily," com-
mented Dandy Charlie. "All the same, I'll vote we order
a new needle when we handle our millions. With it and
some string we could tailor up our togs to last a long
time yet."
" If we're going in for extravagance, boys," the Dis-
grace ventured, "let us be reckless, and buy a small
folding mirror for camp use. I would like if some of
my mates could see how ugly they are."
"Are you looking at me, Disgrace?" roared Melbourne
Mike, raising a frying-pan threateningly.
" No," said the Disgrace hurriedly, "it's too soon after
supper to do that, Mike; and anyhow I'm not needing
medicine."
Here Ignorant Tommy interposed; he saw trouble was
brewing.
" We'll order everything that any man can fancy," he
said, rising from his blanket, "and we'll not give expense
a thought. But, boys, I don't think you have thanked
Edmund for what he has done for us. Remember,
we thought this reef was barren. We owe him a
lot."
" I squared all that, boys," cried Damper Jack. " I
called that patent stew you got to-night after him, and


he'll be famous for ever now, and have his photo in the
papers."
" As the man who lived after eating it," finished Dandy
Charlie. " We'll keep some of it, Jack, to give to the
Chinamen if they rush at us."
" But say, boss," broke in Melbourne Mike before the
cook had fully realized the nature of Dandy Charlie's
words, " I haven't exactly got the hang of this great
discovery. How was it that Dandy Charlie didn't get
any gold when he washed off a pan?"
Then Damper Jack got even.
" How could you expect to find gold if you allowed
Dandy Charlie to do the panning?" he asked derisively.
" He couldn't find himself on a dark night!"
"Gentlemen, Dandy Charlie didn't find the gold because
it was well hidden by something else," Ignorant Tommy
interrupted. " This reef is a most remarkable occurrence,
and decidedly has been upheaved by some tremendous
volcanic disturbance, which forced it through the dioritic
schist formation of this island."
" Knock him down, somebody," wailed the cook.
" He'll be giving us dioritic schist for breakfast if he is
allowed to go on."
"You tell the story yourself, Edmund," broke in Uncle
Sam. " Tommy can't get away from geology."
" There's very little to tell," the lad at once said. " The
gold is finely distributed throughout the quartzy matrix,
but it is coated with a thin film of sulphur, which has
blackened it in appearance. The sulphur added to the
gold particles has also made them lighter, according to
size, and thus most of the gold was washed away in the
panning process, and what remained was unrecognizable."
" Now, that's what I call a bosker speech," said Damper


Jack. "Any man with a first-class eddication can under-
stand it, which is more than can be said for Ignorant
Tommy's wisdom bricks. All the same, I want to know
what good is the funny stuff to us if it is carried away by
sulphur or anything else? We can't go after it."
"The sulphur is not combined chemically with the
gold," Edmund said. "It is only a coating, and can be
destroyed easily by heat. Then the gold is left free and
can be treated in the usual way."
"Where did you acquire your knowledge of minerals,
Edmund?" asked Uncle Sam with a show of some sur-
prise. "You are talking a bit beyond me, although I
can grasp your ideas all right. I understood you were
a Londoner?"
" But even a Londoner can study, sir," Edmund
laughed, "and in that city there are lots of technical
colleges where one can be taught almost anything. I
was always greatly interested in mineralogy, for I hoped
some day to be in a place just such as this."
" Eddication is a wonderful thing," commented the
cook thoughtfully. "What a pity Dandy Charlie and
the Disgrace haven't got any. Of course, they can't
help it, but " He shook his head mournfully, and
dodged a piece of timber the first - named individual
flung at him.
For a wonder the Disgrace said nothing. Doubtless
he was thinking over matters which were too important
to allow of his thoughts wandering. Dandy Charlie,
Edmund, and he were constructing a battery to crush
the roasted ore, and it required a fair amount of in-
genuity—strategy the Disgrace called it—to make rough
timber serve the purpose, especially as the tools at their
disposal consisted of a saw, an axe, and a hammer, and


some nails. But they were managing in a way that
would have surprised most people who had any know-
ledge of the machinery required for gold mining, al-
though there certainly was an amount of originality
displayed which would not have been countenanced by
any modern mine manager.
Still, they were pleased themselves, and Ignorant
Tommy found no fault with their work, and soon the
valiant cook and his temporary assistants came to help
in the building of the oddest hand-power crushing battery
ever invented. It consisted of a massive log frame, with
an equally strong base, upon which the rock, after being
roasted in the fire, was to be laid. A crude pulley ar-
rangement was fixed in the framework, over which a
rope worked to pull up the crushing stamp. This was
a block of wood weighted with ironstone, and shod on
the under side with the metal of a shovel. The surface
of the base was also lined, but, as no more shovels could
be afforded, the sides of a kerosene tin were pressed
into service. Evidently the engineers thought they could
crush more of the friable ore with this contrivance the
stamp being worked by as many men as were available —
than could be done by dollying. After they had crushed
a ton they meant to carry the powder in sacks to the creek
and there treat it on an inclined-plane arrangement the
Disgrace was already inventing. Wonderful progress was
made in the erection of the battery, but in time Ignorant
Tommy called a halt, for he saw that all were very
tired, and that it was enthusiasm which kept them at
work. Damper Jack was a marvel. He sawed wood for
the uprights, checked them with the axe, and made
them ready for fitting, and then, when he saw that the
rest could manage without his assistance, he quietly


ran off to the far end of the building to prepare coffee.
He was a most invaluable man, and his comrades knew
it, although they did not often admit the fact.
The rain ceased about midnight, but the men did not
know this. They were sleeping the sleep of healthy,
although physically exhausted human beings, without
exception, and the sun had arisen before they awoke.
Then, while the indefatigable cook prepared breakfast,
the others finished the crushing machine.
That breakfast was a meal which not even millionaires
in London or New York could have had provided for their
jaded palates. It comprised eggs of birds innumerable,
freshly gathered, chops of animals which had some re-
semblance to sheep, but which had little or no fleece,
cold turkey, and cold something else to which no one
could give a name, left over from the meal of the pre-
ceding evening. Damper Jack had also baked a damper,
for all the stores of Eldorado camp had been brought over
to the mysterious island on the raft, and there was no lack
of the necessities of civilized life.
After breakfast all hands helped to hoist the finished
battery over the wall, and in the world's record time it
was working alongside the strange reef a few yards from
the house. It had been conceived, built, and set to
work in a round of the clock, and by men with only
the most primitive of tools, and without any special
training that might be expected to qualify them for the
work.
And it did work. Dandy Charlie, Damper Jack, Fat
Herman, and Edmund raised and lowered the stamp
head, and Melbourne Mike and Ignorant Tommy fed it
with the chunks of roasted stone previously broken from
the reef. Uncle Sam and the Disgrace attended to the


removal and sieving of the crushed material, and so work
went on regularly and systematically.
By noon they had crushed two tons of the sulphur-
expelled ore, and all were ready for dinner, especially
the tired battery workers, as Damper Jack had left off
to prepare the meal an hour before stopping time, and
the remaining three operators missed his great strength
on the raising ropes.
They dined well on a hot "hash-up" of everything,
cold meat of various kinds, and rice cooked to per-
fection, and turned out to work again after assisting
to "wash up", re-invigorated. Ignorant Tommy was
a good works manager, however, and he ordered the
battery to be "closed down" for the rest of the day,
while all hands "washed off" the crushed ore. This
process, if all the gold were to be saved, meant long
and laborious work with the pans. But the Disgrace
had now evolved his patent "washer", as he called it,
and while the other six men "panned off" in the or-
dinary way, Edmund and he set to work to call it into
being. The Disgrace was certainly a born inventor, but
he would have broken the heart of any trained engineer
who had to deal with him. He ignored all rules and
laws on the science of construction, began invariably at
the wrong end of his work, that is, started where he
should have finished, and completed at the point which
should have been the beginning. But he was not a
trained engineer, and therefore did not know that it
was quite impossible to construct a serviceable concen-
trator out of nothing, and without tools or plant, in
half a day. Half a year, in all probability, would have
been the time in which any first-class firm would have
contracted to deliver the finished machine, if they had


not such a thing as would serve in stock. Certainly,
the properly built article would have been made of metal,
and held together with bolts or rivets, and every part
would have fitted perfectly. Probably, too, it might prove
more efficient in working. The Disgrace, however, being
blessed with ignorance where it would not have helped
him much had he been wise, went ahead with his labour-
saving device, sublimely indifferent to the fact that pieces
of string were not really good substitutes for bolts and
rivets. Edmund and he worked as if their lives depended
on their efforts, and very soon had cut down an entire
clump of magnificent bamboos growing down in the valley
near where washing operations were being carried on, and
to which spot all the roasted and crushed ore had already
been carried.
After stripping the bamboos, the boys, who both knew
the entire scheme, split the straight hollow tubes into two
pieces, longitudinally, and lashed all the parts together,
inverted, with cross pieces, and plenty of rope, until they
had joined a long corrugated frame about twenty feet in
length and almost six feet in width, the channels leading
lengthwise. Into the grooves of all these channels, at re-
gular distances apart, and usually at the natural joints, they
then fixed, transversely, little pieces of tin which stood up
at right angles, thus intercepting the natural trend of the
passages. Then, with the help of their comrades, called
from work for the purpose, they carried the long furrowed
structure over to the creek, and laid it in position, in in-
clined-plane form, where the water fell on its top part, and,
after trickling down the corrugations, rushed away along
its natural channel at the foot.
For some time the men surveyed the many-grooved
washing-table in silence. All could see the idea, but its


originality of construction and its simplicity made them
dubious of its utility.
"I say, Disgrace," Dandy Charlie observed, "here's
a piece of string and a button; make me a suit of
clothes."
"And here's a nail and another piece of string," said
Melbourne Mike. "You might make me a motor car.
One that can act as a boat, mind, or I won't accept
delivery."
Damper Jack sniffed scornfully.
"And here's a bean," he said. "You make the supper
to-night, for I'm blowed if I can, unless you fellows
either go out and shoot something, or let me away to do
it."
"We'll try the thing, anyhow," said Uncle Sam. "It
looks all right."
And it was all right, as the first shovelful of "dirt"
thrown on showed. The water at once washed it down
the inclined plane, and swirled it out of sight at the
bottom, but at the base of every transverse piece of tin
inserted in the split bamboos was a gleam of yellow. Not
much, but still it was there, and the quickly constructed
washer was in full working order. The water had carried
away the lighter material, and the heavy gold had been
caught in the tin "riffles" as had been calculated by the
inventor. In a couple of hours the entire amount of pul-
verized ore had been passed through, and on "cleaning
up" almost nine ounces of gold were scooped from the
" riffles". It was now near sundown, but no one heeded.
They had made thirty-six pounds worth of the precious
metal in the first day, and four pounds ten shillings per
man per day was quite encouraging under the circum-
stances.' They knew they could make more later, and
(C 204) 21


they were in no special hurry until their lost comrades
came back.
"Gentlemen," Ignorant Tommy announced that night,
after he had carefully dried and weighed the gold inside
their house, " I think we may now safely congratulate
ourselves. When we are in full strength I'll send down
south for an engine and the very latest form of crushing
and concentrating apparatus, and who knows what we
may make out of Mackay's reef?"
The men made various suggestions as to how the
enormous wealth could be applied, but as the total of
their proposed expenditure was not any more than they
had been spending since the formation of Eldorado Camp,
it was clear that something drastic would have to be
done if they wished to use their money —when they got
it.
"Ah well," Damper Jack remarked, when Ignorant
Tommy informed all that even a gramophone would not
seriously affect their resources, " if we have any money
left we can buy half a dozen of them things called
Dreadnoughts. I reckon old mother Britain wants some
badly, and we can make her a present of them."
This proposal found favour with all, although Uncle
Sam asked that one should also be given to Ameiica,
and Fat Herman did his best to show that Germany
could also do with one. But the men were obdurate.
" I'm sure I don't know what a Dreadnought is,"
Melbourne Mike said, " but if we're going to give any
away, it is the old country that is going to get them."
They were sitting at supper when this important an-
nouncement was made, and, as the rain had not yet
started, the roof had not been drawn over the building.
All around, except on the one side, was impenetrable


darkness, and overhead the clouds hid the stars com-
pletely.
" Talking is all very good," Uncle Sam said, " but
we're forgetting that we are not alone on this island;
we'll have to deal with white, black, and yellow men
before we can present Dreadnoughts to any nation.
Now, I propose that we keep a watch from now on-
wards, as we are liable to be rushed at any time by
some of these people."
" Let them come," growled Damper Jack. "I reckon
they'll be sorry afterwards."
" But things are too slow here for us," cried the
Disgrace. " We've nothing to do to-night, and we —I
mean Edmund and me—are not so sleepy-headed as you
fellows."
"What are you driving at, Disgrace?" Ignorant Tommy
enquired. "Tell us, and we'll not offer objections need-
lessly." He knew the Disgrace well.
" Oh! I was just thinking that while you fellows were
sleeping we might be doing something on our own, but
as we don't want any more lectures from the crowd, we
want them all to know first."
" Out with your scheme, Disgrace," laughed Uncle
Sam. " Maybe I'll come with you, if it is possible."
"Then we're not going," returned the Disgrace. "It
takes us all our time to look after ourselves."
Uncle Sam smiled: he wasn't on the bridge of a
steamer just then; but even if he had been, and the
Disgrace the uncomplimentary speaker, it is probable
that he still would have smiled. Uncle Sam was never
angry.
" I reckon the game has got to be stopped right now,"
put in Melbourne Mike. "If there is going to be any


fun after a hard day's work we've got to be in it. I'll
bet we're all eager after that Chinese treasure."
"Who said we were thinking about that?" the Dis-
grace demanded indignantly; but the laugh from all which
greeted his words showed that his comrades were not so
absent-minded as he had thought they were.
"Boys," said Ignorant Tommy, "thanks to Damper
Jack, who is the best cook in the whole world, in my
opinion, I have dined so well that I feel I'd rather go
to sleep than go forth to seek for adventure. But I
have no objection to any of our fellows doing what they
please, so long as they do not go more than, say, four
hundred yards from this camp. Surely they can always
get back that distance should trouble arise."
He lit a cigar and lay back in his blanket, and soon the
room was filled with the aroma of the fragrant Manilla.
And the men were all so tired that they speedily followed
his example, only pipes were prepared by most. Shortly
after, the rain started, and Dandy Charlie arose and closed
the roof and put out the light. Tired men sleep well, and
prospective millionaires have few worries. Then the
boys sat up; they had been waiting till the camp had
gone to sleep.
"We've full permission," the Disgrace said, "and we
don't want to go more than four hundred yards away;
but I reckon it's only fair we should haul Fat Herman
along with us."
"All right!" Edmund responded, shaking the sleeping
German by his side. " But we must be careful, Disgrace,
for I'm sure some of our enemies must be prowling around
by this time."
" Oh, let them go hang! We know all about strategy,
and they don't," snorted the Disgrace.


And just then fat Herman sat up, blinking sleepily, but
otherwise ready for any adventure.
And in five minutes they had embarked upon a scheme
which, if not necessarily foolhardy, had only a remote
chance of success. They had gone to search for the
Chinese treasure. The night was so dark that they
couldn't see each other as they walked down into the
valley past the scene of their day's labours. They knew
where they wished to go, but that was a different matter
entirely from going there. The cave from which they
had escaped, and near which the battle had been fought,
was well within the four hundred yards' radius, and,
despite the fact that it might be filled with bloodthirsty
natives, it was their objective; for had they not Dirty
Face's word that the yellow men's god was hidden
therein? They passed the patent washer, and, still
following the wonderful reef, crossed the creek, and
began to ascend the opposite side of the valley, for they
knew that the cave was hidden somewhere near the top
of a wall of rock in the vicinity.
" Hullo!" suddenly exclaimed Edmund. " The reef has
run into the mountain side; we've come to the end of it."
"Vat does dat matter?" said Fat Herman. " Dere
vas plenty of it dot don't run into de mountain."
" I feel certain, almost, Disgrace, that it was near
here we climbed down from the cave," Edmund said.
"Hullo! what has happened to Fat Herman?"
The German had disappeared completely.
"Oh, he'll be sleeping, I suppose!" answered the Dis-
grace. " We'll kick him up when we come back, if the
rain doesn't drown him out before then. My! isn't it
coming down?"
"By Jupiter, it will drown us out very soon! But


look! there is that star again. I wonder if that really
is the light of the Vulture?"
"We don't care much whether it is or not. Mackay
can boss things there, we may be sure, and we've simply
got to find this confounded cave. Fat Herman, where in
thunder are you?"
No reply came to the Disgrace's words, and, feeling
somewhat alarmed, the boys retraced their steps and sud-
denly tripped over some human bodies. In an instant
the young adventurers had grasped the situation; they
had been ambushed by some natives, and their comrade
had been captured. Like furies they threw themselves
upon the wriggling forms that sought to trip them up
again, and in a few seconds had pinned two aborigines
to the ground and liberated Fat Herman, who arose
with many expressions of disgust and an extremely
tender throat.
"Jumping beans," the Disgrace muttered, "we're
always fighting! What on earth are we to do with the
niggers now? I'm soaking through already, too."
" We'll carry them over to the washer," said Edmund,
"and tie them to it with the spare pieces of rope lying
around. Then we'll come back and find that cave, for
it is quite evident that these fellows are sentries guarding
the approaches, and we must be near it."
"All right!" replied the Disgrace. "I reckon we're
the champion knockers-out of North Queensland, and I'll
bet Ginger Bob will go mad when he hears what he's
missed."
" Ach, dat vas true!" said Fat Herman. "But I vant
no more trade vid dat fellow; he grips mine throat like
a Chinaman; he vas no shentleman."
The two aborigines were unceremoniously bundled over


to the washing-machine framework and strapped to it.
They were puny creatures, and it required no effort to
carry them. They expostulated in what was doubtless
eloquent language, but, as their words were meaningless
to their captors, the effect was lost. In a remarkably
short space of time the three lads were back at the
base of the rock, and Fat Herman stumbled across a
sort of path leading upwards, which, after some in-
vestigation, the Disgrace and Edmund felt sure would
take them to the cave. The adventurous trio at once
began the ascent, which was not difficult, and in time
reached a ledge of rock which Edmund declared to be
that on which the cave opened. They stood for a time
to regain their breath. They were almost at the top of
the rocks, and a delightfully cool wind was blowing on
their faces, though where it came from, and why it
didn't dispel the film of mist which, but for the one
open stretch, surrounded the island, they did not know.
They could just make out the position of their own
camp on the opposite side of the valley, because of
some spasmodic glimmers that still arose from the half-
sheltered camp fire outside the main building, and away
to the north the unmistakable lights of a ship shone
out, now apparently much nearer than before. An ex-
clamation from Fat Herman made Edmund and the
Disgrace turn round. A man was standing a few feet
away from them, evidently also surveying his position.
The German sprang at him instantly, and both swayed
in deadly grips on the verge of the precipice. Fat
Herman was muttering words in German, doubtless ex-
pressive of deep feeling, but the other made no sound
of any kind. It was no time for a man-to-man fight,
and the Disgrace and Edmund instantly leaped to their


comrade's assistance. But Fat Herman was exceptionally
strong, and unaided he threw his man to the ground.
" Donner und blitzen!" he gasped. " I can't hold him,
boys. He vas greased all over, und he vas slippy as von
eel—ach!"
"We'll fix him all right," cried Edmund; "but where
on earth did he come from?"
"Where has he gone, you mean?" spluttered the Dis-
grace. " I've only got a silk jacket or something in my
hands, and there isn't any man inside it."
The man had disappeared as if by magic.
" I have him!" cried Edmund, bounding forward again.
" Quick, boys! Lend a hand! Trip him up! I can't hold
him! He's not an aboriginal!"
Again the three lads flung themselves upon the agile
and soundless being. The struggle was terrific, but short.
They found themselves gripping each other. Their victim
had slipped through their hands. He certainly was a
marvel, and the lads felt very foolish.
"I'm jiggered!" ejaculated the Disgrace. " The beggar
has beaten the three of us. He felt like a flash of light-
ning."
"Mine vord, he did," Fat Herman groaned, "und he
stinged like a hundred hornets!"
The boys stood where they were, amazed and crestfallen.
Not a sound indicated the direction in which the man was
escaping. He had dissolved into the night, leaving only
a piece of clothing to prove that he really had existed.
"Anyhow, here is the cave," said Edmund. "I sup-
pose he was exploring around, the same as we are,
although I'm sure he was a Chinaman."
They entered the cave, and Edmund lit a candle which
he had carried from their own camp. And what a sur-


prise the light disclosed! The cave floor was covered
with sleeping natives! There were scores of them, and
they all breathed heavily, as if very sound asleep.
"Howling snakes!" the Disgrace muttered. "What
have we struck this time?"
"Yes, it vas time to get back to camp," commented
Fat Herman. "Come on, boys; it vas late."
"Can we tie them all, do you think, Edmund?" asked
the Disgrace, ignoring Fat Herman's words.
"No, we've no rope, and we could never handle such
a crowd in any case. But let us chance things. We
came here to look for that treasure, and if we make no
noise these people will not awake. Jupiter! There is a
most peculiar smell in this place I feel it is making me
sleepy. What can it be?"
" Niggers, of course. They're pretty powerful smellers
at times," the Disgrace answered. "What's wrong with
you, Germany?"
Fat Herman was sniffing the atmosphere in a manner
not good for him.
"I know dot schmell." he said. "It vas de shame
schmell I schmelled ven Oncle Sam und Leetle Peter und
I first shtruck de Chinese camp oop de river from El-
dorado. Some Chinamen vas been here und drugged dese
niggers. They schleep now for long time."
"By thunder, you're right!" said the Disgrace. "This
is the very smell we ran against among the sleeping
beggars down on the beach, Edmund. These beggars
are drunk with it."
And so it seemed; for although the boys soon picked
out Dirty Face among the naked sleepers, and made an
attempt to rouse him, it was wasted effort. The natives
were under the influence of some soporific drug, and little


danger could arise from them if the lads didn't go to sleep
themselves, which they felt very much inclined to do.
Stepping over the slumbering forms t and lighting more
candles, the explorers proceeded to inspect the place.
Well two of them knew its general appearance already,
for had they not lain there for many hours trussed to-
gether like fowls for the market? Still, they now believed
that the Chinese treasure, which had been so many times
stolen, and for which so many different parties were look-
ing, was somewhere within the cave, and they meant to
find it.
"You're thundering quiet, Edmund," the Disgrace re-
marked as they examined the walls, never giving more
than a look to the drugged warriors they stumbled
against.
" I'm wondering what all this means," Edmund an-
swered. "This is the second time we've played with a
sleeping camp. Why, the last time Chinamen and white
men were our victims."
" I'm blowed if I see what you're worrying about. If
you look for trouble, you are sure to find it."
" Dot vos true as ever you schpoke," put in Fat Her-
man. "Trouble vas never very far off."
"I wasn't exactly thinking of possible trouble," said
Edmund; "I was only wondering if there were not more
than ourselves working on lines much the same as our
own, and I confess I'm beat to explain why we always
find our work made so easy if there are not."
"You mean that other fellows drugged the men for
us, and that we're just poor blundering fools?"
" Well, that's what Damper Jack said we were, you
know; but that was a Chinaman we caught and lost
outside the cave."


" Well, what of that? The Gulf country is full of them,
and niggers, and no-good white men."
"Yes, but we were always seeing—or thinking we saw
—a slimly built Chinaman flitting in and out among the
bough shades and tent flies on the beach. Now, I'm
beginning to think that that man and the fellow we
tackled to-night were the same; that he was the cause
of that camp being asleep, as he is of this; and that,
in both cases, we've simply followed close on his
heels."
" But what could any Chinaman want to knock out his
countrymen for," enquired the Disgrace, "and what in
thunder would he be risking his life for among the abo-
rigines, who hate his kind like poison?"
"He is on the same game as ourselves; he is looking
for the stolen treasure, and I'm almost positive now that
he answers to the name of Quong Lee, the man whom
Mackay and I practically brought back to life."
" My, Edmund, why didn't you think of that before?
Of course, that's the fellow; and we tried to give him
beans to-night."
" Coom here, boys, and schtop talking so mooch. I haf
made von discovery," a voice interrupted. " I haf found
anoder cave, und I feel it in mine bones dot it is in it ve'll
find de Chinese treasure."
"All right, Kaiser!" said the Disgrace. " Lead on, and
we'll follow, no matter where you go."
They had reached the end of the cave without seeing
anything they hadn't seen before, but Fat Herman had
discovered an opening in the rocks which might be the
home of some animal, or a private recess in which the
aborigines stored their valuables. He wriggled into the
aperture, and close behind followed his comrades. The


passage grew wider almost at once, and soon their candle-
light showed they were in another chamber nearly as
large as the outer cave. The boys stood upright. No
human beings other than themselves were in this second
hall, but several snakes glided into the rocks, and one
or two winged creatures flapped about angrily on their
presence being known.
"Hullo!" cried the Disgrace; "what is this?"
He held up a miner's pick which he had almost fallen
over.
"Proof that some poor beggar has left his bones here,
I suppose," Edmund replied. "But I think Mackay told
me he thought he had left his tools and weapons in a cave
he found."
" Und vat vas dis doing here?" cried Fat Herman, hold-
ing another object aloft. " Mein Gott! it vas a rifle, und
it vas loaded, und—und—dere vas a name on it—und dot
name schpells M-A-C-K-A-Y!"
"Hurrah!" cried the Disgrace; "then we've found
Mackay's cave as well as his reef. I reckon we'll soon
find himself now. Say something, Edmund; you're not
at a funeral!"
" I will be, and you too, if our friends next door wake
up," Edmund laughed. " Hold my candle a minute while
I have a look up here."
He nodded towards a recess in the rocks about ten feet
overhead, and, while the Disgrace relieved him of his
candle, and continued to hunt for more of Mackay's relics
with Fat Herman, he scrambled up the face of the rock
and crawled into the hole. Soon he came out again,
and, lying in the mouth of the hole, he called to his
comrades:
" I say, boys, you might come and give me a hand.


ppr
Hw Hr .■ »
PjHtoPk w ■ JB
y # jKM c • \fcJj , 1
w mtimM$mr Jul
v:^^-- :: |jp./^^jfigr wfc;';
If *dT*~\ H * -*§1
■■jfr | •% ■
"
r ~ Skt ytB
THE DISCOVERY OF THE TREASURE




This place is filled with snakes, and I'm not so well used
to them as you fellows."
"Then come down!" said the Disgrace with a laugh.
" We can't afford to wait here much longer, even to hunt
snakes out of holes. But what's wrong, mate? Have
you been bitten by one?" The Disgrace suddenly be-
came alarmed, and Fat Herman also appeared to be per-
turbed.
" No," Edmund answered, but his voice rang a trifle
strangely. " I'm only trying to be as cool as Mackay
would be, but I'm not built that way. I—l have found
the Chinese treasure!"
" Great gum-suckers!" murmured the Disgrace. " I was
just waiting to hear you say that. What like is it? Can't
you chuck the old thing down? I'm mighty anxious to
see what so many people have been hunting for."
"All right! Catch!" Edmund poised something for a
moment, then dropped it into the Disgrace's outstretched
hands.
It was a small, curiously carved, gold-mounted box, but
the great dragon whose sinuous body was inlaid in pearls
around the sides left no doubt as to the nationality of its
constructors.
Fat Herman gave vent to his feelings in all the lan-
guages of Europe, but the Disgrace did not speak.
Edmund dropped down beside his comrades, and shook
some soil from his garments, apparently unconcerned.
"Open the thing!" said the Disgrace. "Let's see
what all the fuss was about." He handed the case to
Edmund.
"I can't; I don't know how it opens, and I don't see
any keyhole."
" Donner und blitzen! Put it down, und I vill open


him sooner than quick," growled Fat Herman, raising
Mackay's pick over his head with businesslike intent.
" No, no! " cried Edmund, drawing the box away. "It
isn't ours, and and these pearls must be worth many
thousands of pounds. Let's get back to camp now and
give it to Ignorant Tommy."
Dearly would the Disgrace have loved to see what was
inside the case which had been the cause of so much
trouble, but he knew that Ignorant Tommy and Uncle
Sam would be very angry if they broke it open, so he
agreed with Edmund that it was time they were some-
where else, as the natives wouldn't sleep for ever. Five
minutes later they were feeling their way down the outside
slope, and already the form of their improvised washer
was discernible. They had now but to climb the easy
opposite side of the valley and they would be among their
comrades with the fateful treasure. Breaking into a run
they approached the creek, meaning to liberate their two
prisoners, with whom, after all, they had no quarrel. But
a sound fell upon the Disgrace's remarkably sharp ears.
" Lie flat, boys" he whispered, "someone is near. Ah,
help, boys, I've caught a snag!"
He had, with his usual impetuosity, sprung at the throat
of a form which had just loomed up beside them. He cer-
tainly had caught a snag. Fat Herman and Edmund had
thrown themselves upon the man in a moment, but he
seemed to be a fixture upon the ground, and did not
give way an inch under the combined attack.
"Take it easily, lads, and you'll ha'e more chances
o' gettin' it constant," he said. " But maybe you don't
understand English, so I'll just ha'e to gie ye practical
deemonstration o' my country's motto, which is: ' Wha
daur middle wi' me "'


He had thrown off his assailants before his words were
spoken, but next moment one of them came flying back
into his arms with a cry of delight.
44 It's Mackay, boys!" he yelled. 44 It's Mackay!"
44 Edmund, laddie, I'm vera glad to feel you once again,
though I canna see you," spoke the man, 44 and I've little
doubt that your comrades are the Disgrace and Fat Her-
man. But you tackled me like niggers, laddies, and you
had nae chance. Will you never learn strategy? Strategy
removes mountains. Strategy, like a good fountain pen,
is mightier than the sword. Strategy—but I'm hungry,
boys! Where's the camp?"


CHAPTER XVI
The Treasure is Restored
MORNING had dawned through the mist once more, and
the men were sitting on stones round the fire at break-
fast. Mackay was there, and was eating as if he had
not tasted food for days. "You are the best cook I have
ever come across, Damper Jack," he said, as the latter
deftly landed on his enamelled plate another nicely browned
chop. "I havena had a square meal since since
What day is this, boys?"
"Sunday, I reckon," answered Melbourne Mike, "but
I'm not betting on it."
"You'd lose if you did," said the Disgrace. "This
is Tuesday."
" I rather fancy it is only Saturday," observed Ignorant
Tommy. "We have had some kind of business on hand
nearly every night as well as day, and one is apt to asso-
ciate each special event with a day of its own, where-
as "
" We want no learned lecture from you in the mean-
time, Ignorant Tommy," Damper Jack interrupted. "And
anyhow you're wrong, for I know by my beard that this is
the Thursday after your Saturday, and high time I had a
shave "
"You are getting mighty particular, Damper Jack," said


Dandy Charlie, running his hand over the bristly part of
his own face, an action copied by every man in the
party except Ignorant Tommy, who possessed a care-
fully trimmed beard of some years' growth.
But no two agreed as to what day it was, Mackay
and Edmund professing absolute ignorance, and thus
leaving each day one champion. But all ate, and all
talked, and all kept a more or less observant eye on
the cave on the opposite side of the valley. Some also
smoked, and among them were Mackay and Ignorant
Tommy.
"You might tell us your story now, Mackay," broke
in Uncle Sam, who had been unusually quiet for some
time "We are eager to hear everything about our com-
rades, and, you know, you have as yet only given
us fragments of your experiences. Tell us every-
thing."
"What's the use?" Mackay asked. "You guessed what
we were doing, as we calculated you would, and, thanks
to other circumstances in the shape o' fires at the time
when they were not expected, and their absence when
they were, and other things, we've all but won the
game. If we could only get these Chinese treasure-
hunting gangs off the island we'd be all right, and free
to look for that reef. But we're bound to have a tussle
with Ah Sin and his merry men before long; for, of
course, Messrs. Carson and Thomas went to call upon
them when they left your company. Boys, you have
done good work, and I'm proud to call you mates, and
I'm vera glad to know that my young partner Edmund
has been no disgrace "
"Fair play, Mackay! Have I not listened to your
longest-winded yarns without saying a word, though it
( C 204) 22


was mighty hard, and all the other boys had cleared
out?" The Disgrace was the complainer.
"I'll admit that whiles, for the good o' your souls,
in the auld days, I may have been eloquent on some
subject which was maybe too subtle for some o' the
boys to appreciate, and that you stood to the last
always. But I'm no' saying you didna, and wherefore
the reason o' your present remarks?" Mackay paused
for a reply.
"You went back on me an hour ago, or just before
you began your last speech. You said you were glad
my pal had been no ' disgrace', and we were together
hunting for you all the time. And I'm pretty well sure
that, if he hadn't been himself, he would rather have
been me than Dandy Charlie, for instance."
Edmund asserted that he had no fault to find with the
Disgrace, and, as the men roared with laughter, Mac-
kay, recollecting his words, said: "Disgrace, I beg your
pardon. I didna mean to mak' little o' you in any way;
but the English language doesna seem equal to the de-
mands sometimes made on it, and—and I assure you I
meant something entirely different from what my actual
words implied."
The Disgrace was mollified at once, and, peace being
again restored, Uncle Sam repeated his request that Mac-
kay should give a connected account of his experiences
since they saw him last. Just then, too, Edmund remem-
bered that as yet neither his late comrades nor himself
had made any mention of the trifling fact that they had
found what, presumably, was the Chinese treasure. But,
as Mackay had now begun his story, he concluded to say
nothing until he had finished.
"Well, lads," Mackay said, "I'll summarize as briefly


as possible, for I'm no' forgetting the fact that there are
one or two matters needing attention. As you know, the
New Chum and I fell in among thieves I mean the
Chinese-runners' camp—and joined with you all in a bit
o' fun there. Of course we suspected you at once, but
it took us some time to pick you out, and therefore it
was only the Doctor, Bunyip Bill, Little Peter, Ginger
Bob, the New Chum, and myself who became actors in
our little play, which was really the New Chum's idea,
for he understood the language and saw our chance.
Well, that camp on the mainland, which we all visited
on our own, was composed of two white men without
any disguise, some white men dressed as Chinamen for
purposes we needna go into now, Chinese sailors from
the Vulture> Ah Sin's men, and those yellow birds just
landed and who were to go away with Ah Sin's men at
daylight. The disguised white men, we soon found out,
were the chief officers of the ship under, of course, Carson
and Thomas. We gave them our special attention—and
I hope they have recovered by this time—and took their
places as you told me you guessed we had done. We
came with the crowd through the water to this island,
landing at a place seemingly well known to the leaders,
who were pulled out in a boat.
"By this time we had gathered a lot o' information,
and had judiciously dealt wi' o' the sham China-
men, so that when a party was ordered to go out to
the ship to help to man it, we, knowing that there werena
many men on board, got into that party. There were less
in our boat when we got out than what started, for the
New Chum was fairly on the warpath, and Ginger and
Bunyip were in good form, and the Doctor, and Little
Peter, and myself didn't care much what we did. How-


ever, the water is shallow all the way out, if they kept
clear o' the deep-water channel I sometimes floundered
into on my first visit, and I'm sure we wished the poor
beggars the best o' luck in reaching the shore safely. To
cut a gey dry story short, boys, the ship is now in our
hands, and she is a flier, I can tell you. We've been
hanging around looking for deep water, and trapping any
man or men, black, white, or yellow, who came out to us.
We started to get in touch with you fellows on the main-
land, but the two last fellows we collared, as they came
from the shore, gave us information that made us come
back to the old anchorage again; and while the New
Chum tried to bring her in nearer the shore, I came off
in a dinghy myself to hunt for you boys. We couldna
spare any others; and, besides, strategy is no' their
strong point." Mackay paused and drank half a billy of
tea.
"My word, but that is a good yarn!" said Melbourne
Mike. "Think of it, mates; we're sailors now!"
" Well, I tell you fellows straight, I'm not going to
allow Bunyip or Ginger to play the boss over me," cried
Damper Jack. "They'll be dressed in gold buttons now,
and blow it, my damper is burning!" He rose and
kicked away the ashes, disclosing a magnificently browned
creation, prepared in advance for their next meal. A
damper is not at its best until cold.
" Here is a chart of this island, and the deep channels
around it," said Edmund. "We took it from a China-
man." He handed the paper to Mackay, and explained
that the deep channel marked seemed to be the con-
tinuation of the creek.
"This is the vera thing we need, laddie!" Mackay
cried. "But how did a Chinaman happen to have this


when none o' the white leaders seemed to be aware o'
the existence o' deep water?"
"What seems a more pressing- point, Mr. Mackay,"
spoke Uncle Sam, "is troubling me. I happen to
know something of international sea law, and, by all its
possible interpretations, you and your comrades —I mean
ourselves as well, for we shall certainly stand by
you—are pirates. You have seized a vessel on the
high seas, and I don't know that our justification will
be deemed sufficient when we have to answer for the
act."
" Blow the act! We'll answer with our shooters if
any beggar comes sticking his nose up this creek," said
the Disgrace.
" We'll wreck the old ship when we've had a little sail
on her," suggested Melbourne Mike, "and maybe we'll
find some stuff on board that might come in handy about
camp."
" Gentlemen," said Mackay dryly, "some o' us—l'll no'
mention names —have the makings of first-class, double-
distilled, bloodthirsty pirates in us; but in the present
case we're breaking no laws, for, according to inter-
national law, Uncle Sam, so far as I know, it is not
called stealing to take your own."
" What do you mean, Mackay? The ship isn't ours,
and its owners, though scoundrels, can make it hot for
us."
"The owners—excepting one—are not scoundrels.
They are a set of honest British-Chinese merchants, and
the ship was built on the Clyde only last year to in-
augurate a fast tea-trade service between China and
London, and touching at Port Darwin to connect with
Australian traders."


''Well, what of that? We've captured it now, and
you've knocked away our last excuse." Uncle Sam was
excited.
"We've re-captured it, Uncle Sam. It is now in the
possession of its rightful owners, and will remain so,
while I can pull a trigger. The New Chum is the son
o' the head o' the owning firm. He was on board as
chief officer on her first run home, and was marooned
on this coast by the skipper and his satellites, who,
with the knowledge o' one o' the partners, had entered
into the game o' Chinese-running, depending upon the
most remarkable speed o' the ship to reach the various
ports to schedule time."
Edmund started violently. Much had suddenly become
clear to him. The New Chum was the son of Mr. Lang-
lands, the head of the firm in whose service he had
been employed. The strangely familiar appearance was
now explained. He said nothing, but remained deep in
thought.
"Boys, didn't I tell you?" cried Melbourne Mike. "I
guessed something like this all along."
" I guessed part of it too," Ignorant Tommy said
quietly. " I knew the New Chum was only biding his
time with us."
" Well, now that our little drama is so far played out,"
continued Mackay, "we've got to finish it; and that means
we must somehow catch enough Chinamen to make up
a crew; and afterwards we'll come back and look for my
reef."
" Why, Mac, have we not told you? We've found
your reef, and already have batteries and all the latest
kind of machinery at work on it." Dandy Charlie was
the only man who seemed to recollect their previous


day's work, but his words aroused the others to more
enthusiasm.
" Dear me, I'd forgotten all about gold reefs!" Ignorant
Tommy remarked. " Come along and see your property,
Mackay. We have been mining it for you according to
the mining law of Queensland, and we'll hold it against
all comers."
" Boys, my reef is common property to us all, as you all
know. But—but I'm no' so sure o' its being found. I
had an impression that it was maybe just over the line into
South Australia "
"It doesn't matter a hang. It's your reef, whether it's
in Queensland, South Australia, or China," broke in the
Disgrace. "It is yours by right of discovery, and we can
prove it. Inside the pegs we put round it we found a
cave, and in that cave we found your rifle and Howl-
ing snakes, boys, we've forgotten the sleeping niggers!"
" No, we haven't," said Uncle Sam. " Not one has
appeared outside to-day. But it appears to me, young
man, that you know a lot which is not yet common
knowledge. You never mentioned finding the rifle in
the cave."
" Look here, Uncle Sam," began the Disgrace; " when
we start to tell you fellows anything you never listen, or
you say kids should be seen and not heard, or something
smart like that."
" But not since you became sensible, Disgrace. Not
since Edmund and you have become comrades."
" And, anyhow, we didn't want to make our little yarns
any longer than we could help, seeing Mackay was here.
When we brought him in, we were so pleased that we
forgot to do more than say we had seen the niggers in
the cave."


" You're saying a mighty lot now, then, Disgrace,"
growled Damper Jack, " and I've got everything to
wash up yet."
" Und tell dem vot you found, Edmund," cried Fat
Herman, just waking from a sleep. " Mine vord, dey
vill sit up!"
" Don't, Edmund," said the Disgrace aggrievedly.
" We'll let them know later that they are blamed little
use without us."
And Edmund didn't tell, although he meant to com-
municate the secret to Mackay when he got an oppor-
tunity.
" Well, you needn't trouble about the poor aborigines,"
said Mackay. " They all know me, and are my friends.
I met two of them while coming here; they were escaping
down the creek from some horrible form of torture our
young friends had designed for them, but which they didna
clearly understand."
" We didn't torture them," spoke Edmund, seeing the
Disgrace was sulking. "We only tied them to our
washing machine."
"Which would appear to them to be a devil-hatching
arrangement, laddie. But you made a mistake that time;
you canna tie up an aboriginal like as you might do a
white man; their bones are more flexible, and they can
wriggle out of anything."
"I'll bet they didn't wriggle out that time, though,"
put in the Disgrace. " I'll tie a streak of lightning if
you hand it to me. It must have been that slippery
Chinaman who cut them out. I wonder who he is?"
" It is a fellow whom I named Dirty Face who is now
chief of all the tribes, these two frightened beggars told
me," Mackay resumed; "and, as I know him vera well,


I'll guarantee that his warriors will fight for us instead
of against us. All the same, if that sleeping trick is
being played on them, they won't be of much use to
anyone for some time. I have an idea now that the
same thing was tried on me before this, and I wouldna
wonder but that the same man was the operator."
"Then he has been working overtime of late," Edmund
said. "For we found the camp on the beach sleeping
too, and in no case did anyone awake while we were
present. He must be an independent party working for
his own interests against everyone else."
"And, by thunder!" exclaimed Dandy Charlie, "he
won't need to waste much of his drug if ever he gets
among us; I could sleep for a week now, without any
trying."
"Then come along and show us these wonderful ma-
chines you have constructed," said Mackay. " I canna
waste much time, for the New Chum expects me back
with help before night, and I'm thinking the day has now
got a good start."
The men soon after adjourned to the crushing battery
and showed it in operation, afterwards carrying the
resultant roasted and crushed ore to the "washer", where
the gold was speedily extracted. Mackay's comments
made the Disgrace as pleased and proud as he had ever
felt in his life; for though the machines were of the
crudest description, they had been built without tools,
were highly original in every way, and did their work—
points which the generous-hearted Scot saw at once,
and for which he gave full credit. But it seemed as it
the entire day would be lost in talk; everyone had so
much to say, and everyone deeply resented the intrusion
of anyone else upon his conversation.


" Well, boys," Mackay said, after a varied discussion
had raged for a long time, "there is seemingly enough
gold to give us all a fair fortune, so we'll now make
some attempt to gather a scratch crew for the Vulture,
and "
"You won't have to go far to look for them," cried the
Disgrace from the rocks above the "washer", whither
Edmund and he had climbed to look for any signs of
the Vulture. "There are millions of them swarming
over the rocks out of the mist now; and Carson, and
Thomas, and Ah Sin, and Wun Lung are with them.
We're going to have the biggest fight in the history
of Australia."
"Have we time to reach the fort?" enquired Ignorant
Tommy. "Or must we wait here?"
"We can get there if you come at the double now. As
yet the Chinkies don't seem to know where they are, and
they are blown out with their climb."
Before he had finished speaking the men were running
towards the head of the valley, where the easiest path led
to their fort, and the Disgrace and Edmund sped towards
it by the level road on top. Just as the men reached the
high level, the Chinamen uttered a yell, and charged down
upon the erection; they had only now been shown it by
the white men of their party.
"Take cover, boys, where you are," ordered Mackay.
"We must stop them from coming down this way or
they'll get the Vulture back again. Fire into them, but
not to kill!"
"But where are the kids?" cried Dandy Charlie.
"They're away on their own again."
A couple of flashes of flame leaping out from the im-
perfectly fitting stones of the blockhouse answered his


question; the kids had managed to get there first, and
the Chinese rush was stayed. The men lay flat behind
the reef outcrop, and covered the Chinese leaders with
their rifles. The lives of Messrs. Carson, Thomas, Ah
Sin, and Wun Lung hung by a very slight thread
indeed, whatever the result of things might eventually
be. Not another shot was fired from the fort; the boys
were well up in strategy by this time, and knew better
than to give any indication of their strength. The
Chinamen were now emerging above the mist in great
numbers, and among them were some of the timid
aborigines who had shirked the corroborree, and many
of the late fire dancers, white and yellow, who had been
saved by Edmund and the Disgrace. What these last-
named youths now thought of their humane actions on
that occasion could not be ascertained, but doubtless
their ideas had undergone a decided change.
At length fully two hundred pigtailed men stood on
the top of the mist-surrounded rocks, and listened to the
appeals of their leaders to wipe the white men off the face
of the earth. But the Chinamen seemed divided in their
opinions. They didn't wish to be "wiped off" them-
selves just then, and when a half-hearted forward move
made by some of the more daring among them was
checked by a hail of bullets from all quarters, they seemed
to decide that the time for rushing the fort was not yet.
"Hullo, here are some more performers!" sang out
Melbourne Mike. "Will you preach to them, Mackay,
or shall we pump lead into them?"
An army of astonished aborigines had climbed out of
their cave, and were looking on wonderingly, yet with a
display of clubs, spears, womerahs, waddies, and boome-
rangs that suggested they wouldn't object to a fight.


" That's Dirty Face, and a big South Australian tribe,"
cried Mackay. " Don't fire on them; they'll be our friends.
Hullo, Dirty Face! Don't you know me?" Mackay shouted
his last words.
The natives turned their eyes towards where the white
men were lying on the opposite side of the valley, con-
cealed from the Chinese, but open to their view. Next
moment Dirty Face gave vent to a yell, but it was one
expressive of joy.
"Frien' Mackay!" he shouted. " Frien' Mackay!"
"Where's King Henry, you ugly old sinner?" Mackay
next bellowed, much to the terror of the Chinese mob,
who could hear the stentorious shout, but could not see
the originator.
"King Henry, him dead; Nulla Dulla, him dead; Ugly
Mug, him dead; Holy Moses, him dead! My word! Great
Scot! You bet! Auld Lang Syne; all big chiefs, bar
Dirty Face, deaded too; they no' want more fire corro-
borree, you bet! God save the King! Why hims no'
come over help Dirty Face an' his warriors to swipe
yellow pigtails? Them no good to white fellow or black
fellow."
"That's a solid fact," muttered Damper Jack, "and I
don't think they're much good to themselves either."
"We're standing by you, Dirty Face," Mackay cried,
"and Michty me! Clear out, Dirty Face! They've
got rifles, and they're coming for you."
And such was the case. A number of the Chinese had
suddenly produced rifles, and a babel of what seemed like
argumentative sounds arose from their ranks. Clearly
the pigtailed men were of two opinions in some matters,
but apparently wonderfully unanimous in the desire to
rush the natives. And they did, and as strange a battle


as ever was fought ensued, the white men looking on
almost helpless, for they couldn't now distinguish friend
from enemy. Still, where a pigtailed head stood out
prominently in the fray, a well-aimed bullet rendered its
owner harmless for the time. But with the white watchers
was an intense revulsion against the spilling of blood.
They were all prospectors, and therefore soft-hearted
men, and even Damper Jack hesitated to pull his trigger
at times when he couldn't get a clear aim at his man's
feet. In the blockhouse the boys felt the same way. In
self-defence they were compelled to weaken the Chinamen
as much as possible; but neither could shoot at a being
who was completely at their mercy the moment they got
a clear view of him. Strangely enough to the spectators,
the aborigines were holding their own, and with yells
which fully equalled those of their enemies, and with
clubs, spears, and waddies as a slight addition, they
fought ferociously, both parties being now mixed up in
an almost unrecognizable mass
Meanwhile the renegade white leaders were shrieking
and cursing in wild endeavours to obtain a hearing, and
some of the Chinese in command were also imploring their
men to do something or other which evidently they were
neglecting.
" Why in thunder are the ab's not going down faster?"
Dandy Charlie cried out above the din of conflict. " There
are more Chinkies being knocked out than them, yet the
firearms have been going all the time."
" A nigger can take lead pills as easily as those worth
a guinea a box when he's corroborree mad," Damper Jack
replied. " But, Ignorant Tommy's whiskers! Look there!
The Chinkies are not shooting the niggers; they're plunk-
ing their own people!"


"I'm jiggered, they are!" cried Melbourne Mike.
"Look! Did you see that fellow drop his mate there?"
"Dear me, Mackay," said Ignorant Tommy, "what
game is this? There goes another, and—and—dear me!
he was a white man. Isn't it time we stopped this
slaughter?"
"By slaughtering more?" Uncle Sam grunted. "That's
the only way in this case."
" Ha, I've got an idea now!" cried Mackay. "Do you
see that little Chinaman standing clear of the fight with
a smoking revolver in his hand? That is Quong Lee, and
I'll bet he's squaring off old debts."
"By Jupiter, he is!" exclaimed Uncle Sam. "Watch
him; he is gliding up behind Thomas! See, they recog-
nize each other! Ah, they are firing! Stars and stripes!
Thomas has been sent for that time."
" Here, boys, this isn't fair!" cried Damper Jack. "All
these fellows with popguns are sliding round clear of the
fight, and squirting bullets at their own people. What is
the meaning of it all?"
"There's Carson!" cried Mackay. "Keep your eyes
on him, and you'll soon begin to understand."
"Come out, men of the Vulture\ " Carson roared.
" Leave the yellow rabble to fight it out. Rush the
miners yourselves! They must have the treasure."
But apparently the Vulture had now no men, for no
response greeted his words. Instead, the slim, lavishly
dressed Chinaman suddenly appeared in front of him, and,
when a slight puff of smoke cleared away, Carson was
lying upon the ground—at least his body was; his spirit
had gone elsewhere.
Quong Lee was paying back in full.
But now a change came over the battle. The Chinese


seemed to be galvanized into a spurt of activity, and,
aided by those who bore arms, who had hitherto been
the cause of most of the slaughter, they charged through
the aborigines, who promptly broke and fled, Dirty Face
himself setting the example. The victorious Chinese
horde—what was left of it—was now evidently under
command, and, instead of following the fleeing aborigines,
as under ordinary circumstances they would have done,
they formed up in line on a piece of ground free from the
debris of the battle, and listened to a harangue from Ah
Sin, which evidently pleased them greatly. Matters were
now looking bad for the white spectators, for, although
the Chinese were now without their white leaders, they
had killed them themselves, and therefore were not likely
to hesitate in "wiping out" the paltry opposition of
another mere handful of human beings who had every
reason to be against them.
" Let's make a dash for our castle now," Dandy Charlie
suggested; "the kids can't hold it if they're rushed, and
I don't want the Disgrace to be monkeying about with
my new pants."
"And that damper I baked will be mostly carried away
by ants by this time," said Damper Jack, "and there isn't
time to make another before dinner."
"Never mind, Jack," said Mackay consolingly; "may-
be we'll no' need any dinner to-day, or to-morrow either."
" Look, boys; they're getting ready to rush our place!"
cried Melbourne Mike. " I'm going to knock over Ah Sin
anyhow."
He levelled his rifle, but, before he could fire, another
report rang out from the blockhouse, and the prominent
Chinaman dropped to the ground with a sickly smile.
" Blow that Disgrace!" murmured Mike. " He's always


spoiling sport. I reckon I'll draw a head on Wun Lung
now."
But he didn't. A second shot from the blockhouse
accounted for that gentleman, and all knew from the
report that it was Edmund's weapon which had so accu-
rately done its work.
Still the Chinamen had not moved, and Melbourne
Mike, not to mention the others, who had all had their
guns trained on the group, was wondering whom he
should honour with a lead pellet, when an exclamation
from Fat Herman distracted his attention.
" Shtop, shtop!" he cried. " Don't fire! I see some-
dink dat gives mine heart jumps over behind the rocks
which come oop out of de mist. Hoch! I knew it vas,
I knew it vas! It vas de New Chum und Ginger Bob.
I thought I knowed Ginger Bob's hat, for it vas once
mine."
"Dear me!" ejaculated Ignorant Tommy. "I believe
you are right, Herman. How did they get there, I
wonder?"
Ignorant Tommy lowered his rifle and looked at Mac-
kay for an explanation.
"Good old Ginger!" rang out from the blockhouse,
showing that the Disgrace had also perceived the valuable
reinforcements, and Ginger responded promptly by haul-
ing himself over the ledge as the Chinese had done earlier,
and waving his tattered remnant of a hat. He was fol-
lowed closely by the New Chum, and both had their rifles
at their shoulders in a moment. They did not know the
position of things, but they were not taking any risks just
then.
The Chinese also turned towards the newcomers, but
their stolid faces, so far as anyone could see, showed no


surprise. They could not know how many men were still
in the mist cloud, but they were ready for all.
"Where are the other boys, New Chum?" sang out
Uncle Sam, somewhat excited. "And how did you get
here?"
The New Chum looked everywhere to see where the
well-known voice came from, and it was only when Uncle
Sam stood up and signalled to him with Dandy Charlie's
hat that he knew.
"We grounded the ship and came ashore after Mac-
kay," he shouted back, his words being easily heard be-
cause the Chinamen were silent. "We fell in with some
of his victims and got all the news from them, and so
came round to tackle the foe in the rear. Is he with
you?"
"I'm here, New Chum!" bellowed Mackay; "but do
nothing rashly. The blockhouse is ours too, an' I'm no'
without hopes that the Chinese leader is under some ob-
ligation to me."
At the sound of Mackay's voice the young, pleasant-
faced, slimly built man who had now assumed full com-
mand over his pigtailed countrymen stepped out from
his fellows, and unfurled a white Japanese-paper ser-
viette. Its meaning was quite clear to everyone. It
was a flag of truce.
"What is it?" Ignorant Tommy roared. "Why don't
you start with the funeral?"
"Gentlemen," answered the Chinaman in perfect Eng-
lish, and though his voice was low his words were easily
distinguishable, for he had even mastered the sound of
the "r"—a feat almost impossible to Chinamen. "My
name is Quong Lee, and I am a trusted agent of the
Chinese Government. Neither I nor my men have any-
(0 204) 23


thing to do with you or your country, but we have reason
to be at war with some white men and some of our own
people who have come here. We will fight until all are
killed, for our purpose. But I heard a voice only now
which told me that perhaps a fight was not necessary.
Gentlemen, I have been educated in Edinburgh Uni-
versity, and I know exactly what I am saying. I have
killed all my personal enemies, and I now ask if you
will oblige me by standing out and discussing our dif-
ferences. I give my word my men will not move until
after we have finished and you say you are ready to
fight."
"A mighty fair proposition that," said Damper Jack.
" Only we can't trust the beggars. I suppose it's your
voice he thinks he knows, Mackay. It's a mighty good
voice, I know. All the same, we're not so green as to
give ourselves away to Chinkies."
"A Chinaman's word is better than a European's bond,"
Mackay answered, rising to his feet. " Stand up all of
you who want to take part in this conference."
Every man stood up. Mackay's word was good enough
for them, and the New Chum and Ginger Bob evidently
had also considered Quong Lee's word good enough.
They walked through the Chinese lines unconcernedly,
the New Chum talking to many in their own language,
and even adopting the European fashion of shaking hands
with some of them. Thus the entire band of comrades
were once more united except for the presence of Bun-
yip Bill, Little Peter, and the Doctor, who, as the New
Chum at once explained, had been left in charge of the
ship in case of unexpected things happening. Edmund
and the Disgrace leaped over the walls of the block-
house and joined the circle, at Mackay's request, and


now they were all standing round Quong Lee, who was
smoking an opium-charged cigarette, but entirely un-
armed. The Chinese were standing motionless a hundred
yards away.
"Well, old man, here we are," said Ignorant Tommy.
" What have you to propose?"
"Nothing, now," came the reply as the good-looking
Chinaman leaped forward, on recognizing Mackay and
Edmund, and shook hands with them.
"The business is over. I see my friends among you.
We make no war upon you. Friends of my friends are
my friends and we will go away now."
"Not just yet, friend Quong Lee," said Mackay, as
Edmund whispered a few words to him rapidly. "We
are not bad men, I hope, and I believe you are no worse
than any of us, even though you were born in the land
whose history is as old as the world. What's your
special trouble, and we'll see you through if we can?
We've no connection with the white fellows who were
your enemies."
"I thank you, my friend," replied Quong Lee. "You
and my other young friend have saved my useless life
before this, and I ask no more. The men who attacked
me before you came along now lie there, and Quong
Lee is squared. But he remembers, and is grateful to
you, and he will not fight with you."
" Don't you remember me too, Quong Lee?" inter-
jected the New Chum, as Damper Jack hastened over
to rescue his damper, and put on as much rice to boil
as his kerosene tin would hold.
"Oh yes, I know you!" Quong Lee smiled. "We
all sailed in the same ship."
"And we're still in the same ship, Quong Lee!" cried


the New Chum. "Only it is mine now, and I want
a crew from you to sail it back to Shanghai."
"If we are at peace, you can have your pick of my
own men, and of those just landed in this country. I
will pay their passages back, or their poll taxes, myself,
if they wish to stay."
"You talky too muchy," put in a voice, and Wun Lung
limped into the circle. "We wanty all ou' own fellows to
look fo' tleasule."
"My wold, you bet we do!" echoed Ah Sin, dragging
himself up also. "When we find the tleasule we will
give as many men as will cally the ship. All hele no'
smuggle Chinamen; some al' Govelment Agents."
"We'll say nothing about that," said Mackay. "It's
none o' our business what you are, so long as you don't
trouble us, and you behave decently towards your fellow
men. I've no doubt the tax collector will find you in good
time."
" We will not trouble you, Mr. Mackay," said Quong
Lee. "I give my word, and we'll go now."
" No, not yet," cried the Scot. " The New Chum
needs a crew, and you have promised him one on con-
ditions. Now let us know your special object here, and
I give my word we'll help you."
" And tell your fellows to roll up for some rice," put
in Damper Jack. " It's all we have in their line, but
they look as if they needed it."
"You're not afraid?" Quong Lee enquired, looking
round hesitatingly.
"Not a cent's worth," Uncle Sam answered. "Sound
the 'roll-up' and we'll stand rice."
And the Chinamen did gather round, laughing and
talking like children, and Damper Jack, assisted by


Dandy Charlie and Ginger Bob, dealt out handfuls to
them. Meanwhile Quong Lee began his story.
"A time in the young Emperor's life has come when,
according to custom older than the Western world, a
certain ceremony should take place. But he has many
enemies, and some stole the one thing necessary for the
performance. We found out it was the Brothers of the
Lotus Flower who were the thieves, so we watched them.
Many were coming to Australia, and we knew the treasure
was with them, so some of us came on the same boat,
pretending to be of the same brotherhood. But the boat's
people were all in the pay of the secret society, and the
men were all landed here to go to work for Ah Sin and
Wun Lung, who were my friends. I have not much more
to say. The boat's people and the Lotus-flower Brother-
hood hid the treasure, and the boat sailed away, leaving
the men with Ah Sin. I found the treasure, and, knowing
I couldn't keep it then, hid it again; but it has been found
and taken away once more. The boat came back with
more Chinamen for Ah Sin and Wun Lung, and also to
take back the treasure; but they cannot find it, nor can
we. They think you white fellows have it, and we think
the natives have it. They tried to kill me, but Mr. Mac-
kay and my young friend saved my life and I do not
forget. I have watched you all the time, and killed off
their fellows one by one, after making their men sleep.
You, many times, especially my young friend, nearly
killed me, but I know things you don't know, and so
I am still alive."
"Aye, you're still living, Quong Lee, though I dinna ken
why," said Mackay. " But as our cook is getting angry
at our delay in coming in for what a kind Providence has
provided, and our mutual young friend has just made a


communication to me bearing on the subject, I, on behalf
o' this company o' honest miners, have much pleasure
in asking you to take your blessed treasure, and as
many o' your countrymen as the New Chum will allow
on his ship, back to China as soon as you conveniently
can."
"What a speech!" commented Dandy Charlie, as all
gaped in wonder.
"But what an opportunity, lads!" grinned Mackay.
"Step up, Edmund, and make the presentation."
" If this is what you are looking for, and for which
so much blood has been spilt, you are welcome to it,
Quong Lee," said Edmund. "We found it in the natives'
cave."
"My young friend," cried the Chinaman, and all his
comrades gazed stolidly at the little box, "you have
given me more than life. Ask what you will and Quong
Lee will give it. He is wealthy beyond dreams." He
laid the box on the ground reverently.
"Thank you, Quong Lee! We want no payment for
being of service to our fellow man."
" The best speech I ever heard," cried Ginger Bob, and
for once Damper Jack agreed with him.
" Do you know what is inside?" Quong Lee asked.
" No," answered Fat Herman. " Dey not let me smash
it oop with Mackay's pick."
" Then look!" cried the Chinaman. " Look at what so
many men have died to possess."
He picked up the box, and, pressing a spring some-
where, it flew open in his grasp, disclosing a shrivelled-
up hand. The sight was not pleasant, and Quong Lee
closed the box before any of the Chinamen saw it.
"That is the hand of the great King Shrong Tsan


Gumpo," he said, "and favoured am I by the great God
to be allowed to restore it to bless the young Emperor's
reign. My life and my wealth are yours, my young
friend "
" Some of the gold buttons off your coat would be more
acceptable to me," said Dandy Charlie irreverently. " I
see you've given some away already, anyhow."
*
" Uncle Sam," said the New Chum that night as they
sat round the camp fire and smoked in peace, "will you
accept the captaincy of the Vulture? I happen to know
your life story, and I am most happy now to inform you
that you have been completely vindicated."
"Then I need never leave my comrades," said Uncle
Sam. "My cup of happiness is full."
" Then it is lucky we were decent to all the prisoners
we made on board," rejoined the New Chum. "They,
with Quong Lee and his men, can take the ship back
themselves, for I'm not going to leave the best fellows I
ever knew for all the fortunes in the world."
" You forget that the Doctor, Bunyip Bill, and Little
Peter are still keeping watch and ward on board," said
Mackay. " Now, I propose that we all go the length
of Thursday Island on the Vulture. We can hand it
over there and then come back in a schooner with the
latest gold-mining machinery; Edmund has a chart of the
deep-water channel leading ashore, and while we're in
Thursday Island we can register our claims to this reef,
knowing that we'll never be troubled by Chinamen, or
by aborigines until the next big corroborree is due,
when, I've little doubt, if Dirty Face is chief, we'll not
be molested."
" Roll up for hot coffee," sang out Damper Jack as all


the men signified their willingness to do as Mackay had
suggested.
" Will not my young friend take half of my fortune
and go home too?" put in Quong Lee, who had remained
with the white men.
" No," said Edmund decisively. " Like the New Chum
and Uncle Sam, I will never leave my comrades, and my
fortune will come from Mackay's reef or wherever theirs
comes from."
"That being so," murmured Mackay, "I'll gie ye a
wee bit tune on my flute, which I hav'na played for
many a day."
As the men drank the hot coffee, the plaintive strains
of " Home Sweet Home " were exquisitely rendered by
the one man whose home was anywhere on the globe.
The men joined in the chorus, and soon after went to
sleep. Their futures were bright and their troubles light.
And Edmund was happy beyond words.




UK II




|sjjk£ Mm ISM PL7LL ■
s£l» MfiwWEaMiwß
RfMifll ®*HI
'V
iigHgaiH
HIP
I
m p
■N
