





PAPERS FOR WORKING PARTIES.
of their dependants, and so the State Incurs no expense in the relief
of Indian paupers.
After the famine was passed and our sub-committees broken up,
: heir services beings no longer required, I took leave to one of the
Hill stations, in the Salem Collectorate (Salem, Chellam, means
rocks), but on my return to Cuddalore I had a very severe attack of
famine fever, 'which' no doubt had been lurking in the system for
some time, but which the excitement through which we passed had
warded off. And though to a certain extent I regained strength, yet
I never was quite the same man again, and so working with decreasing
vitality for eighteen months longer, under medical advice, and after
upwards of thirty years service, I was obliged, reluctantly and with
deep regret, to leave the country I love so well, and whose people I
have such an affectionate regard for.
Painful was our parting at the railway station, the people, the agents
and native non-Christian friends pressing forward and bidding a last
farewell to one who had tried to do his duty by them, but with how
much feebleness at best God only knows.
My heart’s desire is that many young men may press forward and
supply the places of those gone to rest or retired from the field. Surely
the harvest cannot be allowed to stand still or rot for want of harvesters.
St. Paul prayed everywhere that doors might be opened before him.
To us they stand everywhere already wide open, and Missionaries may
itinerate at will from the Himalayas to Cape Comorin amongst 240
millions of people, and meet with no natural obstructions or physical
opposition. Our Lord would never have commanded His disciples to
make disciples of all the nations if the conversion of non-Christians
were an impossibility. What is there to prevent it, but the Church’s
vant of zeal and self-denying love ?
Having recently been kindly favoured by the Secretary of the C.M.S.
, vith the decennial statistics of Missions in India, Ceylon, and Burma,
for 1881, it will be found that the increase of the number of native
Christians in the last ten years has been no less than 86 per cent, in
India proper.
In 1871 the number of native Christians in Ceylon, Burma, and
India was 318,363 ; in 1881 the total 528,590. In India alone there
were in 1871, 224,258; in 1881, 417,372. The native clergymen of
the C.M.S. and S.P.G. in 1871 amounted to 104 ; in 1881, the num-
ber rose to 167. In 1871, the number of communicants were in India-
-5 2,816, and in 1881, 113,325, and nearly four shillings a year is shown
to have been contributed for Church purposes by every communicant
in the native churches.
367


THE WARANGERSDA MISSION
(IN THE NEWLY FORMED DIOCESE OF RIVERINA),
NEW SOUTH WALES.
BY THE REV. J. B. GRIBBLE.
PSjgjjjARANGESDA —where is it ? Warangesda, or the “ home of
mercy” for the poor down-trodden aborigines, is situated on
MhS9 the large and beautiful Murrumbidgee, in New South Wales.
It occupies a position on the south bank of that river, one hundred
miles below the town of Wagga-Wagga, and may be reached by rail
and steamboat from Victoria, or by rail from Sydney, a distance of
400 miles.
The small township of Darlington Point lies about three miles
away, where there is a most serviceable post-office and a punt. The
district for hundreds of miles around the Mission Reserve is purely
pastoral. Some of the grandest sheep runs in New South Wales are
to be found here. Millions of sheep are depastured upon the broad,
and at certain seasons lovely, plains of Riverina.
The climate, for about eight months of the*year, is everything that
could be desired, but during the summer season the heat is very
great, and every vestige of herbage disappears before the fiery rays
of an almost vertical sun, and the raids of myriads of locusts. Sterility
and famine, as a natural consequence, take the place of verdure and
of plenty. During such periods horses, cattle, and sheep die in great
numbers, and the settlers have to bear serious losses.
The above description will prepare the minds of my readers for
many a little incident in the course of the narrative which, without
such information, would perhaps appear rather strange.
Now for the facts connected with the founding of the Mission and,
its subsequent history.
While travelling from station to station in the wilds of Riverina,
scattering the incorruptible seed of the Word amongst the white
settlers, I unexpectedly came in contact with the blacks. I found
them in a condition most shocking to contemplate. I visited their
camps; I entered their wretched bark and bough gunyahs. I went
from place to place, and everywhere I met with the same wretched-
ness and woe. In some instances, on making a first visit to a camp,
the children ran away from me terrified at my presence ; whilst their
mothers, some of them, alas! Only children themselves, cowered in their
little dens like so many wild beasts, doubtless wondering what brought
368
MISSION LIKE,
it-


me to such a place. In one camp I gleaned from the women that a
tin y half-caste infant was concealed close at hand. I made a search,
and by-and-by I discovered what I at first supposed to be a bundle of
dirty rags stowed away under some bushes, but on raising it I found it
contained a dear-4ittle infant girl. Oh! at that sight how my heart
sickened and my blood warmed! Such helplessness, such woe,
caused by the professedly Christian white man! And this case, I
soon learned from good authority, and from personal observation, was,
so to speak, but an index to a ponderous volume of iniquity existing
throughout the colony in this .very respect. One evening, after
spending some time with the blacks, and having heard the poor
young women say that they would like to have a home, such as I
described to them as existing in Victoria, I returned to
Station, where I was engaged to hold service. I told the lady of the
house what I had heard and what I had seen. She replied : “ Mr.
Gribble, I have often thought what a sin it must be for Christian
ministers to pass through these parts and never to speak a word to
the poor blacks. I can assure you that of all the clergymen who have
called here, the Rev. A. Hardie, of Victoria, and yourself, are the only
two who seem to care anything about them. If some earnest and
kind-hearted minister would only take the matter up, something
might be done to induce the Government to take steps to ameliorate
their condition.” A long conversation followed, in which this lady
(a resident on the Murrumbidgee for twenty years) drew a picture
most sad to contemplate, which sent me to my room filled to over-
flowing with the wants and woes of this unhappy people. I threw
myself upon my knees, and wept before God, and said: “ O Lord,
show me Thy way; teach me Thy path ; tell me what to do for these
perishing aborigines.” The answer was : “ I will instruct thee, and
teach thee in the way which thou shalt go.” I rose from my knees
calmly resigned to the Divine will, and feeling confident that some-
thing would be done, but not even then for a moment thinking it was
my duty to become a Missionary.
I wrote to the Colonial Secretary upon the subject, and after wait-
ing four months I received a kind reply from Sir Henry Parkes
signifying his interest, and requesting certain items of information,
which I, of course, supplied. Some time after this, in conjunction
with mjr good friend and brother Missionary Mr. Daniel Matthews,
of Maloga, I inspected a certain portion of the river in search of a
suitable site for a Mission station. During this tour we found a
little camp of women and children, and we prevailed upon them all
(eleven in number) to go along with us. The poor creatures willingly


undertook a journey of 200 miles to escape the horrors of their camp
life.
I subsequently removed several young women to my home at
Jerilderie, where they were properly cared for. But all this time the
conviction grew stronger and stronger that a Mission should be
founded at once on the Murrumbidgee; therefore I wrote to Mr.
Matthews, and asked him whether he would be willing to break up
his small Mission school, and undertake the founding and manage-
ment of a large concern elsewhere. After much thought and prayer,
he informed me that he could not leave his Murray blacks. What,
then, was Ito do for my own unfortunates ? I saw very plainly that
one of two things must be done^—either I must abandon the idea of
the new Mission, and-remain at my regular work, or else relinquish
ray comfortable position and undertake the real work of the Mission
myself. For six months a severe struggle was kept up between the flesh
and spirit. The flesh said—“ Stay where you are ; why impoverish
your wife and family, and isolate them from all society?” But the
spirit said—“ Go and rescue the perishing! Go and build them a
home in the wilderness ! ” At length I said to my wife—“ I cannot
bear this any longer; I must bring the matter to some issue. I have
just been praying about it, and I -seem directed to leave the whole
matter with you. If you say No, I will not go; but if you say Yes, I
will go.” Her answer decided me. In her own quiet way she said
“If you think God is leading us amongst the blacks, go, and I will do
what I can to help you ; but if God is not leading us, don’t go.”
I wrestled no longer with the flesh, but set about arranging matters
for the establishment of the Mission. I resigned my charge, a very
comfortable and profitable one, and early in March, 1880, to the utter
amazement of our old'friends, we left the town of Jerilderie with our
little belongings.
As we passed through the town we must have made a singular
procession, for everybody “ came out for to see.” Our household stuff
was conveyed in two waggons ; my wife, little ones, and several black
girls followed in a waggonette, the rear being brought up by myself
and the black lads driving the cattle and goats.
After three days and nights spent on the road, we arrived at our
destination—a rough log cabin in the wild forest, which I had secured
from the owner as a temporary home for Mrs. Gribble and our
children, and the few black girls we had brought from v Jerilderie.
After a day or two I drove down the river with my four black men,
in search of a suitable spot for our proposed Mission ; and decided to
commence operations on a reserve which I knew had but recently


been revoked from lease. I hoped that I should thus escape , all
unpleasantness with the squatter, for I was led to understand that the
establishment of a home for the blacks was not well received in the
district. Here, then, on the south bank of the Murrumbidgee, three
miles from Darlington Point, and twelve from our temporary home, we
knelt down amidst the beautiful pine-trees, and gave ourselves to God
for the work. We then began in real earnest, cutting down the trees,
and preparing timber for building; In about a month, two huts (the
first for a- married black couple, the other for my own family) were
drawing near completion, when suddenly I received a letter from the
Lands Department cautioning me not to proceed any further, and
this notwithstanding a distinct promise made beforehand. lat once
told the poor black fellows to leave off, and we returned with heavy
hearts to our rough bush home to acquaint Mrs. Gribble and the
black women with the circumstances of our seeming failure.
And failure did seem to stare us full in the face ; for our money was
nearly gone, our supplies would soon be exhausted, and those around
us were unfavourable to our enterprise. After prayer, however, upon
the matter, it was decided that I should proceed to Sydney and lay
the matter before the Government. After a wet and weary ride of
one hundred miles to Wagga-Wagga, I took train and went to Sydney,
where I was almost a stranger; for the work amongst the blacks was
begun without anything in the shape of human organisation. We
were simply led step by step under the great Father’s hand. On
reaching Sydney I made the acquaintance of a few Christian men,
who went with me to the Government ; and we very soon discovered
that a most unjust influence had been brought to bear on the Lands
Department by certain interested parties. But God, who is the Judge
of the oppressed, interposed for the Aborigines, and the result of my
two months’ advocacy in Sydney was the settlement of the land
question, authority to continue the work, and the establishment of a
Government School for black children, with the appointment of myself
as teacher, at a salary of £9O per annum—a matter which, in our
straitened circumstances, proved a very great blessing. On my return
to the Murrumbidgee the work was resumed with a fulness of faith
and hope, and ere long we removed our little community to the
Mission station. It was then that the poor waifs and strays in the
district, hearing that a home was prepared for them, began to flock
to Warangesda, our “house of mercy,” for protection and food. Our
accommodation was small, and our means were slender, but seeing so
many unfortunate women and children in a state of hunger and naked-
ness touched our deepest sympathies, and we were compelled to


admit them. We had no regular or certain income except my salary
for teaching, so that -we were frequently reduced to the deepest
poverty. We were at times without either sheep or, flour, to say
nothing of the other necessaries of life. But in ways most wonderful
—as I shall by-and-by describe —God interposed for us in every season
of want, and cheered our hearts with assurances of His favour and
guidance.
By example, coupled with precept, I got the black fellows to work
pretty freely at building, fencing, gardening, clearing, &c., and in the
course of two years quite a township sprang up in the lonely bush,
consisting of my own dwelling, the school-house (which also served as
a church), a number of two-roomed cottages for married couples, a
home for girls, a hut for single men, store-room, out-buildings, and
last, but not least, a schoolmaster’s cottage ; for after the first year I
was obliged to give up the duties of teacher, and secured the valuable
services of Mr. W. P. Carpenter, my cousin by marriage, to fill that
responsible post. During this time the work of fencing in the Mission
Reserve was also carried on, so as to secure our grass against surround-
ing stock. *
But although our work during the first two years was very hard,
and our privations many, these trials did not affect Us neatly as much
as did the cruel conduct of those around us, who were professedly
Christians. In different ways they sought to break up the Mission
and to scatter the blacks. On one occasion a man who passes for a
gentleman brought a case of gin during my absence, sent it to the
women’s camp, at some distance from the Mission, and made them all
drunk. The scene which followed was indescribable.
On another occasion the keeper of a low bush hotel supplied the
camp with drink, called in the white men around, and, as an eye-
witness informed me, “the scene was a little hell.” The following
morning I visited the camp, and there I witnessed a most revolting
sight—poor old women and quite young girls helplessly drunk. One
poor young creature, with a half-caste babe upon her bosom, staggered
towards me at my approach. I said: “What, have you been doing,
Louisa ? ” “ I have been drinking,” she replied. “ Who gave you the
drink ? ” “ Mr. D ,” referring to the publican ; and then, with the
big tears streaming down her black face, she cried : “ Oh, do take me
away from this place. I don’t want to be a bad girl. I did not want
to take the drink, but they made me take it.” I said, “If you will
wait till to-morrow I will bring a buggy and take you away,” which,
of course, I did, to the exceeding joy of the poor creature.
Even after the Mission home was founded, and we had gathered in


a goodly number, wicked white men continued for a long time to
cause us annoyance. One night the girls’ cottage was broken into,
and the poor things ran screaming to the Mission-house for protection
in the greatest alarm, and I was compelled to mount my horse and go
in pursuit of the offenders. At daybreak they were captured and
conveyed by the police to Narandera, a distance of forty miles, where
they were made to suffer for their misconduct.
One day an employ / from a neighbouring station rode deliberately
into the Mission square, and, after tearing off the stirrup iron from his
saddle and flourishing it over his head, swore that he would kill the
first man, white or black, that ventured near him. After keeping
everybody in a state of the utmost terror for about half an hour, he
gave me a fortnight’s notice to break up the Mission, saying that if I
did not abandon it I should have to stand'to the consequences. Thus
in many ways was the good work opposed by those who should have
regarded the movement with favour. Before our fences were erected
our small reserve was daily flooded with neighbours’ flocks driven
there on purpose, and even when we were doing all in our power to
protect ourselves peaceably they set fire to our fences, and would not
desist until the law was brought to bear upon them.
Before the establishment of Warangesda, Darlington Point was, so
to speak, the very focus of iniquity on the Murrumbidgee, so far as
traffic in the blacks was concerned. Therefore when the carnal
interests of men were interfered with by us they did all in their power
to thwart our endeavours.
For the first two years of our Mission life the main difficulties we
had to encounter were from the white man’s horrible passions. But,
thank God, stronger was He that was for us than all the powers of
evil that were arrayed against us ; and now after four years’ struggle
we see the same Darlington Point, once the standing horror and
disgrace of the district, thoroughly reformed as regards the traffic in
the bodies and souls of the poor blacks.
But all through our difficulties, both from without and from within,
the work was never allowed to stand still. Believing that God had
sent us to set up a place of refuge for those who were ready to perish,
we continued building, fencing, and clearing, combined with preaching
and teaching, feeling assured that we should in due time reap the
promised harvest.
Por three years we had no certain source of income, consequently I
was obliged to leave home from time to time, and to make preaching
and lecturing tours in different parts of the colony in order to raise
money to carry on the work. Such tours resulted in awakening an


interest, and creating a real practical sympathy, the benefit of which
we still realise.
As time passed on our numbers continued to grow, more natives
came pouring in from all quarters —from the Darling, the Lachlan, the
Murray, and even from the distant Namoi. Hearing that there was a
home for the blacks on the Murrumbidgee, they came to see for them-
selves, and, although some returned, many decided to remain. Increase
of numbers called for increased accommodation, and that called for
increased activity, and so our buildings have spread, until now what
is quite a township occupies the spot where four years ago we lay
down under a forest tree.
Our school-house being now too small for our congregation, I
conceived the idea of building a substantial and roomy church. After
due consideration and prayer, I began felling timber with my black
fellows. We prepared and erected the framework, and then waited
until the way was further opened up. Then I got boards, iron, doors j
windows, &c., from Sydney, and then, with the aid of a skilled
carpenter, the Mission church became an accomplished fact.
The opening celebration took place on tjie 22nd October, 1882, and
was indeed a red-letter day in our history.
About this time the Department of Public Instruction, recognising
the importance and the unmistakable success of the day school, raised
it to the position of a public school, thereby securing to our institution
all the facilities and benefits enjoyed by every white school in the
colony.
I am happy to say that the eduational part of our work is very
encouraging. Even from the very first the black boys and girls have
shown great aptitude. Many of them can read the Bible fluently, and
some of them can answer well, and the Word of God is becoming “ a
light to their feet and a lamp to their path.”
During the progress of our work we have-frequently been brought
face to face with the most wonderful exhibitions of the power of
prayer. In the time of our trouble we have called upon God, and He
has delivered us. When we could do no more, and could not take
another step, God has in His own way divided the waves before us, and
we have passed over safely. At one time we ran out of money. What
with hard work and anxiety, my strength of body and mind failed,
and I really felt as though the task must be abandoned. In this state
of utter despondency I went down to Sydney to seek for sympathy
and aid. On my arrival I repaired to the Young Men’s Christian
Association rooms, and there met the general secretary. Noticing
my careworn and dejected appearance, .he asked me the cause. I


said, “My strength and faith are failing, and I must give up the work.”
He replied, “You must not talk like that ; come and let us pray for
guidance.” He first opened the Bible, and having made a few com-
ments on the words, “ Certainly I will be with thee,” we knelt
together. I rose somewhat encouraged ; but still my heart was heavy,
and I retired to a private room, and, locking the door, cast my burden
on the Lord. Our great need at the time was money, and in my deep
anxiety I was led to make a request which startled me. I said, “ O
Lord, send me Then, remembering that the resources of the
whole universe were in His hands, my faith took wing, and, rising
above doubt and fear, I said, “O Lord, send me £150.” Faith was
given. I was confident that God had heard, and that the amount would
be forthcoming. For the whole of that week nothing came to hand,
but I knew that, “ in some way or other, the Lord would provide.”
The following week money began to flow into my hands, and before
the end of three weeks I had received about £125. With this I
returned home, wondering where the other £25 could be ; but on my
arrival I found that Mrs. Gribble had received it through the post!
About five months after this we were again reduced to great straits.
The £l5O had helped me thus far, but we were within a week of
Christmas, and I was penniless; worse than that, there was not a
pound of flour in the whole settlement. The overseer said: “ What
shall we do ? There is no flour in the camp.” “ I don’t like to go
into debt,” I said, “so call the workers together.” So we met and
read the account of Elijah and the ravens, and asked God to send us
means to buy flour that very day. In the afternoon I sent Mr.
Bridle, the overseer, to the township with instructions to open my
letters and, if they contained money, to buy flour. By that day’s post
a letter came containing £$ from an unknown friend in Ireland. So
our prayer was heard, and we were enabled to buy< all things necessary
for our Christmas festival!
We were once very badly off for animal food. The season was very
dry, and our sheep were dying of starvation. I was sorely exercised,
not knowing what to do; so I prayed for help and direction, and
direction and help came. An old black fellow came home one even-
ing, saying, “ Plenty of fish down long river.” At first I took no
notice, but as he kept repeating it, I said, “ All right, I will send a
horseman to-morrow.” Upon this he became very warm, and said,
“ You no send horse, you send big dray ; plenty fish.” I was struck
with the old man’s confidence, and, thinking that in that way the Lord
might provide, I arranged for a fishing expedition. The following
morning I started for the place indicated by old Jackey, with four


black men. He led us on mile after mile till we were ten miles from
home. Suddenly reaching a steep slope to a back-water of the river,
three of the black fellows bounded down the incline, and pulling off
their clothes plunged into the water, and began spearing the fish.
Such a sight I never before witnessed. The three spearmen kept
Sambo and myself gathering up and bagging, and in the course of
three hours we had secured about six hundredweight. After thanking
God we returned home, and caused a general rejoicing throughout the
settlement. On the following Friday I sent Mr. Carpenter, the school-
master, with another party of blacks, and they brought home four-
hundredweight more; so that our fishing, expedition resulted in half
a ton of fine fish. This timely supply helped us to tide over existing
difficulties.
Even the black fellows themselves were amazed at our success.
We could only remember Galilee, thank God, and take courage.
From the; very commencement of our work at Warangesda our
great end and aim has been to enlighten the minds of the poor blacks
upon the great truths of the Gospel. Pervading all our temporal
efforts there has been the desire to reach the inner feelings of their
souls. We have endeavoured, in season and out of season, to win
them to Him “who is able to save to the uttermost,” and we rejoice
in the knowledge that the Gospel of Christ has proved itself to be the
very power of God unto salvation even in the case of those whom so
many,regard as little more than animals. Several of our people have
been brought to a saving knowledge of the truth. Some of them are
still with us, adorning the doctrine of God their Saviour, while others,
after witnessing a good confession, have peacefully and hopefully
passed away, to “ be for ever with the Lord.”
I cannot better close my sketch of our Mission’s history than by
referring to the. experience of two or three of those who have died in
the faith of Christ.
Eliza Nelson, a pure aboriginal, was, when I found her in the camp,
a most pitiable object; but under Christian training she soon exhibited
some most attractive traits of character. First of all she was led to
see herself a lost sinner. She showed every sign of a true repentance,
and then there followed a simple trust in Christ, which she never
again lost. I saw from the first that she was very delicate. Con-
sumption, the dread enemy of our blacks, claimed her, and she
rapidly declined. A few days before she died her sister came to
me to say that Eliza was very ill, and would like to see me.
I found her surrounded by weeping friends. She was having a
hard struggle for breath. I said: “You are-very weak, Eliza.


Have you any fear of death?” She replied: “No, because Jesus
is with me.”
“ The Lord Jesus,” I said, “ is always near those who put their trust
in Him, and especially those who, like you, are passing through the
dark valley.” Clasping her hands, and with a look full of meaning,
she said : “ I know that, sir, I know that'' On the night of her death
she sent' for me. I hastened to her bedside, and found that she was
indeed passing away. I poured into her ears portions of the Divine
Word, which I knew she loved. She was unable to speak, but enjoyed
perfect calm and peace. Her little boy stood by her side, and to him
she had said just before I arrived: “ Harry, I am going away from
you to Jesus; I want you to be a good boy. Give Jesus your heart;
serve Him, and then when you die you will meet me in heaven.”
Thus Eliza Nelson, one of the first-fruits of our Mission, was gathered
to the eternal home.
Rowley, one of the young men whom I had brought to the station
from the distant Namoi River, had been a most wicked young fellow,
drunkenness being his chief failing ; but from the time he joined the
Mission an entire reformation set in. He freely gave up the use of all
intoxicating drink, and it was soon seen that the preaching and teach-
ing of God’s truth was working powerfully on his mind and heart.
He was most regular at the various religious services, and appeared to
drink in the water of life greedily. By-and-by he expressed an earnest
desire for Christian baptism. He humbly and sincerely professed his
faith in the Son of God, and then followed a beautiful request to be
admitted to the Lord’s table. Not long after this he was laid low by
consumption, but all through his period of weakness and pain there
was cheerfulness and resignation. When at length he felt that he
must die, instead of sorrow and dread, he manifested quite a spirit of
gladness at the prospect of being so soon with Jesus. His end was
perfect peace—“ Peace in believing.”
Johanna, a little black girl, about twelve years of age, came with me
to the Mission station from a place called Cootamundra, about one
hundred and fifty miles away. Though her skin was very black, her
heart seemed pure and tender, and soon yielded to the touch of the
Saviour’s.love. Very earnestly she listened to “the old, old story,”
until the love of Jesus became to her a great reality. She opened her
heart to Him ; He entered, and dwelt there.
One evening, after service, I was walking to the Mission-house, when
I: heard the familiar pattering of bare feet behind me. Looking round
I saw the little girl. “ Well, Johanna, what is it ? ” With a great deal
of native shyness she replied : “ I would like you to baptize me, sir.’’


“ Why would you like me to baptize you ?” I said. “ Because I love
the Lord Jesus, sir, and I want to show my love to Him before my
friends.” Tears came to my eyes at these touching words, and I
said: “All right, Johanna, I will baptize you;” and one Sunday
shortly afterwards the dear girl came forward, in the presence of the
whole of our Mission community, and in the holy rite of Christian
baptism made her profession of faith and love.
Only a few weeks afterwards Johanna’s pure'and loving spirit passed
away from “our home of mercy” to join that “great multitude”
before the throne.
It was my sad duty to prepare the coffin, and to place the little
wasted black form therein ; but amid my tears, joy filled my heart to
overflowing at the thought of this precious gem, the glorified spirit
of our dear little Waradgery girl, shining in beauty in the Saviour’s
crown.
NOTE —The Government of New South Wales assists the Mission
to the extent of pound for pound voluntarily contributed.
Contributions received by Rev. J. B. Gribble, 19, Delahay
Street , S. W.
A REPLY BY R. RAWLE, BISHOP OF THE CHURCH
OF ENGLAND IN TRINIDAD,
To some Remarks of fanon Churion on the Constitution , Canons , and
Resolutions of the Provincial Synod of the West Indies contained in
an article in Mission Life for March, 1884.
ItegSMANQN CHURTON objects to our limiting the Provincial
kKi Synod of the West Indies to the Episcopal Order as “in
conflict with ” a recommendation of a Committee of the
first Lambeth Conference, which, while not questioning the right -of
Bishops to meet by themselves in Provincial Synod, advised that the
Clergy and Laity should be represented “whenever there is no law or
usage to the contrary.”
In the Preamble to the Articles constituting the Provincial Synod,
we state our belief that the mixed Synod is in accordance with
Scripture and the practice of the ancient Church in the best times,
arid of various branches of odr own Church ; but that local circum-
stances, which we indicate, preclude in the opinion, which is also Our
own, of the greater part of our Clergy and Laity, the possibility of
forming a Provincial Synod which shall in fact as well as in name be
representative.




