

THE
MACDONALD
COLLECTION
LOT 230
TO BE SOLD BY AUCTION AT
THE GALLERY SALE ROOMS OF JAMES R. LAWSON
ON TUESDAY, 16TH OCTOBER, 1923
AND FOLLOWING DAYS
Websdale, Shoosmith Ltd., Printers, Sydney.
JAMES R. LAWSON, AUCTIONEERS
196-198 CASTLEREAGH STREET
(NEAR PARK STREET). SYDNEY




THE
MacDonald Collection
COMPRISING
TOBY JUGS. CHELSEA FIGURES. &c.
PRATT JUGS
STAFFORDSHIRE FIGURES
WORCESTER JUGS
DERBY MASON JUGS
BRASS BRONZE IVORIES
FURNITURE BOOKS
BOW FIGURES • COLOURED PRINTS
PAISLEY SHAWLS
JAMES R. LAWSON
AUCTIONEERS
196-198 STREET
(NEAR PARK STREET), SYDNEY




WT E have much pleasure in submitting the Collection of Mr. J. D.
MacDonald which has been placed in our hands for sale.
The Collection will speak for itself, as it is the finest of its
kind that has ever been submitted for sale in the Commonwealth.
Many of the pieces have been inherited, and the remainder have
been collected over a long period of years.
We venture to say that many of the lots offered are not now
procurable, unless at excessively high prices.
Mr. MacDonald is well known as a writer on the subject of
ceramics, and for many years has contributed to, and portions of his
Collection have been illustrated in, many of our leading art journals.
Never before has such a Collection of choice examples of Chelsea,
Bow, Derby, Worcester, Rockingham, etc., been offered in Australia.
This Collection affords unique opportunities to secure genuine ex-
amples of the work of these famous factories.
The whole Collection will be displayed at our Galleries, 141
Elizabeth Street, from the 3rd October until the day
prior to the Sale, which is on October the 16th, at
Lawson’s Gallery Rooms, 196 Castlereagh Street (four
doors from Park Street).
TYRRELL’S LIMITED.


CONDITIONS OF SALE.
1. The highest bidder to be the buyer, and if any dispute arise
between two or more bidders the lot so in dispute shall be im-
mediately pat up again and re-sold, and the Auctioneer’s
decision to be final.
2. Every bidding shall be at least 5 per cent, in advance of the
previous one, and no party will be allowed to retract his or
her bidding after once taken. ■
ft. In the case of lots upon which there is a reserve the Auctioneer
shall have the right to bid on behalf of the seller.
4. The clerk to sign the sale book for and on behalf of the vendor
and purchaser.
5. The purchasers to give their names and places of abode, and
to pay down five shillings in the pound or more in part of
payment, or the whole of the purchase money if required, in
default of which the lot or lots so purchased to be immediately
put np again and re-sold.
6. The Lots to be taken away and paid for, whether genuine and
authentic or not, with all faults and errors of description at
the buyer’s expense and risk, before 11 a.m. of day following
sale, Mr. JAMES R. LAWSON not being responsible for the
correct description, genuineness, or authenticity of, or any
fault or defect in any Lot, and making no warranty what-
ever.
7. To prevent inaccuracy in delivery and inconvenience in the
settlement of the purchases, no Lot can on any account be
removed during the time of Sale, and the remainder of the
purchase money must absolutely be paid on the delivery.
8. Upon failure of complying with the above Conditions, the
money deposited in part of payment shall be forfeited; all
Lots uncleared within the time aforesaid shall he re-sold by
public or private sale, and the deficiency (if any) attending
such re-sale shall be made good by the defaulter at this sale.
JAMES R. LAWSON,
Auctioneers,
196 and 198 Castlereagh St., Sydney
Near corner of ParK Street.


CATALOGUE
LOT
1 Turner Mug, -jin. higli, u-Jin. in diameter; Wedgwood blue ground, basket-
ware round foot, with hunting scene in white jasper relief, showing
“The Kill”
2 Turner Mug, similar to No. 1, but with darker blue ground colour
:! Staffordshire Pepper Castor, (jin. high, in the form of a man holding a
jug. dark blue coat, red breeches, green three-cornered hat
4 Staffordshire Mug, jade coloured ground, beautiful pastoral scene in
transfer colour
d Stone-ware Liquor Bottle, buff ground, and a hunting seem 1 of “The
Kill,” in white relief
(I Small Brown Staffordshire Jug, 4in. high (by Haddeley). The handle
is formed by a greyhound (a/f.)
7 Two Staffordshire Earthenware Dishes, diamond shape, llin. x bin.;
exquisite blue and white (probably by Rogers)
8 Rare Liverpool Earthenware Plate, Klin, diameter, with painted Oriental
scene in dark blue (marked “Tndeo”)
9 Fine Turner Jug, (sJin. wide and Gin. in diameter, dark blue cylindrical
neck, lower part white, with bunting scene in relief
10 Choice Earthenware Jug (by Meigh) ; GJin. high, with foxes and dogs.
etc., in high relief. The handle is formed by a fox peering over the
rim of the jug. A beautiful piece. (Marked)
11 Seven Pieces of Rare Nottingham Brown Stone-ware, with rich irides-
cent glaze, consisting of a cottage, a small jug, a greyhound, a fox.
a hare, a retriever, and an otterhound. (This beautiful ware is vei’y
scarce)
12 Fine Specimen of Liverpool Earthenware Teapot, decorated in Sadler
and Green transfer; 4in. high. The lid has three angels’ heads on it,
one side has the portrait of John Wesley, while on the other is a
Scriptural quotation in a scroll


lot . . .
13 Very Early Staffordshire Earthenware Bacchanalian Mug, 4 2 m. Inga.
a faun’s head entwined with vine leaves
14 Rare Miniature Toby Jug, 3in high, of the Whieldon period
15 Beautiful Little Rockingham Vase, sJin. high. The lower part of this
piece is coloured in dark red, whilst the upper part is encrusted with
finely-coloured flowers in high relief. (A wonderful specimen)
16 A Bacchanalian Mug, with the bearded face of a man. The piece is of
porcelain, and is nicely coloured with vine leaves and bands of purple
lustre (marked B.)
17 Davenport China Bacchanalian Mug, 44in. high, in the form of a faun s
head encircled vine leaves
18 Two Mason Ironstone Vases, Tin. and jjin. high, dark blue ground.
gold sprays, grotesque handles
19 Fine Old Staffordshire Earthenware Drinking Cup, m the shape of a
fox’s head. Coloured dark red and French grey. 44in. high
20 Beautiful Little Spode China Drinking Cup, in the shape of a fox’s head.
Reddish brown, with white muzzle. Cold collar inscribed Tally-
Ho”
21 Fine Leeds Earthenware Drinking Cup, in the shape of a fox s head.
Coloured bright yellow, and finely glazed; oin. high
22 Pratt Jug, rare shape, finely decorated in relief, with peacocks in panels;
6in. high
23 Pratt Jug, 6in. high, very finely decorated. The figures in relief are
Britannia, and angel with trumpet heralding the approach of Nep-
tune’s car, and other figures (finely coloured)
°4 Pratt Jug, 6in. high, with busts of Nelson and Captain Hardy in relief
and coloured. (A “Nelson” Pratt jug is specially valuable)
PRATT JUGS
25 Pratt Jug, 7-Jin. high, with two figures in relief Spiing and
‘‘Autumn” —finely coloured and decorated


*26 Fine Earthenware Jug (by Pratt), Gin. high, decorated with figures of
Lord Jarvis and ships. Finely coloured in dark blue, orange and
green
27 Choice Pratt Jug, Gin. high, with figures in relief—‘‘The Sailor’s Fare-
well.” In the usual colours used by this potter, viz., blue, brown,
yellow, green
28 Pratt Jug, Sin. high, figures in coloured relief —‘‘Sportsmen with Dogs
29 Pratt Tea-poy, s£in. high, four figures in relief, nicely coloured
30 Rare ‘‘Armless” Toby Jug (by Pratt); Sin. high, finely coloured and
glazed
31 Genuine Old Staffordshire Philpot Toby Jug (by Whieldon) ; 10m. high.
The colours of this jug are mottled blue, manganese browns, and
yellow, so typical of the famous maker. This Toby has a small keg
between his feet, and the usual small jug on his left knee. The piece
has a plain looped handle and the large three-cornered hat, as in all
proper Toby jugs. (A magnificent specimen.)
32 Fine Old Staffordshire Toby Jug (by Neale & Co.); 10m. high, in beauti-
ful colouring—blue, yellow and brown and orange. The base am
handle are mottled. (A choice early piece)
33 Fine Early Toby Jug (of the Whieldon School), in brown and yellow
colours incorporated in the rich glaze; lOin. high
TOBY JUGS
154 Excellent Early Toby Jug (of the Whieldon School) ; 10m. high, with
mottled brown markings, and bine and orange decoration
35 Fine Early Staffordshire Toby Jug, 9f in. high, in dark brown and orange
colourings, with loop handle. (Fine specimen of the correct period)
36 Very Choice Early Staffordshire Toby Jug, 9iin. high, finely modelled,
and coloured in puce, red and mottled base. (The jug may be
attributed to Ralph Wood, Junior)


LOT
37 Perfect Specimen Rockingham Toby Jug, 81in. high, in the famous
Brown-ware of the factory. Finely modelled and glazed
38 Staffordshire Toby Jug, 9Jin. high
39 Staffordshire Toby Jug, 9in. high (of the Whieldon School), green base
manganese brown colourings
40 Six Blue and White Staffordshire Plates, 81 in. in diameter. Pastoral
scene, with cows
41 Three Mason Ironstone China Plates, 9 Jin. diameter, blue and white
decoration, conventional design (marked)
42 One Mason Ironstone China Plate, and One Blue and White Mason Iron-
stone China Plate
43 Four Blue and White Staffordshire Plates, 8-Jin. diameter. Landscape
scenes, cottages, and bridge; border of roses
44 Three Blue and White Staffordshire Plates, 9-1 in. diameter, of beautiful
quality, Anglicised willow pattern
45 Large Staffordshire Blue and White Meat Dish, with a well; 18Jin long,
pastoral decoration, with cows
46 Two Staffordshire Blue and White Dishes, 15in. long. Pastoral scene,
with cows; charming tone of blue
47 Six Staffordshire Blue and White Earthenware Deep Plates, Chinese
design. The soft blue tone of these plates cannot be surpassed
48 Six Dark Blue and White Staffordshire Plates, 19in. in diameter (by
Stevenson Cobridge), with a view of Faulkbourn Hall
49 Large Blue and White Staffordshire Dish, 17in. long (by Riley, Burslem)
50 Very Rare Pair of Lambeth Delft Plates (painted with initials E.P.R.,
and dated 1685), in cartouches composed of griffins, masks and
foliage, and surmounted with coronets .
51 One Lambeth Delft Plate, similar to Lot 50, but dated 1693
52 Rare Oval Spode Earthenware Fruit Dish, lOJin. long, green ground,
brightly decorated with flowers and birds (marked)
53 Rare Oval Spode Fruit Dish, (earthenware), lOJin. long, green grey
ground, brightly decorated with flowers and birds (marked)
54 Rare Spode Dish, 9in., green grey ground, coloured birds and flowers,
etc. (marked)
55 Two Fine Spode Earthenware Plates, Sin. diameter, brown ground,
brightly coloured flowers and birds (marked)
56 Four Pieces Mason Ironstone China Fruit Dish and Plates, in coloured
Mandarin design. (Seldom met with.) Marked


57 Rare Wheildon Earthenware Teapot, in the famous cauliflower-ware;
sin. high
58 Rare Wheildon Cauliflower Teapot, Sin. high (similar to Lot No. 57)
59 Large Mason Ironstone China Jug, Din. high, of octagonal shape, with
snake handle. The colours of the decoration are dark blues and
reds, with a green handle
60 Mason Ironstone China Jug, 7Viin. high, with snake handle, octagonal
shape. The decoration is in Mason’s conventional pattern of blues,
reds and gold. The handle is green scaled. (This is a perfect
specimen of these famous jugs)
61 Mason Ironstone China Jug, VAm. high, with snake handle. This is a
replica of No. 60, and together they make a splendid pair (marked)
Lot 62
Lot 61
62 Fine Mason Ironstone China Jug, Oin. high, octagonal shape, dark blue
ground, and richly decorated with gold
Lot 63
60 Mason Ironstone Jug, sin., the same colouring and shape as No. 62


(i 4 Magnificent Set of Six Mason Ironstone China Jugs, from 2fm. to 7m. in
height; octagonal shape, snake handles, dark blue ground, richly
ornamented with gold (the largest jug restored)
65 Very Fine Set of Three Mason Vases, centre vase llin. high, side vases
10in., with covers. These pieces are after a Chinese model; have lion-
head' handles, and are beautifully coloured, the decoration being
large butterflies and flower sprays (marked Chinese square)
66 Extremely Rare Staffordshire Bacchanalian Mask Jug, Bin. high. The
body of this piece is a Satyr’s head, encircled with vine leaves and
grapes. The spout is formed by a grinning face, and the handle con-
sists of a Merman with his hands on the lip of the piece. It is beauti-
fully coloured, and was made by the famous potter, Ralph Wood, to
the design of Voyez. (See “The Earthenware Collector,” by Rhead.)
67 Magnificent Large Sunderland Earthenware Jug, Sin. high and Sin. in
diameter. On one side is an illustration of the bridge oyer the
River Weir, on the other finely coloured Masonic design. This piece
has three interesting inscriptions
68 Exceedingly Interesting Liverpool Earthenware Jug, with mask spout ;
7(4in. high, quaintly decorated with a pastoral scene in blue. This
piece is unique, as it is painted in blue, not transferred. Above the
figures is inscribed the name “Benj. Jeffery,” in large letters
69 Hexagonal Sunderland Lustre Jug, panels decorated in relief; 6m. high
70 Fine Quality Turner Earthenware Jug, of in. high, with classical figures
in relief
71 Set of Three Very Fine Quality White Stone-ware Jugs, Tin., Sin. and 9m.
high. On each jug is eight panels, enclosing the figure of a Saint.
The general finish of these jugs is very fine; they were probably
made at Hanley, by Ridgway
72 Very Fine Earthenware Jug (by Meigh), with Bacchanalian figures in
high relief; 7in. high. This piece is bronzed colour and richly glazed
(marked)
73 Exquisite Marked Cohridge Earthenware Jug, illustrating “The Good
Samaritan,” in relief; beautifully modelled
74 Cobridge Jug, 7in. high. Indians fighting on elephants, in beautiful
relief
75 Exquisite Silver Resist Lustre Jug, 4-Jin. high
76 Rare Staffordshire Jug, Sin. high, dated 1794, and inscribed “George
and Sarah Lesster.”—“May the Honest Heart Never Know Distress.
Blue and white


LOT
77 Small Staffordshire Jug, 4in. high — Man Taking bnuft
78 Large White Stone-ware Jug, 9in. high, classical design (probably made
by Ridgway)
79 Staffordshire Jug, 6Hn. high, with figures in high relief. This jug is by
Copeland & Garret, and is an early copy of the “Fair Hebe jug
originally made by Yoyez. The body of the piece is a tree trunk,
coloured brown. On one side is a man with a dog, and on the other
is a youth holding out to a girl a bird’s nest with eggs in it (marked)
80 Leeds Earthenware Tea-poy, 4in. high. The colourings are typically
Leeds —dark red ground, green leaves, with one panel enclosing a
figure in red
81 Turner Earthenware Mug, 4in. high, dark blue ground; hunting scene,
“The Kill,” in white relief
82 Interesting Early Staffordshire Jug, siin. high—“ God Speed the
Plough”—decorated with agricultural implements and animals, and
suitably inscribed
83 Interesting Early Staffordshire Jug, Sin. high, blue circles round rim of
spout and base, sponge decoration
84 Staffordshire Cream Jug, s|in. high, purple lustre decoration
85 Pair Magnificent Jasper-ware Oviform Vases (by Turner); 15m. high,
classical design, dark blue ground, with flowering vine leaves in
white relief
86 Rare Whieldon Spill Vase, of square shape, formed of four green leaves,
with blossom between each, manganese brown colour inside
87 Blue and White Rogers Earthenware Sauceboat, with cover and plate
beautifully decorated with Christmas roses; the handles are formed
of lions’ heads
88 Blue and White Staffordshire Sauceboat, with cover, lion-head handles
design, pastoral scene
89 Leeds Earthenware Two-handled Cup, decorated in red and green show-
ing man and woman in old English costumes, with sprays of flowers
90 Very Fine Specimen of Leeds Cream-ware Mug, 6in. high, printed with
exotic birds in dark red
91 Magnificent Jet Black Whieldon or Jackfield Coffee Pot 9in. hi " h ’ wltl J
three feet, and a domed cover surmounted by a bird. The body of
the piece is decorated with designs in relief
92 Brilliant Black Glazed Jackfield Teapot, with three feet. A beautiful
specimen of early earthenware


93 Blue and White Oval Staffordshire Plate, 9in., with perforated border
94 Pair of Fine Davenport Deep Plates, 9’4in. The decoration is in transfer
outline, nicely coloured green, red and blues. The design is sprays
of flowers, leaves and birds (marked)
95 Double-masked Rockingham Brown-ware Cup, with two handles; 44m.
high
96 Leeds Cream-ware Teapot, gilt, with flowers (dated 1769)
97 Small Leeds Cream-ware Teapot, 44in. high, decorated in conventional
red and green
98 Magnificent Early Staffordshire Figure of Saint Paul, with an open
book; 9in. high, on green base, tree behind him. lie wears a puce
cloak, with green lining and sandals
99 Fine Staffordshire Figure of St. Peter, 9in. high, on green base. Peter’s
robe is of fine purple colour
100 Fine Staffordshire Figure— A Woman with Mandolin—on green base,
with sheep beside her; she is sitting on a tree stump, which is well
hocaged
101 Very Fine Large Early Staffordshire Bull-baiting Group. Such groups
are exceedingly rare, and this is a very good sample; in excellent
condition
102 Pair of Early Staffordshire Reclining Figures, silver lustre decoration,
depicting Cleopatra and Mark Antony
103 Very Fine Early Staffordshire Figure, on square base—The Woman with
a Broom —sin. high, coloured in red and black
104 Early Staffordshire Figure— Woman beside a Tree with three Sheep—
44in. high, on round base, nicely coloured
105 Early Staffordshire Pottery Figure— A Gardener with Spade and Plant
p 0 t (jin. high, on green base, with bocaged tree stump
106 Early Staffordshire Pottery Figure— Boy with Bird’s Nest— 6in. high,
on green base, bocaged tree stump, brightly coloured
107 Early Staffordshire Pottery Figure— Woman with Tambourine—6m.
high, bocaged tree stump, brightly coloured
108 Very Fine Small Early Staffordshire Pottery Figure— Cupid with
Basket of Flowers, and bocage—following Chelsea model; 3|m. high
109 Fine Early Staffordshire Pottery Figure, 4in. high, on square base—
Cupid with Basket of Flowers—following a Chelsea model
110 Early Staffordshire Pottery Figure— Cupid with Basket of Flowers on
left arm, on round green base; 4in. high; fine quality


LOT
111 Pair of Very Fine Staffordshire Pottery Groups— Men and Women Play-
ing Musical Instruments. Bach has a dog and swan beside them, on
square bases; the colours of these pieces are very good; they were
probably made by Walton; 7Mn. high
112 Very Fine Early Staffordshire Pottery Figure, 11-Mn. high—Classical
Figure, with bow and arrows; on square base. The colourings of
this are puce, yellow and red, and it is copying a Chelsea model of
the same period
113 A Pair of Super-fine Early Staffordshire Pottery Figures— Gardener and
Shepherdess, beside hocaged trees, finely coloured, on green bases;
5-iin. high
114 Fine Quality Pratt Earthenware Figure— “ One of the London Cries
5-tin. high, charming colours in glaze. (A rare specimen)
115 Fine Specimen Leeds Cream-ware Figure, (in. high (marked Leeds
pottery). Such figures are very scarce
11G Small Hexagonal Mason Ironstone China Jug, iViin. high
H 7 Ektru Fiat Quality Parian Figure, 6Ji„. Negro Boy Seate.l
Heading a Boole, a basket of cotton beside linn. (I reliably an ear .
Copeland & Garrett piece)
118 Worcester Blue and White Acanthus-leaf Jug, 9in. high, with mask
spout and loop handle
119 Worcester Blue and White and Gold Large Teacup and Saucer
120 Worcester Porcelain Trinket Tray, decorated in blue and gold
121 Very Early Derby Plate, Sin. diameter, decorated in quaint design, dark
blue, green and purple (marked)
122 Swansea Porcelain Plate, Sldin. diameter, pink and gold border, coloured
flower sprays
123 Worcester Porcelain Plate, 9in. diameter, in rare black transfer decora-
tion of a temple ruin (imperfect)
124 Derby Porcelain Plate, 93in. diameter, basket-ware border, painted with
sprays of flowers (nuirked)
125 Fine Chelsea Plate, brown edging, decorated with sprays of flowers
126 Chelsea-Derby Plate, 9|in. diameter, prettily painted with spray of
flowers
127 Pair of Octagonal Bow Plates, 9Viin„ decorated in colour, with the
famous quail pattern. (Very fine pair)
128 Three Bow China Plates, 9in. diameter, decorated in colours on both
sides. Very early pieces (marked)


LOT .... , • n
129 Very Fine Chamberlain Worcester Deep Plate, 10m. m diameter, richly
decorated in dark blue, red and gold
130 Two Very Fine Chamberlain Worcester Plates, lOin. in diameter, richly
decorated in dark blue, red and gold
131 Chamberlain Worcester Plate, SV±m. diameter, decorated with red and
gold
132 Exquisite Chelsea-Derby Plate, 9in. diameter, with canary-coloured
border and flowers in relief. The centre is finely painted with
brilliantly coloured flowers
133 Beautiful Chamberlain Worcester Dish, 9lin. x Tin., brilliantly decorated
in red, blue and gold
134 Exquisite Swansea China Dish, 9in. in diameter, beautifully painted
by Billingsley. The ground colour is claret, with a spray of large
roses and leaves round the plate
135 Magnificent Old English Tea Service, decorated in red, blue, gold and
grey consisting of Queen Anne shaped teapot, two-handled sugar
basin, cream jug, two bread plates, Tlin. diameter, nine cups and
saucers, six extra coffee cups. Many of these pieces have the
Plymouth mark, but can be attributed to Chamberlain, of Worcester
136 Rare Tea Service of Bow China-ware consisting of teapot, 7m. high, bowl,
cream jug, six cups and saucers. This little service is decorated in
Chinese taste, blue underglaze and dark red overglaze. It is very
seldom so many pieces of Bow are offered together
13T Grand Old English Dinner Service, in Chamberlain Worcester porcelain
(forty-four pieces in all), comprising soup tureen, with cover, the top
of which is formed by an apple; eight oblong ashets, llin. to 18m.
in length; two vegetable dishes, with covers; two sauce tureens, with
covers and stands; twenty-four large plates. The decoration of this
magnificent service is in underglaze mazarine blue, overglaze red and
gold, interspersed with sprays in brilliant green
138 Choice Chamberlain Worcester Bowl, 6Mn. in diameter, brilliantly
decorated in dark blue, reds and gold
139 Bow Blue and White Bowl, decorated with sprays of flowers
140 White Bow China Cream Jug, 4in. high, with figures in relief. (A very
early piece)
141 Charming Porcelain Jug, of unusual shape, 4Mn. high, decorated in rare
enamel colours, showing a mounted Cossack attacking another horse-
man. The jug is inscribed on the base “Cossack mode of Attack. ’
Maker problematical, but may be attributed to Derby. (A,ver>
interesting piece)


LOT
142 Very Fine Chelsea Plate Dish, in the form of a large leaf, llin. x 8 2 m.
Beautifully painted with large spray of roses, and deep border of
green (mark, anchor)
143 Fine Chelsea Dish, KHin. x Bin., with vine sprays in relief, and decorated
with butterfly and insects in enamel colours
144 Very Fine Chelsea Vase, with cover, 12in. high. This splendid piece
has a bird with outstretched wings on top, while the body has two
masks in relief, and is heavily encrusted with sprays of leaves and
flowers, butterflies and insects painted on the panels in brilliant
colourings
14b Pair Fine Twist Fluted Chelsea Vases, Tin. high, beautifully painted
with flower sprays, some of which are in relief, green twisted
handles
14fi A Pair of Miniature Chelsea Vases, 34in. high, with twisted handles; the
bodies are coloured in the rare turquoise of Chelsea, and each has
two panels finely painted with flowers
147 Pair of Derby Two-handled Mayflower Baskets, with stands; Dim..
pierced, and royal blue border (marked). Very fine quality
148 Beautiful Rockingham China Vase, Din. high, crimson colour, gold
handles, one side exquisitely painted with brilliantly-coloured flowers
149 Early Chamberlain Worcester Octagonal Vase, Diin. high, with cover,
and swan handles; decorated with brilliant colours (marked)
150 Pair of Very Fine Rockingham Vases, encrusted with flowers, apple-
green border and gilt; 12in. high. (The quality of these pieces is
unsurpassed)
151 Handsome Rockingham Vase, with gold handles; lOin. high, dark mottled
blue ground, panels beautifully painted with flowers, and richly
ornamented with gold. This mottled blue is very scarce
152 Set of Three Exquisite Rockingham Vases, sin., Sin. and 6m. high. The
ground colour of these pieces is of a deep mottled scale blue; the
panels are beautifully painted with bouquets of flowers outlined
in gold; the handles are of classic shape. Such a set is rarely met
with, and they are often attributed to Worcester
153 Pair Superb Colebrookdale Vases, Din. high, oviform shape, handles in
the form of swans; exquisitely painted with flowers and coloured in
gold
154 Colebrookdale Vase, lOin. high, rococo ornamentation, exquisitely
painted and coloured in gold
155 Very Fine Specimen Salopian Porcelain Blue and White Mug, 6in. high,
beautifully decorated with bird subject (crescent marked)


LOT
156 Very Fine Worcester Blue and White Jug, high. The ovoid body
is formed of acanthus leaves in relief; the neck is cylindrical, with a
mask spout, loop handle (crescent marked)
157 Very Fine Worcester Blue and White Jug, 9in. high, ovoid body,
cylindrical neck with mask spout, loop handle. The body is formed
by acanthus leaves in relief. Similar to No. 156 (crescent marked)
158 Worcester Blue and. White Jug, Bin. high, similar to No. 156 (crescent
marked)
WORCESTER JUGS
15!) Worcester Blue and White Jug, B!4in. high, finely decorated with birds
and fruit. Similar to No. 156 (crescent marked)
IGO Exquisite Worcester Blue and White Jug, Tin. high, ovoid smooth body,
masked spout
161 Very Fine Caughley China Jug, of the acanthus leaf pattern, with ovoid
body and cylindrical neck, with mask spout and loop handle, blue
and white. Charming decoration in dark blue Chinese scenes. This
Jug was made co-temporaneous with the Worcester pieces of the
same type, but can be identified from them by a difference in the tone
of the blue
162 Worcester Blue and White Butter Dish, with cover, with acorn top, con-
ventional decoration (crescent marked)
163 Choice Small Worcester Bowl, 41in. diameter, blue and white, decorated
in conventional sprays of flowers and butterflies (crescent marked)
164 Worcester Bowl, Sin. diameter, conventional blue decoration
165 Very Interesting Early Lowestoft Bowl, 4in. diameter, crudely decorated
in blue
166 Magnificent Pair of Bow Sauce Boats, long, leaf pattern, finely
decorated in colours, with insects and flower sprays


LOT
167 Small Chelsea Sauce Boat, decorated in colours, with flower sprays.
Early specimen before gold was in use as a decoration
168 Colebrookdale Spill Vase, 4in. high, beautifully encrusted with coloured
flowers
169 Exquisite Derby China Mug, richly decorated with gold, and beautifully
painted with bouquets of flowers
170 Small Worcester Cream Jug, 3in. high, in relief, decorated with sprays
of flowers
171 A Small Worcester Cream Jug, 3in. high, decorated with coloured shells
in relief
172 Charming Small Coalport Cream Jug, 3in. high, blue and white, sprays
of flowers and fruit decoration
173 Bow Cup and Saucer, decorated with hawthorn blossom and gold
174 Derby Cup and Saucer, with turquoise decoration (marked)
175 A Doctor Wall Period Fluted Worcester Cup and Saucer, apple green
decoration and gilt (square mark)
176 Chelsea-Derby Cup and Saucer, decorated with garlands of flowers in
enamelled colours. Very fine quaint shape
177 Fine Spode Cup and Saucer, decorated with panels of flowers on pink
ground, and gilt (marked)
178 Worcester Porcelain Cup and Saucer, blue and white and gold
179 Two Odd Worcester Cups, decorated with coloured flower sprays
180 Worcester China Teapot, din. high, decorated in blue, gold and red
(crescent marked)
181 Charming Worcester Porcelain Teapot, din. high, decorated in coloured
flowers, sprays and insects
182 Lowestoft Teapot, 6in. high, decorated in under-glazed blue and over-
glazed red. A beautiful sample from this rare factory
183 Worcester Blue and White Small Teapot, sin. high (crescent marked)
184 Small Worcester Blue and White Teapot, decorated with sprays of
flowers and willow trees (marked)
185 Charming Little Bow Teapot, 4-Jin. high, decorated in dark blue Chinese
style of decoration
186 Worcester Porcelain Coffee Pot, lOin. high, with domed cover. It is
decorated in the famous enamel colours, with manderin pattern (im-
perfect)


LOT
187 An Exquisite Pair of Bow Boys, on heavy flowered bases; Sin. high, hold-
ing baskets of flowers, and with garland around heads and shoulders
BOW BOYS
188 An Exquisite Pair of Bow Boys, or Cupids, Sin. high, on flowered bases,
with baskets and garlands of flowers
189 Small Rare Bow Figure, 41 in. high—Man in Turkish Costume—puce
cloak, flowered coat, holding a wine cup
190 Exquisite Bow Figure —Huntress with Dog—Sin. high, scarlet coat, puce
and green three-cornered hat, flowered skirt, boeage
191 Very Fine Bow Figure, high—Man seated on a Basket of Grapes,
holding a cup in one hand and a bunch of grapes in the other; white
coat, blue apron. A very rare piece
192 Bow Figure, Sin. high —Una standing beside a Lion, and holding a
cornucopia (finely coloured)
193 Magnificent Bow Figure, Sin. high—Man in Turkish Costume, with green
cloak ermine lined, brilliantly coloured (marked anchor and dagger)
194 Bow Group —Kneeling Cupid with Dog—Tin. high (restored)
195 Chelsea Figure of Neptune with dolphin; Gin. high (incised mark)
196 Very Fine Pair of Chelsea Cupids, Sin. high, holding baskets of flowers,
decorated with garlands and coloured boeage


LOT
197 A Very Fine Chelsea Figure of Falstaff, with buckler and sword; lOin.
high, on rococo base. The colourings on this figure are red, puce,
and a splendidly-flowered waistcoat
198 Magnificent Chelsea Figure of Neptune, standing over a large dolphin,
on a high base, richly decorated with shell and seaweed; llin. high,
and gaily coloured in puce, green and yellow
199 Pair of Finest Quality Chelsea Candlesticks, kneeling Cupids on rococo
bases. The bocage is exceptionally fine and delicate; measures 6in
x 4in. These pieces are 9in. in height. A quiver of arrows is at the
feet of each Cupid, one of whom is shooting an arrow through the
bocage, and the other holds in his hand a heart. A girdle of flowers
encircles each of the Cupids. The colours are subdued and delicate.
These are an exceptionally fine pair
200 Exquisite Chelsea Figure, on flowered base, BMn. high—Youth with
Lamb under his arm, with basket of fruit, some of which he holds in
his left hand. Yellow knee breeches, black shoes, puce coat, and
brocaded waistcoat
Lot 201
Lot 200
201 Exquisite Chelsea Figure, Sin. high—Youth with Basket of Grapes, dog
at foot beautifully coloured. This figure is exceptionally fine, and of
the gold anchor period
202 Very Fine Chelsea Candlestick, lOCiin. high, complete with sconce. This
piece consists of a Homan soldier representing Mars standing beside
a garlanded tree, beside which are a shield and a flag


LOT
203 A Superb Chelsea Figure, (iViin. high. This is one of the much-sought-
after Mansion House Dwarfs. He is complete with high feathered
hat and staff. The colourings of this rare piece arc perfect; the
flowered waistcoat and the turquoise breeches being particularly
attractive (incised mark)
Lot 203
Lot 204
204 A Superb Chelsea Figure, (d/iin. high. This is the companion dwarf to
No. 203. He is gaily decorated in checkered waistcoat, decorated
with playing cards, and he wears a tasselled girdle. These two
dwarfs, Nos. 203 and 204, were known as Gog and Magog, and they
arc very scarce and seldom come into the market in such perfect
condition .(incised mark)


LOT
205 Pair of Magnificent Chelsea Candlesticks, 9*/4in. high, complete with
handles and sconces. The body of these pieces consists of Gin. x Gin.
of hawthorn bocage, in which are perched two beautifully-coloured
birds
206 Very Early Chelsea Figure, lOin. high—Diana the Goddess of the Chase,
with hound at side. This is a fine sample of the early products of
this famous factory
207 Small Chelsea Sheep, on green base
208 Exquisite Little Chelsea Cupid, 4f4in. high, with basket of flowers and
wreath on head
209 Fine Small Chelsea Figure, sl4in. high—Boy with Basket of Flowers on
his knees, sitting on tree stump, rococo base nicely coloured
210 Three Chelsea Cupids, 4Jin., 4'/tin. and 4in. high, each holding a basket
of flowers
211 Chelsea Cupid, sJin. high, with tree stump and basket of flowers
212 Large Size Chelsea Derby Cupid, 6-Jin. high
213 Very Fine Small Chelsea Derby Figure, 4Jin. Holding a
Sheep, vase at side
214 Chelsea Derby Figure of a Stag, resting beside a tree, with bocage; 3Jin.
high (incised mark)
215 Chelsea Derby Figure of a Stag, with bocage at hack; 3in. high
216 Charming Little Chelsea Derby Figure, on green base, 3fin. high—Man
Holding Cup. Dressed in Turkish costume, with jewelled turban,
red cloak and brightly-coloured tunic (incised mark)
217 Small Derby China Figure —Girl with Mandolin, on green base. The
dress in dark blue and gold, yellow apron, red bodice with gold
braid (incised mark)
218 Pair of Derby China Small Figures, 4)in. high—Youth with Gun, and
Girl with Sheaf of Corn. The colours are dark blue, green and gold
(marked)
219 Beautiful Derby Figure, of a girl with flowers and a watering-pot. The
colours are dark underglaze, blue with red and yellow; sin. high
(incised mark)
220 Chelsea Derby Figure, sjin. high—Girl Playing Mandolin—green and
gold base, flowered skirt, yellow bodice, white stringed cap (incised
mark)


LOT
221 Charming Chelsea-Derby Figure, 64in. high, of a girl carrying a water-
bottle. Her skirt is flowered, bodice is puce, and she stands on a
green base bedecked with blossom (incised mark)
222 Very Fine Specimen of Bloor Derby —a china figure of a Gardener Girl,
with flower basket. Her dress is dark blue with gold spots; the
bodice is brown, and she wears a wide-brimmed yellow hat; din. high
(marked Bloor Derby)
223 Pair of Derby Figures, sin. high—Shepherd and Shepherdess Playing
Instruments, with sheep and dog; beautiful colours (incised mark)
224 Very Fine Chelsea Derby Figure, Bfin. high—Boy Playing with Dog—
pale blue breeches, puce-lined coat
225 Charming Derby Figure, of a woman holding flowers; Sin. high, on
rococo base. The woman is standing beside a bocaged tree stump,
the skirt of her dress is gaily painted in gold and roses, the apron
is yellow and the bodice dark blue and gold. She wears a flowing
cap (incised mark)
Lot 226
22G Superb Pair of Derby Figures —“The Sailor and his Lass”—9in. high
on rococo bases, with tree stumps. All the beautiful colours used in
the Derby factory are introduced in these pieces, which must be
seen to be appraised at their full artistic value (one incised mark, one
crossed swords)


nor
227 Magnificent Derby Figure, BV4in. high, of Youth, on rococo base—“ The
Itinerant Musician,” with flute and drum. Richly coloured in gold,
red and brown, flowered coat, and knee breeches, puce cloak. A
brilliant specimen of the Derby factory (incised mark)
228 Rare Derby Figure of a Youth playing a Flute; lOin. high, finely gilt and
coloured. The youth is leaning against a tree stump, and a sheep is
beside him (marked and incised)
229 Very Fine Derby Figure, TV)in. high—“ Girl Cleaning Beau’s Shoes.”
The colouring of this piece is extremely fine, blue and gold pre-
dominating (incised mark)
230 Magnificent Chelsea Derby Figure, 12Jin, high—“ The Winged Mercury,”
on rococo base. Mercury has in his right hand a bag of gold, and in
his left the caduceus, a bale of merchandise is at his feet, and he is
dressed in a flowing cloak and winged cap. The colouring of this
figure is particularly pleasing (W on base.) See illustration on cover
Lot 230
Lot 231
231 Magnificent Chelsea-Derby Figure, I2in. high—“ Venus,” on rococo base.
The figure is delicately coloured, with puce cloak and flower-
bedecked garments. This piece is a companion figure to No. 230.
One wing restored (marked C. on base)
232 Unique Derby China Figure, 6V4in. high, of a Musician seated on a chair
playing a flute; below the chair is a violin case, a music score, and
books. The colours in this figure are magnificent—pink, green and
gold predominating


LOT
2:5:5 Exceedingly Rare Derby Figure —A Boy Seated with an Open Book olin.
high. lie is gorgeously dressed in old-world garments, and wears a
periwig, ruffled sleeves and flowered waistcoat. This figure is alter
a well-known Micssen model, and is actually marked with the Dresden
cross swords. Such figures were made at Derby soon after 179.)
294 Choice Derby Biscuit Figure, bin. high, of an Eton Boy with white mice,
unglazed, on round base
295 Derby Biscuit Figure, 9Jin. high—Girl Seated on a Cushion Tying Shoe
296 Derby Porcelain Figure (by Stevenson & Hancock), 7-Jin. high—Boy with
Dog, after a Chelsea model (marked). These figures marked with
Hie Derby mark with S. and 11. added must not he confused with old
Derby. They were made from 1.84(1 onwards at Derby
297 Derby Porcelain Figure of Falstaff, Sin. high (by Stevenson & Hancock).
marked
298 Derby Porcelain Figure (by Stevenson & Hancock) —Paid Pry (s|in.
high)
299 Derby Porcelain Figure (by Stevenson & Hancock) of Doctor Syntax;
5-Jin. high (marked)
240 Pair of Derby Porcelain Figures— “ Nigh t” and “Morning” (by Steven-
son & Hancock) ; 9in. high (marked)
241 Pair of Derby Porcelain Figures (by Stevenson & Hancock) ; 4in. high,
beautifully coloured in Royal Derby blue, etc. —“Helper Joe, and
“African Sal,” These were two well-known Derby characters
(marked)
242 Derby Porcelain Figure (by Stevenson & Hancock); 4in. high Helper
Joe” (marked)
249 Derby Porcelain Figure (by Stevenson & Hancock) ; 4in. high “The
Toper Man,” royal blue and gold (marked)
244 Interesting Old English China Figure of a Girl riding on the back of a
dog, on round base, nicely coloured. This piece is sin. long
245 Extremely Interesting and Rare Small Rockingham Figure, 4-Jin. high
Chinaman seated on a rock holding a basket of flowers; colours dark
red. gold and green. This is a very fine piece
246 Rockingham Figure (exactly similar to No. 24;)), hut in white and gold
247 Biscuit Figure (similar to Nos. 24;>/6) ; 4-Jin. high, in the rare white
biscuit of Rockingham
248 Rockingham Biscuit Figure, 4in. high —Woman with Tambourine


LOT
24!) Pair of Miniature Rockingham Figures —Man and Woman, in Turkish
costume. Colours blue, gold and puce; 04 in. high
250 Two small Oriental Perfume Bottles
251 Two Chinese Soft-paste Porcelain Figures, in Hlanc-de-('hine of Kuan-
Yin
202 Porcelain Inkwell— The Head of a French Soldier. Finely modelled and
coloured in red and green (marked X.)
2.1:! Pair of Handsome Oriental Vases, 2(iin. high, ovoid body, and a long
neck on which are two handles formed by elephant s heads and trunks.
Elegantly decorated in greens and purple
254 Pair of Handsome Oriental Vases, 24in. high, yellow ground, decorated
in various subjects in enamel colours
255 Two Oriental Plates, Sin. diameter —Family Hose; One Fine Oriental
Bowl (marked)
25(1 Large Oriental Vase, 24in. high, finely decorated in enamel colours
(damaged at top)
257 Superb Capo-de-Monte Flagon, 74in. high, with lion top, and handle
formed by an elephant’s bead and trunk. Richly coloured and
decorated in relief, with men fighting with animals. A magnificent
piece (marked crown N.)
258 Pair of Capo-de-Monte Vases, 12in. high. The bodies are ornamented
with Cupids and sprays of flowers. On Hie top of the cover a boy is
seated holding a bunch of grapes
25!) Very Fine Capo-de Monte Vase, Ojin. high; the handles are formed of
winged heads and allegorical figures in relief (marked crown X.)
200 Fine Continental Fruit Service, consisting of four stands and eight plates,
Brilliantly decorated with birds, and gilded
201 Oriental Bowl and Cover, blue ground, white decoration in relief
(marked)
202 Japanese Plaque, 12in. diameter
200 Large Imari Bowl, lOin. in diameter (imperfect)
264 Pair of Magnificent Royal Worcester Vases (modern), of classical shape;
] 5-Jin. high. These pieces are beautifully painted with sheep (by 11.
Davis), and finely decorated with Mat gold
205 Choice Royal Worcester Oviform Vase; 15in. high, beautifully painted
with peacocks (by A. C. Lewis), and ornamented with blue and Mat
gold


LOT
266 Two Wedgwood Blue Jasper Plaques, with busts of Captain Cook and
Admiral Nelson, in heavy black and gold oval frames
267 Black Jasper Plaques (by Wedgwood), of a winged Cupid, in heavy
brown and gold oval frame
268 Black Jasper Plaque (by Wedgwood), of Josiah Wedgwood, in heavy
black and gold oval frame
269 Exquisite Opal Painting (by Sutton), Minton’s famous china painter—
“ The Renunciation of Paris.” From the original work of Solomon
V. Solomon (signed)
270 Japanese Bronze Vase, 11-Jin. high, fish and flowers in relief
271 Japanese Bronze Vase
272 Fine Old Japanese Bronze Figure —Man Smoking Opium Pipe, seated
on a tree branch
273 Fine Japanese Bronze Incense Burner, in form of a cask, with an acrobat
on the cover
274 Bronze Eagle, with wings outstretched, standing on a globe
275 Four Pieces Japanese Wood-work —Figures of Monkeys, etc. (imitation
bronze)
276 Pair of Fine Old English Glass Lustre Flower Vases, 9in. high, surrounded
by pendant lustres (each have two pieces); 6in. long
277 Pair of Genuine Antique Brass Candlesticks, 7in. high, with central
candle pushers
278 Pair of Genuine Old Brass Candlesticks, lOin. high, with central candle
pushers
279 Pair of Jacobean Pattern Brass Candlesticks, lljin. high, with double
twist stems
280 Old Copper Hot-water Can, with cover and handle; the body is banded
with brass
281 Old Pewter Beer Mug, with glass bottom
282 Old Sheffield-plate Beer Mug, with wooden bottom (marked)
283 Old Glass Beer Mug, with pewter mountings
284 Pair Indian Wood Figures of Buffalo with Riders, black inlaid, with
silver tracery
285 Exquisite Japanese Ivory Carving of Geisha Girl, 4V 4 in. high (signed)
286 Exquisite Japanese Ivory Carving of a Fruit Seller, 4in. high


LOT
287 Very Fine Ivory Carving of a Turkey, 2iin. high
288 Pair of Small Ivory Carvings of Pigeons
289 Two Soapstone Figures, 54in. high
290 Pair Old Wedgwood Dishes, nicely decorated in colours, baskets of
flowers in relief (marked)
291 Old Parian Jug, with pewter top, decoration in relief
292 Two Large and One Small Wedgwood Dishes, fine transfer decoration
(reproduction of the old Queens-ware)
293 Coloured Print (framed) —“The Koval Mail Coach”
294 A Set of Three Framed Old English Coaching Coloured Prints
295 Genuine Old English Coloured Engraving—“ Pheasant Shooting,” in
frame (by Keeve)
296 Grand Old Oak Chest, on feet, panelled top and carved front. A genuine
17th Century piece
297 Genuine Antique Sheraton Stationery Cabinet, with a sloping top; lain.
x 9in.
298 Pair of Fine Dutch Tapestries, 34ft. x 2ft.
299 Mahogany Chest of Drawers, with four drawers, Bow front
300 Two Oleographs, in gilt frames
301 Genuine Old Paisley Shawl, 111 ft. x 51ft.. in the delightful red pattern,
and with its original fringe
302 Genuine Old Paisley Shawl, 11 lit. x 51f1., in the delightful red pattern,
with its original fringe
303 Fine Old Early Victorian Dressing Table, in mahogany, with Bow front,
two nests of drawers, large oval mirror
304 Large China Cabinet, 6ft. Sin. high x 6ft. 4in. wide, 18in. deep, glazed
front and sides for the display of old china. This cabinet is made in
silky oak, and stained mahogany colour
305 “The A.B.C. of Collecting Old Continental Pottery” (.1. F. Blacker)
306 “English Earthenware” (A. H. Church)
307 “Chelsea Porcelain” (King). Keeently published with magnificent
illustrations (now out of print)
308 “Old Chinese Porcelain and Works of Art in China” (by A. W. Bahr;
309 Large Sang-de-Boeuf Oriental Porcelain Vase


fiOT
.‘5lO Fine Oriental Mottled Vase
•‘5ll “Chats on Old Silver” (by E. L. Lowes); well illustrated
312 “The A.B.C. of Collecting Old English China” (J. F. Blacker) ; finely
illustrated
313 “Handbook of Marks and Monograms of Pottery and Porcelain (by
William Chaffers)
314 “The Earthenware Collector” (G. Woolliscroft llhcad); finely illustrated
31') “A Textbook of Precious Stones” (Prank B. Wade)
31(5 “Illustrated Catalogue of Porcelain in the Schreiber Collection at the
Victorian and Albert Museum, London,” with beautiful plates illus-
trating hundreds of pieces (1915 edition)
BIT “Illustrated Catalogue of Porcelain in the Schreiber Collection at the
Victorian and Albert Museum, London” with beautiful plates illus-
trating hundreds of pieces (1915 edition)
318 “Old Pewter” (Malcolm Bell); finely illustrated
319 “Marks on Pottery and Porcelain” (Burton & Hobson)
320 Large Corner Cabinet, on legs; 6ft. Klin, high by 3ft. wide, removeable
shelves
321 Genuine Old Waterford Cut-glass Decanter (a/f.)
322 Six Coloured Genuine Old Wine Glasses
323 Fine Old Glass Goblet, engraved with game-cocks fighting. (A rare
collector's piece)
324 English Glass Water Jug, beautifully engraved; 104 in. high
325 Three Genuine Old Tokay Glasses
326 Five Old Champagne Glasses, with hollow stems
327 Two Brandy Glasses (wide lipped), with coloured spiral in stems
328 Pair of Cut-glass Spirit Bottles, choice design
329 Magnificent Service of Cut English Table Glassware, consisting of six
liqueurs, six sherries, six clarets, four ports, six champagnes, three
small tumblers, six large tumblers, six finger bowls, two large wine
decanters, and one small wine decanter (forty-six pieces)




