

THE
Germ Theory of Disease,
WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO
THE DANGERS TO BE GUARDED AGAINST IN
OASES OE CONSUMPTION.
By
ALFRED J. TAYLOR, F.L.S.
A Lecture Delivered to the Amateur Nursing Band of the Y.W.C.A.
[. Reprinted from the Tasmanian News, August 9th, 1893.']




The Germ Theory of Disease.
Me. Alfbejd J. Taylob, F.L.S., delivered
a lecture to the members of the Nursing
Band of the Young Women’s Christian
Association last evening, on “ The Germ
Theory of Disease, with Special Refer-
ence to the Dangers to be Guarded
Against in Cases of Consumption.”
The following is a full report of the
valuable information given :
The subject I have undertaken to lec-
ture upon this evening is a somewhat
difficult one, but I will endeavor to make
it as simple as possible, and keep it as free
as I can from the dry technical phrases
that render so many lectures uninstructive
to the masses. The more scientific parts
of my subject I hope to make clear by the
aid of specially prepared slides that will
give you some idea at least of the
character of the little forms of life I am to
tell you about, and the conditions under
which they may exist in, and do harm to,
the human body.
The germs I am about to describe are
low form? of vegetable life, and you
mostly hear them spoken of as bacilli or
bacteria. Sometimes you hear these germs
spoken of as microbes. It was long a matter
of dispute whether they belonged to the
vegetable or animal kingdom. Those who
regarded them as forms of animal
life termed them microzoaria —a word
signifying small animals. Those who
regarded them as forms of plant life
called them microphyta, i.e., small plants.
At the Paris Academy of Sciences, March,
1878, Sedillot, in a discussion between the
two parties, suggested the word microbe,
which only signifies a small living being,
and decides nothing as to whether it
belongs to the animal or vegetable king-
dom. This word has been adopted by
Pasteur and other authorities, and has
been in common use in France for several
years. It has not been fully used by
English or German authorities, the word
bacteria being used by the latter to indicate
the organisms supposed to produce disease;
but I wish you to remember that the word
bacteria refers only to one species of the
group of low forms of life covered by the
word microbes. I wish you to remember
this because all microbes are not prejudicial
to the welfare of humanity. On the con-
trary, it is by the action of many of them
that the processes of Nature are worked
out in benevolent directions. Thus,
for example, they clear the surface of
the earth from decomposing matter
and all other substances that may be
regarded as the refuse of life. We now
know from the conditions under which
these minute organic forms exist that
decomposition is not a consequence of
death, but a result of microscopic life
fulfilling its natural function. Their pre-
sence is necessary in such simple matters
as causing bread to rise in the process of
baking. They produce marvellous chemi-
cal changes in the economy of nature
essential to healthy human life. Various
species of them are to be found in the
healthy human body—in the mouth, the
alimentary canal, and other parts. Thus bac-
teriologists distinguish between pathogenic
bacteria —or those that produee disease—
and those that may be present without
doing any harm. In a word, they are the
invisible agents of life, as well as the in-
visible agents of the change we name
death.
This evening I wish particularly to direct
your attention to the speoies injurious to
human life. Let me endeavor first of all
to make clear to you something of the nature
of bacteria. The words bacterium and bacillus
mean very much the same thing—a little
staff or rod—and refer to the rod-like form
which the low forms of life included in the
words usually assume. There are also*
spherical or ovoidal forms of bacteria known
as cocci or micro-cocci —words literally
meaning grains or seeds —and a corkscrew
or spiral form known as spirilla (from spira,
a coil).
They are all very minute and can only
be rendered visible to the naked eye by
the aid of a powerful microscope. Under
this instrument they appear as little drops


of albuminous matter known as ’protoplasm,
—claimed by Professor Huxley to be
the “ physical basis of life,” —because the
whole vegetable and animal world is built
up of this material. Man himself starts his
individual career as one of these single cells
of protoplasm; and the complexity of his
nature is due to the multiplicity of
such cells necessary to the completion of
his structure and the many functions
he has to fulfil. In the building up of
that structure many of the cells have
become so modified as to fit them for the
discharge of definite physiological func-
tions ; but they have all descended from a
single parent cell or ovum.
New, while in some instances this won-
derful development has resulted from a
single parent cell, there is one great group
of cell life, each individual member of
which has continued to exist in a primitive
state of structural simplicity. These little
plants—for it has now been very clearly
demonstrated that the cells I am describ-
ing belong to the vegetable kingdom—are
the bacteria or bacilli, some of which I wish
to introduce you to this evening. As illus-
trating the persistence of their character
it may be mentioned that a specimen of
bacteria taken from the tartar on the tooth
of an Egyptian mummy proved to be
absolutely identical with the variety known
to occur on our teeth to-day, although
calculating in a direct line of descent, up-
wards of twenty-six millions of bacterial
generations have come and gone within
that interval. I have said they are small.
Their size may be said to be somewhere
about the twelve thousandth part of an
inch in diameter for the rod-shaped bac-
teria, and half that size for the round
cells ( micro-cocci ). About 25,000 of the
round cells placed in a row, or of the
longer ones side by side, would make up a
chain or band one inch in length. More
than a thousand might be placed in a row
across the head of an ordinary pin. It
may be said of them that they swarm
everywhere. They are to be found in the
air we breathe, below the earth and on its
"surface, and on the face of the waters. We
swallow myriads of them with the uncooked
food we consume, and it has been calcu-
lated that we inhale about one hundred :
millions every year. :
But there is one place in which the
bacteria I particularly wish to draw your <
attention to / are never to be found, and :
that is in the blood of a healthy person. '
The strength of the germ theory of disease <
lies in this fact: —that all morbid processes s
which threaten the life of man or interfere
with his natural health appear to be asso-
ciated with a particular species of bacteria—
; a characteristic bacterium. When a drop of
blood or portion of the tissue of an animal
that has died of disease is examined under
the microscope it is found to contain some
particular kind of microbe. The particular
kind of microbe discovered, if introduced
into the blood of a healthy animal, is
found to produce the same kind of
disease as that which killed the animal
from which it may have been taken.
The presence of a given microbe is therefore
believed to have a direct connection with
the disease with which it may be found
associated. Dust, air, water, common
articles of food may contain numerous
bacteria ; but observation goes to show
that no amount of these would set up any
of the infectious diseases like cholera or
typhoid fever, tetanus, or diphtheria unless
there be among them the particular microbe
of cholera or typhoid fever, etc. To quote
the words of Professor Tyndall, “As
surely as a thistle rises from a thistle seed,
as surely as the fig comes from the fig, the
grape from the grape, the thorn from the
thorn, so surely does the typhoid virus in-
crease and multiply into typhoid fever, the
scarlatina virus into scarlatina, the small-
pox virus into small-pox. . . The thing
which we vaguely call a virus is a
seed. . . The germ theory alone
accounts for the phenomena.”
The question is still being discussed
among scientists whether disease is due to
the presence merely of the microbe or to
some poisonous principle which the microbe
secretes, etc., etc.; and while the gradual
progress of discovery seems to justify the
conviction that each disease has its par-
ticular and characteristic bacillus there can
be no doubt that we have yet much to learn
regarding the physiological connection be-
tween the presence of the baciUi and the
conditions of disease under which they are
alone found to be present in the human
body. But there is one aspect of this
question of such a very practical character
that it may be given effect to in our every-
day life—especially by those whose duty it
is to nurse the sick and who have any re-
gard to the importance of preventing the
spread of disease.
Before dealing, however, with this side
of the question I would like to give you
some idea of the wonderful rapidity with
which bacteria multiply, and their method
of propagation; for it is right that you
should know as much as possible of the


nature of the death-dealing but invisible
enemies with whom we have continually
to fight the battle of life and death. “ All
bacteria ,” Klein tells ns, “ multiply by
division —the typical multiplication con-
sisting in the enlargement of an individual
and in subsequent splitting in two by
fission, at the conclusion of which process
two new individuals are the result —each
of them capable of enlarging and again
dividing in the same way into two, and
so on.” There are variations from this
mode of multiplication. Occasionally after
rapid division several remain connected,
thereby forming a short chain —but the
typical method described will be sufficient
to give you some idea of what I am wish-
ful to convey in this lecture (which I am
anxious to make as simple as possible).
This typical method applies alike to the
cocci, bacilli and also to the spirilla.
One very important fact, however, I
must not omit to mention under this head,
and that is, the formation of spores or
seeds in bacteria. (Some of the bacteria are
non-spore bearing.) From experiments
made we know that the atmosphere con-
tains very few fully developed bacteria, but
it contains the spores I am now speaking
about. From their extreme lightness they
are readily disseminated by the wind.
They form the point of departure for
epidemic diseases ; and it is to them that
we refer when we properly use the word
“germs.” Well, at a certain stage of bacterial
life the spore forms as a minute glistening
granule in the protoplasm, generally oval
when fully matured, spherical when im-
mature. This increases in size while the
rest of the bacillus in which it has had its
birth gradually disappears, leaving the
spore iree. Under favorable conditions
these spores develop into bacilli. The
spores possess wonderful vitality, resisting
chemical re-agents, extremes of tempera-
ture, and remaining dormant at times for
periods extending over months and years,
until favorable conditions present for their
future development into bacilli. The
bacilli may be destroyed if kept at the
temperature of boiling water for a few
seconds; but the spores may be kept at
the same temperature for at least ten
minutes, may be frozen in ice, and sub-
jected to a 10 per cent, solution of
carbolic acid, without destroying their
power to germinate into bacilli. Should
spores find a favorable nourishing medium
(and they remain dormant until they do
so) after a few hours each spore germi-
nates into a bacillus. In this process a
i pale projection appears from one part of it,
■ and increases in length until it becomes as
. long as a bacillus, the investment gradually-
disappearing. The new bacillus enlarges,
• divides into two, and so multiplies as
. previously described.
The rate at which bacteria multiply de-
i pends upon conditions—such as the tem-
. perature and nature of the soil in which
. they grow. Some multiply quickest at a
. high, others at a low, temperature. It has
; been shown by direct observation that at a
- temperature of 20degs C., bacteria divide at
intervals of from 18 to 30 minutes. In
one instance some of the round form
(cocci) were placed in a suitable medium-
eight of them only being present in each
space represented by less than half a
cubic inch (a cubic centimetre). The test
i tube Klein tells us, was then kept at
37degs C. In the first twenty-four hours
' the cocci had multiplied to 640,000 per cubic
space mentioned; in the second twenty-
■ four hours to 248,000,000 ditto; and in the
i third twenty-four hours to 1,184,000,000
i per cubic space mentioned.
The following illustration given by Dr.
i Parke, who accompanied Stanley in his
Emin Pasha expedition, may bring this
■ point more clearly home to you:—“Accord-
, ing to an eminent biologist/' he says, “a
• single one must, if the proper conditions
; be maintained, in less than five days
l generate a mass that would fill the space
occupied by all the oceans on the
; earth’s surface supposing these to
l have an average depth of one mile. (“Ex-
■ periences in Equatorial Africa,” p. 168.)
i Cohn has calculated that a single organism
i could produce, by simply dividing as I have
i already described to you, two of its kind in
! one hour; in the second hour these would
ibe multiplied to four, and in three days
• they would, if their surroundings were
■ ideally favorable, form a mass weighing no
• less than 7500 tons. Fortunately for us
, our little enemies can seldom find sufficient
• food to enable them to develop to this ex-
i tent, and other unfavorable conditions also
) interfere with their multiplication beyond
r certain limits : but the fact remains that
; we are surrounded by unseen foes, dormant
l and quiescent at times it may be, but at
• other times virulently active, which, if
c once they take possession of the body, are
: capable of producing such changes in the
L vital fluids as to “ transform them from the
i harmless necessary material which bathes
> all our tissues and supplies them with
- nourishment and life into active poisons,
b such as are utterly incompatible with


health, and if absorbed in any quan-
tity are certain, sooner or later, to cause
death/’
Much more that is interesting could be
said regarding the life-history of these
microscopic organisms, but let us now see
how we can turn to practical account the
knowledge we have gained of their exist-
ence. Wherever we go the atmosphere is
always thick with dust —the kind of dust
that is revealed whenever a beam of light
passes through it. Even the snow that falls
will be found to leave a sediment of this
dust after melting and evaporation.
Now we can never avoid being brought
into contact with this dust; and in it may
be found floating the germs I have been
describing, and from which so much
danger arises to humanity. From the
presence of these germs originate the dis-
orders and diseases that so frequently
result in death : and just as from a single
seedling a whole forest may spring, so may
one case of disease brought about by their
agency shake abroad fresh germs to find
food and produce disease in the bodies of a
whole population. Nor do the germs that
give rise to disease die with the bodies
they destroy. This has been sufficiently
demonstrated in the fact that the
re-opening of plague - burial - pits has
led to an outbreak of disease;
and examination of the soil above
the buried bodies of persons dying from
yellow fever and other disorders has re-
vealed the presence of germs of the
diseases from which the individuals have
died. Thus superfluous soil taken from
graveyards and distributed for garden
purposes, resulted in the decimation of the
town of Minchinhampton in the year 1843.
lasteur has shown that the germs of
disease from deeply-buried bodies are
being constantly brought to the surface by
worms in their castings; and Darwin has
shown the amount of work that these little
creatures can do in the way of producing
surface soil. Pasteur detected in the
intestines of worms on the surface
of the ground the specific germs of “splenic
fever ” of which an animal had died, and
the body of which had been buried 7ft
deep t vo years before. Mr Spencer Wells
relates a case in which some persons who
had died from scarlet fever were interred,
and, on the old graves being dug over 30
years afterwards, scarlet fever broke out
forthwith.
From these illustrations you may gather
how the germs are brought into inti-
mate association with the air we breathe,
and how they spring from centres where
people are least likely to look for
them. Epidemics of disease may be com-
pared to the bursting out of conflagrations
from matter that has long been smoulder-
ing, the smouldering elements in such
cases being represented by the germs
which have been waiting for the conditions
favorable for their further development into
bacilli. On examination it is found that the
dust made visible by a beam of light is
organic matter—partly living, partly dead.
If we could protect the tissues of the body
from this living organic matter there is
every reason for the belief that by doing so
we should protect the tissues from disease.
If we could keep it from wounds there
would be no need for the anti-septic treat-
ment that is now necessary, for all forms
of putrefaction are entirely due to organic
life, the germs of which are to be found in
the ocean of air in which we live and move,
and have our being.
It is a common belief that bad or foul
air produces disease, but as a matter of
fact if the special germ of any epidemic
disease be not present a corrupt atmo-
sphere, however disagreeable, will not
produce the disorder. Thus it is well
known that a bad condition of the Thames
and a low death-rate occur from time to
time in London. On the other hand, if the
germs be present, diseases may develop
where the air is otherwise pure and the
drainage all that could be desired.
Has foul air, then, nothing to do with
the propagation of disease ? Most cer-
tainly. Defective drains and cesspools dis-
tribute the germs, and a foul atmosphere
promotes an epidemic. These factors help to
bring about the conditions necessary to en-
able the germs to get a hold upon the body—
for let me press upon your attention a
truth I would not have you readily forget,
that anything that tends to lower the
vital activity of the tissues helps to induce
the conditions I have referred to. Over-
work mental or bodily insufficient
nourishment, a bad atmosphere, excesses
of all kinds, break down the resisting
power of the body and yield possession to
the insiduous foes that are ever striving to
destroy the mucous membranes that,
in a healthy condition of the body, prevent
their entrance into the circulatory system
by which they are enabled to carry on
their work of disintegration and death.
To turn to the practical aspect of this
question that I have referred to. There is
one way at least in which you may protect
yourselves, and teach others how to protect


themselves, when you or they have to
meet the invisible enemy in the hospital
ward or in the sick chamber. To bring
the lesson home to you I cannot do better
than tell you what has recently come to
our knowledge regarding that terrible
disease, consumption. More than 20 years
ago, as the result of certain experiments I
had been trying on myself and others with
sulphurous acid in chest complaints, I un-
hesitatingly predicted that when the cause
of consumption was discovered it would
prove to be some low form of life belonging
to the vegetable kingdom. Some years
afterwards that prediction was fully
verified, Professor Koch having announced
in the year 1881 that he had discovered the
germ of consumption in the shape of a
minute rod-shaped bacillus, which, if
introduced into healthy animals by
innoculation would re-produce the disease.
More recent observation has shown —and I
wish you particulaily to remember this
fact—(the importance of which you will
realise as I proceed)—that after it has been
permitted to remain under conditions
rendering it dormant for many months on
being introduced into the body the germs
will even then re-produce consumption.
Now, these germs literally swarm in the
matter expectorated from the lungs of con-
sumptive persons—but they are never to
be found in the matter expectorated by
healthy persons. Among those who fol-
lowed up the discovery made by Professor
Koch was Dr George Cornet, and in an
article contributed to the Fortnightly Re-
view a few months back, Professor Tyndall
drew attention to some of the results of Dr.
Cornet’s studies, a knowledge of which
must be of lasting interest to those who
have to nurse cases of comsumption —
of interest and importance because Dr. Cor-
net has given the answer to the following
questions : —“ How is phthisis generated ?
How is it propagated P What is the part
played by air as the vehicle of tubercle
bacilli? How are healthy lungs to be
protected from their ravages ? What
value is to be assigned to the hypothesis of
predisposition and hereditary transmis-
sion ?” Previous investigation had placed
beyond doubt the fact that matter ex-
pectorated by consumptive patients is in-
fectious. Cornet was anxious to find out if
—as some believed —the bacilli of tuber-
culosis could be carried by the breath of
such a patient. The first thing he did was
to examine the dust of a sick room. I
have already told you that the air we
breathe is charged with minute organisms.
We oall this organic matter dust, and we
know that it is always settling upon fur-
niture, upon the floor, and wherever else it
can find a resting place. Bacteria may
be found upon all such places, be-
cause, although so minute they fall in calm
air and sink in water and pus. Cornet
selected for his purpose seven hospitals,
three lunatic asylumns, fifty-three private
houses, and certain lecture rooms, surgical
wards, public buildings, and open streets.
He first gathered dust from places in-
accessable to the expectoration of cough-
ing patients. He took it from the frames
of pictures, railings, and from walls behind
the patients—taking good care that the
instruments he used for the purpose of
collecting the dust were not infected. He
next infected guinea pigs with the dust so
collected, by injection (after being mixed
with a suitable liquid). For every sample
of dust several animals were made use of.
They were allowed to live for from 30 to 50
days. In some instances the animals ex-
perimented upon were found to be swarm-
ing with the rod-shaped bacillus of
consumption. Others were free from it.
Tested by the dust gathered as above,
Cornet was able to show that some hospital
wards were apparently free from the
bacillus, while others were richly endowed
with the organism.
Further examination served to show the
connection that exists between mortality
and dirt; and the value of cleanliness in
the hospital ward and in the sick chamber
has been strikingly illustrated by Cornet’s
experiments. “ How,” he asks, “ does the
tubercle bacillus reach the lungs, and how
is it transported thence into the air ? Is
it the sputum alone that carries the
organism, or do the bacilli mingle with the
breath ?” A little difference of opinion
upon this point still leads many to deal
with consumptives in very different ways.
Thus one lot will do everything to avoid
taking the breath, the other will
cover up the spittoon so that the bacilli
may not escape by evaporation. The evi-
dence, however, that the sputum alone is
the source of infection may now be re-
garded as conclusive; and Cornet has
drawn our attention to the fact that in the
conflict of opinion above referred to, both
sides usually omit to settle the all-impor-
tant question whether the patient deposits
all his sputum in the receptacle provided
for him, and whether, as a matter of fact,
he does not frequently dispose of it in such
a way that it may become dry, afterwards
reduced to a powder, and so rendered


capable of being inhaled. He gives us
the comforting assurance that it has
now been proved beyond all doubt that
bacteria contained in a liquid or strewn
upon a wet surface cannot escape or
be carried away by currents of air,
but he shows us also how the
germs may be allowed to escape. He
earnestly directs attention to the dangerous
practice many patients have of spitting
upon the floor. Here the sputum dries,
and is rubbed into dust by many feet.
When the broom is used the dust flies up,
and may be inhaled by any persons pre-
sent. Not less dangerous, he points out, is
the custom of well-to-do people who spit
into their handkerchiefs. Here, again, the
sputum dries, is rubbed into dust, and the
bacilli set free whenever the handkerchief
is used—to the danger alike of the patients
and those who may be present with them.
That such dust so inhaled may re-produce
consumption has been shown in manifold
instances, and the following are cases in
point taken from the article by Professor
Tyndall that I have already referred to.
“ A woman who had for two years
suffered from phthisical cough, and who
had been in the habit of spitting first
upon the ground and afterwards into a
glass or a pocket-handkerchief, was visited
by Cornet. During her lifetime he proved
the dust of her room to be infectious. Six
weeks after her death he again visited the
dwelling. Rubbing the dust from the wall
on which he had previously found his in-
fectious matter, and which had not been
cleansed after the woman’s death, he in-
noculated with it three of his guinea pigs.
Examined 40 days after the innoculation
two of the three were found tuber-
culous Cornet visited a
patient who for three-quarters of a year
had suffered from tuberculosis of the lung
and larynx. The dust of the room occu-
pied by this man was proved to contain
virulent infective matter. A brother of the
patient who, at the time of the examination
of the dwelling, was alleged to be in perfect
health exhibited phthisis of the larynx ■
four months afterwards. . . . Cornet :
visited a man who for two years had suf-
fered from phthisis. He lived in the same :
room with two brothers who were very ]
robust, one of whom, however had begun ;
to cough, though without any further ;
evidence of serious disorder. The patient i
had been at home for eight days, while i
previously he had acted as foreman in a '
tailoring establishment. It was proved to i
a certainty that this patient had taken the i
i place of a colleague who had died from
i phthisis of the throat, and who had been
' in the habit of expectorating copiously
. upon the floor. In the workroom, more-
■ over, the present sufferer had occu-
pied a place next to the man who
died. . . . With dust rubbed from the
wall near the spot where the
patient worked Cornet infected guinea-pigs
and produced tuberculosis. . . . Cornet
describes some cases which irresistibly
suggest family infection; ... he visited
a patient, the father of a family, who six
years previously had lost by consumption
a little girl of 14 years old. A year and
a-half afterwards a daughter of the same
man, 21 years old, fell a victim to the
disease. One or two years later a robust
son succumbed, while a fortnight before
Cornet’s visit a child a year and a-half old
had been carried away. . . . For many
years the father had suffered from a
phthisical cough and directly or indirectly
he, in all probability, infected his chil-
dren ”
Tyndal relates a case that came directly
under his own observation : —“ On visiting
the Nessel three years ago, he says, I was
requested to look into a hut occupied by a
man suffering from a racking cough,
accompanied by copious expectoration. I
did so. It was easy to see that the poor
fellow was the victim of advanced lung
disease. In the same hut lived his
daughter, who, when I first saw her, pre-
sented the appearance of blooming health
and vigor. Acquainted as I was with Koch’s
discoveries, I remarked to a friend who
accompanied me that the girl lived in the
midst of peril. We had here the precise
conditions notified by Cornet:—Spitting
on the floor, drying of the sputum, and the
subsequent treading of the infectious
matter into dust. Whenever the hut was
swept this dust mingled freely with the
air, and was, of course, inhaled. I warned
the girl against the danger to which she
was exposed. But it is sometimes difficult
to make even cultivated people comprehend
the magnitude of this danger, or take the
necessary precautions. A year afterwards I
visited the same hut. The father was stand-
ing in the midst of the room—a well-built
man, nearly 6ft high, and as straight as an
arrow. He was wheezing heavily, being
at intervals bowed down by the violence
of his cough. On a stool in the same room
sat his daughter, who, a year previously,
had presented such a picture ot Alpine
strength and beauty. Her appearance
shocked me. The light had gone out of


her eyes, while the palor of her face, and
her panting breath showed only too plainly
that she also had been grasped by the
destroyer. . . . Last summer I learned
that both father and daughter were dead,
the daughter having been the first to
succumb.”
I have already pointed out to you that
Cornet’s researches go to show that the
bacilli may be trapped by moist surfaces.
The establishment of this fact has an im-
portant bearing upon the question whether
the bacilli may be carried by the breath of a
consumptive person. Cornet induced
patients to breathe against plates of glass
coated with glycerine; also to breathe
into water; the vapour of the lungs has
been condensed by ice; but no bacilli has in
any of these cases been detected. Now,
the lungs, air passages, and mouth all
present wet surfaces, and it has been
proved that air passing over sputum
swarming with bacilli has been kept free
from these organisms.
We know then the direction from which
danger of infection may be feared in cases
of consumption; and armed with that
knowledge, we knew the precautions that
must be taken to prevent infection. There
is a very popular idea that many patients
suffering from consumption have inherited
the disease from some of their ancestors.
The idea that the malady may arise in-
dependently of infection from without has
been fruitful of much mischief. The in-
stances I have quoted are sufficient to show
this. In the light of larger knowledge we
are required to realise that what such
sufferers have inherited has been a
weakened condition of constitution, render-
ing it peculiarly susceptible to the disease;
but that the specific germ must be present
to develop the malady. Wherever a
wounded or decaying tissue presents itself
the bacillus will find food for its nourish-
ment and mutiplication. Such conditions
of lesion may be produced by pre-
vious attacks of such complaints
as measles, whooping cough, fever, etc.
Should the germs inhaled be few in
number some months may elapse before
the disease is made manifest, and some
constitutions may battle longer with the
destroying influence than others, but un-
less that destroying influence can be
eliminated altogether the struggle must
inevitably end in death. That the danger
from expectorated phlegm is very great
may be guaged by the fact stated by
Tyndal that Cornet found that in 15 out of
21 sick rooms in the dwellings of private
patients the dust from the walls and from the
bed furniture contained virulent tubercle
bacilli. In each of such cases Cornet was
able to show that “ in no ward or room
where the organism was found did the
patients confine themselves to expector-
ation into spittoons, but were in the habit
of spitting either upon the Moor or into
pocket-handkerchiefs. In no single case
on the other hand, where spitting on the
floor or into pocket-handkerchiefs was
strictly prohibited, did he find himself able
to produce tuberculosis from the collected
dust.”
I want you to realise the important
bearing of these facts upon the welfare —
not only of those who visit the sick, but
upon the welfare of those whose duty it is
to nurse the sick.
Tyndall tells us that Cornet’s enquiry,
relating to the mortality of the nursing
orders, which was made under very rigid
conditions and extended over a quarter of
a century demonstrated the fact that
scarcely any other occupation, however
injurious to health, shows a mortality
equal to that found in the 38 hospitals he
gave his attention to. In these hospitals
deaths from typhus and other infectious
disorders exhibited a frequency far be-
yond the normal, but the enormous total
augmentation is mainly ascribed to
the frequency of death from tuberculosis
Cornet’s figures show that nurses in such
hospitals are sacrificed for the most part in
the blossom of life. The younger nurses
engaged in sweeping and dusting fill the
air they breathe with virulent bacilli that
have dried upon the floors and settled upon
the walls of the wards—and ] are stricken
down by the invisible enemy. I do not
quote these facts to frighten you, but to
impress upon you the truth that such pre-
mature deaths and unnecessary sacrifices
as those recorded might have been avoided
—and that such sacrifices may be prevented
by precautions based upon the knowledge
we now possess.
Professor Tyndall sums up Cornet’s
conclusions as follows : —“lt is universally
recognised that tuberculosis is caused by
tubercle bacilli, which reach the lungs
through the inhalation of air in which
bacilli are diffused. They come almost ex-
clusively from the dried sputum of con-
sumptive persons. The moist sputum, as
also the expired breath of the consumptive
patient is, for this mode of infection, with-
out danger. If we can prevent the drying
of expectorated matter, we prevent in the
same degree the possibility of infection.


It ‘is not, however, sufficient to place
a spittoon at the disposal of the patient.
The strictest surveillance must be exercised
by both physicians and attendants, to en-
force the proper use of the spittoon
(covered spittoons are recommended be-
cause flies have been known to carry infection
from open vessels), and to prevent the
reckless disposal of the infective phlegm.
Spitting on the floor or into pocket hand-
kerchiefs is the main source of peril. To
this must be added the soiling of the bed-
clothes and the wiping of the patient’s
mouth. The handkerchiefs used for this
purpose must be handled with care and
boiled without delay. Various other
sources of danger, kissing among them,
will occur te the physician. A phthisical
mother, by kissing her healthy child, may
seal its doom. Notices impressing on the
patients the danger of not attending to the
precautions laid down in the hospital
ought to be posted up in every sick-room,
while all wilful infringements of the rules
ought to be sternly punished. Thus may
the terrible mortality of hospital nurses be
diminished, if not abolished; the wards
where they are occupied being rendered as
salubrious as those surgical wards in which
no bacilli could be found.”
When I tell you that Koch’s last enquiry
reveals the startling fact that one-seventh
of the deaths of the human race are due to
Printed at the “ Tasmanian News ” Office, Hobart.
tubercular disease you will understand
why, in my lecture, I have given so much
attention to this particular disease. I ask
now that you will take to heart the lesson
I have been endeavoring to convey.
One word in conclusion, and let that be a
word of encouragement. You who are work-
ing members of the Nursing Band, are per-
forming the noblest work that can possibly
be performed in this world of toil and
suffering. For the relief of those who are
stricken down with sickness and disease
you have banded yourselves together in a
noble sisterhood. If in the course of m y
lecture this evening I have said anything
that will render your services more helpful
to suffering humanity and that will mal
you better able to protect yourselves in ti
discharge of your self-sacrificing dut
then I shall rejoice to know that I ha\<
not spoken in vain. May the Father oi
Love and Life bless and prosper the work
you have taken in hand!
There was a good attendance of mem-
bers and visitors. The lecture was capitally
illustrated with slides lent by Dr. Park
with the aid of an oxy-hydrogen lantern
manipulated by Mr Nat Oldham, and at
its conclusion a hearty vote ot thanks was
accorded to Mr Taylor and the gentlemen
named for the valuable information con-
veyed to the nursing band of the Society.




