

The
Bermuda Conference
On Refugees
Documents and Essays


The
Bermuda Conference
On Refugees
Documents and Essays
Issued by the World Jewish Congress (Australian Section)


CONTENTS.
PACE
I. INTRODUCTION. 3
11. WHILE THE JEWS DIE, 6
by Freda Kirchwey.
111. DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED TO THE BERMUDA
CONFERENCE: 9
(a) Programme for the rescue of Jews from Nazi-
Occupied Europe.
(b) Appendix to the Programme.
(c) Memorandum of the World Jewish Congress.
(d) Memorandum of the Jewish Agency for Palestine.
IV. TEXT OF FINAL COMMUNIQUE OF THE
BERMUDA CONFERENCE. 3!
V. AVOIDANCE OF THE ISSUE, 32
Congress Weekly Editorial.
VI. BERMUDA FAILURE, 34
by Israel Goldstein.
VII. OPEN THE GATES OF PALESTINE. 37
by Pierre van Paassen.
VIII. THE GENTLEMEN AT BERMUDA. 39
“Jewish Frontier” Editorial
IX. STATEMENTS OF LEADING AUSTRALIANS. 41


Introduction
The Anglo-American Conference on Refugees opened
at Hamilton, Bermuda, on April 19, 1943, and deliberated for
ten days. The American Delegation of four, headed by Dr.
Harold Willis Dodds, President of Princeton University, in-
cluded Representative Sol Bloom, Senator Scott Lucas, of
Illinois and R. Borden Reams, of the State Department. The
four British Delegates were all Parliamentary Under-Secre-
taries, with Richard K. Law, as their leader.
Only the opening and the closing of the Conference were
public. Its deliberations were held in complete secrecy. Its
decisions remained confidential with the exception of an indi-
cation that all aspects of the refugee problems, including the
position of “potential refugees,” were thoroughly discussed.
The delegates were able to agree to a number of concrete
recommendations as regards the relief of a substantial number
of refugees of all races and nationalities, according to the
official statement which added that some of the measures
involving military considerations must remain confidential.
An enlarged Inter-Governmental Committee on Refugees
will be one of the results of the Conference. Neutral coun-
tries will be invited to participate in that body. The financing
of the plans drafted in Bermuda is a question still under
consideration.
The following statement was published by the American
Associated Press:
New York, April 30th (A.A.P.)
The Anglo-American Refugee Conference at Hamil-
ton, Bermuda, ended yesterday with an announcement that
an agreement had been signed making joint recommenda-
tions assigned to relieve a substantial number of refugees
of all races and nationalities.
The Associated Press states that a confidential report
is understood to include:
Firstly, the impossibility of large-scale evacuation
of Jew's and other oppressed persons from occupied
Europe because of the transportation problem and the dif-
ficulty of negotiating with the enemy.


Secondly, a recommendation temporarily to relocate
in Africa 80,000 refugees now in neutral countries until
peace permits their return to their homelands.
Thirdly, provisions for feeding and caring for refugees
in neutral countries through an Inter-Governmental Com-
mittee including Spain and Portugal.
(“Sydney Morning Herald," May Ist, 1943.)
The attention of all civilized nations, especially of all
Jews of the world, was focussed upon the deliberations and the
decisions of the Bermuda Conference. The curtain rose, the
curtain fell. The result was the above laconic statement pub-
lished by the Associated Press. “The mountain has brought
forth a mouse.”
Even now, 2\ months after the Conference, nothing has
transpired to the effect that efficient measures have been
taken to check the frightful slaughter of Jewish men, women
and children which is continuing in the charnel-houses of
Poland, with the accuracy of a scientific experiment, at the
rate of 6,000 persons per day—unfortunate human beings
who are guilty of one crime only: that of being Jews.
It is therefore of utmost importance to emphasize that
the Bermuda Conference was amply informed of all the
angles of the Jewish problem. It is necessary to prove that
practical measures for the rescue of Jews from Nazi-occupied
Europe were duly laid before the Conference.
The Memoranda and material submitted to the Bermuda
Conference by the Jewish organisations were received in
Sydney only at the end of June. The World Jewish Congress
(Australian Section) resolved immediately to publish same, in
conjunction with some essays written before and after the
Bermuda Conference and with statements made by some Aus-
tralian leading citizens in connection with the results of the
Conference.
The Bermuda Conference was a failure much more de-
pressing and discouraging than that of the Evian Conference
of 1938. It revealed in all its horror the incredible state of
selfishness, indifference and callousness in which mankind is


being plunged after nearly four years of present World War.
There is, however, one consideration. We have had a long
and pathetic history of four thousand years, a history of pro-
found suffering, but also of highest acts of idealism and
heroism. This history has taught us, never to lose faith
and courage, even in the most crucial hour. We know that
Governments come and go. We know that the Bermuda Con-
ference will not be the last word in the tragic problem of
European Jewry. But we are also fully aware of the fact
that had there been a genuine will to rescue as many as pos-
sible of the remnants of Jewry in Europe, hundreds of thou-
sands who are now doomed to perish would remain alive.
We face the present Jewish tragedy, the certain disaster
for thousands of our kinsfolk in Europe, in profound grief and
mourning, but without despair. We believe that the fate of
the Jews still surviving in Europe is a matter not for Jews
only, but for Christians too, and in fact, for the whole civil-
ized world. And we are strengthened in this belief by the
words of encouragement and of understanding coming from
prominent men and women outside the Jewish people, from
Church leaders, statesmen, leaders of the working class, scien-
tists, writers, journalists, artists, community and social workers,
etc.
We have no right to let our hands fall down. We must
continue to appeal, to demand, to claim, to shout until our
voice is heard. This is our only weapon. We must not relax
our efforts until those who are proclaiming to the world in-
spiring and lofty ideals embodied in great and eternal Char -
ters, will have resolved to transmit their words into deeds.
Sydney, July, 1943.


While the Jews Die
FREDA KIRCHWEY
Jews in Europe are being killed because they are Jews.
Other innocent people are being killed too—hostages, men
and women who resist oppression, old people who consume
food needed by German soldiers and workers. But only
Jews are being killed without other excuse or cause than the
fact that they belong to a single religious-racial group. Hitler
has promised their total liquidation, and he is carrying out
that promise as fast as his Mobile Extermination Squads can
work. They work fast. Seven or eight thousand Jews a
week are being massacred. The ghetto of Warsaw, two years
ago the dumping ground for Jews from all over occupied
Europe, is now depopulated. Every Jew is dead. In Cracow,
where 60,000 Jews lived, 56,000 have been killed.
The ways in which these slaughters are conducted have
been reported. The numbers have been verified. The story
is old. But the killing goes on. And as Hitler’s armies are
forced step by step back into Europe, the tempo of extermin-
ation quickens. He must hurry now lest the liberating
armies arrive in time to rescue some fragment of the doomed
race. It is not fantastic to believe that even when Hitler is
overthrown, he will find profound compensation in leaving
behind him a Europe “cleansed” of the hated Jew.
If this happens, no one living today will escape retribu-
tion for the crime. For the purge of the Jews is only posi-
tively a Nazi crime. In this country, you and I and the Pre-
sident and the Congress and the State Department are acces-
sories to the crime and share Hitler’s guilt. If we had be-
haved like humane and generous people instead of compla-
cent, cowardly ones, the two million Jews lying today in the
earth of Poland and Hitler’s other crowded graveyards would
be alive and safe. And other millions yet to die would have
found sanctuary. We had it in our power to rescue this
doomed people and we did not lift a hand to do it—or -per-
haps it would be fairer to say that we lifted just one cautious
hand, encased in a tight-fitting glove of quotas and visas and
affidavits, and a thick layer of prejudice.
Today we hear something is going to be done. Secretary
Hull has suggested a meeting at Ottawa of the executive com-
mittee of the Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees
appointed at the Evian Conference in 1938.


By all means let’s have the conference. But let’s remem-
ber that it wasn’t called because our government felt im-
pelled to do something about the greatest crime committed
in our generation. Not a move of any sort was made until
a delegation of prominent Jews called on Secretary Hull and
the President of the United States on December 8 and pre-
sented them with verified accounts of the massacres in
Poland which were simultaneously released to the press. The
President and Mr. Hull promised action. But nothing hap-
pened until more than a month later, when Lord Halifax
presented an aide-memoire to Secretary Hull expressing the
“concern” of the British government over the killings. And
then it took another month for Secretary Hull to reply. Hun-
dreds of thousands of Jews fell into their self-dug graves while
our government, with glacial slowness, moved toward a pro-
posal to confer and to explore. And in view of this record
of delay it is fair to wonder whether even this modest step
would have been taken if a great mass-meeting of protest
had not been called for March 1 in Madison Square Garden
in New York—a meeting organized by the American Jewish
Congress and sponsored by a group of important labour and
liberal organizations.
Whatever the sequence of events, we must be glad that
some voices were loud enough to penetrate the official armour.
But let us not bank too much on the new “Evian” conference.
The first one was held in 1938 while ij was still possible to
save the Jews of Europe. But Hitler is still busy with the
job of exterminating 5,000,000 of them. Let us be hopeful
—but not sanguine.
And let us also acknowledge the uncomfortable fact
that if a group of American Jews had no£ demanded action,
nothing, not even a conference, would have resulted from
the horrors in Europe. Let us acknowledge that in shame.
And let us ask ourselves what has come over the minds of
ordinary men and women that makes it seem normal and
indeed inevitable that this country should stolidly stand by
and do nothing in the face of one of the world’s greatest
tragedies until the Jews themselves press for action.
But what on earth could we have done more than we
did do? . .
One answer is that we could have cut down those barbed-
wire defenses strung along our shores. We could have sus


pended the immigration quotas for the duration of Hitler.
We could have raised funds to support refugees who couldn’t
bring out any money. We could have chartered ships to
bring them from Europe. We could have offered an example
of decency and humanity to a world hungry for evidences of
good feeling.
We could have done all this. We could have made
the resolutions of the Evian conference a reality instead of a
hollow gesture. We could have entered into an agreement for
common action with the other anti-Axis nations—an agree-
ment to absorb all the victims of Hitlerism who were physi-
cally able to escape—each nation taking a quota decided upon
with due regard to its size and wealth and capacity to absorb
immigrants. If the United States had taken the lead in such
a move, I am certain that no nation would have refused its
co-operation. And under such a scheme, the burden on each
would have been insignificant.
But nothing was done. Every nation established its own
restrictions, the United States admitting no more immigrants
than in the days before the persecutions began. And so we
come to the horrifying present . . .
One thing is certain. If the representatives of the Anti-
Axis powers meet in a mood of impatience, prepared to deal
on a minimum basis with a difficult and irritating problem—
if, in short, the mood of the past prevails—nothing will hap-
pen at Ottawa or after. Europe’s remaining Jews will be
saved only if their anguish has become unbearable to men
and women who live in safety at a distance. They will be
saved only if we recognize their fate as inextricably linked
with our own.
(“The Nation,” New York, March I 3th, 1943.)


Documents submitted to the Bermuda
Conference
Programme for the Rescue of Jews
From Nazi Occupied Europe
Submitted April 14, 1943, to the
Bermuda Refugee Conference by the Joint
Emergency Committee for European
Jewish Affairs of
AMERICAN JEWISH CONGRESS
B’NAI B’RITH
JEWISH LABOUR COMMITTEE
AMERICAN EMERGENCY COMMITTEE
FOR ZIONIST AFFAIRS
AMERICAN JEWISH COMMITTEE
AGUDATH ISRAEL OF AMERICA
UNION OF ORTHODOX RABBIS OF AMERICA
SYNAGOGUE COUNCIL OF AMERICA
The systematic mass extermination of Jews in Nazi-
occupied territories as a programme of German state action
was revealed as early as September, 1942. The authenticity
of the extermination programme was established by the
directed investigations of consular agents of the United
Nations in neutral lands.
By the end of 1942, it was estimated that more than
two million Jews had been killed. The extermination pro-
gramme of the Nazis was achieved through mass deportations
in caravans, where the victims died of suffocation or starva-
tion; through extermination centres where the victims died of
asphyxiation by gas in gas chambers; by fumes from sulphur
mines; by carbon monoxide from army trucks; through mass
cremation; through mass machine gunning; through planned
starvation.
Four months ago, in response to the appeals of an
aroused humanity, to which the voices of great leaders of


religious thought and statesmen of vision gave their support,
the United Nations issued a denunciation of the Nazi policy
of mass murder, and pledged themselves to take practical
measures. Since that declaration was issued, months have
passed, and its implementation has yet to be achieved.
But the holocaust of murder continues unabated. As
the failure of Total War is driven home to Nazi leadership,
the frustration of their hope of world conquest turns them in
fury to the murder of all Jews who are helpless in their grasp.
In addition to the Jews who already have been done to death,
total extermination threatens all those who remain in Nazi-
occupied Europe.
Our deepest sympathy goes out to all peoples suffering
from the hardships of Total War, and especially to those
peoples of all denominations suffering under the heel of the
Nazi oppressors. But it is our duty to point out that of all the
peoples who have suffered and are suffering under the oppres-
sion of the Nazi aggressors, the Jews are the only people who
have been singled out and marked for total extermination by
Nazi Germany.
The daily accounts of mass murders accumulate in all
their heart-rending details. These accounts have shaken the
Jewish community to its depths.
Those who linger in helpless captivity, awaiting the
dreadful call for departure to ghetto or concentration camp
where death awaits them, are thrown into the depth of un-
utterable despair by the thought that they are regarded as
merely the wastage of a cruel world, that they are unclaimed
and unwanted, that their kinsmen from afar are unable to
aid them, and that there seems to be no shadow of hope for
them anywhere.
The 'threat of retribution after the war and the excoria-
tion of their horrible deeds have not served to turn the Nazi
leaders from their determined policy of mass murder. The
condemnation of the civilized world has not arrested the
mounting tragedy. It is submitted, therefore, that the United
Nations cannot afford to close their eyes to this appalling
situation.
So far as is known, the United Nations have as yef taken
no decisive action to rescue as many of the victims marked
for death as could be saved. Public opinion is far ahead of
Government decision. The moral indignation of great


Americafn communities, of their religious and labor leaders,
was climaxed by an appeal for action by the United Nations
on March 1, 1943, in New York, at a mass demonstration
of mourning and an appeal for action.
At this meeting, a detailed programme of rescue was
submitted and approved and forwarded to the Government
of the United States. What was registered at the meeting
on March Ist was endorsed by similar demonstrations which
followed in other cities. The American press and assemblies
of Christian religious organizations have joined in the demand
upon the Government for action. Elsewhere throughout the
democratic world the public clamors for immediate action.
The Bermuda Conference was in a measure prompted by
all these public manifestations of humanitarian interest. It is
submitted, therefore, that it becomes the duty of the United
Nations to turn to a planned programme of determined action,
looking toward the release of a substantial number of Jews
from Nazi Germany, the creation of Sanctuaries for them in
Allied and neutral countries, and the feeding under appro-
priate guarantees of those who are compelled to remain im-
prisoned within Nazi-occupied countries.
In the belief that it may contribute to such a programme,
the following proposals are respectfully submitted:
I. The United Nations should approach the German
Government, and the governments of the states it now partly
dominates or controls, through the Vatican or neutral gov-
ernments like Switzerland, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Argentine,
with a view to securing their agreement to the release of their
Jewish victims and to the emigration of Jews to such havens
of refuge as may be provided.
11. The United Nations should, without delay, take steps
to designate and establish a number of Sanctuaries in Allied
and neutral countries to accommodate substantial numbers of
Hitlers’ victims and to serve as havens of refuge for those
Jews whose release from captivity may be arranged for, or
who may find their way to freedom through efforts of their
own.
111. The procedure that now prevails in the administra-
tion of the existing immigration law in the United States,
which acts as a deterrent and retardation of legal immigration
under the established quotas, should be revised and adjusted
to war conditions, in order that refugees from Nazi-occupied
territories, within such quotas, may find Sanctuary here.


IV. Subject to provisions for its national security, Eng-
land should be asked to provide for receiving a reasonable
number of victims escaping from Nazi-occupied territories and
to provide for their accommodation for the duration.
V. The possibilities in several British territories, both in
Africa and in the Caribbean, should be explored without
delay. Sanctuary has already been afforded to thousands of
refugees in these territories and there is room for many more,
if not for permanent settlement, at least for the duration.
VI. The United Nations should urge the Republics of
Latin America to modify such administrative regulations that
now make immigration under the law extremely difficult, and
to endeavour to find temporary havens of refuge for a sub-
stantial number of refugees.
VII. Overriding pre-war political considerations, Eng-
land should be persuaded to open the doors of Palestine for
Jewish immigration and the offer of hospitality made by the
Jewish Community of Palestine should be accepted.
VIII. The United Nations should provide financial guar-
antees to all such neutral states as have given temporary refuge
to Jews coming from Nazi-occupied territories and provide for
their feeding and maintenance and eventual evacuation. The
neutral states should be guaranteed that the refugees will not
become a public charge and that they will be transferred to
permanent Sanctuaries as soon as possible.
IX. In order to do away with the lack of identity which
many stateless refugees present, and to give them sponsorship
and protection, an arrangement similar to that which existed
under the League of Nations should be established and the
Stateless refugees should be given identification passports
analogous to the “Nansen” passports.
X. In view of the fact that mass starvation is the design
of the Nazi regime, the United Nations should take appropri-
ate steps without delay to organize a system for the feeding
of the victims of Nazi oppression who are unable to leave the
jurisdiction and the control of the Axis.
XI. It is submitted that the United Nations undertake
to provide the financial guarantees that may be required for
the execution of the programme of rescue here outlined.
XII. The United Nations are urged to establish an appro-
priate inter-governmental agency, to which full authority and


power should be given to implement the programme of rescue
here outlined.
In support of these proposals an aide memoire is ap-
pended.
In the name of humanity and of the ideals which the
Armed Forces of the United Nations have arisen to defend,
we respectfully submit this appeal in the hope that effective
action will be taken without delay.
Appendix to the Programme
For the Rescue of Jews from Nazi Occupied Europe
A.
THE RECORD OF EXTERMINATION.
The total extermination of the Jewish population of
Europe is now proceeding at a rapid pace. Through deporta-
tions to Eastern Europe, forced labour, planned starvation
and outright murder this clear-cut Nazi programme had
already taken at least 2,000,000 Jewish lives by November
1942, it is reported. In the five months that have since
passed, it is believed several hundred thousand Jews have
perished at Axis hands. Today there still remain perhaps
3,500,000 Jews in Axis-occupied Europe. The fate that
awaits them is no secret. In every public address since last
summer Hitler has reiterated his threat to destroy them com-
pletely. That threat is being carried out day by day. The
statistics that are available prove that unless drastic steps
are taken immediately, Hitler and his lieutenants will achieve
their goal.
The Need for Evacuation.
Of the still surviving Jews in Axis Europe, it may be
assumed that some 600,000 are children. Of these, about
380,000, is believed, are less than 1 1 years of age, and the
remainder between 1 1 and 1 5. Some 230,000 of these child-
ren, it is estimated, are now in Polish ghettos; about 130,000
are in occupied Soviet territory; nearly 100,000 are in Axis
Hungary; about 53,000 are in the Balkan Peninsula, and the
rest are scattered throughout occupied Europe. All face im


mlnent death unless immediate, forthright action is taken to
save them. Civilized society’s duty to check the mass exter-
mination of 600,000 children and of several million adults
as well is clear. Their only hope for life lies in evacuation.
Those who can be evacuated in time must be evacuated and
sanctuary must be provided for them. The aged, the infirm
and all others who cannot be removed from Axis Europe
must be fed now before starvation destroys them.
B.
SANCTUARIES.
1. A number of neutral countries have already expressed
their willingness to do their part to save some of these human
beings. Tiny Switzerland has earned the undy »g admiration
of all freedom loving peoples by providing hr.ven for thou-
sands who escaped deportation from France to annihilation
centres in Eastern Europe. Switzerland has done this despite
her precarious position as an oasis of liberty within Axis
Europe and, it is believed, would be ready in addition to
accept thousands of children for temporary asylum. In
Sweden, a committee of prominent Christian leaders has been
established to help save Jews from deportation, starvation
and death. In the words of a prominent Swedish churchman,
spoken in connection with the deportation of Jews from Nor-
way;
Sweden cannot remain silent when such things happen
close to our frontiers. If we keep silent, the very stones will
cry to high heaven.
Effective action on the necessary scale is, however, quite
impossible without the concerted and resolute efforts of the
United States and Great Britain, as the leaders among the
United Nations. They and they alone are powerful enough
to secure the evacuation of Jews from Axis Europe and to
establish and maintain the necessary havens of refuge for the
victims of Axis terror. They and they alone possess the
moral force to stir other countries to action.
2. Great Britain, which has already given aid to thou-
sands of refugees, has found them to be useful in war industry,
in scientific research directly connected with the war, and in
many other branches of the war effort. Its hospitality could
be further extended to its own advantage as well as for human-
itarian reasons. Furthermore, such action on the part of both
Great Britain and the United States would at once have
favourable repercussions elsewhere.


3. A number of countries bave formally and informally
indicated that they are prepared to receive children. Among
these, in addition to the United States and Great Britain, are
Canada, Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Mexico, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Paraguay and Chile. Needless to say,
Jews of Palestine are most anxious to receive as many as pos-
sible. Probably other neutral and friendly countries such as
Australia and Cuba, as well as other Latin American states,
could be prevailed upon to admit Axis victims, and especially
children.
This temporary sanctuary could be assured where gov-
ernments are given adequate guarantees that (a) the children
and others whom they admit will remain for the duration
only, and (b) that the necessary food and financial assistance
will be forthcoming during the war. The leading United
Nations, and primarily the United States and Great Britain,
should be willing in this tragic emergency to furnish these
assurances.
4. In the United States, the present method of admin-
istering the immigration procedure is a serious deterrent to
the admission of many thousands of persons legally admis-
sable to the United States under the quota. It is a matter
of common knowledge that the failure to take prompt action
and the present high percentage of rejections on purely techni-
cal grounds have left many worthy and admissable emigrants
to the rr*ercy of the Nazis. Under the present procedure only
a small fraction of the 153,000 persons admissable to the
United States annually by quota actually enter this country.
For the fiscal year ending June, 1942 only 39,389 persons
were admitted. Although the quotas for Nazi dominated
countries within the total of 153,000 are relatively limited,
the relaxation of the present administrative procedure would
permit the lawful admission of many thousands now facing
death. It would undoubtedly lead to the liberalization of the
immigration procedures of Latin American countries.
5. Palestine is the country closest to Europe which is
eminently suited to serve as a haven of refuge. It has already
proved its ability to absorb large numbers. It assures to
Jewish victims of the Axis the most hospitable reception, and
it is close enough to the scene to reduce transportation pro-
blems to the minimum. For the Jews of the Balkans particu-
larly it is the closest sanctuary. It is possible to provide for
the transit of Jews from Poland and Southwestern Europe, via
Bulgaria and Turkey to Palestine, both by rail and by


Swedish, Turkish or other neutral ships. In Palestine employ-
ment possibilities directly connected with the war effort are
available for those adults who are admitted, and adequate
care is assured for children.
A substantial number of refugees now in Spain and Por-
tugal can be evacuated to Palestine, provided transportation
facilities are made available beyond Lorenco Marques.
6. Additional numbers can readily be moved to North
Africa. Facilities exist there for their reception and for their
employment.
The evacuation of refugees from Spain and Portugal to
North Africa and elsewhere would make room in these coun-
tries for admission of others now trapped in France. It is
estimated that there are now between 14,000 and 15,000
refugees of all nationalities and faiths in Spain.
7. Camp Gibraltar, Jamaica, is another haven with im-
mediate facilities to accommodate several thousand persons,
provided additional food is sent there.
Transportation Facilities.
It is of the utmost urgency that the United Nations explore
every possibility to make available shipping facilities to rescue
hundreds of thousands of human beings from death. In this
connection it would appear that many neutral vessels of
Swedish, Turkish, Spanish, Portugese, and other registries,
might be utilized. In addition, there are thousands of cargo
vessels returning from Europe with empty bottoms. If safe
conduct is provided, these ships, flying neutral flags or the
emblem of the Red Cross, could do the job that must be
done as the only alternative to the mass extermination of the
Jewish people.
c.
STATUS FOR THE STATELESS.
Victims of Axis terror who are stateless or deprived of
documents of identity must be provided with the necessary
protection through the issuance of identifying and travel docu-
ments, similar to those created in 1922 and known as the
Nansen passport. Experience with the Nansen passport for
stateless persons and with the 1935 Convention which gave
similar documents to early victims of Nazi terror, has proved
these are effective.


E>.
FEEDING.
Jews who cannot be removed from Axis Europe face
imminent death from starvation. Under the present German
rationing system they receive only a small fraction of the
food allotted to other subjugated peoples. They are expressly
denied all meat, fish, milk, vegetables and fruit. They are
not permitted to buy any unrationed foods. They are
limited almost entirely to a pound of bread per week and a
few potatoes, it is reported. The present diet of the Jewish
population concentrated in the ghettos of Poland yields only
about 400 calories a day, or about one-sixth of the required
minimum, and about 200 calories a day less than the Starving
population of Greece. As a result of planned starvation, the
1941 death rate in the Warsaw Ghetto was nearly 10 times as
high as in Holland; more than 7 itimes that of the Czechs;
nearly 7 times greater than in Belgium; and more than 4-J
times that of the neighbouring Polish population of Warsaw.
The Jewish death rate in Vienna between June 1 5 and Sep-
tember 15, 1942, was 10 times as high as for a comparable
three months period before the war.
Both the British Government and our State Department
have expressed their willingness to allow limited quantities
of food indigenous to neutral European countries to be sent
to Jews in the Polish ghettos. But if we are to prevent the
complete extermination of the Jewish people, action on a
different and enlarged scale is necessary. The experience in
the case of Greece, to which considerable food supplies were
sent by the United Nations, and where effective supervision
was introduced to keep the Germans from appropriating these
supplies for their own use, is proof that there is an answer
to German organized starvation. Medical supplies, emer-
gency medicinal and concentrated foods could be obtained
for this purpose in the United States and South America and
perhaps elsewhere.
The International Red Cross or the Red Cross Societies
of several neutral countries should be entrusted with the super-
vision of the distribution of such food and supplies, as in the
case of Greece.
E.
JEWS AS PRISONERS OF WAR.
Jews who remain in Europe are de facto prisoners of
war. They are confined in ghettos and penal labour colonies


under the pain of death. They are imprisoned in “Jewish
towns” (Poland), reservations (Terezin, Czechoslovakia and
Rumanian occupied “Transdnistria”) . Within these concen-
trated areas, Jews are prisoners of war to all intents and pur-
poses, and, therefore, should be entitled to the Red Cross aid
which goes to war prisoners.
The jurisdiction of the International Red Cross should,
therefore, be broadened to empower it to render to Jews in
ghettos and similar concentration areas the same services as
are rendered to prisoners of war. The victims should, there-
fore, be permitted to receive food packages sent from belli-
gerent or neutral countries.
F.
MACHINERY FOR PROGRAMME OF RESCUE.
The existing machinery for rescuing the victims of Axis
oppression is wholly inadequate. The tragic circumstances
are so overwhelming, the need so imperative, that it is
believed indispensable to confer large powers upon an inter-
governmental committee. Furthermore, the present Inter-
governmental Committee is not an organization of the United
Nations. It is, therefore, essential that an agency should be
established by the United Nations, vested with full power to
carry out the necessary programme of evacuation and rescue.
G.
FINANCIAL RESCUE PROGRAMME.
The financial obligations necessarily arising in connection
with the evacuation of these victims of Axis persecution must
come from the governments of the leading United Nations.
Private organizations are in no position to meet the full burden
involved, although they are ready to continue to contribute
up to the limit of their resources. Maintenance for those who
are evacuated in countries of temporary asylum whose own
resources are limited must be guaranteed by the leading
United Nations.


World Jewish Congress Memorandum
The following Memorandum to the Bermuda Refugee Conference was sub-
mitted by the World Jewish Congress over the signatures of Dr. Stephen S. Wise,
chairman of its Executive Committee, and Dr. Nahum Goldmann, chairman of its
Administrative Committee .
1. THE DESTRUCTION OF JEWISH LIFE IN EUROPE.
The Nazis have never concealed their determination to
destroy European Jewry. As late as March 14, 1943, Dr.
Goebbels, in an interview given to foreign press representa-
tives, declared:
Germany is firmly convinced that the Jews are an
international disease which must be exterminated in
Europe.
In his broadcast to the German people on February 1 Bth,
when he exhorted them to “total mobilization,” Dr. Goebbels
made this reference to protests of the United Nations:
If hostile foreign countries raise a sanctimonious pro-
test against our anti-Semitic policy and shed hypocritical
crocodile tears over our measures against Jewry, that can-
not prevent us from doing what is necessary. Germany in
any case has no intention of yielding to this Jewish threat,
but intends rather to exercise against Jewry our prompt
and if necessary, our complete and most radical suppres-
sion.
In his New Year’s Message (1943) to the German
People, Hitler made clear his intentions:
. . . And if furthermore I gave assurance that the hope
of international Jewry to destroy the German and other
European nations by means of a new World War will be
the gravest error committed by Jewry for thousands of
years, that it will in any case not destroy the German
nation but will exterminate itself.
Starvation has probably been the most effective method
of destroying the Jews. Many ways are employed to prevent
Jews from eating their daily bread. Restrictions against them
are such that Jews, unlike others, find it almost impossible to
obtain anything except their allotted rations, even when these
are not available. Segregated behind urban ghetto walls they
cannot search the country-side for food. The barbed wire of


the ghetto prisons as well as their systematic pauperization
deny to them, except in rare cases, the food of the black
market.
There exists a number of anti-Jewish food decrees and
practices which spell in the aggregate slow death. Shopping
hours for Jews are, in all Nazi-controlled countries, limited
to two hours in the afternoon, when the shops are practically
empty. Moreover, the ban on the delivery of food to Jewish
homes made it impossible to circumvent the shopping-hour
restrictions with the aid of Gentile friends. In addition, stamp-
ing ration cards with the letter J, or issuing cards of a distinct
colour, have been other devices to insure discrimination
against Jews. Furthermore, mass expulsion of Jews from
villages, and expropriation of all rural Jewish property, made
it impossible, at least for one section of the population, to
enjoy the fruits of their toil. The deliveries of food in the
ghettos depend entirely on German transfer offices; the Jews
are forbidden to buy or even to accept gifts from outside of
the ghetto. Finally, in this connection, it may be recalled
that leaving the ghetto is punished by death.
Even worse is the situation with regard to the character
of the food and the rations themselves. The Jews receive
practically none of the essential protective and vitamin foods.
They get no meat, fish, poultry, milk, dairy products, fruit
or vegetables. They may purchase none of the foods which
are still unrationed, none of the items which are distributed on
the basis of the consumer lists, none of the semi-rationed
items. More and more rationed staples are entirely denied
to them; and of such rationed food as they may still receive,
they are allotted not more than half of the normal rations.
As a rule, the weekly rations for Jews in Polish ghettos amount
at best to a pound of black bread, two ounces of so-called
jams or marmalade, one ounce of sugar, and perhaps a few
potatoes. They receive no other food. 400 calories is the
daily ration of a ghetto-Jew as compared with a nutritional
minimum of 3,000.
The result of these starvation rations is a decimation un-
paralleled in any other group. So, for instance, in the War-
saw ghetto alone, during the year 1941, 47,428 Jews per-
ished. This would amount to about one out of ten. Spotted
typhus and tuberculosis are rampant.
Most terrible is the situation of the children. In
1941, the death rate among Jewish children in the Warsaw


ghetto was estimated to be thirty times aa high as among the
Polish children.
A Swedish journalist who visited Warsaw in 1941,
wrote:
Hunger in the ghetto is frightful. The inhabitants
seem to be living corpses. Their faces and eyes are sunken
. . . Jewish life in. ghettos is tragic, gloomy and hopeless.
The Jews wait and long for a new Moses.
A Hungarian visitor in 1942 described in the following
words the German capital:
The Jews of Berlin are very pale. Their faces are waxy
as if already wearing a death mask. When I pass by one
of these Jews, I could hear his bones softly rattling.
What has happened since is cloaked in darkness and
horror. Last summer Hermann Backe, German Food Min-
ister, was said to have proposed the mass extermination of
Jews as a food conservation measure.
The practice of large scale deportation has proved a no
less effective instrument of extermination. Under the impact
of a fanatical hatred and a migromania which does not stop
even before his own kinfolk, Hitler is moving hundreds of
thousands of Jews in overcrowded and locked cattle-cars,
with little if any belongings, with insufficient food, for long
journeys, to discover at the arrival at the “unknown destina-
tion” how many of them have perished en route. There is
on record an official statement made last summer by Himm-
ler’s special expert for deportations Obersturm fuehrer Hiege
to the effect that thirty per cent, of the deportees perish en
route. The Jews are permanently on the move: from Germany,
Austria, and the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia to the
fortress reservation of Terezin, from there to Poland, from
Poland to the Soviet Nazi front.
The greater part of these people may be used by the
Nazis for their war effort as long as they can serve this pur-
pose. There is no doubt that they are destroyed as soon as
they are no longer of any use to the Nazi war machine. In
the meantime, conditions of living, housing, and labour are
such that the process of destruction continues automatically.
As a consequence of this policy, many ancient Jewish
communities have disappeared, and there are today in
Europe a number of countries which have practically no more


Jews. The Jewish population of Germany has been reduced
from half a million to 25,000; in Austria, from more than
200,000 to 5,000; in Slovakia, from 80,000 to 15,000. Esto-
nia and Danzig are completely Judenrein ; and the same is vir-
tually true also of Yugoslavia. What Jews remain in the
Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, are, with few excep-
tions, concentrated in the so-called reservation of Terezin.
The great Jewry of Poland has been reduced from three
and a quarter million souls to several hundred thousand. The
remainder, with the exception of some half million who fled
during the Polish Campaign and at the beginning of the
Soviet-Nazi war to Asiatic Russia, have perished. Warsaw,
the greatest Jewish community in Europe, was first concen-
trated in a small ghetto where living conditions were such that
the death toll was appalling. And in February 1943, a Ger-
man newspaper, The Donauzeitung of Belgrade, confirmed the
reports current throughout the world to the effect that the
community had practically disappeared and the ghetto area
was made accessible to the general population.
11. THE ATTITUDE OF THE UNITED NATIONS.
The leaders of the United Nations have from time to
time denounced in unequivocal terms the outrages which the
Nazi authorities have perpetrated on the Jewish populations
in the countries under Axis control, and they have made it
clear that they propose at the conclusion of the war to bring
the Nazi criminals to justice. The most important of these
pronouncements was the following joint statement of the
United States and the European members of the United
Nations, published on December 1 7th, 1942:
The attention of the Belgian, Czechoslovak, Greek,
Luxemburg, Netherlands, Norwegian, Polish, Soviet,
United Kingdom, United States and Yugoslav governments
and also of the French National Committee (Fighting
French) has been drawn to numerous reports from Europe
that the German authorities, not content with denying to
persons of Jewish race in all the territories over which their
barbarous rule has been extended the most elementary
human rights, are now carrying into effect Hitler’s oft-
repeated intention to exterminate the Jewish people in
Europe.
From all the occupied countries, Jews are being trans-
ported in conditions of appalling horror and brutality to
eastern Europe.


In Poland, which has been made the principal Nazi
slaughter house, the ghettos established by the German in-
vader are being systematically emptied of all Jews except
a few highly skilled workers required for war industries.
None of those taken away are ever heard of again.
The able-bodied are slowly worked to death in labour
camps. The infirm are left to die of exposure and starva-
tion or are deliberately massacred in mass executions.
The number of victims of these bloody cruelties is
reckoned in many hundreds of thousands of entirely inno-
cent men, women and children.
The above mentioned governments and the French
National Committee condemn m the strongest possible
terms this bestial policy of coldblooded extermination.
They declare that such events can only strengthen the
resolve of all freedom loving peoples to overthrow the bar-
barous Hitlerite tyranny.
They reaffirm their solemn resolution, to insure that
those responsible for the crimes shall not escape retribution
and to press on with the necessary practical measures to
this end.
The reading of this statement by the Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs in the House of Commons was followed
by a demonstration of sympathy with the Jewish victims of
Nazi oppression without precedent in the history of the House.
The legislature of the United States expressed its sym-
pathy in the following resolution, adopted by the Senate on
March 9th, 1943, and concurred in by the House of Repre-
sentatives on March 18th, 1943;
Whereas the American people view with indignation
the atrocities inflicted upon the civilian population in the
Nazi-occupied countries, and especially the mass murder
of Jewish men, women, and children; and
Whereas this policy of the Nazis has created a reign
of terror, brutality, and extermination in Poland, and other
countries in eastern and central Europe: Now, therefore, be
it
Resolved by the Senate (the House of Representatives
concurring), that these brutal and indefensible outrages
against millions of helpless men, women, and children
should be, and they are hereby, condemned as unworthy
of any nation or any regime which pretends to be civilized;
Resolved further, that the dictates of humanity and
honourable conduct in war demand that this inexcusable
slaughter and mistreatment shall cease and that it is the


sense of this Congress that those guilty directly or indirectly,
of these criminal acts shall be held accountable and pun-
ished in a manner commensurate with the offences for which
they are responsible.
On March 23rd, 1943, the House of Lords adopted the
following resolution on the motion of the Archbishop of Can-
terbury, which has since been placed on the Order Paper of
the House of Commons by nearly three hundred of its mem-
bers:
That in view of the massacres and starvation of Jews
and others in enemy and enemy-occupied countries, this
House desires to assure His Majesty’s Government of its
fullest support for immediate measures, on the largest and
most generous scale compatible with the requirements of
military operations and security, for providing help and
temporary asylum to persons in danger of massacre who
are able to leave enemy and enemy-occupied countries.
Particular attention is drawn to the following excerpts
from the speech made by the Archbishop of Canterbury, as
reported by the Associated Press:
He said that it was inevitable to contrast the solemn
declaration made by the United Nations last December I 7th
with the very meagre action tha(t had followed. Difficulties
were great but the Government should be spurred on to
greater rapidity of action.
He urged that steps be taken to carry oujt a promise
given by the Colonial Secretary that Bulgarian, Hungarian
and Rumanian Jewish children and accompanying adults
would be admitted into Palestine; he proposed that visas
be granted for Great Britain at least to all those refugees
able to reach this country who have husbands, wives or
children already here; he suggested that blocks of visas be
granted British Consuls in Spain, Portugal and perhaps Tur-
key for issuance at their discretion to refugees reaching
those countries; and he asked that neutral nations be en-
couraged to admit additional refugees by guarantees from
the United Nations to relieve them of a stipulated propor-
tion of the refugees after victory or sooner, and by offers
of supplies and financial aid for their care.
The Archbishop said that there was a suggestion he
would put forward more tentatively, but that he thought
ought to be seriously considered; that through some neutral
power an offer should be made directly to the German
Government to receive Jews in territories of the British
Empire, and other Allied Nations! if they agreed, on a basis


of so many a month. Such an offer would very likely be
refused and then Hitler’s guilt would stand out all the more
clearly.
In conclusion, he declared that his chief protest was
against procrastination, asserting that it had taken five
weeks after December 1 7th for the British Government to
approach the United States, and then six weeks for the
American Government to make the reply in which it had
suggested a meeting of representatives for preliminary ex-
ploration. The Jews were being slaughtered at the rate
of tens of thousands a day, and it should at least be urged
that when this meeting occurred it should be not only for
exploration but to reach decisions.
It had in the meantime become abundantly clear that
the declarations and statements of governments and legisla-
tures have no effect on the determination of the German Gov-
vernment to carry out its policy of extermination and that the
only hope for the surviving Jews of Axis-occupied Europe
was their removal to places of refuge, whether temporary or
permanent, provided by the United Nations or neutral coun-
tries.
On January 20th, 1943, more than a month after the
publication of the declaration of December 17th, Lord Hali-
fax expressed in a note to the United States the concern of the
British Government over the situation. It was not until five
weeks later, on February 25th, 1943, that Secretary of State
Cordell Hull proposed that British and American representa-
tives should meet in Ottawa to undertake a “preliminary ex-
ploration of the problem, the place of meeting for this Con-
ference being subsequently changed to Bermuda. This note
was made public on March 3rd, 1943 following the great
public demonstration held at Madison Square Garden, New
York, on March Ist, 1943 under the auspices of the American
Jewish Congress in conjunction with national church and
labour bodies.
111. THE NEED FOR ACTION.
Many months have elapsed since it became apparent
that the Nazi Government was determined to carry through its
policy of extermination to its bitter end, and it is four months
since the United States and the European members of the
United Nations gave public and formal expression to the feel-
ings of horror with which the destruction of a whole people
was being watched by the civilized world. It cannot but be
regretted that hundreds of thousands of Jews have been
allowed to perish while the leaders of the democratic nations


have been in the process of formulating a policy which even
now has got no further than “preliminary exploration.”
The warnings of retribution uttered repeatedly by the
most authoritative spokesmen of the democratic world have
had no deterrent effect on the enemy. There remain only
two ways in which the total destruction of the Jewish popu-
lation on the continent of Europe can be prevented: 1. The
sending of supplies under proper safeguards to places of de-
tention and remnants of Jewish communities which survive,
and 2. To remove as many Jews as possible from Nazi-con-
trolled areas to places of refuge.
All the Jewish organizations concerned with the problem,
whether in the United States, Great Britain or elsewhere, have
worked out plans for submission to ; lhe Conference, and the
substance of these several proposals is virtually the same.
The programme submitted by the Joint Emergency Committee
for European Jewish Affairs, a copy of which is appended, re-
presents the views of all the major Jewish organizations in the
United States. A similar Joint Committee in Great Britain
has drafted a virtually identical programme. The World Jew-
ish Congress urges the Conference most earnestly to give the
closest study to these proposals.
If the gravity of the problem is not recognized, and
action not taken immediately, the victory of the United
Nations may mean nothing to the worst victim of Nazi barbar-
ism. Dead communities cannot be restored to life.
Memorandum of the Jewish Agency for
Palestine
PALESTINE AND THE REFUGEE PROBLEM
■The following Memorandum was submitted to the Bermuda Refugee Con-
ference by the Jewish Agency for Palestine over the signature of Dr. Chaim
Weizmann f President.
I. In submitting this memorandum on behalf of the Jew-
ish Agency for Palestine, we desire in the first instance to offer
some observations on the scope and character of the Bermuda
Conference.
11. In the light of the overwhelming tragedy which faces
the more than four million Jews which, it is estimated, still sur-
vive in the Nazi occupied countries, it was hoped that the
governments of Great Britain, the United States and other


members of the United Nations, would be ready to undertake
practical steps commensurate with the vastness of the pro-
blem. Unhappily the statements of the Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Anthony Eden, and of United States Sec-
retary of State Mr. Cordell Hull, give little support for this
hope. The terms of reference for the Bermuda Conference
are severely limited in scope and are intended apparently to
deal only with the fringe of the problem rather than with the
problem itself. While the Jewish Agency for Palestine is
grateful for any measures which may be calculated to save the
lives of at least some of Europe’s Jews, it would be failing in
its most elementary duty were it not to call attention to a
situation which, overriding all ordinary political considera-
tions, calls ior a plan conceived on the broadest possible lines
for the rescue of these four million Jews who are in imminent
danger of physical annihilation.
111. The Jewish Agency for Palestine is deeply conscious
of the fact that the sufferings occasioned by the war are part
of the burden which every people must carry and that the
Jews are not the only people subjected to such suffering. But
it must be borne in mind that of all peoples, the Jews have
been singled out for utter and complete destruction by the
enemy. Should the announced policy of the enemy continue
unchecked, it is not impossible that by the time the war will
have been won, the largest part of the Jewish population of
Europe will have been exterminated. In these circumstances
it is inconceivable that the democracies, engaged as they are
in a struggle for world liberation, should fail to take fullest
cognizance of the plight in which the Jews in Nazi occupied
countries find themselves.
IV. The Jewish Agency for Palestine is fully aware of
the enormous difficulties, military and other, involved in this
problem, yet it dares to hope that farsighted statesmanship
on the part of the United Nations will find a way to meet it
without in any way weakening the prosecution of the war
against the enemy.
V. The memoranda submitted to the Bermuda Refugee
Conference by the American Joint Emergency Committee on
the European Jewish situation, and by the British Joint Emer-
gency Consultative Committee contain a number of proposals
for dealing with various aspects of the problem. In present-
ing this memorandum we address ourselves to the great pos-
sibilities of rescue and rehabilitation offered by Palestine. We
do so in the belief that in any plans that may be adopted for


coping with this situation, the contribution of Palestine can
and should be a major one.
VI. In the memorandum submitted by the Jewish Agency
for Palestine to the Inter-Governmental Conference on Refu-
gees called at Evian in July 1938 on the invitation of Presi-
dent Roosevelt, attention was drawn to the possibilities offered
by Palestine for large-scale resettlement of Jewish refugees.
It was pointed out that the capacity of Palestine to absorb
new immigrants was not a matter of speculation but was based
on the experience of several decades of colonization and the
demonstrable possibilities of its rapidly developing economy.
As was there emphasized too, Palestine is unique amongst the
countries of possible Jewish immigration in that it is the one
land to which Jews come, with international sanction, “as of
right and not on sufferance.” As the Jewish National Home it
is the country above all to which Jews are entitled to claim
admission.
VII. In the intervening years the situation of the Jews
of Europe has immeasurably deteriorated and now presents a
spectacle of unbroken horror. Unhappily too, the possibilities
of large-scale rescue, by emigration to and absorption in
countries other than Palestine, have been shown for political
and other reasons to be limited in the extreme. The statement
that the world is divided into countries in which the Jews can-
not live and countries which they must not enter has proven
only too true. So far as Palestine is concerned, however, de-
spite great obstacles, in spite too of the outbreak of war and
the closing of the Mediterranean, there has been continued
and rapid development, and a further substantial immigration
has been absorbed. The Jewish population which numbered
about 65,000 at the end of the last war has grown to about
550,000 today, and, in the years since the rise of Hitler, Pale-
stine has absorbed more immigrants from Germany and Ger-
man-occupied Europe than any other country. It is urged
that both as an ad hoc reception centre to which Jewish refu-
gees may be brought and for the time being kept and main-
tained, and also as a place where in the long run the refugees
may be absorbed into the general economy, Palestine should
for the following reasons be given principal consideration:
(a) As Jews coming to the Jewish National Home they
would be welcomed in every possible way by their
fellow Jews there. The spirit which animates the
Jewish community of Palestine in this regard was
given expression in a recent manifesto in the course of
which it was stated that “the Jews of Palestine solemn


ly declare their willingness and readiness to extend
shelter to all Jews who are leaving or who have left
occupied territories, to share their bread, to open their
houses and to give their garments, as everything else,
to save their brothers and sisters, fathers and mothers,
from being led like sheep to the slaughter house.” So
far as the refugees are concerned, they would feel
themselves not exiles, but persons returning home. It
would constitute the first step in their psychological
rehabilitation.
(b) From the practical point of view, Palestine by reason
of its proximity to the Balkan countries has important
geographical advantages. Transportation there from
South Eastern Europe would be possible overland or
by a relatively short sea-route, thus eliminating the
need for large-scale shipping and greatly simplifying
the transportation problem.
(c) Once in Palestine the gradual absorption and integra-
tion of these refugees into the economic life of the
country could in due course be effected. It is esti-
mated that for 50,000 there would be immediate pos-
sibilities of absorption within the framework of the
present economic structure. The very great expan-
sion of Palestine’s agriculture and industry since the
outbreak of the war, and the fact that 30,000 Palestine
Jews are today serving in the armed forces of the
United Nations, has produced an acute shortage of
labour which is in no degree met by current immigra-
tion. As regards the ultimate absorption of much
larger numbers, an aide memoire is attached marked
“A” and dated February 1, 1943 which has been pre-
viously submitted to the British Ambassador in Wash-
ington and to the United States Department of State.
Very many of the refugees will, unquestionably, after
all they have been through, be reluctant 1 to return to
the countries of their origin. It can hardly be intended
to return them there against their will if an alternative
course is open, and the great majority will almost
certainly wish to remain and settle in Palestine. Thus
by bringing them to Palestine in the first place, not
merely is a second and wasteful transfer avoided, but
the refugee is immediately placed on the road to a
permanent solution of his problem.
VIII. We desire at this point to refer to the announce-
ment of His Majesty’s Government on February 3, 1943 of its


intention to allocate 29,000 Palestine immigration certificates
primarily for refugee children from the Balkan countries. The
efforts of His Majesty’s Government to arrange for the evacu-
ation and transportation of these children to Palestine are
warmly appreciated and it is our earnest hope that everything
will be done to press forward with these arrangements with
all possible speed. In this connection we would point out
however the necessity for increasing the proportion of adults,
since efforts to arrange the emigration of children alone would
undoubtedly encounter much greater difficulties than would
that of children with parents. Moreover, the knowledge that
adults are almost entirely excluded from the possibility of such
evacuation plans, places them, as events have already shown
even in the Balkan countries, in much greater jeopardy than
might otherwise be the case. It is to be added, that in any
event the immigration and maintenance of the large numbers
of children contemplated, involving as it would the expendi-
tures of great sums of money, should fall within the frame-
work of any general scheme for financing refugee emigration
which the consulting governments may be ready to undertake.
IX. The major proposal set out above for a large-scale
transfer of Jews to Palestine is premised of course on the
abandonment of the policy adumbrated by the British Gov-
ernment in the White Paper of May 1939, in terms of which
Jewish immigration to Palestine is limited to approximately a
further 30,000 immigrants and is to cease altogether after
April 1944. That policy was a part of and at one with the
discarded programme of appeasement in international rela-
tions which characterized the period immediately prior to the
War. The policy of the White Paper was declared by the
Permanent Mandates Commission to be out of accord with
the obligations accepted by Great Britain and internationally
approved in the Balfour Declaration and the Mandate for
Palestine. It cannot stand the test of time or of justice, and
it should be abandoned forthwith.
X. In this hour of grim tragedy for the Jewish people it
is our fervent prayer that the great democratic nations whose
conscience has been stirred even in the midst of a terrible war
by the sufferings of the Jewish people in Europe, will seek to
get to the root of the problem of European Jewry as it now
manifests itself. It is a problem essentially of the homelessness
of a peoole. Twenty-five years ago, also in the midst of a
war, the first great promise of redemption by giving them back
a home of their own was made. No greater contribution can
be made to that problem at this time, than by doing every-
thing possible to give practical effect to that historic promise.


Text of Final Communique of the Bermuda
Conference on Refugees
The United States and United Kingdom delegations ex-
amined the refugee problem in all its aspects, including the
position of those potential refugees who are still in the grip
of Axis Powers without any immediate prospect of escape.
Nothing was excluded from their analysis and everything
that held out any possibility, however remote, of solution of
the problem was carefully investigated and thoroughly dis-
cussed.
From the outset it was realized that any recommendation
that the delegates could make to their governments must
pass two tests: would any recommendation submitted inter-
fere with or delay the war effort of the United Nations and was
the recommendation capable of accomplishment under war
conditions?
The delegates at Bermuda felt bound to reject certain
proposals which were not capable of meeting these tests.
The delegates were able to agree on a number of con-
crete recommendations which they are jointly submitting to
their Governments and which it is felt will pass the tests set
forth above and will lead to the relief of a substantial number
of refugees of all races and nationalities.
Since the recommendations necessarily concern govern-
ments other than those represented at the Bermuda Confer-
ence and involve military considerations, they must remain
confidential. It may be said, however, that in the course
of the discussion the refugee problem was broken down into
its main elements. The questions of shipping, food and supply
were fully investigated.
The delegates also agreed on recommendations regard-
ing the form of inter-governmental organization which was
best fitted, in their opinion, to handle the problem in the
future. This organization would have to be flexible enough
to permit it to consider without prejudice any new factors
that might come to its attention.
In each of these fields the delegates were able to submit
agreed proposals for the consideration of their respective gov-
ernments.
(“Congress Weekly,” May 14th, 1943.)


Avoidance of The Issue
The Joint Emergency Committee for European Jewish
Affairs is properly withholding judgment over the results of
the Bermuda Conference until its complete report is received
and studied. What the Conference has accomplished or failed
to accomplish by way of concrete steps for the rescue of those
on whose behalf it was called will point the course of future
action for the Emergency Committee. However, the psycho-
logical atmosphere in which the Conference met and the poli-
tical course which it followed is indicative of the general
attitude of the United Nations toward the Jewish problem, and
it would be folly to ignore it.
With the exception of the messages of President Roose-
velt and Prime Minister Churchill to the Madison Square
Garden Meeting in July 1942, and the Declaration of the
United Nations on the mass-massacres, the tendency has been
to avoid direct reference to the Jews. This must be regarded
as part of a military strategy. Hitlers’ propaganda which
blamed the war on the Jews was the principal weapon in his
psychological warfare on the democratic nations. The ground
for his offensive had been prepared by years of anti-Semitic
propaganda prior to the war. But the democracies did not
regard this Hitler attack as part of the general warfare. In-
stead of meeting the barrage of lies with a counter-attack
aimed at shattering the prejudices and hatreds the Allied
leadership seemed to have decided on a strategy of total re-
treat and gave up position after position. Anti-Semitism
within the free countries was tacitly recognized as an inevitable
consequence of the war and the policy of ignoring the Jews
and playing down the Jewish tragedy was adopted as the most
“realistic” method of meeting the situation.
This was and continues to be a decisive Hitler victory.
When the United Nations’ Declaration on the mass massacres
was issued it seemed as though the policy had been changed
and a powerful offensive in the field of propaganda was to
take the place of the constant retreats. But no sooner was the
Declaration issued that the previous course was resumed.
That was evident from the exchange of letters between Secre-
tary Hull and Lord Halifax on the then proposed Ottawa
(later Bermuda) Conference in which the word Jew was de-
liberately omitted. In line with this attitude the terms of
reference of the Bermuda Conference sidetracked the problem


of the millions of potential Jewish refugees threatened with
extermination, and limited the deliberations to the problem
of the few thousand refugees now in Spain, Portugal and
Switzerland.
The Bermuda Conference, to quote the Manchester
Guardian and other organs of the liberal press, sprung from
the horrors of Nazi extermination of Jews.” Yet the proposals
of variods organizations and groups dealing with the rescue
of the Jews were brushed away as soon as the Conference
opened. The idea of negotiating for the release of the Jews
and finding ways of feeding those who must remain in Hitler
captivity was rejected immediately for “military considera-
tions.” Granted that negotiations with Hitler are contrary
to the spirit of total warfare it is still impossible to overlook
the great moral consideration that could be placed vis-a-vis
the military consideration: Is the saving of the lives of several
million people who are certain to perish worth bargaining for
with the enemy? This moral question did not arise. Although
a way had been found by the United Nations to ease the
blockade when it was necessary to feed the Greek people,
it seemed to be inapplicable in the case of the Jews in the
Polish ghettos. Again one must come to the conclusion that
in addition to military considerations there was also the fear
that looking for a way to feed the Jews might give the appear-
ance of substantiating Hitler’s charge that this is a “Jewish
war.”
When all this is coupled with the fervent defense of the
Giraud decrees by our own State Department and the fact
that the ex-Mufti of Jerusalem still dictates the policies of
the British colonial office from his Rome or Berlin headquarters,
one sees the Hitler created phantoms hovering over the poli-
cies of the United Nations, with respect to the Jews. All the
appeals of religious leaders in the name of human conscience,
and all the demands for rescue action on the part of members
of Parliament and the press have had little effect upon the
strategy of a government which is intimidated by the fear of
the effects of the Axis and anti-Jewish propaganda. It is true
that whenever possible a few thousand refugees will be
admitted here or there, that a word of sympathy will be
uttered for those who perish, and some vague reference will
be made to the restoration of the rights of Jews as equals with
all others after the victory. But in no fashion will the gov-
ernments commit themselves to the recognition of the parti-
cular Jewish tragedy, the unparalleled Jewish martyrdom, the


unique and exclusive victimization of the Jewish people and
the specific conditions that must be created for Jews after
the war in order that their future free existence as a people
be secured.
We have no other friends in the world but the United
Nations. Upon the victory of the democracies our very life
depends. For that victory we work and gladly give our lives.
But while working for victory we must also be mindful of the
fact that up to this moment our friends have gone only so far
and no further in acknowledging our suffering, our contribu-
tions and our problem.
(“Congress Weekly,’’ Editorial, No. 18, May 7th, 1943.)
Bermuda Failure
ISRAEL GOLDSTEIN.
Those who are not wise in the ways of State Depart-
ments and Foreign Ministries expected that the British and
American delegates at the Bermuda conference would
address themselves not only to the periphery of the problem
but to the centre of the problem, not only to the question
of the 30,000 or 40,000 refugees who have already escaped
Hitler’s clutches and are now in neutral countries such as
Switzerland, Turkey, Spain and Portugal, but to the question
of how to rescue additional numbers from the charnel houses
of Hitler’s Europe.
On the face of it, it seems a difficult task and is indeed
a difficult undertaking, involving as it does negotiations with
the enemy through neutral intermediaries. But there are
ample precedents, as was pointed out in the memorandum
submitted on behalf of the whole of American Jewry and
endorsed by numerous non-Jewish bodies. There have
been negotiations which resulted in the consent by the British
Government and the Nazi Government to have food brought
into Greece and distributed under the auspices of the Inter-
national Red Cross. There have been negotiations going on
continuously with regard to the exchange of prisoners and
the safe conduct of certain vessels.
Our programme proposed negotiations through the inter-
cession of neutral countries, the Vatican and the International
Red Cross to the following ends, namely:
1. Food for the remaining Jews of Poland who are re


ceiving a small fraction of even the miserable rations being
allowed the rest of the population.
2. Release of numbers of Jews from Bulgaria, Hungary,
and Rumania, satellites of the Axis who still have a remnant
of self-government and w'ho, now that the tide of war is
turning, might see the wisdom of laying up a few credentials
with the inevitable victors.
3. Undertakings by the United States and England to
finance the wartime maintenance in the adjacent neutral
countries or all who can be rescued, and to guarantee their
repatriation or their emigration to permanent havens after
the war.
4. Offers by the United States and England to settle
numbers of refugees in accessible territories under their pos-
session, particularly in Palestine where the Jewish community
eagerly awaits and is ready to share all they have with the
newcomers.
Of course, we are grateful for even the small measure of
help which may eventuate from the Bermuda Conference.
The saving of even one life and the rehabilitation of even one
family is an act of decency. Yet the fundamental dissapoint-
ment remains that the proposals dealing with the centre of
the problem have been ignored by the Bermuda conference.
Reasons are offered which do not carry even surface convic-
tion. The real reason was adumbrated by Lord Cranborne
in Parliament some weeks ago when he said that there was
no sense in trying to rescue large numbers of Nazi victims be-
cause there was no place to put them. No place to put a few
scores of thousands or even hundreds of thousands in the vast
territories controlled by the British Commonwealth or by the
United States? Palestine alone needs 50,000 more hands
for its war industry and agriculture.
Here then is the root of the difficulty. Victims are not
being rescued because the democracies do not want them; and
the job of the Bermuda conference apparently was not to
rescue victims of Nazi terror but to rescue our State Depart-
ment and the British Foreign Office from possible embarrass-
ment. It is a sad commentary upon the disparity between our
professed war aims which speak in terms of humanitarianism
and our actions which are motivated by timidity and by cater-
ing to the forces of reaction in our midst.
The Bermuda Conference has been adjourned but the
problem cannot be so readily adjourned. Our State Depart-
ment and the British Foreign Office must not be permitted
to rest at ease merely because a conference has been held.


There are enough men and women of goodwill and of con-
science in the United States and in England to lift their
voices in the name of humanitarianism and religion.
Sunday, May 2nd, was designated by the Federal Coun-
cil of Churches as a “Day of Compassion.” In the Catholic
Church prayer and compassion have been the theme on many
occasions. Christian compassion with Jewish suffering,—
what a potent witness that the heart of humanity is still
athrob and the glow of God in man is still alive!
If the message of this Christian Day of Compassion were
to reach any of the tragic company of Jewish survivors in
Nazi Europe who have survived only to await their turn to be
exterminated it would give them new strength and new hope.
If they could speak for themselves, they might say, “Brothers
across the sea, we can meet our fate with less bitterness of
soul when we know that somewhere in the world there are
Christians who understand our plight and who want to help.”
To understand the plight of Jews in Hitler’s Europe is
to understand that they are not merely another page in Hitler’s
voluminous catalogue of terror, like the Yugoslavs, the
Greeks, the Poles, but that unlike all the others, their ap-
pointed lot is total and complete destruction. The other
peoples, however decimated, will live to see the day of vic-
tory. As for the Jews, if a way is not found to rescue num-
bers of them, the victory of the United Nations will come too
late. They will be dead.
We, their fellow-Jews, who have the good fortune to be
American Jews, would be the last to make unreasonable re-
quests of our government. But is it unreasonable to say to
our government, “What would you do if four million Ameri-
can citizens were trapped in the Nazi charnel houses of Eur-
ope? Would you be content to let formal barriers stand in
the way of exercising every resource to rescue some if not all
of the victims? You would find a way to get food to those
who are starving as has been done in Greece under the
auspices of the International Red Cross. A Bermuda con-
ference dealing with four million American or British victims,
would find a way to save many of them.”
In the name of compassion this is what we ask for the
Jews who are trapped in Hitlers’ domain. We have a right
to ask it in the name of compassion. For unless there is a
feeling of self-identification with the victim, nothing deeper
than lip-service to humanitarianism can be expected. Compas-
sion is the identification of one’s self with a brothers’ afflic-
tion.


Bermuda will go down in the record as an unfortunate
sequel to Evian. If the Evian Conference to consider the
plight of the refugees was a failure, 'Bermuda was a mockery.
It was a mockery because it had before it the ghastliness of
the Nazi horrors and the imminence of Jewish extermination,
which the Evian conference might have apprehended but did
not yet encounter. Yet the name “Jew” was not permitted
to pass the lips of the conferees. This kind of make-believe
is another evidence of the escapism which was the leitmotif of
the Bermuda Conference. Conceived reluctantly, brought to
birth grudgingly, straitjacked from birth, its chances for
worthwhile results are meagre indeed.
Open the Gates of Palestine
Pierre van Paassen Calls on Christian England and
Christian America to Put an End to Jewish Tragedy.
That Palestine presents the only solution for the Jewish
refugee problem was advanced by Pierre van Paassen, author,
in a sermon delivered last Sunday at Carnegie Hall. Mr.
van Paassen after reviewing the tragedy of the Jewish people
in Europe said:
They scanned the horizon at Bermuda as they did at
Evian, and they found no place for the Jew to go.
But there is a place of refuge for the weary wanderers
of Israel, whose footsteps have left a trail of blood through
all the centuries and all the lands of Christian civilization.
There is a home awaiting them in Palestine, in their own
land, the land of Israel. There the social, economic, cul-
tural and religious framework for the reception and integra-
tion of millions of Jews has been put in readiness by the
pioneers at an immense cost in treasure and devotion and
blood. There you have a land that has undergone a trans-
formation in the last quarter century that is truly amazing.
Both the Evian and the Bermuda conferences have
shown conclusively that no nation on earth would welcome
mass immigration of “refugees from racial persecution,”
as the Jews are called in those official communiques whose
authors think it the better part of valour not even to men-
tion the Jews by their name.
The Jews of Palestine cannot do otherwise but stick to
their soil and go on building, for behind them is the
nameless, desperate pressure of the martyred Jewries in the
Fortress Europe, who cannot go anywhere else either but
to that same country of Palestine.


What the Jewish pioneers in Palestine have accom-
plished thus far is not a finished product, an historical
achievement that can be roped off at a moment’s notice by
a fiat of the British Government. It is the homeland of the
Jews of the world that is under construction in Palestine . . .
The Palestinian pioneers have so far laid down only
the framework of an economic-social-cultural and national
structure that shall be able to take in and absorb the rem-
nants of the Jewish people which survive the anti-Semitic
holocausts of Europe. To that end alone the work was
undertaken. . .
Palestine is the cup of grace offered to Christendom.
It is the proffered opportunity for Christendom to redeem
itself from the blood-guiltiness of ages of Jewish persecu-
tion. None knows this better than the statesmen of Protes-
tant England. None knows this better than the country-
men of Archbishop Temple, who in speaking of Israel’s
agony, reminded his people and government in April 1943:
“We stand before the bar of history, of humanity and of
God!”
Of course Britain may disregard the moral rights of
the Jewish people in Palestine. Britain is mighty, the Jews
are weak.
It will still be an injustice. . .
She may call a dozen more conferences on refugees
and make a show of humanitarian principles. But so long
as Palestine is surreptitiously excluded from consideration
at these international confabulations they are a hollow
mockery. . .
The injustice goes on.
America may approve this course of action, accept the
sophistry of the imperialistic deductions.
It will still be an injustice. . .
I cannot be optimistic. I cannot bring a message of
cheer to the Jewish people in this hour which is the dark-
est in their long melancholy history. I can only say this:
For the Jews all depends on whether the Christians, Christ-
ian America and Christian England, will change from being
Christians in name to being Christians in deed.
(Excerpts of “Congress Weekly,” May 7th, 1943)


The Gentlemen at Bermuda
Bermuda is a pretty place, especially at Easter time.
There are lilies, sunshine, and fine sea bathing. It is the ideal
vacation spot, and lives up fully to its reputation.
The gentlemen at Bermuda have had their vacation.
They were blessedly undisturbed by any “pressure group.”
They were guarded from the representatives of Jewish organi-
sations who had worked out concrete plans for the possible
salvation of the remaining human beings marked for murder
in Hitler’s slaughter house. They were protected from repre-
sentatives of American labor who indicated their desire to
participate in the humanitarian enterprise of the Conference.
Both Philip Murray of the C. 1.0. and William Green of the
A.F.L. have made public the refusal of the Government to
admit officers of these great American labor organisations to
the deliberations. The gentlemen in Bermuda were hedged
in by the fragrant Easter lilies even from the spokesmen of
the Christian churches and from the members of the vast non-
sectarian relief organisations which have had practical experi-
ence in the work of rescue. They were at peace behind closed
doors.
One voice from which the individuals who participated
in the Refugee Conference were particularly careful to
insulate themselves was that of the hundreds of
thousands of helpless men, women and children doomed to
be murdered in cold blood by the Nazi executions. While
the Bermuda Conference was in session, the secret Polish
radio appealed for help in an underground broadcast from
Poland. The broadcast pleaded: “The last 35,000 Jews in
the ghetto at Warsaw have been condemned to execution.
Warsaw again is echoing to musketry volleys. The people
are murdered. Women and children defend themselves with
their naked arms. Save us .. .” At this point, the station
went dead.
“Save us . . —that cry did not reach Bermuda. Even
before the Conference made its report, consisting of a “number
of concrete recommendations,” none of which has been made
public, it was obvious that no serious rescue program was
under consideration. This was plain from the outset. It was


plain from the locality selected for the deliberations, from the'
exclusion of the representatives of those most concerned, and
from the secrecy. Above all, it was plain from the funereal
croakings which accompanied the deliberations. The dele-
gates chosen for a mission to save lives in the most literal
sense went at their task in the spirit of undertakers.
No one disputes the fact that the successful prosecution
of the war is the first objective of the United Nations, and that
nothing must be done to impede victory. However, none of
the detailed rescue programs presented by responsible organi-
zations to the Bermuda Conference could in any way be viewed
as conflicting with the primary purpose. Would opening the
gates of Palestine beyond the restrictions of the White Paper
harm the war effort? Would the granting of havens in neigh-
boring countries hurt any one except the Nazis? Would
the adequate utilization of the United States immigration
quotas permitted by law “postpone the day of liberation?”
If vessels which now return from their destinations
with empty bottoms were to be used for the transportation of
human beings each one of whom, depending on age and sex,
would be a passionate worker and fighter for democracy,
would that be injurious to the cause of the United Nations?
The questions answer themselves. The trouble with the
gentlemen at Bermuda was not that they were too martial,
but that they were not martial enough. They were afflicted
not only with inhumanity, but with timidity and the fatal
appeasement bhndness for which the world has already paid
so dearly.
Hitler has .von another victory at Bermuda—a moral
and political victory in which Nazidom rejoices. Every reaction-
ary who wants the purposes of the United Nations defeated
has triumphed in the failure at Bermuda. The so-called
Refugee Conference has made a mockery, not only of the
agony of millions of heloless human beings, but of the great
cause of liberation to which the democratic world is com-
mitted, and which alone makes the horror of our time under-
standable and endurable.
(“Jewish Frontier,” New York, May, 1943.)


Statements of Leading Australians
From The Right Reverend E. H. Burgmann, M.A., Th. Soc.,
Bishop of Goulburn.
The Nazi massacre of the Jews is one of the most horrible
deeds in all human history. It is a deliberate and sustained
persecution and not the result of sudden passion. It presents
the c’vilized world with one of the most acute problems
imaginable. Civilized nations cannot pass this problem by and
retain any claim to moral sensitiveness or human justice. It
is a question that stands in the way of history to-day and there
can be no forward movement for man unless the right answer
is found.
The Jew is in the middle of human history. He cannot
be taken out of it and he cannot be by-passed. Until a just
place is found for him and his abilities, there will be no peace.
The Jew may be massacred but he also stands as a test
to the Nations. If we are not with the Nazis we must do
everything in our power to save their victims. And everything
means everything. Having saved what Jews it is humanly
possible to save, we must seek out and give them their place
in the world. If we do that successfully and justly we shall
have solved many other human problems on the way.
We cannot escape this question. However preoccupied
we are, we should not wish to escape it. It will remain a test
case for modern civilization. Until the Jew no longer has
reason to fear, and the Gentile has good reason to be grateful
for the service of a free Jewry to the world, there can be no
peace.
12th July. 1943.
E. H. Burgmann.
From P. J. Clarey, M.L.C., President, Australasian Council of
Trade Unions.
The bestial treatment of Jews in Nazi-occupied Europe
is a challenge to all the ideals of humanitarian civilization for
which the Democratic countries are striving. The history of
Mankind is pitted and scarred with the persecution of minori-
ties and brutal repression arising from racial prejudice. Never,
however, have such outrages reached the pitch of ferocity and
grim ghastliness as has been witnessed during the last three
years in Poland and adjoining countries. That in such a brief
period 2,500,000 of Poland’s 3,300,000 Jews should have
perished by torture, starvation and other fiendish methods,
that only the Nazi mind could conceive. This is unparalleled
in world history.


These things have happened and apparently will con-
tinue to happen notwithstanding the wonderful part played
by the Jewish race in world progress. In the fields of Industry,
Science, Literature, Art, Music, Culture and Research and in
the realms of all those professions which have assisted in man-
kind’s advance, this race now so mercilessly persecuted has
more than played its part. As a people, they possess the same
human qualities of love, of race, of home, of family, the same
aspirations, hopes and fears that the peoples of all nations
possess. What a tragedy for this generation that a fanatical
and methodical plan for the extermination of such a race can
be carried out without check.
The Australian Trade Union movement is appalled at the
calamity which has fallen upon the Jewish people. In no un-
measured terms at the Congress of the Australasian Council of
Trade Unions held in Melbourne on June 21st to 25th, 1943,
Trade Unionism expressed its horror and condemnation of the
unbridled persecution of the Jews. Along with the organised
workers in Allied and other countries who have also expressed
similar horror and condemnation, the Trade Unionists of the
Commonwealth demand justice for the Jewish people and
prompt action by the Allied Nations to save the remnants of
the race still in Europe.
Action much more decisive and far-reaching than the re-
commendations of the Bermuda Conference is imperative. That
Conference cannot and should not be accepted as the last
word in the solution of the tragic Jewish Question. The Trade
Union Movement expects, further insists on immediate and
energetic measures.
10th July, 1943.
P. J. Clarey.
From Rev. E. J. Davidson, 8.A., Rector of St. James’ Church,
King Street, Sydney.
The appalling mass murder of the Jewish people, so
systematically and relentlessly pursued by the Nazis, must
surely horrify everyone who is acquainted with the facts. This
crime against humanity beggars description. It is plainly the
concern of all those who call themselves Christians or who
acknowledge the Christian ideal of brotherhood to urge upon
the Allied Governments the necessity of doing something more
than issuing mere protests. This is not a matter confined to
the Jewish community. It is the concern of the civilized world,
the concern of all men and women who detest tyranny and
hate cruelty and, above all, the concern of those whose Master
calls upon them to exercise the widest charity and exhibit the
deepest sympathy. It is Christianity, not only common kindli


ness, that bids us take up the cause of the oppressed and the
tyrannized. Some sanctuary must be found for those who can
be saved from the European slaughter-house. Palestine seems
at least one such place.
E. J. Davidson.
From Miss Aileen Fitzpatrick, 8.A., Director of Social
Research.
■ The conference at Evian led the world to expect that the
democratic countries were undertaking immediate and con-
tinuing responsibility for the settlement or what was even then
the greatest refugee problem that had ever faced the world.
When the conference at Evian was held, the Nazi rulers
had already begun to work out their declared intention of dis-
uniting and breaking up the democratic world by invoking
anti-semitism, persecuting and driving into exile millions of
Jews. One of Germany’s declared war aims is the total extinc-
tion of the entire Jewish people.
While, since the outbreak of war conquered populations
have gone down before the German war machine and the
Japanese conquests, Hitler and the other Nazi leaders have
ruthlessly pursued this aim. In January 1942, Hitler said in
a speech to the Reichstag; “We know full well that war can
end only by the extermination of the Germanic people or by
the disappearance of Jewry from Europe. The Aryan people
will not be removed from Europe and this war will see the de-
struction of Judaism.”
In September 1939, there were about Jews in
the countries now in the control of the Axis, in July 1942,
about 5-million were still alive. It is, therefore, quite plain
that in the total refugee problem, the plight of European
Jewry is most urgent and desperate.
And so when a further inter-governmental conference
was proposed as a follow-up to Evian, it was fondly hoped
that at long last the democracies would begin to plan actively,
not only for postwar rehabilitation of the refugees of the
world, but would also take immediate steps on behalf of
European Jewry which had been and was still being so sadly
decimated. There has been no let-up in the barbarous cam-
paign of cruelty and extermination.
Unfortunately these hopes do not appear to have been
realized. A conference has been held at Bermuda. But the
voice of the Jews does not appear to have been heard and
there seems to have been a total absence of realism in the
approach to one of the sorriest and darkest problems in human


history. There seems even to have been an undemocratic
approach in the remoteness of the location and absence of
representation of those most vitally concerned and best able
to suggest practical plans for immediate action to save life
now, and to lead to later and continuing rehabilitation.
The Conference at Bermuda raised many hopes only to
dash them again.
Perhaps there is something ironic that by strange fortune
Bermuda was first settled in the seventeenth century by British
refugees who fled from:
"... prelates’ rage
. . . Unto an isle so long unknown
And yet far kinder than our own.”
Even now it is possible and practicable to save some of
those who still live by using the means already available. The
will and determination to act will find the means.
Each day that passes without action is too late for thou-
sands of fellow human beings. We must act before it is finally
too late, or it will appear that it is not lack of understanding
but lack of will that prevents action. Future action will not
restore life already lost, but will still save some of the sur-
vivors, in which the flame of life remains.
Aileen Fitzpatrick.
From J. J. Maloney, M.L.C. President Labour Council of
N.S.W.
The ruthless treatment of members of the Jewish frater-
nity by the forces of the Hitler regime has been such that has
shocked the peoples of the whole world.
Resolutions of protest have been carried by organisations
and bodies representing all shades of political and religious
thought against this inhuman treatment of innocent men,
women and children whose only crime has been to have been
born of Jewish parents. Unfortunately, those Jewish people
still within Hitler’s reach have not —and will not —benefit
from mere resolutions of protest. They are still being
massacred to satisfy the maniacal desire of ruthless savages
who ara devoid of all sense of fair play or Christian teachings.
Something more than resolutions are needed if the lives
of these unfortunate people are to be spared. Hitler should
be told in no uncertain terms “Hands off the Jews,” and every
effort should be made by all peoples regarding themselves as
Christians to force the rescue of those Jews that are left in
Europe and to assure their persecutors of adequate punish-
ment for their barbaric, crimes.
J. J. Maloney.


From The Right Reverend C. Venn Pilcher, M.A., D.D.,
Bishop Co-adjutor of Sydney.
Hitler has declared his intention of murdering all the
five million Jews in Nazi-occupied Europe. He already is
executing his third million. In face of this unexampled
tragedy the Bermuda Conference of representatives of Britain
and the United States, called to consider possible action, could
only reply in effect: “We can do nothing for the Jews in Nazi
Europe. We may, however, remove those who have already
escaped to Switzerland and other neutral countries, out info
the inhospitable solitudes of the African desert.”
Such a decision is a mockery. The only solution is the
immediate opening of the Gates of Palestine.
Bth July, 1943.
C. Venn Pilcher.
From Mrs. Katharine Susannah Prichard, leading Australian
writer.
That the Bermuda Conference was a farce must be
apparent to all intelligent men and women who understand
something of the tragic problems which confront the Jewish
people today. Its proposals offer no constructive solution to
any of these problems. They savour rather of pre-war
appeasement policies.
Why is this so ?
Because there are fascist tendencies in all countries where
the Capitalist system strives to maintain social and economic
power by inflaming national prejudices. These tendencies
are always associated with anti-semitism.
The only way for the Jewish people to achieve an
equitable solution of their problems is for them to unite with
the most progressive and democratic forces in any country
where they may happen to be. Only these forces are opposed
to racial discrimination and religious persecution. Only these
forces can bring pressure to bear on governments for the
inauguration of a scheme of social justice for all peoples.
The Bermuda Conference has indicated what is to be
expected from conservative statesmen.
But the agony of the Jews in the occupied countries of
Europe continues, and demands united action on the part of
Jewish people of the Allied nations with all democratic
organisations, so that effective measures of relief may be
immediately arranged and a sanctuary provided for these
helpless victims of Fascist barbarism.
Katharine Susannah Prichard.


From Professor lan Clunies Ross, D.V. Sc., Dean of the Faculty
of Veterinary Science in the University of Sydney.
That the civilized world, unmoved, has regarded the
spectacle of the unparalleled martyrdom of the Jewish people,
is explicable only by the inability of the human mind to pic-
ture suffering and death on this vast scale.
So it is that, as days lengthen into months and the
months into interminable years, thousands, millions even, of
the aged and sick, the fathers and mothers, the helpless child-
ren have found, not the swift and honourable death of the
battlefield, but a shameful, lingering death by cold, by torture,
and starvation.
Time grows short to save even the remnant of the con-
demned host. But even now it is in our power to offer suc-
cour and sanctuary to those who yet remain. To fail to hold
out our hands, to raise our voices, to stab the sleeping Christ-
ian conscience to action, while one child can be rescued from
unspeakable terror, is to count ourselves accomplices in a
crime, the stain of which time itself will not erase.
I. Clunies Ross.
From Sir Robert Wallace, K. 8., M.A., LL.D., Vice-Chancel-
lor, University of Sydney.
It is understandable that the outcome of the Bermuda
Conference has been a keen disappointment to all interested
in the tragic situation in which the Jews in Europe find them-
selves. High hopes were entertained that something definite
and tangible would emerge, but, so far as I can gather, the
result has been to plunge the Jewish people into still greater
despair. No one can afford to be indifferent to the catastrophe
which has befallen millions of their fellow men. The tragedy
is of such magnitude that it baffles the imagination. I trust
that the documents here printed will bring home to people still
more vividly the essential aspects of a problem which clamours
for some sort of solution—a solution which ought not be long
delayed.
July 12th, 1943.
R. S. Wallace.
From The Hon. Camilla Wedgwood, M.A., F.R.A.1., Princi-
pal of the Women’s College within the University of Sydney.
When Hitler first achieved power in Germany, he de-
clared himself to be the implacable enemy of the Jews. Dur-
ing the past ten years, he has showed that his intention to do
his utmost to make his enmity effective was not an idle boast.


For ten years he has persecuted them with ever increasing
vindictiveness; for the past nine months he has avowedly set
out to exterminate them from Europe. When his campaign
began in 1933 the people of the democratic nations were
shocked and incredulous; the progressive ruthlessness of the
Nazis stirred them and efforts were made to save the victims.
Alas for human idealism! As the numbers of those who must
escape or suffer the horrors of a concentration camp increased,
the democracies became anxious, afraid of the mounting flood
of would-be immigrants. Many refugees sailed from port to
port seeking permission to land and permission was refused.
A conference was held at Evian: sympathy with the plight
of Hitler’s victims was expressed, but pitifully little was done
to make that sympathy effective. Then came the war; the
horrors of the German occupation of Poland; the collapse of
France. Those who thought that they had escaped from the
Gestapo were trapped again. If we had not become familiar
with horrors during the last four years, we should surely be
roused to vigorous action by what is taking place today in
occupied Europe. True, the people of the democracies have
protested against the mass extermination of European Jewry,
and as a result there has been—the Bermuda Conference! And
while representatives of the governments talk, the Jewish
death roll mounts daily. Some die most horribly at the hands
of the Nazis; others wandering without hope die by the way-
side; others die as did those on the Struma.
All great achievements require for their performance two
things; faith and courage. In our approach to the terrible
problem of what to do for the Jews of Europe, I am afraid
that we, the people of the democracies, have shown ourselves
weak in both: expediency has seemed more important than
justice; and we have offered sympathetic words instead of
active mercy. Even today during the war there is one coun-
try to which many, many Jews could escape to begin life
anew, if we had the will to open the doors wide instead of
keeping them cautiously ajar. What has been achieved in
Palestine by the Jewish immigrants during the past twenty
years should be known to all; in truth the desert has been
made to blossom as the rose.
It is an earnest of what may be done in the future.
But while we dream of the future we must keep our minds
on the present. We are much exercised in these days with
post-war planning. Do we realise I wonder, that for perhaps
some sixty thousand Jewish children alone, there may be no
post-war period to plan for, unless we act and act swiftly.
C. H. Wedgwood.


The WORLD JEWISH CONGRESS is an association of
Jewish Communities and Organizations throughout the world,
whose sole purpose is to defend those rights and interests
which Jews have in common.
Such a defense of the Jewish position has never been
more necessary than in these critical times. Never have Jew-
ish rights and interests been more closely identified with the
rights and interests of all liberty loving peoples.
“The main idea underlying the World Jewish Con-
gress is, like all constructive ideas, very simple. It is so
simple that one should hardly be called upon to defend it.
The idea is that the Jews of the world ought to join in a
common effort to defend their common rights.” (Dr.
Nahum Goldmann, Chairman of the Administrative Com-
mittee of the World Jewish Congress.)
Issued by
THE WORLD JEWISH CONGRESS (Australian Section)
Box 1869 K, G.P.0., Sydney.
President: Mr. Cecil A. Luber.
Chairman: Dr. Maurice Laserson.
Official Representative of
THE WORLD JEWISH CONGRESS
(for Australia)
Dr. Maurice Laserson,
Box 1869 K, G.P.0., Sydney.


Printed by Shepson Printing Co.
588 A George Street,
Sydney.
