

“ Where giant ferns their green plumes wave
O’er the dark Queen’s unnotic’d grave,
Near stately Derwent’s rolling wave
Sleeps poor Mathinna ! ”
'( In Verse, by a Pen Unknown. {
Tasmania:
PRINTED AT THE “MERCURY” STEAM PRESS OFFICE. (




Itffi 0J
In Prose by Old Boomer.
In Verse by Tasmania’s Tennyson.
“ Where giant ferns their green plumes wave
O’er the dark Queen’s unnotic’d grave,
.Near stately Derwent’s rolling wave
Sleeps poor Mathinna !”
Tasmania: *
PRINTED AT THE “MERCURY” STEAM PRESS OFFICE.
FriSl 7




jxi - 7-7 .
®|ix steg of |ptlrat:ra.
SOMETHING OF THE PAST.
By “Old Boomer.”
of **
(From the Hobart Town Mercury, June 7th, 1870.)
SOME time about the year 1836 or 1837 —at all events, in
the early part of Sir John Franklin’s Government, and
when I was a boy, the last of the aborigines were captured,
or rather brought in from the country by the singularly per-
suasive faculties of a Mr. George Augustus Bobinson, who
was employed by the authorities for that purpose, but whose
worth and benevolence were never properly appreciated by
the men of power in those days. There were about 50 or 60
of both sexes, if I remember aright, and they were lodged in
that queer roofed two story brick building, which even now
stands unaltered, just opposite James’s brewery on the New
Town Hoad. Amongst the number I saw then was the head
chief or king of the north part of the island ; and one of his
fellow captives was his only daughter, a little curly headed
naked girl about six years old. I had then seen but as many
snows on the top of Mount Wellington, but well do I remem-
ber with what a gloating interest I stood by and gazed at the


sable family, as they squatted on the floor and ate their oat-
meal porridge out of tin plates, while each had a great
kangaroo dog, or a mongrel of some sort or other in close
attendance, with a lop-ear and watchful eye, anxiously wait-
ing for his accustomed share of the evening meal. One day,
when dear old Lady Franklin paid a visit to the establishment,
the chieftain’s baby attracted her attention, and as there were
no picaninnies at Government House at that time, it was
in some way arranged that the little wild girl should
take her place as one of the family at the palace below.
So she rolled down in the vice-regal carriage, from her father
and the brick building before mentioned, to Sir John’s resi-
dence, which stood at that time where his statue stands now,
just opposite the Commercial Bank in Macquarie-street.
Although a princess of the purest lineage, the king’s daughter
carried no dowry with her, save, indeed, a single kangaroo
skin, a rush basket, a shell necklace or two, a pet opossum,
and—her name—that was Mathinna. This pretty sound
means, in the language of her fathers, “ Beautiful Valley.”
And how beautiful indeed is that meaning! Yet, we shot
them down over their bush fires, while the men slept and
women suckled their babes at the breast. Oh, “Fair Tas-
mania, ” how may these lines apply to thy case !
“When the loud cry of trampled Hindostan
Arose to Heaven in her appeal from man,
His w r as the thunder—His the avenging rod,
The wrath —the delegated voice of God !”
Byron's Monody on Sheridan.
Filial affection is alike in strength in all creatures ; but
in Mathinna’s case the broken link of love was soon
repaired when she became the fostered daughter of the
lady of the great navigator. In a few days whom should we
see in the Governor’s carriage but our charming little heroine,
standing up as straight as a sassafras plant, and dressed in a short
bright scarlet frock, while her head, arms, and legs were quite


unclad, and presented a black and shining, yet strange and
pleasing contrast, with her new attire. There she stood—and
stands now in my mind’s eye—just like a queen. I see her,
quickly turning her head this way and that, as her infant
mind fed nervously and curiously upon the strange sights of
houses, horses, bullocks and carts, white men with chains
round their legs and funny clothes on, and a thou-
sand things she had never seen before, and which
naturally bewildered the senses of one so recently re-
claimed (ah ! what a mock-word) from her own native home
in the mountains of the north. Well, time rolled on then as
it does now, and made all the change that we still see
creep on amongst ourselves and in every phase of nature.
Mathinna afforded no exception to the general rule, and she
grew to be a tall, graceful girl—but here I am at a loss to
describe, perhaps, one of the grandest specimens of our kind
that ever nature smiled upon. She stood, when I saw her
last, over the average stature of women, was very erect, with a
quick, thoughtless, or perhaps, thinking, if you please—toss
about her head, now and then. Her hair still curled short as
before, but seemed to struggle into length, and was blacker
than black, bright, glossy, and oh ! so beautiful! Her
features were well chiseled, and singularly regular, while
her voice was light, quick, yet somewhat plaintive. When-
ever she spoke, her mind seemed to steal far away, and
her full and brilliant eyes ever and anon rested for a
moment—or rather wandered along what we call Mount Wel-
lington—she Unganyahletta—and the mountains that reach
away into the dim distance beyond. But let me steal a line from
the brain of the immortal Byron, whose statue by-the-by—
chiseled by the Greeks from the purest marble—the British
public kicked about the dockyard at Plymouth, only forty years
ago, whilst one, whose highest abilities never could have
qualified him for a shoeblack to the poet, is now enjoying the
patronage of the best of England’s Queens, and consequently


—but only so, thank God—-of the English people. Here is
the extract and the only description that could be given of
the peerless Mathinna—
“ And in her air
There was something which bespoke command
As if she were a lady in the land.
* * * Her eyes
Were black as death, their lashes the same hue
Of downcast length, in whose silk shadow lies
Deepest attraction ; for when to the view
Forth from its raven fringe the full glance flies,
Ne’er with such force the swiftest arrow flew ;
’Tis as the snake late coil’d, who pours his length,
And hurls at once his venom and his strength. ”
This tale should go no further, because the heart will
sicken at what has yet to be told. But having written thus far,
and as it is a matter in the history of our—nay, not our ! —but
of the island we have stolen from those whose grant it
was from Heaven, and who were murdered, man by man,
woman by woman, child by child, by many a hoary-headed
and black-hearted monster, who may yet be living to read
these lines, until, as our parsons say, the will of God
was accomplished; I feel that I ought to proceed to
the end of my story. When Sir John’s period of govern-
ment had expired, Lady Franklin determined upon taking
her protege to England with her, but the girl being con-
stitutionally delicate and inclined to be consumptive—
as in fact the whole race were after the red-handed white man
had hunted them out of their mimis and commenced the same
work of butchery and murder as now carried on after the same
style under the protection of the British flag in New Zealand
—she was advised by Dr. Bedford, her ladyship’s physician,
that a removal to a climate so much colder than her own
would, probably, be followed by fatal results, and, con-
sequently, poor Mathinna was transferred, sobbing and broken
hearted, from the tender care of one who had always proved


far more than a mother to her, and the luxury and grandeur
of Government House, to a cold stretcher in the dormitory of
the Queen’s Asylum. And now her sorrows and her death
began. Being naturally high-spirited, and having been always
indulged in every whim, perhaps to a fault, by her noble
benefactress, she could not brook the taunts and gibes of the
other girls as to her colour and such like ; and that nature
which had never been aroused since her infancy was often
excited, and, knowing no other correcting hand than her
foster mother’s, she could not submit to punishment ; so she
soon fell sick and took to her bed in the hospital. Poor girl !
She had no friends then, save one, who sleeps with her now.
All those fawners about Government House who used to say
kind things, and pretend to be proud to take her hand in the
ball-room, because it pleased Lady Franklin, had suddenly
disappeared, and, as her wan lingers beat upon the wall, she
sighed and thought of days gone by, and of that flock of
summer friends who revelled in the sunshine of the hour, but
vanished with its splendour.
In the meantime, about 1847,1 think, those of the aborigines
who had not died out at Flinders’ Island were removed to
Oyster Cove, where the old convict station—whose ruins are
still standing on the spot—were turned into account for their
accommodation, and a certain Dr. Milligan was appointed
Superintendent of the establishment at a salary of three
hundred pounds a year. Mathinna, having somewhat recovered
from her illness, was ordered off to the new establishment, and
hurried into that former state of existence which her education
and kindly treatment at Government House had taught her to
forget. Too soon, alas ! she fell into the habits of the rest, and
as they were permitted to wander about the bush in all direc-
tions, amongst sawyers, splitters, and characters of the deepest
depravity, the reader may guess for himself what my pen
refuses to write. One night, however, Mathinna was missing,
and, although cooey after cooey resounded from mountain to


mountain, and from gully to gully, no tidings were heard of
the lost girl. In the morning the search was continued, till
at length the wanderer was found—the little wild girl with
the shell necklace and the pet opossum—the scarlet-coated,
bare-headed beauty in the carriage—the protdgd of the noble
woman—the reclaimed daughter of the native chief—had died
—abandoned by every virtue, and—in the river.


®lic of ||Mjiima.
IN VERSE.
By Tasmania’s Tennyson.
W OME thirty years ago or more,
(Yd At any rate ’twas long before
Brave Franklin left our island shore.
To plough the billow :
And, leaving England far behind,
’Mid Arctic snows his path to wind,
Was doomed on ice-bound shores to find
A hero’s pillow.
Well ! never mind about the year,
’Twas when Sir John was ruler here.
That first I saw my darkey dear,
My own Mathinna !
As clears away my memory’s fog.
Once more I see her and her dog.
As squatting naked on a log
She ate her dinner !
Let Tennyson, poor rhyming hack,
Unworthy Byron’s boots to black,
The laureate’s ill worn wreath give back
A base presumer !
The beauties of my dark-hued belle
Save Byron, ne’er could poet tell
In fervid verse, one half as well


As love-lorn Boomer !
Her full and restless coal-black eye
Turned sometimes to the passer-by
And sometimes to the ’possum pie
That stood before her !
Whilst I, a simple child from school
Neglecting sense, and reason’s rule
(I always was an awful fool!)
Could but adore her !
Though strong and deep the love I bore,
We were but children—nothing more ;
I was but eight the month before,
And she was seven.
But true love ne’er was trammelled yet,
By days or years, and as she ate
She raised her head—our glances met—
I tasted heaven.
Ah me ! it was my childhood’s dream
(Though some, such raptures foolish deem),
To think of happiness supreme,
When I grew bigger.
And how, when I was seventeen,
I’d woo and win my young heart’s queen,
Each Boomer, Junior, then had been
A little nigger.
Great Franklin’s spouse received the child,
And quickly won her fancy wild,
With gorgeous gifts her eyes beguiled
And robes of scarlet !
To teach her hymns the parson came ;
But ’tis related to his shame,
He wished to change Mathinna’s name
To Sarah Charlotte !
Mathinna ! ’twas a thrilling word
When like the love song of a bird,


’Twas in her soft accents heard
“ The Lovely Valley !”
Ah, who that on its wild notes hung,
Whilst through the air its echoes rung,
Resounding from her silvery tongue
Would call her Sally ?
But years roll on ; her friends depart,
Mathinna feels the hitter smart
Of losing her whose loving heart,
And nurture tender,
Had won the simple forest maid
From leafy couch ’neatli woodland’s shade,
And brilliantly her form arrayed
In robes of splendour !
Forsaken, she was left to rove
Once more the mazes of the grove,
’Till in the wilds of Oyster Cove,
The Chieftain’s daughter,
Relapsing into habits rude
To drown her woes a potion brew’d,
And got—how shall I write it —SCREWED !
On rum and water !
Awhile, a vagrant life she led,
Until one night from ’neath the shed
Where late she’d made her humble bed,
Her comrades missed her.
They sought Mathinna far and nigh,
The hills re-echo to their cry,
Alas ! in vain, none could espy
Their truant sister !
Next morn they scour the country round
’Ere noon the grief-worn wanderer’s found,
But cold and rigid, dead and drowned,
Beside the river !
The mourners slowly bear her back


Along the’ forest’s devious track,
And ’neath the she-oak’s branches black
A grave they give her !
There resting in her narrow bed
Where Crowther’s hand, so gory red,
Can never mutilate her head,
Nor rudely skin her.
Where giant ferns their green plumes wave
O’er the dark Queen’s unnoticed grave,
Near stately Derwent’s rolling wave
Sleeps poor Mathinna !
And now in this our later day
Her very race has passed away,
E’en Lanne last, whose breathless clay
By Jackals plundered,
For vengeance cries, ’gainst those who sold
His mangled corse for British gold,
Torn limb from limb, ere scarcely cold,
In fragments sundered !
Last of his race 1 Mathinna’s race,
That lovely maid whose matchless grace
Of rounded form and smiling face,
My youth enchanted!
With grief my heart is bruised and tom ;
My childhood’s friends, all—all are gone.
Oh ! may my last sad prayer forlorn
For death, be granted !
And when I die, may I be laid
Beside my peerless native maid,
Where weeping gums, with gloomy shade
And ferns entomb her !
And o’er my grave a single stone
Of granite, from Mount Wellington,
Shall bear these simple words alone,
“ Here lies Old Boomer.”


Iptprara.
tHE following article is extracted from tlie Hobart Town
Mercury of February 20th, 1857 :
“ This, then, is all that has been ostentatiously done in
regard to the poor aborigines; and to what has it amounted ?
To what will it amount? We need no ghost from the
grave —not, even, the ghost of a murdered Native—to answer
the question : the whole business connected with these for-
lorn, neglected, despised, and wretched people, is bad and
wicked from beginning to end ; and, although in poor Sir
John Franklin’s time, some kind consideration was shown to
them, since that period their history has been dismal, dark,
and disgraceful.
“Strange and fearful tales have reached us of the fate of
some of these poor creatures—the females, more especially.
We will mention one. During the Government of Sir John
Franklin, a young girl, named Mathinna, attracted the notice
of Lady Franklin, and was taken into her service at Govern-
ment House ; she was a lively, merry, light-hearted girl, and,
as we are informed, was not devoid of personal attractions ;
she became a sort of pet with her Ladyship, used to ride in
her carriage with her, and was, in fact, her own personal
attendant. If we mistake not, Mathinna was an Orphan
School child, and her plain education had been considerably
improved by the kind attention of her mistress. In the due
course of events, Sir John Franklin left the colony, and his
lady, of course, left with him, poor Mathinna being trans-
ferred to the superintendence of Dr. Milligan, at Oyster Cove.
We almost fear to record what follows, but, as it has been


communicated to us, as an authenticated fact, and "well known
in the neighbourhood of the Native Settlement, we here give
it publicity. From a laxity of superintendence, the females,
Mathinna with the rest, were allowed a liberty of roaming,
which, in such a locality, was as unwise as it was injurious :
the poor free-hearted girl became acquainted with some
sawyers and splitters, acquired a liking for ardent spirits, and,
step by step, become a confirmed drunkard, and, at last, died
drunk in the river ! What more fell to the lot of this unhappy,
abandoned girl, in her unhallowed companionship with her
associates, needs no description : her short and miserable
history is before the public,—let them reflect upon, and
shudder at its contemplation.
“ Whether this laxity of supervision, or rather no super-
vision at all, still exists, under the superintendence of Mr.
Dandridge, we have no means of knowing, but the accounts
we have received of the horrible effects of the cohabitation of
the native women with the sawyers and splitters in the bush,
have made our heart sicken at the recital, while we have
pitied, as we are sure our readers would, the wretched and
neglected victims.
“ If, as we firmly believe, these things are true, they call for
a most strict and searching enquiry : at all events, some
means should be adopted to satisfy the public mind on the
actual condition of the aborigines, the few, that is, that are
left, of a once numerous race. We are not to be told, that
they are, by nature, degraded and debased ; they are, we
presume, so many human beings,—not without a soul, —not
without a mind, capable of discriminating between right and
wrong, good and evil; —and a fearful responsibility rests
upon those, to whose charge the diminishing remnant has
been committed,”


Iptljimra's tolxe.
(From the Cornwall Chronicle.}
yAt SHOET time ago a very touching story appeared in the
;|fl Hobart Town Mercury from the pen of “Old Boomer,”
narrating an episode in the sad history of the Tas-
manian aborigines—a story which has been copied by Mr.
James Bonwick into his latest work, and which has also been
noticed by many of the leading English newspapers. Mathinna
was the last born aboriginal of the colony, the daughter of a
powerful chief, who with others surrendered to Mr. Eobinson,
and were by him conveyed to Hobart Town. She was ad-
mired by and became the of Lady Franklin, living in
vice-regal splendour at Government House for a number of
years ; but on Sir John Franklin’s retirement from the colony,
she fell under the care of the authorities, and pined away
within the cold charitable walls of the Queen’s Orphan
Asylum, finally being transferred to the society of the last
miserable remnant of her race located at the Oyster Cove
Aboriginal Establishment, where she soon ended, in the river,
a life which had become insufferable. A correspondent sug-
gests to us that it is a shame the grave of the native chief-
tain’s daughter, the adopted of the noble gentlewoman, should
remain unmarked by memorial stone. She now lies amid
rude blue gum and stringy bark trees, dashed in here and
there with her own native heather, over which tosses now and
then with the freaks of the sea breeze, the star-like clematis,
and the ever whispering peppermint trees. These lordly


sentinels of nature cannot always keep watch over her resting
place, and it would not be discreditable to colonists of the
present day, some of whom have fawned around the poor
black girl and praised and admired her, because to do so was
to please Lady Franklin, were they to subscribe towards the
erection of a suitable memorial, which shall mark the grave
of poor Mathinna, when the march of civilisation shall have
swept away the tall moaning trees, and surrounded the
spot where her dust reposes by the bustle and excitement
incident to the pursuits of a money-loving and advancing
people.
Printed at the “ Mercury ” Steam Press Office, Hohart Town.




