

THE 1951 CENTENARY
and JUBILEE TRAIN


THE CENTENARY
and JUBILEE TRAIN
r | 1 HIS year, 1951, is a great year of Commemoration. We are
celebrating the Centenary of Government, the Centenary of
the Discovery of Gold and the Jubilee of the Commonwealth.
The Government of Victoria, in co-operation with the Government
of the Commonwealth, has organised this Centenary-Jubilee-Train
to travel throughout Victoria carrying exhibitions of art and fam-
ous manuscripts, and models of the great State and Federal under-
takings including those in being and those projected for the greater
development of our country. It is not a Train of propaganda but
one which is an exhibition of our time. The Train has been made
possible through the active co-operation of the Railway Commis-
sioners and the Officers of the Department. The Premier (The
Hon. Mr. J. G. B. McDonald, M.L.A.), is deeply appreciative of
the helpful co-operation the Government received from all State
and Federal Departments in the complicated work of organising this
historic Train.
I—THE FOURTH ARM
The present Department of Supply can be described as the Fourth Arm of the Services.
It is responsible for the supply of war material to the three Fighting Services. It is due to the
efforts of Supply that the Navy, Army and Air Force are supplied with the guns, ammunition,
aircraft, Naval weapons, clothing, food, and other equipment which enables them to maintain
themselves in the field.
The main divisions of the Department of Supply are Munitions- (Ordnance, Ammunition,
F.xplosives, Marine Engine and Ball Bearings Factories), Aircraft Production, Research and
Development (including the Woomcra Long Range Weapons Establishment), and Supply
Directorate (procuring agent for all Service requirements, not produced at the Government
Munitions, Aircraft and Clothing Factories).
2—ROYAL AUSTRALIAN NAVY
The spirit of the Royal Australian Navy is typified by an autographed foresail which
has a prominent place in the R.A.N. display on the Centenary-Jubilee train.
The sail carries the signatures of a number of members of the crew of "Perth,” the
Australian cruiser that was lost in action against the Japanese in 1942 in the battle of Sunda
Straits. After "Perth” was sunk a party of the ship’s company found a boat and tried to
escape from Java. They were unsuccessful and, later, were captured, but managed to retain
the sail during captivity.
The R.A.N. exhibit in the first carriage of the train carries a sectionalised model of
H.M.A.S. "Sydney,” a light fleet aircraft carrier (short-titled "C.V.L.”) of the Majestic class.
This ship arrived in Australia in 1949 and is the first of two aircraft carriers to be acquired.
In the second compartment is a representation of H.M.A.S. "Condamine,” an Australian-
built River class frigate, attacking a submarine with depth charges. The R.A.N. already has
12 frigates and intends building 6 more to modernise and enlarge its anti-submarine force.
3—THE ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE
Fifty years ago most people would have expressed the opinion that controlled flight in a
heavier-than-air machine was impossible and, in any case, not likely to be of much use.
Now, fifty years later, our young men move through Australian skies at better than 500
miles per hour, in machines built in this country by Australian technicians.
In the R.A.A.F. exhibit, models of R.A.A.F. Station, Point Cook, show how the advance-
ment in military aviation and in aircraft performance have required a continuous expansion
of the airfield and base facilities.
Other exhibits show some of the weapons of war employed by the Air Force, a typical
aero-engine, some typical radio and electronic equipment, and lastly but by no means least
important, some of the equipment used by the R.A.A.F. in meeting Australia’s search and
rescue commitments under International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) agreements.
4—TASK OF THE ARMY
The task of the Australian Military is to protect Australia from invasions; in the event of
war with a foreign power, to take offensive action with our allies ag'ain.iit our enemies; to carry
out tasks as required in support of the United Nations; and to assist the community in times
of emergency, as, for instance, during bush fires and floods.
The Australian Military Forces consist of the Australian Regular Army, which comprises
an infantry brigade group, Regular Army staffs with Citizen Military Forces units; and Head-
quarter and Base units required for the control and maintenance of the Army.
In the Citizen Forces are the essential elements of almost three infantry divisions, and two
Armoured Brigades.


S—POSTMASTER-GENERAL’S5 —POSTMASTER-GENERAL’S DEPARTMENT
The development of Post Office Communication services in Australia is truly a romantic
story, linked firmly with the history and development of a nation.
From 12 5 years ago right down to to-day, the story is one of dogged determination and
loyal service on the part of postal pioneers in every field of communication service. In
every way, it is a record of progress and achievement.
To-day, the huge organisation now known as the Postmaster-General’s Department is respon-
sible for satisfying the communication needs of all sections of the commercial, industrial and
social spheres by the provision of efficient and modern postal, telephone, telegraph, mail, air
mail and wireless services.
6—THE SNOWY RIVER PROJECT
Tho Snowy River Hydro-Electric Authority was created by the Commonwealth Government
.n 1949 under a special Act to make the Snowy Mountain area of Australia a vital part of the
country’s economic and defence developmental schemes by the generating of electricity from
the snow-fed streams of the Alps.
Work is already well under way, and power will be available to the Nation as each section
of the project is completed. The entire scheme is expected to take nearly a quarter of a century
to complete.
Some figures that demonstrate the immensity of the project are that the total power
will amount to 2,620,000 kilowatts, and that the total cost including transmission will be
£200,000,000. It also provides for extra water for irrigation to the extent of 1,700,000 acre-
feet.
The construction will include thirty-nine miles of tunnels, three major dams, and 325
miles of race lines.
9—VICTORIA’S ARTISTS
The paintings shown in this special train exhibition represent a cross section of Victorian
paintings from the National Gallery Collections. The selection places special emphasis on the
more unfamiliar works of the younger painters.
Buvelot, the earliest of the artists shown, is the father of Australian painting. The Heidel-
berg School is represented by paintings by McCubbin, Strceton and Roberts. Typical works of
the older painters Ramsay, Bunny, Quinn and Meldrum show the influences and tradition of
Australian painting.
The break with this tradition is revealed in the work of Shore, Frater, and Bell who intro-
duced modernism into Australia.
The remainder of the exhibition comprises the work of contemporary painters expressing
things seen in the light of their varying experience and training.
10—GOLD AND NATIONHOOD
The discovery of payable goldfields one hundred years ago hurried Australia to nationhood
Of all the States Victoria has proved the greatest gold producer, and although its yields to-day
give much lower returns than are obtained from agriculture or the wool industry, we owe to the
pioneers who first found gold, a particular debt of gratitude.
In opening up unknown tracts of country, in establishing new roads, new towns, and new
activities, they paved the way for the prosperity we know to-day. The mark of the gold
mining pioneers is everywhere. Not only in the monuments to great discoveries like the Welcome
Stranger nugget, and the great Bendigo and Ballarat goldfields, do we find them. Many prosperous
country towns and cities began as tent towns and felt the fever of the early gold rush days.
And gradually, as the mining became less active, thousands of miners turned to the land as
farmers instead of diggers, and persuaded it to yield them other and more permanent harvests
of wheat, fruit, wool, and meat.
7 —OUR NEW AUSTRALIANS
Australia’s future security and development Is dependent upon continued large-scale
migration under the successful auspices of the Commonwealth Department of Immigration.
The migration flow has stepped up our population growth during the past few years, and
if continued, will enable Australia to reach the target of 1 5,000,000 Australians in another
twenty-five years. At this rate of increase Australia’s population should reach 20,000,000 a
century earlier than by normal natural increase.
We must appreciate the contribution migrants are making to our economy and the wide
range of jobs they are filling in defence projects, agriculture, industry and other phases of
Australian life.
The Prime Minister’s call to the Australian people to be good neighbours to newcomers is
echoed throughout the country.
Additional work of the Department of Immigration is the issue of Commonwealth monthly
newspapers spearheading the assimilation drive, and literature, posters and booklets which are
distributed overseas to attract to Australia the best migrants offering.
B—TREASURES8 —TREASURES OF ART
In May, 1860, six years after the founding of the Public Library, the Trustees of that
body met to discuss the spending of £2,000 which had been voted for the purchase of works
of art, and thus was laid the foundation of the present Art Museum and National Gallery.
With the bequest of Alfred Felton following his death in 1904 the whole course of Gallery
affairs was altered for it enabled the Felton Trustees to compete on more or less equal terms
with buyers from richly endowed galleries on the other side of the world. Over £75 0,000
has already been made available for the purchase of works of art making the National Gallery
the largest in the Southern Hemisphere with a collection of over one thousand paintings, including
such masterpieces as the Van Eyck “Madonna and Child” and the Rembrandt “Self Portrait.”
11.
After a hundred years of amazing development we look back and honour the gold mining
men and their families who did so much for Victoria. In the display which represents the
Centenary of Gold a joint exhibit by the Public Library, the Museum of Applied Science, and
the Mines Department shows various aspects of the growth of the gold mining industry. Water
colours by Gill show the life of the early goldfields. Models show some of the equipment that
was used. Gold nugget replicas tell of the romance of unexpected "strikes”; and modern
photographs show how new developments have changed the face of some of the mining fields,
bringing such new methods as the giant bucket dredge.
In one hundred years the gold from the mines of this State has brought us both wealth
and a pioneering spirit, and we acknowledge our deep debt to the “diggers” of earlier times.
12— VICTORIA’S GREAT PUBLIC LIBRARY
The foundation stone of the Public Library of Victoria was laid in 1854, and in 1856,
despite great difficulties, this> institution was opened as the first free public library in Australia.
Successive Boards of Trustees, realising the debt owed to the pioneers, have built the library
into the greatest in the Southern Hemisphere and, in part payment of the debt, have gathered
together the historical records of the State.
To mark the centenary of responsible government, for the first time in history the Trustees
have permitted priceless and famous manuscripts to leave the building. Collected carefully
over the last century, a selection of the journals, diaries, private papers, paintings and drawings
of the men who made Victoria is presented here, in honour of those strong and upright men
who laboured always that Victoria might be a place in which their descendants would be proud
to live.


13—GATEWAY TO VICTORIA
Through the Port of Melbourne, port to the fifth largest city in the British Commonwealth
of Nations, passes l nine-tenths of Victoria’s sea-borne trade.
Control and manag.ment of the Port of Melbourne are vested in the Melbourne Harbour
Trust Commissioners, and the Board of th'* Harbour Trust comprises a full-time Chairman and
four part-time Commissioners.
The Commissioners are free from routine political control and the Trust acts as an inde-
pendent business board, making its own decisions, formulating its own plans, and, within its
statutory limitations, arranging its own finances.
The aim of the Port of Melbourne administration is to provide first-class facilities for
shipper, consignee, and all who depend for their well-being on goods imported or exported.
Since the recent war, the Commissioners have embarked on a programme designed to bring
to the public’s notice the functions and workings of the Port of Melbourne.
14— VICTORIAN POLICE FORCE
The Victoria Police Force has a complement of one Chief Commissioner, 84 officers and
2,990 sub-officers and men of which 224 are attached to the Criminal Investigation Branch, 356
to the Traffic Control Branch and 74 to specialized Sections such as Communications, Finger
Prints, Scientific and Technical.
The Force has a strength of 170 cars and 70 motor cycles which perform Wireless
patrol, mobile traffic and general transport duties. Two way radio equipment is standard on
all mobile patrol cars.
Each of the 12 country district headquarters Is equipped with radio telephony transmitters
and receivers which facilitates speedy communication between Police Headquarters and District
Headquarters and to 189 radio equipped police stations throughout the State. Two-way radio
telegraphy is also available from Police Headquarters to all the capital cities in the Common-
wealth.
17—THE FRUITFUL SOIL
The functions of the Victorian Department of Agriculture can be grouped under four
headings: regulatory, research and investigation, advisory and agricultural education. The
Department administers thirty-two Acts of Parliament designed for the betterment of Victorian
Agriculture, and conducts scientific research into many aspects of the production of agricultural
and horticultural crops and problems of the live stock industries.
Research stations are located at Werribec, Rutherglen, Walpeup, Burnley, Flealesville, Tatura,
and Scoresby. In addition, experimental and demonstrational plots are conducted on some 150
private farms and orchards throughout the State. Soil research is also conducted.
An important function of the Department is to convey to primary producers the results
of scientific research and to advise them in regard to adopting improved scientific methods.
Technical advice is conveyed to them by experienced officers of the Department through several
media including the following: farmers’ field days, agricultural competitions, lectures and
wireless talks, farmers’ classes, mobile film units and publications and press statements.
18—WEALTH FROM WATER
The State Rivers and Water Supply Commission supplies water to the people in 128 country
towns in Victoria. It provides water for the irrigation of three-quarters of a million acres
in 28 irrigation districts. And it distributes drinking water through channels, bores or pipelines
to farms covering million acres of the State.
Thirty-five large dams and 230 smaller reservoirs have been built by the Commission, which
has also constructed 1 5,000 miles of channels, thousands of bridges, regulators and other channel
structures. It has laid down 1,100 miles of water pipes to supply water for domestic and
industrial purposes in country towns; and acquired, subdivided and settled many thousands of
acres of land for irrigation.
The value of production from dry lands made irrigable has increased the national production
by £17,000,000 a year and assured domestic and stock water supplies in the formerly waterless
Wimmera and Mallee Districts have made possible a further increase of at least £20,000,000
in wheat and wool.
15—PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
The Department Is the principal authority for the designing and constructing, fitting out,
»nd maintaining of buildings for State Departments, and for renting accommodation for such
Departments, throughout the State of Victoria, for constructing and maintaining harbour
facilities in Port Phillip and elsewhere along the Victorian coast, excluding the ports of Mel-
bourne, Geelong, and Portland, which are controlled by local Harbour Trusts.
The Department is also responsible for the general supervision of municipalities under the
Local Government Act.
The expenditure of the Department is now about £7m. per annum, of which £3£m. is
spent on school buildings and teachers’ residences; £lm. on sanatorium and mental institutions,
and about £200,000 each on police buildings and residences, agricultural buildings, harbour
works, and municipal works, the balance being spent on many miscellaneous works, such as
foreshore protection, development of tourists’ resorts, immigration hostels and other temporary
housing, etc., and numerous other buildings and other programmes.
16—PROGRESS OF EDUCATION
The dual control of education by the National and Denominational School Boards In the
eighteen fifties was followed in 18 62 by the Common Schools Act establishing a Board of
Education. Not until the Education Act of 1872 did education become free, secular and
compulsory.
To-day 12,000 teachers are employed by the Education Department in its various types
of schools —primary: 2,150 schools with 185,000 pupils; secondary: 129 schools with 36,000
pupils; technical: 3 5 schools with 1 5,000 pupils.
Special branches guide special activities such as school broadcasts, visual education, music
and speech training, physical education, horticulture, forestry, young farmers’ clubs, art and
crafts, correspondence tuition and the education of the handicapped children. Wider educational
facilities are being extended into country districts.
19—IMPORTANCE OF LANDS DEPARTMENT
The law relating to Crown Lands is contained principally in the Land Acts, which are
administered by the Minister of Lands, and for administration purposes the State is divided into
six divisions.
The first settlements in State consisted of the large grazing runs; these were followed
by private selections which carried the right of alienation. Then came various forms of small
holdings followed by selection purchase and closer settlement. Of the State’s total area of
56,000,000 acres, approximately 30,000,000 acres have already been made freehold.
The Lancia Department has played, and is still playing, a very important part in the
development of the State. Settlement in the Mallee and Wimmcra developed the resources for
wheat production, closer settlement furthered dairying and mixed farming, and, with the
advent of irrigation, the Crown land areas suitable for orchards and dried fruits were established
on a sound economic basis.
20—PLANNING FOR DEVELOPMENT
The Central Planning Authority, which is administered by the Premier’s Department, was
constituted in 1946 to promote "regional” planning in the State of Victoria.
Broadly, regional planning aims at the development of each Region of the State "in order
that it may support a maximum population with an adequate standard of living.”
Committees of local people, departmental officers and others have been set up in each
region, and, working in collaboration with, and with the advice of the Central Planning
Authority, are making a study of existing development as a preliminary to advising the Govern-
ment as to the best means of achieving that maximum development.
It is the function of the Central Planning Authority to co-ordinate all plans of the Regional
Committees and those of other planning bodies in the State.


21 —POWER AND FUEL FOR VICTORIA
The State Electricity Commission has had a major role in the development of Victoria*!
natural resources both for the generation of electric power and the production of high-grade
fuel.
In its comparatively short history the Commission has provided power for a supply network
covering two-thirds of the area of the State; over half a million consumers; 700 country centres
now served; and 11,000 additional farms in the past 10 years.
Under the heading, "Power from Brown Coal,” the Centenary-Jubilee train exhibit illustrates
the operation of the famous Yallourn open cut; the great Yallourn power station, Victoria’s
main source of electricity; work now in progress to double the output of Yallourn power station
within the next few years.
A separate section, "Fuel from Brown Coal,” describes' the operation of the pioneer briquette
factory at Yallourn and another deals with "Electricity from Water Power,” with a compre-
hensive diagram of the Kiewa hydro-electric project.
22—COUNTRY FIRE AUTHORITY
The Country Fire Authority is a statutory corporation created by the Country Fire Authority
Act of 1944. It is the successor of the Country Fire Brigades’ Board and the Bush Fire Brigades’
Committee which controlled the Urban and Rural Fire Services respectively.
The Authority is responsible to the Chief Secretary, but has wide powers and duties and
an effective degree of autonomy. The Authority consists of ten members, appointed by the
Executive Council for not exceeding three years, representing the Government, fire insurance
companies, municipalities, rural fire brigades and urban fire brigades.
The territory for which the Authority is revponsible is that portion of the State of Victoria
which remains after deducting the Aletropolitan Fire District and the State Forests. In this
area, the Authority has the duty of preventing and suppressing fires.
For administration purposes the State is divided into twenty-four regions, three of which
(Ballarat, Bendigo and Geelong) are entirely urban, the remainder comprising both urban and
rural areas.
25—RAILWAYS AND PROGRESS
The Victorian Railways’ exhibit on the Centenary-Jubilee Train portrays the growth and
development of railways in Victoria and tells of their Influence on the prosperity of the State.
The main panel, on the wall of the car, traces the history of the system by means of a
series of photographs. These include pictures of locomotives and other rolling stock from
the early days onwards, and some showing scenes and people of bygone days.
On a table at the foot of the panel is illustrated the industrial development of the Victorian
Railways. These are a series of illuminated maps showing the spread of the railway network
over the State since 18 54, and incorporating some of the future developments of the service.
The accompanying letterpress gives a brief outline of "Operation Phcenix,” the Victorian
Railways’ £BO million 10-year rehabilitation plan.
26—HEALTH OF THE PEOPLE
The first Health Act—lB Victoria No. 13 —entitled "An Act for Promoting the Public
Health in Populous Places in the Colony of Victoria” came into force on the 19th December,
1854.
During the period 185 5 to 1890, several amendments were made to the Health Act so as
to bring it into line with English Public Health Legislation.
Tha Ministry of Health Act, 1943, came into operation on the 14th February, 1944, when
all matters relating to health, including Hospitals, training of persons in health services, and
all medical care of people by the State became the responsibility of the Minister of Health.
The Infant Welfare Section of the Department of Health was set up in 1926.
In 1944 the Maternal and Child Hygiene Branch was established. This Branch took over
the functions previously carried out by the Infant Welfare Division of the Department of
Public Health, and in addition a Pre-natal and Pre-school Child Welfare Section were included
The School Medical and School Dental Services were also incorporated in thij branch.
23—HIGHWAYS AND ROADS
The Country Roads Board was constituted under the Country Roads Act 1912 (now
incorporated in the Country Roads Act 1928), and is responsible for the administration of
that Act, to achieve a better system for the construction and maintenance of roads.
Certain of the roads throughout the State are classified by the Board and are State high-
ways, main roads, tourists’ roads, and forest roads —a total of 14,3 34 miles. The Board
assumes responsibility for the full cost of all such types other than main roads, in respect
of which the Municipal Councils are required to contribute not more than one-third of the
cost of maintenance.
From time to time the Board is requested to undertake, on behalf of other authorities,
including the State Electricity Commission, Housing Commission, Forests Commission, etc.,
works for which it is suitably equipped from point of view of technical staff and the operation
of earth moving plant. In addition, the Board has from time to time constructed bridges
in the metropolitan area.
24—MINES AND THE COMMUNITY
The work of the Victorian Mines Department is many-sided and of its wide reach into
every-day affairs the public, generally, is unaware.
The mining of gold is, of course, its most spectacular activity, but from the long-range
view the winning of brown coal is now assuming greater importance, as this mineral occurs in
Victoria in seams of remarkable size and promises to encourage vast industrial development.
In a hundred different ways the metals and minerals from Victoria serve us and help us to
enjoy a high standard of living. In the small Mines Department exhibit on the Centenary Tram
an attempt haa been made to show interesting samples of the various metals and minerals, and
beside each one is a short description of its uses. By assisting in the winning of metals and
minerals the Victorian Mines Department is unobtrusively helping everyone to comfort and con-
venience.
27—FISHERIES AND GAME
The Fisheries and Games Departments’ display in the Centenary-Jubilee train illustrates
thil department’s activities in pictures.
It has two purposes; Firstly, it is intended to show the public and particularly the country
people what the department is doing. The department is proud to do this because it knows
that what it is doing is worth while.
Gone are the days when this Department was concerned purely with inspection work and
the policing of regulations. While that is still being carried out, it is hoped that, with enlighten-
ment, it will become less necessary in the future.
Such enlightenment will perhaps protect valuable fauna and help the observance of
Fisheries and Game regulations, for these regulations will be based on research that will cut
out guess work. This is the modern method of arriving at the truth, and it will demonstrate
why the department wants you to throw that ten-inch fish back or why it wants you to wait
until a certain month before shooting a duck.
28—CONTROL OF THE FORESTS
The Forests Commission cares for and manages the State Forests. These consist of nearly
5.000. acres of permanent forest and 10,000,000 acres of unoccupied Crown lands. Until
recent years Victoria’s requirements of sawn timber came from forests within 120 miles of
Melbourne, but continued milling, the enormous losses in the 1926, 1932 and 1939 fires and
and a greatly increased demand has required the opening up of more distant forests.
To allow this expansion of sawmilling activities the Commission has built over 7,000
miles of roads in the past 10 years. These roads are permanent assets' and are vital to harvesting
the crop, and the protection and supervision of the regenerated forest. In the decade 193 8-
1948 the production of sawn timber from State forests has doubled from 1 00,000,000 to
200.000. super feet. This production cannot be increased greatly but it can be maintained
provided losses by fire are reduced to a minimum.


AUSTRALIA’S JUBILEE
AUSTRALIA as a Federation is cckbr.uing its Golden Jubilee this year, the 50ch anniversary
ol its birch. It is 5 0 years since, by the Federation of individual British Colonies into
the Commonwealth of Australia, she acquired the status of a Nation. It marks half a
century of imposing growth and development. Truly, as our Prime Minister (Mr. R. G.
Menzies) has said, it is not only an occasion for great rejoicing and satisfaction, but also
an ideal occasion for national stocktaking.
Actually it is more than 100 years ago since men with vision first dreamed of Federation.
Back in the 1840’s when the various Colonies, still suffering great growing pains, were
hampering each other by restrictive tariff and other measures, there were already thinkers
and idealists who foresaw that, with the common links of origin, loyalty to the Crown, and
objectives, an eventual union was both inevitable and desirable. Many proposals for the linking-
together of the Colonies were advanced spasmodically, the new Colony indeed gave a very
strong lead, and a loose but incomplete link, the Federal Council, was forged in 188 5. But
it is generally conceded that it is to Sir Henry Parkes, then Premier of the Colony of New
South Wales, credit for initiating
the full, Australia-wide movement
must be given. Following a mem-
orable speech at Tenterfield in
1889 the forging of the bond of
Federation gained ever-increasing
impetus that even a number of
fairly serious rebuffs could not ar-
rest.
Sir Henry’s proposals were
placed before an Australian Feder-
ation conference at Melbourne in
1890 and this was followed next
year by an Australasian Convention
at Sydney. A draft constitution
embodying the best of both British
and American charters was drawn
up but failed to be ratified by the
individual Colonial Parliaments.
Another decade passed before the
advocates of Federation gained suf-
ficient numerical support to ap-
proach Queen Victoria, through the
Imperial Parliament—and even th n
Western Australia was still stand-
ing aloof. Early in 1900 a dele-
gation from the Colonies, repre-
sented by such names as Barton,
Deakin, Kingston, Dickson and
Fysh, went to London with a draft
constitution for the proposed Com-
monwealth and after some altera-
tions by the Colonial Secretary
(Joseph Chamberlain) it was submitted to the Imperial Parliament.
Events then moved quickly. The Bill was passed by Parliament and on July 9 Queen
Victoria gave her assent. On July 14 it was announced that the Earl of Hopecoun would be
the first Governor-General of the Commonwealth. Two weeks later the people of the Colony of
Western Australia took a hurried vote and decided to join the Commonwealth.
The Earl of Hopetoun arrived at Sydney at the close of the year and in Centennial Park
on January 1, 1901, proclaimed the Commonwealth of Australia and was himself sworn in as
Governor-General in the presence of nearly 100,000 people.
On March 20, 1901, members of the first Federal Parliament were elected and the Rt.
Hon. William Morris Hughes, sitting member for East Sydney in the present Federal Parliament,
was among those elected on that day.
To Melbourne fell the honour of being the first seat of Federal Government and the first
sitting of the newly proclaimed Commonwealth Parliament was held in the Exhibition Building.
The Exhibition Building on that day, May 9, 1901, presented a colourful and impressive spectacle
as the then Duke of York (later King George V) opened proceedings before a gathering
of more than 12,000 people.
Subsequently, until 1927 when their Majesties King George VI and Queen Elizabeth (then
Dime and Duchess of York) opened Parliament house at Canberra in the Australian Capita!
His Royal Highness, the Duke of York (afterwards His Majesty, King George V.) opening the first
Commonwealth Parliament in the Melbourne Exhibition Building on May 9, 1901
Territory, Federal Parliament continued to sir at Melbourne in the Houses of the Victorian
Legislature.
Thus our Jubilee, constitutionally, hinges on two significant dates in Australian history—
January 1, 1901, and May 9, 1901. New Year’s Day saw the Royal Proclamation of the
Australian Commonwealth and the swearing-in of our first Governor-General. The second date
marked the opening of the nation’s first Commonwealth Parliament, in Melbourne.
There are many other national days, too, such as January 26, the day in 1788 when
Captain Arthur Phillip unfurled the British flag at Port Jackson, April 25, to mark the glorious
landing of the Anzacs on Gallipoli in 1915, and November 11, when the armistice was signed
to end the first World War.
Australia’s directive for the commemoration celebrations has come from the Prime Minister
himself. It is crisp, comprehensive, inspiring:
"This is a time in which we should demonstrate our progress in the arts, in learning, in
science, in industrial development, and in sport,” he said. "We must strive to express the
determination of the Australian
people to work for the development
and prosperity of Australia and to
make the next fifty years of our
national existence even more im-
portant than the first fifty. Let
us take stock of what has been
done, what must be done now, and
what we must do in the future.”
Great progress has been made
in Australia since the establish-
ment of Federation. At first Aus-
tralia was regarded solely as a great
land of pastoral and agricultural
development but a marked change
was noted after the First War
during which its industrial potential
became evident. Industrial pro-
gress has continued and with the
Second War new industries came
into being, others were expanded,
and Australia, for the first time,
became a large manufacturing
country with an export trade in
secondary goods.
The necessity of war forced
Australia to make aeroplanes, arm-
aments and mechanical vehicles
which previously had been imported.
Shipbuilding was carried out on a
large scale, and also machine tools
and delicate optical instruments
were manufactured. The newsprint
industry was developed. In fact, almost all branches of industry came into being or were inten-
sified.
So great has been the growth of manufacturing industries* that, during the year 1948-49,
946 new manufacturing companies were established. The nominal capital of those new companies
represented nearly £30,000,000. In the same period, 357 established businesses announced expan-
sion plans at a total cost of more than £18,000,000.
While the story of the industrial development of Australia is a great romance, it must
not be overlooked that Australia still leads the world as a sheep-raising and wool-producing
country. She grows about one-quarter of the world’s wool from approximately one-sixth of
the world’s total flocks. Selective breeding for more than a century has made her the source
of the finest merino wool —more than 75 per cent, of her flocks are merino.
Wheat is Australia’s principal agricultural industry, and in the year 1942-43 the value
of all Australia’s farming production was £297,000,000 —equal to nearly £39 a head of popu-
lation. In 1947-48, the latest period available, the figure had grown to £583,800,000 repre-
senting £76 a head of population.
Celebrating our 50th anniversary we are now more than 8,185,000 strong and we are still
building our population, aided by immigration, more considerably than at any previous period
in the nation’s history.


VICTORIA’S CENTENARY
On July Ist, 1951, the State of Victoria celebrates the centenary of its establishment as
a self-governing colony.
What was the Port Phillip District of New South Wales had not attained its tenth year
of existence before its people’s demand for independence became insistent. Not until 1850 did
the agitation have any definite result. In that year complete separation of the District of Port
Phillip from New South Wales was embodied in a "Bill for the Better Government of Her
Majesty’s Australian Colonies.”
It was a signal honour that the name chosen should be that of Her Majesty Queen
Victoria, then in the thirty-first year of her reign.
The Bill set forth that the constitution of the Colony of Victoria should be similar to
that of the parent colony. Provision was made for the ce3sation of the authority of the
Governor of New South Wales over the newly-created colony; for the institution of a Supreme
Court in Victoria; and for the creation of a Federal Union among the colonies for general
purposes, but primarily to secure uniformity in the fixing of tariffs.
Although the Bill had passed both
Houses of the Imperial Parliament
by June 18 50 and had received the
Royal Assent, it was not until No-
vember 11th, 1 8 50, that Melbourne
heard the news. Formalities com-
pleted, His Excellency the Governor
of New South Wales, Sir Charles
Fitz Roy, by proclamation issued
on July Ist, 1851, declaied that
"The Territories hitherto comprised
within the said District of Port
Phillip, including the town of Mel-
bourne, have thereupon been, and
now are, separated from the Colony
of New South Wales, and have
been erected into, and will hence-
forth form, a separate colony to
be known and designated as the
Colony of Victoria . . . .”
In accordance with the terms of
the new constitution, Mr. Charles
Joseph La Trobe, who had been
superintendent of the District of
Port Phillip, was promoted to the
status of Lieutenant-Governor, and
on July 15th, 1851, he formed his
first administration.
So, with a uni-cameral Par-
liament a Legislative Council,
partly nominated—and an Adminis-
tration in being, the way was clear
to rapid progress. In fifteen years the population of the province had risen from 224 to
77,345. Revenue from all sources was increasing rapidly.
But nobody anticipated the wonderful gift Fortune was to bestow on the new colony.
Even as the formalities which attended its birth were being completed, the discovery of gold
in the Bathurst district of New South Wales was opening the most marvellous chapter in
Victoria’s early history.
A short while later, in July, 1851, the gold discoveries extended to Victoria which, almost
overnight, became known to the world as the New El Dorado.
If it is right to say that the swaddling clothes of the District of Port Phillip were of wool,
it is equally true that the Colony of Victoria was born with a golden spoon in its mouth.
In little more than eight years, 18 5 1-18 59, the miners of Victoria produced gold to the value
of £87,045,276, and in six years the papulation of Victoria increased from 77,345 to 410,766,
of which 65 per cent, were migrants from England, Scotland and Ireland.
Overwhelmed by the rush and turmoil of extraordinarily busy years, Lieutenant-Governor
Latrobe resigned. His successor, Governor Sir Charles Hotham, who arrived in Melbourne in
June, 1854, found the colony in a growing state of turmoil because of the opposition of the
diggers to heavy licence fees. Their unrest culminated in the Eureka Stockade riots of 18 54
in which in a clash with the military, an officer, four privates and 24 miners lost their lives.
Official Opening of the first House of Legislature, in St. Patrick’s Hall, Bourke Street, Melbourne,
on November 13, 1851
The constitution of 18 50 had not given complete satisfaction. Considerable attention
had been given to the subject in England, with the result that the Legislative Council of New
South Wales was asked to construct a constitution for itself, taking the Canadian consitution
for a model.
In 18 53 the Secretary of State for the Colonies sent a despatch to the Victorian Lieutenant-
Governor, inviting Victoria to frame for itself a new constitution. By the following year a
draft constitution had been prepared, approved of by the Victorian Legislative Council, and
forwarded to England in the form of a Bill which was passed by the Imperial Parliament under
the title "A Bill to Establish a Constitution In and for the Colony of Victoria” and received
the Royal Assent in July, 18 55.
The new constitution was brought into operation by proclamation in the Victorian
Government Gazette dated November 23, 1 8 55. It set up two Houses of Legislature—a Legis-
lative Council and a Legislative Assembly, with a restricted franchise for each.
But, even before that, Victoria
had made one of chose changes
which, from time to time, have
invested her legislative experience
with interest for students of poli-
tics in other parts of the world.
The principle of voting by bal-
lot was adopted and, thereafter, in
England and America, when th-
ballot was proposed, it was gener-
ally referred to as the "Victorian”
or "Australian” ballot.
The meeting of the first Vic-
torian Parliament under responsible
Government took place on Novem-
ber 21, 1856. A few months pre-
viously, a further measure of de-
mocratic reform was the inaugura-
tion of the’ Eight Hours system of
working hours in the buildiny
trades of Melbourne.
The next th : ng accomplished
was the abolition, in August, 1 8 57,
of the property disqualification of
members of the Legislative Assem-
bly, On November 24, 1 8 57.
manhood suffrage for electors of
the Legislative Assembly was made
law, and on December 17, 1858,
the number of members of the
Legislative Assembly was increased
from 60 to 70. There have since
been other increases.
By 1890, Victoria was an exceedingly well-developed colony, not only in primary and
secondary industries but also in respect of its public utilities, educational systems, and enter-
prises generally. Its population had passed the 1,000,000 mark, deposits in its State Savings
Bank had increased from £1,661,409 in 1880 to £9,1 10,793 in 1 890.
Victoria’s total area is not large but from its auriferous, agricultural, pastoral, and horti-
cultural districts, vast wealth has been, and is still being, won. In the !()() years since
separation, its population has increased from 77,000 to 2,170,000. The total net value of
recorded production, primary (£130,000,000) and secondary (£lB 5,000,000) is (£3 1 5,000,000).
It has a livestock population of 19,000,000 sheep, 1.750,000 dairy cattle, 750,000 beef cattle,
and 220,000 horses. The wool clip for 1949-50 weighed 195,404,886 lbs. and its gross value
was £37,105,206.. From the wheatgrowing areas the average crop in good seasons is in the
vicinity of 50,000,000 bushels the value of which, at present figures, exceeds £2 5.000,000.
The State’s consolidated revenue in 1949, latest figures available, reached record figure.
£46,842,000.
No enterprises of greater magnitude than those in being in Victoria are to be founl
in any province of the British Empire. They are a true reflex of the indomitable spirit an 1
breadth of vision of leaders of to-day and yesterday in the political sphere and that of pub' r
and private enterprise, and of a courageous citizenry, that have made Victoria great and will
keep her so.


