

THE GROWTH AND DEVE[?]
PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICES AUSTRALIA
DURING FIFTY YEARS
BY A. J. METCALFE,
Director-General of Health, Commonwealth Department of Health
The story of Australia’s public health services over the last fifty years,
like so many other facets of her development, is one of great pioneering,
of intense activity and of the emergence of a pattern as varied as the
kaleidoscope itself. In the building of this pattern many influences and
agencies, both inside and outside, have been at work.
The beginning of the twentieth century introduced an era unparalleled
in human history—vast discoveries in science opened the doors to the
development of a new world. Electricity, bacteriology, chemistry, nuclear
physics, refrigeration—to mention only a few of the discoveries which
were to revolutionize man’s material way of life —brought countless bless-
ings to mankind as well as major problems.
Public health has shared in the triumphs of medicine and science. An
increasing knowledge of the causation of disease and of the means of
prevention has put into man’s hands the weapons which have saved
thousands of lives and increased the span of life. No period in the history
of medical science has seen such progress and so many far-reaching
changes as the last fifty years. These in turn have had their impact on
the expanding and rapidly growing Australian public health organization.
Early pioneering with sanitation and hygiene control was carried out by
State health authorities. The turn of the century and the advent of
Federation saw the Australian public health services unhampered by
tradition or established forms ready to be stimulated by the vast changes
which were to come in the new era of medicine.
Some indication of the existing conditions at the end of the last
century and of the road of endeavour which lay ahead is given in a state-
ment made at the Inter-colonial Medical Congress of Australasia held in
Melbourne in 1888-1889:
There is nothing to prevent as perfect a condition of sanitation
in the Australian colonies as obtains in England. We have not over-
crowding and poverty to contend with, our climate is one of the
most healthful in the world, and we have ample means at our
disposal. What we require is (1) special legislation; (2) organization
and co-ordination of authority; (3) the sympathy and assistance of
the public, who, at the present time, display an apathy in all matters
of public hygiene.
A public health service, in its fundamental purpose, is a service to the
community, whether it be to a nation, to a State, or to a local group. In
the final count, its success or failure is measured in mortality and mor


bidity statistics. A few examples from Australia’s statistics give striking
proof of the changes that have been brought about through progressive
public health measures over the years. In the latest health records (1948)
from the State of Queensland it is reported that typhoid fever is rare
and is not a public health problem. In 1885 the death rate per 100,000 of
population in this State was 61.9. Records in New South Wales of the death
rate from tuberculosis in the year 190 D showed a rate of 98 per 100,000.
By 1948 the rate had been reduced to 26.9. The rate for typhoid fever
during the same period fell from 29.5 to 0.1 per 100,000. Australian infant
mortality figures show the same rapid decline. In 1907 the rate was 81.1.
By 1917 it had fallen to 55.91 per 1000 births. In 1949 it was 25.26.
Long before Federation, State authorities had introduced their own
legislation to meet their local public health problems as they developed.
Such problems as the control of water supplies and drainage, notification
of infectious diseases, and the control of food standards, were some of the
early matters for State legislation. Quarantine services were also estab-
lished under State control, following outbreaks of smallpox at intervals
during the last century. Outbreaks of this disease in 1881 and 1884 led to a
conference of State representatives in 1884 to discuss a uniform system
of quarantine for Australia. This was the first Australian public health
conference.
In 1900 bubonic plague reached Australia, and an Inter-Colonial Plague
Conference was held to discuss the situation. The definite need for the
control of certain public health matters on a national basis was clearly
demonstrated at the conference.
It was following this conference, which had considered and then dis-
regarded the role of the flea as the transmitter of plague, that Dr. Ash-
burton Thompson, Chief Medical Officer to the Government of New South
Wales and one of the most distinguished figures in Australian public health
during the early part of the century, made an intensive study of the
epidemiological facts observed during the 1900 outbreak in Sydney, and
established irrefutably that infection was transferred from infected rats
to man. As a result of the acceptance of these conclusions, Dr. Thompson
became an international figure in the study of plague prevention, and his
discovery was responsible for the now complete control of the disease
which can be effected by efficient rat control on incoming ships, and in the
community.
During these years, Federation was in the making, and with the
framing of the Federal Constitution, the Commonwealth was given power
to legislate with regard to quarantine.
In addition, under Section 96 of the Constitution, whereby the Com-
monwealth could make grants to any State under such conditions as it
thought fit, the Federal Government was placed in a position where it could
assist the health policies of the States.
The fourth conference of principal health officials of the States was
called by the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth in 1904, and the
recommendations of this conference were embodied in the first Australian
public health legislation on a national basis, the Quarantine 1 Act of 1908.
Under this Act, a Commonwealth Quarantine Service was set up
under a Director of Quarantine, the service to be administered by the
Commonwealth.
The proximity of Australia to Asia and the inclusion within her terri-
tories of large tropical areas emphasized the need for understanding the
conditions under which tropical diseases existed and their effects on
white population living in the areas of their incidence. The advent of
Federation in Australia had also established “White Australia” as a
national policy, which meant that the tropical areas of Australia would


have to be developed by white men adapting themselves to climatic and.
other physical conditions of the tropics.
The need for more knowledge and research into these problems was
obvious, and in 1909, as a result of the joint enterprise of the Common-
wealth and Queensland Governments and the Universities of Sydney, Mel-
bourne and Adelaide, an Institute of Tropical Medicine was established at
Townsville in north Queensland, having as its purpose the study of tropical
medicine under Australian conditions.
Among the many fields of investigation in which the Institute played
an important part were those of investigation into obscure tropical fevers
prevalent in Queensland at this time. In addition, assistance was given in
the hookworm campaign which was conducted in 1916 in cooperation with
the International Health Board of the Rockefeller Foundation following
the discovery of a high incidence of the disease in parts of tropical
Queensland,
Subsequent developments have proved the establishement of the
Institute to be one of the landmarks in Australian medical history. It
laid the foundations of an Australian medical training centre in tropical
medicine and public health to be established later at the University of
Sydney and led to the development of a major research school in tropical
diseases, not only for Australia but also for the many island territories
of the south-west Pacific area.
The year 1900 marked the beginning of a new era in public health
services in Australia. New ideas of social security were revolutionizing the
social structure of western democracy. The acceptance of legal respon-
sibility by the community for the health and welfare of the individual
showed its first signs of growth in Australia in the passing of the Invalid
Pensions Act, 1909. This marked the first step in the vast expansion of
public health and welfare services which has taken place in Australia
during the last forty years. Public health and social welfare had emerged
as a national as well as a State and local government responsibility.
The following two decades saw fresh problems of national health
arising, to meet which.,nation-wide machinery and national policy became
increasingly necessary. The first World War focused attention upon
national health standards as revealed in the medical examination of
recruits, and also brought in its train an increased realization of the
significance of the social diseases. The problem of the rehabilitation of the
physically disabled after war became, for the first time in Australia, a
national one. Finally, the nation-wide influenza epidemic which struck
Australia with the rest of the world in 1918-1919 and an outbreak of
bubonic plague in 1921-1922, extended both the quarantine and general
public health services. It became clear that the time had come for the
development of a wider concept of a public health service and the estab-
lishment of more adequate machinery at both the Commonwealth and
State levels, with a closer association between public health and the ever-
widening field of clinical medicine and medical research.
These national experiences led in 1921 to the creation of a Common-
wealth Department of Health. The Director of Quarantine became the
Director-General of Health and the quarantine services were brought
under the control of a Minister for Health instead of the Minister for
Trade and Customs. At the same time the Institute of Tropical Medicine,
which had been established in Queensland in 1908, was put under the
control of the newly created Department of Health, this special research
service being thus brought into closer contact with the practical problems
of a growing health service.
The establishment and subsequent Work of the Health Organization of
the Deague of Nations called for increasing international responsibilities
for Australia’s expanding national health policy, and brought her into


active contact, through international conferences, with the changing 1 world
of medicine and its practical application to public health problems.
The prospect of the cessation of vital supplies of vaccine and other
biological products from overseas during war-time led the Commons
wealth, after the first world war, to extend the operations of its own
production unit, known as the “Calf Lymph Depot,” which had been
established some years before. This organization has now expanded into a
nation-wide service, “The Commonwealth Serum Laboratories,” with head-
quarters at Royal Park, Melbourne, and manufactures almost the whole
range of biological products required for both human and veterinary
use. Among the many preparations of the Laboratories is sufficient
penicillin to meet all ordinary needs in Australia. Research is also carried
on continuously, and the Laboratories serve as the national centre for the
maintenance in Australia of the international standards for biological
products set down by the World Health Organization.
In addition to the Serum Laboratories, the Commonwealth also
developed a network of health laboratories located at strategic points, as
an essential part of the quarantine system, and also to serve as 1 research
and diagnostic centres in localities where particular public health prob-
lems were known to exist. Among these special laboratories are those
established in the tropical areas of Queensland and the Northern Territory.
A laboratory was established at the gold-mining town of Kalgoorlie
in Western Australia where special work on silicosis and tuberculosis
among miners is carried out. In these services, the Commonwealth main-
tains close cooperation with State and local health authorities.
As a result of increasing Commonwealth interest in public health
and the need for cooperation with the States, a Royal Commission was
appointed in 1925 “to enquire into and report upon public health as a
matter for legislation and administration by the Commonwealth in con-
junction with the States.”
The Commission’s terms of reference covered a wide field, including
the prevention and control of disease in the Commonwealth, with special
emphasis upon the coordination of the medical services of Common-
wealth departments, and the cooperation of Commonwealth and State
health authorities.
Following extensive inquiries, recommendations over a wider field were
made by the Commission, and this opened up a third and still more im-
portant period of development in the history of public health in Australia.
Among the most important of the recommendations of the Commission
were those advocating the setting up of a Federal Health Council, and
the provision of specialist training for public health personnel, and of
Increased facilities for medical research.
These recommendations were translated into action within a relatively
short time. The first Federal Health Council met in Melbourne in January,
1927, In 1930 the Institute of Tropical Medicine was transferred fom
Townsville, in north Queensland, to the University of Sydney, where it
was merged with the newly established Australian School of Public Health
and Tropical Medicine, which was to provide advanced training in public
health and preventive medicine specially related to Australian conditions.
The School also was to become a major research centre for tropical
medicine, with special application to the south-west Pacific areas. The
value of the School has been more than justified in the magnificent
contribution which it made in the field of tropical medicine during the
Pacific campaigns of the second World War.
The Royal Commission had also recommended considerable expansion
to Commonwealth health administration, including the provision of sub-
sidies to States for expenditure on health and the setting up of Divisions


to investigate and control such diseases as tuberculosis. The importance
of increased coordination of all medical services and the medical examina-
tions of migrants was emphasized, and attention was drawn to the need
for uniformity in the assembling of vital statistics and in the control
of imported food and drugs. Other matters on which it was felt that
national policies should be developed were maternal hygiene and child
welfare, industrial hygiene, public health engineering and health education
of the people.
The next ten years saw rapid expansion in all directions. The Federal
Health Council acted as an expert advisory body on all matters of public
health which came within the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth and
became the channel through which the States and Commonwealth pooled
their knowledge oh public health problems. This machinery has been of
Incalculable benefit to State health authorities responsible directly for the
the health of the people within their borders and has tended to bring
about improved standards of public health practice in all States.
This period saw also the great advances in medical science and social
medicine in many parts of the world, being increasingly applied to public
health problems. Falling birth rates became matters of national policy and
focused attention on maternal and infant mortality and upon maternal and
child health and welfare.
Extensive research, and the attention focused on living standards of
the peoples of the world, established nutrition as one of the major factors
in national health. Research into tropical and other diseases became
increasingly important and demanded the attention of all progressive
health authorities.
Australia’s public health services were still in the building stage when
these significant advances In medical science were taking place, and it was
inevitable that their impact should be felt with increasing intensity.
The reports of the Federal Health Council, from its 1 first meeting in
1927 to its Tenth Session held in Perth in September, 1936, reveal a wide
range of activity covering surveys into various public health fields, such
as the control in Australia of tuberculosis, leprosy, hookworm, cancer and
venereal diseases. Investigations had been made into aspects of maternal
and infant mortality and reports submitted on the notification of infectious
diseases, the control of dangerous drugs, problems of industrial hygiene,
and standards and regulations in connexion with the preparation and sale
of biological products for both human and veterinary use.
In 1937 the powers and scope of the Federal Health Council were
broadened to enable the Commonwealth to interest itself more extensively
in the field of research, and to provide additional machinery whereby
cooperation between State and Commonwealth health agencies could be
increased through an exchange of knowledge concerning public health
and the latest research in this field.
The new Council, with Its name changed to the National and Medical
Research Council, has been responsible for the initiation of many health
projects involving valuable health surveys and research. These activities,
in spite of intervening war conditions, have resulted in a great stimula-
tion of public interest in national health, and in Increased activity on the
part of the Commonwealth and State health authorities.
The first of the listed functions of the new Council give an indication of
its scope:
To advise Commonwealth and State Governments on matters of
public health legislation and administration, and on any matters
concerning health, medical and dental care, and medical research.


The nature of the ten sub-committees of the Council now constituted
gives a picture of the field of activity. These committees cover medical
research, industrial hygiene, maternal and child welfare, nutrition, overseas
travelling fellowships, radioactive isotopes, streptomycin and other anti-
biotics, tropical physiology and hygiene, tuberculosis, and X rays.
One of the most important steps taken in 1937 was the setting up of
a Medical Research Endowment Fund, which has been applied to the
furtherance of medical research throughout Australia in universities and
other institutions and to the provision of fellowships for post-graduate
study abroad.
Many interesting fields of research closely associated with health
problems in the fighting services were investigated during the war years.
A Central Medical Coordination Committee with State branches was set
up, under which coordination with the country’s defence authorities
developed in such vital matters as research, control of medical supplies and
equipment and the allocation of medical personnel for the needs of the
armed services and the civilian population. Of the many valuable pieces of
research carried out during these years, those into nutrition, both in
groups of the civilian population and of the armed forces fighting under
tropical conditions, were of particular interest. Another interesting develop-
ment was the work done for the armed services in the field of acoustics
which resulted in the setting up of a special acoustic laboratory in Sydney,
and its continuance as a civilian service into the post-war period.
A further area of public health in which the Commonwealth has played
an important role is that of maternal and child health. Continued investiga-
tion over a number of years into such problems as maternal and infant
mortality, social and physical causes of the falling birthrate, and
nutrition of mothers arid children, dental care and other child health
problems, has greatly stimulated the promotion of maternal and infant
health services by State health authorities.
In 1938 the Commonwealth established six model child centres known
as the Lady Cowrie Child Centres, as demonstration and training centres
in pre-schbol child practice, and as research centres into problems of child
growth and behaviour. The Institute of Anatomy at Canberra, administered
by the Commonwealth Department of Health, was made the headquarters
of this research, combining investigations into child health and nutrition
with nutrition research in other fields.
The importance of child health in national development led to the
setting up in 1949 of an Institute of Child Health within the framework
of the School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine at the University of
Sydney, to be used as a research centre and training school for post-
graduate study in all phases of child health. At the same time, a Division
of Child Health was created within the Commonwealth Department of
Health with the object of promoting a national policy for child health in
cooperation with State agencies.
Concurrently with these developments, the National Health and
Medical Research Council was responsible in 1939 for the initiation of a
national fitness campaign. During the period from 1940-1949, the cam-
paign, which is administered by a small Division in the Commonwealth
Department of Health, has been responsible through State authorities
and voluntary agencies for the development of specialist training at
university level of teachers of physical education, the extension of modern
physical education methods in schools, and, through State National Fitness
Councils, of many activities in the youth recreation field.
Another problem of national importance which has occupied the
attention of health authorities for some years is tuberculosis. Agitation
for a national plan to combat this scourge became intensified towards
the end of the second World War and culminated in the passing of the


Tuberculosis Act, 1945-1948, the creation of a Commonwealth Division of
Tuberculosis, and the setting up of a National Tuberculosis Advisory
Council to advise on all aspects of national policy for the elimination of
this disease. This has set a plan for future Commonwealth-State relations,
the Commonwealth coordinating, stimulating and encouraging activity
with financial and technical assistance.
It soon became evident that the development of aerial transport was
going to have far-reaching effects on the public health services in Aus-
tralia, particularly upon the quarantine service and upon health services
for the sparsely settled northern tropical regions of Australia, Over-
seas air routes, as they extended, were bringing northern Australia within
a few hours’ flying time of countries where endemic diseases were serious
problems. The traditional freedom of Australia from quarantinable
diseases will require ever-increasing vigilance if it is to be maintained.
The post-war period saw considerable expansion of public health
services in the Northern Territory and also in the Australian Capital
Territory. The sparsely populated areas of Australia, particularly those
in the northern tropical and central parts of the Continent, have always
presented special problems. The Australian Aerial Medical Service, begun
between twenty and thirty years ago by the Presbyterian Church as part of
its Inland Mission activities, has pioneered a public health service for
the Australian outback, and the “Flying Doctor Service” has earned a
special place in the history of Australia. The Commonwealth and States
have subsidized this service, and the Commonwealth is now supplementing
it with its own aerial service carried out by its own medical staff and
three aircraft based at Darwin, the capital of the Northern Territory.
Wireless sets are supplied to station properties and other strategic points
throughout the Territory so that a complete network is now established
and advice, followed if necessary by medical care, is now available to the
most remote and isolated areas.
In the Australian Capital Territory the Commonwealth has developed
local health services which provide hospital care, medical services for
pre-school and school children, and the Mothercraft Society. School dental
clinics, a district nursing service, and a general public health inspection
service are also provided.
No mention has been made of the many ancillary services which have
been provided over the years as the need has arisen; of the work of the
Repatriation authorities in the rehabilitation of the war-disabled; of the
work of various voluntary agencies, such as the Red Cross Blood Trans-
fusion Service, Ambulance Services, Crippled Children’s Association and
other voluntary groups in the maternal and child health field; or in the
provision of medical services to the vast numbers of migrants passing
through migration camps all over the Commonwealth.
From the time of Federation, the growth and expansion of Australian
public health services have been promoted by the cooperative effort of
States and Commonwealth. The States have continued to introduce and to
administer their own public health Acts, covering such fields as the control
of infectious diseases, the supervision of hospitals, registration of doctors
and nurses, the inspection and sale of foods and drugs, the control of
public building et cetera. Trends towards uniformity in legislation have
been the result of conferences between the States and the Commonwealth,
together with increased knowledge of the prevention and control of disease,
[n the States the implementation of many health functions is carried
out by powers conferred on local municipal authorities by State health
authorities.
Over a period of forty years, with two world wars intervening, Com-
monwealth activity in public health has spread far and wide in spite of
the relatively limited powers allowed under the Federal Constitution.


Beyond the Quarantine Act of 1908 aud its various amendments* very little
additional legislation was enacted considering the extensive machinery
for. the promotion of public health which had been built up over the years.
The increasing tendency on the part of the Federal Government to
take the lead in problems of health and social welfare, together with the
situation which had developed out of the existing State-Commonwealth
financial relationships, brought about changes in Commonwealth powers
in relation to the States.
Following the passage of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Act, 1944-1945,
a challenge in the High Court made it clear that the Commonwealth was
exceeding its constitutional powers, and the matter was submitted to a
people’s referendum in 1946.
As a result of the referendum an amendment to the Federal Con-
stitution extended the powers of the Parliament of the Commonwealth
“to make laws for the peace, order and good government of the Common-
wealth with respect to . . . the provision of maternity allowances, widows’
pensions, child endowment, unemployment, pharmaceutical, sickness and
hospital benefits, medical and dental services (but not so as to authorise
any form of civil conscription), benefits to students, and family allow-
ances.”
This extension of power, combined with the financial strength of the
Commonwealth, opened up new opportunities for the development of
national health services on a much more comprehensive scale.
Looking back over the years, one realizes that the foundations of
the Australian public health services were laid during the first half of
this century as a result of the cooperation of State health authorities and
the coordinating influence of the Commonwealth. Great things have been
achieved from small beginnings by the wisdom, courage, initiative and
professional ability of many outstanding figures in Australian medical
history. The particular circumstances and the enormous geographical prob-
lems which a sparsely populated country of the size of the Australian
continent presents would have been sufficient to daunt the most courageous.
In spite of these difficulties, an organization has been built which is
capable of integrating official administration with the preventive, curative
and research fields of medicine. Clinical medicine, research and public
health administration have advanced hand-in-hand and the machinery so
developed has made it possible to apply these three fields of knowledge
to the practical problems of public health.
Australian public health services are now on the threshold of a new
period of development. The same fundamental objectives are present as in
former years, and with the continued cooperation of all the agencies con-
cerned, with much greater medical knowledge, more modern administrative
machinery, high living standards of the people, and the natural advantages
of climate, there is no reason why Australia should not develop one of the
most effective services in the world.
The Federal Capital Press, Canberra.
