

COLONY OF AUSTRALIA




THE COLONY OF AUSTRALIA.
Views of Sir Alfred Stephen and
Sir John Robertson.
■ft&l 6




Vieics of Sir Alfred Stephen.
Vass/rgsxs
U-S-77
Tuesday, 29 November, 1887.
My dear Sir Henry,
My motion last July in the Legislative Council for changing
the name of the Colony suggested that of “ Australia , or some
other appropriate name,” and I was quite prepared to accept as
an amendment the name East or Eastern Australia , had the
Council appeared to favour the latter rather than the former
appellation. But it never entered my head until the objection
was that evening started, that to adopt the name “ Australia,”
simply and alone, would (or could reasonably) be regarded as an
invasion of the right of any other portion of the continent —or
as an assumption in any way likely to offend our sister Colonies.
And after hearing all that has subsequently been said on the
subject, I am unable to think the objection a reasonable one.
Tor admitting that Victoria and Queensland have always been
included under the general geographical term of Australia,
neither of those Colonies has ever been known by it—or has so
called itself —any more than Tasmania has, although equally
entitled. They have had specific names from their birth, and in
manhood have adopted others equally removed from the original;
New South Wales, on the contrary (including in common
acceptation both those divisions, and legislatively in fact including
them), has always been known as Australia, and you have asked
only its perpetuation. G-eographically and generically, our
sisters would still be Australia, but the specific appellation would
remain where it always was, and they would also keep, specifically,
what they themselves have sought and obtained. I think, never-
theless, that peace and goodwill among communities, as in the
family, are above all things. If therefore our neighbours think
themselves injured in any sense by the projected measure, I
would adopt the East or Eastern addition, which would remove
all grounds of complaint, and yet indicate our own nationality
equally with the name complained of.
I am, &c.,
ALEE ED STEPHEN.


Views of Sir John Robertson.
Reform Club, 29 November, 1887.
My dear Sir Henry Parkes,
I thank you for the copy of your Bill affirming the
desirability of our making Constitutional and legal provision for
our officially assuming the name of “Australia.”
I say “ officially,” because our name in every day use has ever
been Australia.
Prom our first settlement we have been Australia, half a century
before there was a white man in any of the adjoining Colonies.
We introduced civilized man, also all kind of suitable agri-
cultural products, as well as horses, cattle, sheep, and all other
live stock of commercial value, before any of our neighbours had
existence. If this Colony is not Australia I should like to know
what Colony is.
Under earlier and better leading than they now have, South
Australia, rightly seeing the true position, left us “Australia,”
and placed before her name the prefix “South”; Western
Australia took a similar course by placing “Western” as a prefix,
and the two Colonies next in seniority, Victoria and Queensland,
threw Australia from them altogether.
We have without dispute ever claimed it in our motto “ Advance
Australia,” and whatever may be done with your Bill, we shall
be Australia to the last.
To me it is amusing to see the two pretentious Colonies,
Victoria and Queensland, who led the attempt to overbear all the
rest by their precious federation law, or more properly law to
denude New South Wales of her railways, her lands, and her
position, now so thoroughly in accord on the great question of
naval defence, that the one has passed the Bill for the purpose
with indecent extravagance of approbation, and the other threw
it out. Yours sincerely,
. : JOHN ROBERTSON.
Mr |




Views of the Press.
PAGE,
Evening News 7
Illawarra Mercury 8
Cumberland Times 10
Cumberland Mercury 12
Goulburn Herald 12


PRES,S EXTRACTS.
[From the “ Evening News,” 24 November, 1587.]
WHAT’S IN A NAME.
That there would be some objection on the part of the other
Colonies to the parent State assuming, at an appropriate lime,
her proper name of Australia, was, perhaps, only what might
have been expected ; but that there should be any opposition
from our own colonists is perfectly inconceivable. Yet the op-
position here is not altogether unaccountable, for all in New
South AVales are not of New South 'Wales. No one who heard
the debate in the Assembly last night, or who reads the reports
of it in the press, can fail to be struck with the strong pro-
Victorian feeling displayed by that section of members which
hails from over the border —the tender regard that was exhibited
for the interests and sentiments of Victoria, and the indifference
to those of New South Wales. This feeling appears to have been
stimulated by the hysterical shrieks of a Sydney morning paper
that was started by Victorian capital, and under Victorian
auspices, and which, upon most subjects affecting the interests
of New South Wales, has earned the reputation of not knowing
its own mind. The right of what has been known for a time as
New South Wales to be called Australia is incontestable. It
was Australia that was settled from Sydney, and the settlers
called themselves Australians. Years before a white man set
foot in the districts now known as Victoria, and Queensland,
and South Australia, and West Australia, Sydney was the capital
of Australia. When the Colonies abovenamed broke off and
separated from their parent, each chose a name for itself. And
now, when the great country from which they seceded wishes to
retain her proper appellation, some of them object. But their
objections are as unreasonable as those which were raised in the
Assembly last night against Sir Henry Parkes’ motion for leave
to introduce a Bill to give effect to his proposal. Of course the
Melbourne papers, which on most other subjects wrangle and
snarl among themselves, are united in objecting to what is the
right of New South Wales. Having for some years found that
the outside world does not look upon Melbourne and Victoria as
Australia, they are wroth at anything which will emphasise this
fact by letting the country which is Australia be known by that
name. It is noticeable that they have no reason to give for


their objections beyond that which is essentially a woman’s,
namely, “ I don’t like it.” They all admit—which, by the way,
some of their injudicious friends here do not —that New South
Wales is not a fitting name, and that it should be changed, but
“ they don’t like ”itlo be called Australia. This is in effect all
they have to say on the matter, except a little ponderous levity,
and, in some cases, spiteful abuse. Those few gentlemen in our
own Parliament, whom Mr. Want very appropriately describes
as “ thin-skinned sympathisers ” with Victoria and South Aus-
tralia and Queensland, and whom Mr. Garrett grouped together
under the generic title, “ Johnny-come-ups,” do not in any
sense represent the 022,000 native-born inhabitants of this
Colony —a number, as Sir Henry Parkes pointed out, largely
exceeding the native-born population of any other Colonies,
and a number justifying their calling their country Australia, as
they themselves are called Australians. The Copelands, and
Lynes, and O’Sullivans, the Barbours, and the Walkers, though
they live here, and have forced themselves, or have been forced,
into our public life, are not of us or with us in national sentiment.
They are not the men to whom the native-born of the parent
colony are likely to look for guidance in matters affecting their
national honor, or as exponents of their national aspirations.
They do not understand, they cannot understand, how men like
Mr, Dibbs, Mr. Want, Mr. O’Mara, and Mr. Melville view this
question. Consequently they fail to realise that it is Australians
who are demanding that this country should be called Australia.
Those gentlemen who so strongly objected to the change of name
in the Assembly last night have shown their real sentiments
with a little too much ardour. It was impossible not to see
running through all their speeches a strong sympathy for
Victoria rather than for Australia. They are in opposition to
Sir Henry Parkes and the great majority of the people and the
Parliament of this country on the particular question under
notice, because they look at the question with Victorian eyes.
However their opposition in this case matters little. The over-
whelming majority which pronounced in favor of the Bill shows
the true direction of public opinion on the question, and that
before long the cumbrous, ugly, and inappropriate name Now
South Wales will be changed for the far fitter one “ Australia.”
[From the “ Illaivarra Mercury ,” 21 November, 1887.]
Our Government has done the right thing in selecting the name of
Australia for this Colony. After giving the matter a good deal
of thought it has been our opinion for years past that the name
which characterised the Colony before the subsequent off-shoots


of Victoria, South Australia, Queensland, and Western Australia
came into existence, should be assumed, or more properly speaking,
resumed, instead of New South Wales. So long as the first
settlement, of which Sydney was the centre, was the only one on
this island continent with a Government of its own, the then
parent Colony was to all intents and purposes Australia. In
those days persons in other parts of the world looked upon Sydney
or New South Wales as Australia , as in fact it was. Instead ,
therefore, of fault being found with the present proposal to resume
the original name of the Colony , the fault really lay ivith those who
did not insist upon the good old name being retained by the mother
Colony from the first. As this Colony was Australia, and Aus-
tralia was this Colony for many years within the century, the
end of which is now about being celebrated by the forthcoming
centenary demonstrations, that name by right, title, ownership,
and usage for so long a time should have been continued,
instead of the clumsy and inappropriate designation of New
South Wales being adopted. Although Captain Cook virtually
named a part of the coast country of what is now this Colony
New South Wales, it would be as reasonable to have named
the Colony of Victoria after Gippsland, or Queensland after
Moreton Bay, as it was to apply its present name to this
Colony. Asa matter of fact, the names of South Australia and
Western Australia need changing as well as that of New
South Wales. All three names are awkward to say the least of
them, as also is the twofold make up the name of New Zealand.
The three Colonies of Victoria, Tasmania, and Queensland have
done well in regard to their names, which were substituted
respectively for Port Phillip, Van Diemen’s Land, and Moreton
Bay. On the present opportune occasion of the centenary the
Colonies of South and Western Australia should follow the
example of the mother Colony by adopting more suitable,
convenient, and euphonious names than their present ones.
Nothing could be more inapplicable than South Australia being
designated that name. It is net, and never was South Australia
in any sense of the term, and of late years more especially since
that Colony includes not only a vast extent of central territory,
but actually the northern territory of Port Darwin, the name
of the Colony is ridiculously inappropriate. At any rate a very
strong case can be made out for the resumption by this Colony
of its maiden name, as it were, of Australia, and doubtless Sir
Henry Parkes did so yesterday in the Assembly in asking the
permission of the Legislature for the purpose. It is to be
regretted that any assumed vested interest in that name by the
other Colonies should not be unlikely to crop up against the
legitimate course proposed in the matter, but any such jealousy
should not deter our Government and Parliament from insisting


upon this Colony having its right in claiming its original name.
Of late the term Australasia has become very prevalent and
popular, as applied to the whole of the Colonies of this group,
and by common consent that term could be substituted in
future in any respect in which the word Australia has hitherto
been applied.
\From the “ Cumberland Times 26 November, 1887.]
AUSTRALIA.
We do not pretend to be of those who think a change in the
designation of the Colony to be absolutely indispensable. As
New South Wales we have succeeded tolerably well in making
for the country we inhabit a respectable reputation, and have
shown to the world that there is wealth sufficient beneath our
feet to justify us in lavishing more time and toil than have yet
been expended in scientific efforts to bring that wealth to light.
Nevertheless there are admitted inconveniences attached to the
name of New South Wales when applied to the natives of the
country, which it would not be a bad thing to get rid of; and as
the inventive powers of the community have not risen to the
necessary altitude of providing us with a new, appropriate, and
original name for the Colony, “ Australia ” is clearly that which is
best fitted to designate the pioneer Colony of the group of Austra-
lasian Governments, which comprises the four settlements of the
island continent, with those of Tasmania and New Zealand, the
Eiji Islands and New Guinea. The objections raised to our
appropriating to this Colony the name that has for the last fifty
years been used by the English speaking world to designate the
island, do not appear to us to carry any legitimate weight. The
other settled Governments of the island continent, with the
exception of the Crown Colony of Western Australia, are all off-
shoots from the parent Colony, which for fifty years was known as
“ Australia, an English penal settlement on the eastern shores of
the island continent of New Holland, the capital of which is
Sydney.” Victoria was the name conferred on the Port Phillip
settlement, when, in July, 1851, it was erected into a separate
State, and Mr. Superintendent Latrobe exchanged his official
title of superintendent for that of lieutenant-governor. Erom
that day to this, in the estimation of “Australia’s” eldest
daughter, the name of Australia has merged in that of Victoria ;
and Victoria, in the estimation of the citizens of the southern
capital, was swallowed up in the word “ Melbourne.” “Australia ’ *
was a term insufficiently distinctive for a Victorian, until the
Government of Sir Henry Parkes moved in the direction of


making “ Australia ” the distinctive, political, and official name
of this Colony. “South Australia,” the name by which the
central State of the continental group is designated, is sufficiently
distinctive so far as the settled portions of that Government are
concerned; and South Australians have surely no cause to
complain of any infraction of their rights if we choose to dub
ourselves what we have always been, “ Australians.” The
other Colonies have all been erected by the energy and enterprise
of the residents of the parent State, which adopted the heraldic
motto for her shield, “ Advance Australia! ” Had Captain
Cook followed the example of other navigators, who previous to
his time, and subsequently, surveyed portions of the coast of New
Holland, he would have named the portion extending from Cape
Howe to the Gulf of Carpentaria “ Cook’s Land,” instead
of New South Wales. The shores of the island continent
of New Holland would then have been known as Cook’s Land,
1720 ; Carpentaria, 1628 ; Arnhem’s Land, 1618 ; Van Diemen’s
Land, 1618; DeWitt’s Land, 1628; Endracht’s Land, 1616;
Edel’s Land, 1619; Leeuwin’s Land, 1622 ; Nuyt’s Land, 1627 ;
Elinder’s Land, 1802 ; Baudin’s Land, 1802; Grant’s Land,
1800; and Bass’ Land, 1796. The great navigator chose to call
the portion of the coast surveyed by him New South Wales, and
New South Wales it will geographically remain; but that name
applies to all the territory between the eastern seaboard and the
145th meridian, and includes the Governments of both Victoria
and Queensland, both of which States are offshoots of the
parent Colony of Australia; and the residents of either have no
more right to interfere with our official appropriation of the
name of Australia as a politically distinctive appellation than the
Victorians of Hongkong would have had to interfere with the
adoption by the settlers of Port Phillip of the name of Victoria
for their Colony on the ground that the title had already been
appropriated for the principal city of that island. That the name
will be adopted by a large majority in the House of Assembly we
have not the slightest doubt, and it will be a good reason for a
stock, lock, and barrel reformation of the Upper House if the
Bill does not pass there also. We, with Sir Henry Parkes, do
not court a difference with the other Colonies ; but the petulant
objections raised in their several Parliaments and in the Press
are not wmrthy of a moment’s consideration. The parent Colony
is the only one of the group that has had the wisdom and the
courage to so far sustain old British traditions as to preserve
freedom of trade ; and that policy has pushed her so far ahead of
her rivals, both in material wealth and in population, that she
can afford to despise the splenetic objurgations hurled at her by
the Senate and Press of her jealous and querulous neighbours.


[From the “ Cumberland Mercury ,” 2G November , 1887.]
To rechristen New South Wales “Australia” is a grand idea.
The name will give the motherland of the group a distinctive
appellation, and reduce the other Colonies, at least so far as
nomenclature is concerned, into off-shoots.
[From the “ Goulburn Herald ,” 26 November, 1887.]
After much consideration has been given to many suggestions
it lias been formally proposed by the Government that the name
of the Colony henceforth shall be “Australia,” and the Assembly,
by its division (58 to 18) on the motion for leave to introduce
the Bill to give effect to the proposal, has indicated its approval.
The choice seems to us most felicitous. The name itself is
euphonious; it is one word; and it has long been applied to the
territory of which the present Colony is the parent settlement,
and still remains the most important part.
We are told that the selection shows “poverty of invention,”
because the name is not new. But it has been open for anyone
to propose a better; and no one has suggested one so good.
Therefore to attach importance to this objection would be as
childish as to object on the same ground to the good old names
we continue from generation to generation to bestow upon our
children.
Another objection raised is that other Colonies will be annoyed
at our assuming a name which has been held to be common to
the whole continent. Victoria, whose population is almost equal
to our own, we are told will be specially irate; and confusion
with South Australia and Western Australia is spoken of. Now
the course taken by Victoria, especially in relation to her differ-
ential railway rates and her import tax on live stock, deprives
her of any right to expect us to study her feelings. Besides,
when her name was changed from Port Phillip to Victoria no
one in New South Wales objected. Western Australia will
probably soon have representative institutions, and advantage
might be taken of their inauguration to select a different
name. The name of South Australia is geographically wrong
and confusing, inasmuch as her boundary runs to the far north
and a portion of the Colony has to be called most cumbrously
“the Northern Territory of South Australia.” She ought there-
fore to be glad to change her singularly inapplicable name.
Tasmania was formerly known as Van Diemen’s Land; and no
one objected to her changing it. Victoria and Queensland have
very good names of Iheir own, both improvements on the old


names of Port Phillip and Moretou Bay. Why should they
object to our selecting in our turn a name which we prefer to
that by which we have hitherto been known ?
_ We attach no importance to fear of confusion from the
circumstance that the word “ Australia” has hitherto applied to
the whole continent. At first a few letters intended for Victoria
might come to New South Wales, chiefly because Victoria for a
long time has posed as the principal Colony; but this would not
long continue ; and we do not fear that there would be any more
difficulty than there is at present with the other Colonies. Letters
intended for Western or South Australia, if the first word is
omitted, even now in the first instance are liable to meet delay
before reaching their destination ; and certainly Queensland and
Tasmania need not be anxious over the matter. And if there
are any persons who think one Colony would be doing the others
an injustice in appropriating the name of Australia to herself,
we may remind them that there remains the word “Australasia,”
which embraces more than the whole continent and in which all
the Colonies would continue to be included.
Parliament then, as it seems to us, will deserve credit if it
adopt the proposal to alter the name of the Colony. Its present
name scarcely any one will defend, and no one would prefer if it
had not already been forced upon us. It is inappropriate, for
there is no similarity whatever between this Colony and South
Wales; it is unpleasing to the ear; and, as consisting of three
distinct words it is cumbrous. Whatever it may have had to
recommend it to Captain Cook, who fancied he traced some
resemblance to South Wales in the outline of its coast, it has
nothing to recommend it to us, who know that neither in climate,
in extent, nor in its productions is there any real resemblance
between the two countries.
Sydney : Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lSS7.


