

PAPERS FOR WAR TIME. No. 5
The Decisive Hour
Is It Lost?
J. H. OLDHAM, M.A.
Price Twopence
HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW NEW YORK
TORONTO MELBOURNE BOMBAY




PAPERS TOR WAR TIME. No. 5
THE DECISIVE HOUR:
IS IT LOST?
J. H. OLDHAM, M.A.
HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW NEW YORK
TORONTO MELBOURNE BOMBAY
1914


Great Britain is engaged in a war from which, as we believe,
there was offered to our nation no honourable way of escape.
The desire of all who love their country is to serve it in the
hour of its need, and so to live and labour that those who have
fallen in its service may not have died in vain. While this
may suffice to make immediate duty clear, the war remains
in the deepest sense a challenge to Christian thought. The
present bitter struggle between nations which for centuries
have borne the Christian name indicates some deep-seated
failure to understand the principles of Christ and to apply
them to human affairs.
This series of papers embodies an attempt to reach, by
common thought, discussion and prayer, a truer understanding
of the meaning of Christianity and of the mission of the
Church to the individual, to society and to the world.
Those who are promoting the issue of these papers are
drawn from different political parties and different Christian
bodies. They believe that the truth they seek can be attained
only by providing for a measure of diversity in expression.
Therefore they do not accept responsibility for the opinions
of any paper taken alone. But in spirit they are united, for
they are one in the conviction that in Christ and in His
Gospel lies the hope of redemption and health for society and
for national life.


THE DECISIVE HOUR:
IS IT LOST?
When in days to come men try to understand the
significance of the Great War, they will seek to interpret
it in its bearing not merely upon the nations engaged in
the struggle, but upon the spiritual destinies of mankind
as a whole. Even amid the absorbing excitement of the
struggle for national existence, this larger point of view
must not be forgotten. For Christians especially, who
own a loyalty to a Kingdom wider and more enduring
than any earthly empire, no question strikes deeper than
the question how the war will affect the growth of the
Kingdom of God.
Four years ago a book was published entitled The
Decisive Hour of Christian Missions. 1 Its main argument
was that the peoples of Asia and Africa are at the present
time passing through a renaissance more remarkable and
far-reaching than the movement which changed mediaeval
into modern Europe ; that their entire political, economic,
social, intellectual, and religious life is in process of recon-
1 A revised edition will shortly be published by Messrs. Nelson in
their shilling series of reprints of copyright books.


struction; that their ancient faiths, standards, and social
systems are proving insufficient to meet the demands of
the new time ; and that the question of all questions for
the Christian Church is whether in the present hour of
crisis and of destiny it can give to these peoples a spiritual
faith, to be the strength and inspiration of the new world
which they are setting out to build.
The same view as to the decisive nature of the present
opportunity was taken by the World Missionary Conference
that met at Edinburgh in 1910. In words which in the
light of recent events seem prophetic, it affirmed the
critical importance of the next few years in determining
the spiritual evolution of mankind. ‘lf those years are
wasted,’ it declared, ‘ havoc may be wrought that cen-
turies are not able to repair. On the other hand, if they
are rightly used, they may be among the most glorious in
Christian history.’
Such statements have been criticized as extravagant
and feverish. Every generation, it is said, is apt to have
an exaggerated notion of the particular tasks which it is
called to undertake. And yet history supplies abundant
evidence that there are tides in the affairs of men ; that
real crises occur in the life of nations and of the Church
as well as of individual men ; and that when they arise,
life or death may depend on the capacity of the individual
or the nation or the Church to recognize and to meet them.
The belief that the present time is of critical importance
in the spiritual history of the non-Christian peoples rests
upon a solid basis of facts ; and if the Church is too
preoccupied, or has not sufficient insight, to grasp the
meaning of these facts, the spiritual loss to the world will
be great and inevitable.


Japan, which is taking part in the war as one of the
Great Powers, has gained its position with such astonishing
rapidity that its present Prime Minister has witnessed the
transformation from the beginning, and played a leading
part in bringing it about. Three years ago the establish-
ment of a Republic in China revealed to the world what
revolutionary forces were seething in that ancient and
populous nation. There are many proofs that in both
Japan and China leading men are aware that the roots
of national greatness lie not in material progress but in
the character of the people, and that they are deeply
concerned to find a spiritual basis for the new national
life. What faith and what ideals will mould the thought
and engage the affections of the peoples of the Far East ?
The new order that is steadily and surely taking shape
must rest on some body of beliefs. Can the traditional
religions provide the needful foundation ? If they prove
insufficient, shall we witness the growth of powerful civil-
izations based on a hard and soulless materialism ? Or
shall the east know in its growth, as the west has known,
the vitalizing, renewing, sanctifying influence of Christ ?
The march of history has seldom given rise to questions
of greater moment for the human race.
In India we witness the same unrest. The political
agitation of which so much has been heard in recent years
is only one symptom of a national awakening, which is
expressing itself in manifold gropings after a higher life.
In what moulds will this surging life be cast ? Will it
express itself merely in some new system of thought that
will take its place with the ancient Indian philosophies as a
fresh monument to the powers of the Indian mind ? Or is it
the Divine purpose that the strange contact for a brief


span in its long history between India and a people of
the west should be the means of planting in Indian
experience a seed of truth from which will spring a fairer
and richer harvest than anything that India is able herself
to give to the world ? While this deep question waits for
answer, the Indian mission field presents another problem
of peculiar urgency. The depressed classes, fifty millions
in number, which have been kept outside the pale of
Hindu society, are reaching out their hands towards a
religion that offers them a larger hope and opportunity.
The Christian Church might receive them in hundreds
of thousands, or, as some believe, in millions, if it had the
resources to teach and to shepherd those admitted into its
fellowship.
The contact with western civilization which has set
these mighty forces in motion among the more advanced
peoples of Asia has affected, in ways different but no less
direct, the primitive and backward races of the world.
These peoples have everywhere passed under the tutelage
of western nations. New forces have broken in upon the
child-races of Africa and the islands of the Pacific, shat-
tering the restraints and supports of tribal life, and bring-
ing new temptations and dangers which the people have
little power to withstand. The western nations have
assumed a responsibility the magnitude of which is as
yet little understood. Stupendous and untiring efforts
to protect and to educate the backward races are neces-
sary, if they are to be saved from a state of demoralization
and servitude that will be a cancer in the social life of
the west.
To these tasks must be added that of bringing the
Christian message to the Moslem world. The task is one


which, since the days when Islam in its first onset won
for itself the lands where Christianity had obtained its
earliest triumphs, the Church has never possessed the
courage and faith seriously to attempt. It gains a wholly
new urgency in the light of the profound changes that
within the past few years have taken place among Moslem
peoples. It is immeasurably harder to accomplish
because of the age-long antagonisms and antipathies
between Christendom and Islam. But it cannot be refused
except at the cost of denying that Christ is the Light and
the Life of the World.
It was before such opportunities as these that Christian
Europe stood at the beginning of the year of grace 1914.
When the imagination is allowed to clothe the bare facts
with the warmth and colour that truly belong to them,
they bring before the mind a field for the noblest heroism
and the most splendid achievement. All the lavish
sacrifice of life and of wealth that the war has called forth
might have been poured into these great tasks. It
would have borne an abundant and rich harvest in the
education of the more backward races to take their true
place in the human family and to make their proper con-
tribution to its well-being and happiness. In the effort
to communicate to others the secret of its own deepest and
truest life, Christendom might have experienced within
itself the quickening of undreamed-of powers.
From all this Europe has turned aside. We find our-
selves in the presence of a great tragedy. The favoured
nations of the west, when in the slow movement of
history they were brought into a position of special
opportunity and responsibility in relation to the non-
Christian races, failed to recognize their appointed


mission, and allowed their energies to be diverted from
constructive effort and helpful service to the waste and
desolation of war.
How much has been lost ? There is, in the first place,
the waste of life and wealth. The finest manhood of
Europe is being sacrificed without stint. The best men,
so urgently needed for the higher work of the world, will
in days to come be sadly fewer in number. Hundreds of
thousands of children will have to grow up without a
father’s guidance and care. Europe will emerge from the
war with a crushing debt about its neck. The whole
world will be poorer, and whatever work has to be done
will need to be done with greatly diminished resources.
The clash of arms has invaded many parts of the mission
field. In Togo, Kamerun, German South-West Africa,
British South Africa, Rhodesia, German East Africa, and
British East Africa, in the German possessions in the
South Seas, and in the Shantung Peninsula in China there
has been fighting. In India the work of German missions
has been subjected to restrictions and interruption. The
unsettled conditions in the Turkish Empire have brought
about a general dislocation of missionary work, and at
the time of writing it is uncertain whether Turkey may
not be involved in the war. The admirable missions of
the Paris Evangelical Society are suffering heavily through
lack of funds. There is at present no means of estimating
more exactly the extent of the interruption to missionary
work, or how far its effects are likely to be permanent.
But it is evident that the disturbance affects a large part
of the mission field. Where congregations have been
scattered, schools closed, and workers dismissed, it will


not be easy after the war to repair the damage. If
colonies ultimately pass from one European Power to
another, the difficulty will be greatly increased. When
the Christian Church at the close of the war surveys
afresh its missionary task, it will find itself confronted not
only with the necessity of maintaining its existing work
and with new calls of peculiar urgency, but with wide-
spread losses that will have to be made good.
The missionary cause is seriously weakened by the
estrangement between the German and British peoples.
These had much to give to one another in the common
service of the world. The importance of the German
contribution to missionary work has received increasing
recognition in Anglo-Saxon countries since the World
Missionary Conference at Edinburgh in 1910. The inter-
national committees which have been engaged during the
past few years in extensive investigations of missionary
problems have come more and more to appreciate the
thoroughness, penetration, and painstaking industry of
their German members. The German contribution was
beginning to leaven and enrich the whole work of missions.
All this happy and profitable fellowship has for an indefi-
nite period been brought to an end.
The spectacle of peoples which bear the name of Christ
seeking to tear one another to pieces cannot but be a
shock to the faith of the Church in the mission field and
a stumbling-block to thoughtful non-Christians. It may
be that the actual harm will be less than might naturally
be expected. For the stumbling-block is of long standing.
The outbreak of hostilities is not so much a new and
perplexing ailment as a patent and unmistakable symptom
of a long-established and deep-seated disease. The


greatest hindrance to missionary work has always been
that Christendom has been manifestly so little Christian.
It may even prove a gain that the cancer in the vitals of
western civilization has been so nakedly revealed. But
though good may in the end come out of evil, the open
and startling contradiction between the scenes we are
now witnessing and the spirit of Christ cannot fail to
create perplexities for the peoples to whom Christianity
is being offered as a basis upon which to build their new
national life. Do the western nations believe in the creed
which they profess ? Can the Christian ethic be applied to
the real problems of life ? Is there such a thing as the
Church of Christ, when Christians everywhere appear at
the crucial test to find national loyalty a more powerful
tie than the sense of their unity with their fellow-believers
in the Body of Christ ? To these and other like questions
the missionary will find it harder than before to give a
satisfying answer.
Thus, at a time when every circumstance seemed to call
for a new, large, and deliberate advance in the evangeliza-
tion of the non-Christian world, the Church has to face
far-reaching disturbance of her work, a serious diminution
of the material resources upon which she can draw, and
estrangement and division between those who ought to
be fellow-workers in the furtherance of the Kingdom of
Christ. Is the loss irreparable ? Must generations pass
before the missed opportunity can be regained ? Or are
there still possibilities of recovery and restoration ?
The God revealed in the Bible is a God who causes waters
to break forth in the wilderness and the desert to blossom
as the rose ; who commands the winds and the waves, and


rides upon the storm ; who can make even the wrath of
man to turn to His praise. The faith of the Hebrew
prophets was able to see in the conquering hosts of the
heathen monarch Cyrus an instrument for the accomplish-
ment of the Divine will. We are thus reminded that God
is able to overrule what to our eyes appears an over-
whelming catastrophe, and make it contribute to the
fulfilment of His purpose. It may be that the Christian
peoples of Europe were not fit instruments for the evange-
lization of the non-Christian world, and that they needed
to be purified and disciplined by suffering. It may be
for our good that there should be a removal of the things
that can be shaken, if in the end the things that cannot
be shaken stand forth more firm and clear. The deeps
have opened, but there is no cause for fear. It is in the
heart of great experiences that God is most surely to be
found.
Already, as we can humbly and thankfully recognize,
the war has been the means of quickening forces of good
as well as of evil. Our people have experienced as seldom
before in their history the beat and throb of a mighty
common purpose. In the unity and strength of that
common purpose they have found themselves lifted to
new heights of life. It would be a calamity if the nation,
when the war is over, were to sink back to the old levels.
If the quickening of life, which has meant so much to us,
is to continue and increase, men must have set before them
some redeeming and ennobling task. May not the Chris-
tian service of the peoples of Asia and Africa furnish such
a task ? The love of country, which the war has kindled
to so intense a flame, is a sentiment to which in its highest
and purest form an appeal may be made in the name of


Christ. In the clear light of His life and teaching, the
standard of greatness is service. The highest glory of
any country lies in what it has done for mankind. If,
therefore, men gladly give their lives to preserve their
national heritage and to save the spiritual fabric which
their fathers reared from vanishing from the earth, may
not the same love, deepened and ennobled by Christ,
impel them to toil and suffer in order that their people
may attain the utmost greatness in service ? Never, it
would seem, has the heart and mind of Great Britain been
more prepared for a strong and convincing appeal on
behalf of Christian missions.
The war has taught us the meaning and the power of
sacrifice. Thousands of men have been found ready to
die for their country. The British Empire lives only
through the blood which they have gladly shed. A
world that was flooded with writing and with talk, that
was playing with speculations and programmes, that
was in danger of surrendering its soul to material things,
has been awakened to the realities of life. The old truths
of duty and loyalty and sacrifice have again proved
themselves to be the bread of heaven by which men and
nations live. Can the generation that has seen the
clouds and mists disperse and these mountain peaks
stand out in their beauty and grandeur allow the vision
to fade from its eyes ? Will those who have learned the
strength of sacrifice and service again allow false gods
to have dominion over them ? The brave who have fallen
will have done greater service than they knew if, through
the example of their deaths, their people turn again with
true repentance and a new devotion and love to the strong
Son of God, who, as the author and perfecter of those


that follow in His steps, laid down His life for the redemp-
tion of the world.
A great religious awakening and revival would make
the material losses caused by the war of little account.
The people of this country, as of all countries, will be
poorer after the war, but this will not necessarily diminish
the resources available for missionary work. It is not
in times of national prosperity and ease that money flows
in greatest abundance to the support of good causes.
Sometimes it is in days of adversity that men’s hearts
are most open to the claims of the eternal, and that they
are found most ready to give largely to the work of God.
The readiness to make large sacrifices that the nation has
shown in the time of war is a virtue which at Christ’s
call may find no less striking expression in the service of
His Kingdom. It will be possible to maintain the work
of missions only at the cost of larger sacrifices than before,
but by the grace of God those sacrifices can be made.
The war has helped to make clearer the fundamental
antagonism between the Christian ideal and the attitudes
and practices which have prevailed in western Christen-
dom. God has stripped the veil of delusion from men’s
eyes. The selfishness that has infected so much of our
social, industrial, and national life stands revealed in its
true character and inevitable consequences. In the reign
of this selfish spirit the Church of Christ has too easily
acquiesced. If the shock of the war should awaken the
Church to a new appreciation of the Gospel with which it
has been put in trust for the world, the advantage to the
cause of missions will be incalculable. The missionary
witness of the Church has been seriously prejudiced by
the unchristian character of social and national life in the


west, and by the absence of an adequate and unequivocally
Christian protest. A truly penitent and converted Church
will find itself possessed of undreamed-of powers for mis-
sionary service. In missionary work in the past there
has been a temptation to proceed, in practice, on the
assumption that the primary requirements are more
missionaries, more money, and better organization. We
may yet learn to our encouragement how much more
potent than any of these things is the moral power of the
naked truth, clearly exhibited and intensely believed.
The work of Christian missions has a necessary place in
the ideal for society which earnest men everywhere desire
to see substituted for the false conception of human
relations in which the war has its roots. The only way
to end war is to bring about a radical change in ideas.
War will become impossible when men realize that
nationality is a gift to be used in the service of the world,
and that the different nations are necessary to one another.
Christian missions are in their nature and aims an expres-
sion of this truth. They are an embodiment of the idea
that the stronger and more advanced peoples are meant
to help the weaker and more backward. The importance
of their work will receive increasing recognition, as the
ideal of human brotherhood takes a firmer hold on the
minds of men. For this ideal has its only sure foundation
in the Fatherhood of God which Christ revealed, and the
power to achieve it is found in His Gospel.
The difficulties of the situation may be the means of
bringing about a larger measure of unity in the Church
of Christ. The experience of the mission field shows
that the result of a great calamity, such as the Boxer
uprising in China, has often been to draw the missions


closer together and to lead to reconstruction on better
lines. One of the most striking results of the outbreak
of the present war was that each of the nations in the
hour of its destiny knew itself one. May not the Christian
Church, in a new apprehension of the magnitude of the
task to which it is called, attain a larger, deeper unity ?
Thus through the dark clouds we can see bright rays
of hope. Our eyes have been opened to new possibilities.
But they are as yet no more than possibilities. If the
decisive hour in missionary work is to mean not defeat but
victory, a spiritual warfare has to be waged no less exacting
than the conflict on the battlefields of Europe. The
awful experiences of the struggle for national existence
help us to understand the reality of the fight in which
the spiritual destinies of the human race are at stake.
Success in this warfare demands no less fortitude, perse-
verance, endurance, and devotion than victory in the
war against Germany. Does the Church understand
this ? Is she prepared to accept the conditions ? She will
surely be willing, if in the secret place of meditation and
prayer she allows God to reveal afresh to her heart the
captivating vision of the Kingdom of God. If our
country, with all its faults, can command such devotion
as we are witnessing in these days, has not the cause of
Christ, with all its promise of peace and joy and strength
for mankind, the power to evoke a yet more ardent
loyalty ?
The ultimate and real ground of confidence in the
success of Christian missions has not been shaken. Mis-
sionary work has always been a sublime adventure. It
would be the most foolish of undertakings, if it did not
rest on the immutable purpose of God. For the accom-


plishment of that purpose all the resources of His omni-
potence are pledged. The assurance has been given in
the death and resurrection of Christ. What are the
outward losses of the present time-in comparison with the
infinite resources of God, ‘ who makes the dead alive, and
calls into being what does not exist ’ ? All His energies
go out to bring healing and repair. Amid the fury of
the storm He bids us look up and see in the heavens the
unchanging lights of His goodness and truth, of the
tenderness and pity of His Father’s heart. Each morning
His voice calls us anew to help Him in His purpose to save,
strengthen, and sanctify human life. The only thing
that can bring about failure is that men will not open
their minds wide enough to the sweep of His purpose, and
believe sufficiently in His power to bring it to pass. The
answer to the question whether the decisive hour has been
lost is the putting of another question ; ‘ When the Son
of Man cometh, shall He find faith on the earth ? ’
Note. — A few sentences in this paper have already appeared in an
article which was published in the October number of the International
Review of Missions.


PAPERS FOR WAR TIME
Published under the auspices of a Group drawn from
various Christian bodies and political parties, the editor-
in-chief of the series being the Rev, W. Temple, M.A.
A heady Published,
I. CHRISTIANITY AND WAR. By the Rev. AY.
Temple, M.A.
2. ARE WE WORTH FIGHTING FOR? By the
Rev. Richard Roberts.
8. THE WOMAN S PART. By Mrs. Luke Paget.
4. BROTHERS ALL: THE WAR AND THE
RACE QUESTION. By Edwyn Bevan, M.A.
Published on Nov. 16,
5. THE DECISIVE HOUR: IS IT LOST? By
J. H. Oldham, M.A.
6. ACTIVE SERVICE: THE SHARE OF THE
NON-COMBATANT. Bytheßev. W.R. Maltby.
Ready on Nov. SO.
CHRISTIAN CONDUCT IN AVAR TIME. By
AV. H. Mobehlv, M.A.
THE WAR SPIRIT IN OUR HOME LIFE.
By the Rev. A. Hehrert Gray, M.A.
Two papers will be issued each fortnight: among those
in preparation are the following:
THE REAL WAR. By the Rev. W. E. Orchard,
D.D.
THE CHURCH’S OPPORTUNITY. By Henry T.
Hodgkin, M.A., M.B.
THE ANSWER TO BERNHARDI. By the
Rev. Professor D. S. Cairns, D.D.
OXEORD : HORACE HART, PRINTER TO TUJC UNIVERSITY
