

fl. RF?fii I F OF fjFW SntlTM
The Gothenburg System.
Lecture by
Cr. JOSEPH MALINS, R.W.G.T.,
In the Collins Street Independent Church, 9th November, 1899;
Mr. J. W. Hunt , Chairman of the Victorian Alliance, presiding.
Mr. Malins, avlio was received with loud and prolonged applause, said :
I have visited Norway and Sweden several times, and travelled a great deal
through those countries. My last visit was undertaken at the request of a
member of the British Cabinet, specially to collect information upon the
Gothenburg system of licensing to lay before the Licensing Commission.
The two countries of Norway and Sweden are under one king, Oscar 11., but
they have separate Parliaments, and they differ one from the other at least
as much as the Australian colonies do. The Swedish people rather resemble-
the English, and the Norwegians the Scotch. Both are of the (Lutheran)-
Protestant religion, and well educated. The Swedes are deemed
aristoci’atic, and the Norwegians democratic. Sweden is mainly agricultural
and has about 5,000,000 inhabitants ; while Norway has about 2,000,000,
and is largely a nation of foresters, fishermen, and sailors. Both peoples-
are courteous, honest and industrious. An ardent spirit, called hranvin,.
or brandy, is, or was, the Scandinavian
National Beverage.
It is not a grape spirit but,a colourless grain spirit resembling whisky..
Malt liquors have also been used, but mostly of weak kinds till within
recent years, and nearly all the liquor legislation applies, therefore, only -to
the traffic ixx spirit as the main cause of intemperance. In bygoxxe genera
tions the intempex’ance resulting from the use of this liquor in Sweden was.
such as to repeatedly cause the
National Prohibition
of its xxxanufacture and sale ; but it was again allowed at intervals as a means;
of x-aising revenue for the purposes of war. In the last century the manu-
facture was made over to the Royal Family as a monopoly for the-
maintenance of the Crown, and royal palaces were converted into distilleries.
The evils were so great that a revulsion of feeling resulted in the pendulum,
swinghxg right to the other side, and there came an era of domestic distilling,
and of practically
Free Trade in Drink.
By the payment of a small tax a spirit still could be set up in any homestead,
and this was generally done, and spirit became the daily drink of the entix-e
adult male population. Thus in the year 1829, in Sweden, when the popu-
lation was only about two and a half millions, there were 173,124 domestic
spirit stills in as many homesteads ; the people wei’e steeped in drunkenness
and poverty, and the physical deteriox’ation was such as to render one-thirdl
of the young men of the nation uxxable to go through the requix'ed nxilitia
drill. They had not the stamina for learning the goose step or carrying a.
musket. The estimated annual consunxption of spirits per head was forty-
six litres, or about forty quarts. This was the average for each man, woman,
and child, but though the wife made the spirit she never drank it, and “ the
lords of creation ” were the sole consumers. So that each adult male must
have averaged about 100 quarts per annum. Sweden was out of sight the
most drunken nation in the world.
A Cry for Deliverance
went up from the people, and in 1835 axx Act was passed to suppx’ess
domestic stills, and this was partly effected during succeeding years. The
reform was aided by the visit from the United States of the Rev. Dr. Baird,
who was welcomed by the King, who published some of Dr. Baird’s-


Temperance writings ; and in 1837 the Swedish National Temperance
Society was formed, and in a few years it had 100,000 members on its roll.
The result of this combined moral and legal suasion was that by 1855 the
spirit stills had in the twenty years dropped from 173,000 to 40,000, and the
■consumption of spirits from forty-six to twenty-two litres per head. But
the evils were still great, and in 1854 there was a
National Uprising
to put out the distillery fires. In one instance two hundred men walked a
hundred miles to the capital as a deputation. As a result an Act was
passed in 1855 which contained some of the best, as well as some of the
worst, provisions ever applied to the drink traffic. The legislation
■enormously reduced the number of distilleries ; limited the months during
which distillation should take place ; lessened hours of sale ; punished
■drunkenness, and decreed stoppage of Sunday sale except to those buying
meals, and gave to every borough and parish communal the power to decide
how many public-houses (if any) they would allow in their respective areas.
Having decided how many they would allow, they were required to sell the
license by auction, the license money being mainly applied to local and
provincial government purposes. They could say there should be no
licenses, except in the case of certain life temfre licenses given by the State
in lieu of pensions, and which descended also to the next heirs of the
holders. Some of the holders must have been very young, and perhaps they
married late, as some of these licenses still exist. Sweden consists of about
2,400 rural parishes, and about 100 towns are incorporated boroughs, each rural
parish having a communal-namd or parish council. The council has first to
consider how many licenses (if any) should be allowed, and has to report its
recommendation to the parish meeting for approval. If both parish council
and parish meeting agree the decision is final, but if they differ the provincial
governor decides between them. This power of
Local Option
■proved the best feature of the law. The result was astounding. In 1856
about 2,000 out of the 2,400 rural parishes decided that they would
allow no liquor shops at nil! Thus at the end of 1856 there remained in all
rural Sweden only 537 public-houses, and most .of them were held by
persons under the life tenure privilege, and who therefore, could not be
displaced by the local veto. When it is remembered that at this time more
than seven-eights of the population of Sweden lived in the rural parishes, it
will be seen that the great bulk of the people which within a generation
before had been the most drunken in the world, had seized the first
opportunity given them to so exercise their Local Option power as to
practically suppress the common sale of liquor, and to make themselves one
of the most sober nations in the world ! And rural Sweden has never gone
back in this matter ; but the reverse, for the 537 licenses running in rural
Sweden in 1856 had by 1895 dropped to 250, and these consisted of 109 life
tenure licenses, 81 temporary licenses (for tourist steamers and resorts), 25
licenses for sale for off consumption, and only 28 ordinary licenses for sale for
consumption on the premises ; yet the rural parishes of Sweden now contain
about four millions of the five millions constituting the entire population of
Sweden. See what
£>id the Good.
The spirit consumption in 1829-30 was forty-six litres per head. The
legislation of 1835 suppressing domestic stills, and the national Temperance
work inaugurated in 1837, brought down the consumption to twenty-two
litres per head by 1855. The local veto legislation enacted in the latter year
■effected such a further reduction that by 1865 the national consumption had
dropped to less than ten litres per head. And all this had been achieved
before the invention of what is called the Gothenburg System. In one year
after 1855, 3,000,000 people in the country, mostly under local veto,
yielded only 1,339 convictions for drunkenness, while 250,000 in cities and
.towns yielded 10,507 convictions. The Act of 1855 gave the rural comma-


nities Local Option to suppress the traffic by direct vote, but it did not give
the electors of incorporated boroughs any direct vote on the matter. It
placed the power in the hands of the town councillors and the magistrates.
The result illustrates the fact that while a people entrusted with a direct
veto power may exercise it for their own deliverance, it by no means follows
that, if the veto power is instead vested in a corporate body, that corporate
body will use it as well. The authorities took advantage of
The Immoral Auction System,
and continued the sale of licenses at the highest possible prices for the benefit
of the town treasury. The law stipulated that the bidder must bid the
number of litres of spirits he would undertake to sell during the coming
year, and the highest bidder (if of character) got it, but the law
forbade the bid of less than 1,500 litres for each rural license, or 3,000 litres
for each license in a borough. The competing bidders would sometimes bid
8,000 litres for a single license, and then had to at once pay sale tax on
every litre bid before he could have the license to begin to sell. He thus
had to pay in advance the tax on that quantity whether he could sell it or
not, and, therefore, lost money on all sold short of that ; but he could try to
sell double as much as he had bidden, and all he could sell beyond
his bid escaped sale tax. Worse than this ! the law allowed the municipal
corporation, if it pleased, to sell the whole lot of licenses for a term of one,
two, or three years, to a single company, but required that in that case the
various companies should tender or bid for the let, but no such bid
should be entertained unless it at least amounted to a sum equal to the
aggregate biddings of the private publicans who had previously held
the licenses. Thus it was an auction upon an auction, such as strained the
bidding power to the highest pitch, and made those securing the licenses
ready to resort to any means, fair or foul, to so push the trade as to recoup
themselves for the extreme sums exacted. You ask what about the houses ?
The authorities had nothing to do with them. They merely sold pieces' of
paper giving the right to sell drink. Under this diabolical system the
boroughs were still steeped in drunkenness, and the authorities who had
taken the revenue in advance felt powerless to interfere. While, owing to
the sobriety of the rural parts under the operation of the local veto, the
national spirit consumption had dropped to less than ten litres per head, it
was very far less in rural parts and far more in boroughs—that of Gothen-
burg in 1864 being twenty-eight litres per head. Drunkenness and poverty
were rampant, and to remedy this, certain merchants, including Mr. Carnegie,
the head of a large brewery at Gothenburg, and his manager, Consul Rchman,
persuaded themselves to form a company to monopolize and check the sale
■of spirits and popularize the sale of malt liquors as a remedy for intem-
perance. This was the beginning of
The Gothenburg System.
The company offered to take over all the liquor licenses and conduct the
liquor shops in the interests of public morality, if they were allowed all
necessary fees and working expenses and six per cent, on their capital and
to give all surplus profits over to the town council, subject to a small share
going to provincial administrations. This was agreed to, and constitutes
what is known as The Gothenburg System—a system which was in certain
respects an improvement upon the auction system, but one which, on the
other hand, implicated the municipality in the liquor traffic, and gave the
entire community a more direct vested interest in the continuance of the
liquor traffic than they had ever previously possessed, the profits of the city
treasury constituting,“ golden ” reasons why the traffic should be continued.
Indeed it was so attractive that practically all the Swedish corporations
followed suit and went into the liquor traffic with alacrity and gathered in
its profits with avidity.
The Main Merits
claimed for the system were :
That the number of drinking-houses would be reduced.
That the hours of sale would be lessened.


That the purity of the liquors would be guaranteed.
That the management would be disinterested, each public-house manager
having a fixed salary, and no profit on spirit sales.
That the malt liquors would be popularized, and tend to reduce spirit
consumption and conduce to sobriety.
That the houses would become real “victualling houses,” and thus serve
the original purpose of taverns.
That in houses thus managed by a company, authorized by the town
council, drinking to excess would be checked, and comparative sobriety ensue.
But let us see
How the Scheme Worked.
It is a fact that the Gothenburg company reduced the public-houses by
about one-third. But in doing so they closed small houses in back streets-
and opened larger houses in more frequented parts of the town, which is just
what is taking place in England, where in some cases the number of houses
have been diminished, but the others have been so enlarged as to make as
large a drinking area as before. This was done by the Birmingham corpor-
ation when licenses come into their hands. They became possessed of (50
licenses, and abolished 30, but they opened new public-houses
with 60 feet frontage in the place of old ones of 16 feet frontage.
The Gothenburg company did reduce the hours of general sale in
the houses which they kept under their immediate control, but in
other houses licensed by them they put no such limit, and, in these, drinking
can continue to a late hour. And in some of the houses directly managed
by the company, the rule as to early closing only applies to parts of the
public-house frequented by working people, while the “ cafe ” was still kept
open to a late hour for spirit sale to those who could put on a clean collar
and afford to pay a trifle more for the liquor. As to disinterested managers,
I deny that the fact that a public-house manager is paid a salary instead of a
commission makes him disinterested. Like the salaried manager of a coffee-
house, his security of situation has some relation to his conducting tho
business profitably. The Gothenburg company, however, allowed their
managers a commission on all spirits sold during the first nine years of the
existence of the company. I have said that among the first promoters and
shareholders of the Gothenburg company was Consul Eckman, the manager,
and Mr. Carnegie, the head of the great Carnegie Porter brewery in Gothen-
burg, the porter produced at which contains 8 per cent, of proof spirit (in
contrast with the weaker Swedish malt liquors), and the theory on which
the directors professed to go was that sobriety would be gained by strongly
pushing the sale of malt liquors, rather than ardent spirits. The company
therefore gave each public-house manager the whole profit on his malt
liquor sales, and did so for twenty-eight years, when they claimed the profits-
in future, and allowed the managers more salary instead. Largely in conse-
quence of this pushing of the malt liquor sale, hundreds of independent
beer-houses have been set up. As a result, in thirty years the consumption
of spirits per head in the city has been reduced by about 50 per cent.,
while the malt liquor consumption is estimated to have increased by 1,000
per cent. The net result is that there is about as much alcohol consumed, in-
one form or another, as there was when the company started in 1865. But
it is claimed that drunkenness has been reduced 50 per cent. If it be true
of any system that it reduces drunkenness 50 per cent., I’m in for it. But
What caused the Reduced Drunkenness?
The truth is that prior to adopting the Gothenburg system, every policeman
was entitled to two-thirds of the fine as a reward for securing a conviction
for drunkenness. Hence, as the General Director of Prisons testifies, the
police were abnormally active in arresting many who would otherwise have
been left to go home. The police siezed anyone who could be supposed to
be drunk. Frequently the arrested persons resisted, and the streets
became like battle-fields. If the men were not drunk at first, they looked
drunk when they got to the station. Just as the Gothenburg system was-
introduced, this plan of police payment was stopped. The apparent


drunkenness was reduced 60 per cent., and the company said, “ Look at the
result of our system !” In giving evidence before the Lands’ Com-
mittee in 1877, Mr. Carnegie, the brewer, put in a table with a note to the
effect that in 1860 the police ceased to have the share of the fines for
drunkenness, but the system was not abolished till 1865, and Mr. Carnegie
knew it. The fact that during the thirty years’ trial of the Gothenburg
system the convictions have at times almost attained the height of 1865, and
are still at 30 per 1,000 (even without rewards to the police) goes to show
that the system is a dismal failure. But it is suggested that the drunkenness
is caused by the liquor shops not under company control. In 21 yeairs
(1875-96), 68,431 persons wex-e convicted of drunkenness. They have all
under the law been questioned as to whei’e they became intoxicated, and
nearly two-thirds of them testified. Of these, 19,303 said they got
Drunk at the Company’s Houses,
while 13,714 got drunk at the far more numerous houses conducted by
private persons for private profit. This led me to write the Chief of police
to ask how many complaints the police had laid against the company’s
houses for permitting drunkenness, etc. He replied that they have not
laid a single complaint against the company’s houses for ten years ! Of
course not; the corporation police cannot well attack corporation public-
houses, when such houses have become monetary milch cows to the
corporation. The twenty or thirty thousand sovereigns made every year
are so many strong reasons why the milch cow should not be disturbed. As
a result of the system in many places the municipal authorities are
Sunk in Corruption.
And yet the honesty of individuals is such that a door is scarcely ever
locked at night. Collective bodies will stoop to do what individuals will not.
The rule is for the municipal councils to have seven-tenths of the profits over
six per cent. The remainder goes to the Government and Provincial
authorities, or agricultural societies. Various subterfuges are resorted to
by the municipal bodies to get more than their fair share. In one town,
Sbdertelge, the council owned a vault. It said to the liquor company, “Rent
this for 10,000 Kroners a year.” The company said, “We don’t want it.”
“ But take it,” said the council, and the company did, sub-letting it at 5,000
Kroners a year, and reducing the surplus profit by that amount. As to
results, let us compare the
Drunkenness of Gothenburg
with that of some British cities.
Aberdeen has a population of 135,000, and in the year 1896 its druxiken con-
victions were 784. Gothenburg, with its smaller population of 116,000, had
4,040 drunken convictions. So Gothenburg is about six times as drunken as
Aberdeen. Cardiff has a population of over 160,000, and its drunken
convictions are under 800 per annum. Gothenburg, though so much smaller,
has five times as many convictions. The London Times special commissioner
testified that the position and circumstances of Cardiff are so similar to those
of Gothenburg that they are eminently suitable for comparison. Liverpool
has a population of over 600,000. The police report shows that the drunken
convictions for Liverpool were 4,800, wlxilst Gothenburg (with less than one-
fifth of the population of Liverpool) shows 4,040. The Swedish law provides
for
Sunday Closing,
and only permits the sale of spirits with meals on that day. I have seen in
Gothenburg 7,000 people in a concert hall on a Sunday night, of whom
3,000 were drinking spirits without taking food. This is another abuse
winked at by the corporation police in the interests of the corporation
revenue.
The Norwegian System.
Norway began to adopt the Gothenburg system in 1871, six years after
Gothenburg had started. In Sweden the liquor company is called a
“ Bolag in Norway it is called a “ Samlag.” The national law had already


laiftiao
Fiaa-tOo. 6 ...... .u
caused to a great extent, the prohibition of the retail sale of spirits in the
Iro .rural parts. In adopting the Gothenburg system for its towns, Norway
, imposed restrictions forbidding Samlag shareholders to receive over five per
cent, dividend, and decreed that the surplus profit should not go into the
municipal treasury, but be disbursed for benevolent purposes such as would
not be chargeable in the rates. The British Consul General at Christiania
a few years ago reported to our Government the gross abuses of the system,
and, though his evidence was impugned by resident supporters of it, he
reaffirmed it to me on my visiting him. The £IOO,OOO or so annual profit
was applied to improving parks, roads, and other purposes which might ave
been chargeable to the rates, as well as the benevolent institutions. ihe
Temperance party secured in 1894 a measure of
Local Option,
giving to all men and women 25 years of age and upwards, the power to vote
against the continuance of the traffic. The Act, however, required that it
should have the votes of a majority of all on the register in order to thus
suppress the Sarnlags. Thus all who yot-d for continuance and all not
votirnr at all were to be counted as for the Samlag. The towns were to be
polled in groups, the three years’ tenure of different Sarnlags ending m
different years. The first poll was to be taken on the first group in 1895,
and on other groups in ensuing years. Already in 25 cities and towns the
votes of the people have
Smashed the System.
A wailing cry has gone up from some charitable institutions, old women’s
homes and "iris’ reformatories, whose receipts from private beneficence were
probably checked when the liquor money was allocated to them, and who
now find their dependence on drinking and drunkenness for financial support
has tended to dry up the sources of private munificence. One wonders what
may happen to the hospital mentioned by Dr. Gould in his report which
favours the system. The physician founding it urged the authorities to
increase the hours of liquor sale among the fisherman so as to apply the
extra profits from extra drinking to the completion of the hospital; and they
did so. The drink shops were run full blast, and you may be sure that
when the beds were ready there were plenty of patients to fill them . Unfor-
tunately the prohibition of the Sarnlags does not close
Beer and Wine Shops.
After the closing of the company’s houses there were large importations of
so-called wine from Hamburg. But after a time the authorities had the stuff
analysed, and found it had never seen a grape. Ihey forbade its sale except
as spirit, and whole cargoes went back to Germany. this defect on y
strengthens the intention of legislators to bring beer and wine under control
In Conclusion,
referring to Messrs. Rowntree & Sherwell’s scheme, Mr. Malins said that
when Jews open pork shops, and vegetarians open butcher s shops then
teetotallers may run public-houses, or elect others to run them. All true
Temperance men want power granted to the people to deal with the U attic,
not to embark in it. The Temperance men have not won all they want, but
they are of the breed who have learned to labour and to wait without being
dismayed by temporary repulses.
Price, 2s. per 100. Postage in Victoria, 6d. per 100 ; other Colonies, Is. per 100.
“ ALLIANCE HKOOItU ??
for mation on the questions of Temperance and Prohibition.
Published Monthly Asy&rU subscription, Is. 6d. ; or including Member hip in the Victorian
S 1 1)1 a'nd Offices : Temperance and General L.fe Buildings, corner of
* NOV and Little Collins Streets, Melbourne.
q 177 * JOHN VALE, Secretary,
Printing Co., 127 & 129 Queen-street, Melbourne.


drunkenness was reduced 60 per cent., and the company said, “ Look at the
result of our system !” In giving evidence before the Lands’ Com-
mittee in 1877, Mr. Carnegie, the brewer, put in a table with a note to the
effect that in 1860 the police ceased to have the share of the fines for
drunkenness, but the system was not abolished till 1865, and Mr. Carnegie
knew it. The fact that during the thirty years’ trial of the Gothenburg
system the convictions have at times almost attained the height of 1865, and
are still at 30 per 1,000 (even without rewards to the police) goes to show
that the system is a dismal failure. But it is suggested that the drunkenness
is caused by the liquor shops not under company control. In 21 yeairs
(1875-96), 68,431 persons wex-e convicted of drunkenness. They have all
under the law been questioned as to whei’e they became intoxicated, and
nearly two-thirds of them testified. Of these, 19,303 said they got
Drunk at the Company’s Houses,
while 13,714 got drunk at the far more numerous houses conducted by
private persons for private profit. This led me to write the Chief of police
to ask how many complaints the police had laid against the company’s
houses for permitting drunkenness, etc. He replied that they have not
laid a single complaint against the company’s houses for ten years ! Of
course not; the corporation police cannot well attack corporation public-
houses, when such houses have become monetary milch cows to the
corporation. The twenty or thirty thousand sovereigns made every year
are so many strong reasons why the milch cow should not be disturbed. As
a result of the system in many places the municipal authorities are
Sunk in Corruption.
And yet the honesty of individuals is such that a door is scarcely ever
locked at night. Collective bodies will stoop to do what individuals will not.
The rule is for the municipal councils to have seven-tenths of the profits over
six per cent. The remainder goes to the Government and Provincial
authorities, or agricultural societies. Various subterfuges are resorted to
by the municipal bodies to get more than their fair share. In one town,
Sbdertelge, the council owned a vault. It said to the liquor company, “Rent
this for 10,000 Kroners a year.” The company said, “We don’t want it.”
“ But take it,” said the council, and the company did, sub-letting it at 5,000
Kroners a year, and reducing the surplus profit by that amount. As to
results, let us compare the
Drunkenness of Gothenburg
with that of some British cities.
Aberdeen has a population of 135,000, and in the year 1896 its druxiken con-
victions were 784. Gothenburg, with its smaller population of 116,000, had
4,040 drunken convictions. So Gothenburg is about six times as drunken as
Aberdeen. Cardiff has a population of over 160,000, and its drunken
convictions are under 800 per annum. Gothenburg, though so much smaller,
has five times as many convictions. The London Times special commissioner
testified that the position and circumstances of Cardiff are so similar to those
of Gothenburg that they are eminently suitable for comparison. Liverpool
has a population of over 600,000. The police report shows that the drunken
convictions for Liverpool were 4,800, wlxilst Gothenburg (with less than one-
fifth of the population of Liverpool) shows 4,040. The Swedish law provides
for
Sunday Closing,
and only permits the sale of spirits with meals on that day. I have seen in
Gothenburg 7,000 people in a concert hall on a Sunday night, of whom
3,000 were drinking spirits without taking food. This is another abuse
winked at by the corporation police in the interests of the corporation
revenue.
The Norwegian System.
Norway began to adopt the Gothenburg system in 1871, six years after
Gothenburg had started. In Sweden the liquor company is called a
“ Bolag in Norway it is called a “ Samlag.” The national law had already


eiAiuo
6
caused to a great extent, the prohibition of the retail sale of spirits in the
! W /rural parts. In adopting the Gothenburg system for its towns, Norway
imposed restrictions forbidding Sarnlag shareholders to receive over five per
cent, dividend, and decreed that the surplus profit should not go into the
municipal treasury, but be disbursed for benevolent purposes, such as would
not be chargeable in the rates. The British Consul General at Christiania
a few years ago reported to our Government the gross abuses of the system,
and, though his evidence was impugned by resident supporters of it, he
reaffirmed it to me on my visiting him. The £lOO,OOO or so annual profit
was applied to improving parks, roads, and other purposes which might have
been chargeable to the rates, as well as the benevolent institutions. The
Temperance party secured in 1894 a measure of
Local Option,
favours the system. The physician
increase the hours of liquor sale amo
extra profits from extra drinking to th
did so. The drink shops were run f
when the beds were ready there were
tunately the prohibition of the Sarnlag
Beer and
After the closing of the company’s 1
so-called wine from Hamburg. But a
analysed, and found it had never seen
as spirit, and whole cargoes went I
strengthens the intention of legislator
also.
In Con
referring to Messrs. Rowntree & Shi
when Jews open pork shops, and vt
teetotallers may run public-houses, o
Temperance men want power granted
not to embark in it. The Temperance
they are of the breed who have learne
dismayed by temporary repulses.
Price, 2s. per 100. Postage in Victoria,
for on the que:
' Published Monthly, llis/bar ly subscription, 1:
Alliance, ss. and ujttvanls. Offices : Tempt
“ NOV 1992 V* jliston and Little Co
wG
Printing Co., 127 &
giving to all men and women 25 years of age and upwards, the power to vote
against the continuance of the traffic. The Act, however, required that it
should have the votes of a majority of all on the register in order to thus
suppress the Sarnlags. Thus all who vot°d for continuance and all not
voting at all were to be counted as for the Sarnlag. The towns were to be
polled in groups, the three years’ tenure of different Samlags ending in
different years. The first poll was to be taken on the first group in 1890,
and on other groups in ensuing years. Already in 25 cities and towns the
votes of the people have
Smashed the System.
A wailing cry has gone up from some charitable institutions, old women s
homes and girls’ reformatories, whose receipts from private beneficence were
probably checked when the liquor money was allocated to them, and who
now find their dependence on drinking and drunkenness for financial support
has tended to dry up the sources of private munificence. One wonders what
may happen to the hospital mentioned bv Or. Gnnld in his renort—-which
