

VfC-ni H o*^l
. I. -
Supplement.']
LONDON, THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 20, 1919.
THE STORY OF ZEEBEUGGE : FULL DISPATCH.
Admiralty, February 19. able weather conditions setting in, had to be dispersal, [ance during the weeks of preparation
Despatches from the Vioe-Admxbat., Dover A™ 8 ct » although it caused disappointment amog j ment was so ably organized as to r
p.TM,, Av ..... OsTKNn Oppra- U .°. f ’ cers and n ? e Pl ? nd aBO contained a danger comforts inseparable from the situation
■ Patrol ON Zeebrugge and USTEND Opera (bat the enemy might become aware of our design*. .After the second attempt, when it bo
TIONS, 22.V0-J.tRD April, 1918, AND OSTEND had a considerable practical value as a rehearsal ft (that there would be a long delay,
Operations, 10th May, 1918. the preliminary stages of the undertaking. On Ibis Fined the Hindustan, and the presaur
maf 01 * ° N tht ’ wind changed and served us badly at a nu™Tn" atout mi
Operaiions, April, lylo« when we were finally committed to the attack , ~ ,
Fleet House. Dover, conditions had not —since the preparations were r 1 * ™ s P ec } a !
(Ko 1806/001 ) •***-* mB - btfore ’ nor have they
. I . ,T. Grant (Retired) and a represc
Sir, ; 1 Lhe mam force started from the point of (Director of Dockyards, on account <
, _ . . . i concentration at 4.53 o clock on the afternoon of largo carrying capacity (1,500), and
B© pleased to submit for the information | Monday, the 22nd April. fl v i ew j n the first place to th<
of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty I 20. The bombardment of bv Vindictive alongside the Mole (for w
x-u« _• -r» a au r\ 4. 1 1 on ' ,
- v , • * uuiuMujunit uv vti £jwui Übb” uv momiors , *- >
the following Report on the Operations on the began at 11.20 p.m., simultaneously wi(h that of the re . s . mos t useful) ;to
Belgian Coast on the night of the 22nd-23rd Ostend defences by monitors, and by our shore i r l6 ' indictivo be sunk, of then
Anri I 1018 batteries m Flanders. These bombardments had few and the landing parties
1“’ been carried out on several nights prior fo ihe !H uaanoeuvre in shallow wat
I —GENERAL SUMMARY. 22nd April to S ivß tho enemy no reason to anticipate » elds or torpedoes, , Tho )f P 1"
furl lu,r nclinn vvv. mm nnid nn 4 na »•< i .... ■ (*IU>RGTI- JUwl TH J .n <1 G.rGql Priori SPT
a uiUilT dtuuii VJXX GUI |IUUI vu ixxxn (t.u ucmav OCCOSIOn
2. To make the report clear, the different sections , . . ‘
of the operations have been separated as much as 21 - Th® vessels charged with making a , mc , kB 30. ihe blocking ips am
possible. Fuller details than appear in this despatch •"««» began operations simulUneously off Zcebrvgge Tt Vor
Wi L lW f f<lUnd l i | t 1 "’ complete set of orders and and Ostend at ll tO p.m Lsl iealou.f aL ible he
reports forwarded herewith. j 22. According to time-table, the hour at which th« ,_A.. l)a rtments concerned
(Note. —These orders and reports are not published , mdie.ive (apt am Alfred I. B. (arpinter) i,riuuli.dUp t . cllte ,b,. wor k in every way.
with thi„ iWnateh have been la,d alongside the Zeebruggo Mole was fl . .
R _ midnight. She reached her stai.ion one minute “-J t was able to devote mere fpcrsonal attention
3. Tho main objects of the enterprise were (1) midnight, closely followed by the Daffodil (LieiriOT id lima to Vrvrw-Jg out tlie I>ll ■ of operations and
to block tho Bruges ship-canal at its entrance into the | tenant Harold Campbell) and Iris 11. (Commander ‘Jbe preparation of personnel and material 'than would
harbour at Zeebruggo ; (2) to block tho entrance to Valentino Gibbs). A few minutes later Ihe landing ) ‘oerwiso have been possible, because Kes.r-Admiral
Ostend harbour from the sea ; and (3) to inflict as of the storming and demolilion parties began. By t’ecil F. Dampier, Admiral Superintendent and second
much damage as possible upon the ports of Zeebrugge i.io a.m. the Vindictive had taken off the survivors, n command of tho Dover Flotilla. Commodore the
and Ostend. who had meanwhile done their work upon the Mole, dor - Algernon Boyle, C. 8., M.V.0., Chief of Staff,
4 Zeebniggejiarhour is connected by a.ship- andby Lid a.m. she and her consorts were clear of the
mvmicate agaL'^y' meaM of 'a system of.smaller 23. At 12.15 a.m. Submarine C 3 (Lieutenant jf^d' V plro! ° f l U am T»LK°TdiriS
canals with Ostend harbour. The whole forms a Richard D. Sandford) had succeeded in ramming L m pier for his loyal cooperation in connexion wit li
triangle with two sea entrances. The eastern side, herself betw-een the iron piers of the viaduct, and was I r he ouoralions TV, order to bring together tho
which is 8 miles long, is the ship-canal from Zeebrugge thereupon abandoned by her crew after they had {L mbe ? of destroyers requisite lor the operation,
to Bruges ; the southern side, whmh is 1 I long, lit tho, fuses. Five mmutes later Ihe cargo of explo- j k hile maintaining the work of the pal.rol, it was
consists of smaller canals from Bruges to Ostend sives blew up, comp etely destroymg communication | Lcessarv to have the entil e available force in running
the base, facing north-west, is the 12 miles of heavily between the Mole and the shore. j Lder. This called for high organization on Captain
*i• m °- between Ostend an . W p?*' 24. The Thelis (Commander Ralph S. Sneyd, | ll’omkinsou’s part, and was made especially difficult
This fortified hue is prolonged H miles to IJtamrt- D . 5 . 0.), the first of the blocking sliipi. passed the I because the period of preparation coincided with
ward, eit.emhng in ? ’ .. , .. , end of the Mole, according to arrangement, fifteen 1 (hat in which very heavy demands were suddenly
Army, N.euwrt, and 7 m to the eastward midnight. Making her way to the We on the escort flotilla by the pressing needs of
•“ M t.b« D«t4* frontier I Re include a entranc< , of the shi a . canal> she B carried /way the ihe army in France. The fait that the many addi-
nurnber of hatternes moun^ ng ov “'’,B)™®’ obstructing nets, and being then in a sinking condi- floral services which the Dover Patrol was called on
which are Rom 6-m. to la-in, calibre, the latter ranging y on from gu n f ire) wbb bo tb her propellers fouled, to carry out, in addition to its routine, were performed
up to 42,uuu yams. was sunk by her crew close to the entrance of th« without deranging its working, reflects the greatest
5. This formidable system has been installed canal. The’lntrepid (Lieutenant Stuart S. Bonham- credit 6n Commodore Boyle, whose exceptional
since the German occupation in 1914, and Bruges has Carter), the second of tho blocking ships, following powers of organization have been invaluable to me.
reoently provided a base for at least 35 enemy torpedo a few minutes later, was sunk in the ship-canal „« „.. . .... _ , x , .
craft, and about 30 submarines. By reason of its posi- itself; and the Iphigenia (Lieutenant Edward W. L„, v.° " mg-Commander V. A. Bro<-^.s
tion and comparative security it has constituted a Billvard-Leake), the last of the three blocking ships, b° m» d P Il RRn /
continual and ever-increasing menace to tho sea following close astern of the Intrepid, was suflk with IT * l hl8 aA ack on thib M<fiib. but I cannot
communications of our Army and the seaborne trade .the most complete success across the narrowest part (* j 8 P art tbe subject.without recording m.
6. When the operations of the 22nd-23rd April 25. It was expected that the blocking ships Brilliant! Dover Patrol, I first began to prepare for this opera-
were undertaken it was believed that, although the j (Commander Alfred E. Godsal) and Sirius (Lieu-(lion, it became apparent that without, an effective
blocking of , the Zeebrugge entrance to the Bruges tenant-Commander Henry N. M. Hardy. D. 5.0.) ; fystem of smoke-screening such an attack could hardly
ship-canal was the most important, of all objects, 1 would have found the entrance to Ostend harbour | hope to succeed. The system of making smoke
it would be necessary also to block the entrance to the :by midnight. For the reason, however, which is previously employed in the Dover Patrol was un-
Ostend harbour in order to seal up the Bruges ship- ; explained in the next paragraph, they missed their Stable tor a night operation, as its production
canal and docks ; for unless this were done the lighter ! objective, ran ashore, and had both to lie sunk generated a fierce flame, and no other means of making
craft would still I>e able to pass to and fro more or I about 12.30 a.m. an effective smoke screen was available. Wing-
less freely through the smaller canals. j 26 Tiie Buccess G f the Ostend enierprisft was j Commander Brock and sixty ratings were lent to
7. The attack upon the Zeebrugge Mole, as well affectea to some extent by two adverse factors : j command, a factory was established in the do ok-
as the bombardment of Zeebrugge by monitors and (I) at 12.15 a.m. the wind (N.N.E.), which so far T ar d, he worked with great energy to obtain
from the air, were designed to distract the attention had been favourable for purposes of the smoke screen,. m^ e riaJs, designing and organizing ihe means
of the enemy from the main operations. Without this shifted into an unfavourable quarter (S.S.W.),[ An d the plans, and eventually developing the re-
diversion the attempt of the blocking ships to pass thereby exposing the attacking forces to the fire of ; sources with which wo finally set out. these were of
round the end of the Mole, to enter the harbour, and the enemy ; (2) the buoy which marks the channell vauc €V<^ n ln verse circumstances which
to reach the ship-canal entrance at the inner end to Ostend harbour had been moved very* shortly h ~ us, ami i greany deplore the loss of a. man so
must almost certainly have been discovered, with before, unknown to us, to a position some 2,400 l ve i, “ ° car *T experiments m thiiv matter
the result that the vessels would have been sunk yards further east, so that when Brilliant and Sirius iurtner. When on the Mole he was very keen to
by the shore batteries long before they reached found it and put their helms to starboard they ran; acquire knowledge of. the range-finding apparatus
jb’ . v . a i ashnrp i which might be of use to the country, and his efforts
t . . ... -to do this were made without any regard to his per-
8. An important, though subordinate, object of 2t. The manner m which the survivors or thej sonal safety, and I fear cost this very brave and
the attack upon the Zeebruggo Mole was to inflict crews of the five blocking ships and of Submarine! ingenious officer his life.
as much damage as was possible in the time upon the C 3 were rescue a and brought away by volunteer! . *
harbour works and defences. In order to prevent crews in motor launches and a picket boat was The fitting out of ihe motor launches and
onemv reinforcements being brought from shore while beyond praise. The various incidents are described! J oa stal motor boats with smoke apparatus, designed
, ' x ■ . _ i... t • , . . . , . , )V Wimr-l VimmaruiPi’ Kmi• V irac r.aTriPtl rinf, «•.
Onemv remiorcemems uexug uniugui-xrumsnore wxme uoyunu. pra-uso. Aiie vanuua jaallucxxna *«a-c ua.-duxxl«:u . . • -n • i r ■
/i IiLS work was in progrress arrangements were made in subsequent paragraphs. i Wing-Commander Brock, was carried out at
kn b l°T Wi L g na UP the , TiadUCt WhiCh COIUWCted * he tU* In *> ,f ' * of % att«A,<m •%. v,’ v ..;;. ‘XC
VVrthlT t land. ,- r Da> our to officers and men were afc by Commander Hamilton Bonn, Lieutenant-
9. Similarly the bombardment of the Ostend follows: —Killed, 176; wounded, 412; missing, 49; Commander M. G. A. Edwards, Lieutenant F, C.
defences by our shore batteries in Flanders, by the of the latter 35 are believ?d to have been killed. Archer, and Mr. G. V. Smart, ol H.M. Dockyard, !
monitors, and also from the air was designed to cover Although those casualties are light compared to Dover.
f,be attempt to block the entrance to that harbour. those that the Army constantly suffers in similar staff Pavim-ster Waller d Northoott RNB
.. .. . . ~, , . ..... . ~ r ent<rpnsrs, we have to mourn the loss of comradis 1 Ja * otan P,ayma:«.ei waiter l. .xonmoii,
10. It was anticipated that in addition to the fire j £ d prac ticaHy every unit of His Majesty’s the Naval Supply Officer at Dover, was at all times
from the land batteries and harbour works the gca forceg lossts in shi were {o]lo ._ most zealous and untiring m dealing with the vast
attacking forces would have to face a counter-attack wxj g North Star and motor launches Nos. 424 quantities of stores and munitions which had to be
from the powerful destroyer flotilla which was known ’. ’ j iosunk. No other vessel was rendered" unfit checked and distributed, ofUnat very short not ice.
brugge harbour. 2nd b ro™rted to'lmve for furthtr scrvscc ‘ 40 ' The . of b c, 'r. £ ho be^. e
by a\orpedo fired from C.M.B. No. 5. Other torpedo 29. I have already submitted to the Lords Com- m Ihe Woctehips w;as Lwutenant I van B.
craft, which apnarently had not steam un. remained missioners of the Admiralty the list of naval ofticirs Franks (Dolphin). Although . uff rmg fr m . e
alongside the Mole, and their crews assisted in its whom I considered deserving of promotion, either severe effects of an accident on service, his confident
defence. The greater part* of the flotilla had for some immediately or as soon as they have the prescribed enthusiasm fired all who came into touch with him.
reason been previously withdrawn to the Bruges service. I propose to forward as soon as possible a He was put m charge of the eariy preparations of all
reason >’ 8 supplementary despatch bringing to their Lordships’ the blockships and commanded the Iphigenia m the
_ notice the names of other officers and men who dis- two abandoned attempt s, but to his great disappoint-
-1 I Ac will Vw*> coAn fnoTvi f.hA cn hcnrmnnt, woTTafira 1 .. - . ~ ... 4 1— ill ...iIL n nnnv>/R/.i4:n
notice tae names oi ouncr omcers ana men wno ais- . »,vrr.
1 11. As will be seen from the subsequent narrative, themselves, for they are naturally ment he was taken ill with appendicitis two days
our operations were completely successful in attaining Tiny came from many ships, and were before the actual attack, and had to be sent to hospital
their fimt and most important object BCattert . d irara ediately the operations were over, so to undergo an operation. Ido not wish the good ]
to the Bruges ship-canal was blocked. The second that it js difficult to obtain the details relating to work he did, and the good example he set, to go
object—-the blocking of the entrance to Ostend ~ _ unrecorded,
harbour —was not. achieved, for reasons which Will “ nera ‘ .. ~ „,,, , ,
be explained subsequently. The attack on the Zee- 30.1 cannot close this brief summary without . 41. The flag officers of other commands who were
bragge Mole was completely successful as a diversion reference to those gallant souls who dm not live to m a position to assist me did so most generously,
to enable the blocking ships to enter the harbour, see the success of their endeavours. It seems almost The Commander-in-CTuef of the Grand Fleet sent me
to proceed to their allotted stations, and, with the invidious to mention names when every officer and » selected body of officers and men truly representa-
rixeention of the Thetis, to be sunk in accordance mm who took part was animated by one spirit, tive of his command, for I understand that the whole
with the plan. The blowing up of the viaduct was ardently welcoming the opportunity of achieving of his command would have been equally glad to
carried out without any hitch, arid produced the a feat of arms against odds in order that honour come. From the neighbouring commands at Ports-
desired results. Owing, however, to various reasons aqd merit might be added to that which our Service mouth and the Isore, the Adjutant-General, Royai
Which will be more particularly dealt with later, the has gained in the past. Amongst those who lost. Marines, and the Depot at Chatham, I received sup-
loss important objective, the destruction of the their lives were many who shared with me the secrets port and assistance, nob only in ships and men, but
■ defences on the Mole, was not so thorough as had of the plan, and of those I cannot refrain from re- in every possible way. The Bear-Admiral Command-
been hoped. calling Lieutenant-Colonel Elliot, Captain Halahan, ing the Harwich Force spared me a flotilla leadur and
r ' * ~ , . , , , Commander Valentine Gibbs, Majors Cordm r and six besides protecting the northern flank
12. The mam results achieved have, however, jg a „p s Lieutenant-Commanders Harrison and Brad- of the area in which I was operating.
rJtemod q.ort ha on Tf the Lieutenants Hawkings and Chamberlain, and Brigadier-General McEwan and his staff at Chat-
& STi&iX show bam lapsed the training of the office* andmen
*u,, lighter craft in the Rrnv-k wol “ m , e tn J ml . n p • Pf rs<mnel " Da . "g® T , from the Grand Fleet as if lor the Royal haval Divi-
SVbJSU SS invaluable and
to find an exit through the smaller waterways to c , irried (o a successful issue* were Valuable to me. I much appreciate their whole-hearted cooperation.
Ostend harbour. At least 23 torpedo craft have during the anxious days of waiting in crowded 42. lam much indebted to Brigadier-General
remained sealed up at Bruges ever since the opera- ‘ a sec | ndc , d anchorage, and in spite of two Charles L. Lambe, C.M.G., D. 5.0., commanding the
lions on St. George's Day. and so far as can be seen the patience and faith that our 7th Brigade of the Royal Air Force, and Lieutenant-
Hot less than 12 submarines would likewise appear ch ,. r * would come , which were displayed by all, Colonel Frederick C. Halahan, M.V.0., D. 5.0., in
to be still imprisoned. As yet no effective steps owed much the fine example of these officers. 1 command of the Air Force under my command, for
seem to have been taken to clear the Zeebrugge the cooperation of the 61st and 05th Wings, under
jontroeco to the Bruges ship-canal, where the silt is NARRATIVE. Lieutenant-Colonels P. F. M. Fellowes, D. 5.0., and
shown to be collecting; end although doubtless in ' I James T. Cull, D. 5.0., respectively, throughout the
time the enemy will succeed in opening a way out, 11.-— Composition op Forces. .'preparation and execution of the operations. The
it seems likely that this important section of his raid- 3! j n order that all parts of the Naval Service) | 65th Wing was lent for the purpose by the Field-
ing and commerce-destroying forces must inevitably rn ;„h( share in the expedition, representative bodies; Marshal Commander-in-Chief British Armies in
be seriously hampered.for a considerable period. In o{ men were drawn from■ the Grand Fleet, the three France. For several weeks the 61st Wing was
addition to suffering this substantial injury, the Horae Depots, the Royal Marine Artillery and Light engaged in frequent reconnaissances, and took a
enemy has been obliged to bring down reinforcements l n f o rita-v. The ships "and torpedo craft were fur-) large number of photographs in different conditions
from the Bight of Heligoland to Zeebrugge and n j s h(d by vessels from the Dover Patrol, which was. of tide, from which photographs, plans, and models
(Ostend. reinforced by vessels Iron) the Harwich Force and the; were constructed. On the first occasion of attempt-
-13. The preparations and training for the attack Finn, h Navy. The Royal Australian Navy and the ! ing the operation, the 65th Wing was already com-
over a long period, during the latter portion Admiralty Experimental Stations at Stratford and mitted to their attack when 1 was compelled by shift
of which (i.e., fiom the 22nd March) the Dover Dover were also represented. of wind to withdraw the sea attack. The air attack
Patrol was subjected fo an exceptional strain owing The details thus contributed, which finally com- was delivered with the greatest gallantry at a low
to the unprecedented transport of reinforcements to posed the whole striking force, were as shown in the altitude, and against a tremendous anti-aircraft
France. following table : defence. To the intense disappointment of the 65th
14. Success would have been impossible without ~ . ———————— -j j ‘Besides those
the eager and generous co-operation of the Grand j•.!|3 , oj Is belonging >to
Fleet, the neighbouring commands and dockyards, I |.EI . . S tfU -3 • '.S 'i » ships in
and the Harwich Force. | From- |*l|S•* . “ ” 2 £ -go. ’g .S »■ 3i§ preceding
15. The concentration of the attacking fleet had ! ' JjS R*.2 £ 06 columns,
to take place about 63 miles distart from Zeebrugge ! 77
and Ostend. As the length of time needed for ! Jn JE-? | O tri 32 Officers. Men.
reaching these objectives after the forces had been : - i "
assembled was seven hours, it was inevitable that j Grand Fleet (exclusive of
there shonld be a period of not less than four hours of Royal Marines) .. ——•———— ~~ 47 365
davlight during which enemy observation by air and Harwich Force
submarine might discover our movements. In order Covering Squadron .. —7214 -
to guard against this, which would have meant the Bor Operations .. .. ——l6—— ~T * “ •
certain failure of the expedition, it was necessary for Dover Patrol .. .. ..8 1 417 36 12 —”~~ 1 ~~ ~
the patrols and air forces to show the utmost degree Portsmouth .- .. '..————lol2 “ 1 - J " 41
of vigilance and energy. There is .every reason for The Noro .. •• ———— l2 1 1 4 1 „ 469
believing that, as a result of their efforts, the enemy | Plymouth .. .. •• ————— 2 8
remained up to the last entirely unaware of our | Royal Australian Navy .. ———————•— 1 10
intentions. French Navy .. .. •• ——— 84
16. In order not-only that the attack might have a Hover Experimental Base .. -_ 2
reasonable prospect of succ^: but ‘W it migM not MSlffianU-v'' 30 660
prospucu or kuccphh, ouu tuau id mignu nor , *_ —. . , . T •• .
end in disaster, various coii'l tions were essential — Royal Marine Light Infant I’>
(a) a certain state of the tide: (ft) calm weather;
/-I a mnpn nr less fa.vnura.hle direction of the wind ■ Lota] . • * *
88 7 1
- - , . A* . ' ’ o I . , .. O O i 40 1 VZ I O 1 | it 1 a j 4i | oi i l
(r) a more or less favourable direction of the wind ; 1 (>iajl JL~—
and (d) absence of fog, with, if possible, a moderate Wing, mist and rain made it impossible to cooperate
amount of haze. Tho first of these conditions (the HI.—TRAINING OF PERSONNEL, bv repeating the aerial bombardment on the night
state of the tide) fixed.the dates between which it was prpparaTTON OF MATERIAL of the 22nd-23rd April, but the Cist Wing and air-
pmcticable to make the attempt Th© others it was v/a xxn. . craft fvom the Gus ton aerodrome at Dover escorted
not possible to reckon with in advance, owing to tho 32. A force thus composed and its weiipons the main {orce the North Sea.
uncertainty of the weather, more especialiv at that obviously needed collective training and special pre-
time of year, and also to the fact that all these con- paration to adapt them to their purpose. IV. —PREPARATION AND DEFENCE OF
ditions might be different on the Flanders coast from 33. With these objects, the Blocking Ships and the ROUTE.
UIW”U3 '4.4 4 —*- “ - . 4 00, YYIUII UU'-OO- VUJVV4-.| ' O ,1— UV U -I Xi,
what they wore off the Goodwins, or that they might ctorming Forces were assembled towards the end ot , ~ . ~ „ ,
change for the worse between the starling of the pXuarl and from the 4th April onwards, in the 43. The preparation_of the from the start.mg
exnodition fropi the point of concentration and its West Swin Anchorage, where training specially r° °( attack, bj the removal of obstructions and
arrival at its destination seven hours later. adapted to the plan of operations was given, and the placing of navigational marks and those for the
, 4. . 4 . ~ . -4... “ tertranization of the expedition was carried I long-range bombardments was carried out by Captain
17 It was anticipated that mmetields, wh.ch ffiTit w S used to Henry P. Douglas, borne for surveying duties on my
would endanger the heavier draught might on * J h f. umcS md was toelf tested staff, and Lieutenant-Commander Francis E. B.
be encountered m the enemy s waters, but this risk the timing pmcricafi a “/ c tice wm afforded Haselfoot, his assistant. The completely successful
had to befaced, and special arrange merits were made to carry out 1 the project on two manner in which this very important work was done,
to save the crews and storming-parties in the event by goQ wbicb conditions P of wind and in circumstances of interference from the enemy and
of vessels bemg sunk. weather compelled its postponement, and much was the elements, does great credit to these officers, both
18. On two occasions previous to the 22nd Apnj ] earn t from these temporary failures. The Hindustan, of whom I recommend to the favourable notice of the
the concentration took place, but, owing to unfavour. t liß , t at Chatham and later at the Swin, was the Lords Commissioners.
ICdlTlt UVIU UllvwP av-mp*—. J , , V i 7! • ,
at first at Chatham and later at the Swin, was the
parent ship and training dep6t, and it is due to
Captain A. P. Davidson, D. 5.0., who also did good
work in fitting oat the various ships, that the accom-
modation of the assembling crews and their maintca-
44. To afford protection at a certain point-in the
route, and to maintain the aids to navigation during
the approach and retirement of the expedition, a force
consisting of the flotilla-leader Scott and the destroyers
•Note. —Some amendments to this despatch of 9th
May, 1918, have been made by the Vice-Admiral,
Dover Patrol, in the light of information received
between that date, and 22nd January, 1919.
and Stork, lent from the Harwich special steamers Iris 11., Commander Valentine “B ” (Portsmouth) Company : Captain Edward
- cruiser At tentive, flying the broad Gibbs (Tiger), and Daffodil, Lieutenant Harold G. Bamford, D.S.O.
doro the Hon. Algernon D. E. 11. Campbell (Emperor of India) : the latter detailed “C ” (Plymouth) Company : Major Bernard G.
E Staff, was stationed there. The to push the Vipflictive alongside the Mole and Weller, D.S.O.
were not interrupted by the enemy, keep her there as long a« might be requisite. Machine Gun Company : Captain Charles B. Cony-
icntal in controlling and directing ... _ , . ~ „ , „ . , , , beare.
detached craft in both directions, S b \ Submarines C 3 and Cl, commanded by ( > rl the dea(b o{ Lieutenant-Colonel Elliot, D. 5.0.,
all anxiety on that score. atWed by & a pfcket T “ P%T
SAGE OF THE FORCES. under Lieutenant-Commander Francis H. Sand- batt f£ on . Captoin A. It. Chater°' w.Tbattalion
a _a iv. lora, ILb.U. adintn.nf.
kAt the moment of starting the forces were dis- ° C ’ ‘ * , ... .... , .
d thus : 58. Besides the above, a flotilla of 24 motor This force was embarked mainly m Vindictive, but
) 1 the launches and eight coastal motor boats were told off partly in Ins 11.
For the attack on the Zeebruggo Mole : Vindic- for regime work and to make smoke screens or lay 69. The demolition force was composed of C.
ve Iris II and Daffodil smoke floats, and nine more coastal motor boats to Naval Company, under the command of Lieutenant
To block tho Brugts Canal; Thetis, Intrepid. attact the Mole and enemy vessels inside it, Ac. Cecil C. Dickinson (Resolution), and was divided
id Iphigenia. . At 11.40 p.m., the coastal motor boats detailed
To block the entrance to Ostend: Sinus and to lay the first smoke screen ran in to a very close th .-, Daffolil, and No 2. under lientoWt.
monitors. _ | the ship bail been hit b
Four French motor launches. Nos. 1,2, 33, and many casualti s caused.
34, attending on M. 24 and M. 26. H. Elliot, D. 5.0., and
Coastal motorboats 2, 4, 10, and 12 ; the two senior officers c
(55ft.) 19 and 20. parties, and Captain
46. Navigational aids having been established on 1 co ?5 K ??'„ mg the »»val storming parties, uU ready to went along the parapet to the left (towards the
the route, the forces from the Bwin and Dover were Fad the men on to the Mole, had been killed ; Com- lighthouse extension), where lie found a look-out
directed to join my flag off the Goodwin Samis and A i® - ’ and rnajjy station or control, with a range-finder behind and
proceed in company to a. rendezvous, and thereafter as other officers and men killed or wounded. above it. A bomb was put into this station, which
requisite to their respective stations ; those from 62 . As there was some doubt as to tho starboaid jjas found clear of men. Wing Commander Frank A.
Dunkirk were given their orders by the Commodore. ancho i having gone clear, the port anchor was dropped ” r ock here joined the party, and went inside to
47. An operation time-table was issued to govern close to the foot of the Mole and the cable bowsed-to
the movements of all the forces, wireless signals were with less than a. shackle out. A three-knot tide was
prohibited, visual signals of every sort were reduced running past ihe Mole ; and the scend alongside the
to a minimum, and manoeuvring pre-arranged as far as Mole created by the slight swell caused much move-
foresight could ■’-e-ide. With few and slight delays ment on the ship. There was an interval of three or
the programme id,- the passage was carried out as laid four minutes before Daffodil could arrive and corn-
down, the special aids to navigation being found of mence to push Vindictive bodily alongside. During
great assistance. this interval the ship could not be got close enough for
,4. mi. ir ~. T-. , T . „„ , the special mole-anchors to hook, and it was a very
„ 48 ' j,i C rrSi^m44 h i°OD rfBf> R ™sted to tr - vin e period. Many of the brows had been broken
Reginald Tyrwjntt. K.C.8., MO., was jo.d to shell fire, and a heavy roll had broken up the fore-
C °yTf operation and prevent interference fr most mole-anchor sm it was being placed. The two
northward, which relieved me of all concern • brows, however, reached the wall ami the
49. On leaving the Goodwins, th<- Main Force was by Lit-,tenam,-CoinniaDdor I! yan F. Adams (Princess no pun flashes were seen, as everything was°so well
disposed in three columns. Tho centre column was Royal) ran out along them closely followed bv the illuminated by enemy star shell and the rockets ffrerl
Itsl-by V- vTR c£ ’ wba/Jy Iri w and Arfi- by Vtwiictivc. After caut-^c 2-olc^mb
i-.ii...,... I v., ili*‘ Uv-e hlorkintc shnis aniTthfl pauole tantA.H. t w 'to wiling of Hie ship a Mr. Adams advanced t., Ac eastward i'lonl 40 yards
mine-sweeper Lmgtield, escorting five motor launches most disconcert mg motion wui to the where LV left his party in p^.i
for taking off the surplus steaming parties of the block- brows, the outer ends of which were x—wi n g ” turned to collect more men.
inz ships. The starboard column was led by the War- considerably on the Mole pa;apet. Officers and men 74 e,, i i ,i „4„4: xt.
wick fiving my flag, followed by the Phoebe and North were carrying Lewis guns, bombs, ammunition, &c., f nlln s ße , 40 td ie look-ont .tat ion, Mr. Adams
Star, which three ships were to cover the Vindictive and were under heavy machine-gun fire at close range, i 'J' , woundßd * but later collected two
from torpedo attack while the storming operations add to this a drop of 30 feet between (he ship and the o & N^3
were in progress : Trident and Mansfield, towing sub- Mole and some idea of the conditions which had to be the i ik'd tt nSt‘ S n
marines €.3 and C.l ; and Tempest, to escort the two faced may be realized. Yet the storming of the Mole had LTw/l!?' % 0f^ Cer as he
Ostend blocks hips. The port column was led by by these two brows, and later by two others which fA d “ th % hand a , nd arm b e , fore land :
Whirlwind, followed by Myngs and Moorsom, which wore got into position, was carried out without the ~a j a rit| v 111 reat paln b>td earned on most
ships were to patrol to the northward of Zeebrugge ; smallest delay, and without any apparent considera- B y "
and the Tetrarch, also to escort the Ostend blockships. tion of self-preserva.l ion. Some of the first men on 78. The situation now was that Mr. Adams’s tow
Every-craft was towing one or more coastal motor the Mole did splendid work with the object of hauling men and the two Lewis gunners were beyond the
boats, and between the columns were motor launches, one of the large mole-anchors across the parapet, look-out station protected from the machine-gun fire
50 ’ The greater part of the passage had to be carried Lieutenant-Commander Rosoman
out in broad daylight, with the consequent likelihood Zd
of discovery by enemy aircraft or submarine. This risk
was largely countered by the escort of all the scouting Daffodil arrived three minutes
aircraft under my command. On a-rival at a certain closely followed by Iris 11. Both !
position (C), it being then apparent that the condi- approach. Vindictive occupying i
tions were favourable, and that there was every enemyte attention. As already
prospect of carrying through the enterprise up to pro- primary duty was to push Vindic
gramme time, a short pre-arranged wireless signal was the Mole, to enable her to be sec
gramme ume, » ” “ lu ner 10 Be securea, amer wmen men. Major Weller, Commanding the Roval Marines,
made to the detached forces that the programme Daffodil was to come alongside and land her parties on receiving Mr. Adams’s report dispatched I ieu-
would be adhered to. over that ship. In the end her men had to dis- tenant G. Underhill with reinforcements to assist
51. On arrival at a position 1£ mile short of (G), embark «er bows on to Vindictive, as it /was Mr. Harrison. Whilst this party was being collected
at which Commodore Boyle’s force was stationed, the found essential to continue to push \indictive on to Mr. Adams returned to the look-out station, where
whole force stopped for 16 minutes to enable the Mole throughout the action. This duty was he was informed that Mr. Harrison had led a rush
surplus steaming parties of the blockships to be dis- magnincently carried out by her Commanding Officer, along the parapet and that he and several of his men
embarked and the coastal motor boats slipped. These Lieutenant Harold O. Campbell (Emperor of India), bad been killed by machine-gun fire. Able Seaman
and the motor launches then proceeded in execution during the greater part of the time, was suffering McKenzie, one of B Company’s machine gun-
of previous orders. On resuming the course th© War- fr° ll} a wound in the head which for the time deprived ners with Mr. Harrison, did good execution
wick and Whirlwind, followed by the destroyers, drew hini of the sight or one eye. Without the assistance with his gun, though wounded in several places,
ahead on either bow to clear the passage of enemy Daffodil very few of the storming parties from a nd Able Seaman Eaves [Notf. —Able Seaman
outpost vessels. Vindictive coaidl have been landed or re-embarked ; Eaves, it appears, was not killed, but was very
whLroKs V her a t^l«t Be^ t the skilLfmanncrTi wtoch h/ liandl«l hTstop. Xmit4Tb^gTnVr a^rriwXdy* aS
Mole, the Warwick, Phoebe, and North Star swung 63. The landing from Iris 11. was even more trying. 76. About this time the recall was sounded, and
to starboard and cruised in the vicinity of the Mole The scend alongside made her bump heavily, and Mr. Adams therefore withdrew his men from the
until after the final withdrawal of all the attacking rendered the use of the scaling ladders very difficult, parapet and Mole, collected the wounded, and sent
forces. During this movement and throughout the many being broken up. Lieutenant. Claude E. V. them to the Vindictive. He himself went along the
subsequent operations Warwick was manoeuvred to Hawkings (Erin) ascended the first ladder, secured the parapet in search of Mr. Harrison, but not finding him,
place smoke screens wherever they seemed to he most mole anchor, and was then shot and fell on to the returned to assist in the re-embarkation. As originally
required, and when the wind shifted from north-east Mole. Lieutenant-Commander George N. Bradford planned, Mr. Harrison’s bluejacket storming parties
to south-west, her services in this respect were (Orion) got to the top of a derrick with a mole anchor were to deal with the battery on the Mole head and
particularly valuable. on it, leaped on to the Mole, secured the anchor, and Mole extension only, but for the reasons given in
was shot, falling into the water between Iris 11. and paragraph 71 they started 400 yards further from
VI. — BOMBARDING FORCES. the Molo. Gallant attempts to recover his body were their objectives than was intended with the inter-
r, ’■/ovhr„nnr The monitors Erebus ICant, to made, Petty Officer M. D. HaUihan being killed while vening ground fully exposed to machine-gun fire.
53. zeeftropff n , ■ T - n so‘employed. The gallantry and devotion to duty Mr. Adams and his men, and later Mr. Harrison,
“ w Rrutoul 'Vrith the) of these two officers was of the highest order. In pressed their attack most gallantly, and, though
Charles \\. i )* stationed a( a the end, so impossible was it to get the mole anchors denied a full measure of suecess, it appears probable
Kto L
smtableto g g Owinir to alongside Vindictive to enable D Company and her head coming into action, as these guns did not open
m J*® et Royal Marines to land across her, but only a few ffi*e at the blockships (see paragraph 94).
opening^ of bombardment was delayed slightly behtod raftU }’ ad Vindi<;tive when the withdrawal „ MaHne stormiru, Party.- The Royal Marines
programme time; otherwise the operations of this signal was sounaea. , of this expedition were drawn from the tour divisional
force were carried out according to plan. During the 64. On board the Vindictive the foremost 7.5-inch headquarters and the Grand Fleet. The battalion was
operation enemy shell fell in the vicinity of Erebus and Howitzer’s Marine crow j were all killed or wounded to provide the officers and men of the storming force :
Terror, but. neither was hit. On completion of the in the very early part o,| the action. A naval crew the crews of foul' Stokes guns, one 11-inch howitzer,
bombardment the vessels of this force took up from a 6-inch gun took (heir place, and were almost five pom-poms, and some Lewis guns of the Vin-
patrolling positions to cover the retirement from entirely wiped out. At this period the ship was being dictive’s armament, and a few men to work with the
Zeebrugge. Aerial photographs show the good effect, hit every few seconds, chiefly in the upper works. Naval demolition party. It was carried to Zeebrugge
of this bombardment. from which the splinters caused many casualties. It in the Vindictive, except A Company, two Vickers
54 Ostend. —Similar!v, the monitors Marshal Soult, was difficult to locate the guns which were doing the guns of the machine-gun section, and two Stokes
irwnto Georve R B Blount 1)801 General most damage, but Lieutenant Charles N. B. Rigby, guns, which went in Ins 11. All had token part in tho
(Captain lt. «. Blount, rt.a.U.), General b.M.A., with his Royal Marines in the foretop, kept special training and practices already referred to,
Eugene^(Captain Ernest Wig min. DAO.), andL.rd v g a contiuuoi ;f 'U with te’tn-poms and Lewis gums, the howitzer crews having been put through a course
CUve (Commander Reginald J. N. Watson, D.S.O ), Ranging rapidly from (me forget to ancthcr. Two a t .Shoeburyness.
and the small monitors M. 21 (Commander Oliver M. heavy sheik made diecthts n the foretop, tilling 7g q* b e first objective of the Royal Marine Battalion
F. Stokes), M. 24 (Acting Commander Claude P. C. de teeutenant R.gby and killing or disabling all in the forti fled zone situated about 150 yards from too
Crespigny), and M. 28 (Lieuttmant-Commander to P> xce P fc ’ ;n f 4hou ? U seaward end of the Mole proper ; its capture was of the
Arthur C. Pawssett) were stationed by Commodore Se^ r A heavy shell Cantain Carnenter first importance, as an enemy holding it could bring a
Hubert Lvnes, C.M.G., in suitable positions to bombard wrecked bj another heavy shell. Captoin Carpenter ,‘ ro to bear on the parties landing from Vimlic-
specified batteries. These craft, were attended by live/ This objective being gained, the Boyal Marines
th<* British destroyers Mentor, Ughtfoot, and Zubian, % J t were to continue down the Mole and hold a position
and the French Capitaine Mehl, Francis Gamier that the success of the stomung of the Mole wa« to cover the operations of the demolition parties
Roux, and Bouclier. The Commodore reports that lar « el y due . t s > th « f° d work of thl6> ° &cer and the £rom an attack by enemy troops advancing from the
the bombardment was undoubtedly useful in keeping men under ms oiaeis. landward end of the Mole. The destruction of the
down the fire of the shore batteries. These returned 65. Acting Captain Reginald Dallas Brooks, R.M.A., Viaduct by Submarine C. 3 was intended to assist in
the monitors’ fire about five minutes after, the latter was in command of the R.M.A. gun detachments in this, by preventing reinforcements reaching the Mole
opened, the ships being hit by fragments of shell, but Vindictive. He not only set his men generally a from the shore. Owing to Vindictive coming aiong-
no material damage being done. splendid example of devotion to duty, but com- side to landward of this zone, the Royal Marines were
55 Siege Guru,.— Cooperation by R.M.A. siege ma nded the crew of the U-inch Howitzer in its faced with the double duty of preventing an enemy
oviioiicl Prvce Peacock, R.M.A.) on elver, exposed position m a very fine manner. attack from the shore end and of themselves attack-
enemy targets was arranged by the Commodore 66 . Half an hour after the storming of the Molo tof n Jdlnd thctoc/th/t Irte'll cmlld not rom/hi g"
Dunkirk, to which the enemy replied without causing had been commenced, the Captoin visited the decks | to itnd her company of Royal Marines (s?o
an, casualties or any damage of importance. below and found Stoff-Surgeon James McCutcheon I 63) foft toXSd menln toeltig/s
, XTTT . TTirlr nK - 7FPRRTTrrp vrmr and the staff under turn working with great energy ; f and ing to carry out both operations. The
: VII.— ATTACK ON ZEEBRUGGE MOLE, and care. A constant stream of casualties were being : si t Qafc i on was a difficuit one, for to attack the fortified
I 56. — General. —The attack on the Mole was pri- brought down every hatch, yet there appeared to be zoae brs t, might have enabled the enemy to advance
marily intended to distract the enemy’s attention ! no de in deaun S Wll “ each case. up the Mole and seize positions abreast Vindictive
from the ships engaged in blocking the Bruges Canal, 67. The Mole. —The attack on the Mole was with the most serious consequences to the whole
its immediate objectives were, firstly, the capture of designed to be carried out by a storming force to landing force, whereas by not attacking the fortified
1 the 4.1 inch battery at the sea end of the Mole prepare the way for, and afterwards to cover and zone the gnus at the Mole head could not be pre-
f Note. —After the evacuation of Zeebrugge by the protect, the operations of a second force which vented from firing at the blockships. As will be seen
enemy it was found that these guns were of 5.9 inch was to carry o\ft the actual demolition, damage, &c. j in subsequent paragraphs, the Royal Marines first
calibre, and subsequent to these operations the Both these” forces comprised Royal Naval ranks secured the landward side, after which an assault was
bat cry was moved from the end of the Mole on to and ratings under the command of Captain Henry organized against the fortified zone, but the un-
tie parapet.] whtoh was a serious menace to tho C. Halahan, D. 5.0., and Royal Marines under the avoidable delay prevented this attack from being
passage of the block-ships, and, secondly, the doing command of Lieutenant-Colonel Bertram N. Elliot, carried through before the blockships had passed in and
of as much damage to the material on the Mole as D.S.O. the recall sounded. Major Weller’s action was correct;
time permitted, for it was not the intention to Th Ktorm i n!Z force was composed of Naval lack of men P reveut f d bhn reinforcing thei bluejacket
remain on the Mole after the primary object of .the (J^pa nfos— Bryan F storming parties under Mr. Harrison and Sir. Adams,
expedition had been accomplished. ST ‘ : Trt^
The attack was to consist of two parts ; (a) the G . B. T. Chamberlain, Neptune), and D. (Lieu- stl °ng posttton with une aepierta a a a b cum
landing of storming and demolition parties, and tenant-Commander G. N. Bradford, Orion), all under P a ”“’ a “ d /ot ii tunrfior/liis l/ fsee
(ft) the, desWtion of the iron viaduct between the Hie command of Lieutenant-Commander Arthur L 6 3 “ How“eroicSly“hey failed has been
shore and the stone Mole. Hamson (Lion), and the 4th Battalion, Royal P* a P ' aphs 72 to 75.
57. The units detailed for the attack were : Marines, organized as follows: i „ , , T ■ . w v p , ,
(a) H.M. Ship, Vindictive, Acting Captain Alfred “A” (Chatham) Company : Major Charles E. C. I '♦Kte/aiVt
F. B. Carpenter (late Emperor of India); the Eagles, D.S.O: the first to land, and proceeded to the right
• , j. i , tnau une unng on ootn siaei
bombarding Ostend : Marshal simultaneous. Captain Car
Prince Eugene, General Craufurd, ghip {rom the forw ,
n 0,4 T ,„. Lieutenaut-Coinmander Ko
off Os t f’ ld • Swift, 1 aulknor, directioas as to the handlin
, ana Amm. , „ . . captain be disabled, was in
; royem Mentor. Lightfoot, Zubian, which th hi was { st€
ido-boats Ijestm, Capitame Mehl, 1 "
toux, and Bouclier, to accompany 61. At one minute after mi


\
\
, ■ z'' 1 '• . , ■ •
■
ii. THE TIMES, THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 20, 1919. [Supplement.
ZEEBRUGGE HARBOUR WITH GERMAN DEFENCES AND BHTISH BLOCKSHIPS.
initlsird this, which Major W oiler considers gieatiy handled in a magnificent manner, and that the highest I
a* sisted the disembarkation. Captain Barniord now r~ ~■ t i ~nrinririr'iMnBTirMMMTMfMMM~B'MMMWMBirManMBMMiMBWMWWMWWWiBiBMHiBii imi—wm praise is duo to their officers and men. From Ostend
joined, and with Lieutenant Cooke and tliLs platoon 1 ' ' ' * = reports of the motor launch flotilla are of the same
reached apositionso me 200 yards from the Vindictive ; SCALE OF FEET. a high character. Commander lon Hamilton Bonn
their a<tion greatly ansi ted the advance along the (qqq 2000 3000 4000 Intended Positions C reports that M.L. 283 (Lieutenant Keith H. Hoare,
Mole they themselves being exposed to a galling fire. % f ,v 7 « wiim.rTiwfWrnnM' true:' x H.N.V.R.) took on board the entire crew of Siriiw
Lieutenant Cooke, who set a fine example, wa3 twice q Cj VINDICTIVE DAFFODIL &RI-> and some of Brilliant’s people, and was seriously
wounded, and was rendered unconscious; he was "ALE OF METRES, C\ ~-mfa f overloaded; but was able to reach harbour safely.
most gallantly Q WO 200 300 400 500 WOO * n/j/lWOtfSe ’ He cannot speak too highly of the conduct of Lieu-
Pn% m John D. L. I ress, who was hixose T ,;rtr ’ * —, ,1 -■ ■ ss ~ r . u,..-DAFFODIL ' tenant Hoare and Lieutenant Rowland Bourke,
wounded. Wire Entanglements show thus ? n r S mi «• R.N.V.R. (M.L. 270), who both showed remarkablo
80. No. 9 Platoon and the remnants of No. 10, . u w found tot>C 3 fScro.Guns coolness and good judgment throughout the oncrv
under Lieutenant C. D. R. Lamplough, were the Defences & positions of B/ockSflipS IRIS Cana! tion. Ho also mentions lieutenants, R.N.V.R.,
ne't.to land. They descended from the parapet nhtninpr! from Arrfnl Phrtnnrnnh* Barges Sidney D. Gowing (M.L. 551), Rawsthome Proctor
to the Mole (a drop of 15 feet) by means of ropes, Obtd/OeO tPOttl Henal motOgrapHS* * Nets (M.L. 556) * and Malcolm 8 * Kirkwood (M.L. 11).
and proceeded to establish a strong point at the j between 120. Coastal Motor Boats. —l have been greatly
shoreward end of No. 3 Shed, to prevent P^ as J ® • ff I impressed with the administrative capacity of lieu-
attack from that direction. J his unit later attacked . / ' tenant Arthur E. P. Welman. D 8.C., R.N., the young
a destroyer alongside the Mole, inflicting damage on % % ’ officer in charge of the coastal motor boats of the Dover
the craft and crew. 1 yy ,• \ v ( Patrol. In the Zeebrugge operation he bad seventeen
81. Units were now rapidly landing, and No. 7 Submarine '» of these vessels under his orders. Besides their screen-
plat on (Lieutenant H. A. P. de Berry) succeeded yfftW'Jr Shelter ; in B duties, several of them undertook attacks on
in placing their heavy sealing ladders in position, 9 Net DeftntC enemy vessels and against the Mole, the seaplane shed,
and then formed up to support, Nos. 9 and-10 Platoons. 6 finci &c., with success. Lieutenant Welman always being
.Th<- successful placing of the scaling ladders was /MfyySf » OUL/yj l n the most exposed position. Sub-Lieutenant Cedrio
largely due to Sergeant-Major C. J. Thatcher. Major 6 B. L. Outhwaite, 8.N.V.K., in C.M.B. 6, reports that
Weller then received information that the naval . j he attacked an enemy destroyer which was under
storming party needed reinforcements. lie therefore /AAly/y c n *' —v way, and observed bis torpedo hit below her forward
dispatched No. 12 Platoon and the remnants of MWMf ; ur y aC : —searchlight, the light shortly afterwards. going out,
No. 11, under Lieutenant G. Underhill, to their Seaplane '■ iotv I and her fire diminishing. Sub-Lieutenant L. B. Blake,
assistance. These platoons advanced to the left MMXf R E \ Water'-. ■ t SHALLOW 8.N.8., in C.M.B. 7, reports hitting a destroyer
(e., t.) along the parapet, and reached the look-out MmW °°' >C \ : ‘ alongside the Mole, with a torpedo which struck below
Station, where they were checked by machine-gun ff*YrtUy lA/A TF F? the fore bridge. No. 32A tired a torpedo at the steam-
fire ; Mr. Adams and his men were some 40 to 00 f/// nnl C. n ship Brussels; An explosion followed, but the result
yards ahead of them, and both parties eonid make j/ 1/ 'j; was hidden by smoke,
no headway along the exposed parapet. Meanwhile {/**** j? V j 121. The zest of most of the young officers in the
No. 0 Platoon, which had been recalled from its DSStrOVed bv Ml r \ coastal motor boats, like that of those in the motor
, advanced position, with Nos. 7 and 8 Platoons, aJI t o 4 ; launches, compels one’s admiration. I can select only
under Captain. Bamford, were forming up on the , OUOrn3rin£ rff .. r ._, y\S _ i /s, one of many instances which show the eagerness of
Mole for an assault on the fortified zone and the , • 'III A / v o’• —.-'A . the officers to take part in a fight from which circum-
-1 inch battery at the Mole head. 1 his attack j ■, AO ft /9 /7 stances tried to exclude them. Lieutenant Edward 15.
was launched, but before it could be deve oped the f ( J \l 1 I /O y// // // Hill, in C.M.B. 35A, had the misfortune to foul his
general recall was sounded. The units fell back m jU . ~ / l\ 1 — J.' r .// < r // // // propellers on the evening of April 22 when already
good order, bringing their wounded with them. /// p. & 1\ f]/ ..e ’7/ ////// / 18 miles on his outward voyage. He got a tow from a
V The passing of the men from the Mole oh to the \\ ■< n \\ (1 . ll // // I // // drifter, and arrived at Dover at 8 p.m. HU boat was
parapet by means of the scaling laddere was rendered ifc ”/)" V " ill n* : * 11 u 1 " I // // // ! // immediately hoisted and the propellers cleared, bub
hazardous by the enemy opening fire at that portion ' If It It ll ll 1 ' // // II II -II II as there was other damage he was not afloat again
of the Mole, several ladders being destroyed ; the ll /// * M I •’ lißiilf'euu" \ 4 / // - i " till 9.40 p.m. He then made his way to the Belgian
men were sent across in small batches from the com-, U ' e O/,* /> /// INTREPID I ’ //Jrnlbtlim B r ts. ol Ss I / coast, and was off Zeebrnggo—about 70 miles—bv
pa.rjd.ive shelter afforded by No. 3 Shed, such rushes /// ' ,„\.7 t.f " L 1 11.60 p.m., taking up his smoke-float patrol at once,
taking place as far as possible m the intervals between \\ T \U t „ r,,n f r„ n FmS^ement 3 and continuing it for an hour, in the course of which
the enemy 3 bursts of fire* \ •> I sf'fy 111 & MdCiUnZ j * TrtnchOS » M 300106 u b | camo under rather heavy fire from a battery nt
<■'. Tb* rtmtoliUorn err C Comvfrnv. —Tlife company \1 . rtCJ j _ - R„n» 1/ ' @ a., A \ all Blankouberghe. The chapter of accidents amongst
y was uri'.er the orders of LiAitenant Cecil C. Dickinson \\ * 'Rll /H mm ' Gu ns WharfS 1 I a Emplacements l 1 such smaU craft is naturally a long one, but the re-
(Resolution i, and was divided into three parties, m u Wharf h BeKtoeu I ' source developed in overcoming them is more than
Nos. 1 and 3 consisting of Sub-Lieutenant FeUx E. " / a> m Machine GUP and ! fs / O Tf« n . a I compensation. The dating way in which the crews
Ch.valUer (Iron Duke) and twenty-nine ratings in f J,] Q un £ » AAAA S'! w,« oI.riTT I of these boats approach the shore, djainng the beams
the Daffodil, and No. 2of Lieutenant Dickinson and Ral fj r I § V. J - / Naval GIIPS 111 of th ? B(,ar chlights and the fire of the guns, then ,
twenty-one ratings in the Vindictive. Twenty-two ueppennjodttei y Qffj ce / / ? A I \ I Reaping in their own smoke, is splendid. Ueutenanb
rank and file, H.M.L.1., were attached for the trans- - 4“lsCffi.Naval GuflS. 1 11— 1 I I r>? / ~N oi / ASyCyL I A r 1 1 Francis C. Harrison, who commanded the Ostend
port of the explosive equipment.. I II \ / I I r 7 AyMAAm IEI \ \ 11 section of C.M.B.’s, mentions the of Sab-
. , rt . , . ~. „ . , , , ~ " —.—l I \ I I I I <u v-i I \ 1 1 Lieutenant Peter B. Clarke, 8.N.8., Midshipman
S 3. lieutenant Dickinson and No. 2 party ended M B IO / / / BRUGGE \ \ 1 N - S - Herbert.. 8.N.8.. and Chief Motor Mechanic
after the Naval Storming Parties and assembled on tJKENBFoc,.- /$/ * J \\ G. H. Hebblethwaite (C.M.B. 10) for the dangerous
the pathway of the parapet, which became somewhat I ,_ G HC A ggrpp. I I rA/A/y 1 J \ \ I 1 work which that boat undertook in searching for tha >,
crowded before the scaling ladders could be got into - I XOA' \ \ I engineer of the Sirius, who was thought to be on
position to enable the men to descend on to the Mole. / ° AU.VVAV \ \ I board that ship after she had been sunk, in tie course
No. party Uien proceeded to No. 3 Shed. The I yAtAJ \ \ 1 1 of which the boat came under very heavy fire: and
heavy lire from the destroyers alongside the Mole 2905 / Swing Bridge j \ \ \\ Sub-Lieutenant Frank A. W. Ramsay (C.M.B. 19) for
prevented any advanco towards the shore, and the I— nzz Z. L_~ ! : ■■-■■■ 4~ —■■■■■■ .I—l—l \ bLs coolness and quickness in laying the inshore caL
demolition of this shed was therefore impracticable ; cium buoys under heavy machine-gun fire. Lieutenant
charges were, however, placed and eyei^’ thing P re " ■■ . , ■■■■ ■ ■■■ .i.-- - _ . - - - - - - Welman also mentions the names of several officers
pared in case an opportunity for its destruction TT , . , 1 ' ’ ■ * ” and men in coastal motor hoafs • thew will lw* for**
i a_ fry niooo .. o viadnnt before the exnlosion. Her sneed was not as chances of escane from anv nf blrwrlrincp 0.. m» n t * i i-.ii wed r «rsii auu , , - u . . . r rl a,LS .\ tnese wm t>e lor
]Jti' tU 111 CtI.SC iul uj'purbuiui/y ivii xls ucowulwuu . _ . . . __ , , ,
occurred. An attempt was made to place a charge viaduct before the explosion. Her speed was not as chances of escape from any of the blocking ships a*
alongside the destroyers, but was repulsed by their much as was expected : still she arrived in time to very slender, and this was well known to those who
fire. Some bombs were therefore thrown on board, pick up the motor-skiff very shortly after the ex- so readily volunteered for this .hazardous service and
The enemy’s shell fire at this portion of the Mole plosion, and transferred the officers and men to the to the volunteer crews of the motor launches, who ran
became very heavy, and the recall being sounded the Phoebe. This boat subsequently returned to Dover equal risks in their work of rescue,
party re-embarkecl under the conditions related in under her own steam, as her fore compartment being 90. Iphigenia (Lieutenant Edward W. Billyard-
para. 81. holed and fud of water made towing inadvisable. Leake, Fearless).—This ship, like the preceding one,
, Prom first to last she had made a voyage of 170 miles did not discharge aJ) her mrinp-rnnm Wotieo
84. I lie demolition party was on the Mole about to and from the Belgian coast in unpleasant conditions, managed to avoid it in order to take Dart in
66 minutes, and it was solely on account of the proxi- ant { (.fleeted the risen,, in the face of almost insur- the fight and they therefore joined no with the rest
took 'olae'e °Th£ to Srty ’ably S led to Smt mountable difficulties, due to enemy action, weather of th e crew. The Iphigenia was the third and last
took place. Xh.s party, aoiy lea ny i.ieuienam aaJ tide. I have already recommended Leutenant- c ( the Zeebrngge blockeis to undertake her dntv
Dickinson, behaved in a most cool and undisturbed Commander Francis Handford for promotion ou this an( j jt ta no disparagement to the Dredeenssrm: wlw>
manner both during the approach (when tliey suffered and previous grounds. His boat’s crew were all voiun- ma d e her task thcTeasier by their P examolo to sav
teera ’ T l * l. n ”? y ? Ueral liSt ° f S he l“eve y
th;« o™yaSr tfJlfZpS" recommendaUons to then lordships notice. On approaching the Mole she came under shrapnel
the demolition scheme and organization of the com- VIII BLOCKING OPERATIONS f ' tw 9^ s ® archl « lds °“ tilo
pany for carrying it out was very efficiently planned V IU.—BLULKXNU OPERA llOMb. western (or land) end of the Mole, and by flares,
by Lieutenant-Commander Francis H. Sandford, qj The blocking of the Bruges Canal and the H?? c rend ? r ® d e . e^® m y J^y
D.H.0., borne for special service ou my Staff. entrance to Ostend Harbour was the principal part the attacker. On Toundffig' th? the
o!r ... /-/ IV,I. TV,Anennnf rtf ILa 11 f tlio il-nnlo Aliiopf ixto Ihft fiamaffa f n i VlO y.onVleli (.rro I • _ • j r ti 1 0 , ”, ..
85. ExperimevM Forty.—The account of the of the whole objective, the damage to the Zeebruggo Iphigenia went full speed? a star shell showing
attack on the Mole would not be complete without Mole 'being subsidiary thereto. To the Intrepid, the Inteerid headed for the canal and
reference to the contribution in officers and men Iphigenia, and Thetis was assigned the duty in the the Thetis aground. As she approached Thetis
made by a detachment from the Admiralty Experi- Bruges Canal; Brilliant and Sirius being detailed for that ship showed a green light on her starboard
mental Station at Stratford, and the work done by Ostend. side, which enabled Lieutenant Billyard-Leake to
orders to the blockships v-ere
A T uI? gpmnH-in-rnmmsirul to proceed 111 to tho Canal. it bet two COUSOrtaS were 'V , , ’. nitiug one Hircn
- to be following, the leading (Thetis) was “ d «» of
the working of the fixed and portable flame-throwers, to ram the lock gates ; the second and third (Intrepid U 1 . , , ~ n , ,
übosnhonis irrenades &e either on board Vindictive 311,1 Iphigenia) were to be run ashore near the en- 9 ‘- Iphigema approached the canal entrance
Iris II or with the various naval fcra nce at the southern end of the piers, this being d became obscured by smoko, and her captain
and marine uS Wed on the Mole Thi the narrowest part of the channel and the position fo™d that she was heading for the western pier,
fixed flame-throwers in Vindictive were put out of brat calculated to block the channel by silt. This Going full speed astern he brought his ship in between
aetion bT Z>Z shell ilre on? opinion as to the best, position was baled en local *dredj« «d . barge severing them. He then
accompanied the seaman and marine landing parties, SrtS, &
pf the gites, she would with i
; whereas twx> sliips well hank, he steered
entrance woujd be certain P how of
her and
viaduct was about half a mile off, a flare on the
far side silhouetted tho Mole and viaduct, which
appeared about two points on the port bow. Two
searchlights were then switched on to C. 3, and off
again, possibly in order that the submarine might run
into the viaduct and be caught. By this time the
viaduct was clearly visible. One hundred yards
away, course was altered to ensure striking the
viaduct exactly at right-angles. C. 3 struck exactly
between two rows of piers at a speed of nine and a
half knots, riding up on to the horizontal girders
of the viaduct and raising the hull bodily about
two feet she penetrated up to the conning tower.
two feet tie TOnetrated ap bo the wor. “~tion with the having b r okT n ' West fßenbowl. who throughout the preparation and Lieutenant Spenrer seriously but stiri
down, a messenger was sent, and Engineer Lieutenanf and operation worked his department in an admirable rprming the ship. He took command and steadied
89. The crew having mustered on deck before the Commander Ronald 0. Boddie (Hercules) succeeded manner. the ship on hep couree, fhe coxswain. Petty Officer
collision, lowered and manned the skiff. The fuses were in starting the starboard engine, which moved the 98- Bri'liant and Birins.—l regret that the effort ~ , , nl . ’ et, ckmg to his post with great
then ignited, and the submarine abandoned, the ship ahead : and being still aground aft her heart 4/1 h,r,ck Ostend did not succeed. The Brilliant ’ B C <?rm F Wltb one band while holding an
skiff’s course being set to the westward against the swung to starboard into the dredged channel a« (Commander Alfred E. Godsal, Centurion), with Sirius t‘ lp c < r l c torch^ to the compass with the other; it is due
current. Tier propeller having been damaged, oars she appeared to be sinking, the commander cl'oarert (Lieutenant-Commander Henry N. M. Hardy, D.S.O. , Lieutenant Spencer that the ship was turned away
had to be used. Immediately tho skiff left tho the boiler rooms, sent the boat-keepers to their bolb" (Patrol) in her wake, was approaching the charted M - °m the land. Ins 11. was again hit by three shells
submarine, the two searchlights were switched on, and ordered the smoke to be turned on and the sbto t ' position of the Si,room Bank Buoy, but did not 81m ' ,lt aneously, and as the men were packed very
lire was opened with machine guns, rifles, and pom- be abandoned. Owing to the death of the slßbt !t as P *pecfed. Reducing from the positions ? losely °JL, ,ho mam deck the casualties were very
poms, the viaduct being lined with riflemen firing officer in charge of them, the forward firing iTI of other navigation marks already passed that the r? aV o‘ when tbe "hto was steadied on her course
under the wind screen, and the houses on the inner were not in position ; smoke and shell fumes nreventert ships were to the northward of their supposed position. tirf ' . p ., ouf ;.’ Able Spaman p - E - M. Lake
eud of the Mole opening on her with pom-poms. The their being found, so that the charges were fi~rt T they continued on their original coarse for an extra 4-” n ' , " h) ti 1 ® first , m “ , to attack it, which he
boat was holed many times, but was kept afloat by the after keys; they detonated well two minutes, sighting the buoy to the north-eastward. d , d Wl,b sa ? d > afterwards helpmg Mr. Henderson to
Kjxicial pumps which had been fitted, Mr. Sand- then quickly sank.' The 'ship’s conipanv mamulrt Tbev steered to nass to the northward of tho buov. h °, mbs ” VP f b<> ac d - regardless of his own life,
ford (twice) and two of the crew were wounded at the one remaining cutter and pulled to MT sec ft t which time they first, camo under fire from the A motor launch. No. 558, commanded by Lieutenant-
this time. As' only slow progress could be made (Lieutenant Hugh A. Littleton BNV R i li.li enemy’s batteries, and then shaped a course for the Co ™ n S' l " Lionel 8. Chappell, D.S.C., R.N.V.R.,
against the current, the charge exploded when the was !vins nfiar , g Although crowded imd’hoted In dedl,ced of Ostend. No marks were visible and "? tb C * p ßa i ph -S?H n >i on gallantly
skiff was but two or three hundred yards from the , k i ,i , n01 .®9 m owing to smoke, which made it, came into the heavy fire from the enemy’s mms. and
against tho current, the charge exploded when the
skiff was but two or three hundred yards from the
viaduct. The explosion appeared to have great
effect, much debris tailing into the water around.
Both searchlights immediately weal out, and firing
became spasmodic. The picket boat was then
sighted, and i tho skiff’s crew taken on board,
the wounded being finally transferred to the T.B.D.
Phoebe. Mr. Sandford describes the behaviour
of all his crew as splendid, and worthy of the high tra-
ditions of the submarine service. He selects his next in
command. Lieutenant John H. Price, D. 5.0., R.N.8.,
for mention, and states that his assistance
was invaluable, and his conduct in a position
ot extrenje danger exemplary. To this modest
praise of the exploit, I woiild add that the officers
and men, who eagerly undertook such hazards, are
deserving of their Lordships’ highest recognition.
They were all well aware that if them means of
rescue failed them, as through untoward circumstances
it nearly did, and they had been in the water at the
moment of the explosion, they must almost inevitably
have been stunned and drowned, or killed outright,
by the force of such an explosion. Yet they disdained
to use the gyro-steering which would have enabled
them to abandon the submarine at a safe distance,
and preferred to make sure, as far as was humanly
possible, of tho accomplishment of their duty.
90. Submarine C. 1 (Lieutenant Aubrey 0. New-
bold), owing to delay caused by the parting of the
tew, did not arrive in tha vicinity of the viaduct
ti!) the retirement had commenced. He had pre-
viously seen a big flash, but had not heard any sound,
and was therefore in doubt as to what the force in
general had done, but realized that his boat might be
required for another occasion. He therefore retired,
though he and his crew immediately volunteered for
similar service. They were naturally disappointed,
but in my opinion Lieutenant Newbold was perfectly
right, and their Lordships will not lose sight of the
fact that they, equally with the officers and men of
C. ■S, eagerly embarked on the enterprise in full
realization of what the consequences might well be.
91. The picket boat employed for rescuing the
crew of 0. 3 was commanded by Lieutenant-Com-
mander Francis H. Sandford, D. 5.0., who had
organized the method of attack on the viaduct. The
picket boat displayed bad qualities when towed above
a certain speed in the prevailing conditions of wind and
sea. She was’ steered only with great difficulty, and
was twice on her beam ends, being saved from total
capsize by the tow parting. She then proceeded
under her own steam, and endeavoured to reach th*
was lying near, nivnougii crowded and holed in
two or three places, the cutter was got away without
confusion, due to the exertions of Lieutenant George
A. Belben (Penelope), Commander Sneyd, and
Lieutenant Francis J. Lambert (Sir John Moore'
being at this time disabled by gas.
95. Intrepid (Lieutenant Stuart 8. Bonham-Carter
Emperor of India). —This ship had been unable to
get rid of her spare watch of stokers, owing at. first
to the delay in her motor launch getting alongside,
and apparently to tho disinclination of the surplus
crew to miss the coming fight. She therefore pro-
ceeded to tho canal with 87 officers and men on board
instead of 54. On approaching the Mole she came
under heavy shrapnel fire. She rounded the light-
house and, directed by Thetis, aground on her port
hand, steered for the canal, very few enemy guns
firing at her, as they were concentrated on the Mole
doubtless at Vindictive—and on Thetis. On reaching
his position in the canal, Lieutenant Bonham-Carter
went full speed ahead with the starboard engine and
full speed astern with the port helm hard-a-slarboard.
He then waited for the crew to get into the boats,
but finding the ship was making stern way ho had to
blow the sinking charges before the steaming party
could get out ot the engine-room. Engineer Sub-
Lieutenant Edgar V. Meikle, with his men, got into a
cutter, of which he took charge, proceeding out. past
the Thetis till picked up by motor launch. Another
cutter was picked up by the T.B.D. Whirlwind,
and the skiff by M.L. 282. With the two officers and
(our petty officers Lieut enant Bonham-Carter launched
a Carley raft, and went, down the canal until picked
up by motor launch 282. This motor launch came
right into t he canal under the stem of the Iphigenia—
the next blocking ship—under a heavy fire. She was
commanded by Lieutenant Percy T. Dean, R.N.V.R.,
whose conduct Lieutenant Bonham-Carter describes
as “ simply magnificent.” I have had the pleasure
of recommending this officer to their Lordships for
promotion, and I consider his gallant conduct is well
worthy of the Victoria Cross. Wit h the exception of
Stoker Petty Officer Harold L. Palliser (O.N.
who was killed while in the motor launch by a machine
gun, the whole crow got away. Lieutenant Bonham-
Carter reports the exceptionally fine behaviour of
the whole of his crew—deck and engine-room alike—
and specially mentions Lieutenant Alan Cory-Wright
(Ramillies), Sub-Lieutenant Dudley A. Babb (Sarpe-
don), and Engineer Sub-Lieutenant Meikle. In
another letter I have recommended Lieutenant
Bonham-Carter and tho two last-named officers for
promotion. X may say here that I regarded the
~ , . . . .... , , . , ana men in coastal motor ooata; tnese wm tie lor-
ment due to the defeat of our plans, as we may believe, rest their Lordships will have an opportunity of W arded for Admiraltv consideration shortly,
by the legitimate ruse of the enemy in shifting the considering in the list which I am forwarding aa soon
buoy. As the Commodore at. Dunkirk remarks in tho as it can be prepared. XIII.—-DOVER TRAWLER PATROL,
dispatch to which their Lordships will refer for detail! "vt TADunnn prv i m nuQTDnvpn , _ _ , „,
on this point, the location of buoys by aircraft is 4 XI.—TORPEDO-BOAT DESTROYER 122. Captain William V. Howard, D. 8.0., of the
high art, and can only be done with accuracy in rela* FORCE. Trawler Patrol, accompanied the expedition in the
tion to closely surrounding land or shoal features, bus 110. I desire to relate the proceedings of some of paddle nune-sweeperLingfleld, and did valuable work
aenal photographs have since established the fact thai the vessels of the 6th Destroyer Flotilla under the in keeping touch with the force, givuig assistance by
had the buoy been in its original position the vessel, command of Captain Wilfred Tomkinson, and the towjng, and otherwise helping small craft in trouble
would have made the entrance accurately. Warwick flying my flag, which came under my own wh,l . e , on passage to and from Zeebrogge, also hi
■ C ? mmande f, G^ 1 <“ d Mr. Hardy observation, or are of special interest or merit. SSSJ
immediately^aiuT repeatedly Risked me for other ships. 111. The Trident and Mansfield, after parting bfjen on patrol work off the south-east coast of Eng-
to be allowed to try again. They report that all their company from their submarines, covered the western land daring the whole of the war. His energy and
officers and Petty Officer Joseph Reed have volmr flotilla of smoke-screening smaU craft. The Whirlwind, example are great incentives to the officers and men
r3»f»Pm rn malrn O nnf I>n» era 41, n(- ~rl 41, X** TT „ T nr H/T . n A-t ' m I T 1 j i I ■ , , .
officers
ered to make another attempt, sanguine that witii Myngs, Velox, Morris, Moorsom. and Melpomene of the Trawler Patrol which he commands.
ie expenence gained it would succeed. covered the eastern smoke-flotilla. The Warwick,
IX THE RETIREMENT Phoebe, and North Star cruised off the Mole to XIV. —MEDICAL ARRANGEMENTS.
A * protect the assaulting craft from torpedo attack. ..... •
103. The viaduct explosion having duly taken These duties took the destroyers close in shore, and 123. In conclusion T desire to make a special refer-
v niff, uUI j bevlDfit X UuOL UUvtGO VUV/lk lilL UwvlU j CIO VvIVAjC 111 OUwIV4, u*UU # 1 l *
place, and the blocking ships having been seen pro- they were frequently under a heavy fire from guns j cnee to the praiseworthy manner in which the medical
ceeding shorewards, the main object of storming the of all calibres at short range. When the assaulting officers and their staff and volunteer helpers devoted
Mole had been accomplished, and the only reason for craft were leaving the Mole the Warwick followed their skill and sympathy to those who were wounded
prolonging the operation till the programme time for them for a few minutes, and then returned to assist these operations. Fighting at such close quarter's,
retirement was that of continuing the work of demoln the withdrawal of the small craft, picking up four : the casualties were bound to be numerous, and tho
tion. On the other hand, the only guns in Vindictive motor launches, including No. 282, commanded by ’ wounds likely to be severe. Staff Surgeon James
bearing on the Mole had been put out of action ; tho Lieutenant P. T. Dean, R.N.V.R. This launch had McOutcheon, M. 8., was the senior medical officer
Upper works of the ship and men in exposed positions on board one hundred and one people from Iphigenia the force. _ln an able report that officer outlines*
were presenting an easy target to the shore guns,’ and Intrepid, some of whom had been killed in the ! t* l6 work of his staff, and the circumstances in which
while, in view of th© failure of tho Mole anchors, the launch, and others who were wounded. As the it was done, and I trust that the Lords Commissioners
storming parties would be unable to embark if the motor launch was dangerously overloaded and full agree with me m thinking that no branch of the
Daffodil should be disabled. Captain Carpenter, of wounded I ordered them to be transferred to the naval service surpassed m zeal and ability the efforts
regarding the Daffodil’s escape up to this time as being Warwick, which took more than half an hour to do. jmedical branch to prove itself worthy of its
almost a miracle, therefore decided to give the order I was much struck with the gallant bearing of Lieu- profession and of the occasion. I have selected with
for the retirement, and in this I consider he acted with tenant Dean and the survivors of his crew. They difficulty from a number of very deserving officers the
good judgment; in fact. I had given orders for thq were all volunteers, and nearly all had been wounded names of three to be representative recipients of such
Warwick to close the Vindictive so that I might infomA and several killed* promotion as their Lordships may be able to award
Captain Carpenter that I LbW uy lt ,o white f.to. as stated op«afaoi* to the medical b»«h of tho KoyaJ
and decide on further action, when I saw that she was ” P r f ce^fn K sfie NorthtStar, Saving I have the honoui* to be,
hauling off. M saewaa (ost her bearings in the smoke, emerged from tho ' gjp
... . smoke screen to the south-eastward of the lighthouse. Tour obedient .Servant
. ,04 - TI he searchlights, by which 20 minutes* warn- Seeing some vessels alongside the Mole, she fired all „, ir „n Tnrvrro
mg was to be given, .having been destroyed, as well as her torpedoes at them and withdrew ; but coming ivuurjrt n-Ji I isa, . , . .
the Vindictive’s syren, bv which the executive signal under very heavy fire at point-blank range she was rtce-AamtraL
was to be made, the Daffodil made the latter signal immediately disabled, and soon in a sinking con- —-
at 50 mmntes past midnight, and the retirement com- dition. The Phoebe, commanded by Lieutenant Hm/wrmr
menced. About 15 minutes later it was reported to Commander Hubert E. Oore-Langton, was handled
, ■ . : 1 i..ere jf.Liuws,: — room to go asifm, wruen was none. Aa soon as His , * , ' . ,■ — . I. cum- ui0...... j.uc » ....... 1,...1..... ..J .... .... 1...... ENCLOffUTtr 1
Thetis (Commander Ralph S. Sneyd, D.5.0.). ship was clear he sent lieutenant Philip E Vans I? en £ . . T? . 15 mmntes later it was reported to Commander Hubert E. Oore-Langton, was handled
Sighted the Zoebrugge Mole ahead, and signalled the (Marvel), tho First Lieutenant, to the engine-room tbo u’lT m ™ at officers and men had ceased coming with conspicuous gallantry while under this heavy Proceedttjgs at Ostend. Report PBOJf
fact to the ships astern. She was greatly assisted with an order to go ahead, which was promptly obeyed. 2° a ,arge anmbe f having already embarked fire. She repeatedly circled round the North Star, Commodore, Dunkirk.
by rockets fired from Vindictive, which showed up The entire entrance was then covered in smoke As L. y 83 ™ e means as they had originally used for making smoko screens and attempting under their Office of Commodore, Dunkirk,
the Mole extension and the lighthouse, and also bv soon as he considered the ship had headway, he put tne It , ? A rnake donWy sure. Captain cover to tow her out of action. She was twice success- April 30, 1918,
Captain Ralph Collins in a motor launch, who hailed the port engine astern, the starboard ahead, and his n> 7lA Zf' W - 10 ™ mntee P»»t L and after ful in getting her in tow, the hawser being shot away Sir,—
the Thetis and gave her the bearing of tho light- helm hard-a-starboard, and grounded on the eastern a f STlran,: * B rr mn officers and his own observa- once and parted once. Phoebe then went alongside J have the honour to forward the following renort
house. After rounding the latter the barge-boom hank. He then abandoned ship and fired his chorees, h f,°'^r? d I ? affodil North Star, and endeavoured to tow m that way. on Operation Z -O, carried out on the night of
came into view, and Thetis was steered for the barge which all exploded. The company left the ship in - W j W ? 7 m the Mo,e ’ the P° rt North Sfcar> ho *« v f.' wa * m a sinking condition, and April 22-23. 6
furthest from the Mole, opening fire at the liehte one cutter, as the other one was badly damaged 2 1 was slipped, and towing commenced. The being continually hit. In these circumstances, Mr. ..... ■ , . , j , __
house, and then at the barge, which is reported from While in the cutter the crew came under more shrapnel hawser par *f d almost at once, but tho shin’s bead was Gore-Langton ordered the abandonment of the North •• , A brl ? preliminary report was phoned to Vice-
subsequent observation to W b?en Tte md fire, whichSnsT" hlta * PT^T d St ft,H T - Star, standing byher,.and taking off all of her com- Jover
ship ?as under a fairly heavy fire from the light guim When trying to pull clear of the ship M.L. 282 (Lien- A KZkta P “ y Wh ° W6re left ° eStabl,Bhed tha
on the Mole extension, but her captain did not see tenant P«rcy T. Dean, R.N.V.H., whose conduct ou f ov p ll 3* I regret that the North Star was lost, but the ?°
any firing from the 4-1-inch battery at the Mole head. ’ n rescuing the office's and men from the Intrepid fho m.n ar ) d fakmg conductor Lieutenant-Commander Kenneth C. Helyar _(“•) Sinus and Brilliant are not inside Ostend
As the ship approached what appeared to be an bnK already been described) was sighted across the theless hunt? nn two or thr»?fbr,2? <^., - WalC ° 'lf'ift*'' and his company was all that could be desired, the j Harbour, but lie stranded about 2,490 yards to
opening between the barges and the net obstruction Tphigenia’s bows, and tho cutter pulled to her. The f ou |p<i k v dftrris of (be broSo 3 ’ 7 North Star not being'abandoned until all possibility eastward of eastern pier
extending to the south-eastward from them she maiority of the crew got into the motor launch, reached Dover soon after 8 a.m nr fbo ->ali Vmaictlve of salving her was gone. The Lieutenant-Corn- (6 ) The Stroom Bank Buoy is not in its charted
commenced to swing to port. She was given full which then went astern. The cutter also pulled j -Jra. mander of the Phoebe states that Mr. Helyar by his position, but is a little to eastward of the prolonga-
port helm, but ran into the nets between the two end rotmd the stem of the ship and the launch took the 105 - Some of the proceedings of Iris 11. have been coolness and calm devotion to duty set a splendid tion of eastern pier, approximately lat. 51 15 60 N.,
buoys, and continuing to forge ahead, took the nets mdi on l' oard > except three, one of whom was killed, reported m connexion with the storming of the Mole, example to all, though his ship was totally disabled long. 2632 t E.
with her. The piers of tho canal entrance were in cutter was made fast to the stem ot the motor and (he rest may be told here. Shortly after leaving and constantly being hit. He would not leave his •
sight when both engines were reported to have brought ' onn c b ’ which went out of tho harbour stern first at fhe Mole she came under a very heavy fire from the bridge until ordered twice to abandon his ship when 2. (o) accounts for (a); supposing, as is almost
up. Thetis had thus cleared the net obstruction I* l ' l Lieutenant Billyard-Leake reports that Mo'e and shore batteries, being hit ten limes by small she was obviously sinking under him, and could not certain, that the buoy was in this position on tho
away enough to enable tho ships following to pass fbls mo^°T birmch was entirely responsible for saving Bbe H twice by large ones. The first targe shell ! be saved. He also did his utmost to assist the Phoebe night of 22nd-23rd.
to starboard of her, and she signalled to them to do the revivors from the Iphigenia. Heavy machine came tbrou 8 b , tb< ? .P control position and carried in every way to take him in tow. 3 qn. WaH on boons bv aircraft, is of „
so. Being then about 300 yards from the eastern g™ was concentrated on her wbde on passage_out, o« f . c^ u 1 ? n S a 114. Tempest and Tetrarch, of the Harwich force, very high art, and can only be done with any degree
P‘^7 bea< ?’ and having dnfted slightly to port (shore- 5? Q ?? C^ T ? i m ?, l ??, > ’ I ’ If ' ut< ‘ rl; '' n^ +^, a,lnco P'.?' P°y d ’ ,v„ brid"c It a ” d bo ? lbs J ,l , der accompanied tho Ostend blockships from the Good- of accuracy with relation to closely surrounded land
ward), she appears to hnve ; grounded. She had a® S C - ?°ST ,l w and Lieutenant *“«’ b ” d !*• j ow! d w Valen- wins U they reached the inshore smoke screen off (or shoal) features.
list to starboard, and was settling down, having been ames c - Kelth R.N.V.R., of M.L. 416. Glbba Ostend, after which thev cooperated with the Dun- Captain B. Graham, D. 5.0., D.S.C., R.A.P., and
frequently holed along the starboard side by gunfire, dangerously wormded. and too f th e m ote r ] aunc h. E and seinon .ly R wo,l ? d f i d destroyers Faulknor, flying the broad pendant Captain L. H. Slater D.ac., R.A.F., obtained the
She continued to be hit from the Mole, from craft e T OT, of F™’ 1 ? at Commis- Linitenant Render- of Commodore Lynes, Liglitfoot, Mastiff, Afridi, present position of Stroom Bank Buov by (aiming
alongside it, and from guns on shore east ot the canal. «)Qners, who have so many claims to judge will con- t f w i tb a h ?® e Swift, and Matchless in supporting the small craft down to 100 feet and fixing the buoy with reference!
One or two machine guns were also firing at the ship. ?? J?! of J ho T ’ art b Y the fire * b * ut inshore, within close range of the enemy’s heavy for direction, to the line 6l eastern pier,
her 6-mch forecastle gon engaging these guns nnHl Iphigenia well justifies mV mention of Lieutenant , e of the bridge he ran up on to it and batteries.
her own smoke made it impossible to see To™ BHlvard-Leake and of Mate (E) Sydney Grervillo teund Commander Gibbs, as he then thought, dead, , _ ... ... The organizal ion detailed in my 0/53, of April 21,
munication with the engine-room having West fßenbowh who throughout the preparations Lieutenant Spencer seriously wounded, but still 11 5. I wish to record my entire^ satisfaction with was carried out for Ostend operation, which I con-
down, a messenger was sent, and Engineer Lieuteoarif and operation worked his department in an admirable connm ? the Bhl P- t-ook command and steadied fche w ? rk by « tor P^l°' boat ducted with the assistance of Commander J. L. 0.
. ‘ , » ..I ' wvUJIUrU, BUI rlill * _ . _ 'i <w 1311 uuu 4UJ vovcuu U{rt<lauiUU, nUUJI 1 COH—
conning the ship. He took command and steadied work done by the torpedo-boat destroyer ducted with the assistance of Commander J, L. C.
the ship on her course, the coxswain. Petty Officer foroe throughout the operations. The part taken by Clark, D.H.0., 8.N., from on board Faulknor, leader
David P. Smith, sticking to his post with great the Phoebe in protecting and endeavouring to tow of the Off-Shore Destroyer Force,
gallantry, steering with one hand while holding an ou t of action the North Star, and in the final rescue ~ .
elec'ric torch to tho compass with the other; it is due of ber people, is a conspicuous example of the fine “• Tho operation was out according to
to Lieutenant Spencer that the ship was fumed awav qualities of this branch of the service, and is highly programme. There were no hitches, the times were
from the land. Iris 11. was again hit bv three shells creditable to Mr. Gore-Langton, his officers, and k £P t precisely, and I have complimented the senior
simultaneously, and as the men were packed verv crew. I have already recommended that officer for officers of units, and all, on the care with which they
closely on the main deck the casualties were very promotion, as I consider that his personal and pro- hoth studied and earned out my necessarily rather
heavy. When the ship was steadied on her course fessionai conduct on this occasion marks him as voluminous orders.
to be valuable in the higher Tanks of his Majesty’s
6. (a.) The wind, on starting out, was light north-
westerly, and continued thus until about It) minutes
before Sirius and Brilliant arrived at Stroom Bank
Buoy, when it most unluckily shifted round to
the south-westward, causing all the smoke to go
wrong at the critical moment.
(6.) The M.L.’s and C.M.B.’s strove with resolution
SCREENS. MOTOR
D COASTAL MOTOR
at. wnicn time mey nrsr. camo under fire from the ‘Trk"™',™!™ uy lieutenant-J 44,4 . ’ Uie south-westward, causing all tbe smoke to go
enemy’s batteries, and (hen shaped a course for the i'°cc lll an(ler Lionel 8. Chappell, D.S.C., R.N.V.R., BOAIo. wrong at the critical moment,
deduced position of Ostend. No marks were visible and Wl b Ralph on board, gallantly 116, The orders for smoke-screening the approach (6.) The M.L.’s and C.M.B. S strove with resolution
owing to smoke, which made it necessary for Sirius J? mt . m '° >h e heavy tire from the_ enemy’s guns, and and operations of the forces attacking Zeebruggo and and good judgment to compete with this reverse,
to keep very close station on Brilliant. When the throwing a smote screen around Ins 11. enabled her Ostend, and the reports from the numerous motor but all their efforts were overpowered by the enemy’s
Ostend Piers should have been seen by Brilliant, f re"’ ,be , o very badly damaged ; she launches and coastal motor boats employed on that smoke screen blown to seaward, while they themselves
breakers were observed on the starboard bow, and cached llover at 2.45 p.m., some five hours after tho duty, are necessarily too detailed to be recapitulated became subjected to a heavy, but happily ill-directed
though the helm was starboarded, the ship grounded. . eat .?* "fX cap‘am, who remained confident and in a despatch of this general nature. Apart from the gunfire.
Sirijs, observing this, immediately put her helm hard cheerful until his very heroic spirit passed.! smoke apparatus supplied to the larger craft for _ nl . ~ , .
over and her engines full speed astern, but the ship 106. Although the Lords Commissioners of the self-protection, the duty of making smoke screens . 7‘. r 1 bloP p’mpB made the Htroom Bank Buoy
being already badly damaged by gunfire and sinking. Admiralty have most promptly recognized and re- and laying smoke floats was imposed on a large fleet (which was alight and marked tho whole time), hut
did not answer the helm, and collided with the port warded the services of Acting Captain Carpenter bv of motor launches and coastal motor boats. Without after that the adverse smoke prevented thpm teeing
quarter of the Brilliant. In the end, bo(h ships being promoting him to the Post list, I should not like to th® services of these little vessels lor this duty, for anything by which they might have retrieved tho
practicably fast ashore. Brilliant, with her port end this part of my despatch without putting on rescue work and for inshore work generally, an attack err or o£ the buoys position.
engine immovable, and Sirius, in sinking condition, record the praise which is due to him. An excellent ol nature could hardly have been considered. g. (a.) Since the Captains of the blockships. Com*
hasrfncTSiiZi' PV * tio, s «' aa , o{TioPr ' h ® rendcredmeinvaluahle assistance it, 117. Smoke Screens.— While the wind favoured the mander A. E. Godsal, 8.N., and Lieutenant-Corn-
etorarcc! tA’c Cn.ttTw , the dra^ ,ng " P °* l h ® Operation orders, the screens were efficacious. Captain Ralph Collins, who mander H. N. M. Hardy, D. 5.0., 8.N., will have
Sub- 'il (TWi»i* mvo,vpd Btr enuous work by commanded the motor launches, reports that, in some made their full reports to you, I say little more, since,
knd Engineer Limitmiant Wiltedtel’ dp teiL unite in which the smoke screens were maintained, after what has been Paid, it is needless to remark
all serving? in the Brilliant won, 4il n ; ’ out- and in which most of the boats were under fire, there the failure to find the entrance was no fault of
eautein as having set a fink th “ the attack, but as showing we rc no boats hit; whereas, in one instance, which theirs; on the contrary, the newly discovered position
Commander Godsal also mentions Petty n*™' W j l bee!l'!L eX ii n, !i ° ?v those under his came under my own observation, the absence of a of the buoy only too plainly shows that their course,
Joscoh* J Reed (ON who beWyert rommand, I hear on all sides that the Captam s calm screen led to proventably heavy punishment. As after rounding the buoy, ought to have brought them
K Wh ° tehaved Wllh J and brin ?- :to the smoke floats, the enemy sunk many of them right in.
mg hi. h p alongside (he Mole in darkness, and his directly they were laid, especially if, as happened (t.) I may add that on my return to harbour abont
99. The rescue of the crews by motor launches 5T? at br f lT . pry wben tbe f®*P came under heavy fire , n many cases, thev emitted flame. Those which six hours later, the bitter disappointment of these
which had been standing by under heavy fire of every oj'imncn to encourage similar behaviour on (he part remained were effective. two gallant officers showed itself chiefly in begging
calibre, was carried out in the gallant manner which 01 thp “Tl?’ and ’ bereb y contributed greatly to the ~, r «- for another blockship apiece to-have another try.
distinguished the work of the crews of the motor success of the operation. ... u - M ° toT A ’ , wprc . "Pder 9 _ Xhe low clouds and driajJe put aU ail 4raft
launches and coastal motor boats throughout the , v fiUTPmn tbl , 1 f o / ' ipebr * sg t e ’ partiapation out of the question.
action. Commander lon Hamilton Berm RIM V P —OSTEND. , and Commander Hamilton Bonn at Ostend. As to „ , . ,
srss&&js. t tcv£2 n H r T" n St h ,07 - In seci i-v
SSJSLi to return the
IA7 ti,; a .. _ i the handling of these craft, great credit is due to the 10 * The monitor and siege gun bombardments were
. I I lead ere of sections for the way in which they led their undoubtedly useful as a blind, and to keep the fire
have grouped proceedings of units taking part in boats up to the objectives. When the wind shifted, of the ihore batteries down.
the operations off places, the commanding officers proceeded closer inshore to The. shore batteries commenced to return the
TT V,Pt T r /: <f„^ P , t- by i C< ’ t T, TnodorP give as much protection to the attacking ships as monitors’fire about 5 minutes after the latter opened.
to a u ? ffi u er^ a l possible. One unit, under Lieutenant Gordon S. A number of shell fragments were picked up on board
PuXreGn? Ld f ?r W n° f: bear t pd Maxwell, R.N.V.R., went close inshore, and by the monitors, but there were no hits. Photographs
b ' “ _pf ~o , all tirocs. I dropping three floats without baffles succeeded in show a number of hits around the German batteries,
p^fflfn e ofTh?sXm not hS mfluSng the enemy to concentrate his fire on these but none on tbe guns,
been discovered, but I feel that the Tr "'IT a’ 11- Thii time the enemy took longer to bo
must be accepted as one of the misfortunes of war I a'armed than on the night of llth-12th. He seemed
ins The Jorrtq noruTui-Kirmptc ~.;ii | volunteered toprecode tho blockships and light tlie t Q take but a desultory interest until tho monitors
108. The Lords Commissioners will notice that 1 entrance of the harbour and canal with calcium opened fire, i.e.. i hour after the C.M.B.’s arrived at
RNVR in ML 276 reS-ateX l.a TTS herew4to iZ T>,a f ca ' the commanding offlcem proceeded closer iushoreto The shore batteries commenced to return the
Brilliant ’in the difficult cimimsta'nccs?if W de ttlw K bf i °JS. mo<iorc gim as much protection to the attacking ships as monitors’fire about 5 minutes after the latter opened.
still M f ? ff r er _. a l possible. One unit, under Lieutenant Gordon 84 A number of shell fragments were picked up on board
therommand of Ke th RuS’ Tud lol?i IT wbol ?: bp kaxwell, R.N.V.R., went close inshore, and by the monitors, but there were no hits. Photographs
D.S.C., 8.N.V.H., embarked pr.acUcPlly all ihe share hfe regret a' to the alteSon by thXnkmy dl Y ppin S Abrec floata witl >out baffles succeeded in show a number of lute around the German batteries,
from the Sirius, and sixteen from the Brilliant’s of the position of the Stroom Bank Buoy not having 1118
whaler, sunk by gunfire. been discovered, but I feel that the consequence TT o< i n % IL (“•) Thii rime the enemy took longer to be
100. After leaving the Sirius. Lieutenant Com must boaccepted “ pne of the “fortunes of war. I ™l un U(cred to precede the and a^ e d
mander llardy found that Engineer Lieutenant Wil- 108. Tim Lcirds Commissioners will notice that entrance of the harbour and canal with calcium opened fire Me. 1 hour after the C.M.B.’s arrived at
ham B. Maclaren (Iron Duke) Sid some men were five French torpedo craft cooperated at Ostend buoys. Whilst approaching the entrance M.L. 110 the Stroom Bank Buov and as on the previous
mussing. He therefore haded C.M.B. 10 (Suh-Lieu- with our big momtore, and four French motor launches was struck by three shells, which killed and wounded occasion he cannot liave’ had a single patrol out
tenant Peter B. Clarke. ILN.R.), and with Lieutenant with our small monitors. I should like to be allowed half the crew and wrecked the engines. Lieutenant- (b ) Very few shells fell near the off-shore
Edwanl L. Berthon, D.S.C. (Viceroy), went alongside to express my gratification at this cooperation, and Commander Young, hit in three places, was mortally destroyer? Enemy’s fire was evidently either
the ship under a heavy and accurate fire froin 4.1-inch my thanks for the valuable assistance these vessels wounded, but stuck to his post and gave orders to directed aeainst the inshore boats at tho monitor*-
and machine guns to search for them, but found no gave are due to Vice-Admiral Pierre Alexis, M. A. abandon ship, until he collapsed. This very gallant into?Xko ’
fcoint* pS B un P byThe d? n dL^ M tne C X m temX toXtountee? p sb ® U > - bpf ° rp > about 7,000
Ste W r h toe th!h- d sffip rtee “ ° Ut to 864 de" Boisanger dls O d ° Vaiifiieau Breart Pat ~l has sustained a great loss by his death. S^Vo^ed LTtoedi^ion^ 8 "
ini rn, • T ,1 , ■ ~, ■■_ , , , ! 119. Of the meritorious work reported from the (<*•) At intervals the enemy’s star shell showed up
101. Their Lordships wdl share with me and the 109. Commodore Lynes has recommended for I motor launches, X have already selected the instances to us the M-L-’s busily engaged with their smoke
commanding officers of these ships the disappoint- , special recognition several officers and men, and the) of Lieutenant P. T-JDean, R.N.V.R., in No. 282, and screens, and at 11.50 also the blockships with their
XIII—DOVER TRAWLER PATROL.


Supplement.]
THE TIMES, THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 20, 1919.
escort to tho E.X.E. steering for the Stroom Bank
Buoy. It was at this moment that we noticed the
shift of wind to south-westward.
(e.) About 10 minutes later the blockships dis-
appeared abreast the buoy into the smoke, and we
saw no more of them, but picked up Tempest and
Tetrarch.
(/.) C.M.B.’s 12 and 19 report a “ M.L. blew up ”
about 00.15, E.S.E., 2 miles from Stroom Bank
Buoy ; this apparently refers to the blockships being
hit by shell.
(<j.) About 00.25 burst of firing became more
frequent, and more searchlights switched on than
before, evidently the result of the blockships’ emerg-
“ At (his time the smoke screen was excellent.
There was a lane between the eastern and western
sections, and the only fire experienced was shrapnel,
which X considered was fired at a venture, and did
no harm. We ran on for thirteen minutes from the
Stroom Bank Buoy, and then, as the entrance
was not sighted, altered course to the westward
7. The quicker the delivery of tho new attack the
greater the element of surprise, and consequently of
ence from smote and stoanding. * ” to the westward success. Realizing thisT B pecialTsori S^ —
(h.) After this there was little more than desultory shore, and reduced to 60 revolutions both at Dover and Dunkirk, so that within a few At this moment a very heavy shell burst, either
firing, probably at monitors, with tho exception of ’ , Ay l° f the fil ? fc attack > Vindictive had been prepared on the conning tower or dose ix/it. This must have
two 3-minute burst of barrage fire at 00.42-00.52. -ed coilt. points to starboard, and f or her new r6le of blockship, all the small craft had ki u e d Commander Godsal. for he was seen no more ;
The searchlights continued searching actively until fina t J'S off? 1 com P l ? ted their smoko lights and other and later, after the ship had been sunk in the channel,
about 01.30 when their numbers reduced to three or S , and according to the new plan careful search failed to reveal his body,
four. f ou ™ 16 pomte to starboard. All this time, owing of attack, which had been promulgated to all con- This very gallant officer must have known before
. (i.) At 01.00 tho “retirement” red rocket signals u .... ,_ „ being killed g that his efforts were crowned with
and syren “K’s” were made by destroyers; this iLut nort beamand afthesame “ v „ altematlv ? P la “f ( of atta <*. “ V. 0.” and success. Lieutenant Sir Jolm Alleyne was knocked
produced a few big shrapnel in our neighbourhood. time the sWo
(j.) A few C.M.B.’s aud M.L.’s were seen coming S 7 “rders 0/54 and 0,58 respectively. occupante of the conning tower were, badly shaken
away off and on up to 2 a.m., when we withdrew to ( 1 8. For this rapid aud satisfactory work of pre- by this shell. Lieutenant Victor Crutchley then took
lix position by XI, R.M.C. Buoy, picking up No. 7 On sighting the entrance, in accordance with paration at Dover, I beg particularly to offer my command, and endeavoured to place the ship across
C.M Ji., disabled, on the way. (Tetrarch towed her previous orders, I passed the order * preparatory grateful thanks to Commodore the Mon. A. D. E. H. the channel. The sinking charges were fired by
home.) abandon ship ’ to the engine-room. As soon as Boyle, C. 8., M.V.0., Chief of the Staff, who left no Engineer Lieutenant-Commander William A. Bury,
(k.j Having fixed by Position R, we continued to the entrance was sighted the ship was handled stone unturned to have all my numerous requests and preparations made to abandon ship,
cruise between R and Stroom Bank Buoy until from the conning tower. Commander Godsal carried out; for that at Dunkirk, lam chietiy in- 26. All this time Vindictive was continuously fired
daylight, and the shore became visible, when, nothing inunediately turned up for the entrance and debted to the energy of Commander J. L. C. Clarke, at, both by heavy and machine-guns, and repeatedly
floating being in sight, all forces were withdrawn; ordered smoke to be lighted. At about this time D. 5.0., R.N., my Second-in-Command; to Lieu- hit ; the after control had been completely de-
B.C. Patrol being sent out later, and picking up the communication with the after control failed. tenant-Commander P. H. Sandford, D. 5.0., R.N., molished, killing Sub-Lieutenant Angus Maclachlan
last straggler—viz., C.M.B. 17, who had run out of ”,ust after the entrance was passed, Commander the staff officer you were good enough to lend me, and all with him, and the whole upper deck was a
petrol near 3 B.C. Buoy. Godsal went outside the conning tower and gave who was mainly responsible for the smoke screen mass of debris.
(I.) At 03.20, when near Stroom Bank Buoy, we tlle order hard-a-starboard from outside. organization; and to Lieutenant H, F. Witherby, Notwithstanding this, perfect order was maintained,
saw two searchlights, judged about 500 yards apart, “Immediately after this a heavy shell burst B-N.V.R., my staff intelligence officer, whose know- and a careful search for founded was made before
concentrated on something burning in the water either on the conning tower or very close to it; l ed ge °f the enemy’s coast and close association with embarking in the two M.L.’s (Nos. 254 and 276),
between them. Lieutenant Alleyne was knocked out, and Com- air reconnaissance work of the 61st (Naval) Wing who had run in through the fire zone to effect the
At 03.30 this fire culminated in an explosion, and raander Godsal was not seen again, and all the were invaluable. rescue,
darkness ensued, the two searchlights switched out a occupants of the conning tower were badly shaken. 9. The elements were, however, against us— 2"' Mot 9 r Daunch 254 (Lieutenant Geoffrey H.
few minutes later. I then ordered the port telegraph to full speed astern, for despite all these preparations, strong northerly Drummond, R.N.V.R.), coming alongside V mdic-
(m.) No enemy craft were seen by anyone, except to try to swing the ship across the channel. She winds, with rough seas, precluded all possibility of ,', ve ? inshore side, embarked Lieutenant Crutchley,
that C.M.B. 12 feels sure that she was chased by a grounded forward on the eastern pier when at an the enterprise up to a period when the conjunction of Engineer 1.1 eutfilant-{.<>mmantler Bury, and thirty-
destroyer with searchlights, but I cannot think a angle of about three points to the pier. As the darkness and tide, in its turn, demanded postpone- J?'®? men. With ms 1 irst Lieutenant (Lieutenant
craft coming out of Ostend could have been seen by ship stopped swinging, and at the time I con- ment until the second week of the present month. Gordon Ross, R.N.V.R.) and Deckhand J. thomas
no one else or escaped us, for, apart from the star-shell sidered that no more could be done, I ordered the 10. This enforced period of inaction waif occupied
ddIUSCj mo ° nllght gaVC qUit " ° De SIU . P i? v Perfecting and toting the arrangements and.
mue visibility. When the engine-room had been abandoned, at *>vo all, in the preparation of a second blockship, stiU under a tremendous fire, cleared the entrance,
12, On return to harbour about 07.30, I found Engineer Lieutenant-Commander Bury blew the wt ich, on your representation, was ordered to be and made straight to seaward,
that:— ship up by firing the main chart s and after pared and fitted out by His Majesty s Dockyard, Arriving out-ide the fire zone. Lieutenant Drum-
(a.) All the crews of the blockships had been saved, auxiliary charges, and I endeavoured to fire the CJiKtham. raond found his launch graduallv filling forward
the majority by M.L.’s 276, 283, and brought to forward auxiliary charges. There was a con- Al. The conjunction of darkness and tide made the from her injuries. Standing on at slow speed through
Dunkirk; the few others who had evacuated in a siderable shock when the first set of charges were nClit of the 9th- 10th May the first favourable night the fog, and contriving somehow or other to pass
pulling boat were picked up by the Gap Patrol. fired. lam not positive that the forward auxiliary ofrhe new period. By good fortune the weather close to the offshore destroyers without either getting
(b.) This salvage work of M.L.’s 276 and 283 was charges fired, as I could not distinguish the shock conditions on the 9thgaveeveryindicationofpromi.se, in touch, M.L. 254 was most fortunately picked up
carried out under heavy, but fortunately not accurate, from other disturbances. and accordingly on the afternoon of the 9th the in a sinking condition about forty minutes after
fire with a courage and coolness that alone could have “ When I got on hoard M.L. 254 I found that operations were put in progress, firstly by the passage leaving Ostend by your flagship Warwick. Rescuers
achieved its wonderful result, for not a man was the First Lieutenant had been killed by a shell of .Sappho to Dover, and later by the passage of both and rescued were quickly taken on board, and M.L.254
wounded, and the heavily laden boats returned to bursting, also one deckhand. The captain, Lieu- blockships, with their supporting and escorting forces, then sank.
harbour safely. tenant Geoffrey 11. Drummond. R.N.V.R.. and f ro >n Dover to Dunkirk. It was at first doubtful 28. M.L. 276 (Lieutenant Rowland Bourke,
(c.) All the M.L.’s had returned intact with very the coxswain had been wounded. We went out whether Sappho could be completed in time.but Chat- R.N.V.R.), having followed Vindictive into Ostend
slight casualties, and one damaged bow. of the harbour stem first, followed the whole way bv bam Dockyard made great efforts, and Sappho arrived (engaging lioth piers with his machine-guns en route),
id.) The C.M.B.’s, too, both for Zeebrugge and machine-gun fire. On finally going ahead the fore'- at Dover with several hours in hand. went alongside Vindictive after M.L. 254, with her
Ostend, bad all returned safely, either to iiunkirk or castle flooded, and the boat was very much down 12. For days preceding the operation, rain, cloud, b rst ' resc n e <l party, had shoved off.
Dover, with the exception of two or three which were by the bows. The pump and buckets were got and mist had prevented'more than the scantiest air After much search and shouting, and still under
retrieved later. Their- personnel casualties were two under way, and all spare hands placed right aft. reconnaissances, but towards sunset on the 9th, i.e., a . ver . v heavy lire, lieutenant Bourke aud Sub-
dangerously wounded and four wounded—considering However, the water was gaining, and S.O.S. when the blockships were already steaming eastwards. Lieutenant Petrie managed to find and embark the
the work done, a marvellous result, aud one which was made by flashing lamp continually to seaward. an air reconnaissance announced that all the buovs iaiit three of Vindictive's survivors (Lieutenant
reflects the greatest credit on the C.M.B. officers. The courses steered from Ostend were north for off Ostend had apparently been removed \t con- i Al| oyno and two ratings), all badly wounded, in the
13 Conelusiors—la 1 Tho luck of the win,! 15 “brutes, and then west by north until picked siderable risk of having to land after dark. Squadron- ! wa t«r clinging to a capsized skiff,
ing. iouSdTthth i sMfting of theSteoomTbrrdc up by Warwiek ’ Commander Ronald Graham, D. 5.0., D.S.C., himself , Jhls “no rescue effected, M.L. 276 hit in fifty-five
Buov, accounts for tho failure to Work Ostend “ 1 cannot speak too highly of the bravery at once "ent out, returned safely, and confirmed the I’,f°“, a )^ d tlm ' u °/ faer crew killed or wounded,
Snr Sis bo anyone Mml of th e M.L.’s coming alongside inside Ostend ; «P«t- cleared tee harbour, and able to continue steering
none could have carried out their duties more ad- “?ey Were under a continuous and heavy fire. This now move on the enemy’s part had to be P ‘ Cked “ P takell “ tOW
mirably than did the Ostend forces on this occasion. M.L. 254 resfued two officers and thirty-seven men countered: weaocordmgly arranged to lay a special tWs smdf’ inshore craft—T M R’s under
(c.) The lions share of the work was, Of course, 11. It had been Commander Godsal’s intention to .. IJ *, llle conditions as night advanced con- D. 5.0., R.N.V.R., as bef .re, carried out all their
done by tho C Jnd3. s, M.L. s, and blockships. ram the western pier with the object of swinging tinned excellent, wind 2S. by W.,sky clear, atmosphere duties splendidly; to them must be given the chief
1 have, &c., the ship aerjoss the channel under port helm, a . >ol 1 j* air navigation, sea smooth, honours of having guided Vindictive in.
Hubert Lynes, manoeuvre that would have been greatly assisted by e * lol 4s r ‘ l the small ci*aft to operate, barometer D.*ring expl its of those small craft, all contributory
Commodore , Dunkirk. the tide, which was setting stiongly through the piers steady, ana conditions likely to remain stable. to the general success, are numerous; they are
Vice-Admiral Sir Roger Keyes, K.C.8., C.M.G., to the eastward. It would appear that when the 14. Vindictive and Sappho arrived in Dunkirk recounted by the senior officers of divisions in their
M.Y.0., D. 5.0., R.N., Dover. Vindictive eventually found the entrance she was too Roads in good time, disembarked their surplus crews, detailed reports, but I Would specially mention the
"• ’ J V. . W.. - -■ J ...... ... (Jicvx. U.KU ai.w mull ou Jpi uo vtcno, * r'" ■» nwuu* luiunun rn''
close to the eastern pier to use port helm without and then proceeded with their cssorts at the appointed following :
—i risk of grounding broaijside on. This would account time in the programme. Sappho, however, hail scarcely C.M B. No. 25 (Lieutenant Russell H. Mcßean,
for Commander Godsal’s order “hard a starboard” left the anchorage than a man-hole joint in the side of BN.) escorted Vindictive with smoke screen close
THE SECOND ATTACK ON ft secon ds before he was killed. The Vindictive her boiler blew out, reducing,her speed to about six up to the entrance, where she assisted her with
nQTWn was thus committed to starboard helm when the knots, and therefore putting her participation that guiding lights, then tirpedoed the piers, and finally
UailiiND, command devolved on Lieutenant Crutchley, who night out of the question. eng ge I the machine-guns there with his own machine-
May 10, 1918.
■c, . TT I, ■““•I") me I'uri. propeller, wuieu rpouirpa ronsiHeraGm, whether or no it a/liHu.til. uaemeuaiu. mersean was wounaeO ana ACUng 1,11161
Fleet House, Dover, • was venr severely dan-aged against Zeebrugge Mole, toVoceed with the ooemtion “ W Motor Mechanic G. E. Keel killed. Having seen
.Tt/ne 1 ioi o was of little value. Due to this, and also to the fact • j - • i , _i. ■ A. ~ , Vindictive inside the piers, and her work bcin? com-
/Vo ow /fiA-t \ ’ 18, that the tide was setting strongly against her star- A f m Y“ d,ctlve ’signalled , ete | Su b-Lieuten J o .rgi- U Shaw lN R
(iSO. 2305/003.) board side, the ship’s stern did not swing across ufsap temrm d (second-in-comman“ broughTher' safSy’ back te
Sm > the rha ““ el “ desired, with the result that she ' b ., \v.T of mv d cision P ‘ to n o m-d harbour> Mot >r Mechanic A. J. Davies fifiing Chief
B© pleased to lay before the Lords Com- grounded at an angle, of about 25 degrees to the 3 * y ' Motor Mechanic Keel s place, and keeping the engines
missioners of the Admiralty the followin« re- eastern P ier » leaving a considerable channel between Tims done, I proceeded on board Faulknor running most eflicientlv.
port on the renewed attempt made in tho enrlv her Bte,n and lhe western P ier * (Commander Henry G. L. Ohphant, M.V.0., D. 8.0.), C.xM.B. No. 24 (Lieutenant Archibald Davroll-Reod,
JnoWg of the 10th May, l 1918, -2. ,u 2.45 a.m, fifteen minutes after the pro- Tl-fS
entrance of tho Ostend-Bruges Canal by sinking fTamme time for the withdrawal of the motor 'craft, well on their way to their various stations. Com- torpedo attacks‘on the pier emfs, SeTOatoTteying
the Vindictive therein. . to t he' to'The pr ,“ eeeded sow y mander Clarke and Lieutenant-Commander Sandford and maintaining good smoke screens close inshore
.. T .. 0 „, . ..... .. to westMard parallel to the coadt.. accompanied me m Faulknor to carry out staff work, throughout the remainder of the operation.
ntteJrt to blockOstend td not succeeded T 13 ’ At 3 ' 15 a - m - a of distress was observed ***** ass * stance “ e m ducting the C.M J 3. No. 26 (Lieutenant Cuthbert P. B. Bowiby,
nresentod to their Lordshins the desirahilitv {rom the direction of Ostend. I directed the division °P Dona. R.N.) escorted Vindictive close up to the entrance,
Jene-itiTio- the oneration -it nm-ii to clc >se, and found M.L. 254 (Lieutenant Geoffrey !'• After the sudden removal of the buoys, and in D‘ en rarl ahead, and, finding one of the piers, fired
Hie nnlv Tf-svel available -it the moment heir. i'/’A H. Druuunond. R.N.V.R.) badly damaged and in a the kiiowK-djv- that nine enemy deattiijau, . had bis, .tOCPfdp-'at it — The. Jjßii- .sbiUtan.-_ and
the only vessel at aflame at.thei momciit. hemir placed wink i.i K ,-.,nrfn-*n. «4t-h two umA and rmrtV-Seven seen iilt be ofihig la' e that evening, I had fully expected ra,, ft e '* or t- the explosion shook the boat so severely
at my disposal, every enorc made to repair he f , h vindictive s crew on board. Lieutenant, enemv interference with our ulan before rearhinv the as to damage her engines and open her seams. She
. ", x « _ . in. commanu, ijieui enai
ness suited, t.e., about four days, This was accom- nlhpp mPTI tilled
plished at Dover, thanks to the strenuous efforts of . ma nv of the Vine
Rear-Admiral C. P, Dampier, the Superintendent of Sti^Command^
Iwar-Acnnira . ampler, o , upenntendent ol Engineer Commander, were wounded. Thev were were evidently only part of his ih?w searching routine. oul Hie lire zone, where Commander Bertram H.
the Dockyar , s,na s a * he services ol transferred to the AVarwick, and this took half an Once again his preparations against surprise included Ramsay, leader of one of the offshore (Jivisions, took
Engineer Commander Henry P .8e11.,R..V, and Mr. horn- to do, on account of the serious condition of no patrol craft in the offing. her m tow %
A - 3 - particularly valuable. some of the wounded. By 1.30 a.m. all preliminary dispositions had been C.MJB. No. 22 (laeutenant William H. Bremner,
' r y a t . h^ tonS Gl . cement a wero P" 4 tbo , „ t , . completed, and the (advanced inshore forces, i.e., the K.N., with Lieutenant Arthur E. F. Welmun. D.S.C.,
Vindictives after magazines and upper bunkers on 14. Dawn was now breaking, and H.M.S. Warwick C.M.B. and M.L. divisions, sent in to carry out their Senior Officer of C.M.B.’s aboard), when carrying out
bot h sides, which was all her draught would permit and her consorts were wit hin close range of the various duties. her smoke-screening of the shore batteries, encountered
her to carry, in view of the depth of water in the enemy- s batteries. M.L. 254 was too badly damaged , 0/ -, . . ... ~ ; , close inshore an enemy torpedo boat, who .-witched
apnroaches to Ostend Harbour. forward to allow of her being towed, and was rapidly ' ls - V lle “'v K feature of the present plan was that l on ber searchlight and opened fire. C.M.B. No. 22
Major-General Sir William Hickey, K.C.8., Com- settling down. I ordered her to be destroyed, and, there should be no preliminary bombardments or air | i lild no better weapon than her ta-wis guns, but with
manding Dover Garrison, most helpfully provided a ? soon as this had been carried out, withdrew the ral d :we were to make no attacks until our sea force . these she attacked and peppered the torpedo boat
men for filling bags with cement and putting them division at 25 knots. | were discovered by the enemy. to such good effect as to drive her away from the
on board. 13 B t his time the tide had fallen so low that , 19 ’ At j’ 35 a m -thwe was still no firing from the j harbour entrance, and prevent her interfering with the
3. As already reported in my last dispatch, Com- it was inexpedient to return bv the route inside of short A bu A a r tTn ? 8 k a a commenced to , blockmg operation. _ .. _ _
mander Alfred E. Godsal, R.N., and Lieutenant- the shoals by which the approach had been made, ?? arch ’ 3he C ’ M ’ B ’ 8^ ad a and were running C.M.B. No. 23 (Lieutenant the Hon. Cecil E K
Commander Henry N. M. Hardy, D. 5.0., R.N., of and a course was steered for a gap in the net defence b f/ r s “ ok( ' t^ u> . en > f lD , es -
the Brilliant and Sirius respectively, had begged to be by the deep-draught route from Ostend to seaward. I ose of the M • p PTt cbln f on their heels ’ was * t ? uch , wlth until VmdicUve gave the last resort ”
allowed to make another attempt, and had reported It would seem that the enemy had mined this of course - carried ashore by the breeze. signal, on which C.M.B. No. -3 laid, and ht, the
that all their officers aud Petty-Offlcer Joseph J. route in anticipation of an attack. At 4.0 a.m. At 1.4 3 a.m. I gave the pre-arranged signal to “open- candle-power flare, by whose light \ mdictive
Reed, of the Brilliant, had volunteered for this H.M.S. Warwick struck a mine, which broke her fire,” which was immediately responded to by the eventually tound her way m.
- V ._ n , , i • , ; i. i r 77.. . _, .7 , __ jn. . j 7 30. To recount, the foreiroiue* evoloifs of the small
IVCGQ) OI lu< ! UjUUdiUl/) llclrCl VUUlubßßlcd 10l Llllo XJI*ITJL.O» VVoI With, airuth. a IXilUe, WIUCO DrOiiG Her , UIGII ndo llulUtUlobcl V IvsjHHIUCU I/O Uy vQc „, rn . ~ , - . . , ~
Service. As Commander Godsal had led the previous back just before the superstructure of the after monitors, siege guns, and the air squadrons. Bombs v?". . recount the foregoing exploits of the small
attack, ho was given command of the Vindictive, superimposed 4-inch gun, and destroyed the after and shells, whose bursts could be seen over the top cram is in no way to detract from the praise due to all,
and Lieutenant Victor A. C. Crutchley, R.N., Sub- part of the ship. She took a heavy list"and appeared of our smoke screen, were undoubtedly giving the particularly to the senior officers of units, for the care
Lieutenant Angus 11. Maclachlan, R.N., and Petty- to bo settling by the stem. H.M.S. Velox was ordered enemy a warm time, and constituting a protection to a “d precision with which they carried out my neces-
OfflecT ' Joseph J. Reed, all of the Bril- alongside H.M.S. Warwick, and the wounded, of whom the small craft inshore. aarily rather elaborate orders.
bant, accompanied him. Engineer Commander there were a large number on board, were trans- 2 «. Shortly before this, I had noticed with some wfthiuT mm 2 tteTSuoorting
William A. Bury, R.N., however, claimed f erred to the former. H.M.S. Whirlwind then took anxiety the gathering of light-drifting “clouds”— Jrttnout lurtnw casualties or mcmem, tnesupportmg
his right to remain in the Vindictive. This H.M.S. Warwick in tow, and the latter being unable but genid -sized gaps, through whip sters shone, could
very gallant officer, who greatly distinguished to steer, H.M.S. Velox was kept alongside while be seen at 145 a m when the skv became eomnletelv “sawed email cram who mignt still w- our. t here
himseff on the 23rd April represented that his k T w- navigating the channels through the shoals to the and ft “
ledge of the engines and boilers of his ship should be open sea. a t h; c k se a fog which for the next all-imnnrtanf ■ „ . _owir hid alrtady oeen towed home,
utilized. He further begged that Engine Room Ar- X arrived at Dover in H.M.S. Warwick at 4.30 p.m. hour, reduced ourmeansof in to“ch with •JhnrtJh'
tificers Hubert Cavr.nagh, Norman Carrofi, Alan T . .. . . .. , . . \ events to sound alone m i«uca wim throughout the operation, but from subsequent reports
Thomas, and Herbert Alfred Harris, who also voluu- 16. I have again to refer to the fine work done by em* to sound aione. G f SO me of the inshore craft it appears that several
teered ’might be allowed to remain with him. I * motor launches and coastal motor boats, as 21. I felt that we could hope for no more air or German torpedo boats were lying close under the shore
acceded to his request. reported in paragraph 29 of the Commodore’s letter, monitor bombardments, and that thus deprived of j batteries the whole time, and made no move to come
Tientonant Sir Tnhn Allevne DSC RN of Their in the late operation confirms the their valuable support, the small craft inshore would out.
H.“rfaiw, who had beermnost useful in fitting of them mmy on the suflcr “Proportion, but fortunately this was not the 33 Our casualties were remarkably light-2 officers
up the navigational arrangements which were des- Previous opeiations. case lhe fog proves to have been merely a local and 6 men killed, 5 officers and 25 men womided, 2
troyed on the 23rd April, asked to he allowed to 17. The cooperation of (he Air Force, under £ th li W ?£‘ officers and 9 men rmssmg believed killed Our only
navigate the vessel during the operation. I approved Brigadier-General Charles L. Lambe, C.M.0., D. 5.0., '• a ’ d ' a^ d h If,^ 8 /? ° »111 J I* W i y / ” 81 ° e . nab f loss in material is M.L. -54. A number of the suial
of this request, feeling that tjiis officer’s experience R.A.F., was of great value during the operation. In and tbe " aft were considerably damaged by gunfire, but aU
and intimate knowledge of the shoals and currents ( spite of the fog the 214th Squadron (Squadron- tr g? 0 ““,7i^ ’°°° lltufe’ 1 tu f e ’ , are, or wdl be shortly, for action again,
on the Belgian coast would be of great value to the Commander Herbert G. BraeUey, D. 8.0., D.S.C.) i„?i. rt l‘ f hese conditions, andthodarlcness due The light casualty list must be attributed to the
Commander of the Vindictive. continued to attack in accordance with the pro- t?“°°J ?ya | A n efficient smoke screens, and probably ateo to the fog.
Tho crew were selected from a very largo number gramme until after the completion of the operation.. 0^.!; v C h - 1, iShftto Bprogramme 8 programme is, in itself, 34. Of the Sappho, I can hut reeled tho bitter dis-
cf volunteers from vessels of the Dover Patrol. T , . , „ „ a very high tribute to the efficiency of the air appomtment of all aboard her at the accident that
. 18. I greatly regret the loss of so fine an officer aa squadrons, who, under tho orders of Brigadier- prevented her following Vindictive. One and all, they
4. The Vindictive was in ell respects ready by the Commander Godsal. His zeal to retrieve the failure General Charles L. Lambe, C.M.G., D. 5.0., took part begged to be given another chance, and when the day
desired date, but the weather was unfavourable, and G f the Brilliant on the 23rd April impelled him to in the operations. All our aeroplanes eventually comes for their request to be granted., lam sure they
the operation had to be postponed until the necessary disregard all protection in order to secure success on returned to their aerodromes : some landed well to will not be found wanting,
condition of tide and darkness recurred. This delay this occasion. the westward, naturally under difficulties, one crashed I have &c
made it possible to prepare a second ship, tho old # so badly that the pilots were both severely injured. 9 ’* T
Sappho, which was taken from Southampton 19. As on the 22nd/23rd April, lam much in- Tjh e monitors, too, did good and useful work—par- HUBERT IjTnbs.
to Chatham and fitted out by Chatham Dockyard debted to Vice-Admiral Pierre Alexis M. A. Ronarc’h, ticularly Prince Eugene. Captain Ernest Wigram, Commodore*
With the greatest celerity and thoroughness. Commandant Sup£rieur de la Marine dans la zone D. 5.0., led his division well inside range limits, in To Vice-Admiral Sir Roger Keyes,
r. T ioutpuant-Commander Hardv took command d ? s Arm^s dn Nor . d ’ Dunkerque, who placed at my order that guns of the secondary armament might K.C.8., C.V.0., D.S.O.
of her and he was accompanied by all the officers d^P°salad the available vessels under his command, plav a part as well as the big guns. This they did ( London Gazelle Supplement , Feb, 19.)
of the Sirius. Lieutenant Edward L.Vrthon, D.S.C., f nd b Jwe iTrtre w'' etfcCt ’ an , d *-.1? T" 7 - rath f that '
Tt x ‘inb-T.ipiitenant. Alfred V Knivht, RN R and torpedo craft and M.L s. performed valuable service bis division escaped without injury, for his front rank
Engineer- Lieutenant William 'R. McLaren', R.N. “ connexion with the monitor bombardment. position put him inside the enemy’s long-ranged TTCT Of? TTO’NmTTR«
To realize these conditions, and tho darkness due The light casualty list must be attributed to the
to absence of moon, and to know t hat the Royal Air efficient smoke screens, and probably- also to the fog.
Force carried out its whole programme is, in itself, 34. Of the Sappho, -I can but record tho bitter dis-
5. Lieutenant-Commander Hardy took command
of her, and he was accompanied by all the officers
of the Sirius, Lieutenant Edward L. Berthon, D.S.C.,
R.N., Sub-Lieutenant Alfred V. Knight. R.N.R., and
Engineer-Lieutenant William R. McLaren, R.N.
Her crew were selected from a very large number
of volunteers in the Royal Naval Barracks at Chatham
LIST OF HONOURS.
star shells, and brought his division under a heavy
fire from the shore batteries.
The R.M.A. siege guns, under Colonel Pryco Pea-
cock, also maintained a valuable fire on the enemy’s
heavy coast batteries throughout tho operation.
20. I commend Commodore Hubert Lynes to their
Lordships’ favourable consideration.
The officers and men mentioned by him are being
included in my list of recommendations, which will
be forwarded as soon as possible.
The story of the attacks on Zeebnigge and
Ostend would be incomplete without a list of
the awards which were bestowed. We therefore
give below the names of the officers and men
who received the principal honours, the full
list of which were published in July and August
last: —
6. Aerial observation on the 9th May showed
that many torpedo and submarine craft were still
shut up in, Bruges, and proved that the effectiveness
of the blocking of the Zeebrugge branch of the canal
was maintained up to that date. Although the craft
so shut up in Bruges have been unable to use the small
waterways to Ostend, the latter port was still being
used by enemy torpedo craft and submarines.
I have, &c.,
ROGER KEYES,
Vice-Admiral, Dover Patrol,
7. Other information, confirmed by aerial observa-
tion, also disclosed the fact that to counterbalance
the forced inactivity of the craft in Bruges, and
probably to resist any repetition of the April attack,
a considerable number of German destroyers had
joined those units of the Flanders force which were
outside the canal on the night of the 22-23rd of that
mouth.
8. Commodore Hubert Lynes, C.M.G., at Dun-
kirk, having so ably carried out the direction of the
former attempt as part of the Zeebrugge and Ostend
scheme. I entrusted the conduct of the operations on
this occasion to him, placing under his orders all the
monitors, destroyers, motor launches, and coastal
motor boats required, in addition to tho blocking
ships Vindictive and Sappho. On the evening of the
9th May, the weather conditions being most promis-
ing, the Vindictive and Sappho sailed in company
to join Commodore Lynes at Dunkirk.
His report, which is attached, furnishes the details
of the operation.
9. In order to prevent interference from Zee-
brugge by the newly-arriYed enemy destroyer force
mentioned in paragraph 7, H.M.S. Warwick, flying
ray flag, and a division of destroyers consisting of
H.M. Ships Whirlwind, Velox, and Trident, under
Captain Wilfred Tomkinson, R.N., cruised midway
between Ostend and Zeebrugge.
10. Meanwhile the operation proceeded in accord-
ance with the plan, except for the unfortunate break-
down of the Sappho, due to a boiler accident, which
reduced her speed to such an extent that she was
unable to reach her destination in time to take part.
This halved the chances of success, and was a great
misfortune, ....
With regard to the proceedings of Vindictive,
1 cannot do better than quote from tho report of Lieu-
tenant Victor Crutchley, on whom the command
devolved when Commander Godsal was killed and
Lieutenant Sir John Alleyne seriously wounded: —
“ On arrival at Position P, course was altered for
the Stroom Bank Buoy. The boat marking the
buoy vas seen and left close on the port hand ;
the buoy was not seen. Speed was reduced to
twelve knots on passing the buoy.
Enclosure to Vice-Admiral, Dover, Letter No.
2305/003, dated 15th June, 1918.
(No. 053.)
Office of Commodore,
Dunkirk,
15 th May, 1918.
Snt,
I have the honour to forward the following
report on the operations for blocking Ostend Harbour,
carried out on the night of the 9th- 10th May, 1918.
2. It will be remembered that on the night of the
22nd-23rd April, when the forces under your command
so successfully achieved the blocking of the Zeebrugge-
Bruges Canal, the Western Squadron, under my
Command, was unsuccessful in its attack ; simul-
taneously delivered, and with the same object on
Ostend.
3. The failure on that occasion was due, firstly,
to the adverse shift of wind that blew all our Smoke
screens across the harbour entrance at the critical
moment, and secondly, to the displacement—-^whether
by design or chance on the enemy’s part—of the
Ostend Buoy, whose normal position had formed a
convenient departure point for the blockships.
4. Our lack of success was the fortune of war, not
the fault of anyone con< emed ; indeed, no one could
have carried out their duties more admirably than did
the Ostend forces that night, and I am deeply grateful
that, in recognition of this fact, you were so con-
siderate as to place the organization and leadership
of another attack in my hands.
5. In the first ojx-ration the blockships hail ad-
vanced under cover of a smoke screen, guided by the
lights and signals made by the small craft (C.M.B.’s
and M.L.’s) working close inshore. I decided to
adopt in general a similar plan tor the new attack,
but previous experience, and the necessity for
luniing that the enemy would make counters
eparations against an exactly similar attack,
(led for modification in detail.
6. In preparing for the new attack, particular
lention was paid to perfecting the navigational
fangements ; numerous small, but important, im-
bvements were introduced into the smoke gear, and
e alternatives for guiding the blockships into the
trance were made so numerous as to reduce chance
failure, in that respect, to the smallest possible
22. To return to Ostend. 2 a.m., i.e., Vindictive’s
programme time to arrive at the piers, was signalled
by a heavy cannonade of quick-firers and machine-
gun fire near the entrance. The enemy had now
almost certainly realized the nature of the attack, and
since the smoke screens and fog prevented him aiming
at definite objectives, except when the small craft
ran close alongside to fire torpedoes at, or engage, the
Sier-heads with their machine gnus, he concentrated
is effort in a continuous barrage fire across the en-
trance from the whole of the exceedingly formidable
array of batteries in the neighbourhood of Ostend.
23. For the next 20 minutes, the critical period
during which Vindictive must succeed or fail, the off-
shore destroyer forces were ordered to fire star shell
over the entrance, and shell at the enemy’s batteries
—the former to light up the pierheads for Vindictive,
and the latter to divert the enemy’s attention further
seaward. This firing was useful ; the inshore forces
were encouraged by having audible proof of our
support close behind them, and the enemy diverted
a small proportion of bis fire. Very few shells came
near us, however, either at this time or later; there
were no casualties either to material or personnel
among the off-shore forces. X attribute this mainly
to the fog and smoke screens.
24. Meanwhile, Vindictive, after passing our
calcic-phosphide buoy, had arrived “on time ” at
where she expected to find the entrance. The fog,
and apparently also some of the smoko borne on an
easterly draught of air (the result of wind impinging
on the tall houses on the sea front), had reduced
the seashore visibility to two or three hundred yards
at the most, and nothing could be seen.
• Vindictive accordingly reduced speed, turned about,
and searched to the westward. Still finding nothing,
she again turned about, steering slowly eastward,
and gave the “ last resort ” signal to her C.M.B. escort.
This signal was obeyed by lighting a million candle-
power flare close inshore to the westward of tl,«
entrance. In most circumstances, the illumination
of the whole sea front by this intense! brilliant flare
would probably have brought very heavy casualties
to the inshore craft and Vindictive herself, through
placing them under accurate gunfire, but on this
occasion the fog, hitherto our enemy, now proved our _, , .•»„». ,7 „r .? r-,
friend, for while the Hare showed Vindictive the piers, ■ htS Space IS placed at the disposal Of the Dover
the small craft still remained ill-defined or invisible, n.t Wnr Fund free 0/
ZEEBRUGGE AND OSTEND.
April 22-23, 1918.
THE VICTORIA CROSS.
Capt. A. F. B. Carpenter, R.N. (Vindictive).
Lieut. R. D. Sandford, R.N. (Submarine 03).
Lieut. P. T. Dean, R.N.V.R. (M.L. 282).
Capt. E. Ram ford, D. 5.0., R.M.L.I. (Storming Party).
Sgt. N. A. Finch, R.M.A. (Vindictive).
Able Seaman A. E. McKenzie (Storming Party).
Comdre. H. Ltnes, C.M.G., R.N. (Dunkirk).
Capt. W. Tomkinson, R.N.
Capt. R. Collins, R.N.
Maj. B. G. Weller, D. 5.0., R.M.L.I.
C.M.G.
Comdre. the Hon. A. D. E. H. Boyle, 0.8., M.\. J.,
R.N.
Capt. H. P. Douglas, R.N.
DISTINGUISHED SERVICE ORDER.
Com. E. O. R. S. Osborne, R.N.
Com. A. E. Godsal, R.N. (killed) (Brilliant).
Lieut.-Com. K. C. Helyar, R.N. (North Star).
Engr.-Lieut.-Com. R. C. Boddik, R.N. (Thetis).
Lieut.-Com. K. R. Hoare, D. 5.0., R.N.V.R. (M.L.).
Lieut. H. G. Campbell, R.N. (Daffodil).
Lieut. S. S. Bonham-Caktbr, R.N. (Intrepid).
Lieut. C. O. Dickinson, R.N. (Demolition party),
Lieut. O. Henderson, R.N. (Iris II.).
Lieut. A. K. P. Welman, D.S.C., R.N.
Lieut. J. O. Annesley, R.N.
! Lieut. E. W. Billyard-Lkake, R.N. (Iphigenia),
Surgeon F. P. Pocook, M. 0., R.N, (Iris It.).
Lieut. J. Howbll-Pricb, D. 5.0., R.N.R. (Sub-
marine C 3).
Lieut. B. Bourke, R.N.V.R.
(Continued at foot of next column.)
°i^scst^ran^ a * ' b ’ debned or Palro[ War Memorial Fund free oj charge.
25. Vindictive now became clearly visible to the
enemy's batteries, who concentrated all efforts on
her, but she had only two hundred yards to go,
and Commander Godsal immediately turned up for
the entrance. r ■"’*
Communication between the conning tower and I <| I I*l 1
the after control soon failed, and, the entrance being I /A I [A f \ Q/2I \1 f[A I '■'v I H/All 7 v-%
passed. Commander Godsal went outside the conning LA lV_/Ovy W 1 i O 1 L I \ I \ } W I
tower and gave the necessary orders for placing tho w ' 1 *
their lives in guarding the
Gateway of the Channel.
THE DOVER PATROL MEMORIAL
We learn from the Official Dispatches published in to-day’s
issue of The Times that the preparations and training for the
attack upon Zeebrugge subjected the Dover Patrol to an excep-
tional strain owing to the unprecedented transport of reinforce-
ments to France.
In this stirring record Vice-Admiral Sir Roger Keyes informs us
that in order, to bring together the number of destroyers requisite
for the Zeebrugge operation, while still maintaining the work .
of the Patrol, it wf*s necessary to have the entire available force in
running order. This additional call upon the services of the
Dover Patrol came at a time when very heavy demands were < r—
being made on the escort flotilla by the pressing needs of the A rmy ▼
in France. That these demands were completely met without
deranging its regular routine work reflects the greatest credit, says
Admiral Keyes, on those responsible for the organization of .the
Dover Patrol.
What was this regular routine work?
For four long years, by day and by night, in all weathers, the
Dover Patrol had to face the menace of mines and sub-
marines in keeping open for our Armies the King’s
Highway across the Narrow Seas and to guard it from
sudden attack by the enemy.
To assist the Zeebrugge enterprise by every means in their power
was but one of the incidents in their long, long trail of duty. The
daring episode on St. George’s day adds, as a matter of fact,
only one more page to the thrilling records of the Trawlers and
Drifters, of the “ Broke,” of the “ Swift,” and of many heroic
acts still fresh in the nation’s memory.
The story now revealed in full in the Dispatches published to-day
will enable every one to realize better than before the great debt
of gratitude the country owes to the heroes of the Dover Patrol.
In their gallantry these men have not only emulated, but have
surpassed the efforts of their forefathers in encountering, with
dauntless courage, dangers and difficulties unknown in Nelson’s
days. , . .
“ Without detracting,” writes Admiral Sims, “in the slightest from
the Work of our gallant armies, history must show that the successful
outcome of this struggle would not have been possible had it not been
for the splendid devotion to duty and self-sacrifice of the British
Navy , and the Dover Patrql fias played a most important part in
the work of the Navy.”
Britons must never forget what they owe to these gallant seamen—many hundreds
of whom have made the great sacrifice—for performing silently, out of sight of and
almost unknown to the public, their dangerous and incessant vigil. How great
our debt to them is as yet but dimly realized. Nevertheless it was only by their
untiring activity and chivalrous devotion to duty that our troops were able to pass
to and fro across the Straits of Dover with comparative immunity. Out of 125,000
vessels escorted through the Straits only 73 were lost !
These men and their deeds are worthy of remembrance, and the idea of erecting
on the cliffs of Dover a suitable monument to the heroes of the Dover Patrol who
gave their lives in their country’s service will surely receive a widespread response.
The DOVER PATROL WAR MEMORIAL FUND is being
raised with the following objects:—
(1) To erect a Memorial on the cliffs of Dover, riot only to the men of the Dover
Patrol, but to the glorious British seamen who lost their lives at Zeebrugge last year.
(2) To erect a Memorial on the French side of the Channel, somewhere near Cape
Grisnez, to the memory of the French sailors who shared in the perils of their
British comrades.
(3) To erect a Memorial in America as a tribute to the part played by the American
naval forces, from their “ Comrades of the Mist.”
(4) To erect in Dover a Hostel for the use of Sailors.
It has been suggested that if every officer and private and every civilian would send
a small contribution for every safe journey he has made across the Channel during the
War a large sum of money would be realized sufficient to enable the Committee to
carry out the above objects.
The Dispatches published to-day speak of the greatness and splendour of the work
of the Dover Patrol and of the heroes of Zeebrugge and Ostend. May this wondrous
chapter in our rough island’s story move many also who have lived at home in safety
during the war to send a contribution to the Memorial Fund addressed to
THE MAYOR,
TOWN HALL,
DOVER,
who will acknowledge all subscriptions in due course in the Press.
Lieut. H. A. Littleton. R.N.V.R. OSTEND.
Capt. A. R. Chatbb, R.M.L.I. (Man 9-10 1918 1
Capt. R. A. D. Brooks, R.M.A. (Vindictive). rp TT ,, VtptorA run
Rev. C. J. E. Pbshall, R.N. (Vindictive). , THE VICTORIA CRO
THE VICTORIA CROSS.
XVC v . V/» o i I'/ ■ X CiOlinGG, l»il'i \ ■ UIUIVVi » , /a _
Lieut. T. F. V. Oooke, R.M.L.I. Lieut.-Com. G. H. Drummond, R.N.V.R. (M.L. 254).
dip rp/i THT ,, n o n Lieut.-Com. R. Bourke, D. 5.0., R.N.V.R. (M.L. 275).
BAR CO IHE U.S.O. Lieut. V. A. C. Crutchley, D.S.C., R.N. (Vindictive).
Xllx-UVa f • XX* *-<• vnu I VUilCi I j X/ilXiVij IVirtl ( T lIIUIUOI >L /,
Lieut. F. C- Harrison, D. 5.0., R.N. B
DISTINGUISHED SERVICE CROSS. Capt. I. Hamilton Benn, D. 5.0., M.P., R.N.V.R.
Lieut. P. J. Lambert, R.N. (Thetis). (M.L. 105).
Lieut. V. A. C. Crutchley. R.N. (Brilliant). C.M.G.
Lieut. A. Cory-Wright, R.N. (Intrepid). Capt. E. Wigram, D. 5.0., R.N. (Prince Eugene).
Lieut. C. F. B. Bowiby, R.N. DISTINGUISHED SERVICE ORDER.
Lieut. P. E. Vaux, R.N. (Iphicrenia). r
Lieut. G. D. Belbbn, R.N. (Thetis). J*; S< il P ' n v'if inn
Engr.-Lieut. W. Long, R.N. (Brilliant). £°“- W. W. Watson, R.N.V.R. (M.L.JOe).
Engr.-Lieut. W. R. McLaren, R.N. (.Sirius). ffg 1 ; £ om - , A - K ' X r , ( v'v o at’i
Surgeon W. L. Clegg, R.N. (Vindictive). Lient.-Corn. J. L. Mikvii.i.i, R.N.V .U. (M.L. -SO)
Lieut. L. J. Lee, R.N.V.R. Luiit.-t-oin. A. O. Watts, R.N.V.R. (M.L. 2.59)
Lieut. J. C. K. Wright, R.N.V.fc. (M.L. 282). Lu-ut.-Com. R. Saundirs, R.N.V.R. (M.L. 128 .
Lieut. J. W. Robinson, R.N.V.R. (M.L. 424). Lieut...Mu J. M. Alleyn k, lit., D.S.C. , R.N. (Vm-
Lieut. A. G. BAOOT, R.N.V.R. (M.L. 283). dutive).
Lieut. G. F. Bowen. R.N.V.R. (M.L. 110). T . , n J' tA p ™ THE T PA° A .,
Lieut. M. S. Kirkwood, R.N.V.R. Ik yll,AKl: ’ DS O ‘ DS L “ A M
Lieut. H. V. Rogers, R.N.R. (Daffodil). R.N.y.R.
Sub-Lieut. C. R. L. Outpwaite, R.N.V.R. Lieut. A. L. I. VVi i.man, D.S.O. D.S.C R.N.
Mate (E.) S. G. West, R.N. (Iphigenia). Lieut. A. Dayrell-Ri mi, Dy 8.0., R.N.R.
Lieut. C. R. W. Lamplouoh, R.M.L.I. (storming DISTINGUISHED SERVICE CROSS.
party). Lieut. R. H. Mcßean, R.N.
Lieut. O. UNDF.RHILL, R.M.L.I. (storming party). Lieut. W. H. Bremner, R.N-
Sub-Lient. P. B. Clarke, R.N.R. Lieut. A. L. Poland, R.N.
Sub-Lieut. L. R. Blake, R.N.R. Lieut. R. Procter, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. A. V. Knight, R.N.R. (Sirius). Lieut. A. C. Mackie, R.N.V.R. (M.L. 279).
Gunner (T.) T. W. Galletly, R.N. (North Star). Lieut. P. F. Brayfield, R.N.V.R. (M.L. 128).
Art. Engi-. W. M. Sutton, R.N. (Daffodil). Lieut. A. L. Gkddes, R.N.V.R. (M.L. 553).
Act. Art. Engr. W. H. Edgar, R.A.N. (Iris II.) Sub-Lieut. G. R. Shaw, R.N.R.
Sgt.-Maj.'C. J. Thatcher, R.M.L.I. Sub-Lieut. J. Petrie, R.N.V.R. (M.L. 276).
BAR TO THE D.S.O, BAB TO THE D.S.C.
Lieut, B. L, Berthon, D. 5.0., R.N. (Sirius). Lieut, the Hon. O. E. H. Spencer, D.S.C., R.S,
Sub-Lieut. M. C. H. Lloyd, D. 5.0., R.N. (Iphigenia). Lieut. C. F. B. Bowlby, D.S.C., R.N.
DISTINGUISH!?!) SERVICE CROSS.
