

The REAL “ARMAGEDDON”
BATTLE OF ARMAGEDDON, to be fought around Jerusalem, at THE
SECOND COMING OF CHRIST, when He comes to reign over this earth.
The Saints who have been previously caught up, now return with Christ,
and the Armies of the Apostate and rebellious nations are destroyed. Read
Revelations xvii.: 12-14, Rev. xix.: 11-21, and Zechariah xiv.; Chap.




PRIVATE NORMAN SMITH, 49th Battalion, A.I.F
His King and Country called him.
The call was not in vain.
On Britain’s Roll of Honour
You’D find this Hero’s name.
Until the Easter glory lights the skies.
Until the dead in Jesus shall arise
And He shall come and call us to the sky,.
Goodnight, Goodnight, Goodnight.




THE REA
ARMAGEDDON
GEORGE DAVIDSON SMITH.
AUTHOR OF
■‘CHRIST’S SECOND COMING IS AT HAND.”




PREFACE.
1 DEDICATE this little book to the memory of
our dear son, Norman. It was on Saturday
afternoon, June 12, 1915, that Norman came
into the study and said, in his bright and cheery
manner: “Dad, I am going into Mackay this after-
noon to volunteer for the front.”
This was the first I had heard of it. I asked
him if he had thought the matter well over, and
he said “Yes.” I said I would not stand in his
way, because men were wanted. I was finishing
an address for a memorial service to be held next
day (Sabbath, June 13th) in memory of Private
Neil McGregor, a Walkerston lad, who was killed
at the Dardanelles, and in that address I referred
to the fact that men were wanted to help to crush
the German military power, and here was my own
boy, before that address was delivered, who had
made up his mind to go, for God, and King, and
country. I told his mother what he had said, and,
although it was a great trial to us, he was so
young, a lad of eighteen years, she also gave her
consent, and so on Tuesday morning, June 22nd,
he sailed from Mackay to enter camp at Brisbane.
We were up early that morning, about 3.30 a.m.,
and after breakfast we had family worship, as has
always been our custom, commending our boy to
the care of our Heavenly Father, and our Saviour
Jesus Christ, and I drove him into Mackay to catch
the tender at 6 a.m.


It was a clear, starry morning, and a wonderful
sight was witnessed by us as we were driving be-
tween Palms and TeKowai. A ball of fire, large
in size, came from the sky behind us. I thought
at first it was a motor-car behind us that was
throwing its light around us so brightly, but on
looking behind we saw a beautiful sight, a ball of
light coming from the sky from west to east, to-
wards the ground, and coming straight towards
us, so straight that I actually drove to the side of
the road to let it pass, but it broke up before it
reached us. Norman came home for final leave on
Thursday, September 2nd, and left again on Sab-
bath, September 12th. This was our final parting
with him. His brother ,George, and I drove with
him into Mackay, and bade him a last farewell, and
he went on board the little motor-boat that takes
the passengers to Flat Top to meet the coastal
steamers. He sailed for Egypt on Tuesday, Octo-
ber sth, 1915. After being in several of the dif-
ferent camps in Egypt, he arrived in France on
June 11th, 1916. When in Egypt he and some
companions visited the Pyramids, and climbed to
the top of “Cheops,” the Great Pyramid. He was
a splendid correspondent, writing home very re-
gularly, and also writing to several friends in
Queensland, and to relatives in the Old Land. He
sent home some beautiful mementoes from Egypt,
“The Pyramids,” “The Photos of the Allied
Rulers,” “The Allied Flags,” some of them
painted, some of them in silk, and a beautiful silk
table centre, with these words on it: “Remember
me until we meet again.”
He sent a cable stating he had arrived in France,
also a cable after he had been in a battle, saying,
“Been in action; all is well.” He was reported
“missing” in France from September sth, 1916.
His last letters were written on August 24th, and
25th, 1916. He was very musical, and could play
the organ when quite a lad. When on The Downs


he used to go with me to several places, sometimes
to lead the singing, sometimes to play the organ.
He decided for Christ when quite young, and was
received into the Fellowship of the Walkeiston
Presbyterian congregation on August 23rd, 1914,
along with his brother, George, and nine others, on
Confession of Faith in Christ. When he sailed on
active service he wrote home, and said that fiom
his wages we could pay for his two sisters to be
taught music. The following extracts from his
letters will be read with interest. Writing from
Egypt on January 16th, 1916, he said: ‘ Don t be
anxious about me, as I am secure in the knowledge
that God will keep me from all evil. I have had
my trials and temptations that I would never have
dreamt about if I was at home. This will be a
great experience for me in the ways of the world.
Writing from Egypt on January 19th, he said:
“On Sunday night I went to a service in the
American Mission Hall in Heliopolis. About 7
p.m. they started singing, and continued until the
minister came. It was easily the best service I
have been at since I left Australia. The text was
“The wages of sin is death.”
The minister went on to say that there were a
lot of us soldiers disappointed at having to stay
over here so long, and having to wait a long time
before we could get into the fight. But, he said,
there is a far worse war taking place amongst our-
selves here, the war between the Devil and God.
The minister was a fine speaker, and he held his
audience spellbound during his sermon. When
the last hymn was given the men seemed to let
themselves go, and it was fine to hear them sing-
ing “God be with you till we meet again.” It was
the first time I have been to that hall, and every
Sunday night will see me there if at all possible.
It was just like as if one had been shifted clean out
of this world of sin and into His Presence.” Writ-
ing from Egypt on January 25th, he says: “On


Sunday night 1 went to the American Mission for
the service. While I was there a couple of Scotch-
men came in, and they were both Christians. They
are in the R.A.M.C., and have been in the Penin-
sula since June.” On January 29th he wrote: “I
went to a Bible Class last Tuesday night at the
minister’s residence at Heliopolis. I went to the
American Mission to get my new friends, and then
we all went round together. There were about 40
present. The subject was the 3rd, 4th, and sth
chapters of Timothy. There was a good discussion
after the meeting. One chap got up and started
something like this: ‘Well, you know/ he said, T
think that all this talk about being saved is all
humbug. I think we are only in a state of salva-
tion till we get called out of this world, then we
receive our awards, etc/ He was very keen on the
word ‘awards/ One of my mates got up and said:
To you believe in the Bible?’ The chap looked a
bit flurried at this bit of straight questioning, but
he said Wes.’ My mate then said: Tt is no good
of you trying to tell me, for instance, that I am not
saved, because I know as surely as I am here now
that I am/ and he quoted numerous passages of
Scripture to that effect. No. 1 was glad to back
out of it before my friend had finished. My new
friend’s name is Mr. A. Paton, and his home ad-
dress is 39 Montague Street, Edinburgh.” Writ-
ing from France on July Ist, 1916, he said. “I sup-
pose we will be in action before very long now. I
hope I will return safe and sound when our turn
does come, but we can only trust in God, and praj
that He will strengthen us if the worst does
happen.” Writing from France on August 24th.
he said in a postscript at the end of his letter: “I
was not sure when I was writing this if we would
be allowed to tell you that we had been in action,
but it seems that we can. Well, I came out all
right, only feeling a bit dirty, but they gave us a
hot bath and a clean shirt, and we felt a lot
fresher.”


Writing to Mrs. G. Swan, Mirani, from France,
on August 24th, one of the last letters he wrote,
he had at the close of his letter, St. John 10th, 27-
28. Those verses read: “My sheep hear My voice,
and I know them, and they follow Me. And I give
unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish;
neither shall any man pluck them out of My
hand.” Although no official word has been re-
ceived up till now, except “Missing,” the following
letters from soldiers at the front seem to indicate
that he has made the supreme sacrifice.
In a letter which Lieut. R. Tambling wrote to
his parents at Pratten, he said that “Pratten and
Thane’s Creek may consider themselves honoured
as Privates Norman Smith and Charles Clarkson
have been selected for work on the Lewis machine
guns, a task for which only the best men are
chosen.” Later, in a letter, Lieut. Tambling wrote:
“I am sorry to say that one of our Pratten boys
was killed in a very strenuous battle about a fort-
night ago. It was Norman Smith, who was a
grand lad. Pie was a bomber, and was doing well,
having gone through three nights and two days of
the fighting. We were very sorry to lose him.”
Lance-Corporal W .H. Geeves, a member of the
same battalion, in a letter to Mr. and Mrs. G. Swan,
Mirani, wrote: “Since receiving your letter I have
been in several hot engagements, but the last one
was the worst. It was in this one that Norman
Smith, of Walkerson, was killed. Poor Norman
was killed by a shell as we were advancing over
the German lines about 5 a.m. on September 3rd.”
Corporal Charles Clarkson wrote to us, saying:
“1 am sorry to have to write and let you know that
your son, Norman, is missing, and believed killed.
It would be cruel to give you any hope, unless you
have got word from him wounded somewhere, for
the bombers he volunteered to help told me a very
big shell burst alongside him. As soon as I had
a chance I made inquiries, as did some other mates


of his, and they all deplore his loss, and wish me
to convey to you their deepest sympathy, for he
had gained their admiration by his lofty principle
and high courage, even after two days of heavy
shelling. I was alongside him when we charged,
and for a few hours after, and I must say he was
among the few who could talk cheerfully of our
future stay in the trench/’
In another letter received from Corporal Clark-
son, written in France, on April 9th, 1917, he says:
“Mr. Smith: Dear Sir, —I received your letter
dated January 4th, acknowledging my letter of
October, in which I told you the sad news of Nor-
man’s death, and I am proud of the manner in
which you have taken it, for it is the hope of all
us soldiers that if our parents have ever to receive
like news that they will take it in the same manner.
I will give you all the particulars that I can. I
would have, but the censors would have cut it out,
but seeing that it occurred some time ago, I do not
think that they will now. I was with Norman at
Pozieres, which is the time that he mentioned in
writing to you. He carried himself through it in
a cheerful manner, which made a very good im-
pression on his mates, for many men were badly
shaken as the result of the very heavy shelling
which we received. It was in the next turn in the
trenches, in which we made an attack and cap-
tured two lines of Hun trenches at Moquet Farm,
that he got killed. We advanced early in the morn-
ing of September 3rd, and I went into a shell-hole
in front of the second line, where Norman and
some other of his mates came shortly after. They
had been bombing on my left. During the day
he proved very good, not being backward, but
rather inclining to recklessness in getting a shot at
the enemy. He did good work that evening in
stopping the enemy in his counter-attacks. Jt
was on the evening of September 4th that he got
killed. The 52nd Battalion got most of their


bombers killed, and sent round to us, asking for
bombers. Norman volunteered, and went round,
where he got killed just before dark, on September
4th. I was with him till dark on the 3rd, but got
shifted to where one of our guns got knocked out.
Death did not find him unprepared, for when re-
monstrated with for recklessness, his answer was,
‘What matter; this is my last fight.’ Though
when he got killed he was not exposed, but having
a rest in as safe a place in the trench as it was pos-
sible to get, so one of the 52nd told me. It is a
curious thing, but true, that many men who are of
a sensitive or feeling nature know when death is
coming for them. Most of our very best men in the
battalion knew when their turn had come, and met
it (as did sNorman, for he was in their class) un-
flinchingly, as true soldiers should/’
Such are the letters from his comrades. On Aug-
ust 25th, 1917, we received the official word that
Norman was now reported killed in action, and
conveying the deep sympathy of the King and
Queen and Commonwealth Government.
We, who believe in Jesus Christ, know from the
Scriptures that when Jesus comes into the air the
dead in Christ shall rise first, and the living be-
lievers shall be changed, and all caught up together
to meet the Lord in the air.
Oh, happy day when we shall meet our loved ones
in the air, in the Presence of our Loving Saviour,
and be for ever with the Lord.
GEORGE DAVIDSON SMITH.
The Manse, Walkerston, Queensland.


THE REAL ARMAGEDDON.
This great European war is not the real Arma-
geddon. It is well for us to go to the Holy Scrip-
tures and find out what information we get there
about the real Armageddon. In the books of
Daniel and the Revelation we are informed that the
Roman Empire must be revived, and in it there will
be ten kingdoms. This ten-kingdomed division of
the Roman Empire has never yet taken place. But
I believe this present great European war will bring
that about. Then, after the ten kingdoms have
arisen a little horn, or king, arises after the ten.
This little horn is the “coming Roman Prince.”
There will then be eleven horns, or kings, when
he arises. Then he subdues three kings. That will
leave only eight. Those three periods of the history
of the Roman Empire, all yet future, are given in
Daniel.
In the first it has ten horns. In the second it has
eleven horns, for the little horn comes up among
the ten. In the third it has but eight horns, for the
eleventh has grown in power, and three of the ten
have been torn away by it. Up to this point
Daniel’s vision represents the beast merely as the
fourth kingdom upon earth, the Roman Empire as
revived in the future, and then, the vision turns
away from the history of the beast to describe the
action of the little horn (the Roman Emperor) as a
blasphemer and persecutor.
And so those three stages of the Roman Empire
take place before we reach the final stage, as re-
vealed in the 13th chapter of Revelation.
There we have revealed the fourth, and final,
form, of the revived Roman Empire. It is no
longer a confederacy of nations ,bound together by


treaty with a Napoleon rising up amongst them, and
struggling for supremacy, but a confederacy of ten
kings, who are the servants of one great Emperor.
These have one mind, and shall agree to give their
power and strength unto the Emperor until the
words of God shall be fulfilled (Rev. 17: 13 and 17).
This fourth and final form of the revived Roman
Empire only lasts for 42 months. That is, it takes
place in the midst of Daniel’s 70th week, which is
also the point of time that the great tribulation
begins.
Daniel’s 70th week, the last 7 years of this age, is
fully explained in my book, “Christ’s Second Com-
ing is at Hand,” and is the key to the true under-
standing of the prophecies.
The restoration of the Tews to Palestine is the
first necessity for the arrangement of the situation
to suit the prophecies. The whole prophetic future
depends upon that fact.
This will be the great political event of the cen-
turies, and one which will attract universal atten-
tion.
Isaiah 18 and 1, reads, “Ho, to the land.”
Attention is called to a great maritime Power,
which for the first time in history takes up the cause
of the Jew. The name of this great Power is not
stated, but the characteristics are given, which seem
to apply to Great Britain. But whenever and by
whomsoever the return of the Jews is effected, the
result will be to change the whole political govern-
ment of the world.
The coming Roman Prince, that is, an Italian
Prince is the man who is going to sign a covenant,
or treaty, with the mass of the Jews for seven
years. That day that he signs that covenant is the
beginning of Daniel’s 70th week, the closing seven
years of this dispensation.
He breaks his covenant in the middle of the seven
years, when 3J4 years have passed, and at the same
time his image is set up in the Temple in Jerusalem


to be worshipped, and then The Great Tribulation
sweeps through the land. So there will be the ten
kingdoms in the old Roman Empire, the Roman
Prince arising after the ten, the restoration of the
Jews to their own land, the land of Palestine, and
The Great Tribulation, all before “The Real Arma-
geddon” takes place.
Let us read Revelation 16th, verses 13-16: And I
saw three unclean spirits, like frogs, come out of
the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of
the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet,
for they are the spirits of demons, working miracles,
which go forth unto the kings of the earth, and of
the whole world, to gather them to the battle of
that great day of God Almighty. (Behold, I come
as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth.) And he
gathered them together into a place called in the
Hebrew tongue Armageddon. Armageddon is a
name that is found but once in the Scriptures, and
this once in the portion we have read. Armageddon
is a large plain of triangular shape a few miles from
Jerusalem, about 14 miles on the north bounded by
the hills of Galilee, about 18 or 20 miles on the east,
bounded by the hills below Nazareth, and about
20 miles on the south-west, bounded by the High-
lands of Samaria. Thus it is a vast plain, very suit-
able for the manoeuvring of large armies. Many
a battle has been fought upon this plain. It is called
in the Old Testament the Valley of Megiddo, the
Plain of Jezreel, and the Plain of Esdraedon. Here
it was that the beloved Jonathan and his father,
King Saul, fell; here it was Josiah received his
deadly wound; here it was Gideon defeated the host
of the Midianities; here it was Elijah slew the pro-
phets of Baal.
The plain of Armageddon has long been famous
as the scene of many ancient conflicts. And the
Plain of Armageddon is to be the place where the
nations of the earth are to meet; where the final
battle is to be fought at the close of this dispensa-


tion, when Christ comes as King of Kings, to estab-
lish His kingdom, from sea to sea, and from the
river unto the ends of the earth.
The three miracle-working spirits of demons will
gather the kings of the earth ,and of the whole
world, with the flower of their armies, to this famous
battle-field of Armageddon. It seems that the
whole world will at that time be in a state of war.
The Jews will be back in the land of Palestine, and
the Anti-Christ will have appeared amongst them,
claiming to be their true Messiah ,but he is Satan's
man, and works miracles by satanic power. The
great mass of the Jews will believe the Anti-Christ,
and his lying wonders. The Roman Emperor will
in the middle of the seven years become energised
by Satan, and the Anti-Christ, and he will force
idolatry upon the people, and compel the people to
worship them or be put to death. The believing
remnant in Jerusalem, instructed by our Saviour’s
warning, will flee when the Emperor’s image is set
up to be worshipped.
But the great mass of unbelieving Jews and Gen-
tiles will worship the image, and believe the lying
wonders of the Anti-Christ. Because they received
not the love of the truth, that they might be saved,
for this cause God shall send them strong delusion,
and they will believe the lie, and worship the Em-
peror, and his image, and the Anti-Christ, and the
Dragon (Satan) that gave power unto the Em-
peror. That is what Satan has always wanted, to
be worshipped, and he tried our Saviour to worship
him, but Christ overcame Satan. But at the close
of this age unbelievers will actually worship Satan.
Those who would not receive Christ will be led so
far away from God that they will worship Satan.
They worshipped the Dragon (Satan), which gave
power unto the Emperor.
Oh, the darkness that lies before those lands that
have had the Bible all those years. Oh, the sad-
ness of it all. Can we imagine in this Day of Grace


that the nations of civilised and Christianised
Europe will so depart from the True God, and the
True Christ that they will worship the very Dragon
(Satan) himself? The spread of spiritualism, or as
it should be called, spiritism is simply paying the
way for what will actually take place later on, the
worship of Satan. Truly, darkness will cover the
earth, and gross darkness the people. Such will be
the state of the nations morally and spiritually when
Christ comes at Armageddon to clear this earth of
the enemies of God, and the servants of Satan.
No doubt the second coming of Christ as King of
the whole world will be widely made known by the
believing remnant of the Jews, who will be scattered
everywhere fleeing from Jerusalem when the image
is set up, and they will go forth preaching the Gos-
pel of the Kingdom, principally to the heathen na-
tions. There will be no offer of an earthly kingdom
to those nations who heard the Gospel of God’s
Grace, and refused the Heavenly Kingdom. And so
the ten kings of the Roman Empire and their Em-
peror, these shall make war with the Lamb (Christ)
and the Lamb shall overcome them for He is Lord
of lords, and King of kings. And I saw the beast,
and the kings of the earth, and their armies gathered
together to make war against Christ, and against
His Army. (Rev. 19 and 19). Six of the vials ot
God’s wrath are poured out upon the earth before
this great gathering of the armies of the earth meet
at Armageddon. The first Angel pours out his vial
upon the earth, and there fell a noisome and grie-
vious sore upon the men who had the mark of the
beast, and upon them who worshipped his image.
The next two vials turn the sea, and rivers, and
fountains of water into blood. The fourth vial
causes the sun to burn men with great heat. The
fifth vial causes darkness all over the ten kingdoms,
and after all the plagues have been poured out we
read: the people blasphemed the name of God, and
repented not of their deeds. And the sixth vial was


poured out and the great river Euphrates was dried
up, that the way of the kings from the rising of the
sun (that is from the East) might be prepared. Just
a few words about the great river Euphrates. This
celebrated river is the largest in Western Asia, and
figures largely in history and prophecy. It is first
named in Genesis, chapter two, and last mentioned
in Rev. 16 and 12. Its entire length from its rise
in the Armenian mountains to the Persian Gulf is
about 1,780 miles. The Euphrates formed the
Eastern boundary of the Roman Empire and it will
be the Eastern boundary of enlarged Palestine in
the future. The Lord made a covenant with Abra-
ham, saying, “Unto thy seed have I given this
land from the river of Egypt (the Nile) unto the
great river Euphrates.” It has ever stood as a geo-
graphical barrier, a natural separating bulwark be-
tween the West and the East. The sixth vial is
poured out upon this great river, and it is dried up.
The barrier is removed by this act of judgment, so
that the Eastern nations can more readily pour
their armies into Palestine.
It is between the pouring out of the sixth and
seventh vial that those spirits of demons go forth
unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world
to gather them to the battle of Armageddon.
And so from all parts of the compass there will
gather the greatest armies the world has ever wit-
nessed on the plain of Armageddon. Between the
pouring out of the sixth vial and the seventh vial,
there is this warning: “Behold, I come as aa thief.”
The kings and peoples gathered by satanic agency,
shall in the moment of apparent success, and vic-
tory, be suddenly surprised by the coming of
Christ in Glory. The whole world will be asleep
in midnight moral darkness, when suddenly the
Lord Himself bursts in upon the scene, unexpec-
tedly, as a thief in the night. God is about to set
His King on Mount Zion so the might of the whole
habitable earth is gathered to try and defeat the


Divine purpose. It is a universal gathering of the
powers. A trinity of evil is employed to effect the
gathering together of the kings of the earth. Satan,
the Roman Emperor, and the Antichrist, are the
three, who work together to bring; about this ga-
thering of the nations. This trinity of evil ,in-
fluence by word, and sign, and miracle, the peoples
of the earth to lure them on, against God, and
against Jesus Christ. .
Then truly it will have come to pass that the
heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing,
the kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers
take counsel together against the Lord, and against
His Anointed, saying, “Let us break their
asunder and cast away their cords from us.” But
He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh, the Lord
shall have them in derision. Then shall He speak
to them in His wrath and vex them in His sore dis-
pleasure. At length the moment of decisive
struggle arrives. The time has come for Christ to
bruise the serpent’s head. Here at last we have
Anti-Christ standing up against Christ, the creature
against his Creator, man against God. Having so
easily conquered the servants of God, they at last
exclaim regarding the Son of God, this is the Heir,
come let us kill Him and seize His inheritance.
Their daring is stimulated afresh by the miracles
and appeals of the Anti-Christ who assures them of
certain victory. The signal for the contest is now
given, the seventh angel pours out his vial into the
air, a noise like the crash of ten thousand thunders,
rolls throughout the skies, and a great earthquake
such as was not since men were upon the earth, so
mighty an earthquake and so great, shakes the earth
and the cities of the nations fall. The seats and
centres of Gentile commerce are involved in the
o-eneral ruin which overtakes all human combina-
o
tions.
And there will fall upon men a great hail out
of heaven, every stone about the weight of a talent.


The Jewish talent was about 125 lbs. and intimates
the crushing overwhelming character of the visita-
tion. But the most terrible scene in the awful
catastrophe is now ushered in. Heaven itself is
opened.
Behold a white horse, and upon it is seated the
Son of God. His eyes are as a flame of fire, and on
His head are many crowns. He is clothed in a ves-
ture dipped in blood. The armies in heaven follow
Him. They are mounted upon white horses, and
clothed in fine linen, white and clean. Christ comes
to tread the winepress of the fierceness, and wrath
of God. And He hath on His vesture and on His
thigh, a name written, King of kings, and Lord of
lords. The special scene before us is one of sur-
passing interest. We have here Christ, the War-
rior King, great in victorious all conquering power.
Before Christ as here described, the hosts of earth
shall quail, but that sight of sights, is a gladdening
one to the Jewish Saints who are upon the earth at
that time, the King and Judge is their Everlasting
Friend. An Angel is seen standing in the sun.. He
stands where he can be seen by all, and from where
he can survey the whole scene of conflict. He
speaks, His message is addressed to the fowls that
fly in the midst of heaven.
Come and gather yourselves together unto the
supper of the Great God. This great supper is of
the dead. Kings, captains, mighty men, horses and
their riders, free and bond, small and great. At
Armageddon will be witnessed the most gigantic
confederation of kings and peoples ever beheld. No
Caesar, or iNapoleon could bring about such a vast
combination, and for such a purpose as we have
here.
Satan is behind the movement. It is a sad and
dark picture to think that the nations of Europe,
and_ even of a wider area, once enlighened and
christianised will be so deluded by Satan that the>
will actually go out and in open rebellion attempt


to fight against the King of kings and Lord of
lords. What madness, what folly.
The sovereignty of the earth is the question of
that day, whether Satan, and the Roman Emperor,
and the Anti-Christ, are going to rule, or whether
Christ, the King of Glory, and the Saints are going
to rule. It will be the decisive battle of the ages,
and the overthrow of the powers of evil and of the
apostate nations, and the establishment of the
World Wide Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ.
• - Two of the wickedest men that ever lived upon
this earth, the coming Roman Emperor, and the
Anti-Christ, they will be the leaders in this great
rebellion against God, and they will be taken ,and
cast alive into the lake of fire. Two men of
God, Enoch and Elijah, were taken up to heaven
without dying; Satan’s two coming men, the Em-
peror and the Anti-Christ, will be cast into the lake
of fire without dying.
The heavenly armies have no weapons, they need
them not, for the battle is the Lord’s. Out of
Christ’s mouth goes a sharp sword, that with it He
might smite the nations. No carnal weapon is in
question, but a destructive power more terrible in
its effects* than any weapon forged by human skill;
the Spoken Word of Christ. He speaks as He
did in the Garden of Gethsemane, when His enemies
fell to the ground. His word at once smites and
slays. The power is irresistible. The assembled
hosts who have joined in the rebellion against God,
lie in the silence of death, killed not by a literal
sword, but by the Word of the King of kings.
What a humiliating end, to the pride, pomp,
strength, and civilisation of Europe. How awful
the slaughter. How immense the number of the
slain.
At the closing crisis of the battle of Armageddon,
the Lord Jesus having visibly descended upon the
Mount of Olives, and having by His mighty Power,


rent that mountain in two from East to West, He
will be looked upon and acknowledged by the Jews
in Jerusalem, who have survived the Great Tribu-
lation, as the promised Messiah, whom their fore-
fathers wickedly slew, and in deep contrition for
their past unbelief, they suddenly become converted
by the personal manifestation of the long rejected
Saviour, and they will afterwards preach the Gos-
pel of the Kingdom, to those who are left among
the Gentile nations. The task of burying the slain
who fall at Armageddon will occupy the Jews for
seven months, and it will take them seven years to
burn all the wood found amid the wreck arid ruins
of the battlefield. The Jews, who will be in the last
extremity of their distress, will be delivered by the
coming of their Messiah, and Jerusalem will be-
come the capital of the world, and the Jews and
Israelites will be united as one nation, and will be
the leading nation of the world during Christ’s reign
of a thousand years over this earth. Such is the
battle of Armageddon. After the Christians have
been taken up to meet Christ in the air, the great
mass of the people who will be left here upon earth,
will cast off all religious restraints, and during the
short period between the taking up of the saints
and the battle of Armageddon, the majority of pro-
fessing Christendom will be in direct opposition to
God, and to His Son, Jesus Christ. At Armaged-
don man will stand up against Jesus Christ.
And the result of the battle is, that the enemies of
the Son of God are destroyed, and God’s earthly
people, the Jews, and the Israelites, are delivered
from their enemies.
This ends Gentile rule. The times of the Gen-
tiles will then be fulfilled. And Christ and His
Saints will reign over the earth for a thousand
years.
The battle of Armageddon takes place at the close
of the Great Tribulation, which is also the close of
Daniel’s 70th week. So that Armageddon does not


take place until 7 years after the Roman Prince
signs the covenant with the Jews. Those who are
living here when this covenant is signed, and who
have a knowledge of the Scriptures, will know that
we have then entered upon the final seven years of
this age. The Great Tribulation begins in the
middle of the 7 years, and Armageddon takes place
at the close of the 7 years. Dear reader, Armaged-
don is still future. Your place of safety is in Christ.
Believe on Him, trust Him, live for Him, consecrate
whatever talent you have to His service, and you,
althought you are a poor sinner, will be pardoned
and because of God’s free Grace you will become
the possessor of Eternal Life, when you accept
Christ as your Saviour. Don’t put off that de-
cision. Accept Christ now, as you read these lines.
Your future welfare depends upon whether you ac-
cept Christ, or reject Christ.
If you have been an unbeliever in the past, God
will pardon you if you make confession. God de-
sires that you may be saved. Christ has paid the
price for you, with His own precious blood, believe
and thou shalt live.
There if life for a look at the Crucified One,
There is life at this moment for thee.
Then look, sinner, look, unto Him and be saved
Unto Him who was nailed to the tree.
Make Christ yours now. He is coming soon. If
you are His, you will be caught up to meet Him in
the air when He comes for the believers, and you
will be amongst that happy throng who shall come
with Him when He comes to reign over this earth.
Think of it. You will be associated with Christ in
His glorious reign, when He reigns as King over
the whole earth. That will be your position in the
Coming Age of Glory, if you are a Christian, if you
have received Christ as your own personal Saviour.
May the Holy Spirit enlighten all our minds and
lead us to Christ and shew us
Things to Come.




