

IE %KH| 4s \ A IvttSk. ' mm* i f jk 31 I
if Mi&i i x /*r i i*i
B >aaEBJr' S/hti£ ,J j: f /i Vl all
I .. 3r | rai\ n a MA f
I ■-'£* *- ? .. -* V X*W
SaMCWPPItfc *4 W' v til
f fe ?’■ ji VI
I Kir i £ «|»
I, wpi*' jt i/t/rv •
iVffl ' w / i 11 yV -J| HM
mil l\ i\VV:^H»l
4rV 1 ilmVm^^'
I Vj| i V * iv ik. I
U 11
II Rgr r j M.
I WSA 1 ■’ v-f*v I
I ja Hf/x -.T < J --WJ*W
I I
i T 'VmtC I
I
I jm>w * \ is ■>?? .. * «; ... - ■ I
Jji *


i P.P.P fUvVr ■
/ <jrjc 1










THE PEARL LAGOONS


trrpARTRiDcnjj




I w''% W- >vli * wM' kSmC
fm i jy 1
V JS J| is g Wi ■ II * Jlfc
jganHHV' ; r*fl> \ f * \ 9 *mk9T
-£> ■£'**5' 4vr *U ■~lfm I'l il ■’
**
Running swiftly they soon out-distanced the roaring furnace
behind.” [P- 29


m. eai a £ oons ||\
] Tlie Lost Chief (^
VCT MACDONALD U0[
(h S. W. PARTRIDGE & CO., LTD. /\\




CONTENTS
CHAPTER
I. THE PEARL ISLANDS, 9
11. THE INVENTION, 29
111. THE TRACKERS TRACKED, 63
IV. THE GAME BEGINS, 79
V. A RACE ACROSS THE WORLD, 102
VI. THE FIRST ENCOUNTER, 126
VII. LAT. 4° 3', SOUTH ; LONG. 165° s', EAST, . . .152
VIII. PEARLING,
IX. NATIVES ! 200
X. THE DEFIANCE FINDS THE PEARL BEDS, . . . 227
XI, THE NATIVE ENCAMPMENT, 260
XII. ANDREW MACALISTER, 291




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
FACING
THE FOREST HAD SUDDENLY BECOME ABLAZE, AND THE
SCORCHING TONGUES OF FLAME LEAPED HIGH INTO
the heavens, ...... Frontispiece
CHARLIE LOOKED THROUGH THE MANHOLE, AND SWITCHED
ON THE ELECTRIC LIGHT SO THAT HE MIGHT SEE THE
BETTER, 34
HE LOOKED AT THE BOYS SEVERAL TIMES AS THEY PASSED, 104
CHARLIE WAS LOWERED OVER THE GUNWALE THROUGH
ITS OPEN MANHOLE DOOR, 182
“WHAT ACT IS THIS?” ASKED MR. HIGGINS, “l DON’T
SEEM TO KNOW WHERE IT COMES IN,” . . . 232
“easy, you young steam engine!” growled the
WARRIOR, 274




THE PEARL LAGOONS
CHAPTER I
The Pearl Islands
'T'WO men leaned over the gunwale of the
Pioneer and gazed down into the wonder-
fully transparent water. One was the Captain
of the Pioneer, a little South Sea trading steamer
belonging to an Australian firm of considerable
importance, and the other was a passenger for
Sydney, picked up at one of the island trading
stations. Both were remarkable men in appear-
ance. Captain Chester, clean-shaven and typical
of the smart officers of the great Australian
Mercantile fleet, was tall, lithe, and handsome,
but his face always wore a worried-like expression
sadly out of keeping with his years, which were
not yet forty, and his companion was equally tall
but of more powerful build, and apparently of
about the same age. But it could not be said
that he was handsome, though his face was
strangely attractive. It was bronzed and rugged,
and strongly suggestive of far away Scotland,
and it sported a black unkempt moustache. A
kindly smile, however, seemed to play about the
features continually, and that smile made most


people friendly with Andrew Macalister at first
sight. When he spoke, too, his voice was pleas-
ing, despite the slight Scotch accent, and his
coldly deliberate pronunciation of certain vowel-
sounding words. His clothes hung over his
bones in a manner which would have broken the
heart of any artistic tailor to behold.
The men were old comrades, and, at the time,
the Pioneer was churning her way through the
sparkling waters of the Pacific Ocean. All around
were islands clad with palm trees, mostly of
coral formation, though some peaks rising high
into the azure blue of the sky were in evidence
showing that volcanic action was not unknovn
in these parts. Indeed, a wisp of smoke floating
above the nearest summit was a fair indication
that volcanic disturbances were fairly frequent.
Through the brilliant foliage of the islands
glistening lagoons could be seen occasionally,
shimmering in the quivering sunlight like streaks
of silver, making the whole scene a brilliant
study in colour. In fact, the picture seemed
more like a stretch of canvas on which paint had
been laid lavishly and without any particular
design, for the white band of glistening water in
the middle of the green, red, and yellow foliage
of the bush-covered land, which in turn was
washed by the deep translucent blue of the
gently lapping Pacific, just showing a rim of
dazzlingly white coral beach, was quite bewilder-
ing to the eye. Round some of the islands a
surf-capped reef broke the long billow s into


boiling foam, and over all shone the tropical
sun.
But the two men were not admiring their
surroundings. They were more concerned with
the water beneath them. The Captain smoked
a cigar, and Macalister pulled slowly at his pipe.
The Second Officer on the bridge, and he
knew the waters well.
“Well, old man,” the Captain said, “you
see, I made no mistake. This is the place I told
you about, and down there are the pearl shells.
See ! the bottom is paved with them.”
“ Ay, they seem vera plentiful,” Macalister
answered. “ I’ve little doubt there are several
fortunes down there.” He removed his pipe
and surveyed the depths more intently. “ What
is the exact position ? ” he asked after a spell
of reflection.
“ 165°5 / , by 4°3',” the Captain replied.
“ The Solomons are the nearest islands w r est
and south, the Santa Cruz are also south, and
the Ellice group lie about three hundred miles
east. There is nothing charted north inside a
thousand miles, but I reckon Pleasant Island
and Ocean Island marked ‘ P.D.’ (Position
Doubtful) would stop us if we made five
hundred miles due north from here.”
“ What is the nearest port ? I don’t mean
an island trading station, but a real civilised
port where you can tie up alongside the
wharf.”
“Well, if you throw out the magnificent


natural harbour of Malekula, in the New
Hebrides, you can have a choice of four ports —
Samarai, in New Guinea; Cooktown, in Australia;
Noumea, in New Caledonia; and Suva, in Fiji.
At any of those places you can buy anything
from a revolver or a cheap gramophone up to
a fairly fast steamer, and men are not very
dear if you offer them prospects of some
adventure, though if you go to Noumea you
mustn’t ask for references from the men you
employ. Retired French convicts are perhaps
good men for daring work, but ”
“ I know Noumea, Chester, and I don’t think
I will trouble that French towuship. The
authorities there are vera decent fellows, but
most of them know me, and a French cruiser
would most likely give any craft 1 bought its
best attention.”
The Captain laughed. “I understand, Mac,”
he said. “ Your kinkled old brain box is still
working along on the same lines as w T hen I first
knew you. You must remember, however, that
there isn’t a port in the Southern Hemisphere
where you are not known. You’ll have to go
north, old man, to fit out for any big scheme ;
try Singapore, Manilla, or Hong-Kong.”
“ I think I’ll find all I want in Sydney and
Melbourne, old man; and if Captain Chester
doesna’ get along too well with his present
owners, I’ll offer him a billet more to his liking
than that of carrying cheap turkey-red cloth,
mirrors, concertinas, and German-made gramo-


phones to poor ignorant South Sea Islanders,
and bringing back copra and some other vera
useful commodities.”
“And Captain Chester will take that billet,
Mac, when it is offered to him; he has an old
mother to keep down in Sydney, and his salary
as skipper of the Pioneer isn’t as much as the
old lady deserves. But to come out of dream-
land, Mac, you needn’t think of fitting out a
pearling expedition up this way; these islands
are within the German sphere of influence, as
diplomatists say, and Germany has a nasty way
of treating people she finds poaching on her
preserves.”
“I know,” said Macalister, “she calls them
filibusters, and her cruisers carry twelve-inch
guns, and a yard-arm specially for the benefit
of those poor beggars they catch. I don’t like
the idea of being hanged from a yard-arm,
Chester.”
“ I can’t say I like it myself,” the Captain
laughed; “so we’ll better say good-bye to these
pearl deposits. Germany won’t stand any
nonsense.”
“ It’s no’ Germany I’m thinking about,” said
Macalister slowly. “ I’ve little doubt we could
deal with her all right, if we didna’ make our-
selves vera objectionable. Trading is not for-
bidden among those islands.”
‘‘ No; but around here there are no people
to trade with. The nearest native village, if
any exist at all, can only be on that island


straight ahead where you see the flaming
summit, and the only other possibly inhabited
island of the group has just faded out of sight
over the stern. No, Mac, the honest tiading
game won’t do. Why, even now, the Pioneei
might be stopped if a Kaiser’s gunboat came
along. Of course our papers are all in order,
and°our firm is too well known everywhere
to be suspected of doing anything wrong.
“ But the Germans might ask what you
were doing here ? If there are no people, you
can’t be trading, and this is not the route
between the Fijis and the Solomons or the
Hebrides.”
“ That’s a fact; but we came up this way to
aet clear of a typhoon now raging dowm south,
and as yet the waters of the Pacific are not
closed to" navigation, even if Britain, France, and
Germany, not to speak of the Tmted States of
America and Japan, have pegged out all the
land.” .
The Scot was silent for some time. He was
thinking deeply. Finally, he said, Are \ou
certain that those islands around us now are
uninhabited ? ”
“ Well, there are no villages on them, as you
can pretty well see. The natives of the nearest
known villages doubtless visit them occasionally
in their canoes, but I have never heard of any
people actually residing upon them.”
“What a place for a man who wanted to
start a Kingdom of Dreams!” mused Mac.


“ Perpetual sunshine, rich land, a well-stocked
sea surrounding, and enormous wealth on its
bottom. I wonder why the gentlemen of ‘ The
Twentieth Century Adventurers’ haven’t dis-
covered this place ? ”
The Captain laughed. “ I never suspected
you were a dreamer, Mac,” he said. “ I always
thought you were the most practical man I had
ever met. You couldn’t start a Utopian
kingdom here, because the German Government
wouldn’t allow it. Utopias are always danger-
ous in this age of advanced civilisation. And
you may as well give up the idea of robbing the
sea bottom of its pearl treasure. Just look at
those sharks down there. A diver, dress and
all, would be devoured in a few seconds by those
monsters, and then the prospects of the yard-arm
performance on a German cruiser doesn’t seem
to add much to the inducement. Think of some
other scheme, old man; I only took you here to
show you that I was not talking idly when I
told you long ago that the greatest pearl
shell deposit in the world lay among those
islands. We’ll head south for Vila in the New
Hebrides when we round the point of that
volcanic island just ahead, and in less than a
week you’ll be wearing a starched shirt and
feeling miserable in the Hotel Australia, Sydney.
But who are £ The Twentieth Century Adven-
turers ? ’ I never heard of that Company in the
Pacific.”
Chester, you re a good fellow, and as straight


as any man I know, but you’re woefully ignorant,
and innocent for a man o your age, and as for
strategy, I don’t think you ken what that science
• i) »>
is f
“ I’m only a poor skipper, Mac, or to put it
plainer, a Pacific mud-bank-scraper, for grinding
along in the shallows in hopes of doing trade is
what I’m paid for. So you can t expect me to
know much of science or anything else. What
is strategy ? ”
The Captain lit a fresh cigar from the
ash of his old one, which he then dropped
into the sea, and awaited with a smile Mac’s
reply.
“ Strategy, my man, is the greatest of all
sciences; it moves mountains, it makes the im-
possible possible. As somebody said, ‘ The pen
is mightier than the sword,’ and, as a matter o
fact, that statement is quite true, though, person-
ally, I think that a good twelve-inch gun in
working order is a fairly powerful weapon, and
also worth two or three swords. But strategy,
Captain, is stronger than them all. It is worth
a dozen o’ the best fountain pens.”
“That’s all very well, but is it equal to
German gunners behind thirteen-inch guns,
Mac ? Because it seems to me that if it
isn’t, it needn’t be employed here, however
many fountain pens or typewriters it may be
worth.”
“ It, speaking metaphorically, of course is
a match for all you have suggested. The


Kaiser’s gunners are only men, and decent
fellows.”
“ Then what about the sharks and other
creatures down there that have had no Scottish
School Board education ? They’ll not know how
to play the game of strategy when you try to
take the pearl shell away ? ”
“ All the worse for them. I mean to have a
cargo of those shells just the same.”
“ But you mentioned a Syndicate or Company,
Mac. ‘ The Twentieth Century Adventurers,’ I
think you called them ? Where do they
come in 1 ”
“ That question is exactly what I’ve been
trying to answer to my own satisfaction since
the first moment you pointed out the pearl shell
deposits. If they are not already in this little
affair you can safely calculate that they will be,
sooner or later, and it will be in dealing with
those people that strategy will be vera severely
taxed. They are well acquainted with the art
themselves, and they are to be feared more than
three German Empires.”
“ Oh, draw it a little milder, Mac! You
surely don’t mean to tell me that this mysterious
people you talk about can do more damage than
a gunboat ? Why, if they caused the slightest
trouble, a fleet of German Dreadnoughts would
come out and annihilate them ! ”
“Vera likely, if they could be found wfithin
gunshot, but the people I mean know enough
strategy to keep out of range, and it seems to
2 17


me that that would not be vera difficult among
those islands.”
“ You’re still dreaming, old man. No pirate
gang could hide even here from the cruisers of
any second or third rate power.”
“Couldn’t they? Do you know how much
water a modern cruiser draws ? ”
“ Oh, anything over twenty feet, maybe ; the
Pioneer herself requires a clear ten feet.”
“ Exactly; and is there any passage through
this group o’ islands yielding a depth o’ four
fathoms, which depth any up-to-date war-boat
would require even if she were by no means a
Dreadnought ? ”
“No, the water is all shallow as far as
I know, but a boat with big guns could lie far
out beyond the islands and fire into them.
“ Possibly, but I’m o’ opinion that the firing
wouldn’t do vera much damage to that island
we are passing now if any people on it were half
prepared for it, and knew anything about
strategy, and had a vera ordinary knowledge o’
engineering science. You see, the supposed gun-
boat couldn’t come nearer that island than ten
miles, as your chart shows, and we can see other
islands surrounding it, all just sticking out above
the elevated submarine plateau which maybe
once was part of a central Pacific continent.
Well, allowing the ten-mile limit, do you think
that any cruiser could fire over those other
islands and do damage on this one beside us,
especially as its vera existence is not charted ?


“ But they could send smaller gunboats or
torpedo craft, Mac. Even the Pioneer could
cause a lot of trouble if she carried a pop-
gun.”
“ And the Pioneer would be blown out of the
water in the first act,” Macalister laughed.
“ Small gunboats and their torpedo satellites
would start aviation in instalments too. Do
you imagine that if the Cosmopolites—l mean
‘ The Twentieth Century Adventurers ’ —made
that island one of their depots or strongholds, they
couldn’t guard against sensational night attacks
by torpedo craft ? ”
“Dear me, Mac, what are you talking
about ? Piracy and secret societies of adventurers
are out of date now. The world would not
tolerate them.”
c ‘ When you’ve wandered through this weary
world half as much as I have done, Chester,
you’ll likely modify the ideas instilled into your
mind by vera excellent school books. Now this
advanced age o’ enlightenment has produced
some things that all the world doesn’t know; it
has also been responsible for the existence o’
some men who, though by accident o’ birth,
might be called Germans, Japanese, British,
Bolivians, or even Chinamen or Negroes, have
outlived all idea of nationality. Such men can
be met with in any big city in the wmrld, and of
the best brained fellows from all parts —brains
are not necessarily the possession of good men
only, remember—the Syndicate known through-


out the world as ‘ The Twentieth Century
Adventurers ’ was formed. They don t advertise,
so that is probably the reason you have never
heard o’ them. But they exist all the same;
and I’m o’ the opinion that they are well able
to hold their own against any single nation, for
they have practically unlimited wealth, and as I
have said, include the best brains o the world on
their books.”
“ Mac, you’ve been reading some sensational
novel while on this little tub ; your Scotch
thinking-box has got off the balance. A
Syndicate such as you speak of would be
known throughout the world, and it would
be exterminated by the combined civilised
nations.” . , ,
“ The Adventurers of whom I speak don’t
break any of the established laws of the civilised
world. They conform to the laws of the country
in which they may be operating. But they hold
that the Pacific Islands belong to no European
power, and I know that one of their head centres
is somewhere among the little known islands
of these parts. Of course they have centres
all over the world, and I believe the absol-
ute headquarters are in London, though the
Australian section to some extent controls the
Pacific.”
“ How do you happen to know all this, Mac f
I confess I am a very ignorant person, but still,
I read the newspapers when I get into port,
an d—oh, you are dreaming ! Let’s go below and


have lunch. We’ll be clear of those islands
early in the afternoon, and if you ever really
think of trying pearling up here, I’ll join you
and take all risks.”
“ All right, Chester,” said Macalister. “ I’ll
hold you to your promise some day. Of course
I don’t know that the Adventurers know this
place, but it seems to me to be an ideal spot
for them, all the same. But I mean to have a
try for that pearl shell, and I don’t care much
for German opposition, and I’ll risk all the
Adventurers can do against me. Just to give
you information, however, I may tell you that
I happen to know of the people called the
Cosmopolites, generally, but whose real title is
that which I have already mentioned, because I
was one of them.”
“What!” cried the Captain. “Are you a
member of any parasitical society ? I won’t
believe it, Mac, until you try to steal my
ship.”
“ The Pioneer is not fast enough to be of
any use to me,” Macalister laughed, “ and you
needn’t be alarmed, Captain ; Andrew Macalister
is a Cosmopolitan, but he is British first, and
may he never see the bonnie hills o’ Perthshire
again if he ever forgets that. I am at war
with the Adventurers now, for reasons needless
to explain. But I know the calibre o’ their
leaders too well to ignore them, and I expect
they’ll keep clear o’ Andrew Macalister too.
But we’ll go and have that belated lunch now,


and after that I think I’ll write some letters
which Til entrust to you to post at Sydney or
some other place.”
“ Certainly, Mac, but you can post them your-
self as soon as I can. After Port Vila, Sydney
is our first stop.”
“ Maybe, but Til give my letters to you, all
the same ; Tm a vera erratic sort o’ character,
and I might forget if nothing else happened.
I suppose you’ve noticed that wee cloud o
smoke that has kept in our wake all day ? ”
“ That is our own smoke, Mac; it has kept
hanging low all forenoon because of the atmos-
pheric "disturbance in the upper air currents,
The typhoon down south probably causes a
suction ”
“ Ay, and that suction would draw our smoke
away, Captain; that cloud o’ smoke I’ve seen
all morning comes from the funnel o another
steamer, and unless there is another trader
working around these parts, it is follow mg
us ”
“ Well, let it follow; we have no cause
to fear anything, and even if it is a German
cruiser of weight light enough to thread
this channel our papers are all in order, and
the Pioneer s owners are too well known to be
disrespected.”
“ Vera well, we’ll no’ worry about prospective
trouble, but you’ll mind and post my letters,
Captain ? ”
“ Certainly, old man, I’ll post you too, it


you like, to any address you wish to be sent
to.
Macalister smiled, and both men went down
to the little saloon for lunch. All afternoon
the Scot wrote letters laboriously; he was
more used to other implements than the pen,
but he wrote in a wonderfully neat hand, not-
withstanding. While he wrote, the Pioneer
cleared the islands and was headed south, and
when night closed in, and the brilliant constella-
tions of the South shone out, she was ploughing
her way through phosphorescent waters which
gleamed far more vividly than clusters of
diamonds. Macalister sat on a deck chair after
dinner that evening and smoked. After a bit
he produced a flute, from which he drew sweet
melodies. Then he smoked again until the
Chief Officer brought along a violin, and then
Macalister devoted his best attention to it until
midnight. And he could play.
All next day the Pioneer continued her south-
ward course, skirting uncharted coral reefs, and
negotiating straits between well-known volcanic
islands, and strangely enough, a tiny smoke-
cloud hung persistently far in her rear.
Macalister and the Captain had many talks about
things in general, and the Chief Officer at times
O O 7
joined in the conversation. Late in the evening
the Pioneer reached Port Vila, the chief trading
station in the New Hebrides group, and
Macalister and Captain Chester went ashore at
once, the former to see some old friends amongst


the traders, and the latter to report himself to
his owners’ agent. There was not much trade
for the Pioneer at Port Vila, the French steamer
Pacifique having called only the day before ;so
after landing some cases of general merchandise
and receiving the outgoing mail, the Chief
Officersignalled by meansof the vessel’s steamsiren
that the Royal Mail steamer Pioneer was ready
to leave for Sydney. While she swung at anchor,
waiting on the Captain, another vessel steamed
slowly to a safe anchorage near, but in the
darkness her form could not be distinguished,
though Mr. Henderson, the Pioneer's Chief
Officer, had little doubt that she was a rival
French trader from Noumea. The night was
sultry and oppressively close, and Mr. Henderson
was anxious to get away. He was a young man
of most handsome appearance, and he was not
yet used to the dreamy nature of the South Sea
life. Why he had left a big P. and 0. Liner to
fill a comparatively humble position on the
Pioneer was a mystery to all who knew him.
But he was exemplary in every respect and well
liked by his fellow officers and the crew. But
it was not so much a sense of duty which made
him eager to get clear of the islands. He knew
the traders, and usually spent an hour or two
on shore with them when his duties were over.
He liked them all, and they felt kindly
towards him, though the smart, strict, and digni-
fied officer, the very picture of a British navy
lieutenant, seemed somewhat out of place


among the boisterous, free-and-easy pioneers
of Empire who had pitched their camps in the
New Hebrides. He was certainly worried
to some extent that night however, and as
he paced the deck, sweltering in his stiff white
uniform, he glanced frequently at the sky.
The ship lay in an almost airless zone, and
well he knew what that atmospheric condition
heralded.
Many dangerous reefs had to be negotiated
before a straight open sea course to Sydney could
be set, and if caught by the impending storm
before clear of those reefs, the Pioneer might end
her trading life upon one of them.
Captain Chester, however, had read the climatic
signs too, and very soon he was on board,
accompanied by some traders who had suddenly
remembered various items they required from
Sydney. Two passengers also joined the ship—
tourists left behind by the last steamer, they said
they were —and they at once turned in to the
cabins appointed to them. A few minutes later
the traders left for the shore, and the Pioneer's
winch hauled up the anchor.
“Full speed ahead,” was signalled to the
engine room, and after swinging round until her
bows were headed S.S.W., the little vessel began
to forge onward, and if nothing happened,
Sydney would be her first stop.
“ We’ve cut things rather fine, Henderson,”
the Captain said, as he stood on the bridge
beside his Chief Officer. “ Maybe we should


have made for some protected anchorage instead
of coming out ? ”
“ Perhaps, sir,” Henderson answered; “ but we
are already overdue in Sydney, and there is no
telling how long this typhoon will last when
once it starts. lam of impression, too, that
the open sea is better than any half-doubtful
anchorage. We would probably get piled up on
shore had we remained, but out here the engines
can at least enable us to keep our head the way
we wish.”
“You are right,” said the Captain, lighting a
cigar, “The open sea is the safest place in a
storm. There’s plenty of room, and if the engines
don’t break down, we can always keep our head
to it. By Jupiter! look back; we’ve not
cleared a second too soon. Both men gazed
astern, and exclamations burst from their lips.
Ahead the sky was vividly lit up by the glorious
stars of the South tropics, but over the islands
astern a dark mantle seemed to have been cast
which entirely obliterated earth, sea, and sky.
As they looked, a great ball of fire suddenly
appeared in the blackness above. It hung for a
moment, apparently, then shot towards the earth
above Vila with terrific velocity, causing the
heavens to glow in its wake as if on fire for
some seconds. Then the storm burst. A peal
of thunder seemed to shatter the atmosphere,
and the gloom became lit up with vivid lightning
flashes. Again and again the awful thunder
crashed out over land and sea, and the inter-


mittent flashes made the summit ridges of
the islands stand out as clearly as if only a
hundred yards away. The typhoon had made
the island its sporting ground, and any ships
caught in the deadly vortex would assuredly
suffer.
“ We’re still in the zone, Henderson,” the
Captain said. “ It’s coming this way.”
“ I think we’ll get clear, sir ; we’re coming into
air currents now.”
“ I’ll go and ask the Chief Engineer to force
his engines all he can. I wonder what Macalister
is doing ? ”
“Macalister is not on board, sir; he left at
Vila.”
“ What! ” cried the Captain. “ Didn’t he
come aboard with the traders ? He is booked
for Sydney.”
“I am quite certain he is not on this ship,
sir. I thought he meant to break his journey
at Port Vila, or I should have told you before
we left.”
“Macalister meant to go to Sydney to buy a
boat suitable for pearl fishing, Henderson, and
he left Fat Jack’s place on shore to come on
board with me when you sounded the Pioneer s
whistle.” The Captain paused and seemed lost
in thought for a moment or two. Then he
turned to descend from the bridge. “ After all,
Henderson,” he said, “ Macalister may have
picked up some old tub at Vila. lam sorry
we’ve lost him, all the same, but we’ll run across


the grim old Scot next trip likely. I think we
will get safely clear of this typhoon, and I’m
going to turn in for a bit. Send for me if
things don’t look promising.”
The Pioneer continued on her course, and in
due time reached Sydney.


CHAPTER II
The Invention
|T was a dirty night towards the end of
December, and the London streets were by
no means pleasant places for those whom necessity
compelled to be abroad. Still, the endless streams
of motor cars which discharged their passengers
at the theatres were indications that the people
of London had to a great extent triumphed over
mere weather conditions, and the well-lit and
inviting places of entertainment only seemed the
more attractive because of the discomforts of the
outside. But everyone not bent on pleasure was
homeward bound, and among these latter people
were two youths who met at the entrance to the
Charing Cross tube station. They were comrades,
and always awaited each other so as to travel
home together. Both were extremely pleasant-
faced lads of about eighteen years of age, and
they possessed brains as well as muscle.
(l It works, Jack Osborne said to Charlie Gray \
I tiied it last night. They walked towards
the lifts as he spoke.
“ That’s good,” Charlie answered. “Of course
we knew it would work, but there’s nothing like


a trial. Now, we’ll have to think out what to do
with it.”
“ Oh ! we’ll be able to sell it easily enough, I
expect, if we want to; but we’ll finish every-
thing to-night, and put it through a final test.”
Charlie made no reply until they were seated
in the train.
“Do you think, Jack,” he said then, “that
the thing really can be of any use ?
“Certainly it can be of use, Charlie. As you
know, it can enable a man to do things that
couldn’t be done before. It is practically a
one-man submarine boat. It can dive or swim
about under the water, or crawl along the
bottom, and do work in any position, and it can-
not go wrong in any way, for if the man inside
ceases to control it, it will rise to the top of its
own accord.”
“Yes, I know all that, Jack. We designed
the thing to do just what you have said ; but I’ve
been thinking that no man wants to swim about
under water, and as for repairing damages to
ships under water, can’t an ordinary diver do
that, or at least as much as we could do ? A good
submarine boat, too, could explore the bottom of
the sea far better and much more easily than we
could inside our affair.”
“ I don’t think that you are half right in your
objections, Charlie ; you were always a pessimist,
but seeing that most of the ideas in that thing
are yours, surely you ought to be able to say
something good for the Submarine Swimmer.


r I c^n t mean to say anything against it,
Jack, but my father laughed at me last nmht
when I told him we were going to make our
fortunes with our invention. He said we could
do nothing without capital, and we couldn’t get
that very easily, even if our patent could do
wonders, whereas, if it were only a little better
than something else, no one would take up the
matter. r
Oh, its all very well for a man of your
lather s age and experience to talk, Charlie ’ He
knows many things we don’t know; but it is just
possible that our ideas are a bit too original for
mm to grasp, and, anyway, were young and well
able to force things for ourselves. If no firm
will buy our patent we’ll work it ourselves.
e go and look for sunken treasure somewhere
tor if there is a treasure-laden Spanish galleon
at the bottom of Tobermory Bay in Scotland,
there s likely a few more elsewhere, and we know
there s a British war boat with a million golden
sovereigns on board at the bottom of the
Mediterranean.
You mean the Victoria ? She lies too deep
tor us. Lots of salvage engineers from all parts
ot the world have tried to get at her alreadf ”
1 don t care what other people have failed to
ho, Charlie, and I m sure you don’t. We are on
our own, and we ought to know as much as any
old-fashioned engineers whose only claim to
superiority is in their years. Who knows more
01 electrical science than you ? ”


Charlie laughed. “ And who knows more of
the science of chemistry than you ? ” he asked.
“Oh, we are wonders, Jack! and were both
engineers as well. And yet this silly old world
has never discovered us. I tell you, Jack, the
world is all wrong, and if you were made Prime
Minister of Great Britain, and I the Emperor of
Germany, we’d soon change it all; but as this is
our station, we’ll have to change ourselves now.
I wish we could get away somewhere where there
were no tubes, and no stations, and no people.
We could do wonders then.”
“You are laughing, Charlie; we surely can
look after ourselves anywhere. You are a Scot,
and I had the idea that Scotsmen never doubted
their own powers.”
“Well I don’t,” retorted Charlie, as they
emerged ' into the street. “I’ll go with you
anywhere, and I’ll stand by you to the end in
everything and anything, and I don t care what
happens. All the same, being of Scotch extrac-
tioY—-although I don’t believe it makes any
difference—l suppose I always look upon the
worst side of things. But why shouldn t i .
You are as English as can be, and you imagine
everything we dream about must come true.
can’t, but we can do our level best to force
things as we wish, and nothing ordinary will
beat us,” •
“ All right, Charlie. Perhaps you are right
although I don’t know that I fully understand
the meaning of what you have been saying.


We’ve got a contrivance that ought to be of
some value, and it is now our business to make
i oi the utmost possible use to ourselves. Isn’t
that so ?
\v man > an 'l tere’s your house.
o' e . ha^ e another look at the Submarine
swimmer.
The lads entered Jack’s home. Charlie had
been specially invited to tea that evening so
that Jack and he could get ahead with their
work as early as possible. Their workshop was
Jacks room, and there many weird and strange
contrivances had been constructed during the
years the lads had known each other. Jack’s
parents were fully aware that the boys were
working out ideas which might mean much or
result in nothing. They encouraged them in
every possible way, and thus it was that all the
experiments were carried out in Jack’s home
Charlie B people were all that could be desired,
but his father did not seem to have much
sympathy with what he termed Charlie’s wild
work” a'' A V® W1 / d CharHe t0 Stick t0 P ractical
work and eave dreams alone. He did not
realise that his son did not dream.
tn :■> e Ws bad tea together and then prepared
to start work. On a bench in the middle of the
oor a Strange, fish-shaped form rested. It was
uilt of some silvery coloured metal, and was
ou eight feet in length, while in diameter it
was only about two feet six at its broadest part
A man-hole door of the usual dimensions was
3 33


fitted on the top or back of the metdh
monstrosity, but that and a short Jour ™
diameter tube protruding from the hea
the only departures, m appearance, Lorn
actual fish Fins and tail were there, though
S that the tail was really a two-bladed screw
propeller, and the fins were not exa°dy what
they seemed. But the inside of that fish was
not the anatomy of a natural denizen of tlhesea.
It was composed of cog wheels, > ’
aauge glasses, and many other applia>ices
the meaning of which would not be clear
anyone not a first-class modern engineer
would U been mdlung
were no wires leading into the nsn.
“ You must have been working ver F a j k „
constantly since I was withyou Jyhvegot
Charlie remarked appreciatively. louve g
everything fitted up ! . niahtt"
u\r j : j T tell you I tried it last nignt.
S y L“r-■»
'To y but I slept inside all night with the
man hole closed ah the artificial tmned on
about.”


rs * 1 [ * ( / v
— r"
M I Y ,| —
• »■*■• :m
Pr s. - - 4 ’ ‘"'] t t *
fV,v|> B ; ij ~~
4 y , v iff I M H
■ ■bJD '\ ■* • ft *^j^BH|
n ;
*—— —_
u CHARLIE THROUGH THE MANHOLE, AND SWITCHED ON
ELECTRIC LIGHT SO THAT HE MIGHT SEE BETTER.”




ttat iT 6 are CODCerDed about, old
man, but if we call upon any bio- firm likelv to
be masted they’ll tot be' sa&fi™ w^our
statement that everything else must work.
“Weiwf t0 See tlie Dnr er actually working.”
Well, they can see it," said Jack; “ that is if
for It P r iSe t0 ' f St dO6S ail we cla ™
toglNn^ e er n ° tafraidofit - D °y--nt
Ut ri \ mt h er be und er water at the
parts.’’ t0 tr ? all the working
I r can do that to-morrow then Charlie
I forgot to tell you before that I called upon
Messrs. Macarthur & Smirh r i P
nponlp ri j ii n , *b the famous salvage
l’ 1 I f Dd t0 C tbem wilat we could do
They laughed, but told me to bring the machi™
round tc.them and they would test ft L a gravt
them tenk the J r haTe m use at ‘heir works 8 I toki
|3“as:S‘
thins anf to ktS g6t ‘° W ° rk andfini sh every-
S> and to-morrow well tvt y
Macarthur and Smith r tomsh Messrs.
the Swimmer in Sfbov I “f" 6 We . Can W
work all ni u U J box °efore morning if W e
them?” ° ht ’ aDC a Cart ean take iJ round to
Chariie Sll) \V<.’i| Ut t"' 6 ' 11 , make some changes,
“• " 611 P nt m a lot of electric apparatus


that isn’t needed, and Ts
do many things. T . -n ta n e better
“ Well watch them, Jack. It *id take oei
ttz isrus s
SW The m vouthful inventors wasted no more time
■ I w SSoueh. they worked, they kept up
in talking, aiinuu o u, j _ p fp rpr , oe to some
an electric motor, bg cut and the
shaft and wheel k } be fixing
wheel in P“ to the segmented
the wire ends of hour would gee Jack
commutator. T hollow fish by
brazing some joints msm rharlie would be
“IS »“p>» a “


their satisfaction, and they lifted the strange
structure into a long wooden box without any
special effort, for it was wonderfully light and
nailed on the lid.
Thus it came about that, early in the fore-
noon of the same day, the two lads were in
the presence of Messrs. Macarthur & Smith,
and the box was also within their offices. Both
Jack and Charlie were absolutely fearless and
nerveless, and they lost none of their self-
confidence while talking to the famous heads
of the great salvage firm. True, both men were
gemal m appearance, and pleasantly mannered,
and listened most attentively to what the
boys had to say. But they were thorough
engineers, as was soon apparent when they
began questioning. J
Well my lads,” said Mr. Macarthur, after
some talk, “you seem very confident that
you have got something of value in our line
of business What do you think it can do
mat cannot be done by other means ? ”
“We supposed you would know that best”
Jack answered. “We can sail round a ship and
repair any damages under water, even to the
extent of repairing a broken shaft, rudder, or
propeller. ’
„ orclmar s 7 diver diving dress can
i a sai d Mr. Macarthur, “and many
other things as well.” y
“That may be," put in Charlie; “but an
ordinary diver requires air-pumps and a lot


of other gear which is not generally carried in
ships and he can only work within a few yards
of where he is dropped if lie is on bottom and
I don't think his work would be of much
if he were merely suspended by chains m de p
Wa “Quite so,” said Mr. Smith, nodding his head
approvingly. “The work of an ordinary diver
has its limitations. But do you think you could
go down to a wrecked vessel and pass chains
underneath her 1 pan
“Yes” replied Charlie promptly. ca
swim about under water at any depth which our
shell can stand, and we can craw along the
bottom, too, without necessarily having any
connection with the surface, but if a couple of
wires from above gave us electric current it
would be very convenient though not rea y
indispensable. You see, we generate our own
current for propulsion and everything else but
while working near a large vessel it could do
«B y w hat means do you generate your own
current 2 ” asked Mr. Macarthur displaying
much more interest than he had previously
Sh °'oh that is one of our discoveries!” Jack
answered. “The metal of which our machine
is constructed sets up chemical action m the
salt water in which it floats. Hie hydiogen
gas thus generated reacts on an inner casing
Sr shell of a specially prepared material, and


an electric current results on Voltaic prin-
ciples.”
“Do you mind saying all that over again ? It
sounds original,” said Mr. Smith, “and I like
the idea so far as I grasp it.”
“ Then let us show our ideas in practice,”
cried Charlie. “ Where is your tank ? Or if
you like it better, come to the nearest river,
or lake, or sea.”
“The tank will do well enough, young man,”
Mr. Macarthur said. “If you can crawl or swim
about on its bottom, and do any work at the
same time, I fancy your invention can be put
to some practical use. In fact, we have had a
visit to-day already from a gentleman who
could, I expect, use your appliance with advan-
tage if it can do as you say.”
“Take us to your tank, then,” Jack said.
“We’ll show you what we can do, but we
cannot allow any of your engineers to be
present until you have agreed to help us with
our invention.”
les, yes, boy, we understand all that,” broke
in Mr. Smith. “We have been called upon to
witness great experiments before, and each time
we had to promise secrecy, although why, I never
could make out, as any apprentice engineer
could ha\ e made a fool of the best supposed
invention ever presented to us for inspection.”
“I don’t think any man will make a fool of
our affair,” said Charlie hotly; “ and I don’t care
how famous he may be.”


In a few minutes they were standing by the
tank, an experimental water-holding appliance,
in which the firm tested all their deep-sea
apparatus. The box containing the “submarine
swimmer ” was already there, having been
brought thither by some of the firm’s workers,
who had been instructed to attend to it. Ihe
lads hauled off the lid and lifted out the gleam-
ing, fish-like casing, and the partners of the
firm gasped, as they noted how light the
structure was, and how perfectly formed was
the whole thing. The tank was filled with
water, made saline to represent the water of
the sea as nearly as possible, there being about
one thirty-fifth difference in floating powers in
favour of the salt water as against fresh. The
lads examined their “swimmer” carefully and
without speaking, then they heaved it bodily
into the tank, where it floated like an enormous
cork. Charlie jumped astride and unscrewed
the man-hole door, but even with his weight
the “ fish ” bobbed about like a gas-bag. Next
moment Charlie was inside, and by some unique
arrangement had closed the door again. Still
the “fish” simply floated lazily on the surface
of the water.
“ Very finely constructed,” said Mr, Smith,
“ but nothing special after all. A cylinder of
aluminium could support a man’s weight just
like that. I suppose your affair is built of
aluminium, young man ? ”
“ No, it isn’t,” Jack responded ; “ and you are


in too big a hurry to criticise. What do you
want to see our patent do ? ”
“ Ha, ha ! ” laughed Mr. Macarthur. “ Will
it do what you tell it ? ”
Yes, Jack answered, sitting down on the
edge of the tank, which was about twenty feet
in length, by ten in width, and twelve in depth.
He dangled his feet in the water, seemingly
careless of the cold.
“ Then tell it to dive.”
Almost as soon as the words were spoken the
fish dived headlong to the bottom of the
tank and lay there, clearly visible through the
water. It looked exactly like a shark, only its
body gleamed more silvery perhaps.
“ Good •' ” both men muttered, hiding their
astonishment as much as possible.
“ Tell it to move to the far end and come back
again, said Mr. Smith, and in a few seconds the
thing at the bottom began to move slowly as
requested. It travelled the length of the tank
and back again, and when one of the partners
unconsciously, cried “ Faster,” it suddenly darted
like a live fish diagonally to the surface.
Remarkable!” Mr. Smith muttered, rubbino-
his eye-glasses. “I don’t know which surprises
me most, the ability of the thing to move as it
does, or its obedience of spoken orders up here
absolutely no means of connection.”
-w! A g r Uf i pardon .’ ar.” broke in Jack.
• A not W . to claim more f° r our patent
an is due to it. There is nothing remarkable


in its obeying your wishes, for I am signalling to
my comrade all you say.”
“ What! ” both men exclaimed ; and Mr. Smith
added, “ But you have no connecting wires ? ”
“ We don’t need wires for deep-sea signalling,”
Jack replied ; “ nor, in fact, does any ship. The
interior of our machine acts like a big miciophone,
and the slightest contact I make with my heels
on the sides of this tank under water is magnified
considerably.”
“Dear me!” ejaculated Mr. Macarthur.
“What do you know of deep-sea signalling?
You cannot have studied it ?
“ I don’t know anything that the world
doesn’t know, sir, but my comrade and I are
aware that sound carries a great distance under
acidulated water, and we both know the Morse
telegraphic code. I simply telegraphed your
orders to him by kicking my heels against the
side of the tank.”
“Young man,” said Mr. Macarthur after a
long pause, “we require some smart men to
help us in our work. We’ll pay you bigger
wages than you can earn elsewhere. Will you
join our staff? ”
Jack thought for a moment. “ Will you take
up this invention of ours and develop it if we
join you ? ” he asked,
i 6 Dear me ! wtiy trouble about th.at in tbe
meantime ? If occasion arises where we can
use it, certainly we’ll take advantage of it,
but you’ll be employed at work, which will draw


from you better schemes than that contriv-
ance.”
“ I don’t think so,” said Jack. “ We’ve
worked at this idea for years, and we intended
if we could get help to go ourselves and work
it.”
“ But your idea, wonderful and all as it looks,
is not practical. No one wants a mechanical
fish to disport itself around a ship or in a tank.
If your fish could bring up things from the
bottom of the sea, it would be a different
matter.”
“ If it could bring up anything from the
bottom of this tank, would you consider that as
fairly satisfactory ? ” Jack interrupted, and Mr.
Macarthur seemed slightly annoyed.
“ Yes,” he snapped. “ Tell your wonderful fish
to bring up those coins. If it can catch them in
its teeth it can do anything.”
He threw a handful of silver and copper coins
into the tank as he spoke, and immediately after-
wards the strange fish dived. They could see
it moving along the bottom, and a few bubbles
of air broke through the surface of the water.
All watched most interestedly, but although the
partners did not know, Jack was more nervous
than he had ever been before in his life. His
comrade was below, and carrying out work which
they had not yet tried to do, and although he
had full faith in the apparatus now to be em-
ployed, he knew that it had never been tried,
and that Charlie’s life depended upon its success-


ful working. But his fears were soon dispelled,
for the “fish” rose to the surface and swam
towards the side of the tank.
“ Dear me ! ” Mr. Smith ejaculated. It
looks as if it were alive; surely it hasn t
swallowed all those coins I
“Just what it has done,” said Jack proudly.
“ It has sucked them all in through that tube
you see in front. That is what the tube is there
for ! ” And sure enough he had spoken correctly.
The “ fish ” stretched its nose over the tank edge
and showered out the coins on the ledge which
surrounded it.
“ Is there anything else you would like to see
done?” Jack asked. “We can bore holes in a
ship’s side, charge and fire mines, and do almost
anything on the sea bottom that can be done on
shore.” „
“ How much do you want for your patent ?
Mr.Macarthur asked. He appeared to be thinking.
“Five thousand pounds,” Jack replied
promptly. “We didn’t mean to sell it outright,
but if you’ll give us that sum, we can go out to
some part of the world where there are minerals
and try some of our other ideas.”
“ Five thousand pounds ! ” exclaimed Mr.
Smith, rubbing his glasses again. “ That is a
lot of money to give to a couple of lads. We’ll
give you five hundred.”
Jack shook his head, and signalled to Charlie
to come outside. “ The fact that we are young
makes no difference to the value of our inven-


tion,” he said, “ and five hundred pounds wouldn’t
enable us to do what we wish afterwards.”
“ Boy,” began Mr. Macarthur reprovingly,
“ you should learn while you are young to
acquire less extravagant tastes. Money is a
curse and has been the cause of more evil than
wars. With five hundred pounds invested in
our business, and you yourselves in our employ-
ment, you might yet become worthy citizens of
the capital of the British Empire. You might
even be so respected among your fellow-men
that, when you grew older and better able to
assume responsibilities, civic honours would be
conferred upon you, and—and what are you
laughing at, young man ? ”
“ Our horrible fate, sir; and I was picturing
my chum, Charlie, as a County Councillor.”
“You’d just be as funny yourself, Jack!”
cried Charlie, emerging from the floating “fish.”
“ How did it work ? ”
“All right. Did everything act as we calculated?”
“ Exactly; I seemed to be as familiar with
everything as if we had been picking up coins
by suction for years. I tell you the thing is all
right, Jack; we can go to the nearest w r reck
any time, and take away all that is worth
removing.”
“What is your reconsidered price for this
affair of yours ? ” broke in Mr. Smith. “ I don’t
know, after all, if there is much in it, but we are
willing to take the risks if you don’t ask an un-
reasonable price.”


“ Our price is five thousand pounds,” said
Jack. “We don’t know anything about the
value, but we require that amount of money.”
“Preposterous!” ejaculated Mr. Smith, again
wiping his glasses. “Take your confounded toy
away out of this place at once. We’ll talk to
you when you have more sense.”
“ Yes, take it away; we can’t afford to waste
more time with boys,” added Mr. Macarthur.
“ Age may bring you wisdom, and then you will
know perhaps that an ordinary diver could have
done all you have shown us. Five thousand
pounds ! What is the world coming to ? W hen
I was young, I thought five thousand pence au
enormously large figure.”
“Possibly, sir,” said Charlie, who was far
more impetuous than Jack. “But the world
has advanced a bit since you were young, and
people think differently now. Our price will
probably rise during the next few days, but you
know my comrade’s address if you wish to
deal.”
“We cannot tolerate such impertinence,” Mr.
Macarthur spluttered. “ Get out of this at once.”
The two partners walked away, and the boys
lifted the metallic “fish” out of the tank. A
few minutes later it was in its box, and in
another half-hour was on its way back to Jack’s
parents’ house on a lorry. The boys walked
alongside their property, but they were not
despondent in the slightest. Indeed, they
seemed quite pleased with themselves. They


knew now that they had made absolutely no
mistake, and that their machine could do all that
they had designed it to do. The fact that
Messrs. Macarthur & Smith had declined to
buy the contrivance and its rights of manu-
facture from them was only of secondary
importance, for there were several other firms
in London who doubtless would appreciate its
value. On the way home they decided that
they would call upon another well-known firm of
engineers that afternoon and endeavour to get
them interested, and if the results of that visit
were not satisfactory, that they should make
their invention go through some evolutions in
the river which would, because of the newspaper
paragraphs describing the performance, draw
attention to them.
“We’ll force the world to recognise us some-
how,” Jack said. “ We’ve just to keep pegging
away and not get down-hearted.”
“ I’ve got half an idea that some people recog-
nise us already,” Charlie answered. “Don’t look
behind until we reach the corner, but there are
two men following us, and I’m quite sure I saw
them when we left your house this morning, and
also when we left the works of Messrs. Macarthur
& Smith.”
Jack laughed. “I’ll look round when I get
the chance,” he said, “ but your face is as grave
as a doctor’s, Charlie ; surely you’re not dreaming
of wild schemes in which we have to fight
anarchists and all sorts of law-breakers ? We


are living in the twentieth century, you know,
and that kind of thing is out of date. Besides,
we are unknown, and not worthy of notice as yet,
and only Messrs. Macarthur & Smith know what
we can do.”
“Oh, I’m not worried about anything, Jack!
We can look after ourselves all right; but I feel
certain those men are watching us, all the same.”
“ Then let’s go back and meet them, and give
them a chance to speak if they wish. Maybe
they want to buy our patent.”
The boys instructed the lorryman where to
deliver his light load, and then swung round and
retraced their steps. The two men at that
moment stopped to look at a shop window, and
they were still scrutinising it intently when the
boys passed them. They were both medium-
sized men of powerful build, and dressed almost
fastidiously. There was nothing about their
appearance suggestive of their being other than
what they seemed —two English gentlemen
attending to their own affairs. They did not
even look up as the lads passed, and when Jack
looked back after walking to the next intercept-
ing street, they could not be seen.
“ I suppose you are now satisfied, Mr. Sherlock
Holmes, that we are not yet of special interest
to any people 1 ” Jack said with a laugh, as they
stood for a moment before returning.
“ No, I’m not,” Charlie answered bluntly.
“ Walk on a bit yet, and turn down the next
street. These men were following us, and we’ll


give them some work to do if they are still at
the game."
But they didn t even look at us,” said Jack ;
14 and they are not mysterious foreigners. You’re
excited, Charlie.”
I m not, but I’m curious to know what they
want with us. They may be British, but they’re
not nglish, Scotch, or Irish, for their faces were
bronzed in a way that all the sun we cret here
would never cause.”
“ But we didn’t see their faces, Charlie ; their
backs were to us as we passed them.”
I saw their faces in the mirror inside the
window in which they were also having a a oo d
look at ours. They were good-looking faces,°and
i should guess from them that the men were
under forty years of age.”
“°h ! st op trying to be a detective, Charlie ;
we J1 never get ahead with our own schemes if
youstart imagining people are studying us through
mirrors in shop windows. They were probably
interested in something in the window, and didn’t
even notice the mirror.”
I d like to know what men could see to
interest them in a milliner’s window, Jack ? If
they weren’t admiring themselves in the mirror
they were certainly watching us.”
“ I didn’t notice that It was a milliner’s
window, Charlie ; but even then they might have
been commercial travellers, or merely ordinary
m6 - n^u^ in S tlle prices of hats for their wives.”
* Jhats rot, Jack, and well you know it.
4 49


They have been on our tracks all day, and they
stood at that window when they saw we were
coming towards them so that we might not
notice them particularly, while they could see
our faces distinctly in the mirror.
“ But Charlie, we have done nothing wron a ,
and there is no reason that I know why any men
should be interested in our movements
“ Maybe Messrs. Macarthur & Smith are up
to some game. These fellows just behind
us now in a taxi-cab may be in their employ-
ment, though I hardly think so. They are fm-
too smart-looking to_ be common detectives.
Look, there they are! ” , ,
A taxi-cab passed them as Charlie spoke, and
inside, sure enough, were the two men under
discussion. They were smoking cigars and
apparently completely indifferent to all thing
around them. But the taxi was moving
slowly, and even Jack saw that the driver
was keeping an eye on the people on the pave-
“Bv Jupiter!” Jack exclaimed, “ 1 believe
you are right, Charlie. We’ve got mixed up m
something or other which looks as if we can have
some fun out of it. One of those men was
staring straight at you before you looked up, and
he bewail puffing at his cigar then only.
“Yes, I saw that,” said Charlie; “and I also
noticed, without apparently looking, I hope, tha
their cigars had as yet no ash at their ends, which
shows that they had just been lit. I suppose


now they will follow us in that taxi until they
know all our doings or find out our homes.”
“ Well, we can block that game easily enough ;
here is a tube station, and I’ll defy any taxi to
follow us overhead.”
“What, Jack! do you want to spoil all the
fun ? We’re not afraid of anything, but I am
just filled with curiosity to know what they
want with us. I propose that we lead them all
through London, and then, late at night, drop
into a tube and lose them. They are very silly,
after all, if they think they can find out our
ideas by shadowing us.”
“By Jove ! Charlie, I’ve got an idea !” cried
Jack. “ You’re certainly right about those
people following us, for that taxi is coming back
now on the other side of the street, but we’ll
track them. I propose that we get lost for a
few minutes; then you or I can reappear, but
only one of us. When they follow that one, the
other of us will follow them. What do you say ? ”
,“ 1 fy y° u are beginning to think again, Jack.
Its a first-rate idea, and it promises a lot of fun
Lets do a quick turn round this corner and
separate, and then we’ll take up positions on the
mam street again, and wait until one of us is
seen When one begins the trip through
London, the other will look out for the other
fellows and follow them.”
The boys agreed, and after arranging a scheme
and some signs, which each would understand
they cut through some lanes, and finally


reappeared at different corners of the main
thoroughfare. They did not know why they
were watched, and they did not care much, but
they meant to have some enjoyment out of the
affair —that is, if they really were followed at all.
It seemed as if they were, for the taxi, whose
number both lads had previously noted, flashed
along the street and back again, and finally
stopped on the opposite side of the road from
Charlie. He at once moved off, and the taxi
soon also glided away in the direction he had
taken. Jack followed it. He knew he could
keep it in sight, if its occupants were intent on
watching his comrade, and he knew how to
intercept it at any point of the pre-arranged
route, if at any time it travelled ahead too fast.


CHAPTER 111
The Trackers Tracked
lACK and Charlie were sportsmen of the
highest order ; they loved sport for itself
and not for any gain, although in the various
athletic clubs with which they were associated
they usually did gain the chief prizes. But now
a form of sport had come along which appealed
to both. They were the hunted, and they were
also the hunters. What the game was about,
and what it would end in, w T ere matters strangely
indifferent to them. ° J
As soon as Charlie saw that he was being
watched he started off at a smart walk down the
street He did not betray himself by looking
behind too often, and in time he had led his
followers into Euston Road, then, after travel-
ling eastward, he turned down Tottenham Court
Road until Oxford Street was reached. He
headed eastward again after noting that the
slowly moving taxi had not lost sight of him, and
soon turned down Kingsway. Wishing to show
some method in his choice of routes, he swun»
into the eastern half of the Aldwych Crescent
and continued along Fleet Street. Through


Ludgate Hill he swiftly walked, and feeling
hungry by this time he suddenly darted up a
side street, ran down Paternoster Row for some
distance, and then cut through a lane which
brought him out just opposite the Post Office
tube station. He took the train there back to
Tottenham Court Road station, and changed then
for Charing Cross. Feeling safe now, he walked
along the Strand to the restaurant where he and
Jack had arranged to meet. But his comrade
did not put in an appearance, and he dined alone,
expecting him to turn up at any time. An hour
passed however, and then another, and Charlie
became anxious. He could not understand what
had happened, because he had seen the taxi
behind him just before he had made his dash for
the “ Post Office ” tube station, and he knew his
comrade would not be far behind it. The short
winter’s day drew to a close, and still Jack had
not turned up. Now feeling very much alarmed,
Charlie hurried along the Strand until he cut into
his old route at Aldwych. Then he went over
the ground again until he reached the lane which
had Ted him through Paternoster Row to the tube
station. But no trace of his comrade could he
find. He had hardly expected to run against
him, but he knew that Jack would have made
a struggle which could not fail to be noticed had
he been attacked by the two men, and judicious
inquiries all around the place where he had
dodged the taxi revealed nothing of that nature.
After some thought Charlie took the train for


home. He had not seen his people that day,
and he feared they might become alarmed, too,
if he did not show himself. Of course they were
aware that he had been working with Jack the
night before, but they had no idea of the nature
of the developments which had followed.
Charlie’s scheme was to report himself, and then,
if no message were awaiting him, to run round
to Jack’s home and make very careful investiga-
tion there. If his comrade were really lost he
would then tell the police his story, giving them
the number of the taxi-cab which had followed
him all the earlier part of the day, and he would
also call at the residences of the heads of the
salvage firm they had interviewed to see if per-
chance they knew anything.
But Charlie’s proposed programme was not
carried out. When he got home he found a
letter awaiting him. It was a much handled
envelope which enclosed the communication, and
the post-mark was “ Sydney.” Charlie turned
the letter over in his hands several times in
surprise. His name was written in full in large,
bold handwriting, and his middle name, which he
never used, was correct in its spelling, a circum-
stance uncommon among the few letters he
received from any friends who knew his middle
name.
“ Open it,” said his father, a typical city man.
“It cannot hurt you, and maybe old Mac is
coming home.”
Charlie tore the letter open, and repressing an


exclamation as he noted the address marked at
the top right-hand corner of the single leaf of not
over-clean paper, read it through with mingled
emotions. His father and mother watched him
all the time ; evidently they had guessed from
the handwriting who had been the writer, but
they made no comment, although they could see
that Charlie was greatly excited over the contents.
Just as he was about to tell what the letter
said, Jack ran into the house, breathless and hat-
less. He knew Charlie’s parents well, and wasted
no time with apologies for his behaviour and
condition, but began at once to tell his story,
forgetful that Charlie’s parents might not have
been made acquainted with their day’s doings.
“ Charlie,” he began, “ I’ve had such a time.
I couldn’t join you at lunch, and I hoped I
should find you here.”
“ That’s all very well,” grumbled Charlie;
“ but I dodged the other fellows all right, and
surely you could have noticed that ? ”
“ Of course I did ; you left them in Ludgate
Hill, but let me get my story told at once, for
we’ve a lot to do to-night yet.”
“ I’ll bet you we haven’t,” said Charlie, hand-
ing his father his letter. “ Sit in and have tea.
Now that you’ve turned up, everything is all
right. Where did you go after I dropped out
of the game ? ”
“ After the others, of course. I followed them
easily all the way, and I expect they kept just
behind you. I knew they had lost you at


Ludgate Hill, because the men came out of the
taxi there and hurried through side streets,
along Paternoster Row, and then through into
the ‘ Post Office ’ tube station. Well, I was
nearer them, I expect, than they were to you,
for I got into the same train as they did and
watched them all the time. I have no doubt
they asked the lift man if he had seen you,
and also the attendants on the platform, but
of course I don’t know anything about that.
They travelled to Tottenham Court Road, and
changed there for Charing Cross, but when they
got out at that terminus, they seemed to be
beat. I kept out of sight, but I met Tom
Nelson when following them into the street,
and got him to change coats and hats with
me. they walked into Trafalgar Square with
me close behind, but after a bit they turned
back and went down Northumberland Avenue.
It was now dark, and I walked almost at their
heels and often heard bits of their conversation.
They went into the Hotel Victoria, and quite
boldly—for I now thought myself as good a
detective as Sherlock Holmes—l walked in after
them. I knew they hadn’t seen my face very
clearly, and Nelson’s coat and hat were almost
a disguise. I have never been in a big hotel
before, but I acted as if the place belonged to
me, and when the two men entered the smoke-
room, I was just behind them. By this time,
Charlie, I had come to the conclusion it was you
they were after, for I heard your middle name


mentioned once or twice. However, they sat
down at a table, and I sat down behind a
screen not four feet away from them.
“What on earth are you talking about,
Jack ? ” broke in Charlie’s father, who had been
giving all his attention to the letter while Jack
had been detailing his adventures. “You are
living in London, boys, and this is the twentieth
century. I hope you haven t been pla} ing any
silly tricks.”
“We haven’t, father,” Charlie said; ‘ but
some people are trying to play a silly game with
us. Do you understand that letter ? ”
“ Why, yes; it’s from your uncle, your
mother’s brother, a wild world-wanderer who
is never happy unless he is in trouble of
some kind or other. He is a man vho could
make several fortunes in London if he would
use his brains as a business man. But Mac
will never do that; he has always some im-
practicable scheme on hand, and yet he some-
how contrives to make more w T ealth in a } ear
than I could do in ten.” _ f>
“But Andrew is not really so foolish, John,
said Mrs. Gray. “He calculates everything out
very carefully before he starts, and I don t
think he makes many mistakes. He certainly
is always mixed up in some dare-devil adventure,
but you know he always comes through all right.
“ Read this letter,” Mr. Gray laughed, “ and
then perhaps you will not praise your brothei
so much; though I must admit I d join him


myself without much thought if he asked me.”
Mr. Gray spoke the latter half of his words
admiringly, and he looked strangely at his son.
Charlie explained, briefly, the result of their
visit to Messrs, Macarthur & Smith and their
subsequent experiences.
Mr. Gray laughed as Jack told of how the
“submarine swimmer” had interested them.
“ I have no doubt it would interest them,” he
said. “ Any toy will interest children, and in
scientific or engineering matters the people you
mention are not much more than children so far
as their knowledge is concerned. They are about
the sharpest men in London when it comes to
making financial deals, though ”
O 3 O
“ But they do more salvage work than any
other people in London, father,” cried Charlie
in surprise.
“ They get the credit of it, I know, but they
couldn’t do much more themselves than salve
a red herring from a kitchen sink. They take
on big contracts, but they don’t carry them
through; they give out the contracts again to
real engineers at a much lower price, and the
world rings with their name and fame, thanks
to their undoubted knowledge of advertising
methods, when anything great is accomplished
by the real workers. No, boys, you needn’t
trouble those gentlemen again, although I
expect they’ll trouble you if they had an
expert salvage engineer hiding somewhere while
you were performing for their edification and he


thinks well of your invention. But let’s hear
the rest of your wonderful detective story, Jack ;
I see you are almost exploding with the effort
to keep it back.”
“ I am, sir; I overheard some arrangements
the men made, and I learned that they were
greatly disappointed at losing Charlie. They
talked about some letter, too, but it seems they
had made some mistake about it which they
could not understand.”
“Easily enough explained,” said Mr. Gray.
“ Charlie’s letter was addressed to our old house,
and the Post-Office people readdressed it here.
Evidently your two friends of the day knew
the old place, and naturally are feeling bad at
having been foiled so simply. I don’t quite
grasp everything yet, however. I can’t see
how they managed to get on your tracks at
all after finding out their first mistake.”
“ Why, sir ! ” exclaimed Jack, “ you speak as
if you knew the men, and what their purpose
• 9 ))
IS f
“ I don’t know them, my boy, but un-
doubtedly their object is to get hold of that
letter. I don’t know why, but I think I could
guess fairly near the mark since reading the
letter. Charlie’s uncle has another mad scheme
on hand, and he has, as usual, run against a
very powerful opposition who want badly to
know the extent of his knowledge. But finish
your story, Jack, and then Charlie can read
the much desired letter.”


“ I haven’t time now, I fear,” said Jack. “ I
overheard one say that they must remember
they had asked Mr. Smith to dinner in the
Victoria at 7.30, and the other replied that if
Mr. Smith could sell them a machine to do all
he said it could do, they would not have lost
their time altogether. Now I think the machine
they were talking about was our Submarine
Swimmer, for they mentioned diving and pearl
shell often. I came away to find Charlie,
meaning that we should both go back and, if
we thought right, tell the men that we can
deal with them.”
“ I see through that little game,” Mr. Gray
said, looking at the clock; “ but we’ll spoil it
at an early stage. Make some alterations in
your dress, boys, and we’ll all pay a visit to
the Victoria. I’ll see you over your first
hurdle, at anyrate.”
“Oh, John, surely you are not going to
encourage the boys in this mad idea Andrew
suggests ? ” cried Mrs. Gray.
Mr. Gray laughed. “ I told you you would
change your mind about that brother of yours,”
he said. “It was all very fine when he played
the filibuster himself, but when he wanted to
drag Charlie into his games I thought you
would complain.”
“But you don’t object, father?’ 1 Charlie
asked anxiously. “ You know what you would
do yourself.”
Mr. Gray looked at his son in silence.


“Charlie,” he said at length, “I would do
just what you are thinking about, but it is
wrong, all the same. The sensible thing to do
would be to sell your joint invention to those
enterprising people you have already seen, and
who evidently have already found a market
where they can resell it; but No, my son,
I’d go solid for Andrew Macalister myself, as
I know you wish to do.”
“And I’ll do it, father, if you’ll allow me.
He asks for me, and surely Jack and I need
not fear what other men can meet ? ”
“My boy, get your mother’s consent, and
I’ll not stand in your way; still, it will be as
well if you bear in mind that old Mac is not
quite the same as other men. He can pretty
well do anything, and most other men would
fail miserably where he would carry all before
him.”
“ But, Charlie, we can talk about all that
later. We must find out if those men are
actually buying our invention from people who
haven’t got it to sell. We’ll play a game of
high finance with them which they won’t like
afterwards.”
“ We’re not o-oing to sell our Submarine
Swimmer, Jack—that is, if you don t insist.
A better scheme has come along, and those
men following us to-day are interested in the
same game. Just read this letter. He handed
the letter to his comrade, instructing him to
read it aloud. And this is what Jack read :


“‘ At sea on board the steam-tub Pioneer ,
N.W. of the Solomon Islands. Don’t know the
date, but calculate a fortnight earlier than the
Sydney post-mark.
“‘My dear Nephew,— We have never seen
each other, and you ought to be thankful, for
your mother used to tell me my face would
do more damage to decent people than a good
German-made sword, or an honest working
fountain pen ’ ”
“I never said that,” interrupted Mrs. Gray.
“ Andrew is only joking. He is a very hand-
some man, only he would never smile.”
“Not while you were looking,” Mr. Gray
laughed; “ but when we have been together in
the old days, his face was never without a smile.
You see, Mary, Andrew was Scotch, and his
idea of a joke lay in making some people think
that he was incapable of smiling.”
But as your father was a good fellow and
your mother is my sister’ (Jack continued read-
ing)> ‘ 7°u must be as good a young Briton as can
exist in these times. I have heard that you are
a promising engineer as well, and I hope you
also lead a God-fearing life, and have no bad
habits that are not eradicable. (I am not very sure
of the spelling of that last word—maybe it should
be eradictable—but it is a long time since I was
at school, and if you are gifted with a fair
modicum of sense you’ll grasp the meaning.)


Well, as I was saying—though this is not a good
pen to say anything with —the Pioneer is not
replete with every modern convenience—l have
had many pleasing adventures during my wicked
and perverse life, but I’m getting old enough
now to feel that I am out of date, and this is why
I struggle with this pen to make it write this
letter. Know ye, therefore, as the story-books or
the poets say, that I leave all my tangible worldly
wealth to you. It is in the Bank of Australasia,
Sydney, N.S.W. ; and I hope that when it comes
into your hands, you’ll do some good with it to
atone for my shortcomings. But lam not dead
yet, and now I’ll come to what I want to tell you,
as the knowledge may be an asset worth a good
bit more to you than three or four doubtful gold
mines. In latitude 4° 3' South, and longitude
165° 5' East, and for some distance around, is a
submarine plateau which rises to within ten
fathoms of the surface. I think the formation is
coral, but the evidences seem to prove otherwise,
for there are several islands of undoubted volcanic
origin all around. Anyhow, the lagoons are
paved with pearl shell, and shell at present, lam
told, is worth one hundred and twenty pounds
per ton. But —and it is a fair-sized hut —the
water is alive with sharks and octopodi (I think
the last word is right, but I mean the plural of
octopus) and electric eels; and I have my
suspicions that the Germans claim the earth
there, and the waters, and the earth under the
waters. There may also be other opposing


influences, but if in view of what I have said, and
with your scientific knowledge, you care to make
a bid for the pearl shell, Andrew Macalister will
be proud. He will also stand all expenses, for
the fun of the thing is worth more than money
to him, and his address is either the .Hotel
Australia, Sydney, or the Bank of Australasia in
the same city. I don’t think I’ll try to write
any more, for my pen is not behaving as a decent
pen should, or maybe it is that I am not able to
drive it as I once could. If you can, come out
here, and we’ll make as many fortunes as you
want. Tell your mother lam still on top, and
show this letter to your father before you decide
upon anything.
I hope you are well, and leading a good life,
i our bad uncle, Andrew Macalister.’
Captain Chester of the Pioneer and
his Chief Officer, Henderson, are good fellows,
and I promised them a share in the profits of
the pearl shell business if it ever came to
anything. A M >»
ack looked at Charlie when he finished read-
mg the letter, and Charlie looked at his father.
r. Cray in turn fixed his gaze upon his wife,
and for some seconds silence ensued. Mr. Gray
was the first to speak. “Do you think you
South Seas, Jack?” he asked,
the climate is good, though hot, and I believe
5 65


some of the Islanders are still cannibals. Pearl
shell is fairly high in price at present.”
“ I am going with Charlie, sir, even though it
is to the South Pole. Our invention is the very
thing to get the pearl shell Mr. Macalister speaks
about, and we are easily able to look after our-
selves, no matter what happens.”
“ That’s right, Jack!” Charlie cried. “We fear
nothing in the way of danger from natural causes,
for w<T know the powers of our Submarine
Swimmer, and we can easily beat the efforts of
any men who try to interfere with us, if those
two we tricked to-day are samples. But how
are we to get to the South Seas ?
“By P. and 0., or Orient, or some other line
to Sydney, thence by the Union Company of
New Zealand’s boats or Burns Philip’s line,”
Mr. Gray answered promptly. Evidently he
knew more about some matters than the boys
had imagined. “ And if Jack’s people will allow
him to°go, I’ll find the necessary money on
behalf of old Mac. If I weren’t an old conven-
tion-bound business man, I believe I’d go myself.
“ John ! ” exclaimed Mrs. Gray in astonished
dismay, “ what are you saying ? ”
“Nothing, beyond telling the boys that the
South Seas and your brother Andrew offer
inducement to them that is very tempting.”
“But they will be eaten by cannibals, John.
How can you encourage them to think of any
of Andrew’s mad projects ? ”
“It seems, after all,” Mr. Gray laughed, “I


have more faith in your brother than you have
yourself. Now, lam of opinion that that erratic
gentleman desires Charlie’s help for reasons he
does not state; and as I have the fullest con-
fidence in Andrew, and do not think that he has
ever done anything of which he need be ashamed
or which I shouldn’t do myself if I had his
nerve and opportunity, Ido not feel disposed to
raise objections to the lads having the chance
ol their lives Their invention will stand by them.’’
Good old dad!” shouted Charlie, and Jack
also raised an approving cry. Mrs. Gray, how-
ever, was silent. J
“ Wlll y° utalk t0 my father, sir ? ” Jack then
““ d ea f. er y- “If only saw things as you do
«e could leave for Sydney by the first boat.
don t think my mother will raise any objections
because she knows what our dreams were.”
at n - see y° ur father to-morrow”
fear as" to hkd ' think y° u *eed
tear as to his decision. He and I have not been
so indifferent to your work as you may think
Zl tour t many T , talks your inventions
rh» I futures - But we must hurry down to
thatwfknn’ f ° r 1 his essentW
men !„\ l n* “ UCh aS P ° ssible about those
ments Th Jv “ !°, lnterested in your move-
ments. Ihey cannot know me, at anyrate aud
sivht° W H th M k Maeartbur and Mr/smit’hby
m n riy ’ b °ys, and let’s go.” 7
r - ray had certainly become very enthusi
astie, much to pleasurable^^


and although. Mrs. Gray did not at first seem to
view matters as they were in a favourable light,
she at length signified her approval also. The
boys were soon ready for action, dressed in
different clothing, for Jack and Charlie were of
the same size and build, and Charlie s clothes
fitted Jack exactly. Meanwhile, Mr. Gray had
ordered a taxi-cab by telephone, and had also
rung up Jack’s parents and satisfactorily ex-
plained Jack’s absence to them.
Ten minutes later they entered the Hotel
Victoria, but as most guests had already dined,
they cautiously approached the smoke-room first
to see if perchance their men were in that apart-
ment. They were, and the boys saw them at once.
The two strangers and Mr. Smith were seated at
a table smoking, and following Mr, Gray, the
boys moved towards them apparently uncon-
cernedly, and took seats immediately behind
them at another table. Mr. Gray s intention
had been to go forward openly to the two
strangers and ask them what they meant by
following the lads. If they answered to his
satisfaction, and desired to have a conversation
with them, he would then bring Jack and Charlie
forward ; but if they could not give any reason-
able explanation, he would inform them that if
they persisted in their strange tactics, the}
would probably find London an extremely un-
comfortable place very soon.
But Mr. Gray’s ideas underwent a change
when he entered the large room. The spirit of


adventure came over him, and he became as
young in temperament as his son. Perhaps he
was even more daringly inclined; yet when the
thought struck him that he, a staid, middle-aged
city man, should be looking for adventure in the
Hotel Victoria of all places, he laughed, and called
himself an overgrown boy. Then he ordered the
waiter to bring some light refreshments for the boys
and a cigar for himself, and awaited developments.
The three men were speaking rather carelessly,
considering they were in a public place, but
doubtless they reasoned that their conversation
would have no interest to others, or perhaps
they thought, and not entirely wrongly, that
the only safe place to discuss matters of an
extremely private nature is in the middle of a
large crowd. But they really should have taken
note of their nearest neighbours, all the same
But perhaps the fact that Charlie and Jack sat
on chairs which, when tilted back, touched the
backs of theirs disarmed all suspicions. They
could not see the faces of the boys, and only Mr.
Gray and Mr. Smith were in a position to see
each other, and the latter, if he did know Mr.
Gray by sight, had certainly no conception that
he was in any way connected with the young
engineers who had called upon his partner and
himself that morning.
“ V ell, then, to cut things short and get to the
point, can you give us such an affair as can do
what we require?” said one of the strangers
addressing Mr. Smith across the table. “We’ve


lost a lot of time already, and old Macalister
will be thinking he has everything his own
way.
“I can sell you a new invention for five
thousand pounds which can bring up anything
from the bottom of the sea, and be perfectly
immune from danger, from sharks, or any other
creatures,” Mr. Smith replied. “Itis a
marvellous contrivance, and a boy can work it.
Of course, if you only want to purchase one
machine and not the entire patent, you can
have it, I suppose, for a few hundreds, but then
you must understand that dozens of the same
machines might be working alongside you in the
hands of rival syndicates.”
“Oh, we’ll take the patent rights for the
world,” one of the men interrupted, M e want
the thing to ourselves, though I don’t think any
people would work alongside us very long if we
didn’t want them near us. When can we see
the affair ? ”
“ I’ll endeavour to make arrangements as soon
as possible,” Mr. Smith answered. “ L nfortun-
atelv, it is a very obstinate-minded inventor we
have to deal with, and although he has promised
the rights for five thousand pounds we didn t
close, and he may ask a much larger sum now,
if he imagines we are very anxious about the
matter.”
“ Very natural on his part, laughed the
second stranger. “ The value of anything lies
in the demand for it. Give the fellow a thousand


more whether he asks for it or not, if his
invention will do all that is claimed for it.”
“ It can do more, gentlemen, a great deal
more,” Mr. Smith replied. “My partner,
Mr. Macarthur, and myself saw it tested
thoroughly this forenoon. It can do almost any-
thing under water that can be done on shore,
and we saw it picking up coins from the bottom
of our experimental tank just as if it were
actually a fish feeding upon them.”
“ All right, old man; you close the deal at
once. Buy the sole rights, and we’ll buy them
from you on the usual basis of a 10 per cent,
commission in your favour. If you care to put
us into direct communication with the inventor,
of course we’ll deal without your aid, but we’ll
pay you the commission just the same.” The
speaker was still the second stranger.
“Gentlemen, you insult me,” complained the
famous salvage engineer. “ I seek no commission.
I am anxious to be of service to you, because
you are sons of the Britain beyond the seas. I,
too, should glory in being a pioneer of our
glorious Empire, but, alas! sordid business, by
which I earn my daily bread, will not permit.”
“Don’t cry, old man,” the first stranger
interrupted. “We happen to be sons of Greater
Britain, but most of our comrades are not; and
anyway we don’t pioneer worth a bad penny.
In fact, we’re bad men, and if Britain, Germany,
France, or America could lay hands on us,
I reckon some Insurance Companies would lose


some money; at least, they should if they paid
up on our lives,”
“ Dear me ! ” Mr. Smith ejaculated. “I
I didn’t know youwweree —er —that kind of people.
I—er—am sorry I have an important engagement
in—er—er
“ The Hotel Victoria,” finished the second man
with a laugh, “ and you’ve got to keep it. You
silly old juggins, we won’t eat you. There are
worse people in this over-civilised city than we
are, only they haven’t been found out. Here,
have another brandy and go on with your yarn.
We want that patent submarine grub-catcher,
and we don’t care what we pay for it.”
Mr. Smith gulped down one of the drinks that
the waiter brought forward at that moment and
seemed much benefited. He looked up at the
faces of his companions and smiled. He was
now very brave—for him. “ Well, well,” he said,
“ it doesn’t matter to me who or what you are.
You require my services, and I have promised to
help you. I like brave fellows, and I’ll do my
utmost to help you. But what, honestly, do you
mean to do with the patent when you have got
it ? ” He assumed what, doubtless, he thought
was an expression calculated to show that he
knew a thing or two himself.
Both men laughed loudly without any apparent
cause, and one said, “ We are greatly interested,
Mr. Smith, in the study of coral formations, and
it is to enable us to see the coral trees waving in
their native element that we came to your famous


firm for assistance. But now that we’ve settled
about the purchase of that marvellous invention,
which you have the power to sell, let’s talk on
another matter.”
“ Surely,” said Mr. Smith. “ Variety, even in
conversation, is highly desirable. Mr. Macarthur
and I often argue with each other ”
“Yes, we’ll take that for granted,” one said;
“although what two old Darling Whalers* like
you can find to argue about beats me.”
“ Sir! ” cried Mr. Smith, rising from the
table indignantly, “ I am not used to suffering
insults.”
“ Of course not,” laughed the other stranger.
“You’d put six shots into the stomach of the
man who insulted you, I’m sure. But we’re only
paying you a compliment; you see, w T e are
Australians, and we naturally drop into the
vernacular when we feel deeply moved. A
Darling Whaler means a man who uses his
brains instead of his hands to earn his living,
and certainly you are a man of brains.”
“I flatter myself 1 am, sir; but I should be
obliged if you will confine your remarks to the
language of Britons as spoken in London.”
“ Oh, certainly; as a matter of fact I lied—
that is, I was wrong when I stated we were
Australians. We claim Australia as our home,
but I believe both of us were born in the Old
Country. But to cut things short, for w T e want
to go to one of the halls to-night to hear a
* Australian back-block loafers who live on the fish they catch.


certain singer much talked about. Have you any
information to give us concerning the gentleman
we inquired after this morning? You said you
knew him well, but we have lost sight of him,
although we adopted every scheme known to
modern detectives in following him. It almost
seems as if he knew he was being shadowed.”
“ I’ll tell you all about him to-morrow,”
Mr. Smith said. “ I know where he is em-
ployed, and I’ll make judicious inquiries. What
do you want with him, anyway ? He is only a
boy, and I’m sure he can’t help you much,”
“ Tell us all you know about him, and never
mind whether he can help us or not,” the first
and most bluntly-spoken stranger interrupted.
“You can add another thousand to the price of
your confounded diving apparatus if we get in
touch with him.”
“ Very well, gentlemen, call upon me to-
morrow. My partner will have arranged the
business of the diving and submarine-working
contrivance purchase by an early hour, and about
the same time I shall introduce you to the person
you desire to know. To show that lam acting
straightforwardly, too, and keeping back noth-
ing, I may add that he is the comrade of the
inventor of the apparatus you wish to buy.”
“ What! ” both men exclaimed, starting from
their chairs.
“ He is even co-inventor, I believe,” continued
Mr. Smith, wondering what he had said to cause
the sudden change in his companions. Hitherto


The Trackers Tracked
they had been languid and indifferent, but they
had become galvanised into activity with
startling suddenness.
“ Look here, Mr. Smith,” said one of the men,
“ your soul—if you’ve got one—is wrapped up in
mud pumps, diving dresses, and bank notes.
Now, we don’t know much about the first two
things, but we fairly scintillate when common
gold is the subject. We’ll double the price of
that mechanical fish you mean to swindle out of
the inventors and sell to us, if you arrange an
introduction between that co-inventor, as you
call him, and ourselves.”
“ What do you want with him ? ” Mr. Smith
inquired as innocently as he could.
“The matter cannot possibly concern you, but
we may as well satisfy your confounded curiosity
by telling you that he knows something we
want to know, and it was to get that knowledge
that we came halfway round this world to this
village called London.”
“ But when you get the diving machine, my
engineer can explain it all to you without the
inventor.”
“ Hang the diving machine and you and your
engineers ; it’s where the thing is going to work,
and one or two other matters that we want to
know.”
“ But surely you can study coral growths
wherever you wish when you secure the patent
rights for the world; and you can certainly
interdict other people from infringing.”


“ Excuse me, Mr. Smith,” broke in the other
man, “ but you are not much short of being a
first-class idiot. I don’t believe the thing is
patented at all, and if it is it is a pity, for all
the world will know of it. Brins us into touch
with the inventors to-morrow, including the lad
indicated to us to-day, and your bank balance
will swell as if you had just got paid for another
big cheating deal. We must go now, or we’ll be
too late to hear that singer.”
“ Sir, you are insulting ! ”
“ Not a bit; you see, we know you and your
precious partner. Our fellows have had dealings
with you before, although you may not connect
us with any of your previous strange experiences.
We do a kind of salvage trade, too, sometimes,
but not your way.”
Mr. Smith’s injured air gave place to dawning
enlightenment. His face was very mobile, and
he could have posed equally well for a saint, a
music-hall comedian, or a low class villain.
“ Ha ! gentlemen,” he exclaimed with a dramatic
gesture, “ I know you now. Oh, why didn’t you
tell me earlier, and therefore save all talk of
sordid business ? I, too, will go and hear that
singer, for I am fond of sweet music, and
afterwards we can talk confidentially with-
out any restraint. Gentlemen of the Twentieth
Century Adventurers, I raise my glass to
you.” The little man stood up, and with a
laugh the others signified that he had found
o o
them out. The three then passed out of the


room without a glance at the people at the
nearest table.
“Come on, boys,” Mr. Gray said when the
door closed on the other trio, “ I should like to
hear that wonderful singer, too, but we can’t very
well follow them now. Andrew Macalister has
started another mad game, and this time he
needs you two boys to help him.”
“ But how did they know I had a letter from
him, father \ ” Charlie asked as they went outside.
“ It seems to me that if they ever were in a position
to read the address they could have stolen it.”
“ Perhaps they wished to see who Andrew was
writing to for other reasons,” Mr. Gray answered
thoughtfully. “ They did not seem to be aware
that you had any connection with the apparatus
they were buying from Messrs. Macarthur &
Smith until the last-named gentleman told
them.”
“ 1 think I can explain about the letter,” said
Jack. “When I was listening to them this
afternoon, I heard them regret that they did not
break into the Pioneer s mail room and get
possession of it, even at the risk of more serious
trouble. One had an envelope in his hand, too,
and they seemed to be worrying over it because
it was wrongly addressed. I remember, too, one
said, ‘ If old Mac had only written two letters as
well as two envelopes our work would have been
easy. ’ ”
“Just what I have been thinking,” Mr. Gray
said; “Andrew wasn’t pleased with the first


envelope he addressed and threw it away, and
they found it. How or why they were in
Andrew’s company without his knowledge, I
can’t understand, but I expect you have been
involved in a game in which there are many
complicated parts. We’ll go to Jack’s house at
once and see that your invention is all right,
I want to see Jack’s father, at anyrate.”


CHAPTER IV
The Game Begins
MESSRS. Macarthur & Smith were in their
ITI offices early the following morning, much
to the surprise of their clerical staff, who couldn’t
understand why the heads of a great firm should
put in such an early appearance on such a
miserably cold, foggy, and frosty day. So far as
they knew no business was of an urgent nature,
and no great salvage scheme was under discus-
sion. But the partners never took their staff
into their confidence unless they wished to
advertise some big contract they had received
and then, only a few of the oldest clerks who’
could be trusted implicitly for Messrs.
Macarthur & Smith paid their trusted servants
extremely well—ever knew that that contract
would be given out to more practical, but less
lamous engineers.
The partners paced about Mr. Macarthurs
roona impatiently. They had expected the
youthful inventors to be in attendance at an
early hour, but as yet they had not turned up.
Mr. Smith had already told Mr. Macarthur of


his experiences the previous evening, and both
men were excited.
“You are sure you communicated with the
right place after receiving my message through
the telephone at your house last night ? ” Mr.
Smith asked. “I think I made the state of
affairs very plain ? ”
“ I ’phoned the manager of the works where
Jack Osborne is employed at his residence,
Mr. Macarthur replied, “asking him to send the
boy round here first thing in the morning. I
also wrote a letter to the lad himself, which
should have been in his hands at least an hour
ago, telling him that we might possibly give a
couple of thousand pounds for the invention,
but that at anyrate we desired his presence here
as early as possible.”
“ You didn’t mention anything about the
other fellow, Gray ? ”
“No, Osborne is the person we are dealing
with. Gray may be co-inventor, but we’ve
nothing to do with that.”
“ I don’t know ; if by any chance you remember
the Twentieth Century Adventurers’ Syndicate,
and our dealings with it, I expect you 11 be
surprised to know that it is members of that
body we are now in touch with, and they seem
to be more interested in the other fellow named
Gray than in either Osborne or the wonderful
invention. They can pay all right, as of old,
though how they raise the money I don’t
know, I wish we had been easier with the


youngsters yesterday; they might be worth a
lot to us.”
“Ah, well! they’ll be here presently, I’ve no
doubt; but I’ll just ring up the manager of the
place where Osborne works. He’s a friend of
mine, anyway.” Mr. Macarthur sat down at
his desk and seized the portable telephone, and
in a few seconds was in communication with the
famous engineering establishment where Jack
was still an apprentice.
“Is that you, Mr. Brown?” he called; and
then, obviously receiving an answer in the
affirmative, he went on, “ Ah ! good morning ; I’m
Macarthur of the salvage people. Has young
Osborne of your place asked leave to come to
see me this morning ?—What, he hasn’t ?—Oh
e as asked permission to be absent on private
business? That.is all right, then, Mr. Brown.
—,i_ _ 1 i * i ITS# Oljj no, we
Shan t keep him very long.—Yes, he’s a smart
lad, and I can quite believe you would be sorry
to lose his services; but we won’t take him from
you. By the way, do you know anything about
his people ?-I mean are they poor or-w?ll you
understand?-oh, they’re no?! His rathe/”?
manager of the Cosmo Chemical Works. Dear
1 kn °w that. Ah! yes, it is very
T°° d mornil >g-” Mr. Macarthur laid
down the instrument and turned to his partner.
Us borne will be here presently,” he said. “He
as already left his place of employment. But
we cannot deal with him exactly as we had
6 81


arranged, for it seems his people are not of the
class from whom most of the inventions we
Pave —er —bought have come.”
“ Yes, yes; I heard your words at the tele-
phone. 5 But I hope he and his comrade turn up
soon, for it means a good few thousands solid
cash to us, besides the goodwill of the very
wealthy, influential, and enterprising gentle-
men we know. Confound it; here they come.
What can we say to them, and how can
we explain why we cannot show them the thing
working ? ”
“That’s a simple matter. Were a business
people, and have so many important matters
requiring our attention that we forgot about
their affair. We ll tell them that, and try to
interest them in some of our other schemes
which require capital, and then one of us will
slip away and meet the lads when they come.
It will never do for us to allow the venders and
the buyers to meet until we have made our own
arrangements.”
“ Certainly not; they would deal direct and do
us out of our legitimate profits. You speak to
them, and I will wait in the entrance hall until
the boys come.”
The two gentlemen with whom Mr. Smith
had spent the previous evening were ushered in
a moment after that person had left the room by
another door. Mr. Macarthur put on his best
smile and invited them to be seated, at the same
time proffering his cigar case.


But the partners had made one great mistake,
the boys were not coming to them at all. When
ack turned out to duty the morning after the
adventures in which Charlie and he had taken
prominent parts, it was not to visit the famous
salvage firm he asked leave of absence. It was
to go home again with some of his private tools
so that Charlie and he might make some improve-
ment in their strange invention which had now
become known among themselves as the “ sub-
marine swimmer.” Their parents had at last
thinv eC If hat ] the b T l ad . rea % invented some-
thing of value and both Mr. Gray and Mr
Osborne were fully determined to see their sons
through with it. Thus, late the previous evening
after a long discussion with Mr. Osborne Ur’
Gray had dispatched a cablegram to Andrew
Macalister, Hotel Australia, Sydney, wooded
we I 0"' Andrew knew
a VT Letter received all right.—Will leave for
fet to7o
r tS h ;° address - being° merely “Gray"
When he reached his office next morning a
reply was awaiting him in the same code, winch
on being translated, read“ Come as soon «
possi e,— Bring friend.—lnvention greatly
83


required. Beware Adventurers. Andrew
Macalister.” ~
“That settles the matter, Mr. Gray said,
“ and the boys will see the part of the world in
which I live in my dreams. Ah, well! we’ll miss
them sadly; but it is their chance or Andrew
wouldn’t ask for them.” He rang up Mr. Osborne
on the telephone and read the decoded cablegram
to him. After a brief conversation both men
aoreed that their sons should be allowed to choose
their future course for themselves, only receiving
help and advice from their parents. Then Mr.
Gray rang up the works where Charlie was
employed, and after a short discussion with the
manager, got his son at the other end of the
wires. He informed him as to the nature of the
cablegram he had received, and instructed him to
get into communication with his comrade at once.
He also told Charlie that if he had decided to go
out to his uncle, he should notify his employers of
his desire to leave their service immediately.
Mr. Gray felt, after all this had been done, that
he was in no mood for business that day, and
that he might be of some use to the boys at
home. Home he went, arriving only a few
minutes before Charlie, who was so filled with
enthusiasm that he felt neither cold nor dis-
comfort, even although he had forgotten his
overcoat. He explained that he had already
seen Jack, and even while they were still talking
Jack appeared.
“ Well, lads,” Mr. Gray said after some general


talk, “you have evidently already decided upon
what you are going to do, and nothing now
remains for your parents but to see you well
started. But let me advise you that now you
have determined upon a certain plan of action
you must not dally; you must move so quickly
that any possible enemies will be unable to grasp
your ideas or to follow you. Funds sufficient
for your requirements are at your disposal; once
there you must depend upon yourselves—and
Andrew Macalister. Now, act as seems best to
you, and Mr. Osborne and myself will stand by
you when required.”
“ You’re the best father that ever lived,” said
Charlie impulsively.
“I don’t know that your mother would agree
with you in that, my boy,” Mr. Gray said with a
forced smile. “ She does not see things as you
and I do. But I trust lam acting for the best.
I know I should wish to do exactly what is in
your mind were I young and strong and had no
responsibilities. And I have the utmost faith in
old Mac. I haven t seen him for eighteen years,
but he lets your mother and myself know he is
all right, periodically, by—well, never mind, but
I have built up the business which I had hoped
you should carry on some day by means of the
material assistance Andrew has given me
from time to time. Now, my boy, lam giving
him my best treasure, excepting your mother,
and I know you will well repay Andrew and—no,
my son, 111 not say any more. Jack’s parents


are making even a greater sacrifice, for they don t
know your uncle, and —I’m done, boys.
Mr. Gray left the room to talk things over
with his wife, but Charlie knew that his father
was just as soft-hearted as his mother, although
he spoke so bravely. And Jack had a similar
story to tell. His people offered no objections
to his going away. They had learned from Mr.
Gray that the object was not so improbably wild
as it looked, and having full confidence in their
son, they would not stand in the way of his
doing what he thought best.
Thus it was that while Messrs. Macarthur &
Smith were entertaining the two gentlemen of
the Twentieth Century Adventurers, or endeav-
ouring to do so, pending the two boys arrival,
the lads themselves were making arrangements
in which the enterprising salvage engineers had
no part. Jack read the letter he had received
from Mr. Macarthur that morning to his comrade,
and both laughed heartily over its most innocent
wording. But they did not mean to have any
further dealings with the famous firm, and after
a consultation Jack wrote a short note to the
partners signifying as much. The young in-
ventors then walked over to Jacks house and
spent the rest of the day putting the finishing
touches to the long, fish-like, diving, and swim-
ming contrivance they had built.
They got everything to their satisfaction, and
had just completed all arrangements for packing
the affair in a manner which would preserve it


intact during a long voyage, when Mr. Gray
was ushered in to them. He was excited beyond
doubt.
“ Boys,” he said, “ this game is becoming
more complicated every minute. I got on the
track of your two friends of yesterday, and I
can tell you things are being hustled by them.
They, by a trick which I need not trouble to
explain, have got copies of the cablegrams from
the office of the Cable Company, and they’ve
driven Messrs. Macarthur & Smith mad with
anxiety to find you. They have also located
this house by some means or other, and I
expect that inside an hour it will be watched
night and day. Come, boys, get your invention
out of here at once, for we can’t afford to give
away chances to those fellows.”
“ But where can we take it, father?” Charlie
asked. “It is finished in every way, and surely
a dwelling-house in London is safe from any
gang of thieves ? ”
“I have no doubt the house is quite safe,
boys,” Mr. Gray replied, “ but you may not be.
Gan t you see you’ve taken sides in some affair,
and have therefore laid yourselves open to any-
thing that the opposing side may do, or try to
do against you ? You can’t allow yourselves to be
caught in anyway, for has not Andrew Macalister
warned you to beware of the Adventurers ?
They are after you now, and you simply must
throw them off the scent, or give up the idea
of helping old Mac in his wild scheme.”


“ All right,” broke in Jack. “ Tell us what
you think we should do, and we’ll set about it
at once. We know we are into a conspiracy of
some kind, but we’ll look after ourselves, and
the people who think we are not worth taking
into account, will make the biggest mistake of
their lives.”
“ I believe you, Jack,” Mr. Gray said. “It
is strange to honest, sober-minded citizens of
O *
London to imagine that two lads could be
shadowed wherever they went without any
reason known to the lads themselves, but old
Mac said, only this morning, and if you will
examine the cablegrams you’ll see that, accord-
ing to the time in Sydney, he is really saying
it now, for his message is marked 5 p.m.,
Wednesday, and it is still a minute or two
from that time in London owing to the differ-
ence in time between Australia and Britain.
Dear me ! what was I talking about ? Oh, yes ;
the man you are going across half the world to
join warns you to beware of the Adventurers, and
we know that the two men we overheard in the
Victoria, and who took up my time to-day, are
members of a society known by that title.
They have got this address, for I heard Mr.
Macarthur give it to them, after getting it
himself through the telephone from your late
employers, Jack. I came here at once, for I
know they’ll watch this house now in the hopes
of tracing Charlie through you, and what may
then happen I don’t know, except that you’ll


have lost the first part of the game because of
your movements and yourselves being so well
known.”
“ Well, suggest something, father,” said
Charlie. “We are not fools, and we know
that we have run against powerful enemies
already.”
“ Shift your diver, or swimmer, or whatever
you call it, away from here immediately, and
if you and Jack have anything to say to each
other don’t say it here. Dodge about in the
tubes until you are certain you have lost any
followers before speaking of important matters.
And, by the way, I mention that Reuters
have notified me to-day that five hundred
pounds have been cabled to my credit from
Sydney. Of course you know from whom it
came and for what purpose. Andrew Macalister,
filibuster, adventurer, world-wanderer, gentle-
man, and my brother-in-law, is a man in whom
I have the most implicit faith, and if my sou
and his comrade cannot see him through in his
his present venture —I’ll—I’ll go out to him
myself.”
“ All right, father, but give us a chance
first,” said Charlie. “Maybe we’re a bit slow,
because we’re not used to an adventurous life,
but we’ll beat the men who are watching us,
O'
all the same. Do you know any place con-
venient where we could store this thing for a
few days ? ”
“ There is a warehouse near my office where it


could be stored safely; but it must be got away
quickly, or not at all,”
“ We’re ready now,” said Jack ; “ and we can
get our swimmer shifted in a few minutes, for a
cab can take it if we place it diagonally, and I
see a cab standing just across the road.”
“ Then, if you are ready, signal it to come
here,” said Mr. Gray. “ I am expecting every
moment to see those Adventurers or some people
in their service standing outside.”
A few minutes later the wonderful “ submarine
swimmer ” was on its way to a safe resting-place
pending the boys’ further arrangements, and
when it was in sure keeping, all went back to Mr.
Gray’s house to dine.
“ Well, boys,” said Charlie’s father afterwards,
“ your stay in poor old England must be short.
Sydney is your magnet, and although some
hearts will feel the wrench of parting, there you
must be at the earliest possible moment, if you
are to be of any use to the man who calls you.
What do you say, Charlie ? ”
“ The P. and 0. Mongolia leaves on Friday,
father, and we could easily be ready for it.”
“ No use ; you’d be followed as sure as night
follows day. Your friends will keep an eye on
all ships leaving Loudon for Australia, especially
the P. and 0. and Orient Liners.”
“Then why not leave on Friday just the
same ? ” interposed Jack, “ and by travelling
overland across France, catch last week’s Orient
Liner at Marseilles, or even at Naples ? ”


“ I am afraid that that is just what our friends
will expect you to do,” Mr. Gray said. “ I
should almost advise you to travel by some less
direct route, so as to baffle them as much as
possible. Doubtless there are more than two
concerned in trying to obtain your knowledge
and your invention, and even if you got away
safely, they could cable to some of their agents
at any of the ports on the way, instructing them
to watch you. In fact, my boys, I think it is
highly essential that your connection with old
Mac should not be known any more than can be
helped.”
“ I know a plan which will beat them all,”
cried Jack, “if you can persuade my people to
let me get away at once.”
“Your parents will not stand in your way,
Jack,” Mr. Gray said. “They think as I do,
and my opinion is that you cannot afford to lose
time.”
“Then we won’t,” Jack said. “We’ll have a
record race round this old world, and we’ll
juggle with boats and trains so much that no
people can follow us, or know where we are at
any time.”
“ Oh, we know you are a freak when it comes
to dealing with railway routes and time-tables,
Jack,” Charlie said. “You know everything
about times and trains, but unfortunately there
isn’t a railway from London to Sydney, and unless
you have an aeroplane hidden somewhere, I
don’t see how we can do anything sensational in


travelling, unless we book on board a cargo
tramp.”
“The Union Line of New Zealand steamer
Makura is running on the All Red route between
Vancouver in British Columbia and Sydney,”
Jack said, “and she is the fastest boat on the
Pacific, I believe.”
“ Well, what of that ? ” Charlie asked,
“London is a long way from Vancouver.”
“Yes, but she sails from Vancouver for
Sydney a fortnight to-morrow, and if we make
no mistakes and get across the Atlantic in good
time we’ll catch her, and there isn’t another boat
on that service for a month after. She will land
us with luck even before the Orient boat we
could yet catch at Naples or Marseilles.”
“ Can’t do it,” said Mr. Gray. “ The first boat
from this side possible for you to get, not a slow
intermediate ship, is the Cunard Liner
Mauretania. She sails from Liverpool on
Saturday, and she would just miss giving you a
through connection by a day, even although she
made one of her famous passages. If there
happened to be a fast Canadian boat you might
manage ”
“ I beg your pardon, sir, but I feel quite sure
that if no accidents happen we can do it. The
Mauretania will land us in New York on
Thursday night, that is a week to-morrow.
Surely we can get across to Vancouver before
the following Thursday morning when the
Makura sails ? ”


“ Jack, you are wonderfully well up in the
knowledge of the times of boats and trains, and
you certainly would make a good business man,
but in this case you must be slightly wrong, as
the mail for Honolulu, Fiji, and Australia by that
route left London to-day to go this afternoon by
the big White Star Liner, Now you cannot
travel faster than the British mail. ,,
“We can, sir; if you think the scheme is good
in other ways. We can gain some hours on it at
New York, which will mean a full day, if we
catch the C.P.R. Pacific express leaving Montreal
at ten minutes past ten on Friday morning, or
the Imperial Limited at half-past ten the same
night.”
“But you seem to forget, my boy, that
Montreal is a long way from New York, and
that you can’t get through the Customs in the
latter place in five minutes. If I were going
that way, I think I should travel direct from
New York to Seattle by Chicago and the Lake
Shores Railway, thence to Vancouver.”
“ The route I propose works out ten hours
faster, sir,” Jack said. “ I know it well, although
I’ve never been out of Britain, for I’ve dreamt of
taking part in a wild rush to Australia these
last few years, and I’ve made myself acquainted
with everything we should know. lam there-
fore quite sure we can catch the Makura if the
Mauretania arrives in New York even on Friday
morning, and as the Lusitania has just made
a record homeward passage, the weather on the


Atlantic must be favourable. We could catch
a train from New York for Montreal on Friday
morning if lucky, and if not, on Friday evening.
That would allow us to connect, by a few
minutes, with the Transcontinental Friday night
or Saturday morning train, which would carry
us to Vancouver either the night before the boat
sailed, or an hour before her departure the next
morning. Why the mails take so long I don’t
know, but I expect they go by some other
route.”
Mr. Gray looked at Jack for a moment with-
out speaking, then he laughed. “ All right, my
boy,” he said; “ you seem to have it all arranged,
and so far as I can judge your times and figures
are correct. I’ll book your passages to New York
to-morrow morning by the Cunard Liner,”
“ Why not right to Sydney, father ? It would
be much cheaper,” put in Charlie.
“ Because those interested in you could easily
find out, through the shipping offices, your
destination, and if they were too late to follow
you, would cable to Sydney to their people to
watch you ; and also because your uncle, Andrew
Macalister, is one who never counts the costs of
anything. But it is now late ; I’ll see you
home, Jack, in case your friends might be
watching for Charlie, and to-morrow we’ll hustle
things.”
And they did hustle things. They sent their
invention off to Liverpool securely packed and
well disguised, marked, “ Passenger’s Baggage,”


and “Wanted on the Voyage.” Of course they
had taken their tickets first at the London
office of the Cunard Company. Then they
dispatched their few personal effects by another
route also well labelled. Mr. Gray, during the
afternoon, cabled to Sydney in code, through the
Post Office, a few words to the effect that the
boys would arrive in that city by the end of
January. He was very discreet in his message,
for fear it came into the wrong hands; but he
knew the British Postal Department would not,
on any pretext, allow the original message to be
seen by anyone. An answer came next morning
cautioning the boys to make no friends en route,
and to be ever on their guard, as it was certain
they would be watched.
The boys laughed at the idea of their being
taken in by chance acquaintances, and mentally
resolved that those who did follow would require
to move very lively. They also marvelled a
little why there was so much mystery and the
reason thereof, and wondered in what special
way they could be of use to Macalister against
such a powerful organisation as seemed to be
against him. They saw the two gentlemen of
the “ Adventurers ” frequently. They kept a
constant watch on Charlie’s house, so that the
boys entered and departed by back thoroughfares
to avoid being seen. Letters and telegrams
came from Messrs. Macarthur & Smith, at first
merely requesting an appointment, as they
thought they could now do business, but latterly


in almost frantic terms, offering them five, and
then six, thousand pounds for their inven-
tion.
All these messages were ignored by the lads;
they were well aware that if the great salvage
engineers once got into touch with them again,
they would use every means to keep them in
sight afterwards, and neither Jack nor Charlie
could now be tempted with six thousand pounds.
They had souls above the purchasing power of
money, and henceforth their best efforts were to
be on behalf of the world-wanderer, Andrew
Macalister.
But the gentlemen who professed themselves
members of the “Twentieth Century Adven-
turers ” were not so easily shaken off, and on
Friday evening they called at Mr. Osborne’s
house and asked to see Jack. The two lads were in
the drawing-room at the time, and they decided
that boldness was their best policy, in so much
that it would really appear to be absolute
innocence. Jack got a hint conveyed to his father
to be in readiness, while Charlie hid behind the
piano, and next moment the two mysterious men
were ushered in.
Jack received them most politely, and waited
for them to explain their business.
“We heard,” began one, “ that you are the
inventor of a piece of apparatus which might be
useful for salvage work, and we thought we
would call to inquire further about its possi-
bilities, and if you were inclined to do business,


make you an offer for the sole rights of the
world.”
“ But I don’t know you,” said Jack diplo-
matically. “ I cannot discuss anything with
people I don’t know.”
“ Our names do not matter much,” said the
man who had opened the conversation. “We
are only acting for others. Still, if you desire
to know the names we sign on our cheque books,
there is no reason why you shouldn’t. My
friends handle is John D. Brown, and mine is
Wilhelm S. Buelow. He is an Australian, and I
am a German, according to the accident of birth ;
but we claim no nationality; we are children of
the world.”
Then what are you prepared to give for our
invention ? Jack broke in. “ I suppose you
know all about it already ? ”
“We know very little about it,” Buelow con-
tinued in absolutely perfect English. “ But we
are prepared to give a fair figure for it, and take
all risks. Have you got it here ? ”
Ao, }ou see, I am only a part-inventor.
Mj comiade must be considered before we can
deal.”
Then take us to him at once and we’ll close
matters on the spot,” broke in the Australian
called Brown. “ Were rather pressed for time
and anyhow we are not people to haggle over
money matters.” 5
“ I believe you,” Jack said, “ but unfortunately
ni) partner is not available at present. As a
7 97


matter of fact, we’ve had several communications
regarding our contrivance, and —and he is con-
sidering one at this moment.”
“We’ll give a thousand pounds more than
the highest offer you receive from any people,”
said Buelow.
“ And if you will kindly give us your partner’s
address we’ll write to him, making our offer
formally,” added Brown, much too eagerly to
carry conviction.
“ Make your offer to me and I shall discuss it
with him,” said Jack. “We have so many
things to think about that we’ve divided our
work, and I’m the business man.”
“ You’re only a kid,” Brown said with a laugh.
“ What do you know about business ? Where
does your partner live ? ”
“ I know enough not to tell you anything
until I hear your proposal,” Jack returned coolly.
“ And I’ll talk the thing over with my partner
then, not before.”
“ You’re mighty independent,” Brown re-
marked. “ Why won’t you give us his address ? ”
“ Because he’s not at home at present for one
reason, and because all arrangements are in my
hands for another.”
“ Oh, he is not at home ? ” cried Buelow.
“ Probably that explains a lot ? ” His comrade
administered a kick, and he ceased speaking
abruptly.
“ No, and I expect to be away myself next
week on important business,” Jack went on,


thinking he was acting correctly if he could mis-
lead the visitors.
“ Indeed; when will Mr. Gray be back in
town ? ” Mr. Buelow was the speaker, and his
hand stroked the place where, evidently, a
moustache had recently flourished.
“ Who told you that was my comrades name ? ”
demanded Jack, beginning to feel tired of acting.
“ Why, you said so yourself, didn’t you ? ”
Brown answered. “ I thought Gray was the
name you gave, but if not, it doesn’t matter.”
“ Perhaps not,” said Jack. “ But, gentlemen,
I’ve some work to do to-night, and if you are
really anxious to meet my comrade, I’ll see that
he writes you himself making an appointment.
Of course you must be prepared to give a good
price for the invention.”
£< Oh, the price doesn’t matter to us ! We can
expect a letter from your partner, then ? ”
“ Yes, sometime. He’s a strange fellow though,
and he 11 not write until he feels inclined. But
he’ll do it some time.”
Ah, w ell! said Buelow, “ I suppose w T e must
be content wdth your assurance. We wdll now
wish you good-night.”
‘‘Good-night, gentlemen,” Jack responded,
and a minute later the men were out of the
house.
“There’s one good thing about your promise
of my letter, Jack, Charlie said, comino- out
from his hiding-place, “ I cannot very 5 well
wu-ite to them until 1 know their address and


they forgot to tell you that. I expect it will be
from Sydney that 111 write them.
“ Well it doesn’t matter if it is from Mars or
Saturn; ’they didn’t leave their cards and I
don’t know where they stay. But we d better
separate for the night, partner. V. e sail to-
morrow know, and weve never
been to sea before," ~ f
Charlie only laughed in answer, ihe idea ot
voine to sea for the first time was very pleasing
to him. Shortly after he went home, taking
every care that he was not followed, and next
morning, after saying good-bye to all their
people, Mr. Gray, Mr. Osborne, and the two bo} s
paraded the main line departure platform ot bt.
Pancras Station very ostentatiously.
But they had no intention of travelling troin
St. Pancras. They were there for the benefit ot
anyone who might possibly be watching them.
Suddenly they disappeared, and a few minutes
later they climbed up the stairs from the Euston
Tube Station and got on board the Liverpool
train very quietly indeed. ,
Mr Osborne kept a sharp look-out until the
train'started, but he saw nothing to cause any
alarm. They lunched in the train, and arrived
at the great seaport in the afternoon. H ol ®
they soon became lost amidst the crowd ot
people making for the Mauretania, and when
they cot on board they went below to their
cabins? Their luggage was there before them;
and while the passengers said good-bye to their


friends on deck, the boys parted with their
fathers down in the heart of the magnificent
steamer. All felt far more than they showed ;
indeed, Jack and Charlie felt very much inclined
to change their minds when the last warning
signal sounded. But only for a moment, the
next they were laughing, and it was in this
mood that their parents left them. Soon after
the Mauretania cast off and headed down the
Mersey, The great game had begun.


CHAPTER V
A Race across the World
THE young travellers did not put in an
appearance at dinner that evening. They
felt they were cut adrift from their dear ones, and
they could not help dwelling on the possibilities
of ever seeing them again. They sat in their
little well-ventilated cabin and comforted each
other, but when a kindly steward came and
inquired if he could bring them anything from
the dining-table, informing them at the same
time that certain dishes would not upset their
stomachs, they were forced to laugh.
“We don’t think we’ll be sea-sick,” Jack said,
“but we don’t feel like eating anything at
present. We’ll come to breakfast to-morrow
all right, so please reserve places for us, if that
is necessary.”
Thus it was that next morning, while the
Mauretania was taking on the American mails
at Queenstown in Ireland, the lads sat down to
their first meal since their lunch in the train.
They had now recovered their spirits considerably,
and were prepared to take all the enjoyment


possible out of the journey. The passengers
seemed to be mostly Americans returning home,
and English business men, with a fair sprinkling
of German, and a few representatives of most
Continental countries, and one or two others.
All appeared to be happy and careless, but the
lads knew that appearances w T ere often deceptive,
and that many had worries beside which their
own were insignificant.
After leaving Queenstown, the great vessel s
speed was accelerated, as was easily seen by the
wash from her bows, and by the very slight
vibration that permeated her entire frame. She
was now working up to her best, and if engine
and boiler power could drive her through the
Atlantic, her first stop would be to take the
pilot on board at New York. Nothing on the
face of the waters could now overtake her, and
as every hour saw another twenty-six knots put
between them and the British shores, the boys
began to think that they were at least safe from
pursuit. Still, the number of wireless messages
constantly being received and sent off by the
people on board was a strong reminder of the
fact that the ocean was no longer the sanctuary
it had been.
Charlie and Jack paced the deck after break-
fast, well muffled up in their coats. The slight
heaving motion of the vessel as she ploughed
into the shoreward-moving swell was not
unpleasant to them, and this gave them a great
advantage over a number of their fellow


passengers who already appeared uncomfortable.
One passenger attracted the boys’ attention at
an early stage. He was an extremely tall, clean-
shaven man, of not unhandsome appearance, and
he too walked the deck, puffing all the time at
an enormous cigar. He looked at the boys
several times as they passed and re-passed, and
his eyes seemed to twinkle slightly as he did so,
in a manner that showed he was amused at
something, or was brimming over with good-
nature. Many of the other passengers had made
friendly overtures to the lads before lunch time
came round, but although they were answered
most politely, none received any encouragement
to continue the conversation. Finally, as it was
very cold, the youths entered the smoke-room,
and sitting in a corner looked on interestedly at
the various groups of people playing cards and
other games. Soon tiring of being merely on-
lookers, they procured a draught-board and
began playing themselves. They were both
good players, and the end of the game was very
close and most skilfully contested.
At length Jack won by a stroke of brilliant
strategy, and a voice beside them murmured :
“ Ver y finely played, youngster ; I couldn’t have
done better myself.”
The speaker was the man with the twinkling
eyes. He had lit a fresh cigar of abnormal size,
and he was smiling at the players.
“ Oh, my comrade could have done the same
easily had he had the same position I ” Jack said


7 —r-Mis
"r ■' "K5* * i< j' V «F i-„ :
%*, .5
1 ■ X
i Jl
“ HE LOOKED AT THE BOYS SEVERAL TIMES AS THEY PASSED.”
Lf. IC4.




sturdily. He wanted no credit at Charlie’s
expense.
“Just what I guessed you would say, young
man ; but allow me to introduce myself, for we
have a lot in common. My name-plate when at
home—l mean when I’m at home, not the
name-plate—bears the glorious legend, Cornelius
P. Higgins, and I plead guilty to being a
poet.”
“ But what have we in common, sir ? ” Jack
asked, neglecting purposely giving their own
names. “We know nothing about poetry.”
“ Ah, then ! believe me, my boys, you miss the
greatest blessing this poor old world can give.
Just think what a comfort it is to know that—
“ ‘ The boy stood on the burning deck
“ Well, he didn’t need to unless he liked,”
Charlie broke in. “I don’t see any comfort in
standing on a burning deck unless it is a very
cold day.”
“Just what I was about to remark,” smiled
Cornelius P. Higgins, sitting down on a camp
stool between the lads. “ Here are the next
lines—
“ ‘ How very strange that was
No girl would think of standing there,
Because—well—-just because.’
Touching, isn’t it ? Ah! I knew you would
appreciate it. But just to show you how a true
poet deals with captious critics who insist that


the deck is the chief object deserving of lime-
light and not the boy, I’ll give you another
version—
“ ‘The boy stood on the burning deck,
That’s nothing strange to me,
I’d rather stand on any deck,
Than stand upon the sea.’ ”
“Beautiful!” exclaimed Jack. “I perceive
you are truly a great poet; but as we are not
poets, what have we in common ? ”
“ Ah, yes! I forgot that for the moment.
What have we in common ? Why, our love of
the real and true. Just listen to this; it is my
own—
“ ‘ The shades of night were falling—quickly,
As o’er the ocean there passed—sickly,
Two youths who bore ’mid clouds of smoke
A secret which they never broke.
“ ‘ Cornelius P. Higgins.’
“ We’re sorry we must go,” said Charlie,
kicking Jack underneath the table and tapping
his forehead significantly when the poet was
gazing at the roof.
“ But there are more verses,” remonstrated
Mr. Higgins. “ You surely want to hear them.
You are the youths, you know.”
“Are we?” Charlie grunted. “Then I may
tell you we’re not sickly, and we don’t think we
have anything in common with you.”
“ Oh, yes, you have ! Don’t you remember the


line about the secret ? We have that in common.
Is that patent shark-catcher on board ? ”
“ What do you mean ? ” cried both boys simul-
taneously, starting up horn their chairs. They
were astounded.
“ Soft! We are observed. Methinks, how-
ever, you will now agree we have something in
common. Let’s adjourn to a more private
place.”
“We won’t,” Jack interrupted. “We don’t
know what you mean, and we’re not anxious for
enlightenment. Please leave us alone.”
“ Oh, you innocent little lambs! Don’t you
know, can’t you realise, that I’m one of the bad
men in this little play of ours ? I tumbled to
you the moment I saw you, and the wireless
I got an hour ago settled matters. Now behold
in me a villain; one whose hands are steeped
in crime; one who will stop at nothing but to
hear good poetry. Oh, 1 am bad, I can tell
you ! ”
“ You don’t look it,” Charlie commented.
“ From your appearance I should have thought
you were a quack doctor, or a tame suffragette
lecturer.”
“Ha, ha!” laughed Mr, Higgins. “You are
' OO
the next best thing to being a poet, young man.
You are a humorist. Perhaps I am not so very
bad after all, and believe me, that is why I have
forced myself upon you. You see, although I
am an American by birth and parentage, I’ve
wandered over the surface of this planet so much


that I kind of feel it is all mine. Now, there are
lots of other fellows of all nationalities who have
also gyrated to some extent around this playful
little spheroid, and as most of us have met some-
where or other, and found that most were good
fellows, we formed a sort of Cosmopolitan Syndi-
cate, which has since made its influence felt on
the effete Western world. We obey the laws
of any country while we sojourn within its bound-
aries, but we have our own laws when not within
the corner pegs of any power. We do not
necessarily wish harm to any man, but if any
man runs against us, we feel quite absolved from
the consequences of defending ourselves. We
are gentlemen, however, and that is why lam
now speaking to you.”
“Very interesting,” Jack commented evasively;
“ but are your people not some hundreds of years
behind the times ? The age of filibustering and
buccaneering is past, and what else can a private
Syndicate composed of such people as you men-
tion do, unless engage in lawful, but common-
place trade ? ”
“ You’re wrong, my boy, in your ideas. This
is the age of romance, not the dead past, and as
much can be done to-day as in the times of
Drake and his merry men. We do things
differently, of course, and science plays a more
important part. The world in general doesn t
know of our existence, but we do exist, all the
same, and we make more money in a year out of
our scheme than some very important European


powers. But, as I said, we are gentlemen and
sportsmen, and mere wealth is not our chief
object.”
“ I suppose poetry comes first ? ” Charlie put
in, “ Surely you have forgotten that you are
a poet ? In any case, we are only plain Britishers,
and we have no desire to be mixed up in mysteri-
ous Syndicates who send men roaming aimlessly
over earth and sea.”
“Not aimlessly, young man; and you are
mixed up in our affairs already, and I am now
going to prove to you that we are sportsmen.”
“ Indeed; I am sure we don’t understand
what you mean, and as it is stuffy in here, I
think we’ll go out for a walk along the deck,”
Jack said. “Come on, Charlie.”
“ Then keep your eye on that little Japanese
fellow standing at the door. I guess he’s one of
our fellows too, and his ideas of sport may not
be the same as mine. If you have any im-
portant letters, too, take my advice and give
them into the hands of the purser. I guess I
don’t want them, but others might. And if
your precious invention is landed all right at
New York, and in your possession, it will only
be because Cornelius P. Higgins has arranged
that much for you. Now go and enjoy your-
selves, youngsters, but keep your eyes and ears
open, and your mouths shut. C. P. Higgins
wishes you a fair start, but he’ll be after you
an hour after you land in New York, and don’t
forget it.”


“ Why ? ” asked Jack, beginning to see that
the American was trying to make them under-
stand something without actually putting his
meaning into direct words. “We have broken
no laws, and we don’t care who follows us.
We’ll look after ourselves and our property;
and America is a civilised country which surely
can protect its visitors.”
“ I can’t say much more, boys, except that
I like you, and that no harm will come to you
if Cornelius P. Higgins, Cosmopolite and Poet,
can prevent it. But if, after looking upon my
plain frontispiece, you think I am the bad man
I said I was, then treat me as such; if you
have half an idea that I am a decent fellow,
despite my poetic instinct—which, by the way,
I had forgotten these last fifteen minutes —then
you will take my hint, and let us be good friends
until we land. I will give you, say, a three
hours’ start; then, and after that, it is your
fertile but inexperienced brains against mine.”
“ But we like you in a kind of way already,
although you are a poet,” said Jack laughingly ;
“and we cannot imagine what you mean by
saying you will give us a three hours’ start.
We’re not trying to run a race, and our business
cannot concern any people but ourselves.”
Cornelius P. Higgins laughed. “ Now that
I see you have abandoned the idea of pacing
the deck of this floating township,” he said,
“ and as a quarter of an hour is between us and
feeding time, if you like, I’ll tell you something;


if you don t want to hear it, then I guess you
had better go now and brush your hair, and
look pretty, as befitting little boys.”
Jack burst out laughing, and Charlie scowled.
“I f you think you can treat us as boys,” Jack
said, “you are making a big mistake. We don’t
want to look pretty, and as we don’t fear poets,
we’ll even listen to your wonderful story if you
can put it into the fifteen minutes before lunch.”
A smile spread over the face of the American.
“I like your cheek,” he drawled, “and your
self-confidence is mighty refreshing. I hope it
will carry you through, and just keep your
memory on the fact that this world-famed poet
is your friend when you care to fall back on
him, even though his duty at present is to keep
an eye on you, and to buy, borrow, steal, or
otherwise acquire that invention of yours, which
I’d really be obliged if you’d show me.—No not
now; hear my story first, but don’t repeat it, or
you 11 get me into trouble.”
“Then why tell it?” Charlie growled. “We
are not over-anxious to hear it, and we don’t
want you to get into trouble.”
But it is to keep you out of the same thino-
tor a time that I wish you to listen,” said the
man, “for you’re only kids, and you don’t
realise what you ve run against. But here is
what I want to tell you Yesterday afternoon
while in Liverpool on a holiday, we’ll say I
Wlre from Lond on asking me to watch
tne Mauretania for two youngsters who were


sailing somewhere with a patent which the
Syndicate, of which I am a member, badly
wanted. I was to get on their track and keep
on it, possess myself of their invention by any
means I liked, and report everything at head-
quarters at the earliest possible moment. Now,
I always have a bag packed with a tooth-brush
and a collar or two, but I had to buy out
another fellow before I could get on board this
ship, as she was full up when I telephoned the
booking-office. Well, I spotted you coming up
the gangway —if I hadn’t I shouldn t have sailed
—and I overheard enough of your conversation
with your people in your cabins to convince
myself I was right. The rest you know. If
you will sell your patent, I shall buy it \ if you
won’t, then remember I’m after you, but Ive
promised you a three hours start, and 111 keep
my T word. I’m a sportsman, but this chase has
been too easy to give me any fun, and I like
you well enough to wish to see you get a good
run before being brought up. All the same,
there are more than Cornelius P. Higgins in
this game, and y T ou’d better look out for them.
I’m done now, boys, and there goes the call for
lunch. Don’t speak to me any more unless you
feel you want to.”
After lunch the boys retired to a corner in the
dining saloon where they could talk freelyq as no
people could approach without being observed.
Here they made plans calculated to upset the
over-confident Mr. Higgins. They did not


waste time in bemoaning the fact that they had
not escaped the Adventurers, but they resolved
that if matters came to the test, they would give
the latter people’s agents as much work as they
could undertake, despite their vaunted powers.
Following out the programme they arranged,
they went on deck and amused themselves with
the other passengers, even joining in conversation
with some of them. Nor did they avoid
Cornelius P. Higgins. They spoke to him
freely of anything and everything except their
own affairs, and he in turn quoted poetry of a
weird and wonderful nature which sent all who
heard him into fits of laughter.
The da} s passed, and at length Sandy Hook was
passed late one afternoon, and all knew that if
the Mauretania had not broken all her previous
records, it would be only a question of minutes
between her present run and her best. The
boys had worked out their possible rail connection
by means of railway time-tables on board, and
they knew exactly what they meant to do.
-But Jack was worried, and strangely enough it
was because of the fact that the ship had made
such a fast passage. It was only Thursday
evening, and the Makura did not sail until the
following Thursday morning. True, the
Continent of America lay between the boys and
the boat, but Jack had worked the connections
out so finely that he knew they could arrive in
Vancouver a whole day too soon, and if Mr.
I §g llls had a fraction of the brains they
8 113


imagined he possessed, his promised three hours
start would not give them much advantage, as
leaving twenty-four hours after them he could
still catch the Makura if he found out that that
ship was their object, and nothing happened to
his train. But fate intervened in the shape of a
dense fog, and although the Mauretania had
crossed the Atlantic in probably record time, she
was now brought up at the end of her
and daylight faded into night as the noble
steamship drifted slowly onward, with fog-horn
and bell sounding incessantly. Most of the
passengers bewailed their bad luck, but the boys
were glad. The delay cut the margin of time
down in their favour, and they had the assurance
of one of the officers that, fog, or no fog, the
vessel would be berthed on Friday some time.
It was bitterly cold, but the lads paced the
deck instead of joining in the farewell conceit
down in the warm saloon.
“ Well, my boys, how do you feel now ? ” A
voice sounded beside them, and turning they saw
Cornelius P. Higgins. As usual he was smoking
a very large cigar, and he seemed at peace with
the whole world. “With apologies to my brother
poet, Mr. Kipling, let me ventilate my deep
emotions on again nearing my native country
“ ‘ Ship me somewhere west of Europe
Where the fog lies o’er the land,
And the trains in which lie your hope
Cannot leave ’
Now, why in thunder cannot they leave ?


“ Without command,” suggested Jack, but the
poet shook his head and went on striving.
“Is ‘German band’ any good ?” Charlie
asked, “or ‘ Down the Strand ? ’ ‘ Better land ? ’
‘From where they stand?’ ‘Silvery sand?’
* Blood-red hand ’ ? ”
“Boys, you mock me!” exclaimed the poet
distressfully; but but, I have forgotten what
my subject was. At anyrate, remember that
three hours after you land C. P. H. is after you,
and if you make his work easy he’ll be
disappointed in you. And, please, don’t insult
him by thinking you can dodge him by elementary
methods, for, as another poet has said
The day was long, the way was cold,
And Higgins for his age was old,
Yet he a minstrel was, you bet,
And played for—for ’
Dear me, what on earth did he play for ? ”
Pennies, maybe?” Jack suggested. “I
hardly expect he would get a silver°collection.”
“ ‘ Yet he a minstrel was, you bet,’ ”
repeated the poet, not hearing Jack,
“ ‘ And played for—for
“All that he could get?” finished Charlie
interrogatively.
Cornelius P. Higgins laughed. “ I believe
that was his sole idea in playing at all,” he said.
We are ail playing for what we can get. But


let me tell you, that you fellows could get far
more from me for your invention than you are
ever likely to make out of it yourselves, it you
don’t lose it altogether.” „ ~ T ,
“We’ll part as friends, anyway, said JacK,
wilfully ignoring the invitation to discuss matters;
“and while not fully understanding what you
mean by your generous gift of a hours
start, we accept it. We dont know York,
and probably we’ll renew our acquaintanceship in
some hotel in much less than three hours after
landing, if you really desire to find us.
“ As another poet said,” began Mr. Higgins—
“ * Life is weary, life is woeful,
And I’m sure I’m not to blame,
For they tell me that most people
Feel inclined to say the same.’ ”
“ They would feel inclined that way it they
were in your company.” Charlie, who was not
a diplomatist like Jack, growled. Why dont
you work off your poetry on the engineers.
They might hammer it into bricks.
“ I see you don’t appreciate my efforts, boys,
so I’ll below and pack up my tooth-brush.
Do remember the three hours’ grace, though,
and keep your optics on that little Jap leaning
over the rail. He is about the smartest fellow
I have ever met, and —well —I cannot tell you
more.
Mr Higgins went below, and the boys con-
tinued their walk. They watched the Japanese


gentleman carefully, but he never even cast a
glance at them. Meanwhile, the fog had be-
come denser, and the Mauretania had come to
a dead stop. All around bells, fog-horns,
steam sirens, and other discordant noises gave
evidence of the near presence of other vessels ;
but in that crowded waterway nothing moved.
Disaster sure and speedy would be the penalty
of recklessness, and every captain knew it.
The night wore on, the concert in the saloon
finished with “ Auld Lang Syne,” and realising
that there was little probability of getting on
shore that night, the experienced travellers
retired to rest. Those who were new to life
at sea, or who were nervous, congregated in the
smoke-room, and waited anxiously for the fog
to lift. The boys went to bed. They felt they
were already seasoned wanderers, and they
certainly were not troubled with nervousness.
And the great liner, after such a magnificent
run across the Atlantic, was thus ignominiously
held up only a few miles from her berthing
place. At daylight she had crawled forward
to within a few hundred yards of the end of
her journey, and the tugs which had found her
during the night were still making skilful efforts
to negotiate the giant Cunarder to her berth,
guided only by the sound of w T histles from the
shore. After breakfast the passengers were
given the opportunity of going ashore in a
steam tender, and most of them availed them-
selves of the chance, for the small vessel could


easih T land them even though it only crawled,
while the big boat was too risky an experiment
to attempt to haul alongside. The boys did
not go off. They wanted their luggage with
them? and, anyway, they would have been too
soon to profit by the three hours’ grace allowed
them, according to Jacks calculation.
“ I hope we don’t get alongside until late
to-nmht,” Jack confided to his comrade. “We
can then get through the Customs and catch
the morning train for Montreal, and if we have
a three hours’ start we’re safe, for we ha\e
only minutes to make the C. P.R. connection to
Vancouver, which will land us just an hour
before the Makura sails next Thursday, and
if our friends allow us to get away from New
York all right, the next connection will bring
them to Vancouver, when we are twelve hours
out on the Pacific.” .
“Do you think that poet fellow is worth
treating seriously ”? ’ Charlie asked, as the}
paced the cold, damp, and almost deserted deck.
“ I do, Charlie. I think he is a decent fellow
who doesn’t half like his job, and he s trying
to give us all the chances he can. (ff course,
he thinks we’re only boys, and that he 11 have
no trouble in doing all that is required of him
and probably that idea of his will be changed
before very long.”
“ But do you really think it matters whether
he follows us or not ? We have nothing to do
with Adventurers or mysterious Japanese, and


we do not intend to break any laws. The idea
that we are people so important that we must
take steps to hide our movements seems very
funny. Why, only last week we would have
sold our entire invention —if it is an invention
at all—to anyone for a decent figure that would
help us to go on with other work.”
“Yes, Charlie; but you see that uncle of
yours, whose money we are now using rather
recklessly, has come into our lives since then.
He has got mixed up in that pearl shell scheme,
which this strange Syndicate of Adventurers
think is their special property, and we have
taken sides with your uncle. We’ve got to
play the game to a finish now, and we’ll do
it.”
“ And quite right, too, young men ; only don’t
talk so loudly in a fog like this. People can’t
help hearing you, although they may not see
you.”
“ But we don’t mind you, Mr. Higgins,” Jack
answered pleasantly, most cleverly hiding his
mortification at being overheard. “You know
all about our affairs already, and therefore we
can have no secrets from you. But we wanted
to see you, anyway. We want to discuss the
meaning of the three hours’ handicap. That
isn’t any use to us if we have to pass the
Customs, and then find our way in an unknown
city to an hotel suitable for our modest means ? ”
“ I’ll take you to an hotel, my boys; and if
you’ll be my guests, I’ll neither talk poetry to


you nor say a word about what interests us all.
In fact, I’ll not begin to count your three hours
until you tell me you are ready to begin the
battle. Surely that is fair and sportsmanlike ?
“It is,” Jack answered; “but we would
prefer being by ourselves. You see, we are
not quite able to pretend to be friendly with our
enemies.” T
“But, dear me, I’m not your enemy. I
simply want that patent affair of yours, and
I’m willing to buy it. If you don’t wish to
se H_ we ll—that is your own business, but I
have instructions to keep an eye on it and you
so as to find out who does buy it, I expect. I
don’t even know whether your great invention
is a flying machine or a submarine boat.”
“It is a sort of submarine boat,” said Jack,
“and it is already promised to another person.
We are now on our way to deliver it, so you
will see you needn’t follow us farther. If you
do, you can only mean to try to steal it, and
I warn you that we will defend our property.”
“ I didn’t guess it was such a thing, my boys.
Who is the fellow who has bought it ? Tell me
that, and I’ll go and deal with him.”
“We cannot tell you,” Jack said; “and if
you mean to follow us, we hold you bound to
your promise to give us three hours start after
we say good-bye to you.”
“The word of C. P. H. is the only thing he
holds of value, after his comrades,” said the
American. “ But I gather from your words


that your journey is not ended in New York?
I guess I’ll have to buy another tooth-brush.”
“ I think you had better buy two,” Charlie
laughed. “ Hullo ! the fog is lifting. Why, we
are in the middle of an enormous city ! ”
“My native city,” said Mr. Higgins -with a
touch of pride in his voice; “and I guess New
York can hold up its head with any other city
in the world.”
“ I’m sorry the voyage is ended,” Jack put in
irrelevantly; but he didn’t say his reason was
that they were still too soon to catch the last
possible connection vid Montreal for Vancouver.
Half an hour later all had landed, and having
nothing to declare to the Customs authorities—
except the “ submarine swimmer,” which they
left behind—the boys were among the first to
pass through. Mr. Higgins, of course, was
absolutely the first. He offered his services to
the lads again, but they refused to accept them,
promising at the same time to say good-bye to
him at his hotel before they left New York.
They did not think for a moment that they
would now be left unwatched, but they meant,
all the same, to take full advantage of anything
and everything that came their way. They
soon found an hotel, and then they called at
various railroad and steamship agencies, and
finally went back to the docks and cleared
their well-boxed “swimmer.” It was labelled
Vancouver, and sent off per passenger train
vid Montreal, and only when the evening fell


did the lads pay any attention to the wonders
of the city.
They would have liked to have left that night,
but prudence forbade their doing so, as the
morning train could still do all that was required
for a man whose baggage consisted only of a
tooth-brush. They strolled along the chief
thoroughfares, and eventually discovered the
station from which they intended leaving in the
morning. They had fixed upon the 9.30 train
by the Delaware and Hudson route, which would
land them in Montreal at 8.30 that evening if
nothing unusual happened, and after making all
inquiries they returned to their hotel. They
had observed several of the Mauretania's
passengers throughout the city, but they had
not seen either Mr. Higgins or the Japanese.
Early on Saturday morning they were ready
for the rapid rush across the continent of
America, and after taking their baggage to the
station and booking to Montreal, they called at
Mr. Higgins’ hotel to say good-bye to that gentle-
man as arranged. They found him at breakfast.
“Hullo, boys!” he exclaimed when he saw
them. “ Has the game begun ? I saw you at
the station last night, but honestly I didn’t
watch you.”
“It is now nine o’clock,” said Jack; “and
we’ve come to tell you that we have made our
arrangements to mind our own business, and you
can count your three hours from now, if you still
are of an interfering disposition.”


“ Don’t be nasty, my boy. I’ve got to do my
duty just the same as you ; only you’re a couple
of kids and I’m a ”
“ Poet,” interjected Charlie, “ and one of the
best still alive, though I suppose you’ll die, too,
as soon as you try your poetry on a man able
to defend himself.”
“ We’ll talk of that when next we meet,”
laughed Mr. Higgins. “You’ve got three hours
all but five minutes. Clear out, and use your
little brain boxes, and look out for the Marquis
Kari, your Japanese friend.”
The lads shook hands with the strange man
and left. They got on board their train, which
left prompt to time, and at 8.30 that evening
they were in Montreal. Booking for Vancouver,
they joined the famous west bound “ Imperial
Limited” at half-past ten, and almost immedi-
ately fell asleep. They passed Ottawa, the
Federal capital of the Dominion, about two o’clock
in the morning, but they were sublimely in-
different to that fact, and not until Chalk River
was reached, at twenty minutes past six on
Sunday morning, did they awake.
“By Jupiter! we’ve lost that poet fellow now
for good,” Charlie laughed after breakfast in the
train. “If he really gave us three hours, he
would have to make it twelve before he could
leave New York, and I rather fancy the Pacific
Express leaving Montreal an hour after now
won’t catch the Makura”
“I’ve had a bad half-hour working out if he


could possibly catch us at Winnipeg,” Jack re-
plied ; “ but I find he cannot, so we are all right as
far as he is concerned.”
All day they sped along through forest land
and smiling meadows, and the covering of snow
made everything look wonderfully home-like.
At night they were passing through the
rich mineral country between Sudbury and
Chapleau, and at breakfast time next morn-
ing reached Port Arthur. At half-past nine
on Monday night they steamed into the
mushroom-grown, but marvellous city of Winni-
peg, and w r hen next they awoke they were
rolling through the great treeless but fertile
plain of Regina. Then into the mountain region
again the train sped, and the boys forgot the
days. Past Moose Jaw, Medicine Hat, Calgary,
and through the awe-inspiring gorges in the
Rockies to Banff. By this time the winders of
the route had ceased to interest them, and even
the great glacier straddled ridges which flanked
the steel track only received passing comment.
Down the Pacific slope they rushed through
snow-clad ranges, and along the banks of great
swollen torrents. Field was passed, then Golden
on the magnificent Columbia River, then the
Selkirk Ranges were negotiated, and boiling
whirlpools and awesome canyons again met
their eyes on every side. They now slept most
of the time, only noting vaguely such names as
Revelstoke, Kamloops, Yale, and some inter-
mediate stations. Winding in and out along


the Fraser River gorges, they finally arrived at
Vancouver some minutes before eight o’clock on
Thursday morning. Their big case was awaiting
them, and two hours later they were sailing for
Sydney on board the Makura. They had
travelled so far to time, and they knew nothing
could overtake them now by the route they had
come. Yet when, after three weeks’ delightful
sailing, with calls at Honolulu, Fiji, and Brisbane,
they steamed alongside in Sydney’s famous
harbour, the first man they saw was the little
Japanese whom Mr. Higgins had called the
“ Marquis Kari.”


CHAPTER VI
The First Encounter
'X'HE smart-looking little man nodded familiarly
* to the lads as they landed, but apparently
paid no further attention to them, and slightly
surprised that Charlie’s uncle was not meeting
them, the boys drove off to the Hotel Australia
at once, leaving their big case in the hold until
they had made arrangements for its disposal.
To their dismay they were informed at the hotel
that Mr. Andrew Macalister had not been there
for about a month, but a letter had been left for
them. The letter was a marvel in briefness; it
read : —“ Call at the bank,” and had no signature.
But the banks were now closed for the day, and
hiding their feelings as much as possible, the lads
went down to the ship to clear their boxed
invention. This they had no trouble in effecting,
as the Customs officers were most polite and
obliging, and half an hour later a carrier
O _ O’
deposited the case in the baggage storeroom of
the hotel. In another half-hour the lads had
opened the box to see if the “ submarine
swimmer ” had suffered any damage during


its long journey. A cry of amazement burst
from their lips as the last board of the lid was
removed. The “ swimmer ” was not there ! A
few lengths of iron tubes lay where it should
have been, but that was all.
What the poor lads felt cannot easily be told ;
but it was surely a sad end to their journey.
Clearly, another box had been substituted for the
original one, somewhere between London and
Sydney, but who had done it, and when the
change was effected was a mystery.
Suddenly Charlie laughed. “ After all, Jack,”
he said, “ 1 don’t see that we need worry much,
for we really have the laugh against the people
who stole the thing. We have plenty of money
left to build another, and likely my uncle has
arranged that we can get more funds at the
bank ; and you must remember that we removed
the most important parts of the contrivance
before we boxed it. Some people will get a big
cheat when they try to work the thing.”
It must have been that fellow Higgins who
did this,” said Jack. “He knew he was safe in
giving us a start.”
“What about the two fellows in London?”
Charlie asked. “ Might they not have done the
trick before the box left London ? ”
“ Maybe, but I don’t think the British railway
companies are managed so carelessly that such
a thing could be done. I expect the change was
made in New York; likely enough that Japanese
fellow and the half-mad poet arranged it,


while we were scheming how to get ahead ot
them.”
‘« Well, it doesn’t matter. We’ll make another,
and we can get the parts made for us by
engineering firms here, Charlie said hopefully.
“ The Adventurers’ people are only common
thieves after all, and now that we know that,
we need not fear them.
“ I wish your uncle had been here to meet us,
Jack answered. “ We’ve got a fairly big job to
tackle—but let’s get this box closed up again, so
that the beggars won’t have the chance to laugh
at us. We’ll say nothing in the meantime, but
we’ll go round the town and see about getting
another Swimmer built.”
They closed the box and went up into the
hall. The afternoon mails had just come in, and
there was a letter in the rack addressed to
Charlie. The handwriting on the envelope was
half familiar, and Charlie tore it open with a
shout of joy and read :
“My dea.r Nephew, — l am sorry it wasn’t
convenient for me to meet you to-day, but I saw
you land, nevertheless. I hope you had an
enjoyable passage, and with your comrade are
feeling fit for our great work. I had to leave the
Hotel Australia for reasons you can guess; it
was much too public a place for one of my name.
This is to inform you, however, that I am not
very far away, and I wish you both to join me
to-night on board the steam yacht Defiance


lying alongside the North German Lloyd wharf
in Circular Quay. The vessel is my own. and
anyone will direct you to it. Just walk on board
and give your name, and you’ll receive everv
attention at once. I trust you left all your
people well.—Your affectionate uncle,
“Andrew Macalister.”
“ There, now ! ” exclaimed Charlie, “ what do
you think of that ? ”
“ 1 thiuk is a very different kind of letter
from the one he wrote you first,” Jack replied ;
“ but what fools we’ll appear to be when we tell
him \\ r \e lost the thing that he was depending
on us to bring. He’ll not think much of us then*
I fear, although we can have another one ready
m a few days.” J
Oh, he 11 only laugh when we explain that
the stolen machine won’t work ! ” said Charlie
“Let us dress in our best and go and find out
where that boat is lying.”
"I know,” Jack answered. “I saw a very
fine steam yacht lying near where we landed but
on the other side of the bay called Circular Quay
1 noted its name was Defiance, and thought it
belonged to some American multi-millionaire on
holiday.
An hour later, when Sydney was ablate with
electric light, and the magnificent streets crowded
with people either going home, or coming into
the city on pleasure bent, the boys boarded an
electric tram passing the hotel door, and in a
9 129


few minutes found themselves at the world-
famous Circular Quay. This remarkable water-
way was brilliantly illuminated by the lights ot
Hittiuo- ferries, and they had no difficulty m
locating the Defiance. It, too, was lit up with
an extravagant lavishness surprising to the lads,
and a band was playing on deck. 1 hey had left
London in the midst of winter, but now they
were experiencing the climate of the hottest
part of the year in Sydney. And it was delight-
ful ! ,
They marched boldly up the gangway, and
were met by an officer of some description, who
inquired their names most politely. On being
informed he invited them to follow him, and led
the way to the dining saloon, where about a score
of men were just beginning dinner. All were in
evening dress, but almost the first thing that the
lads noticed was the presence of the Marquis
Kari. But anyone who might be taken for
Andrew Macalister was not in evidence, which
surely was strange, seeing he was the owner of
the ship.
A tall, distinguished-looking gentleman at the
head of the table rose as the boys were ushered
in and bade them welcome in most courteous
language, and all the others stood up until the}
were seated. Jack thought some mistake had been
made, and that they had come aboard the wrong
ship, but Charlie’s mind was dwelling on other
matters, and he felt sure he had seen a smiling
face among the men that could only belong to


Cornelius P. Higgins. But the gentleman pre-
siding was speaking “ Gentlemen,” he said
addressing the boys, “ we are honoured by your
presence, and we hope you will make yourselves
as much at home as we are ourselves. We
haven t all had the pleasure of meeting you
before, but believe me, your names have reached
us coupled with very fine recommendations
°“ K?r 1101 , kll ° W , all the around
them before. l y ° U haVe “ 6t SOme of
“ I think we have made a mistake,” Jack beo-an
abruptly, yet apologetically. “We thou<rht°we
had come on board the Defiance, which we were
invited to do by its owner, Mr. Macalister We
are very sorry.” ’
~ x are °u hoard the Defiance now,” smiled
the gentleman at the head of the table, and the
others also seemed amused. “The legitimate
owner is, as you say, Mr. Macalister, hu? in h s
SmnVu " ShaH d ° ° Ur beSt t0
voice ADd ’“ ‘ Thk 6 P °m Says ’” „P ut in a
all Wl , WOrld Is sm all—With seas and
a *i —'»lien last we met ’ ”
bo ,' H ®f i, out yo “ g et! ” cril? d the nearest neigh-
bour of the speaker. “We can't stand that ”
the poer d ut he Ut b t0 physical f ° ree “P™
t ie poet, but he changed his mind when he saw
that the latter had become silent a^ain.
fv r° U the Gentlem en of the Twentieth
Century Adventurers,” began Charlie impetu-


ously. “We have heard of you, but we dent
wish to have any dealings with you. You have
already stolen our apparatus, and now you have
tricked us here for purposes I can t even guess.
But we don’t fear you m the slightest, and
if Sydney is a civilised city, you 11 have a
visit from the police as soon as we can intorm
down and have dinner first, Mr. Gray,’
said the presiding gentleman. “ The police are
pretty well taxed at this hour attending to the
theatre traffic, and it wouldn’t be kind to trouble
them needlessly. Pray do not allow yourself to
become angry, Mr. Gray. Your comrade, you
will observe, is quite cool, and really it is
a pity to spoil the dinner prepared in your
k°“ We’ll not wait here ! ” cried Charlie. “ Come
on, Jack. Shoot them if they try to stop you !
Both boys leaped towards the companion way,
the deadly little revolvers which they had pur-
chased in New York flashing in their hands
Not a man moved to stay their progress, but all
laughed as if vastly amused. The reason was soon
very plain to the lads. The entire flight of
steps ffiving access to the deck had been swung
aloft bodily by some mechanism evidently set in
motion from the dining-table, doubtless by
electric means. Charlie turned and faced the
men, and he had grown marvellously cool, ihe
Adventurers ceased laughing and awaited is
words. “ Unless those steps are lowered in bait


a minute,” he said, elevating his revolver, “ I
shall begin shooting. The gentleman at the far
end of the table will be first, and after that I’ll
pick you out as I please.”
“And I’ll begin with the Marquis Kari,”
added Jack, covering that person with his
weapon, “ And I expect C. P. Higgins will
be next unless some of you move.”
Again the men laughed, and the poet began
declaiming some lines which finished abruptly,
as the President rose and signed for silence.
“ Your half-minute is up, my lad. Hadn’t you
better begin your desperate work ? See, I am
standing, and you can’t possibly miss me. Why
don’t you fire?” The silence was intense. All
eyes were fixed upon the lads.
“Do you mean to lower those stairs ? ” Jack
demanded. “ I assure you we’ll fire immediately
* p i ). * J
it you don t.
“We do not require any communication
except by telephone with the deck while we
are assembled in council,” the President answered
slowly, and with great dignity. “ But to relieve
your minds of the great strain they must now
be enduring, and to prove to you that you
couldn t do the slightest harm to anyone here,
let me just mention that your weapons are
loaded with empty cartridges. One of our
talented men effected the substitution in your
hotel this afternoon.”
Charlie pulled the trigger, and the slight click
was the only sound. Again and again he re-


peated the operation, but with no result. Finally
he flung the weapon straight at the head of the
President; he was far past caring what he did.
The aim was good, and the revolver flew straight,
but he who was called the Chief by the men
caught it adroitly in his hands just in front of
his face, and with a bow to Charlie handed it
to a Chinese steward to return it to him. Jack,
meanwhile, had moved up behind the Marquis
Kari with intent certainly not favourable to that
gentleman. He was just about to grip him by
the throat, when the Marquis turned and offered
him his hand, saying in most pleasant tones,
“ I deeply regret that we have not had an
opportunity of speaking to each other before
this. We have travelled a long way for an
introduction, but now we are friends.
“ Are we ? ” asked Jack. “ I think I will beg
to be excused taking your hand until we see if
we are or not. I was just about to wring your
neck! ”
“Then, pray proceed,” the Marquis returned
indifferently ; “ but please allow me to drink this
sherry first.” . <4 v
“ You stole our invention,” cried Jack. t ou
are a common thief! ’
“ Now, you are becoming personal, the little
man said reprovingly. “ Why not wait until
dinner is over before making a scene . the
coolness of the man was remarkable, and Jack
instantly became just as calm.
“ Very well,” he remarked. “ After all, if this


is Mr. Macalister’s ship, I suppose we have as
much right to it as anyone. But we don’t want
your dinner, and as our weapons are useless, we
cannot shoot you. Tell us where to go until
your people are finished, and then we’ll discuss
matters. I don’t know that either Charlie or
I want to leave this ship now.”
“Of course not,” interrupted Mr. Higgins
approvingly. “‘ In Sydney when the sun was
down—And lights were shining through the
town —Two lads who saw they’d been done
brown
“ I’d knock you down for half a crown,”
roared the man nearest the poet. “ And I’ll
do it for nothing if you say another word.”
Cornelius P. Higgins grinned, but he said
nothing, and the President, after a brief dis-
cussion with those beside him, said: “ Well,
my boys, I am sorry you do not appreciate our
company, but as we have taken some little
trouble to bring about this meeting,wwe
do not see our way to part with you until we
know you a little better. No harm shall befall
you here, and you will be free to go on shore,
if you do not care to come with us, when you
answer one question. Kindly step through that
doorway and enter my room. It is the first
on your right. I shall interview you myself
later.”
“What is the question 1 ?” Charlie asked, still
in a defiant mood. “You may ask it now, and
we’ll consider if we should answer it.”


“ The question is simple,” the Chief drawled.
“ Where is that pearl island ? ”
“ We know nothing about any pearl islands,”
Charlie replied promptly. “ You are all making
a great mistake if you think we carry pearl
islands in our pockets.”
“You can think over the matter during the
next half-hour,” said the Chief. “Remember
we’ll pay you well for the information, and you
cannot possibly make any use of the knowledge
of its position yourselves. As for the strange
structure which some of our people took the
liberty of removing from your possession, you
have just to appraise its value and you shall
have my cheque at once.”
“Where is Mr. Macalister ? ” asked Jack
irrelevantly. “Ifhe is the owner of this ship,
we’d like to see him. We don’t usually deal
with subordinates.”
“ Good old Britain ! ” cried a man. “ The
Home islands are not effete yet, comrades,
when they can produce lads who can cheek us
like that! ”
“But dey not vas know vat ve is,” replied
another man. “ Dey p’raps dink ve is nodink
vorth anydink. My countrymen vould be shust
as prave.”
“ Of course they would, Dutchy,” Cornelius P.
Higgins laughed ; “ but all the same, it is mighty
refreshing to know that poor old Britain isn’t so
dead as some people would like to believe. As
the poet says ”


“ Put on the brake, Higgins! ” someone
cried. “If you inflict us with what any un-
fortunate poet said, I’ll read my latest essay to
you.”
“ Then the poet is dead, Chambers, I’d
rather eat him than listen to your long-winded
literary efforts on nothing in particular.”
“ Eet ees so !” a Frenchman added. “ Mistaire
Chambaire ees so long of vat you call vind zat I
grow vairy sleepy ven he begin.”
“ Keep your minds easy, gentlemen,” the
Chief said. “ Neither our poet nor our author
will be allowed to speak to-night unless in
general conversation. We have too big a project
on hand to listen to them. Please retire as
I have directed you, my young friends, unless
you can persuade yourselves to ioin us at
table.”
“Oh, we’ll wait until you’re finished!” Jack
answered. “We don’t want your hospitality,
and—and ”
“You needn’t hesitate, my boy,” said the
Chief with a smile. “You want to reload
your revolvers. Do so, by all means, in my
cabin.” J
A steward of some unknown nationality led
the way, and the boys found themselves locked
in a spacious, luxuriously furnished cabin a few
moments later. Every scientific instrument
known to modern science seemed to be present,
and many of a nature the boys could only guess
were also in evidence. A telegraph instrument


of unique design took up their attention at once,
and they soon discovered that it was really the
medium by which wireless messages could be
transmitted.
“ Jove, Charlie ! why shouldn’t we use that
machine ? ” said Jack. “ I know the Morse code,
and our message would be picked up by some
ship in the harbour, at auyrate.”
“ Bang off a word or two if you like, Charlie
answered. “ I’m worried over one or two other
matters.”
Jack tapped away at the keys for a moment.
“The current is on!” he exclaimed. “11l
send off this : ‘ T—o, t-h—e, p—o—l—i-c- e,
S-y-d-n-e-y. W-e, a-r-e, k-e-p-t, o-u,
b-o-a-r-d, t-h-e, D-e-f-i-a
“You freaks of wisdom!” roared a man,
flinging open the cabin door and rushing up to
the instrument and disconnecting it. “ Where
in thunder did you learn that trick ? ”
“We know the elementary sciences fairly
well,” Jack replied coolly. “We are sorry to
see you needlessly excited. 1 suppose you
heard the clicks ? ”
“ We’ll hear no more, anyway,” the man
growled. “ What message did you send off, and
who did you call for ? ”
“Really,” Jack said, “I’m surprised at you.
I tapped the keys, but if I had only thought
of it, I could have used the telephone, for
I feel sure you have a shore connection.
Surely you don’t take Charlie and me for


idiots ? ” Jack was completely in command of
himself.
“ No, you’re not idiots by a long way ; but
you’re a good bit too smart for the good health
of the people on board this ship. The telephone
connection is now cut though, and you can tap
those keys till next Christmas if you like, for the
current is off. Is there any other thing you
can do ? If there is, you’d better set about it
quickly, for we sail in half an hour, and steam is
up now.”
“ Are you a gentleman ? ” Jack interrupted,
“ or are you only a common adventurer ? ”
“ Sir, I am a member of the Twentieth
Century Adventurers,” returned the man with
great dignity. “Every member must be a
gentleman.”
“Tm glad to hear it,” said Jack. “ And in
that case, you will understand we mean no
personal affront if we request you to leave us
to discuss our affairs privately ? ”
“Certainly not; but I hope for your own
sakes you will fall in with our views. 1 may
say most of our fellows like you, and some
would even welcome you amongst us as comrades.
O X* O
but, of course, you know r your own business best,
and, anyhow, there is no reason why we should
be deadly enemies, even if you happen to differ
from us in your ideas.”
“ None whatever,” Jack responded. “We do
not understand why we are so important as to
be worthy of your attention, but if you will


leave us to ourselves, we’ll not worry over that
matter. Tell your Chief to call on us when
he has finished dining, for we are pushed for
time.”
“ I like your nerve,” the man said ; “ but for
any sake don’t talk to the Chief that way, or
you may have a bad time.” He closed the cabin
door, and the boys were once more alone.
Then Jack spoke. “ What special worries were
you thinking about, Charlie ? ” he asked.
“ Weil, the first one troubling me is : How
did that Japanese and C. P. Higgins get here
before us % The second is : Where is my uncle,
Andrew Macalister ? And the third is concerning
the number and the appetite of sharks in
Sydney harbour ? ”
“ You’ve mentioned some things that I’ve been
puzzling over too, Charlie,” Jack answered. “I
cannot imagine how those fellows got here first,
and I fear your uncle is greatly in need of our
help, so much so that your third trouble has
been in my mind too. You are thinking of
dropping through that port-hole ? ”
“ Yes, I fancy we could get ashore somehow,
and then think out matters. We must get out
of this fix before they are finished dining, for they
intend to sail then, and Mr. Macalister would
not think much of us when he heard we were
prisoners in the hands of the very people we
had come out to help him to fight. I’m going
through that port-hole, Jack.”
“ So am I, but I don’t think it is necessary to


drop into the water.” Jack stood on the Chief’s
bunk and looked out over the brilliantly
illuminated waters of the harbour. The night
was sultry and the boys were perspiring freelv.
He drew in his head after a brief survey
of his surroundings. “Charlie,” he continued,
“ I believe we can do the trick if we keep our
nerves. We can reach the deck rail fairly easily
through that port, and surely you and I can
haul ourselves up by strength of hand.”
“ Yes,” agreed Charlie, “ but we are still on
deck after that.”
“Well, there are two of us. Only an officer
or someone watching the gangway will be on
deck at this time, and even if there are more
people we could give them a hot time, and surely
we could get down the gangway somehow. I
think so, at anyrate, and I am ready to risk
things.”
“ All right, Jack. Let’s start now. I feel I
want to beat those over-polite, scientific
gentlemen adventurers at any cost. Out you
g°-”
And Jack did go out. He swung himself
through the open port without much effort and
gripped the deck rail above. Then by sheer
strength of arm he pulled his body upwards, and
when, finally, his feet were resting on the lowest
deck rail, and he knew he could leap over on
deck at any moment, he whispered to Charlie to
follow. A minute later he was beside him.
They were athletes of a very high order, and they


had kept themselves in training while at sea.
They vaulted over the rail quietly and moved
towards the gangway. One man was pacing
the deck in front of the chart-house, and another
was standing by the gangway. Both were in
uniform, and apparently were officers. A thin
wisp of steam was hissing oil into the air show-
ing that everything was in readiness for a
departure, and that the engineers down below
were awaiting the signal to start. The two
comrades drew into the shadows cast by the
deck houses. They could see through the open
saloon roof-lights into the saloon itself, and they
could even hear the men talking. Fora moment
they listened.
“ Well, gentlemen,” the Chief was saying, “as
usual we have done exactly what we calculated
we should do. The boy who knows the position
of that great shell deposit is our guest, and the
inventor of the appliance by which we can make
that treasure ours is also on board. There is
only one thing I feel is not conducive to our
satisfaction, and you all know what that is.
We have lost all traces of Andrew Macalister,
and at any moment he may drop on us in a way
we’ll not like. Personally, I fear no nation’s
gunboats, and I laugh at the idea of any inter-
fering with our schemes, but—and I think you
are with me, gentlemen —I do not sleep well
when running against Andrew Macalister.
“ He is only one man,” spoke the voice of the
Marquis Kari. “We are well able to deal with


him when he appears, and we’ve got his chiet
assistants in our hands now. We’ll sail in about
ten minutes I calculate, for the train for which
we are waiting must be in now.”
“Come on, Charlie,” whispered Jack. “We
cannot wait that ten minutes. You attend to
that fellow who is pacing the deck and I’ll tackle
the gangway watcher. If you’re beat sing out,
and break away somehow, and I’ll do the same,
but we must get ashore.”
Charlie muttered some words to the effect
that he thought he was equal to two men of
the size of his special antagonist, and next
moment the battle began, Charlie sprang upon
his victim and bore him to the ground, and Jack
rushed forward and gripped the gangway officer
from behind before that individual had time to
realise the meaning of his comrade’s cry for
help.
It was all over in a minute. The suddenness
of the attack had given the men no chance.
Charlie, as soon as he flung his man aside, ran to
help Jack, but his comrade had already accounted
for the gangway officer. Their way was now
dear, and they did not wait for further trouble.
They ran down the gangway and out through
the sheds, and in less than a minute were on
board an electric car. Where it was bound they
did not know and they cared little ; they had
beaten the Adventurers first try, and the
thought was extremely pleasing. The car took
them along a magnificent street lavishly lit with


electric arc lamps, and in time they knew they
were travelling along George Street. Sudden y
remembering that they were playing a game
against a Syndicate of enormous influence and
which had means of doing things beyond the
powers of other people, Jack suggested that they
should cret off the car and make for their hotel as
quickly°as possible. Charlie at once agreed, an
they a ot off the car at the first stopping place.
A policeman directed them to the Hotel Australia
in very concise terms:—“ Walk up any street
until you come to the second crossing street, he
said. “ Any car passing will take you to the
“ But in what direction does it lie ? ” Jack
asked. “We might board a car going away
from it?” •
“Not on that street, the policeman said.
“The cars all go the one way. You get on
board the first car you see.” , f u
The lads followed their instructions taithtulU
and found they were right. Thus in a few
minutes they were in the great hotel. But the>
did not mean to stay there now. They realised
it was much too dangerous a place lor them,
alone and unaided as they were ; and they were
fully determined to find out what had become ot
Andrew Macalister. Strangely enough they
were not alarmed concerning his safety. Some-
how they felt that he was keeping out ot the
way for a purpose ; and if that purpose were to
brino' about the discomfiture of the Gentlemen


Adventurers, they meant to help him in every
way possible. Hastily they collected their
baggage, and in a very short space of time they
were ready to leave. A tall gentleman of
attractive features was standing in the hall as
they passed through. He was smoking a cigar
and scrutinising most people who entered or
went out. He was young, clean-shaven, and
smartly dressed.
“ I’ll bet that’s one of the Adventurers, Jack,”
Charlie muttered. “ He’s got his eyes on us
already. What do you say to leading him a
journey round Sydney ? ”
The man certainly had that air of mystery and
dignity which the boys had learned to look for in
the Adventurers.
“ Not nearly good enough, Charlie. W 7 e don’t
know this city, and we should most likely
run into more trouble. We must now act very
cautiously.”
“By Jupiter, we’ll surprise him, anyhow!”
Charlie said. “ We’ll take the wind out of his
sails by tackling him.” Before his more
thoughtfully inclined comrade could stop him,
Charlie had spoken to the stranger. “ Good
evening, sir,” he said. “ I suppose you are
looking for us ? ”
The man started slightly, but almost immedi-
ately he replied: “I suppose so; your names
are Gray and Osborne ? ”
“ Correct, and we don’t fear the Gentlemen
Adventurers of the Twentieth, or any other
10 145


Century, in the slightest. And our revolvers
are loaded now with the real thing, and we
know a little about how to use them, Charlie
went on.
“ That’s good,” the stranger said coldly ; “ but
there is no call for the use of shooting irons in
Sydney. Now that we’ve met, you had better
come with me at once, and explanation can wait
for a bit.”
“Aren’t you just a bit too sure of your
powers ? ” Jack put in. “ Why should we go
with you ? As a matter of fact, we have some
private business requiring our attention to-night,
and if you, or any of the gang follow us, you
do so at your own risk. We’ve tolerated your
people long enough, and now we’re going to
fight. My comrade can do some fine work with
the revolver, and I don’t think I would miss a
man of your size myself.”
“ I beg your pardon, gentlemen, but I hardly
understand what you are talking about. I don t
want to follow you. My instructions are to
attend to you, and I am entirely at your
service. My name is Henderson. 1 am not
of much account, but I hold His Majesty s
Commission as an officer in the British Navy,
and I have earned the trust of the gentleman
who I thought was our mutual friend, and in
whose behalf I am here to meet you. If you
mention his name I shall know that you are
the gentlemen he expected to arrive in Sydney
to-day,”


The First Encounter
“We’ve been had already, old man,” said
Charlie ; “ but if you are thinking of Andrew
Macalister, he’s my uncle, and were here to
fight for him, and no dodge of the Adventurers
will take us in now. We’ve just got clear of
their clutches, and ”
“ Yes, Captain Chester thought you would
wriggle free. He boarded the Defiance immedi-
ately our wireless apparatus caught your inter-
rupted message, and I came here to catch you
if you did get away.”
“Excuse me,” broke in Jack. “What was
the message ? If we appear to suspect you,
you will understand why if you are one of
the Adventurers, and if you are not, then we
can explain afterwards.”
“ Possibly, but meanwhile this hotel is being
crowded with men I suspect are in league with—
if not members of—the Syndicate you mention.
Your message didn’t say who you were as we
caught it, but it broke off towards the end of
the word ‘ Defiance ,’ and as our boat was lying
next to the yacht of that name it was a fairly
easy guess.”
“ But how did you know who sent the
message?” persisted Jack. “And what con-
nection is there between all that and this
hotel?”
I knew you landed to-day from the Vancouver
boat. I knew the Defiance people were watching
it and this hotel very carefully, and I knew you
veie of special interest to them. Then I saw


you go on board, and after that I received your
wireless message myself. In fact, gentlemen, if
you are friends of Andrew Macalister, come with
me. If you are not, then don’t, for my business
is only with his friends.”
“ Prove to us that your name is Henderson
and we’ll come,” Charlie said. “We are friends
of Andrew Macalister.”
The stranger laughed. “ It’s a very simple
matter getting identified,” he said. “ Ask any
person you see around you now —hotel officials,
or visitors —what my name is, and I’ll stand by
the result.”
Jack hailed the hall porter. “ Can you tell
me the name of that gentleman talking to my
friend ? ” he asked.
“ Lieutenant Henderson, sir ; late Chief Officer
of the Pioneer but now disengaged, I believe,”
the official answered promptly.
Jack rejoined his comrade and the stranger.
“ It’s all right, Charlie,” he said. “ Our friend
is straight, and I vote we go with him. He is
the man who was mentioned with Captain Chester
in your uncle’s letter.”
“ Look here, boys,” Mr. Henderson broke in.
“ I don’t like to be rude, or rush you in any
way, but we can’t afford to lose time in this
place. Already I can see quite a lot of fellows
I’ve seen on board the Defiance. See, they’ve
all got overcoats on to hide their evening dress,
and yet the temperature is nearer a hundred
than any other figure.”


“ I think I recognise some of them myself,”
said Charlie. “ I’m very glad we spoiled their
dinner, at any rate. We know we must get out
of here, but what do you propose ? They’ll
follow us, no matter where we go.”
“They’ll try, but I don’t think they’ll make a
success of the job if you’ll get on board the
motor car I have waiting outside at once. They
have one waiting too, I know, but it won’t be of
much use to them.”
“Where is my uncle?” asked Charlie abruptly,
looking straight in Mr. Henderson’s face.
o o
“ I only wish I knew, my boy. He has
disappeared as completely as though he had gone
back to 4° 3' South by 165° 5' East.”
“ Why didn’t you say that before ? ” cried
Jack. “Now we know that you are one of
ourselves, for it is to get the information
you have just thrown away that these people
who call themselves the Twentieth Century
Adventurers have followed us across the
world.”
“ Never mind ; we’ll do them this time. But
come along now, or it will take us all our
time.”
The lads made no comment until they were
seated in the car outside. As it started, Jack
said, “ Where are we going ? ”
“ Down to Circular Quay, where you have
been alreadv. We’re going on board the vessel
J o o
lying next to the Defiance, and as soon as we
are aboard we’ll probably get to understand each


other thoroughly. Captain Chester is in
command.”
“ But we will not be safe so near the other
boat,” said Jack. “ Shouldn’t we put up at some
hotel ? ”
“ You’ll be safe enough, for we’ll sail for the
position you know without any loss of time, and
the Caledonia is absolutely the fastest craft that
ever entered Sydney harbour. The Defiance
will never come near us.”
“ But we are not ready to sail for that pearl
place,” Charlie put in. “ Our invention has
been stolen, and we need some time to make
another.”
“ Yes, I know,” replied Mr. Henderson. “ But
you needn’t worry. We stole the thing back
from them, although they don’t know it ) 7 et.
Your contrivance is on board the Caledonia now.
The Gentlemen Adventurers are very clever, no
doubt, but others can play a game similar to
theirs and perhaps beat them.”
Amazement held the boys silent, and before
they could question Mr. Henderson further, the
car ran alongside the dock sheds, and a minute
later they were on board the Caledonia. Captain
Chester was waiting to meet them, but his face
was stained with blood, and his general appear-
ance such as indicated he had been having a
rough time recently.
Ten minutes afterwards the Caledonia had
cast off her moorings and was heading down
the harbour. As they cleared the wharf, all


could see there was much excitement on board
the Defiance , and it did not surprise them when
it quietly left its position and steamed after
them. Its funnel was belching smoke, and its
deck and saloon lights were obscured. Captain
Chester laughed.
O


CHAPTER VII
Lat. 4°a' South; Long. i6s°s' East
THE Caledonia skimmed through the waters
in a manner surprising. She made little
sound, and she seemed to glide along as if
endowed with life. As a matter of fact she was
fitted with the very latest turbines, and oil fed
her furnaces instead of coal. Henderson had not
exaggerated when he said she was the fastest
craft that ever entered Sydney harbour. There
may have been freak motor launches which could
touch a higher speed, but their peregrinations
would never take them outside the Heads, those
famous sentinels which guard the world-famous
harbour. Past the Manly steamer, and the
Mosmon’s Bay ferry the Caledonia glided with-
out any effort, and then she darted past one of
the crack steamers in the Queensland service.
Soon she was negotiating the Heads, and then
the open Pacific lay before her. But the Defiance
kept her place behind ; she, too, was a boat with
engine power far in excess of that required for
ordinary purposes.
Captain Chester called one of the junior officers


Lat. 4° 3' South ; Long. 165 °s' East
to the bridge. “ The course is the usual south
south-west,” he said. “ Let me know when we
are in sight of the A.U.S.N. boat which left an
hour before us, or off Kiama, whichever is first.”
The officer looked surprised but he said nothing,
and Captain Chester then asked Henderson and
the boys to accompany him to the saloon for a
few minutes’ conversation. When seated there
the Captain addressed the lads saying : “ This
ship is the property of Mr. Macalister, and
I have instructions from him to place it and
its officers and crew at your disposal. I await
your orders.”
“ But we haven’t received any instructions
ourselves,” Charlie said. “We were to call at
the Bank of Australasia to-morrow for them.”
“ Mr. Henderson and m}’self had also orders
to look out for you and keep you out of the
hands of a Syndicate of Adventurers at any
cost,” the Captain went on, “We were there-
fore compelled to get you away to-night, but
of course you can now order us to return if you
wish.”
“ Where is Mr. Macalister ? ” Charlie asked.
“I do not know. He wrote me last from a
place I never heard of, but the post mark was
Noumea in New Caledonia. He placed funds at
my disposal, and requested me to purchase the
fastest vessel, under a certain draught, that
could be bought, and after making certain altera-
tions and additions, to hold it at your service.
We knew vou were coming on the Makura, and
•/ o


we knew you were watched, and we acted in
your interests as we thought best, I have reason
to believe that the instructions awaiting you at
the Bank were to the effect that you could draw
any money you wished, and that you could rely
on the services of Mr, Henderson and myself.
Of course, I am aware that Mr. Macalister had a
scheme in view, but it is not my place to prompt
your actions in any way.”
“Your face is bleeding,” said Jack after a
pause. “ Had you an accident ? ”
“ Not much, but it was serious while it lasted,”
the Captain replied. “ I boarded the Defiance
an hour or so ago, and received an extremely
warm reception. I think I made it fairly hot
for the other people, too; but when I learned
that you had escaped I took my departure,
and I’ve not had time since to make myself
presentable.”
“ We are grateful, Captain,” Jack said. “ You
went on board that ship to help us, and you
must have known the nature of its people.”
“ Oh, I wasn’t without friends. I had all our
own fellows handy, and they are a powerful lot
when it comes to trouble, I can assure you. I
know every man on board this ship—excepting
yourselves—and, believe me, they’re not just
exactly what the ship’s books say they are. But
I am awaiting orders.”
“ We’re in a position a bit unusual for us,”
Charlie began, “ and I don’t know if we can rise
to it. I know we have started on a big scheme,


and we know that the people opposed to us are
able to do things on a scale far beyond our
powers. Oh, by the way, can you tell us how
any man could travel from New York to Sydney
faster than we did ? We caught the last possible
connection to Vancouver via Montreal, and yet
we saw the men we left in New York when we
landed to-day.”
“ That’s easily explained,” Henderson put in.
“ They saw you away from New York on the last
connection for Australia by the All Red route,
then they travelled leisurely across to San
Francisco and got a Spreckel’s steamer to Tahiti
or Samoa, where the Defiance picked them up.
She only got into port a couple of hours before
you, and if you had left the Makura at Brisbane
and come down by train, you would have beaten
them. But it doesn’t matter : we were watching
* O
them just as closely as they watching you,
and we did that substitution trick as neatly as
they did it, and only to-day.”
“Very well, gentlemen,” said Charlie, his face
becoming stern. “We do not presume to be
able to instruct you in any way, but if you
cannot act without our authority, we’ll take on
all responsibility. Where are we bound now,
Captain ? ”
“ Wherever you order. At this moment we
are heading down the Australian coast on the
usual Melbourne track, but that is because I
thought you might like to give the boat following
us the slip. My idea was to overtake the


Wyanclra, and then, with all lights out, swing
eastwards. Possibly the Defiance will think
they are still following us when they see the
Wyandra’s lights, and before they have dis-
covered their mistake, we’ll be off on the course
you determine.”
“ Your plan is good, Captain,” Charlie said.
“ I am very anxious now about my uncle, but I
think I understand his wishes, and he’ll find that
Jack and I are not unworthy of the trust he has
placed in us. Please coutinue as you have
planned, and when we have shaken off the
Defiance , set a course, according to your own
judgment, which will eventually bring us to
Latitude 4° ‘.V South, and Longitude 165° o'
East.”
“ Gentlemen, I am very glad to have that
instruction. You have mentioned the position I
know was Mr. Macalister’s objective, and which I
believe the people who followed you, and who are
now following us, are very anxious to know.
You may now retire to your cabins if you are
tired. You shall be informed when we have
reached the position you have specified, and the
Defiance cannot follow us. We are still sailing
easy, and are good for a couple of knots more,
but she is at her maximum now.”
“ Are you on the side of my uncle, may I ask,
gentlemen, apart from your duties as this ship’s
officers ? ” Charlie asked.
“ Young man,” returned the Captain, “ the
fact that we can navigate a ship and are acting


Lat. 4°3' South ; Long. 1 65°5' East
as its officers is of no account. The interests of
Andrew Macalister are our interests whether on
land or on sea, and we don’t care much who is
against him.”
“ Then we are friends, Captain,” said Charlie,
offering his hand, “ and you needn’t worry about
considering our ideas. We don’t know enough
to advise about anything, let alone give orders ;
but we believe w r e can bring up pearl shell all
right.”
“ I believe that pearl shell has something to
do with Mr. Macalister’s plans,” the Captain
smiled, “ but I don’t think that is his entire
scheme. But you know your way about the
ship, gentlemen. Please pass your time as
pleasantly as possible, and the steward will
attend to your requirements. I must go on
deck now, and I shall be the better of Mr.
Henderson’s presence, though if you wish, I’ll
manage myself.”
“ You are absolutely in command, Captain,”
Charlie hastened to assure the modest officer.
“ We’ll be all right, and you needn’t give a
thought to us. All the same we’ll call upon
that steward now, for we’ve had nothing to eat
• o
since we landed in Sydney.”
And while the Captain and his Chief Officer
discussed matters on deck, the boys were attended
to by a Chinese steward, who informed them
on being asked his name, that he was called
Wun Lung. “Me vely clevel fellow,” he
volunteered, “me got good educate, an’ know r


most tings. Me no’ ’flaid like odel China fellow,
the cooky, an’ me can sing, ‘ God save de King.’ ”
“ Oh, we can see you are an exceptional man,”
Jack said, as he finished a very excellent meal,
“ but why is the cook afraid ? ”
“ The silly fellow tink we all be eaten by
huugly black-fellows. He say Andiew Makalistel
always in tlouble, an’ dat he no’ cale much
whedel cooky be eaten ol not.”
“ But no one will eat him,” laughed Charlie.
“We’re not going among cannibals.”
“ Wun Lung no’ know ’bout dat. Wun Lung
O # o
know Mistel Makalistel well, an’ you can bet
youl whiskels he no’ cale whele he goes. Ally
samee I telly cooky he all li’.* Black-fellow tasty
him, no’ likey him, no’ eaty him, Wun Lung
blave man; he likey Andlew Makalistel an’ go
anywhele fo’ him. Oh, my whiskels, hele is de
ole man! ”
Wun Lung began dancing around the table
with great activity, and the boys observed that
the Captain was just entering the saloon. “We
have overhauled the Wyandra ,” be announced,
“ and the Defiance is still hanging on to our
heels. We are now about to double northwards,
and 1 thought that you might like to watch
things ? ”
The lads went on deck at once. The lights
of the coasting steamer were plainly visible
ahead, and the Defiance's mast head light was
also clearly distinguishable astern. Henderson
* All li, the usual Australian-Chinese for “ all right.”


was on the bridge. He knew his duty well.
Suddenly the Captain signed to him, and the
Chief Officer telegraphed to the engine-room.
The response was instantaneous. The engineer
in charge switched all lights off at the dynamo,
and the sailors had at the same moment ex-
tinguished all lights not in direct connection
therewith. The Caledonia was now in complete
darkness. Again the telegraph bell tinkled out
some message to the engineer, and immediately
afterwards Henderson spun the fancy steering
wheel round. The electric steering gear now
brought into play did its work silently but
effectively, and the vessel described a half circle
in the water, and then darted ahead at right
angles to its former course. When a safe
distance away the engines were stopped, and all
hands not employed at the moment gathered to
watch the movements of the Defiance . She
sailed past at full speed, her decks, saloons, and
cabins blazing with electric light.
far all is well,” mused Captain Chester.
“ They’ll discover their little mistake when they
overhaul the Wyandra in an hour or so, but
we’ll not be here then. Mr. Henderson, kindly
set a course for the position you know, which
will take us to the west of the Avon coral banks,
and directly on to the Malayta passage in the
Solomons; and ring down ‘full speed ahead,’
iou attend to that, and I’ll turn in. Wake me
if anything unforeseen happens.”
“All right, sir,” Henderson answered. “TH


stay on the bridge, myself, until daylight, and
by that time we should be clear of all trade
routes.”
“ Yes, and I’ll hang about all day to-morrow,
although I’m sure the Third can handle this ship
as weff as any of us, and he’ll not like if we
appear not to trust him. Of course we must
not interfere with the Second, Mr. Wilson, for
though unfortunate in his experiences he knows
every mud bank and coral reef in the Pacific.
“ Yes, he’s piled up ships on a number of
them,” Henderson laughed, “ but all the same,
he’s a good fellow. Good-night, sir.
The Chief Officer went on the bridge, and
Captain Chester and all others not on duty
retired to rest. “Full speed ahead” was rung
down to the engine-room, and the Caledonia
started on her voyage to Latitude 4 3' South,
and Longitude 165° b f East.
When morning broke the Caledonia was sail-
ing swiftly through a sea as smooth as a sheet
of°glass, and when night fell over the phos-
phorescent ocean the condition of the water
was still the same. On the evening of the third
day they entered the zone of the coral sea
which fringes the coast of North Queensland,
but another day’s swift sailing brought them
safely through it. The next evening they
sighted one of the reefs belonging to the New
Hebrides group, and a day later they approached
the famous Malayta passage between the moun-
tain islands of Guadalcanar and San Christos al


iu the Solomons. They were now sailing in a
tropical sea, and islands met the eye wherever
one looked. Some were palm-clad coral strands,
and some reared themselves high into the clouds,
but all were surrounded by a ring of boiling surf
which betokened the presence of an encircling
reef of coral which no ship could pass, unless
through some gaps which would first have to
be found.
Next morning as the boys were having a
swim in the canvas bath in the forward part
of the ship, the third officer, a boy not much
older than themselves, called down to them
that the islands amidst which was their destina-
tion were iu sight. They dressed hurriedly,
and examined their surroundings through the
Captain s glasses. They were approaching a
group of low-lying, forest-clad islets which
looked as if they had been dotted all over the
ocean haphazardly. And what a study in colour
they were to the lads so suddenly transplanted
from dreary drab London into the heart of the
enchanted world. The dark green fronds of the
palms, touched up on their topmost branches
with vivid splashes of white, gold, and red
creeping flowers of the orchid variety, formed
the centre-piece of each island; and through
the trees an occasional glimpse of the sparkling
lagoon which they fringed, told that their very
existence was due to the mighty efforts of the
tiny coral zoophytes whose piled-up skeletons
really formed their structure. Round each island
II 161


a shimmering band of white coral beach separated
the foliage from the gently lapping waters of the
Pacific, and further out to sea the usual ring of
snowy surf indicated the position of the outer
barrier reef. Over all, the sun shone down
through a cloudless, azure-blue sky, and the
terrific heat of its rays caused a steamy haze to
arise from the dancing wavelets, which partly
obscured the vision and rendered all things as
seen through a glass, but in a distorted per-
spective. Because of this latter effect the boys
did not see the big mountain-island which lay
in the heart of the small coral atolls, until its
foliage-covered slopes shone out above the haze
belt only a few miles distant. Its bold cone-
shaped summit was surrounded by a snow-like
substance which sparkled in the sunlight as if
composed of innumerable diamonds, and streaks
of this material stretched down the mountain-
side, until lost amidst the luxuriantly-hued
foliage which encircled the lower parts. Of
course, the white substance was lava, and the
clouds of white smoke which rose every few
minutes from the peak, and hung in the deep
blue of the heavens gave the reason: the island
was of volcanic origin, and its internal fires had
not yet died down.
For hours the Caledonia threaded her way
through the maze of islands, the Captain, person-
ally, attending to the navigation, and at lunch
time they had worked round to the north side
of the volcanic island after zig-zagging more


Lat. 4°3 / South; Long. 165°5' East
than three times the actual distance. Captain
Chester would not leave the bridge for lunch,
and Henderson took upon himself the duty of
answering the boys’ questions.
“ Where are we at this moment ? ” Jack asked,
after some general talk about the nature of coral
islands.
“ Practically where you wished to be. As a
matter of fact you are only about half a mile
olf the spot where Captain Chester and myself
took the observation which gave Mr. Macalister
his figures.”
What! ” cried Jack. “ Then you have been
here before ? ”
“Yes, several times, but Captain Chester has
sailed through those islands oftener than any
other man. He knows the channel.”
“ But we understood the position we know
was only a few fathoms under water, and that
you could see the shell ? ”
“You are quite correct, but we are picking
a passage now as we don’t want to get stuck ;
a few yards on port or starboard our keel would
graze upon the coral bottom, and Captain Chester
intends to lighten the ship and establish our
land base before taking any risks.”
“But surely the people who call themselves
‘The Twentieth Century Adventurers’ didn’t
need to waste so much time on us to find out
this place ?” Charlie asked. “I see that there
is a channel charted right through the islands,
and that they are well known ? ”


“ Oh, yes, the passage is fairly well known to
the few German traders who come this way,
but it is not deep enough to float any craft
drawing a few feet more water than the
Caledonia, and, as I have said, the sharp ridges
of coral which flank the twisting channel would
rip the bottom out of any vessel if she touched
them. Hence, only the few skippers who have
come to grief around here know what the
shallows contain, and I expect that when this
ship is lightened to her minimum safe line,
you’ll know too. We are only crawling now,
as you may see, for we are not taking any risks;
and I don’t think anything floating can follow
us. Captain Chester alone knows the passage
to that island, and he told me we would not
be there much before sundown.”
And such was the case. The Caledonia
slewed and twisted all the afternoon, heading at
various times to all points of the compass, and
only moving forward at the slowest rate which
allowed steering way. Towards evening the
Captain left Henderson in charge and came
down to the saloon for a cup of tea. The boys
were waiting to attend him, themselves, much
to Wun Lung’s satisfaction, for he was sleepy.
“ Ah, well, my lads,” the Captain said cheerily,
“ to-night will see the end of the first stage of
O 'll 0
our work, and to-morrow your part will come
into play. I expect Mr. Macalister will put in
an appearance any time. He may drop from an
aeroplane or a balloon, but you can safely allow


Lat. 4° 3' South ; Long. 165° 5' East
that he’ll not come along in any ordinary
way.
“ Does he know these channels as well as you,
sir ? ” Jack asked.
“ Andrew Macalister knows everything, my
boy,” the Captain laughed. “He is the most
wouderful man I have ever met. He never
allowed that he knew anything, and though I
can claim that I knew of the great pearl shell
deposits on these shallow's and in the lagoons
around long ago, and had the good luck to be
the first to tell him, between ourselves, boys,
I believe he knew all about them, even while he
was pretending to be getting information from
me. He’ll show up before long; of that you
may rest assured.”
“ I hope he comes along before the Adven-
turers,” Charlie said. “ They’ll trouble us a lot
if they come up here.”
“Oh, I don’t know about that,” the Captain
replied. “ 1 certainly expect to see the Defiance
looming up behind one of those islands some
day; in fact I hope so, for she will assuredly
get piled up on the shallow's, and then those
adventure-loving gentlemen will be forced to
deal with us direct; if they refuse, well, that
is their business, and a German cruiser will
probably finish their existence as a Twentieth
Century gang of—of Adventurers.”
“Are they bad men?” Charlie inquired. “I
didn’t think it was possible for a band of law-
breakers to exist in these times, and all that w r e


saw of them did not suggest that they were
awfully wicked people ? ”
“ They work on up-to-date lines,” the Captain
replied. “ They are not bad people, necessarily,
but they have chosen to run against my
employer, Andrew Macalister, and that is enough
for me. I didn’t know they existed until
recently, although I had heard many strange
stories of the doings of a mysterious people
among the Islands in our Club in Sydney,
which I didn’t believe. Since then, however,
I have met some of them, and I know more
about them than they think. In fact they
have approached me to join their number, on
account of my little knowledge of the Pacific,
I suppose. They are a Syndicate composed of
cultured men, who, for some reason or other,
have forsaken civilised life in their native
lands in favour of what I may call the Life
Adventurous. So far as I know they break no
laws, but I don’t think they care much whether
they do or not. They have unlimited means,
sail under no flag, for they are composed of men
of all nations, and those I have met —without
their being aware that I knew them, of course —
were thorough gentlemen; and I know that
some of them were present at the last reception
held by the Governor-General of the State of
New South Wales.”
“ Then why are they interfering with us if
they are such an honourable band of men ? ”
asked Charlie. “We have done them no harm.”


Lat. 4°3 / South ; Long. 165°5' East
“Maybe Andrew Macalister has spoiled some
of their little games, though, and we are his
friends. A state of war exists between Mr.
Macalister and them, at anyrate, and we are
fighting for him.” . ,
“ But they seem to be following us merely
to know where these pearl-shell deposits are,
said Jack. “ I should have thought they were
above that kind of thing ? ” . , . . „
“Oh I expect that is not their real object,
the Captain said. “It pleases them to _ make
you think that, but I rather fancy it is Mr.
Macalister they are chiefly concerned about and
they hope to strike at him through you. l ru( h
the pearl shell beds in the lagoons are voith
several fortunes, and it may be that the Adven-
turers would like to work them, especiall} as
Germany is very jealous of her preserves, and
the chances of trouble would add the necessai}
excitement to their pearling operations. Still,
Andrew Macalister has something up his sleeve,
too, and the fact that he is not here shows he
knows the forces against him, and prefers to
play a lone hand, while we —his deputies—do
our best, openly. But we have reached our
base safely, gentlemen, for I see Henderson
has got through into the deep water surround-
ing this island. We’ll unload during the night,
and start raising the shell to-morrow.”
“ But are we safe from pursuit now ? ” Jack
asked. “ Cannot the Defiance trace this passage
as we have done ? ”


“ Well, she might, but I don’t think so. This
channel which has taken us in here is merely the
way cut by a river which flows down that
mountain ahead. It has worn out a road to the
open sea under the salt water, and we have
sailed in between its winding submarine banks.
After we discharge all w r e can of ballast, we’ll be
able to float over the shallows which flank it, and
no ship of any size can come near us, although
the Defiance could easily enough pass through
the known charted channel leading through the
group.”
“ But if they saw us wouldn’t that be enough ? ”
Jack inquired. Charlie was listening, but not
speaking much.
“Well, that’s one reason why we are having a
land base. You see, while we’re out raising the
shell we’ll keep a constant look-out, and should
detect the approach of any ship long before she
could see us. Then while she was slowly navi-
gating the only known channel we could make
for our hidden base up this river just in front.
There may be natives on the island, but I don’t
think we need to worry about them; a present
of some cheap mirrors and turkey-red cloth and
German pocket knives, all of which we have a
fair store on board, will make them our friends,”
“By Jupiter ! We would have some fun if we
fell in with natives,” Charlie laughed. “ They’re
all cannibals around these parts, aren’t they ?”
“ Well, the inhabitants of the nearest islands
in the Solomon group are about the worst speci-


Lat. 4° 3" South ; Long. 1 65° 5' East
mens of man-eaters on earth. They sail over here
among the lagoons in their big war canoes some-
times, I know, but whether on raiding expeditions,
or paying friendly calls, is not within my know-
ledge. Germany and Britain send warships around
frequently. Both countries claim this group,
you know ; Britain because she considers them
part of the Solomons, and Germany because they
lie north of the parallel which is diplomatically
termed the Pacific boundary line —but the war-
ships can’t come in here even by the deepest
channel, and even if they landed a shore party
to explore this island, or any of the others, our
knowledge would not be greatly increased, for if
there were any inhabitants, they would keep out
of sight among the dense forests, unless they
thought they were strong enough to kill and eat
the invaders.”
“ And as we are a shore party,” Jack said,
“we may look forward to being eaten if we
cannot do great deeds in the way of fighting —
that is, if this island is inhabited ? ”
“ Oh, I hardly think so,” the Captain laughed.
“ A\e’ll protect ourselves as well as we can, as a
matter of course, but it will be against another
7 # c!)
shore party, rather than in fear of an attack from
the natives, if there are any. I fancy that next
to Andrew Macalister 1 know the natives of the
Solomons better than other people, and although
he might do brilliant things among them
by means of his pet hobby which he terms
‘ strategy,’ I can handle ferocious natives, too, in


a smaller way, by diplomatic tactics, and cheap
presents.”
Charlie was about to ask more questions when
Wun Lung entered and announced that dinner
was ready, and would he served at their pleasure.
He, being a privileged person, also added:
“Me no’ likey this place. Me been hele befo’
wi’ Andlew Makalistel.”
“Go on, Wun Lung,” said the Captain.
“ What happened then to give you cause for
alarm ? Never mind sounding the dinner gong
until we are alongside.”
“Wun Lung no’ likey big fellows who say
goo’day to a Chinaman wi’ spikey clubs. They
always hungly, an’ me nevel know wha’ dey will
do next.”
“ What, Wun Lung! Have you been here
before ? ” cried the Captain in amazement.
“My wold, you bet,” came the answer. “Me
know this place well. Plenty wild pig, an’ bilds,
an’ odel tings all alound, but, my wold, the
people all vely big an’ vely hungly. Only
Andlew Makalistel know how to talky to dem.”
“ Then don’t worry, Wun Lung,” the Captain
said, after some deep thought. “If Mr. Andrew
Macalister can talk to them I can do so, too. I
know every language in the South Seas, and any-
how we’re going to land here, and you’ll have to
make the best of things. If a native wants to
eat you, just refer him to the cook ; he is much
fatter than you.”
Wun Lung did not appear to be much com-


Lat. 4°3 / South; Long. 165° 5' East
forted. He bustled about the table setting things
in order for a minute, then he said : “ Have bosses
got any pins they no’ wanty ? Wun Lung tinks
Joss no’ doin’ vely squale. He must be asleepy.”
“ What can you do with pins to help matters ? ”
Charlie asked. “ And who is Joss ? ”
“ Joss is his portable god,” the Captain ex-
plained, seeing that the steward felt hurt by the
lad’s ignorance, “ and he wants pins to stick into
him so as to rouse him to a sense of his duty.
Go to the Chief Engineer, Wun Lung, and tell
him I told you to ask if he could give you some
nails; they’ll make your Joss sit up far more
than pins, if you hammer them in far enough.”
Wun Lung departed in a thoughtful mood,
but he did not say that he was grateful for the
Captain’s advice. Probably he wasn’t. Shortly
after the Caledonia glided between the foliage-
clad banks of a small river, and after steaming
hard against its current for half an hour, during
which time many bends were negotiated, and
not a few barriers of wild vine creeping en-
tanglements burst asunder by the vessel’s bows,
open water was reached where the river widened
into a small lake.
Henderson was on the bridge all the time,
and the Captain walked the deck, smoked a
cigar, and talked to the boys. He gave them
much information about things as they were in
the Pacific, and enlightened them greatly con-
cerning other matters which had never yet come
into their minds. Finally, at sundown, the


Captain signed to the Chief Officer, and in
response that gentleman rang down “ stop ” to
the engine-room. The Caledonia then drifted —
under skilful management —alongside the right
bank, which was almost an impenetrable network
of fibrous flowering creepers. The electric search-
lights were switched on at once, and the crew
sprang ashore and soon cut away the scrub im-
mediately fringing the waterway, and a few
minutes later, the Caledonia was safely moored
to some of the larger trees growing near. Then,
Wun Lung was allowed to serve dinner, and
with the cool heavily-scented shore breeze
blowing through the open ports, and the soft
music of the rustling leaves as an accompani-
ment, the boys dined for the first time since
leaving home with a feeling of peaceful rest and
security.
But Captain Chester did not believe in rest
when work lay ahead, nor did Mr. Dixon, the
chief engineer. Thus, the rattle of steam
winches on deck, and the tramp of men overhead,
as they opened the hold preparatory to discharg-
ing, interrupted the conversation at the end of
the dinner, and the Captain remarked to his
Chief Officer : “ Dixon means business, at any-
rate. He’s got his men started on a night shift.
I think I’ll go and keep an eye on things myself.
I know Dixon is a great friend of Mr. Macalister,
and wants to hustle things on his behalf; but I
don’t know that his juniors and his firemen, who
are now doing work, outside their own sphere,


Lat. 4°3 / South; Long. 165°5 / East
above with the deck hands, have any special
knowledge of how things might happen in this
part of the world.”
“ I think they know most things,” Henderson
replied. “ Dixon picked them all; you know
every man, and I fancy I know them fairly well
too. Besides both Wilson and young Smith are
on deck now, and what they don’t know about
the conditions in the Pacific is hardly worth
knowing.”
“ But we have some work to do, too,” said
Charlie. “ You know that our contrivance was
not exactly complete when it was stolen from us ?
Well, with the help of the ship’s engineers we
have completed all the missing parts, and we’ll
fit everything together to-night while the ship
is being unloaded.”
“ All right, gentlemen,” the Captain said.
“ We’ll go on deck now, and to-morrow we’ll
start raking in the spoils of the sea if you have
made no mistake which cannot be rectified by
our own engineers, the best men any Captain
ever sailed with.”
“We have made no mistake, Captain,” Jack
broke in. “We can raise the shell in spite of
sharks and octopuses.”
“ Octopodi,” corrected Charlie. “ That is the
word my uncle used in his letter, and it seems he
never makes a mistake.”
They went on deck, and while the engineers
and crew unloaded the ship of almost everything
she carried, and reduced the ballast to a limit


that would have made the British Board of
Trade stand aghast, the lads worked at their
“ submarine swimmer,” with the assistance of
Smith, one of the junior engineers, an exception-
ally clever youth with whom both Charlie and
Jack had already become very friendly. Towards
morning the ship was floating on the absolute
minimum line of safety, and the crew retired to
snatch an hour’s sleep. But the boys still
worked on, helped now by Henderson and the
youngest officer.
“ Well, my lads, how are things going?” Mr.
Dixon called out, as he lit a cigar after complet-
ing the unloading duties. “If my powers of
pushing a file, or of driving a chisel can be of
any use, well—l am among the unemployed
now, and I guess some work would give me an
appetite for breakfast.” Mr. Dixon was an
American of Scotch extraction, and his nature
was typical of the best of his nationality.
“ If you could forge a bar of steel and fit it
into those sockets, we should be very grateful,”
Jack said, showing him a piece of mechanism
they were about to lift inside the “ swimmer.”
“ You’ll have it in no time, my boy,” Mr.
Dixon replied. “ I’ll forge it and dress it
myself. Anything else my jolly men or yours
truly can do for you ? We are all ready to help
you until the boiler bursts.”
But there was nothing more, and true to his
word Mr. Dixon himself fitted in the lost con-
necting lever before half an hour had passed.


Lat. 4°3' South ; Long. 165°5' East
When the sun’s rays shot its first streaks of
crimson across the heavens all was completed.
The boys, and most of the men, plunged into the
river aud swam about like amphibious creatures,
and none gave a thought to either crocodiles or
sharks, although Captain Chester warned them
that the water was probably infested with them.
Ah Sing, the cook, aud Wun Lung had break-
fast ready early, and the firemen on duty had
kept steam up all night. Captain Chester
personally superintended the building of a bark
hut to cover the lauded material, and early in
the forenoon the dangerously light draughted
Caledonia steamed gently out to the shallows to
begin the work for which she was intended.


CHAPTER VIII
Pearling
WHEN the open water was reached, Captain
Chester took his place by the wheel, and
Henderson went forward to the bows with a
couple of sailors to look out for jagged coral
upheavals rising higher than the surrounding
submarine plateau. The Captain at once swung
the vessel out of the river channel, and steered
her straight over the shallow waters which
covered the pearl beds. The Caledonia was
floating like a cork, but she was extremely
touchy in her behaviour, and a very slight
disturbance in the weather conditions would
have brought her to grief. But Captain Chester
and his officers knew what they were doing,
and they were not now under the jurisdiction
of any Board of Trade. Right over the pearl
banks the Caledonia steamed slowly, her twin
propellers high out of their natural element, but
her engines kept well in control by Mr. Dixon
himself. The boys were amazed at what they
saw. The water seemed to be very shallow,
but Henderson explained that it was much


deeper than it looked, and that the intense
sunlight and the nature of the bottom caused
it to be of a transparency very deceiving. The
bottom was as easily seen as if only a foot of
water covered it, but the dark shadows which
darted everywhere with lightning-like rapidity
were sufficient to dispel that illusion. The
shadows were enormous sharks, and they did
not understand what kind of monster was
floating above them. They lived, chiefly, as
Henderson explained, on water snakes and
octopodi, which in turn lived upon the pearl
oysters. What the poor oysters lived on he
did not know, but clearly a perpetual tragedy
was being enacted in the scintillating and trans-
lucent depths. The Caledonia forged ahead
until about six miles from the big island, and
about one mile from a low-lying, palm-clad coral
atoll; then the Captain rang down “stop” and
soon after she was drifting lazily over a pearl
bank such as —so far as Henderson knew —no
man had ever previously seen. The bottom was
covered with them, and they could be seen from
the deck quite plainly. All shapes and sizes
were there, some half-buried in patches of sand,
some resting amidst the fronds of the coral tree-
like growths, and vast numbers lying on ledges
on the edge of deeper depressions. Strange
jelly-fish-like creatures floated about everywhere,
and fishes of most peculiar shapes swam under
the Caledonia s keel on tours of investigation.
Down in the deeper holes, too, huge blurred
12 177


forms moved, seemingly masses of waving ten-
tacles issuing from obscured, shapeless bodies.
These were the dreaded devil - fish, and the
boys knew without being informed. Myriads
of sinuous whip-lash-like objects wormed their
ways through the water in shoals, apparently
not having the slightest interest in the ship
which darkened the water. Some were about
a yard in length, but most were only half that
size. The boys thought they were eels, but
Henderson soon imparted the knowledge that
they were water-snakes, and could give a man
an extremely bad time in several different ways,
although probably, their powers of stinging
whenever their bodies touched any sensitive
part of another living creature were the most
unpleasant. As soon as the vessel ceased to
have movement, sharks of enormous size swarmed
round, and all other creatures disappeared as if
by magical influence. Evidently the sharks
were the lords of the water in those parts, and
nothing disputed their authority.
“ Well, my lads,” observed the Captain,
coming down from the bridge and lighting a
cigar, “ you see the nature of the work we ve
got to tackle ? A diver in the best dress ever
made wouldn’t live many seconds down there
among those fellows. They are about the
ugliestTooking members of the shark tribe I
have ever seen, and they seem to think it is
near their dinner time.”
"We’re not afraid,” Charlie replied. “Our


‘ submarine swimmer ’ is built of a metallic alloy
that can break sharks’ teeth, and we can give
them more than they’ll want in other ways, too.
Please tell the men to hoist the affair over into
the water and we’ll get to work.”
“ We’ll give you a fair start, anyhow,” put in
Mr. Dixon, who had just come on deck with a
little pieoe of tubing in his hands. “This is
what you may call ‘ Dixon’s Shark Annihilator ’;
it is jammed full of gelignite, and has got a cap,
and a yard of fuse coiled safely inside as well.
Now I wall light the fuse, which will burn three
minutes before it reaches the explosive cap
and ” 1
“ Go slow, old man ! ” interrupted the Captain.
“ You’ll maybe blow the ship out of the water.”
The engineer had lit a match.
“ Don’t you worry, sir,” he laughed, “ I’ve
monkeyed with dynamite all my life, and I know
what 1 m doing. I’m going to give the biggest
and most depraved sinner of all the sharks around
a little medicine in the shape of this tube, and I
guess he’ll not want any more. His mates will
get their sensitive nerves so badly shaken too
that I shouldn’t wonder if some of the poor
things died.” Mr, Dixon applied the match to
a piece of projecting fuse and while it hissed and
spluttered, held the bomb in his hands admir-
ingly.
“Throw that thing overboard at once, sir,”
roared the Captain, springing back in alarm.
“It needs three minutes, Captain, and I’m


trying to pick out the fellow I want to swallow
it. Ah, there he is ! Watch ! ”
Mr. Dixon threw the hissing shell as far out
to sea as he could, and before it reached the water
some of the sharks were leaping up to meet it.
It fell into the water, however, and at once was
followed by a very large creature of whom the
others seemed to be afraid. The water was as
clear as glass and no splash was made by the
deadly missile or by the swift movements of the
great shark. The watchers therefore witnessed
the entire proceedings, and these all happened
very quickly. The glint of silvery white flashing
through the waters showed that the shark had
turned to seize the loaded tube, and when next
moment it darted in among its envious fellows,
lashing the water into foam with its convulsions,
it was quite evident that it had swallowed the
pill and did not like it.
“Here, you beggars!” cried Mr. Dixon.
“ Don’t crowd round this ship. You’ve a
minute to spare, so get as far away as you can.”
He flung another tube as far out as he could,
after coolly lighting the fuse, and as the sharks
darted after it he said casually : “ That pill is
timed only for a minute, so I guess both sharks
will go off at the same time.”
And they did; two muffled reports sounded
from somewhere underneath the water, and a
mass of shark, water, coral, pearl shell, sea snake,
and bits of a bonito flew upwards in two separate
columns. Before the spray fell, the other sharks


had rushed in and devoured the pieces of their
late comrades, and then, suddenly, the water
was deserted, and not a creature, except dead
fishes floating bottom upwards, could be seen.
The fishes had been killed by the concussion,
and the sharks had got a fright they would not
forget.
“ Now, boys, I guess you can start gathering
shells by the sea-shore—l mean on the sea
bottom,” Mr. Dixon said. “Just whisper any-
thing you want done, and you’ll have three
good engineers on the job before the sound
waves of your voices have radiated as far as the
Captain.”
“Everything is ready, sir,” Jack said, “but
we depend upon you to keep up the current of
electricity necessary for us to work. We can
generate oiir own, but it is much simpler and
more satisfactory if the ship can do that for us
and send it down on flexible wires.”
“ That s all arranged long ago,” the engineer
said. “ I’ll guarantee the five amperes of current
you require at one hundred volts pressure. I’ll
attend to the dynamo myself.”
“ Oh, we don’t need anything like that volt-
age,” Jack said, “but our transformers can take
that pressure quite easily and reduce it. We
are ready and eager to get to work now. Lower
our pearl catcher into the water.”
The cylindrical fish-like structure was caught
by the tackle on the yard-arm, and the steam
winch hoisted it clear of the rail and dropped it


gently upon the water. It floated lightly, and
next minute Charlie was lowered over the gun-
wale of the Caledonia through its open man-
hole door. The electric transmission wires
were already connected, as were also a couple of
wires for telephonic purposes. Jack had the
receiver fixed upon his ear, and the other end
was always ready.
“ I’m all right,” Charlie spoke through the
telephone, after screwing up the manhole. “Tm
going to dive.”
And dive he did, and when the water settled
down again all could see the patent ‘ swimmer
moving along the bottom like a great fish.
“ Are you all right ? ” Jack asked through the
telephone anxiously.
“Of course,” Charlie replied. “ How could
I be any other way 1 Oh, Jack, I’ve got the
light on a shell as big as a tray, and our suction
pump is not big enough to take it in.”
“Well, leave it until it grows bigger and
gather in the smaller ones,” Jack advised, but
after that he could only get replies from his
comrade in very brief language. Charlie was
working to some purpose, and all his attention
was required.
And it was certainly a new world in which
Charlie found himself. Fully twenty feet of
water lay overhead, but he felt no incon-
venience ; the air generators were working
splendidly, and the propellers which held the
vessel down by their work were revolving at


® BwEvi- t§smF?m *
> r ~ : ' _>««•*•'
h « |i||r ""' ■»
“ CHARLIE WAS LOWERED OVER THE GUNWALE THROUGH ITS OPEN
MANHOLE DOOR.”
Ip. 182.




full speed without any straining, driven by
small electric motors supplied with current
from above. But it was the wonderful sub-
marine searchlight which gave the most remark-
O O _
able effects. It illuminated a narrow strip of
water for some yards ahead and around, and,
strange to say, the waters beyond its penetrating
influence, though quite transparent from the top,
were almost inky black to him. He had enough
work within reach, however, to keep him going,
and shutting his eyes to the beautiful submarine
forests of coral growths, he looked only for pearl
shell. A cluster lay before him, and starting
the suction pump which protruded from the
“submarine swimmer’s” mouth, he quickly drew
them into the large tube, part of their coral
resting place coming with them. Charlie then
closed the outer chamber by means of an ingeni-
ously constructed slide valve, and at once the
shell, coral, and a volume of water rolled into
the second chamber, which opened automatically
when the outer one was shut. The next stage
was to eject the w T ater before removing the
shell. This he did with the powerful little
electric force pump which was permanently
connected to the inner chamber, and could be
set in action by the movement of a switch
handle at his side. When the water was
pumped back into the sea, the lad opened the
plunger-door, or trap, which gave access to the
interior of the “ swimmer,” and the shells and coral
tumbled inside. Charlie closed up everything


again and opened the outer tube, ready for
another operation. He switched on the forward-
propelling motor, and the “swimmer” moved ahead
a few feet, and another cluster of shells came
into view through the lens. These were quickly
transferred to the interior of the strange
vessel, and again and again was the process
repeated.
Charlie’s chief regret now was that the admis-
sion tube was not large enough to take in the
majority of the shells. The invention in every
way worked perfectly. Soon he realised that
all the available space inside was full; and at the
same time he remembered that he had not
expelled the air since being submerged.
“ That explains why I have been feeling so
sleepy,” he ejaculated. “ Jack will be thinking
something is wrong, for he’s been speaking all the
time, and I don’t think I’ve been answering.”
He started the air-expelling pump, and saw that
the oxygen generators were working all right,
and presently the atmosphere was as fresh and
pleasant as on the deck of the Caledonia.
Charlie hauled in some more shells, and then
informed those above that he was coming up.
Coming up was an easy matter. He simply
stopped the revolving screws which held the
vessel down, and it promptly floated upwards,
it having been designed to be much lighter than
water with its utmost possible load. Of course
it could have been hauled up in any case, as
the difference between its weight, and that of an


equal volume of water, allowing that it might
take on a load of something very heavy, could
only be very slight, and the strong wires con-
veying the current could easily stand the
strain of the difference. Mr. Dixon had seen
to that.
But the craft came to the surface without any
effort, as the boys had calculated it should do,
and without loss of time, after Jack had told him
he was on top, Charlie unscrewed the manhole.
The ship’s derrick then lowered a huge bucket,
and Charlie filled it with the spoils he had
collected. Afterwards he was hoisted on board
himself, and Jack took his place inside the
diving craft. Jack’s experiences were much the
same as Charlie’s. Both knew all the working
parts so well that they did not require to give
much attention to them, and when Jack came
aloft with another five hundredweight of shells,
the Captain’s admiration was unbounded.
Mr. Dixon also said a few words, but these were
so terse and full of deep feeling that they may
not be repeated.
Charlie went down again, and when his second
load was deposited on deck, Jack took his second
spell. There seemed to be no difficulty in find-
ing the shell deposits, and when he came up
with his second load, about a ton of the molluscs
lay on deck.
Young Smith, the junior engineer—after much
pleading with Mr. Dixon and the Captain, but
fully approved of by Charlie and Jack, who had


already made him acquainted with all the parts
of their invention —went down, and although he
had to receive some directions through the
telephone, he finally came up with another five
hundredweight of shells, and as proud as could
be of himself. There were now three men who
could handle the machine below, and after each
had another turn, and two tons of shells littered
the well deck, Captain Chester announced that
they could not afford to do more that day, the
afternoon was well advanced, and the track home
to their base was not too easy. “Fd like very
much to have a try underneath myself,” he
added. “ I’ve often wondered what it would
be like to crawl along the bottom.”
“It isn’t like anything, sir,” Smith answered.
“ You feel you are a fish yourself, and I’m sure all
the real fishes think the thing is, too.”
“ Ah, well, we’ve made a start, anyway, and I
don’t think Andrew Macalister calculated that
we could raise a couple of tons of shells so soon.
Why, we’ve made about two hundred and forty
pounds by our work, and we weren’t half
trying! ”
“Yes, let’s get home,” yawned Mr. Dixon.
“We haven’t had a sleep for a year, I think,
and the old boat isn’t safe out here all night.”
An hour before sundown they were berthed at
their old moorings, and after the shells had been
landed, Wun Lung sounded the dinner gong.
Everyone retired early that night, for the
last thirty-six hours, even forty-eight for some,


had been strenuous. But sleep is a wonderful
reviver. At sunrise all were astir, and the
Captain called his officers, engineers, and the
boys together to discuss matters and arrange
their programme for the day. At this meeting
it was settled that half the ship’s company
should remain on shore to erect tables on which
the shells could be laid. Mr Henderson and the
second engineer would remain in charge on shore
O o
that day, and possibly the others would change
places with them the next.
After breakfast the Caledonia steamed out
again, and when at nightfall she returned, she
had five tons of shells on board. Next day the
Chief Officer and the second engineer took
command of the pearling operations ; of course,
Charlie, Jack, and Smith were with them, and
that night another five tons were added to their
store.
The following day was Sunday, and Captain
Chester ordered that all work should cease that
day. He was not what most people would call
a religious man, but those who were well
acquainted with him, knew that his principles
were almost Puritanical. All were glad of the
day of rest, and after breakfast the men went
ashore to inspect the total work done by both
parties. A long shed roofed with bark had been
erected, and underneath were arranged two long
tables, or rather inverted V-shaped benches.
Bamboo gutters were fitted neatly along the
lower edges, and these were half filled with


water. On the sloping desk-like erections the
pearl shells collected during the first two days
had been carefully placed, so that when they
opened any pearls which might be contained
would roll down the inclined plane into the
gutters. The second officer had arranged and
superintended the building of these tables. It
seemed he had been engaged in the pearling
industry in North Western Australia at some
period of his untalked-about career, and he knew
exactly what to do. For that part so did Ah
Sing, the cook, and Wun Lung, the steward,
and possibly one or two of the firemen. Men
who go sailing in the South Seas usually have
had former experiences, although they do not
always talk about them.
The boys walked round the benches surveying
the treasures they had won from the sea. Some
were already opening to “ spit ” the pearl, but
Mr. Wilson explained that less than one shell in
a thousand contained a gem of any value. Wun
Lung seemed to think differently, and from the
manner in which he walked round the tables
with his fingers trailing in the gutter it was
evident even to the boys that his bland child-
like expression was too innocent of guile to be
absolutely honest. Mr. Wilson had no doubts
about the matter, and he caught the steward by
his pig-tail and flung him upon the ground.
“ Wha’ fo’? ” wailed Wun Lung in sorrowful
inquiry, not venturing to rise from his prostrate
position.


“ Nothing,” replied the second officer, “ but
don’t let me catch you near those tables again,
or our ship will need a new steward shortly
after.”
“You tink, Mistel Wilson, I looky fo’ pelils ?
Wun Lung no’ wanty pelils. He only wanty
helpy mastels an’ Andiew Macalistal.”
The Chinaman’s reproachful tones fairly melted
the boys’ hearts, but Mr. Wilson only laughed,
although he was said to be very soft hearted,
“All right, Wun Lung,” he said. “You serve
your masters faithfully, and you’ll be serving
Andrew Macalister too ; but remember what I
have told you will happen if you put your
fingers in those gutters again without being
asked.”
Charlie was about to remonstrate with Mr.
W T ilson for the harshness of his language towards
the poor inoffensive steward, but when Mr.
Wilson suddenly bent down and caught the
Celestial by the throat he was too much sur-
prised to speak. W 7 hen he saw Wun Lung
spit out two magnificent pearls he was still
more surprised, but he now resolved to say
nothing.
“ I just got the beggar in time,” Mr. WTlson
remarked, rising, and handing the glistening
spheroids to Jack. “He would have got them
over his throat in another fraction of a second.
These Chinese know far more than we are
ever likely to learn, but I spoiled that little
trick.”


Wun Lung got up and ran away. He was
not perturbed in the slightest. Probably his
conscience was not built on the same lines as
that of his masters. The boys continued their
tour of inspection, Mr, Wilson still acting as
instructor. He explained that the oysters would
“ spit ” their pearls, if they held any, within a
few days, and that at anyrate they would open
of their own accord in about a week. “ They
die painlessly,” he assured the boys, “ for they
haven’t got any nervous system, and anyhow the
shell is worth a hundred and twenty pounds per
ton, and an occasional pearl, such as the larger
of those two Wun Lung tried to steal, is worth
hundreds of pounds in itself. Oh, you’ve struck
a mighty good thing, boys, I can tell you. You
can carry back a few hundred tons of shell to
Thursday Island or Singapore, and come down
here again for another load. Then your chance
of real first water pearls is very good, and a few
of them will make your fortunes.”
“We’re not looking for fortunes,” Jack felt
constrained to say. “ We’re here to help Mr.
Andrew Macalister, and all we take from the sea
belongs to him. Hullo ! What is the ship s bell
ringing for ? ”
“ Church, I expect,” answered Mr. Wilson.
“ It is eleven o’clock, and Captain Chester expects
every man to attend. We had better get on
board.”
That service was the most impressive the
boys had ever experienced. Handsome Captain


Chester in the full glory of a new uniform
conducted the service personally, with his equally
handsome but younger Chief Officer assisting.
All the ship’s company were present in the
saloon dressed in their best, though it must be
admitted that the hands of some of the firemen
were not over clean. Still, these men were on
duty, and grease cannot be removed very easily.
All reverently paid tribute to the Almighty, even
Wun Lung and Ah Sing and Black Peter, the
negro greaser, being as devout as any, although,
in the case of the Chinamen, at least, their
thoughts must have been strange, seeing they
carried their gods about with them, and doubt-
less had stuck many pins into them that
morning. But to the boys’ minds came a flood
of thoughts, and after service was over they
remained in the saloon lost in contemplation.
It was exactly thirty-five days since they had
left London, yet in that brief space of time what
onderful changes in their lives had been
effected! How altered all the conditions to
which they were used ! What a difference in
their surroundings, and how romantic was their
position !
London with its millions of people—dreary
over-civilised London with its cold, foggy
atmosphere had become to them only a dream-
place. They could scarcely believe it existed.
Yet, when after more thought the details of
their everyday life there came up before them—
the tubes, taxis, theatres, the people, the


buildings, the newspapers —they knew that
Loudon was real, and thought that their present
life was but a dream. Around them was a
brilliantly-lined forest, and the bright scintil-
lating air was laden with narcotic perfumes. An
unknown fairyland lay open to them, and what
its forests hid could not even be guessed. And
they were not suffering the usual discomforts of
pioneers; every luxury of civilisation was at
their call. The water trickling through the
forest glades was tepid, but they could get ice
by touching an electric bell push. In enchanted
lands, too, people sometimes got hungry and
could not always find the best of food ; but they
had their slightest wish gratified in that respect,
and cooked by civilised methods to perfection —
Ah Sing was a first-class cook. Again, pests,
insect and otherwise, were usually attending
discomforts to life in the gorgeous South Sea
Islands, but on the Caledonia they slept as
comfortably, yes, more so, than they might have
done at home, and no pests caused any infliction.
Then, they were not spending their time as
“lotus flower eaters”; they were doing good
work, and earning more in return for their
labours than they had ever imagined was possible.
In fact they could not fully realise that things
were real, and as at first they thought London
was a dream, their fear now was that they would
suddenly awake and find that their present life
was only the fabric of a vision. And yet the
mysterious man Andrew Macalister who had


brought them thither, whom they had never
seen, and in whose interests they supposed they
were working, had not put in an appearance.
Where was he ? What was he doing ? And
why had he left everything in their hands ?
True, he had given them the ship, and men who
could do anything and everything, and who
feared nothing, but what part in this strange
game with the Adventurers was he playing
himself ? Everything was an insolvable mystery ;
but they would have liked greatly to meet the
man whom even Wun Lungf revered. The lads
O
did not speak, but their thoughts were the
same and each knew that. Outside the tropical
sun was shining down upon the little clearing
with terrific intensity, but down in the well-
ventilated saloon, with electric fans blowing cool
breezes over their heads, they felt no incon-
venience. Their musings were interrupted by
the junior engineer. He was on deck and looking
down through the open sky-lights.
“ Would you like to go exploring a bit?” he
cried. “I’m off duty, and the old man has
given me leave to do what I like.”
“ Come down and let us talk a bit first,”
Charlie replied, but the youthful engineer shook
his head.
“ I’m not allowed in the saloon except when
church is on,” he said. “The old man and Mr.
Dixon would take a fit if they caught me down
there.”
“ But not when we asked you, surely ? ”
13 193


Jack said. “ Were only engineers our-
selves.”
“ Yes, but you are the friends of the owner.
Excuse me, gentlemen, but I know my position,
and I’d rather not come down.”
“ All right, we’ll come up,” Charlie laughed.
“ And we’ll go exploring all over this funny
island.”
Half an hour later they walked down the
gangway; Captain Chester was not at first
inclined to allow them to go out of sight of the
ship, but Henderson took their part, and laugh-
ingly reminded the Captain that boys were
always looking for adventure, and that no
danger was likely to come to them on an un-
inhabited South Sea island. Hie Captain by no
means agreed with his lieutenant about the
absence of danger, but he finally gave his per-
mission with the stipulation that two of the
crew should go with them. Wun Lung by some
chance also got added to their company, but as
he had prepared a basket of sandwiches and
other things very necessary on an exploring
expedition, he was allowed to come. The two
men, a fireman and a deck hand, knew the
South Seas well, and had been selected by
Captain Chester to go with the boys because of
their knowledge.
Bursting through the entanglements the party
soon lost sight of the little steamer, and almost
immediately began ascending. Wild vine
tendrils and flowering creepers spread like nets


everywhere, and the boys soon ceased admiring
the beautiful hibiscus flowers and orchids which
grew higher up. In a land of perpetual sunshine
brilliant colours become monotonous in time,
and already the vivid hues of the foliage had
ceased to attract attention. The idea of the
lads was to get as far up the side of the mountain
as possible, so that they might see what lay
around and beneath, but progress upwards was
painfully slow as they had to break through the
interlacements of fibrous dingers by sheer
strength. Overhead gaudily-plumaged birds
flitted, chattering angrily at being disturbed
from their midday slumbers, but down below the
light was so faint that the boys could almost
believe it was night. The air was close and
oppressive, being shut out by the great leaves of
the trees reaching overhead like a canopy.
After half an hour’s struggling Charlie said
he was almost beat; he had been leading the
advance and the work of forcing a passage had
told heavily upon him,
“ If you wish to get to the top of the mountain,”
one of the men said, “ it would be much easier
work if we skirmished around until we found a
waterway.”
“ All right, Fiji Fred,” Smith responded.
“You find the watercourse and then lead the
way. I’ll admit you know more than I do on
shore.”
The fireman grinned. “If I didn’t think, sir,
that I have forgotten more than ever you knew


either afloat or ashore, I reckon I’d give up the
ghost.”
“You are mighty complimentary, anyhow,”
Smith said, somewhat ruffled. “ I didn’t think
it required much knowledge to be a first-class
fireman ? ”
“ Not much,” Fiji Fred laughed. “ Only about
the same as a fourth engineer. I was an
engineer myself once, but after I got my chiefs
ticket I chucked the game and started growing
cocoanuts around these parts. It paid better
and gave more fun.”
“What?” exclaimed Smith. “You held a
chiefs ticket ? ”
“A fact,” answered the man gravely, “but
don’t tell anybody please; they might think
less of me if they knew, and really it wasn’t my
fault.”
“Then why in thunder are you sailing as a
fireman?” demanded the youth, paying no
attention to the sarcasm.
“ Well, I had to get on the Caledonia some-
how, and as Captain Chester had already picked
his officers, and Mr. Dixon his engineers, I had
to sign on as steward, fireman, or deck hand.
But here is a watercourse now. We can force
our way up its bed without much trouble.
“But why had you to get on board the
Caledonia f ” asked Charlie, as all dropped down
between the overgrown banks, and pioceeded
upwards under the flowery arch which budged
the channel.


“ Andrew Macalister asked me to keep an eye
on you fellows, and see that you didn’t get into
trouble. Crinkled Charlie, here, is on the same
business, and as he is a man who never speaks,
everyone thinks he is very wise, although I
reckon Wun Lung knows more about a ship
than he does.”
“ And yet I was once sailing as Mr.
Henderson’s senior officer,” murmured the
other man, “ and that wasn’t on a trading
tub.”
Smith sat down and laughed, “ Look here,
boys,” he cried, “ we’ve been dodging some
mysterious fellow T s called ‘Adventurers,’ and
we’ve got tw r o of the beggars along with us
now. Come on, Wun Lung, who are you when
not in disguise ? ”
o
“Me allee samee allee time,” the Chinaman
smiled urbanely, “ but me tink it w T elly good
ting to git up top dis hill quickly.”
“ And you are talking solid sense,” said Fiji
Fred. “We’ll get a good view from above the
timber zone, and who know T s what we’ll see ?
I’ll go nap that the old Defiance isn’t very far
away at this moment.”
“ If it is I’ll shoot you fellows unless you can
give mighty good explanations of one or two
things,” Smith remarked coolly, and wdth the
dignity befitting the only ship’s officer in the
party. The men laughed, and the upward
journey was resumed.
The watercourse was dry, but signs were not


wanting that at times it was a raging torrent.
The dense creeping vegetation which roofed the
space between the banks made a view of the
surrounding country impossible, but that game
abounded was fairly certain as Wun Lung, by
some wiles which he would not explain, caught
two wild pigs while the others were sitting by
a pool of water eating the sandwiches he had
prepared.
About three o’clock in the afternoon the
entanglements overhead began to be less dense,
and soon afterwards they fell away altogether,
and a stream of lava occupied the bottom of
the greatly decreased channel they had followed.
The top of the mountain was yet a long way
off, but the air was now so much cooler and
fresher that the boys felt they could run the
rest of the way. They climbed out of the
passage - way and inhaled the exhilarating
atmosphere. They couldn’t see the Caledonia
because the inlet in which she was moored was
hidden by the trees. But they could see far
out over the island-studded ocean, and almost
the first thing that caught Jack’s eye was a
column of smoke.
“ Hullo, that must be a steamer! ” he re-
marked.
Crinkled Charlie produced a pair of powerful
glasses from somewhere and gazed through
them; then he handed them to Jack with the
words : “ Yes, it is the Dejiance.”
“Then you have sold us!” cried Smith,


covering both men with a couple of revolvers.
“You knew it was coming?”
“Don’t be silly!” said Fiji Fred; “any
ordinary idiot would have known that ship
would get here in time. Let’s get down and
tell Captain Chester. She can’t sail in as we
did, and I guess the fun of our lives is looming
ahead.”


CHAPTER IX
Natives!
CAPTAIN CHESTER showed no surprise
when told two hours later that the
Defiance was approaching the island. He care-
fully snipped off the end of a cigar and lit it,
and sent Wun Lung to rouse Henderson from
his afternoon sleep. That gentleman soon
appeared.
“ The Defiance is making for the main channel
now,” the Captain said. “ She hasn’t lost any
time.”
“ She has come along very fast, sir,” Henderson
replied. “We hardly expected her until to-
morrow. Where is she ? ”
“ She must be alongside this island now, sir,”
Smith said. “ She wasn’t sparing coal when we
sighted her from the hill-side.”
“ Oh, well, if she doesn’t go slow now she’ll
pile herself up, and that would be a pity, for she’s
a first-class little ship, and we don’t want to have
to extend our hospitality to the people she
carries.”
“Then you are not alarmed, sir?” said Jack,


greatly reassured to note the Captain’s utter
absence of excitement.
“ Certainly not, my boy. Mr. Henderson and
I knew the Defiance would come this way when
her people found we had given them the slip.
But she can’t come in here, and if we make
no sign she’ll probably thread her way through
the charted channel, and sail on to the next
group of islands. She may fall in with a
German cruiser there, and if so, the Gentlemen
Adventurers will have all the excitement they
want. They can’t sail in here, anyway, and
they can’t see us, and if they do land a shore
party by any chance I rather fancy we’ll be able
to give a good account of ourselves. See that
revolvers and ammunition are ready, Mr.
Henderson, and instruct the men you can trust
absolutely to carry arms from now until further
orders. Also, muster the ship’s company, and
draw up the gangway. No man may go ashore
without orders, and we’ll certainly not allow
any people to board us unless under cir-
cumstances which we have not taken into
account.”
“ Sir,” began Smith apologetically, “ I hate
to be an informer, but I feel my duty to you
forces me to tell you that all the men on this
ship are not what they seem. Some may even
be in league with the people following us. I
cannot say any more, but if you’ll question me
Ini )> J
11 answer.
“ What on earth do you mean, Smith ? ” the


Captain asked, removing his cigar from his
mouth, and Henderson delayed his departure in
order to hear the young engineer’s answer.
“Wei], sir, it is not my place to speak, but
these gentlemen know what is in my mind, and
if they don’t think it right to tell, I’ll not.”
“It is all a bit of fun, sir,” Jack said.
“ Mr. Smith thinks that the men who were with
us to-day are not exactly what they signed on
as. I think they were only joking.”
“Call up Fiji Fred and the other fellow,
Mr. Henderson,” the Captain ordered. “ I’ll
have no man on this ship I cannot trust.”
“ I’ll guarantee Crinkled Charlie,” the officer
responded, signing to the men in question to
come aft. “ He’s sailed with me before.”
The men joined the party, and saluting stood
at attention.
“What have you been saying to the boys?”
demanded the Captain irritably. “ I thought
I could trust you two men ? ”
“ You can, sir,” Fiji Fred answered, “ and we
hope to be able to prove it soon. I see that
someone has been saying things, though, so I will
ask you to look at this letter. ’
“ And mine too,” added Crinkled Charlie,
also producing a letter.
The Captain opened the letter proffered by
Fiji Fred and read aloud :
“ ‘ The bearer of this letter, Fiji Fred, is my
friend. He’s had some very rough experiences


in his time, but you can count on him when
trouble comes along. He knows the islands well,
and can handle a shooter better than any other
man I know. ~ ,
‘Andrew Macalister.
“ Oh! the Captain ejaculated. “ I suppose
this other letter is the same ? ”
Crinkled Charlie nodded. He was a very
silent individual.
“If I may be allowed to speak, sir,” said Fiji
Fred, “ I should like to offer some advice as to
how to deal with the Adventurers.”
“Just wait until I examine the signature of
your letters with a magnifying glass,” Captain
Chester replied coldly. “ The gentlemen you
have mentioned have some very talented pen
men among them, and I don’t intend to be caught
with such a simple trick as forgery.”
Fiji Fred smiled, but said nothing. The
boys thought the Captain was needlessly harsh,
for surely there would be no doubting of Andrew
Macalister’s signature.
Henderson went off to attend to his orders,
and Smith discreetly made his way to the
engineers’ quarters. Only the boys were left
with the Captain and the two men. Suddenly
Crinkled Charlie spoke—
“ Captain Chester,” he said, “these signatures
w r ere put there by Mr. Andrew Macalister him-
self, and I give you the word of a brother officer
that that is so. I am he who was Captain


Cricklewood, and I think that Mr. Henderson is
aware of that fact.”
“ What! ” cried the Captain, “ the man who
went down with the Eagle in the typhoon ? ”
He peered into the man’s face eagerly.
“ The man who found the submerged reef off
Despair Island by running the Eagle on to it.
The typhoon got the blame, but I—well, I did
not go down. Afterwards I became one of the
Gentlemen Adventurers and tried to forget my
name; but I left them when Mr. Macalister
parted with their company, as did several others,
and I am now one of your most loyal deck
hands.”
“ That’s the biggest speech old Crinkled
Charlie ever made in his life,” Fiji Fred exclaimed
admiringly, “ and it’s all true, too. Now, I’m
another of those fellows who have a Past with a
capital P., Captain, and if you’ll call up Mr.
Dixon, who was one of my juniors once, I think
he’ll go bail for me. I also was one of the so-
called Gentlemen Adventurers, but when the row
came I stuck to good old Andrew, and that is
why I am here now.”
“ Mr. Henderson,” called Captain Chester,
“ do you know any of these men ? ”
The officer was standing near talking to Mr.
Dixon.
“Yes, sir,” came the answer quietly. “The
man who is known as Crinkled Charlie is Captain
Cricklewood. I’ve sailed under him.”
“ Mr. Dixon, do you know this other man ? ”
204


“ I do, sir. He was Chief Engineer on a
’Frisco boat when I was Third, After that he
tackled some big engineering job on shore and
came a cropper and ”
“ Not quite, Mr. Dixon. I got tired making
dollars, and I chucked engineering life for one of
adventure, and I’ll bet I’m as good a fireman now
as you’ve got on the ship,”
“ You will pardon me, gentlemen, if I take
further steps to protect my employer’s interests,”
said the Captain, “ but you have told me you
belong to the gang of people who have seen fit
to wage war against us, and I must therefore
take all precautions,”
“ I beg your pardon, Captain Chester,” Fiji
Fred broke in, “but we don’t belong to that
crowd now. We dissolved partnership, as we said,
when Andrew threw them over. He was boss of
the mob, you know, and I think we comprised
specimens of most races of earth, although the
bulk were of British, German, or American
extraction, and of course, Australia claimed
most of these as her citizens—l myself was
born in Ballarat and brought up on its o-old
fields.”
“\ou mean to say that Mr. Macalister was a
member of the Twentieth Century Adventurers ? ”
the Captain said, and the boys eagerly awaited
the answer.
“ He was the head, and probably the originator,
of the Syndicate,” Crinkled Charlie replied, “ and
under his management we prospered exceedingly


at copra buying and selling, mat dealing, pearling,
and mining adventures ; but when some of our
number, who perhaps had good reason to feel
that they had no call to be grateful to the
country in which they were born, wanted the
Adventurers to become an interfering power in
South Sea complications, and sell their services
to the highest bidder, Andrew Macalister drew
out, and a lot of us followed him.
“ Great Commonwealth, man ! Do you mean
to tell me that the Syndicate, fairly well known
as the Adventurers, thought they could play
with the powers of the world interested in the
South Seas %" The Captain for the first time
showed surprise; but the boys were past being
moved at anything.
“ Oh, yes, and they have played that game to
some purpose already, even under old Mac,
Fiji Fred answered at a sign from his comrade,
which doubtless indicated that he was tired of
speaking. “ You just cast your mind back a
bit and ask yourself: How did it come about
that old Britain got her finger in the New
Hebrides pie after France had the whole thing
cooked ? When you ve got light on that matter,
then make a guess as to how Britain comes to
own the Solomon group except one island, after
Germany had done all the dirty work in teach-
ing the natives the damage that big guns could
do.”
“But there you’ve got to halt. Andrew
Macalister was making the Gentlemen Adven-


turers a Britisli-annexation force, and as that
idea didn’t appeal to most of the fellows, who
didn’t care an old stamp for any country more
than another, it had to be stopped. Old Mac
didn’t mind at first, but when these islands
around here came into dispute, the Adventurers
decided to throw in their weight with the Power
who offered the most for their services, and
that did the trick. Britain offered nothing,
and said nothing. America didn’t want them
—the islands, I mean. France found means
to inform us that their own cruisers could do
all she required, and that they would sink any
of our ships if they were found poaching where
they shouldn’t be, and the Dutch Government
politely declined our services. But Germany
didn t; she said openly and frankly, through
her representatives, that she wanted those
islands, and was willing to pay for them if an
indisputable title were secured. Most of the
Adventurers then decided that Germany should
have them if they could bring the thing about,
and it was then that Macalister resigned, and
also some others whom I expect you’ll meet
before very long.”
“ I should think so,” put in Charlie. “My
uncle is British.”
“ But the Adventurers are cosmopolites,” said
Crinkled Charlie, “ and therefore of no nation-
ality. If Andrew Macalister had fought the
matter out, I haven’t the least doubt that he
would have turned the Adventurers into a


British Syndicate, but he preferred to go his
own way and leave them to theirs, after he
found that he couldn’t disband them. The
Adventurers are now a powerful organisation
of clever men, all with some claim to the tit e
of gentlemen, but they fear Andrew Macalister
more than any Power. He’s up to some game,
they know, which means no good to them, but
what it is I certainly do not know, although
my services are at his call no matter in v hat
humble position I serve. You need not fear
personal danger at the hands of the Adventureis,
however, Captain. They bear no animosity to
any man.” .
“ I do not fear them, sir, returned Captain
Chester. “ I am a paid servant on this ship,
and I shall do my duty to my employer at any
cost. These young gentlemen are virtually the
owner’s representatives, and their instructions
will be carried out to the letter.
“Which means,” said Charlie, “that well go
on pearling, and if any people interfere With us
we’ll defend ourselves.” _ r „
“ But well not run against trouble, Charlie,
added his more cautious comrade. “We do our
fighting by strategy as much as possible.
“That’s exactly what old Mac would say,
Fiji Fred commented, “but I reckon he him-
self will turn up in time to do most ol the
said Captain Chester, address-
mo- the two men, “1 thank you for your
208


information, and, of course, I cannot allow
you to serve any longer on this ship in your
respective positions. Please consider yourselves
my guests. Wun Lung will arrange cabins for
you, and —and ”
“You expect us not to leave them without
permission, Captain ? ” Crinkled Charlie laughed.
“ In fact, you mean we have to consider ourselves
prisoners in the meantime ? ”
“ Captain Cricklewood, you will understand
my position. What would you do your-
self ? ”
“ Give the fellows I doubted work to do which
would test them pretty thoroughly, or put a
bullet hole in them at once.”
“Captain Chester,” Charlie broke in, “I do
not for a moment presume to advise you, for
you know more than Jack and I, and have
my uncle’s interests at heart, but if I may
ask a favour, I should request that you treat
these gentlemen as being my uncle’s friends
also.”
“ Very well,” said the Captain, with an
expression of relief. “ Captain Cricklewood
and Frederick Moorhousen, I trust you; you
are the guests of the owners; do as you
please.”
“We thank you, sir,” Fiji Fred replied. “My
father was a German, my mother was Irish,
but I am an Australian, and I give you an
Australian’s word that my mate and I are playing
the game straight for Andrew Macalister. Now
14 209


that you have given us the choice we’ll go back
to our duties until you call upon us for anything
else. Good evening, sir.”
Both men saluted, and marched forward. The
Captain thought for some time then he said
to the equally silent boys: “My lads, there
are complications in this affair of ours which
I do not understand. Those men acted pur-
posely as they did to-day to make us realise
that much, I feel sure; but I do wish Mr.
Macalister had given me more instructions.
Well, Wun Lung, what do you want?” The
Chinese steward was standing near, evidently
waiting.
“ Dinnel leady, fo’ long time, sil; but no
mattel, Wun Lung wanty tell you plenty niggels
on this place, an’ he no’ tinky they muchy
good.”
“ What ! ” ejaculated the Captain. “ Niggers
on this island? You must be dreaming, Wun
Lung. This island is not inhabited.”
“ Oh, me no’ know anyting ’bout that, but me
telly you stlaight plenty people hele fo’ me see
lots o’ tlacks when outy to-day. Me no’ know
any mole but tink it goody to telly you, an’ my
wold, you bet! It am tlue.”
“ Thanks, Wun Lung, you have done quite
right in telling me,” the Captain said. “ Now
go and sound your dinner gong as soon as you
are ready.”
Wun Lung glided away, and the Captain
lit another cigar. “ More complications !


he muttered. “ I wonder how thino-s will
end ? ”
He turned abruptly to the boys. “ Have you
any orders, gentlemen ? ” he inquired.
Certainly not, sir; you are the one to give
orders on this ship,” said Charlie, “and we’ll
carry them through somehow, no matter what
they may be.”
“ Then let’s go down to dinner. We’ll sail
out to the pearling banks afterwards and work
all night without lights, and if the Defiance
detects us and tries to come alongside she’ll
stick faster on the coral ridges than a fly to
treacle. The Captain was now in afi ok ting
mood, clearly.
After dinner the Captain said : “ Mr.
Henderson, the Caledonia is going out to-niokt,
and you are to be left in charge of the shore
party. I believe there are natives on this island,
so you will have to keep a watch all night. Tell
all hands that trouble is expected, and that none
must leave the shore camp without your orders
The password for to-night is * Macalister,’ and
deal with any prowlers who cannot give vou
that word on being challenged, as you think
best.
Henderson signified that he understood, and
when all details had been arranged concerning
the camp on shore, and the men divided into
two parties, the Caledonia cast off her moorings
and headed down the stream with all lights
screened. She did not go so far out on the pearl


banks as usual because the men in the bows could
not see the water, and it was highly probable
that at any moment a ragged projecting reef
might rip open the Colcdon'Ki s hull. It was a
very dark night, but the water glowed phosphor-
escently around the vessel’s sides, and the boys
knew they could work underneath as well by
nio-ht as by day. Soon Jack was lowered into the
water inside the “ swimmer,” and while Charlie
and some men stood by to be at his call, the
Captain ordered others to keep a look out to all
points of the compass for any signs unusual. He
himself divided his attention between both
parties.
Jack could not distinguish any difference when
below. The powerful electric light illuminated the
same area as before, and he could see the shells
nestling in clusters everywhere ; but he also saw
many other forms, and he half washed that
Mr Dixon had been on board to explode
another of his gelignite shells. He dismissed
everything from his mind that did not concern
the winning and raising of pearl shells, and in a
short space of time ascended with his first load.
He went down again and gathered in some more
spoils of the sea bottom, when suddenly the area
in front of his lens became obscured and his
suction pump ceased working with a strange
sighing sound. Jack looked at the various
indicator gauges, but everything seemingly was
in order, but when the “ swimmer ” began to
shake violently as if some external influence


were disturbing it, he knew that all was not
right. He reversed the motion of the propellers
which held the vessel down, but it did not rise
even with the help of the screws.
“ Is the current full on ? ” he spoke through
the telephone to Charlie.
“Yes, anything wrong with you?” came the
reply on the instant.
“ Something has caught the ‘ swimmer,’ I think,
and is holding it down. Oh, I see it now ! It
is an enormous octopus and part of its body has
been drawn into the outer tube, and it seems to
have half a hundred tentacles wound around the
hull.”
“ We’ll grapple for you and haul you up,
Jack; don’t be afraid, the thing can’t get at
yy
you.
“ I’m not afraid. Give me all the current you
can and I’ll send it through the beggar. Wait
a moment, though, Charlie, till I disconnect our
motors or their windings will be distroyed.
I am ready now.”
“ All right, Jack, you’re getting a hundred
volts and twenty ampbres. Pass it through the
transformer and you’ll have pressure enough
to ” The telephone wires broke just then and
Jack was left to fight his strange battle without
any advice. Luckily, however, the cables carry-
ing the electric current remained intact, and
while they held, Jack thought he had no reason
to fear. The vessel they had designated as the
“ swimmer ” had been fitted to meet just such


an emergency as now confronted Jack. At
various points in her hull were plugs of vulcanised
fibre in which central holes, one-eighth of an
inch in diameter, had been bored. These holes
were all filled with tightly-fitting bolts carrying
rubber washers, the nuts, of course, being inside,
and long brightly-polished needle-pointed steel
rods were stored underneath each hole ready to
take the place of those bolts when required. An
extremely large current-transformer was also
part of the vessel’s equipment. This was a core
consisting of a long tube of iron filings wound
with heavy silk-covered copper wire, over which
was again wound several coils of very much
finer wire. In all this there was nothing new,
for all current transformers are based on the
principle of a heavy current at comparatively low
voltage passing through the first coil, inducing
a current of higher intensity in the secondary
windings at the expense of the amperes, or
quantity of the original current. Arrangements,
of course, mechanical or magnetic, have to be
made for interrupting the primary flow of
electricity, as it is only at the “ break ” that the
secondary current is set free.
But the boys had invented a transformer
which would work both ways and could be
regulated to any strength required. They had
effected this by means of several movable coils,
of both primary and secondary windings, which
could be connected in “series” or in “parallel”
at will, and a unique pendulum “ contact


breaker” enabled the first current to pass
through either inner or outer coils, thus reduc-
ing or increasing intensity, and gaining 01 losing
O °
current. _ , ,
Needless to say that supplied by the Caledonia
was transformed down for the “ swimmer s
motors, they having been built to run with
large current at low pressure, with a view to
working with electricity generated on voltaic
principles by the vessel itself.
Now, however, Jack wished all the pressure he
could get, and he switched on the current, and
connected the coils so as to give him the utmost
possible intensity. Then he hurriedly fitted the
two high pressure terminal wires to two of the
needle-like rods, unscrewed the bolts in two
insulating plugs and pushed them through into
the sea, the steel rods filling the holes left
vacant. One conductor was driven into the
jelly-like monstrosity’s body at the tube entrance,
and the other was haphazardly flung out in the
hope of meeting with one of the creatuie s
tentacles, about the middle of the hull. It
did! And it was the frantic swaying of the
long arms which broke the telephone wires.
Jack threw on all the voltage the transformer
could yield. The huge octopus didn t seem to
feel the rods in its body at all, but after the
current had been turned on it was ceitamly a
very much surprised devil-fish. It squirmed and
struggled and lashed the hull with its great
sucker-covered tentacles, but the rods being


able to yield considerably, retained their posi-
tions, and soon a current almost as intense as a
lightning flash was in complete circuit through
its body. That moment the “ swimmer ” was
wrenched violently from its position, and Jack
suddenly found himself lying upside down.
Before he could move of his own accord, he
was thrown to the stern of the vessel, and
then heavily back again to the bows. How
he missed hitting some of the many pieces of
mechanism with his head was a point he didn’t
investigate at that moment, but, when after
some acrobatic turns, violent jars, and giddy
gyrations, he found himself once more right
side up, he knew that he had escaped hurting
himself simply because the “ swimmer ” had been
inverted. All was now quiet, and after a
moment’s breathing space he looked around to
see what had happened. The transformer was
still buzzing and sparks were flying in streams
from the “contact breaker”; the ascending
motors were running silently and swiftly; the
air generators were working all right, and the
electric submarine searchlight was still illumin-
ating the waters outside. But what had
happened ? His eyes fell on the depth gauge
dial, and he uttered an exclamation of surprise.
Its needle stood at “ 0.” The “ swimmer ” was
floating on the surface of the water! He lost
no time in unscrewing the manhole, and found
himself in the glare of the Caledonia s search-
light, with its boats and men around him fasten-


ino- chains under the “swimmer” preparatory to
raising it on deck.
“ I’m all right! ” he cried. “ I couldn’t get
up sooner. By Jove !it was a powerful sort
of fish that held us down.”
“Yes,” said the Captain. “It’s the biggest
and ugliest devil-fish I ever saw. See, }ou have
brought it up with you ! That thing could haul
a boat down. Chop it away, and haul up
the ‘ swimmer ’ on deck for repairs.
“ But go a bit slow, mates,” Fiji Fred advised,
as standing on the “ swimmer’s ’’hull he prepared
to chop off the great creature’s limbs. “ The
blamed insect isn’t dead yet, and it may haul
some of us down to Davy Jones when it lets
go its hold.” .
“ Switch off the current, Jack,” cried Charlie,
“ and give it a chance to let go ; I see its body
quivering yet.”
Jack turned off the transformed current, and
the enormous tentacles swung wildly in the air
for a few minutes and then came to rest on the
surface of the sea. The men kept clear of the
sucker-clad limbs, but they were greatly sur-
prised when they ceased lashing about, for well
they knew that the vitality of the family to
which the gigantic fish belonged was usually
only destroyed by getting at the cential body.
Next minute they saw the reason. The body
had not yet been seen, but the Captain gave the
order to start the steam winches just then, and
the “swimmer” was hoisted out of the water.


Quickly it rose, but its bows were tilted almost
out of the slings because of the weight of
the gigantic shape that clung to its forward
end.
“ Great Sydney ! ” exclaimed someone. “ The
thing is hanging on yet, and it is as big as a
paddock ! ”
“ How in thunder can it keep its grip without
its grapplers ? ” another man inquired. “ The
thing is dead ! ”
“ Its body has been sucked into the tube,”
cried Jack, “ and it can’t help itself. Lower me
again and I’ll eject it with the force pump.”
The “ swimmer ” splashed into the water
again and Jack reversed the action of the suction
pump, and after the plunger had worked for
some seconds, the pulpy mass blocking the tube
was driven out, and the octopus flopped heavily
into the depths. Probably it was not dead, and
would recover in time from its rough handling,
but Jack felt he did not wish any more ad-
ventures with its kind that night, and a few
minutes later was standing safely on deck.
Charlie wanted to go down then, but Captain
Chester would not hear of it. “We’ve done
enough for the night,” he said, “ and we have
shown we are not afraid of the Adventurers.
But 1 can’t allow any more work here during
the night time. If it had been day we should
have seen what was happening below, and
doubtless been able to help. We cannot always
get off so easily, though, and who knows


what other strange monstrosities are lurking
O O
in the holes below. We’ll sail back to our
moorings.”
“ Lights on the port bow, sir ! ” sang out one
of the men on the look out, and Captain Chester
sprang to the bridge at once. There was no
doubt about the lights, and they were very near.
They were the lights of a steamer which, judging
from its lavish display, could only be a pleasure-
cruising yacht or —the Defiance. Captain
Chester did not feel disposed to inquire into the
matter. He ordered that all lights on board the
Caledonia should be extinguished, and not
O J
merely screened, and signalled to the engine-
room to go ahead easily. “If they have already
seen our searchlight,” he said grimly to the
boys, “ they’ll be coming here, and that means
an end of them. In fact I am almost inclined
to light up the ship to draw them on. But I
am not a wrecker, so they can navigate the
channel as they please. We’ll get home and
lie low until we know what they are doing.”
The Caledonia was steered to her sheltered
and hidden moorings up the river most skilfully,
and the last her people saw of the brilliantly-lit
ship was her tail lights just dipping out of
sight. Evidently she had passed on through
the main channel, and was bound farther
east.
It was now almost morning, and, excepting
the sentries, the members of the shore party
were asleep in hammocks swung from convenient


trees. They soon got up, however, when the
Caledonia silently, and with turbines scarcely
moving, glided alongside. Henderson and Mr.
Dixon came on deck at once and were made
acquainted with the events of the night; then
while Ah Sing and Wun Lung prepared break-
fast, and the first streaks of dawn flashed quiver-
iugly athwart the heavens and kindled with
gorgeous fire the top of the mountains, the boys,
and Smith and most of the men stripped and
had a swim in the fresh water. They ignored
the startled crocodiles which were lying on the
banks awaiting the sun’s coming; indeed, the
lads had now grown so fearless that they should
not have given much thought to any possible
danger. The luxury of a swim in cool fresh
water was something not to be missed, after
so much bathing in the tepid salt water of the
sea.
After breakfast Captain Chester announced
that all hands would remain on shore that day
and attend to the cleaning of the shells and
other matters which he would specify later.
Most of the shells already on the inclined planes
had opened, and Mr. Dixon promptly fitted up
a long hose pipe to a portable force pump so as
to wash out the bivalves without handling them,
or going any nearer than was absolutely necessary.
The smell was by no means pleasing, and it
certainly would not improve as the sun rose
higher in the sky. Myriads of flies, too, were
already hovering over the decomposing carcases,


and perhaps those insects are the worst infliction
that man has to suffer in tropical climates.
Charlie and Jack walked round the tables with
Mr. Henderson while yet the sun was hardly
hio-h enough to shine over the tree tops. Wun
Lung looked on wistfully from the Caledonia's
deck” but he had been warned of what would
happen to him if he were seen near the tables ;
besides, he had all the breakfast dishes to wash
up and had therefore no time for a casual stroll
around to see how everything was progressing.
Doubtless he, being a philosopher, consoled
himself with reflection of such nature. At any-
rate, he soon began singing, and went about his
multitudinous duties.
“ Great Scott, Charlie ! Here’s a pearl the size
of a big pea! ” cried Jack, as they reached a
point half-way down one of the tables. “It s
perfect in shape, too, and see what a lustre it
has.” He lifted the beautiful pearl from the
“ ripple.”
“ It is worth a hundred pounds, 1 suppose,”
Henderson observed nonchalantly. “ There is
another a yard farther along, and —Hullo ! these
shells are full of pearls, I see quite a cluster of
them shining in the water near the bottom of
this table.” The Chief Officer’s tones had been
painfully indifferent at first, but they changed
suddenly, and in spite of the supposed loss
of dignity he would sustain, he allowed his
enthusiasm to show itself as much as the boys
did.


By the time they had gone round both long
tables they had collected about fifty pearls of
various sizes and quality. One was abnormally
large, and Henderson thought it might fetch even
a thousand pounds ; a dozen were magnificent
specimens, and most of the remainder were worth
at least ten pounds each. Altogether between
the pearls and the shells the Caledonia had
already between three and four thousand pounds
to her credit. She had struck a patch of the
richest shell deposits in the world, but it had
never entered the mind of anyone concerned
that the shells might be so wonderfully fertile in
pearls. The empty shells were washed and
stored away in a bark hut, and the spoil gathered
during the night placed upon tables. Then,
as the sun climbed towards the zenith, and the
air became as hot as a breath from a smelting
furnace, all, except those picked for guard duty,
sought shady corners and went to sleep.
But those on guard included the Captain, Mr.
Henderson, Mr. Dixon, and Smith, and half a
dozen men, and the first three sat on deck and
smoked and discussed matters. Finally Smith
was called aft, and feeling greatly elated at being
invited to the council of his superiors he joined
the party and saluted at once. Then his pride
got the proverbial fall: “Mr. Smith,” said the
Chief Engineer, “ you are excused from guard
duty ; go and sleep and be ready for special
service at night.” The young engineer slunk
away crestfallen, and Henderson walked down


the gangway and went over to where the boys
were sleeping in hammocks. They awoke at
once, and inquired what was wrong,
“ Nothing,” the Chief Officer answered, “ hut
Captain Chester has decided not to take things
lying down, and I am to pick my men for a
small investigating day party, while he himself
is to lead a night one. Now, I should like one
of you boys to come with me, but the other must
stay to join the Captain’s crowd, as he wants one
of you, also.”
“ I’ll come,” spoke both simultaneously.
“ No, only one,” Henderson smiled. “ But
I’ll settle the matter by asking you, Mr. Jack.
There will be no others in our party, for we must
move secretly; and we can’t afford to weaken
the camp and ship defence parties.”
Charlie laughed. “ All right,” he said. “My
turn of the fun will come after dark. Get away,
Jack, and see that you don’t get wet feet, and
take great care not to tramp upon snakes, or
on those electric eels which Fiji Fred told us
live mostly upon land at this time of the year.”
Jack assured his comrade that he would be
very careful, and he slid out of his hammock
and went away with Henderson. The Chief
Officer then led the way on deck and rudely
arousing Wun Lung from his slumbers asked
him to prepare some portable food.
“ Whafo’ you waky me fo’ that ? ” the Celestial
complained. “ Evelyting leady in the saloon
long time ago ; me no gety any sleepy.”


But his visitors had departed. Ah Sing and
Wun Lung were really wonderful fellows in more
ways than one. They seemed to know every-
thing without being told, and sure enough a
parcel of sandwiches and a thermos flask filled
with tea were awaiting in the dining saloon.
Henderson then discarded his uniform and gave
some instructions to Jack, and when a few
minutes later they ran quietly down the gang-
way, they were like a couple of Australian
prospectors, or South Sea traders, so far as dress
was concerned. This consisted only of top boots,
trousers, a black silk shirt, a belt to which were
hung a couple of revolvers and a knife. A
helmet covered their heads to ward off sunstroke
when they crossed open places, but each would
have greatly preferred to have dispensed with
head gear of any kind.
Henderson also carried a compass, and the
thermos flask, and Jack had Wun Lung’s sand-
wiches strapped on his back.
They plunged into the scrub at once, and
circled round to the south, or shoreward part of
the island, directly opposite to the road up the
mountain.
Jack asked no questions; he knew Henderson
had some object in view, and he was prepared to
stand by him in all things. They burst, cut, and
dodged through the dense flowering entangle-
ments, perspiring freely and gasping for breath,
and without eyes for the beauteous effects of the
foliage. After an hour’s work they struck the


bank of a fresh water stream, and as it was flow-
ing towards the south through the low lying part
of the island, they elected to travel along its
channel underneath the network of creepers which
roofed it in. Thus towards nightfall they
suddenly heard the roar of the surf, and soon
J '
after, the sea burst upon their gaze. A wide
band of glistening coral lay between the spot
where they had issued from the forest and the
water, but as far out as the eye could reach,
nothing but islands could be seen upon the face
of the ocean.
“ They have passed on after all,” Henderson
remarked. “ Captain Chester thought they
might have sent a party on shore to investigate.
We can go back now, for it was a false
alarm ”
Avoice somewherenearbroke inat that moment,
and the two explorers lay flat on the ground.
‘ I hear thee speak of a coral strand,
And pearl shell banks, and a flowery land,
Tell me and say if this is the place,
Or whisper if such is not the case.’
“ I—l guess, boys, I’ve forgotten how that
thing goes after that; but I reckon it’s about
time you got up and got ready for work.
You’ve been sleeping all day, and —
“ ‘ There’s a lot to do
For the pirate crew,
And before sunrise,
It is my surmise,


We’ll get all the fight
We’ll want for the night,
For the bad boys bold
Must be here, I’m told.’ ”
“Oh, shut up, C. P. H. ! ” growled another voice.
“ I’d rather get speared or clubbed by natives
than have to listen to you.”
“Those are men from the Defiance” Jack
whispered. “ The poet fellow is called Cornelius
P. Higgins ; we’ve met him before.”
A series of yells, weird, ear-splitting, and of
savage ferocity interrupted Jack’s words, and the
noise of crashing timber, bursting tendrils, and
rushing feet drowned all other sounds.
“ Climb up a tree, Jack ! ” cried Henderson.
“ There are natives on this island, after all, and
they are going to deal with the Adventurers
now ! ”


CHAPTER X
The Defiance finds the Pearl Beds
THE two explorers climbed into the overhead
world without delay, and worked their
way along the interlaced limbs until they were
in a position to see what was happening. And
it was a strange situation in which the) 7 - found
themselves; they were between the two parties.
Down on the coral beach were grouped about a
dozen men from the Defiance; they w T ere lying
flat on the ground, and their rifle tubes gleamed
in the last rays of the setting sun. A camp fire
burned near, but the prostrate men were as far
away from its light as was possible to get in the
time, and they were yet wriggling farther. The
Gentlemen of the Twentieth Century Adventurers
were neither fools nor cowards; but they were
taking no risks needlessly.
But, strangely enough, the attacking horde had
suddenly become as silent as the Adventurers
themselves, nor could any signs of their near
presence be detected by the watchers among the
trees. Swiftly the sun slid down into the sea,
and darkness enveloped the land soon after.


Then the mosquitoes and other night pests began
their festive work, and the air was filled with
their humming sounds. Still, the men lay
motionless on the beach, and still the natives
made no sign. The crescent moon shone out,
and the watchers could see the Defiances boats
drawn up on the coral beach. Jack was getting
tired of inaction ; he was also hungry.
“ Are there really any natives near ? ” he
whispered to Henderson, “ I think we must
have dreamt we heard them.”
“It seems those men down there had a
similar dream,” replied the Chief Officer ; “ but 1
expect we’ll all awake in time.”
“ Then why don’t the Adventurers clear out
in their boats ? ” asked Jack. “ They have every
chance, and the natives couldn’t stop them ? ”
“ I suppose they don’t want to run away.
They think they can look after themselves, and
I’ve no doubt they can, with modern repeating
rifles.”
“ But why are the natives not rushing them ? ”
Jack persisted. “It seems to me that they were
very foolish to make such a noise if they were
not prepared to get to business at once —that is,
unless they are really not bloodthirsty, and
only wished to frighten those people off into
their boats.”
“ There may be something in your last
suggestion,” Henderson answered in low tones ;
“ but as the Adventurers won’t run away, and
the natives of the islands I know around here


are not afraid of anything but ghosts, I expect
you’ll see a big battle very soon.”
And Henderson was right. Jack and he had
started to make a meal of the food Wun Lung
had provided, sublimely indifferent to their
rather complicated environment, for they were
quite comfortable on their leafy perch, and both
were philosophers to a certain degree.
They had almost finished when another series
of blood-curdling yells burst out directly under-
neath, and this time there was no doubt about
who were the cause. The natives could be seen.
They broke through the dense scrub and rushed
down towards the beach, led by a painted
warrior who, judging by the white adornments
in his bleached yellow hair (the colours could not
be determined by those above, but Henderson
knew that a warrior chief couldn’t exist without
the symbols that he had killed many men in
open combat), was not afraid of personal danger.
Instantly the rifles in the hands of the waiting
men flamed out but without apparent effect, as
the natives had thrown themselves flat at
command when they broke through on to the
beach.
Next minute they made a headlong rush, but
not at the burning camp fire ; evidently they
were sophisticated natives. Their Chief bellowed
out some strange order, and his ihen spread out
in all directions, and continued their forward
rush, and next moment each Adventurer was
contending with at least half a dozen powerful
229


warriors entirely naked. The white invaders
used their revolvers freely, but these weapons
were soon wrenched from their hands, and then
a hand-to-hand struggle ensued which, to the
watchers, was terribly exciting. They felt that
their duty was to help the white men, yet they
knew that to do so would mean disaster no
matter how the fight ended. The white men,
however, put up a good fight, and for a long time
the issue hung in the balance, much to the
surprise of the onlookers. They threw the
natives off their feet as soon as they came into
grips, and only when an overwhelming number
assailed one man did the white man go down.
The native Chief was the most prominent of all
his people, and he seemed to be everywhere at
once. Wherever he took part in the fray, the
matter was a foregone conclusion, for although
he carried no club, his great strength settled the
struggle abruptly, and the watchers noted that
when he engaged an antagonist, his men stood
by, or went in search of another victim. At
length not a man of the Adventurers was left in
the fighting line. Two had escaped to the boats,
and one had wriggled off into the forest growths.
The rest had given up the fight and were await-
ing the end in an utterly exhausted condition.
Then came the greatest surprise; the victorious
warriors went round their victims and stripped
off their garments, shouting with glee all the
time, although their Chief preserved a dignified
silence and took no part in the proceedings


except to give orders occasionally. When the
helpless men were thus humiliated, they were
carried into the two boats, and after stripping the
two men who had already sought shelter in them,
the boats were pushed off into the water.
Loudly jeered the warriors; but seemingly
when the white men realised that they were not
greatly hurt and were actually out of danger,
they considered among themselves whether they
should go back and have another fight or not,
until someone pointed out that the natives now
had their arms and ammunition, and that theie-
fore another struggle could not possibly improve
their condition. Realising this, apparently, the
boats were rowed out to sea, and the natives
collected their plunder and marched off into the
scrub singing a weird war song.
“ X hardly understand this affair, Henderson
murmured when all was clear. Those natives
could have killed all the white men without any
trouble if they had wished. In fact, I noticed
that they treated the Adventurers far more
gently than I should have done, and I didn’t see
a club used during the whole fight.”
“Fiji Fred told me,” Jack said, “that sometimes
the natives of the Solomon Islands are forbidden
by some law of theirs to kill anything. I
suppose that is during some religious ceremony ;
though he also told me that, on the whole, they
are the most bloodthirsty cannibals in the
world.”
“ Yes, the latter part of your information is


correct; but I never heard of the law against
killing. However, we know now that we’ve got
our hands full, and that the Adventurers will
think twice before landing here again. Ry
Jupiter! I shouldn’t like to have to tackle that
native Chief alone. Let’s get back to camp.
We’ll better remember, too, that there is one of
the other crowd left on the island. I wish we
could get our hands on him. Hullo ! ”
Someone was speaking directly underneath,
and the voice was familiar to Jack. Both
listened, and this is what they heard—
“ ‘ Under the spreading island trees,
Poor C. P. H. doth stand—no, I mean sit,
His comrades are out on the seas,
And his old head is split.’
By the Stars and Stripes ! that little scrimmage
was warm while it lasted. I wonder if I could
get on the trail of the niggers and have a few
words in private with their mighty Chief. I’ve
got my shooter yet, and even without it 1
shouldn’t mind having a go at him for the sake
of our scheme. If I could only get into the
village and challenge the beggar to fight single-
handed, all might be well. If he went for me, I
guess I would be eaten ; but if I downed him, I’d
be the Chief until some other fellow challenged
me. I guess I could work the trick while I was
boss, all the same. There have been more than
one American who ruled as king among the
South Sea Islands. C. P. H., forward ! Death or


a*. **■. > y* w
L__ -
“ ‘ WHAT ACT IS THIS ? ’ ASKED MR. HIGGINS. ‘ I DON’T SEEM TO
KNOW WHERE IT COMES IN.’ ”
[/>• 123-


*
v '


glory awaits you. Which reminds me that the
beautiful poem could now read —
“ ‘ C. P. H. to the war has gone,
In the village camp you’ll find him,
A fibre kilt he has belted on,
And left his mates behind him
“ Not all, Mr. Higgins,” sounded a voice above
7 OO ' ,
his head ; “ and you are not going to any native
camp in the meantime.”
Jack dropped from his perch straight on to
C .P. H.’s shoulders as he finished speaking, and
the poet flopped to the ground under him with
an unrepeatable ejaculation. He was given no
time to collect his senses. Jack held him down
until Henderson relieved him.
“ What Act is this ? ” asked Mr. Higgins. “ I
don’t seem to know where it comes in ? Oh,
you needn’t grip my throat! I’m a philosopher,
and I know when I’m beaten; let’s argue the
matter.”
“ This is Act 2,” said Jack. “Act 1 was on
board the Mauretania, but I haven’t the faintest
idea what Act 3 will be like. Ido know, however,
that you are coming with us to our headquarters,
and if you cause no trouble you will be treated
decently. But you rather underestimated the
calibre of the boys you nearly killed with
your poetry while crossing the Atlantic, I
think.”
“ Ah, well! as the poet says— ‘ High failure
overleaps the bounds of low success ! ’ Lead on,


Macduff, and don’t you think that I am in the
huff.”
“ All right,” said Henderson. “ Come with us
quietly, and you’ll not suffer, but if you try on
any tricks you’ll probably never make any more
poetry,”
“ Sir, I am an honoured member of the
Twentieth Century Adventurers whom, I expect,
you know. I have given my word that I have
accepted defeat, and the Gentlemen of the
Syndicate I have mentioned do not lie. Get
ahead and I’ll follow, and you needn’t be afraid
of a shot in the back, because even if I were
inclined to break my word of honour I couldn’t;
my lead-squirter is empty, as you may see for
yourselves.”
“We’ll take your word, Mr. Higgins,” said
Jack. “You needn’t trouble giving us your
weapons. We’ll call you our guest instead of the
other thing, and you’ll meet old friends among
our people.”
“ If Andrew Macalister is with you I have no
fear, my boy. You may be playing a game that
forces you to attack harmless people who may
inadvertently interfere, but I’ll not complain;
I’ve had to do dirty things myself.”
“ You are making several great mistakes, Mr.
Higgins,” Jack interrupted. “ Andrew Macalister
is not with us ; we are playing no game except
that of self-defence; you attacked us first and
stole our invention; therefore we cannot allow
you to move about freely anywhere near where


we are. We saw the natives to-night for the
first time, and we quite believe you often do
dirty work.”
“ See here, young fellow, you needn’t rub
things in through my hide with a steam roller !
Mr. Higgins cried reproachfully. “ touve grown
into a man since I knew you on the Atlantic
ferry boat, and I guess I shouldn’t give you the
start now I did then. I didn t steal your old
box of machinery. My orders were to keep both
my optics on you and your mate, and 1 warned
you that there might be others on board the old
tub who had some interest in you. But, never
mind, yours truly accepts the fortunes of war;
C. P. H. is a philosopher as well as a poet —
Tell me not in Christmas numbers,
Life is full of ups and downs,
Rather tell me on my cheque book,
What my ransom is in crowns.’
Of course I mean in sovereigns or dollars, but
crowns is the only word I could fit in there
with any sense, for I know you don t want
gowns, clowns, towns, nouns, or anything else in
exchange for myself.”
“ And we don’t even want your crowns,
sovereigns, or dollars,” laughed Henderson.
“ We’re neither pirates nor Twentieth Century
Adventurers.”
“ Then what in thunder are you ? ”
“ Plain pearl-fishers, minding our own business,
but ready to fight any people who meddle with


us. You have already done so, hence you are
our prisoner.”
“ Oh, I don’t mind about that! I suppose
your people are all gentlemen ? ” Mr. Higgins
was certainly optimistic.
“They are, sir,” Henderson replied coldly;
“ but Captain Chester alone will decide what is
to be done with you.”
“A better fellow isn’t living than Captain
Chester, except maybe old Mac, and I’d give
a good lot to know he hasn’t made a mistake
this time and gone under. Tell me, is he all
right?” Mr. Higgins seemed sincere, and
Henderson informed him that they were without
knowledge of Macalister, but had no doubt he
would put in an appearance some time soon.
“We know our work without his supervision,”
he added; “ and doubtless he is aware that we
are quite capable of dealing with your friends
without him.”
“Are you getting much shell?” Mr. Higgins
asked irrelevantly, pausing to light a very long
and rank cigar,
“ Pardon me, but I cannot answer that
question,” said Henderson. “We do not give
away information.”
Mr. Higgins laughed loudly. “ 1 like that,”
he said. “Do you really imagine you have
any information we don’t possess ourselves.”
“ Well, we know where the pearl banks are, at
any rate, and you may take it from me that your
people can never work them.”


“ And who do you think wants pearl banks,
old man ? I’ll admit they might mean a lot if
the Adventurers were only out on a hunt for
wealth. But they’re not; and the supposed great
shell deposits were never more to them than a
means to an end.’’
“ Yet we were shadowed in London, and
tracked round the world by your people’s agents
in the hopes of finding out the position of those
pearl banks,” put in Jack.
“ A little mistake of yours, my boy. The
Adventurers were interested in you, or rather
your comrade, because they believed old Mac
had given his hand away in a letter he wrote.
Certainly they want to know where the shell
lies, but that matter is of very secondary
importance to them.”
“Then what do they want?” asked
Henderson.
“ Pardon me, but I cannot answer that
question. I do not give away information,”
Mr. Higgins replied, using the words in which
the Chief Officer had already answered one of his
questions.
“ Oh, well, it doesn’t matter. You can keep
your secrets, and we’ll keep ours. I expect we’ll
both have to alter plans considerably, now that
the native question has come into the argument
in the forcible manner witnessed to-night.”
“ I guess the guns of the Defiance will do most
of the talking the next time we are dealing with
the naked aborigines,” said Mr. Higgins. “ But,


do you know, I’ve got a powerful appetite on;
can’t we hustle along faster and get to your camp.
I guess you’ll be sorry I’m your guest before
long unless you mean to starve me.”
“ We’ll not do that, anyway,” Henderson
assured the American, and after that little more
was spoken. They scrambled on through the
scrub, following the tracks made by the Chief
Officer and Jack on their first journey. The
night was most oppressively close and sultry,
and the mosquitoes hung in clouds over their
perspiring faces. At length the lights of the
shore camp burst out immediately ahead,
and soon after they were among their own
people.
“ Where’s the Captain ? ” asked Henderson,
addressing Crinkled Charlie, who was sawing
wood for additional tables in the light of the
huge fire.
“He went out in the petrol launch with the
other young gentleman and that engineer kid
called Smith,” the Crinkled one answered. “He
told us fellows he was going out fishing, but he
didn’t say what kind of fish he was after.”
“Hullo, Cricklewood ! ” said Mr. Higgins.
“ You’ve got a new kind of job, 1 see ? ”
Crinkled Charlie looked up for the first time.
“ Hullo, Higgins ! ” he drawled, without showing
any surprise. “ I was just wondering when you
would turn up to play that third game of chess ;
we stand at one each, you know. Fiji Fred is
on board, but I know he’s expecting you too. I


think it was cribbage you and he were playing
when we parted.”
“ Feed me, and I’ll play the whole ship at
anything,” J\lr. Higgins answered. “I guess
I’m hungry enough to eat a nigger.”
“ Take this gentleman on board, Crink—l
mean Cap—l beg pardon—sir ” The Chief
Officer paused somewhat confused.
“Just plain Crinkled Charlie, Mr. Henderson,
is good enough for me. Man in his time plays
many parts, and I’m playing that of able seaman
now, and getting a lot of satisfaction out of it.”
“ Thank you ; but when alone I think I prefer
to know you as Captain Cricklewood, sir,” went
on Henderson. “ This is a prisoner of ours, or
a guest, according to his own desire. See that
Wun Lung provides him with all his require-
ments, and consider yourself personally re-
sponsible for his comfort and safe keeping.”
“All right, sir. It’s a big job you’ve given
me, but I’ll take it on hand. Here, Cornelius,
just put your strength to the end of that saw
and help me to get finished with my work, and
then I’ll attend to you.” Crinkled Charlie was
certainly a philosopher.
Mr. Henderson and Jack ran up the gangway,
and found the second officer pacing the deck.
He told them that Captain Chester had left
orders for the Chief Officer to act as he thought
best during his absence, and that the Captain
had gone out to have a look round the island in
the shallow draughted petrol launch belonging


to the steamer. Smith had gone as engineer,
and Charlie as the only passenger besides the
Captain. They had left just at sundown and
did not expect to be back much before daylight.
“This means more complications, Jack,” said
Henderson, when he heard all the news from the
Second. “ The Captain will fall in with those
two boat-loads of naked Adventurers as sure as
fate, and we can’t do anything unless we sail out
with the Caledonia."
“ What does it matter if Captain Chester,
Charlie, and Smith do run up against those
fellows?” Jack reasoned. “They’ll have their
weapons and we know that the Adventurers
have none. I shouldn’t be surprised if they
took them in tow and brought them back here
for breakfast. Here comes Mr. Dixon ; he’ll be
able to give advice; you speak to him, and I’ll
square Wun Lung and Ah Sing about attending
to Mr. Higgins,”
Meanwhile the ship’s petrol launch with its
three occupants was speeding swiftly over the
dark waters fully three miles out from the island.
Smith was seated by the engines, and Charlie
was at the rudder. Captain Chester gave orders
occasionally as to the speed and course ; but he
devoted practically all his attention to sweeping
the waters with his night glasses. They had
been sailing for some hours along the shores of
the big island, half expecting to pick up
Henderson and Jack if they had managed to
strike the southern coast line, but as no sign of


The Defiance finds the Pearl Beds
their presence was given, either by sound or
fire-signal, the Captain finally concluded that
they had not succeeded in penetrating the dense
scrub between the Caledonia s mooring place
and the southern beach, and signed to Charlie
to head the launch out to sea. Thus they were
near one of the many coral atolls when a light
flared up straight ahead. Smith instantly
stopped the engines and awaited instructions.
Next minute a series of light flashes shot out
from some elevated position, and Charlie stared
in wonderment. It was the Morse code which
Jack and he knew as well by sound as by sight !
And Captain Chester knew it, too.
“Reverse, Smith,” he ordered, “and don’t
make any more noise than you can help. We’ve
stumbled upon something.”
“ Shouldn’t we answer those signals with our
flash lamp, sir ? ” Charlie suggested. “Perhaps
those are ship-wrecked sailors on that island.”
“ I hope they are,” the Captain answered
grimly, “for in that case they are also ship-
wrecked Adventurers. See, that signal just
completed is calling for the Defiance. There it
goes again ; that is her code signal.”
“ Look, sir ! ” cried Charlie. “It is being
answered.” The Captain turned in the direc-
tion Charlie indicated, and sure enough lights
were flashing mysteriously from some point
about six miles to the east.
“That is the Defiance” he muttered. “She
has come back. Ah, the shore party has started
16 241


signalling. Spell the flashes, Charlie, while I
note them down. That first flash was a dash
and that is a dot now ; that means ‘N.’ ”
“I know,” answered Charlie excitedly. “I’ll
read the signals out to you. Dot, dash ; that
c i >
means A.
“Just call out the signs and we’ll read the
meaning afterwards,” said the Captain. “ that
was ‘ T,’ only one dash.”
“ Dot, dot,” began Charlie, and the Captain
wrote down “ I.” “ Dot, dot, dot, dash, the
lad continued, and Captain Chester wrote down
“ V.” Another dot followed which, of course,
meant “E ” and the following three dots even
Smith knew meant “ S.”
“‘Natives,’ the first word spells,” said the
Captain. “ Whatever that means in their
code.”
Then were flashed out signs which Charlie
named, and the Captain took down on an old
envelope in the dark. They read as follows :
---(»)-• (n) ••(!)•■ ' ( 8 ) '"''W 7 ‘ W‘ '
(u) - • ■(d) •• • ■ (h) • - (a) ■■ • - (v) ■ (e) -■ • ■
(b) ■ (e) • (e) - ■ (n) - • • (d) ■ (e)• •-• f• e
• - (a) - (t) • (e) - ■ ■ (d) • - - (w) ■ - ■ (r) • (e)
- • - ■ (c) - ■ - (k) ■ (e)- ■ ■ (d) ■ ■• ■ (h) ■ (e) ■- ■
(r) ■ (e) - • (n) - - - (o) ■ ■ • (s) • ■ (i -- • (g) - ■
(n) -' - . (C) (1) ' ( e ) "' ' (d).
(o) -■(«)■ • (i) ■ - (a) • ■ • (s) ■ (e) - ■ (n) -■ •
(d) (h) -(e) (1) ■ - - ■ (P) • -0) '.(U
- • (n) - •- • (c) • (e). A space of time
elapsed and then the symbols representing


“A.D.V. ” Hashed out, after which the lights
ceased.
“That was very well done for an ordinary
hash lantern,” commented Captain Chester
approvingly. “ I wonder if we should try to
answer them with ours. Ah, too late ! There
goes the Defiance now. Read hers, Charlie;
the stranded people’s message spells out ‘Natives
on island. Have been defeated. Wrecked here.
No sign Caledonia. Send help at once.’ A.D.V.
seem to be code letters showing who were sending
the message.”
Far away, vivid hashes and darts of light
beg an to pierce the darkness, and the three
men in the boat knew that the Defiance was
replying with her electric signalling apparatus.
Faster than could be easily read it shot out its
message, and Charlie spelt it simultaneously—
“ ” (“ It’s in code ! ” wailed the
Captain. “ What on earth does that mean ?”)
“ 2.0. or twenty, sir,” Charlie answered.
“ Look - - (m) . ( e ) - • (n) -• - • (c) (o) - -
(m) ■ • (i) - • (n) - - ■ (g) - ■ (n) - - - (o) • - -
(w) - - (m) • ■ - (u) • • • (s) - (t) • • • • (h) - - -
(o) ■ - (1) -- .(d) • ■ (i) U) •■•(!)■ ■
(a) - • (n) - • • (d) . - (a) ■ . (n) (y) - • - ■
(c) -- - (o) ■• ■ (s) - (t).” A space followed
and then the symbols “E.N.T. ” were signalled,
which almost immediately were replied to from
the stranded men on the coral island with
“ U.R.E.R.S.”
“ Now we know something which may be


useful to us,” cried Captain Chester : “ ‘ Twenty
men coming now. Must hold island, any cost,’
and the combined symbols appended spell
‘ Adventurers.’ Very well, Adventurers, hold
the island at any cost. We’ll perhaps make
that cost a bit higher than you expect, all the
same. Full speed ahead, Smith; we’ll make
straight for the Defiance ; and be ready to
stop the engines when we locate that boat
with the twenty men. There were not many
more than forty men on board the Adventurers’
craft when she lay in Sydney Harbour, and
if we deduct a defeated shore party, and twenty
men, there can’t be many left on the ship.”
“ Good old skipper! ” Smith sang out.
“ We’ll capture the pirate tub, and hang all
the pirates from the yard-arm.”
“ Don’t speak, boys,” cautioned the Captain.
“ Remember sound carries very far along the
surface of the water, and we are out to listen.”
The launch sped through the shallow waters,
and its occupants relapsed into thoughtful but
alert silence; they were listening for the
Defiances boat. Suddenly the Captain touched
Smith on the shoulder : “ Stop !” he whispered,
“ and let her drift; I hear something.”
Instantly the launch was gliding along, sound-
less except for the slight swish of the waters as
they broke against the motionless screw. Some-
thing was approaching, beyond doubt, and it was
driven with petrol engines, too; the muffled
explosives of the carburetted vapour in the


cylinders being undoubtable evidence of that
fact. And that it had a human cargo was also
a safe conjecture, for that cargo was speaking and
its words could be heard.
“ What can have happened to Count Werner
and his party ? ” one voice sounded out. “ That
was not the main island they signalled from ? ”
“ They say den dat dey vas defeat been by
natives,” someone answered. “Eet ees vairy
clear dat dey escape have made to oder island.”
“ Oh, we can tumble to that much, Frenchy,”
another man laughed, “but how came it about
that they were beaten by natives ? Our
President was in the belief that the place was
uninhabited.”
“ Vella, vat matters eet ? ” a fourth man spoke.
“Ve can—a —make ze naiteeves give us —a—
mooch help now. Eef ve tell to zem zat zey now
Ghermans are ; unt zey haf—a—not fight enough
left in zem to —to —object; zen haf our vork
complected been, for only vat ze Eenglis call
occupationg ees recognised as true title to any
place.”
“ Give us a rest, Senor,” some one interrupted.
“We all know what you are trying to tell us;
but it seems to me that if we have to fight
natives, their Chief won’t be feeling overburdened
with gratitude towards us, and I’ve heard that the
kind of annexation that is so eagerly asked for after
conquest by the poor beggars who haven’t gone
under in the fight, is looked upon very suspici-
ously by most civilised Powers. In fact, I’m


sure America would have some questions to
ask.”
“ Well, that is not our concern,” replied
another voice with a German accent, but in
perfect English. “If we give Germany her title
to the islands she will pay us, and she can fight
for her rights afterwards, herself, if she likes,
and if she doesn’t, well, that is her business ; and
possibly we might offer our services to Japan
and retake them, if the island-stealing business
finds favour with us.”
“ What about Andrew Macalister ? ” spoke a
voice, resembling that of the first speaker,
“ His finger is in this pie somewhere, I’ll bet my
boots. I’ve been looking out for signs of him
ever since we allowed those kids to best us in
Sydney, and I shouldn’t be surprised if this call
for help is a dodge of his, and not from our own
fellows at all.”
“ Your nerves are out of order, Robinson,”
some one replied as the Adventurers’ launch
rapidly passed the drifting vessel. “ How could
even old Mac drop from the clouds ? And if he
had got a perfect flying machine which could
carry him anywhere what good would it do him
to send false signals to us ? We’ll be there
shortly, and if he fell into our hands I guess all
our troubles would be over.”
“That’s all right, but do you think old Mac
would sit down on a coral island and wait on
trouble coming ? ” the first speaker said, his
words not now so plainly heard, the two boats


being swiftly separated. “ I’ll go nap that he is
just the man to calculate that the Defiance is
now practically defenceless, except for the
President and that Russian Prince or Count or
something with the unpronounceable name. All
the other fellows are either sleeping, or piled up
with champagne, and excepting for the two, old
Mac could capture the Defiance himself.”
The voices were no longer distinguishable, and
Captain Chester instructed Smith to start the
engines again: “It is wonderful how much
information one can obtain merely b} 7- keeping
one’s own mouth shut, and one’s ears open.
We’ll strike a blow for Andrew Macafister now
at any cost, as the Adventurers say. Get along-
side the Defiance, Smith, but keep your engines
running as noiselessly as you know how. ’
Ten minutes later the dark hull of the
Defiance loomed before them. She carried no
riding light, but not a few cabins were well lit,
judging from the rays streaming through some
of her port-holes. Her deck was silent as it was
dark, and were it not for the several cabin lights
one might have thought she was a deserted ship.
The launch drew alongside the lowered gangway
and came to rest there. But no challenge from
the deck greeted the three real adventurers.
For some minutes the Captain held on to the
lower steps of the patent collapsible gangway
ready to give the sign to Smith to sheer off into
the darkness should their presence be detected.
But not a sound came from above, and the


Captain stepped out on to the lowest rung quietly
and cautiously.
“ You know our signal, Smith,” he whispered.
“ We’re going on deck, but if things get lively
or if there is some trap laid for us we’ll jump
into the sea and chance the sharks until you pick
us up. Come on, Charlie.”
“That’s all very well,” grumbled Smith, “but
I’m not getting any of the fun, and I wanted
badly to have a look at this ship’s engines.”
Captain Chester and Charlie were on deck
before he ceased his mutterings, and suddenly
realising that, after all, his own position was by
no means free from danger as a bullet from the
darkness overhead, or from one of the port-holes,
could end his adventurous career, or a weighty
substance dropped from the deck would knock
the bottom out of the fragile launch, he became
thoughtful and listened intently. And just then
an harmonious chorus of song burst out through
the port-holes nearest him, and he smiled.
“ They’re drunk,” he muttered. “We can take
the ship if we want. By Jupiter ! I wish I were
Captain.”
But the Captain was just as young in some
things, if not in years, as his youngest engineer,
and the spirit of daring adventure was strong
within him, though kept within bounds by the
prudence born of experience. When Charlie and
he found themselves safely on deck, they stood
still for some time to master their environment.
The Defiance was certainly different from all


other ships, but in the darkness they could not
see the several pieces of mechanism, wired
apparatus, and other contrivances which were
everywhere. Probably it would have taken
Charlie all his time to understand their purport,
even if he had seen them in daylight, for they
were the inventions of some of the best brained
people in the world, and as yet the world was
not aware of many things the Gentlemen of the
Twentieth Century Adventurers knew.
“ There’s no watch kept,” the Captain
whispered. “ Even the bridge is deserted.
There can’t be many people on the ship, or else
they are all asleep.” Just then the drunken
chorus which Smith had heard reached their
ears, and the Captain expressed his feelings on
hearing it exactly as Smith had done.
“ I think I can make out a screened light in
the chart-house under the bridge,” he then said
to Charlie. “ Let’s see if anyone is inside.”
Silently they ran along the deck and peered
past the edge of the curtained port which was
open for ventilating purposes, though carefully
screened. Two men were seated at a table inside,
and Charlie at once recognised the man known
as the President and another whom he had seen
at the dinner-table that night in Sydney. They
were facing each other and evidently discussing
some matters of deep importance. Their voices
floated through the open port, and those outside
felt no compunction in listening.
“Yes, his silence is certainly a mystery,’ the


President was saying. “ I expected we should run
up against him long before this,”
“May it not be that his powers have been
overestimated ? ” the other suggested in perfect
English, but with an accent decidedly foreign.
“ I think not, Mitchenoff; Andrew Macalister
is a marvel in more ways than one, and I do
not think it is wise to imagine that he has left
us a free field. 1 have known him for a long
time, and when he was silent he was always up
to some game. I tell you, frankly, that if we
knew where he was, and had him well attended
to, I should look on this occupation and annexa-
tion business as merely a slight incident, but
with that gentleman free, and a couple of
youngsters of the best type that old England
breeds to help him, I am inclined to think
we’ll have our hands full.”
“ Your nerves must surely be out of order
at last, Sir James ? ” Mitchenoff said, helping
himself to a glass of some sparkling fluid from
a bottle which stood upon the table. “Andrew
Macalister is only one man, and he is not in-
vincible, even if he has taken it upon himself
to check our doings. I feel sure that he is
not troubling himself about us, however; his
interests are more likely to be centred in the
alleged pearl shell deposits somewhere in this
vicinity. I should like very much to know the
place, for possibly the work of getting the shells
would provide us with a good excuse for being
here should an interfering French or British


cruiser come along, and we must remember that
since be left us, we have not added anything
to our general exchequer.”
“ Oh, don’t let us degenerate into a mere
money-making Syndicate!” Sir James inter-
rupted. “We were above that when we started,
and if our funds are low I’ve got plenty to
throw in from other sources, and I have no doubt
others can do the same.”
MitchenofF laughed. “ I am not exactly a
poor man in private life myself,” he said ; “ but
have you considered, sir, that if the Adventurers
mean to go on as they are shaping now —that
is, using their powers to bring about certain
results regardless of nations—we’ll require more
wealth than can be easily calculated, and this
marvellous pearl shell deposit we’ve been look-
ing for—if half of w r hat we have heard is true —
might easily provide it. We must buy up
every invention of w r orld importance before it
is patented, you know^; and we must also buy
the best brains the world possesses, otherwise
our dream of being a power for good or evil
will end rather abruptly.”
“ Ah, well! w-e’ll discuss all that later ; mean-
while, we are in a rather strange position at
present. Practically all our own fellows are
away, and only our paid engineers and crew
are on board. I needn’t mention that at this
moment they are not reliable.”
“No, I heard them; w 7 e’ll fill their places
with our own trained men as soon as possible.


We Adventurers are cosmopolitans, but we are
gentlemen ; those people we were compelled to
enlist in our services are—well ”
“We won’t discuss them ; I took the liberty
of raising all the stair-communication with the
deck as a precaution against the possibilities of
trouble with them, and they’ll sober down in
time, I have no doubt. If not, they will have
a rather unpleasant hour when our comrades
return.” Sir James filled his glass, and quaffed
its contents as coolly as if he were in the smoke-
room of a London hotel. He was a remarkably
handsome man, and his general air and appear-
ance proclaimed him to be a gentleman of the
highest culture. His companion, also, was of
distinguished mien, but while Sir James was
clean-shaven, he sported a long carefully trained
moustache, steel-grey in colour.
“ I wonder why we have not received any
message from our fellows yet ? ” went on the
gentleman of Russian appearance and name.
“They must have joined the shore party by
this time.”
“ I’ll signal and inquire,” Sir James answered,
moving to a switch-board. “ They’ll see my
message from the mast-head; and, meanwhile,
Mitchenoff, you would oblige me if you would
go down and have a look at the boilers; the
firemen are all helpless, and it would be some-
what awkward if we were sent aloft without
any warning.”
“ I’ll go below and rouse them,” Mitchenoff


laughed. “But I’ll take a couple of revolvers
with me.”
He opened the door and passed out, but
before he reached the engine-room entrance,
Captain Chester had seized him in a grip that
had the strength of two ordinary men behind it,
and without a single cry the Russian was
thrown to the deck and held there. The Captain
knew how to catch a man, and where to grip
him.
Meanwhile, Charlie had not been idle, and
when Sir James suddenly ceased tapping the
keys of the electrical transmitter with an ex-
clamation of annoyance, he was standing inside
the door.
“ Confound it ! ” the President muttered.
“ Something has gone wrong with the current.
It has gone off entirely. I really must take
measures to teach some of my paid servants
that they must attend to their work. I suppose
the dynamo attendant has fallen asleep, and
some wires have been fused and possibly short
—circuited.—No ! the current is passing through
this bridge all right. What can be wrong ? ”
“ Not much, Sir James; I’ve cut the wires
leading to the mast-head ; that’s all.”
Sir James looked round and confronted a
shining revolver in Charlie’s right hand. “Ah !
good evening,” he said, “ I did not hear you
announced.”
“ Keep your foot off that electric push on the
door, and your hands away from those buttons


under the table, or the whole ship’s crew will
hear me announcing myself,” Charlie answered.
“ Please don’t be rude, young man. This is
my ship, you know, and really I—l ”
“ Sit still where you are, Sir James. I assure
you my revolver is fully loaded this time , and 1
know how to use it. You surely recollect, too,
that you informed me that this ship belonged to
my uncle, Mr. Macalister ? I am his deputy in
the meantime, and I with my friends have taken
it over for him. If you move another inch, I
give you my word I’ll pull the trigger.” Charlie’s
voice rang strangely, and Sir James laughed.
“ I believe you really mean what you say,” he
said ; “ but I am keenly desirous of replenishing
my glass ; will you kindly fill it for me if I may
not do so myself ? ”
Charlie smiled, “ You are not dealing with a
boy now, Sir James,” he remarked with wonder-
ful calmness. “ And I fear you will have to do
without your refreshment until some of my
friends come. I may tell you we heard all your
recent conversation, and your Russian friend, I
see, is now in a bad way.”
“Well, what do you want?” Sir James in-
quired blandly. “ Perhaps you are not aware of
the crime you are committing ? ”
“It is no crime to take one’s own,” Charlie
replied stoutly; “ and it was you who started
the war, in any case.”
“And you are coming with us as our guest,
Sir James,” spoke Captain Chester, entering the


room, “We really cannot accept any excuses,
and your friend, by silence, has already consented
to accept our hospitality.”
“ May I ask if you people are responsible for
the message we received to-night?” Sir Janies
p o
inquired, ignoring the Captain’s words.
“ No, sir ! ” the Captain answered ; “ we sent
no message, but we intend doing so presently.
If you will kindly walk out of this room and go
down the gangway into our launch you will save
us some trouble.”
“ Indeed! Why should Ido anything to
save you trouble ? ” Sir James was quite im-
perturbable.
“ Because it will save yourself considerably
more. Well have to truss you up like a bale
of cheap cloth and lower you in a sling if you
don’t,” the Captain retorted, equally cool, and
smiling pleasantly. “ May I request that you
keep your hands out of your pockets, too, and
clear of that table ? In fact, I think that until
you give us your word that you admit yourself
beaten, you had better raise them above your
head.”
“You have developed most remarkably for a
South Sea mudbank scraper, Captain Chester.
When I called upon you on your ship in Sydney
Harbour, I confess I wasn’t impressed with your
abilities as a possible enemy. 1 apologise to
you now, Captain, and will double your present
salary if you will become skipper of the
Defiance


“You insulting hound !” roared Captain
Chester angrily. “Do you think for a moment
that I am one of your Adventurers ready to sell
himself to the highest bidder ? I serve only
Andrew Macalister, the Commonwealth of
Australia, the King, and my God; and if you
insult me again, I may not be able to look upon
you as I should, as a helpless beinor in my
hands.”
“Your pardon, Captain. I tried you merely
to see how much command you had of yourself.
I am glad I made you angry; it shows I am
virtually your superior, for I am still master of
myself, and to command other men is a small
matter comparatively. What is amusing you,
young man ? ”
“ I beg your pardon, sir; you are amusing
me. While you are trying to waste time with
the Captain, and calling for help meanwhile by
means of your right foot on that floor-push, you
forget that your men are unable to come up to
your assistance.”
“If I remember aright, my young friend,
some people managed to gain this deck before,
although they were locked in their cabin.”
“Oh, yes, Jack and I went through the port-
hole ; but in this case, your men don’t know
you want them, because I have been disconnect-
ing all the wires on your switchboard, including
your bell communication, while you were
speaking.”
Sir James smiled. “You are a clever young


man,” he said. “ I expect you are endowed with
some of Mr. Andrew Macalister’s traits.”
“Look out, Charlie ! ” cried the Captain, who
had been standing by Sir James’s side the last
five seconds. The President of the Adventurers
had suddenly leaped towards the open cabin
door, and Charlie alone blocked his escape. Sir
James was upon him before he could raise his
weapon, and with a laugh tried to throw him to
the floor. But like most other people when
dealing with those much younger than themselves
he made a mistake. Charlie, as we know, was an
athlete of no mean order, and he knew all that
science could teach him concerning the laws of
self-defence. The result was that both rolled
over on the floor, and it was Charlie who was
uppermost. An instant later Captain Chester
relieved him of his charge, and despite Sir
James’s struggles he was soon bound securely
with a coil of silk-covered wire found in the
cabin.
The Captain then gave Smith the prearranged
signal, and both prisoners were lowered over
the vessel’s side into the launch by means of
ropes found convenient.
“ Keep clear, Smith,” the Captain then called
out to the young engineer, “and come alongside
when we show this craft where the pearl shell
deposits are.”
“ What are you going to do, sir ? ” asked
Charlie in some surprise.
“ Put this ship out of action as a fighting
17 257


unit,” the Captain replied. “Do you think you
could start her engines if I went on the
bridge ? ”
“Certainly, sir, if there is any steam available
and no engineers present to stop me.”
“ I fancy they are all locked down below with
the others,” the Captain said. “Of course, the
leading engineers are Adventurers themselves,
O o
and doubtless are now among those on the coral
island. We’ll go down and see, however.”
But the engine-room was deserted, and the
o *
gauges showed that a sufficient head of steam was
still on the boilers. Charlie signified that he
could do his part, and the Captain ran up to the
bridge and signalled down “ half speed astern.”
The Defiance dragged her anchor along the
coral bottom, but there was plenty of room for
manoeuvring, and the ship was not bound on a
long journey. After some “stops,” “ aheads,”
“ asterns,” the order came, “ full speed ahead,”
and Charlie opened out the throttle and gave
the engines all the steam at command. A few
seconds later the Defiance shook violently, and
a dull grinding noise could be heard even in the
engine-room. Then came a tearing sound as the
sharp coral grazed the hull, and next moment
the trailing anchor caught in some crevice, and
the Defiance swung round taut on the chain,
heeled over to starboard, and lay still.
“ Stop ! ” rang out the telegraph bell, and the
engines also came to rest.
The clamour below was now fair evidence that


some of the crew had become alive to the fact
that things were not as they should be, but
neither the Captain nor Charlie paid any
attention to it. A few minutes later they were
in the launch.
“ You were eager to know where the pearl
banks lay, Sir James,” said the Captain as he
cut that gentleman free from some of his bonds.
“ I don’t think the information will be of much
service to you, but the Defiance is lying on
them now.”
“Really,” drawled the prisoner. “Most
interesting ! 1 should be obliged to you if you
would cut my friend free. I fear he has been
bound tighter than I have been, and I am sure
you do not wish to kill him.”
The dazed Russian was soon released ; and
just at daylight the little launch reached the
Caledonia's side in the forest-fringed natural
o
harbour. Henderson, Mr. Dixon, Fiji Fred, and
some others were on deck awaiting its return
rather anxiously.
J


CHAPTER XI
The Native Encampment
“ TELL, then, gentlemen, we have heard each
▼ ▼ other’s stories. Has anyone a plan to
propose ? ” The speaker was Captain Chester,
and he was addressing Mr. Henderson, Mr.
Dixon, the second and third officers, and the two
boys. Wun Lung was also present clearing
away the breakfast dishes, but like all Celestials,
though he had ears he heard not, and his eyes
never saw anything —at least, he never repeated
what he had heard or seen.
“It seems to me,” began Mr. Dixon, “ that
we’ve already got the whiphand of those fellows
who call themselves Adventurers, and I think we
should proceed with our work and ignore them.
We came here to get pearl shell; well, let’s get
them.”
“Mr. Cornelius P. Higgins has given me to
understand that the chief purpose of the
Adventurers here is to annex these islands for
Germany,” said Mr. Henderson ; “ and that the
pearl beds are only of secondary importance to
them.”


“ Then why were we the objects of so much
attention ? ” Charlie asked. “We don’t care
though they annex the world.”
“You happened to be Andrew Macalisters
nephew,” Mr. Henderson explained, “The
Adventurers have reason to fear him, it seems,
and they evidently thought you knew his plans.
They also knew that before they could go ahead
with their own scheme they would have to
render him harmless. Hence, in my opinion, his
disappearance, and also the reason why you have
been so much sought after. They calculated
that if they followed you, you would lead them
to him, and doubtless they had arranged what
would happen then.”
“ But, as you know, they tried to make us join
them in Sydney,” put in Jack.
“Yes, they thought you would prove a good
bait. Mr. Macalister would certainly come to
rescue you or to make terms, and that was all
they wanted.”
“ But they also were most anxious to know
the position of the pearl shell deposits, said
Charlie ; “ and they even offered a very large
sum for our ‘ submarine swimmer ’ through the
agency of a famous London salvage firm.
I think that is easily explained, and it helps
to throw light on other matters too,” said Mr.
Henderson. “ Indeed, it connects up the links of
fact I have gathered from Fiji Fred, Captain
I mean —Crinkled Charlie, and Mr. Higgins.
To bring about annexation in a manner allowed


by the world’s great powers, occupation is
essential, unless in actual warfare. Now, if the
people we have had dealings with were pearling
around here for some time under the German
Hag, that might legitimately be termed occupa-
tion, seeing that the islands themselves were not
supposed to be inhabited. True, they would
have to prove that they were getting pearl shells,
and not merely pretending, therefore their eager-
ness to know where the pearl beds were, and
their attempts to get hold of your invention.
But the presence of natives on this island upsets
all preconceived schemes completely, for if they
object to annexation, the title to their land is not
valid unless the annexing power conquers them ;
and possibly one or two other powers would have
something to say if German cruisers began
target practice here without any just cause. I
suppose in some way we are interested in this
game, for evidently Mr. Macalister knew what
would happen, and is working against Germany
having those islands. Hence, doubtless, our
presence here.”
“ Excuse me, gentlemen,” broke in a voice at
the entrance to the saloon. “ You very
courteously gave me the freedom of this very
excellent ship, and unfortunately 1 have overheard
part of your most edifying conversation. I have
no desire to hear what obviously is not intended
for my knowledge while I am treated as your
guest, and therefore I am compelled to speak.”
“ If you have heard what has been said, Sir


James/’ Captain Chester replied without showing
any annoyance, although Mr. Dixon did not tr}
to conceal his, “you may.come in and join in
the discussion. I hope you have been well
attended to and have had a good breakfast.”
“ Thanks, I have no complaints of any kind ;
the steward who attended to my requirements is
a gem, and he is certainly above being bribed.”
Sir,” said the Captain stiffly, “ the men on
this ship are not Adventurers ; they are all honest
men ; the man told off to look after you is not a
steward at all. He has been my trusted friend
for many years, and though he is rated on the
ship’s papers as an A.B. only, he would be more
fittingly employed as commander. lam glad to
know he can also add the arts of a good steward
to his many accomplishments.”
Sir James sat down beside Jack. “I didn t
dream you would have a ship manned by
Admirable Crichtons, Captain,” he drawled. “ I
hardly expected there could be more than one
Andrew Macalister in the world, but you seem to
have got together quite a number of his versatile
type.”
“We haven’t time to talk anything but
business,” Mr. Dixon interrupted. “ Steam is
up ; I move we go out for another lot of pearl
oysters.”
“ I was about to remark, gentlemen,” smiled
Sir James, “ that while you are almost correct in
your conjectures regarding our object in this
region, the presence of natives must militate


against the success of your operations also. Now,
I do not offer any inducement, but I suggest that
you join with us in dealing with those gentlemen,
and in return we will waive all claim to the pearl
beds.”
“ The natives have not interfered with ns yet,
sir,” Mr. Henderson replied hurriedly ; “ and we
have no cause to make war against them until
they become troublesome. Perhaps you are not
aware that the shore party you landed was
hopelessly defeated last night?”
“Yes, I believe it came to grief, but it is
reinforced now. May I ask how you came to
know ? ”
“My young friend and I were present; but
we brought back one of your men who can tell
you all about the fight if Captain Chester does
not object.”
“ Dear me! you seem to be collecting the
Gentlemen of our Syndicate in instalments. I
expect you’ll have them all here presently.”
Sir James spoke the last sentence with just a
suspicion of a change in his quiet, drawling voice,
but the Captain noticed it and read its meaning,
“ When they do come, Sir James,” he answered,
“ I trust we shall be able to accommodate them.
Meanwhile, this ship is about to sail out to the
pearling banks. lam sorry I cannot give you
the option of staying with the shore party, but
you will be quite near to the Defiance, and
possibly may be able to inform your late crew
that you are quite safe.”


At that moment Wun Lung approached the
Captain, and on being asked what his business
was, said: “ That sing-song Amelican fellow no
likee bleakfast. He say he wanty come into
saloon. Sailol man telly me to telly you that
he wanty hity him on the head, so he no cause
any tlouble.”
“ You go back and tell Crinkled Charlie that
he must not hit Mr. Higgins on the head,” said
the Captain.
“ Sailol fellow telly me to say he die soon
if he no gety away Horn odel fellow. He
say telly Captain to come upy an’ listen fo’
himself.”
“ Poor Cricklewood,” muttered Henderson.
“ Cornelius will be the death of us all if we
can’t shut off his poetry.”
“ Oh, it is C. P. H. you have got here ? ”
laughed Sir James. “ How on earth did you
catch him ? He is one of the smartest men in
our Syndicate.”
“ Oh, we got him all right! ” Henderson
answered; “but possibly we made a mistake
in bringing him here. Hear him overhead
now ! Who could stand that ? ”
Cornelius was declaiming something on deck
just above, and his words were easily heard
through the open skylight—
‘ ‘ I tell you, Fiji Fred,
You had better go to bed,
You’re as sleepy as can be,
And you never can watch me,’


“ Look here, you blamed old poetical pirate,”
sounded Fiji Fred’s voice, “you’ve nearly killed
Crinkled Charlie, but I tell you straight —I’ll
ventilate your head —with a shooter full of lead
—if you spout another line—which is not —not
—which is not ”
“As good as mine,” helped the brilliant poet.
“With some study and a lot of brains, you
w T ould soon do that kind of stuff quite easily,
Fiji Fred. Now, just listen ”
“ I won’t,” roared Fred. “ I’m a desperate
man now, and I’ll turn the steam hose on you
if you say another word.”
“ I think, gentlemen,” Captain Chester ob-
served, “ some of us had better get on deck
so as to prevent needless bloodshed. Our
conference is ended, anyway, and this ship is
going out in half an hour. That man will have
to be locked up somewhere, or he’ll drive us
all mad.”
“You are finding the Adventurers are some-
thing of the proverbial nature of Tartars,” smiled
Sir James. “ But, please, hasten your pearling
preparation. lam greatly interested. Be care-
ful, however, I advise you ; this is a four-sided
game now being played, and I shouldn’t like
you people to be the victims entirely.”
“ Where are the four sides ? ” Mr. Dixon
asked. “We fancy we are the only people who
count at present.”
“ A little mistake of yours that, Mr. Chief
Engineer,” Sir James replied. “You are only


one of the sides; the natives are another; the
Adventurers, fully armed and absolutely decided
about their duty, though stranded upon some
coral island near, form a third side; and I
venture to think the crew of the Defiance will
eventually prove to be a very formidable
fourth.”
“ All the more excitement in that case,” said
the Captain, “ and nothing will please our young
friends more.”
“ Except your permission to go and look for
the native village, sir,” Jack answered. “We
would take every precaution, and we could bring
you back all information as to their numbers.”
“ Don’t talk nonsense, young man. Have you
any idea of what a native village in these parts
is like ? ”
“ Not the faintest,” said Charlie; “ but we
should like to know, and we thought if Fiji
Fred or Crinkled Charlie were with us, we could
easily keep out of trouble.”
“ Let the lads go, Captain,” put in Sir James.
“ Youth loves adventure, and personally I should
prefer they were absent when some of my hot-
blooded Adventurers come along. I shall look
after them afterwards as well as yourself, or
even the great Andrew Macalister could do.”
“ If I may speak, sir,” put in Henderson. “ I
think it is just as well that we should know all
we can about these natives. This island is
marked on all the interested Governments’
surveys as uninhabited, and it is almost a duty,


therefore, for us to see what kind of people they
are.
“ Certainly, we must know more about them,”
the Captain agreed. “ I intended that Mr.
Dixon, you, or I should go and investigate
with two or three of our best men. We can’t
spare many, because our shore party must be left
strong enough at all times to defend themselves,
and our property against the Adventurers.”
“ May I offer my services in any capacity ? ”
Sir James inquired. “ I am able-bodied, and
ready to do anything except fight against my
comrades.”
“We may call upon you later, Sir James,”
Captain Chester replied. “ Meanwhile, Mr.
Henderson, 1 think you had better remain in
charge of the shore party again, and when we
return, you can pick your men and endeavour to
find the native village. You can escape detec-
tion during the night much more easily than in
broad daylight.”
“All right, sir, but if I may be allowed, I’ll
pick out Charlie, Jack, and Crinkled Charlie.”
“ Then who is to work the pearling machine ? ”
“Young Smith or I,” said Mr. Dixon, “I’ll
do anything to let the lads have some enjoyment,
and I guess they’ll have it this time.”
“ Very well,” Captain Chester agreed, after a
long pause in which he thought a lot. “ The boys
are in your hands, Henderson, and remember
you are responsible to me, as I am to Andrew
Macalister, for their safety.”


“Then we’re not going,” broke in Charlie
abruptly. “If we are not responsible for our-
selves, we can’t do anything without fear of
getting Mr. Henderson into trouble, and we
mmht as well have brought our mothers with
o o
us if we have to be so carefully protected.”
“Mr. Macalister thought we were quite able
to look after ourselves too,” added Jack, “or he
wouldn’t have asked us to join him.”
“ Boys, when you are finished with this little
business, I’ll guarantee you plenty of glorious
adventures if you’ll join me,” said Sir James.
“ Personally, I don’t see why Captain Chester is
so frightened for your safety. You are both as
strong as most men ; can shoot straight, I believe,
fear nothing, and are full of original ideas.”
“ You can go, boys,” the Captain interrupted,
“ but don’t be rash. I’ve got a mother, too, in
Sydney, and for her sake 1 am always extremely
cautious.”
“ Ha ! ha ! ha ! ” Sir James laughed. “ Cautious
Captain Chester ! The man who bearded the
lions in their den, or, to put it in modern form,
the man who boarded the Defiance and carried
off its two chiefs. What would your mother
have said to that, my careful Captain ? Or
did you honestly think the Adventurers were
quite incapable of causing harm 1 ”
“My young friend is the hero of that exploit,
not I,” the Captain replied deprecatingly. “My
mother would be ashamed of me if I did not do
my duty, no matter what danger threatened.”


“ Lucky man, and lucky mother; would
you believe, Captain, that I have got a
mother too, and she feels exactly the same
way as yours. I have also got a wife —
but we’ll not moralise, meantime. Let the
youngsters go, Captain ; they’ll take care of
themselves.”
“ Yes, I second that,” cried Mr. Dixon.
“ They are about the best men we have for a
game like native-hunting, anyhow.”
And so it was settled. Shortly afterwards
the Caledonia sailed out to the pearl beds, and
those left on shore washed out all the shells not
yet cleaned, and gathered them all into sacks
ready to place in the vessel’s hold when the
time to sail away came. They also built a
rough but strong blockhouse in which they
could defend themselves against both natives
and Adventurers if attacked. During the heat
of the day they slept in shady corners of the
forest fringe, leaving only two men to act
as camp guards. Late in the afternoon the
Caledonia returned to her moorings with
another two tons of treasure taken from among
the coral growths on the sea-bottom by all the
ship’s engineers in turn. It had been great fun
to them, and Smith had become a very import-
ant person, having had to instruct his superiors
in the many mysteries of the “ submarine
swimmer.” Ah Sing and Wun Lung prepared
dinner early that evening, but before it was
ready Smith had told Charlie and Jack of his


adventure with an enormous shark while gather-
ing in the shells.
“ It was the biggest fellow in the crowd that
had been hanging round for a long time afraid
to come too near. I expect the lady sharks
must have been saying nasty things to him
about his bravery, for he suddenly came at the
‘ swimmer ’ like a streak of lightning. I had just
time to ’phone aloft for more current when he
was on me. He sent the poor old ‘swimmer’
spinning round with his tail, but he didn’t seem
to care much for the taste of it, and when I got
1 O
a couple of your patent shark-and-octopus-
annihilating wires stuck into his old body, he
sizzled like a fish in a frying-pan ; then steam
rose all about him and he wriggled like a big eel
and kicked up coral, sea-weed, sand, and pearl
shell until the water was so much blurred that I
couldn’t see him. 1 don’t think he liked the
electric current a bit. But he got off, somehow,
and I could just make out a white flash of some-
thing heading for the South Pole, and a lot of
other silvery streaks starting after him when
the fellows on top hauled me up. I don’t fancy
that shark will come back any more, this
season.”
Both lads agreed with Smith that the shark
would probably give the district a wide berth
for some time to come, but Jack could not help
explaining that it was not steam the engineer
saw rising from the creature, when he stuck the
electrodes into it. “It was bubbles of hydrogen


gas,” he said. “ The current electrolysed the
waters and split it into its elements, oxygen
and hydrogen ; the latter gas being the lightest
element actually known, of course, rose in streams
of bubbles to the surface and ”
“ Oh, I know all that,” cried Smith. “ I’m
not so ignorant as the Captain, Henderson, and
Dixon. If I hadn’t the bad luck to be as young
nearly as you fellows I suppose I’d be famous,
but, as it is, the world doesn’t know I exist.”
“ Never mind, Smith,” said Jack consolingly.
“ In time you’ll be old enough, and so will we,
and then we’ll be able to go out on the hunt for
a native village without getting lectures on the
necessity of keeping our feet dry.”
“ Oh, yes, Mr. Dixon was telling me you are
going out to-night. Couldn’t you work things
with the skipper so that I could come with
o
you f
“ No, Smith, they can’t,” said Henderson who
had come up unobserved. “ I’m in charge of the
night expedition, and while I’ll not say that I
wouldn’t have you with us on any account,
1 cannot rob the ship of all its best men.
Just then Wun Lung sounded the dinner gong,
and Smith was left lamenting his run of bad
luck. During the meal the boys informed the
Captain that they had added another dozen of
first-class pearls to their treasure store, and when
Sir James, who was present, saw them, he at
once offered to buy them at one hundred pounds
each, adding that his Russian comrade would


buy all they could sell when he became himself
again.
“I’ll not handle an Adventurer so roughly the
next time,” Captain Chester laughed, “ and I’m
sorry your friend is not yet well enough to join
us. But we cannot sell any pearls, because they
are not our property ; they belong to Mr. Andrew
Macalister.”
“ Oh, he must be dead by this time. C. P. H.
told me he heard something to that effect in
Sydney. We had over a dozen men on his
track.”
“Do you imagine, Sir James, that a dozen of
your men are equal to one Andrew Macalister ? ”
the Captain asked amusedly. “He is not dead.”
“ Well, well, P m sure I hope not. Keep your
pearls. With your permission I’ll go on deck
and smoke a cigar with Cornelius P. Hio-o-ins.”
All were glad when Sir James took his de-
parture, for however much they trusted to his
honour, the position was delicate. Certainly, he
was not treated as a prisoner, and indeed he
acted as if the Caledonia and its officers belonged
to him, although not offensively. After some
discussion and arrangements, Henderson an-
nounced that it was time the night force got to
work. Wun Lung was ready as usual with his
bag of sandwiches, and Crinkled Charlie was
waiting on shore. The boys armed themselves
with revolvers and indicated that they were
ready, but Mr. Henderson promptly informed
them that they were not. He explained what
18 273


he meant a few minutes later in his own cabin
when he stripped off his uniform and showed
that his skin had already been dyed brown.
“ Captain Cricklewood —I mean Crinkled
Charlie is already prepared,” he said, “ and Wun
Lung will soon make you all right—if you don’t
mind mosquito bites; I’ve only got to attend to
my face.”
The boys signified that they thought they
could suffer all the festive mosquitoes could do
to them, and stripped to the skin. Wun Lung
then glided into the cabin with a galvanised
iron bath, and Ah Sing followed with pails of a
dark brown liquid which he promptly emptied
into the bath.
•'‘Get in,” said Henderson, “and rub that
stuff into your skin. It is coffee bean stain with
some leaves added of a tree I don t know, but
which Wffn Lung is well acquainted with.
“ Wun Lung often maky bath leady fo’ Andlew
Makalistel,” volunteered the steward. “He say
it vely good fo’ makin’ white man into Sou Sea
fellow. Me luby you ally ovel, Mastel Challie,
an’ Mastel Jak comey aftel.”
When Charlie emerged from his bath he was
a perfect sample of a Polynesian, except for his
hair, and while Jack was attended to by the
cool and ever smiling Wun Lung, Henderson
ran his fingers through the locks that had not
been cut since a month before leaving London,
and easily worked up a show of hair worthy
almost of a Polynesian Chief. Jack’s hair was


Jy , y V /'jjf'
‘ j j>-‘ v yT *VjJ*9 'rM
Y lp|||K^*/
E||K' Jf *Wj J iBHf jj //. # g£ ' Jf&Ma jy^B
lt% «»9j^| ft*.'.- //.( j fW&m ’jImt jb I
k •i« a > K ?’ * r ] Vf '■‘StiiBvP' •# ’ fl wt&StJtoM ■ - j
1 3| jSa£ jT I ? ?5«p ~.* • < t.-* n|
, •■ . - ■ ♦ 4 -■ /» "-a. >.*“’ ~^ T \, ' ' ' ■
i '_ - JtjMfpllr' ■ . •'*■ *>t‘ -C * *■
“ ‘ EASY, YOU YOUNG STEAM ENGINE ! ’ GROWLED THE WARRIOR.”
IP- 275




attended to when his skin was able to stand
Wun Lung’s critical inspection, and then the
Chief Officer prepared his own face. When all
was ready Wun Lung produced cocoanut fibre
kilts and the three hastily strapped them on their
bodies.
“ Me tinky you maky vely good nigels now,”
was the Chinaman’s comment as he surveyed the
fully-dressed warriors, “ but you no’ need slapy
legs when anyting bite or you’ll give away
whole blame show,”
“We’ll be very careful, Wun Lung,” said
Henderson, as they picked up their revolvers
and bag of sandwiches, and ran down the gang-
way. It was now dark, though the half moon
shed a weird light over the world of trees that
was sufficient to enable them to see where they
were going. All the crew of the Caledonia were
now on board enjoying themselves in their
several ways, so when Charlie ran full tilt against
a burly savage armed with spear and club, he
closed with him at once, crying out at the same
time to his comrades.
“Easy, you young steam engine!” growled
the warrior. “ What do you think lam ? ”
“Crinkled Charlie!” exclaimed Charlie in
surprise. “ I thought ”
I know that; but hasn’t it struck you yet
that you are pretty well made up as a native
yourself, and that if we can’t pass a rough in-
spection as such, we’ll not likely see the old
Caledonia again.”


“ Don’t speak too much, please,” broke in Mr.
Henderson. “ Get into those sandals, boys, to
save your feet, and save your breath all you can.
I expect we’ve got a fairly long journey in front
of us.”
And they had. They pushed upwards and
onwards along the track already made by the
Sunday party, but in the mystic moonlight of
the under world it was not an easy matter
keeping in the line along which the path had
been forced. Crinkled Charlie, however, seemed
to have little difficulty in leading the way and
the rest followed as best they could, squelching
all kinds of slimy wriggling creatures under
foot, and suffering the attacks of myriads of
blood-sucking pests which bored into their per-
spiring skins.
“ Oh 1 ” ejaculated Charlie as a slimy creature
of great length doubled up under his foot and
rolled both ends round his bare leg, “ I’m caught
by a snake. What should I do ? Oh, it> is
biting me ! ” n
“ Don’t move, and I’ll catch it by the head,
cried Henderson, running forward.
“ Get out, you set of kids,” growled Crinkled
Charlie, “ there are no snakes on those islands.
It is one of those blamed hibernating eels he has
tramped on, and I guess it has turned on its
galvanic battery as you fellows have been doing
every day with sharks and other things that
live at the bottom of the sea.”
He bent down as he spoke, and wrenching the


amphibious eel from Charlie’s limb, threw it into
a pool of stagnant water, in, and hovering over,
which, were myriads of insect pests whose com-
bined voices were like the buzzing of many
steam-driven saws. The boys suffered greatly
from the ravages of the mosquitoes, and were
continually slapping their bare bodies in order to
kill the blood-suckinor tormentors. Henderson
o
had his dignity to maintain, and consequently
endured much affliction until he seemed to
realise suddenly that dignity with a perspiring
brown skin and the one very elementary gar-
ment he was wearing did not blend well. He
then began squashing the pests, too. Crinkled
Charlie, apparently, was not troubled with the
attentions of the insects, and he strode on in
gloomy silence. Nor could the boys draw him
into conversation, however much they tried.
“ What is the good of acting a cheap phono-
graph %” he growled. “ Let’s save our wind for
the end of our journey. When a flash of
brilliant originality hits my brain-box I’ll shed it
out on you; but my little plant of thinking
machinery is out of gear at present, and I don’t
feel called upon to say anything,”
Upwards along the bed of the dry watercourse
they toiled, perspiring, gasping for air, and in a
melting temperature. The boys thought that if
the natives had to climb the mountain every
time they returned from a visit to the sea their
visits to the lower regions could not be many,
and they could not imagine how they lived


otherwise, for Captain Chester had told them
that all villages were of necessity built on the
shore, so that the inhabitants could live on the
produce of the lagoons and grow their cocoa-
nuts, taro, yams, and mammee-apples on the
fertile, alluvial soil fringing the coral beach.
There, too, they could swim about in the cool,
sparkling waters, while the women made the
famous mats, which could be exchanged for
mirrors, knives, concertinas, turkey-red cloth,
and other cheap goods from Germany or else-
where.
At length Henderson called a halt. “ I
haven’t been here before,” he said, address-
ing Crinkled Charlie, “ but this side gully is the
place where Wun Lung told me he had seen
native tracks.”
“ Well, I guess you can see them now if you
know how to look for them,” replied the silent
one. “ If you want the shortest cut to the
native head-quarters, we’d better turn up this
way.”
“ Lead on, then; we’ll hang at your heels,”
said the Chief Officer, and without another word
Crinkled Charlie swung round to the right and
forced the pace rapidly. A few minutes later he
turned and said: “ We’ve arrived, gentlemen.
I see the lights of a village or an encampment
straight ahead.”
“All right,” Henderson answered, “Let us
move very carefully now. Lead on as near as
you can without too much risk, Captain


Cricklewood —I beg your pardon—Crinkled
Charlie, and we’ll consider our plans when we
reach the limit of the safety zone.”
Crinkled Charlie made no reply, and in a few
minutes the adventurous quartet found them-
selves on the edge of a clearing at the base of a
precipitous wall of rock, ’there were some
crudely constructed huts in the middle of the
cleared space, but signs were not wanting that a
great many more habitations lay hidden among
the timber, and at, or in, the shadowed base of
the rocks.
A large fire was burning quite near where the
four disguised white men stood, and about half a
dozen natives were tending it with great care.
Evidently it was an important part of some
impending ceremony.
Crinkled Charlie muttered some words, terse,
and deeply expressive, and on hearing them Mr.
Henderson appeared to be shocked, although
when he saw that the boys had not paid any
attention to them he laughed, and advised that
they should all climb trees, the better to inspect
proceedings. The tree branches and interlace-
ments were almost as solid as the land, and soon
the party were munching their sandwiches, and
feeling much the same as if they had dress circle
seats at some theatrical performance. And they
had. The play was not long in starting either,
and for a first act it was somewhat exciting.
About a score of naked warriors suddenly marched
out from the shadows of the forest and ranged


themselves round the fire, and the tenders at
once drew from the ashes a number of hot stones,
which they placed in some kind of geometrical
position. Then, amidst a fanfare of discordant
sounds from tubular drums, bamboo flutes, and
other strange instruments, the Chief stepped
forth from the nearest house and took up his
place of honour on a raised stone seat in the
middle of the ring of hot stones. His seat did
not appear to be heated, the watchers noted.
He was a splendid savage and a perfect specimen
of virile manhood. His height* was difficult to
judge but Charlie thought it was somewhere
near five feet eleven, and Jack agreed with him.
His muscles were abnormally developed, and he
was decidedly handsome. A fibrous kilt was his
complete garb but he also sported a huge ring in
his nose, the lower part of which partly encircled
his well formed chin. He was as cool as his men
were hot and flustered, though it should be
remembered that they were standing by the
heated stones awaiting his pleasure, or the signal
to begin the performance. He was a remarkably
dignified Chief, and his movements were
deliberately slow, and in full accord with his
dignity. Evidently he knew his men well, and
could handle them perfectly.
“ Great Australia ! ” gasped Crinkled Charlie.
“ This is going to be the fire dance, and it only
happens among the islanders now, when they
take possession of some new land after they have
eaten all the original inhabitants ! ”


“ Maybe there weren’t any original inhabit-
ants,” said Jack; and Henderson signified that
he thought there was sense in Jack’s words.
o l
“ It doesn’t matter, the meaning is the same.
The Fijians practise it; the Tongans do it; the
Caroline islanders, the Marquesians, the Ladron-
ians all have the same custom —look, the Chief
is going to play their equivalent to ‘ God Save
the King ! ’ ”
The Chief had produced from somewhere a
strange looking contrivance composed of several
bamboo rods or tubes. They seemed to be all
connected, but all were different in length.
Their purpose was soon apparent, however ; they
were the essentials of a musical instrument, each
tube being able to sound out a more or less
harmonious note on being blown into. The
Chief raised his bundle of tubes and blew into
each in turn as if to satisfy himself that all were
in tune, and the shrill notes resulting caused the
naked warriors to voice their delight in shrieks
of approval. At length the great Chief got his
pipes to his liking, and looking round to see that
his men were ready, he raised them to his mouth
and blew out in staccato notes a weird air that was
doubtless the natives’ National Anthem. It was
not unmusical; in fact, Charlie thought that at
times it was almost familiar to him, and it was
certainly most inspiriting to the warriors. They
instantly formed a living design round the hot
stones, singing lustily, meanwhile, in unison with
the Chief’s pipes, and that individual continued


to work Ills wind instrument with most commend-
able zeal. Soon the tune changed into something
suggestive of the fast movements of a Scotch
Reel or an Irish Jig, and at once the warriors
sprang into action on the hot stones and went
through the evolutions of a weird dance, shouting,
shrieking, and moving their arms in accordance
with the music! As each dancer stepped across
to the next stone, the fire tenders, or priests,
threw some powdered material on it, and a flare
flashed out around the dancer, and in a few
seconds the scene resembled a very fine fireworks
display. But the performers didn’t seem to
mind. Apparently they suffered little or no
inconvenience from the heat, and the dance grew
faster and faster. The Chief began to perspire,
too, but he kept on pumping out sounds of some
kind, and in time a pleasant smoky perfume
filled the air, and the dancers seemed to slacken
down somewhat. Jack and Charlie felt them-
selves becoming very sleepy, too ; a fact not very
strange considering their very irregular resting
hours since they had landed on the island.
Henderson himself was only keeping up his
head with an effort, and Crinkled Charlie
was fanning himself energetically with a large
leaf.
“ Come on, boys,” the last named gentleman
said abruptly. “Let’s get out of this or we’ll
fall down among the warriors. We can’t hold
out against that soporific smoke much longer.
Rouse yourselves ; we’ll be all right when we get


into the pure air. See, the dancers are stopping
now !
“Do you mean—to —say —we’re —drugg —
ed ? ” murmured Henderson almost asleep, and
to the boys his voice seemed to be very far off.
They were very comfortable, and all they desired
was to be left alone for a few minutes, hours,
days, weeks, or months. Crinkled Charlie s
voice seemed to be even farther away as he
replied : “Of course we are; that powder the
priests throw over the hot stones affects all the
senses when burnt, and we are breathing its
gases now. Quick I get a move on, or you’ll
wait here till you’re cooked.”
And they did “ get a move on ”; they knew
that Crinkled Charlie did not waste words with-
out reason, and they forced themselves into a
state of activity. The dancers had now almost
ceased, and the Chief was hanging over his pipes,
blowing only a faint note spasmodically.
Evidently the vapoury clouds arising from the
burnt incense had proved too much for him as
well as for his people. Fighting hard to over-
come the inclination to sleep, Henderson and the
boys crawled through the branches after Crinkled
Charlie, and after some minutes of mighty effort
they felt themselves becoming free from the
subtle influence. They were now over some of
the crudely erected huts which nestled in the
forest’s welcome shade, and about a hundred feet
away from the expiring fires and heavily charged
atmosphere floating above the shimmering


stones. The dancers were all asleep, and huddled
together upon the ground indifferent to the
ravages of pests and all other matters.
“ 1 think we should get down now,” said
Henderson, “ and have a look at the houses
underneath. I have the impression that they
are not quite the usual South Sea Island huts.”
“Of course not,” Crinkled Charlie answered.
“ They’ve been put up in a big hurry; any fool
can see that, and I wouldn’t mind betting I can
tumble to the whole game now. But where in
thunder has old Mac been while all this has
been going on ? ” The speaker began to work
a passage to the under world without explaining
what he thought. He was tired talking. Mr.
Henderson, however, was now fully awake and
he grabbed Crinkled Charlie by the kilt strap and
hauled him aloft again. “ Kindly enlighten us
as to the meaning of things,” he said.
“ Remember we have not an experience of this
part of the world anything like yours.”
“ Mine is not so pleasant that I care to shout
about it,” the other interrupted curtly, “ and I’ll
thank you, Mr. Henderson, if you’ll let go my
belt. I have still some dignity left and 1 don’t
like being dangled among those branches in a
cocoanut fibre kilt.”
“ I beg your pardon, Captain Cricklewood, I
had forgotten I was holding you,” Mr. Henderson
apologised, “ but won’t you explain things
to us ? ”
“ Why, don’t you see that those natives are as


new to this place, nearly, as we are ourselves ?
They haven’t any village, and they haven’t yet
got a decent house for their Chief built. And
who ever heard of natives living high up a
mountain unless they were invaders them-
selves and feared to build their village on the
breach ? ”
“ Well ? ” said Mr. Henderson after a pause.
“We have noted all you have observed; now
you might read the riddle to us.”
“Isn’t it reading itself? Don’t you see that
these natives back there are not inhabitants of
this island ; they have only come here on the
same business as some other people we know,
and they’ll likely win if they sit tight, and keep
clear of the Adventurers. But as yet they have
no more claim to this little chunk of land than
we have, except that they are in possession.
I wonder what has come over Andrew Macalister ?
He must be getting old when he allows things
like this to happen without having a hand in the
business.”
“Do you really think, Captain Cricklewood,
that Mr. Macalister has been caught napping ? ”
Mr. Henderson spoke earnestly, and he looked
at Crinkled Charlie curiously.
“If you put it that way, Mr. Henderson, 1
don't think he has been sleeping. I fully expect
him to appear in the full glare of the limelight
at the end of our little play, but I confess I am
a bit puzzled to account for many things which
are happening now. What he is doing I don’t


know. What we are trying to do apart from
pearl-shell getting I scarcely understand. What
the natives are up to is beyond me. And then
there are the Adventurers ; why they are silent
and inactive is beyond my powers of comprehen-
sion seeing I do know what they meant to try
to do.”
“ Well, I’ll tell you what I mean to do,” said
Henderson. “ I believe that among the islands
around here any man can challenge the Chief
for his position at any time, and if he is able to
defeat him in personal combat, he becomes Chief
himself. Now, I am going to challenge the
Chief of those fellows, and if I beat him I shall
proclaim this island, and those adjacent, part of
the British Empire, and take all consequences.
You fellows had better get away without delay
if you don’t wish to be mixed up in the affair,
and you can tell Captain Chester that I thought
it was the only way.”
“ Then you are an all-fired idiot, after all,
Henderson, and I don’t care a cent, how you
take my words,” broke in Crinkled Charlie.
“Do you imagine I would be sitting up here
like a monkey if I thought I’d half of a one
per cent, chance with that nigger Chief? I’m
bigger and uglier than you, too, and I guess
if I can’t tackle the beggar, you wouldn’t be
hilariously happy in your attempt. I move we
get back to camp and report what we have seen
and what we have gathered, for I bet my tooth-
brush that this happy little hollow will be the


scene of a fairly sanguinary fight as soon as the
Adventurers locate the place.”
“Were you informed that the Adventurers
themselves have been beaten already by the
natives?” asked Henderson. “I meant to tell
vou, but ”
“ Oh, C. P. H. told me all about that; but the
Adventurers are never beaten until they are dead.
Their comrades will now reinforce the first lot.”
“ Yes,” broke in Jack, tired of inaction, and
of the discussion, “but they are pretty well
helpless, too, and their boat is lying on the pearl
banks, almost showing her keel, and her crew
will be pretty hungry by this time if they
haven’t got out of that patent saloon.”
“Oh, I heard all about that, too, young man.
Sir James and Mitcheuoff gave me most of the
details ; but, believe me, you cannot reckon your
battle won so easily as that when dealing with
men so used to matching their brains
against the world’s best. You’ll have to plant
them deep after they are dead and weight them
down with mighty heavy tombstones to keep
them where you put them, if you mean to be
free from them. Let’s get down to the ship,
gentlemen, and ”
“ Hullo ! ” exclaimed Charlie. “ Some people
are coming down over that rock face where the
caves are, just in front. Who can they be ? ”
“ Maybe Andrew Macalister,” Crinkled Charlie
answered. “ I’m expecting him to show up at
any moment —No, by thunder! That little


beggar is the Marquis Kari, and that is Count
—something or other —behind him. I see
Manheim, the German freak engineer, and
Don Antonio, the Pasha, Macpherson, Bourke,
Dessaix—Stars and Stripes! All the best and
most desperate fellows are here ! They’ll play
skittles with the natives as easily as C. P. H.
makes poetry. Just look how they are swarming
down that rock,”
“Then shouldn’t we join in and help the
natives ? ” cried Jack. “ They are beginning to
awake from their sleep, and I see the Chief is
standing up. We could help them greatly from
the tree tops.”
Henderson drew his revolver. “ This is not
our quarrel,” he said grimly, “ but I will shoot
the Adventurer who takes any unfair advantage
of that Chief.”
“ The Adventurers are gentlemen,” interrupted
Crinkled Charlie, “and they do not take life
wantonly. They’ll simply take the Chief
prisoner, and after annexing his property
return to their own head-quarters, and arrange
to tackle the Caledonia next. We simply must
get down to warn our own fellows. Follow
me ! ” He led the way through the dense over-
hanging foliage, and when clear of all signs of
dwelling-huts descended to the ground into a
O o
dry watercourse, and bending low to escape
the trellis-work roof of creeping vegetation, ran
towards the creek which they had followed in
coming up the mountain. Before it was reached,


however, pandemonium burst out in the village
clearing they had re-passed. Terrific yells
showed that the warriors were now very much
awake to the presence of their visitors, and
revolver shots barked out in a manner indicative
that the Adventurers were being forced to fight
desperately. The din was deafening, and the
sound of clubs doing strenuous work, the whiz of
spears hurtling through the sultry night air,
and the rush of many feet were heard distinctly.
Then louder reports rang out, and the shrieks
and yells grew, if possible, louder, and more
ferocious.
“By Jupiter ! The Adventurers are getting all
they want, I guess,” Crinkled Charlie muttered.
“ I feel I d like to go back and see the fun now.
They 11 shoot down the poor beggars I fear.
Hear those rifles spitting out chunks of lead.”
“Yes,” said Charlie, “but it is the natives
who are firing them. The people we saw to-
night had no rifles, and we know that the
natives captured about a dozen Winchesters
yesterday, or the day before. Hullo! what’s
the meaning of this ? ”
The forest had suddenly become ablaze, and
the scorching tongues of flame leaped high into
the heavens, rendering the surroundings more
vividly clear than daylight. Birds, beasts, and
reptiles now added their signs of alarm to the
medley of sounds, and wild pigs, heavy turkeys,
and other creatures rushed past the four men
down the watercourse, while the timber over-
19 289


head resounded with the startled cries of gaudily
plumaged birds of paradise, and other members
of the parrot family.
“ It’s all up now,” gasped Crinkled Charlie.
“ The Adventurers have been forced to fire the
forest, and nothing living can escape unless it
can reach the sea before the flames, or a mighty
shower of rain comes on. Hurry, boys, weve
not got too much of a start ourselves, and we
can’t do anything here, anyway.”
“ I don’t believe the Adventurers would wil-
fully set the place on fire,” said Henderson, as
they ran. ~ „
“ And you can bet the natives wouldnt,
gasped Crinkled Charlie. “They know what
a forest fire means.” .
“ Then maybe Andrew Macalister has arrived,
said Jack. “He may have done it.
No answer was made, and running swiftly,
they soon out-distanced the roaring furnace
behind, and gained the lower regions.


CHAPTER XII
Andrew Macalister
the lights of the Caledonia
loomed through the entanglements, and a
minute later the quartet found themselves in
the clearing in which the pearl-shell tables had
been built. Evidently all on board were asleep,
and there did not appear to be any man on
watch on shore. Not a sound came from the
vessel, and the shore block-house was also silent.
The Caledonia was moored in mid-stream, and
only a plank gangway which could be cut away
in a second connected with the shore. Her
deck lights burned brightly, but all her cabins
were dark. The half moon had gone down
behind the glowing mountain top, and the stars
were standing out vividly and redly, sure signs
of the approaching sun. The forest, too, was
still; all its feathered inmates were slumbering
unconscious of the devastating flames rushing
down upon them.
“By Jove ! ” ejaculated Henderson. “ Captain
Chester has surely become very forgetful; there
is no watch, and he must know enemies are all


around us. Oh! Look out, boys; we re
trapped ! ” The words died away in his throat,
but they had served their purpose. A fraction
of a second after he had uttered his first exclama-
tions, a crowd of men had sprung from the
oround and thrown themselves upon the four
comrades. Henderson had been the first attacked
and his assailant had caught him from behind
and given the gallant officer no chance. Crinkled
Charlie struck out boldly at his two antagonists
and felled one, but the other entwined his feet
round the sailor’s and both fell heavily to the
ground, where they rolled and perspired and
struggled, and gave vent to terse expres-
sions, 0 emotional and fervent, perhaps, but not
edifying.
But strangely enough the boys were not over-
come so easily as might have been expected,
considering their youth and inexperience. Jack
flung his man from him rather easily, in fact,
because he had time to grip him round his waist
and overbalance him before he realised that it
was a young he was tackling. Charlie
also accounted for his assailant by a Ju Jitsu
trick, and then both boys pinned their men down
and wondered how many more were coming.
But only one other person was in evidence, and
he was behaving in a strange mannei foi an
Adventurer. He was armed with a crow-bar
and he was dealing out blows with extreme
energy. Jack was just about to spring upon
him when he saw Crinkled Charlie rise to his


feet and shake himself, and next instant
Henderson also arose.
“ Thanks, Smith,” said the officer. “ I’ll
never be bad to you again. I don’t know how
you happen to be here, but that crow-bar of
yours is mightier than either the sword or the
pen.”
“ And I add my name to those sentiments,”
said Crinkled Charlie. “ I was having a bad
time with those fellows until you spanked them
on the head. But what has happened to the
kids ? ”
“ We’re all right,” Jack sang out. “ Are
there any more Adventurers knocking around,
Smith ? ”
“Don’t speak so loud,” Smith answered.
“There’s been a fairly big fight here to-night
already, and I expect I’m the only fellow who
escaped. The Caledonia is now in the hands
of the Adventurers, and all our fellows are
prisoners. Great Commonwealth! But it was
a bosker fight while it lasted.”
“ What do you mean, Smith ? ” asked Hender-
son. “You said the Caledonia had been
captured ? ” The officer was certainly excited
now.
“ Well, it is now bossed by the fellows we left
locked up in the Defiance, and I saw Captain
Chester drop with a bullet hole in him ; and
Mr. Dixon, my chief, was punctured in more
than one place by other shots, although I believe
they were all 32’s. If they had been 44’s like


what I was using, I reckon things would really
be serious, but as it is we’ve only got to
recapture the ship, or take charge of the
Defiance, and force the beggars to come to
terms.
“Just reduce your gear a bit and go slower,”
broke in Crinkled Charlie, as he set about
the prisoners to trees with long pieces of fibre.
“ Who rushed the ship 1 How did they do it,
and how did you manage to get away 1 Then
who and what are those fellows who attacked
9 ”
US i .
“ I’m only an engineer, Crinkled Charlie, and
I haven’t got a mind jammed full of wisdom, or
an imagination like —like some people I know
I’m not looking at you, Crinkled Charlie ! ”
“ Oh, drop all nonsense and give us the facts
at once,” said Henderson. “We have enemies
behind, too, and they’ll be here any moment.”
“ Well, sir, all 1 know is, that about a couple
of hours ago when all but the shore sentnes
were and the Caledonia was out in mid-
stream, a big racket suddenly broke out on
deck, and revolver shots and commands in all
languages of Europe, and halt Asia, and South
America told me we had been rushed by the
Adventurers. Of course, I tumbled out on deck
with my shooters, and all our fellows were also
at hand mighty soon, and we squirted lead into
the howling mob from every corner. Captain
Chester and Dixon, and the second and third
officers and engineers, and Fiji Fred, and all the


firemen and sailors fought like blazes, and we
dropped a good many of the others, I can tell
you, although we tried not to hurt them much.
C. P. Higgins, the mad poet, ranged him-
self on our side, and did awful damage to his
own people with the words he flung at them,
and the fellows, called Sir James and Mitchenoff,
did their best for us too, even pulling triggers
when they found that the beggars would not
listen to anyone. Of course, it couldn’t last
for ever, and Captain Chester, after a bit, said
to me, ‘ Smith, get out of this if you can, and
warn Henderson and the boys that we’ve been
rushed by the men we left on board the
Defiance .’ The poor old skipper flopped after
that with a chunk of lead in his leg, and I
played ’possum for a bit until I got a chance;
then I cleared. But I’ve cut my back teeth
long ago, so I was very cautious, and I didn’t
take many minutes to find out that the beggars
had posted their own sentries on shore after
having gone for ours, and I lay low and watched
them. Soon after you came along, and now you
know all I know.”
“ Not quite, Smith,” said Charlie. “Do you
mean to tell us that the men of the Caledonia
were beaten so easily by the crew of the Defiance?"
“ Oh, I forgot to say that our boys were
winning hands down until some blamed foreigner
flung a ball of gas at us. It burst when it
touched the deck, and the awful smell knocked
us out in the first act. All our fellows dropped,


and I just managed to climb the gunwale and
fall into the water. But you can bet your false
teeth that the Adventurers boss the Caledonia
now. What are we going to do ? ”
“ Take the ship back, most certainly,” said
Jack. “It is our ship, and anyhow we can play
with science to some extent as well as the
Adventurers. After we are in full command
again, I expect we’ll have to fight another crowd
of those gentlemen, for we’ve just left them in
the native village.”
“All right,” said Smith cheerily, “the more
the merrier. Shall we climb trees and pot the
beggars off as they come ? I’m good for any
number myself.”
“We’ll not climb any trees,” growled Crinkled
Charlie, “ We’re men not monkeys; and we’ll
do our fighting as men should,”
O O . }}
“ But we’ll use all the strategy we can devise,
put in Charlie. “My uncle is great on strategy,
I believe.”
“ Oh, yes,” said the Crinkled one. “He often
said that the pen was mightier than the sword,
but that strategy was a good bit more useful
than even the best gold-mounted fountain pen.
Let’s hear your brilliant idea.”
“ I haven’t any,” Charlie admitted, “ but I
thought we might think out some plan. The
people on board cannot know we exist, and likely
they are only watching against natives now.
Couldn’t we get on board without their knowledge
and set our own fellows free ? ”


“You forget we’re natives ourselves to all
appearances ? ” said Jack. “lam half inclined to
vote for stealing the launch and going out to the
Defiance."
“ No,” Henderson broke in. “ We’ll try
Andrew Macalister’s kind of game. Who is the
bravest man amongst us \ Let him w r alk boldly
up the gangway and create a diversion which
will allow the others to get on board by other
means. The sole object, of course, is to free our
own people, and then we’ll renew the fight if
necessary.”
“ Right,” exclaimed Charlie. “ You are the
bravest man here yourself, Mr. Henderson. I
propose that while you engage the deck watch in
more or less friendly conversation, always
remembering you are a native, Jack and I will
swim out and get on board by other means.
Perhaps Mr. Crinkled Charlie, and Mr. Smith
will do the same, and while one of us can go
through a saloon port-hole and inform Captain
Chester and the others that we are on duty, the
rest can set about getting command of the deck
by any means that presents itself.”
“ Come on, then,” cried Jack impatiently.
“ The village raiders will be here at any time,
and we simply must get back the ship, or we can
never meet Mr. Macalister. I’ll tackle the port-
hole business, if no one else wants the job, and
surely you others can do the rest if Mr. Henderson
gathers all the deck hands around him.”
“ Just a moment!” said Smith. “I want to


make sure Crinkled Charlie has tied those beggars
in real scientific fashion.”
“If you can teach me anything about that
business, I’ll let you tie me,” growled the sailor.
“ Let’s get a move on.”
Thus it happened that a few minutes after
four men had entered the warm water, Henderson
approached the plank gangway and walked up to
the deck. He calculated that he had given the
others enough of a start to allow them to be able
to take advantage of the diversion he would
cause. And he had made no mistake. Even as
he stepped on board the deck he knew so well,
Jack was pulling himself through one of the port-
holes assisted by Crinkled Charlie, who seemed
to be as much at home in the water as on shore.
And while he stood wondering why he had not
been challenged, his other comrades had
clamboured up behind the ship’s boats and were
waiting for the signal to begin their work.
But none came, so each set about his duties on
his own account. Henderson was perhaps the
most surprised of all, because he expected, and
was prepared to have, a very bad time, while his
younger comrades only saw an adventure in their
scheme veiy pleasing to them, and Crinkled
Charlie was absolutely indifferent. The stalwart,
brown-skinned, kilted officer ran lightly along
the deck towards the chart-room and no man
opposed his passage. The ship was apparently
deserted except for the couple of men he could
see on the bridge, and one forward, and one aft.


He vaulted over the bridge rail, and seized one
of the men by the throat. For an instant the man
struggled, but the next he was lying helpless and
still. Henderson knew how to handle men ! The
second man turned when he heard the sound made
by his falling comrade, and his action was prompt.
“ Niggers! ” he ejaculated, drawing his
revolver, “ I was expecting Andrew Macalister.”
He raised his weapon and the click of the
hammer going back was heard by Henderson as
plainly as if it had been an alarm bell. But the
sham native did not hesitate. He threw himself at
the feet of the shooter, and the bullet went over
his head, and before another shot could be fired
the man was lying beside his comrade, inert and
silent. But the single shot had done its work,
and now men w T ere pouring through the com-
panion way, and from the engine-room entrance,
and the forecastle. The sight of a native on the
bridge was more than they could understand,
but when that native showed he was armed with
the very latest of firearms, and knew 7 how 7 to use
them, the remarks made were many and perhaps
picturesque, and a general rush w r as made to
capture him.
Meanwhile, he blazed away apparently un-
concernedly, half sheltered behind the compass
stand, and almost entirely hidden by the bridge
wind screen. And for a native he was a remark-
ably fine shot, though, strangely enough he
aimed to disable his assailants only. Still, they
stormed the bridge, and the gallant officer w 7 as
299


eventually laid low under the weight of a dozen
men. But the fight seemed to be still going on,
although he was out of it, and spiteful barks
resembling whip-cracks resounded from all parts
of the ship.
“Mine Faderland!” exclaimed one man.
“ Dis ship vas full of natives ! See, dere vos von
over dere. Shoot him quick ! Ah, too late ! He
has dropped poor Antonio ! ”
“There’s another blamed nigger behind that
boat, too, I’m sure,” cried another man. “ Rush
him, mates ! ”
The men did rush the place whence someone
was shooting with unfailing accuracy, but they
found only a dozen discarded cartridges.
Charlie had removed to another point of vantage,
and Smith and Crinkled Charlie kept up the fight
from behind some coils of rope. The strange,
one-sided battle proceeded, and the men who
controlled the Caledonia for the time were as
nervous as children. Every little while a spurt
of flame from the darkness heralded another well-
aimed shot, and just as surely another man sub-
sided with a bullet through his leg. Evidently
the shooters did not desire to kill their opponents
or their bullets would have found destinations
elsewhere.
“ Come on, bhoys ! ” yelled a big Irishman.
“ There cyant be more than three or four of the
niggers. Let’s rush the place where the next
shot comes from. Oh ! ” He flopped to the deck
and spoke eloquently in terse and emphatic


language: the first shot had rendered him in-
O O ’ _ _ .
capable of taking part in any immediate rush,
and the supposed native who had fired it was
Crinkled Charlie. And by this time Henderson
had commenced to take an active interest in
things again. He realised that he was not
drawing all the attention he thought necessary
to give his comrades a chance, but he was con-
siderably surprised that he was not handled
more roughly by his opponents.
Then, suddenly, the full lights of the ship
were switched on, and the deck shone out as if
in daylight. In the full glare of an arc lamp
Sir James stepped out from the companion way
and gazed around. He was smoking a cigar,
and he appeared to be as cool as an iceberg.
For the time, the warfare ceased.
“ Really, gentlemen,” he said, addressing all
within hearing, “ this noise is unbearable.
Can’t you contrive to arrange your differences
without rousing the whole ship ? AVhat will the
gentlemen who belong to this craft, who are
temporarily our prisoners, think ? ”
“ Good old Sir James! ” roared someone.
“Just give your orders as of old and we’ll soon
see that the noise stops.”
“Yes, you take command, and we’ll eat the
natives,” cried another, and a general shout of
approval followed the man’s words.
Sir James removed his cigar and glanced
O o
around interestedly. “ Gentlemen,” he began
slowly, “ I owe you an apology. I looked upon


you. as merely the paid crew of the Defiance,
and I never expected you to take any undue
risks on behalf of my comrades and myself.
The fact that you have captured this ship without
the help of any of the Syndicate which employs
you is something that, believe me, will be remem-
bered, But, gentlemen, I cannot tell you what
to do; I am a prisoner here in the hands
of the owners, and I have given my word that I
consider myself such. Had 1 dreamt that you
could have effected this coup, naturally I should
have reserved my right to escape, but as it is I
can only ask of you to make less noise and
behave decently until my comrades come along
to make terms. They, as you know, are annex-
ing the native village now.”
“ Please retire to your cabin, Sir James,” broke
in a voice as calmly as the Adventurer Chiefs
own, “ or you may be accidentally hurt in the little
matter now about to start.” A crowd of the
Caledonia s own men had come out on deck.
“ Ah, Captain Chester, I am glad to see you
on deck again. How did you manage to escape ?
And all your men, too ! ”
“ Qh, we’re here all right, thanks to those
boys you like so much, and in a few seconds we
will begin shooting down all people on board
this ship who do not belong to it, or who are
not our —er —guests, and this time we’ll shoot
with business intentions.” Captain Chester was
certainly explicit.
“ Please allow me to offer my services as


mediator, Captain. I think all differences could
be settled easily without blood-spilling. These
gentlemen believe they are only retaliating upon
3 T ou for stranding the Defiance while they were
—well—asleep, and if we came to an agreement
much future trouble would be avoided. I have
been informed, I may say, that this island has
already been annexed by members of the
Syndicate to which I belong, and I tremble for
your comfort should the successful force return
here and find us in a state of war. We concede
to you the pearl banks; we did not really want
them, although working them would have meant
much as proof of actual possession of these
islands ; and if you will accept the fact that this
island is now part of the German Empire, all
our joint troubles are over and we can honestly
wish each other the best of luck.”
“ Well accept nothing but unconditional
surrender on the part of those—those gentlemen
of yours,” Captain Chester cried.
“ But, my dear Captain, you surely do not
realise the position of matters. We are the
victors, not you ; and we’ll be reinforced by the
real members of the Syndicate before sunrise.
Your position is hopeless, for you can’t expect
any help, and even a German cruiser, if she
could get here, would take our side.”
“Do listen to reason, and save bloodshed,”
cried Mr. Higgins coming out on deck with a
very large cigar in his mouth. “You remember
the poet’s words:


“ ‘ We stood on the bridge at midnight,
While the ship was striking the rock ;
And the engineer being moonstruck,
We all got quite a shock.’ ”
A man stole up behind C. P. H. and pulled
him backwards upon the deck. “We can
stand as much as most people,” he said, “ but
we can’t stand your poetry.” Most of the
others laughed; they were certainly a good-
natured crowd of lawless people, and worry
sat lightly upon them.
But Captain Chester was stern. “ I am act-
ing for another,” he said, “ and my duty is plain
however unpleasant. Tell your men, Sir James,
to lay down their arms and march past me in
single file, or I shall give the order to shoot
them down as pirates.”
“ Eet ees veil to know ze gallant Capitaine’s
thoughts,” laughed a tall, bearded man, but I
dink he unt his people vould pe mooch better
asleep vonce more. Take dis, mine friendts, unt
don’t waken for so long or soon as you can
help.” The speaker raised a small, rubber-like
ball and was on the point of throwing it among
the Caledonia s men, who at once broke away
for cover, for well they knew it was the gas-
laden receptacle which had meant their downfall
before. But the man didn’t throw it. A pig-
tailed figure glided behind him, from nowhere,
so far as anyone saw, and wrenched the bomb
from his hands.


“No wanty sleepy.’’ the Celestial said.
“ Andlew Makalistal no’ likey find all sleepy
when he come alongy fo’ bleakfast.”
“Wun Lung!” shouted Captain Chester.
“ Come here at once ! ”
“You blamed chow!” roared several of
the other crowd. “ We’ll cut off your pig-
tail.”
“ The first man who moves will be shot
through the head,” remarked Henderson from
the bridge, and his revolvers gleamed ominously
in the glare of the electric light. For a moment
there was silence. All knew what the bomb
contained, but all also were aware that Henderson
could shoot straight, and anyway they were not
paid to commit suicide, which any movement on
their part would mean.
“ You fellows no likee, no takee,” smiled Wun
Lung pleasantly. “I no’ wanty myself.” He
flung the little ball violently upon the deck, and
ran towards his own people laughing merrily.
The ball burst with a slight explosive sound,
and a dense cloud of pungent fumes arose and
spread rapidly in the vicinity, almost obscuring
from sight those who stood near.
“ The game is yours in the meantime, Captain,”
said Sir James. “ Those fellows are now helpless
for at least an hour, but if the fumes come this
way your people, as you know, will be just as
bad.”
“Get aft, boys,” ordered Captain Chester.
“ The morning sea breeze has just started and
20 305


we’ll be safe there. But I want a couple of
volunteers to remove Mr. Henderson.
“ I’m all right,” said that officer, limping along
the deck towards the group. “ I ran when 1
saw Wun Lung burst the thing, but Ive got
more lead in my system than is good for a
Marathon runner.” ,
“ I’ll dig out the lead,” said Sir James. 1 m
a bit of a mineralogist if not a surgeon. But
by Jupiter! I like those youngsters of yours,
Captain! Just look at them; they ought to
be members of my little company.” Jack
Charlie, and Smith now partly washed, and
wearing trousers, had run forward when the
aas-cloud had lifted and were now removing
all weapons from the sleeping men. It was
indeed a wonderfully soporific gas that the
second engineer of the Defiance had made his
servant, and those under its influence were
entirely unconscious of what was happening
around them, even as the Caledonia's own men
had been some hours previously. Mr. Higgins
sat up and murmured some words about “ gentle
sleep” but no one paid any attention to him,
and Fiji Fred finally lifted him in his arms
and carried him below. He feared, doubtless,
that he would begin his deadly work if not
checked.
And the first flashes of dawn shot across the
heavens, the stars paled, and the glowing
mountain top became less vivid in colour. But
no signs of the island annexation party, or ot


the presence of natives were evident; and as the
forest fire had not yet swept down to the water,
it was a fair assumption that it had been diverted
by the morning sea breeze and was devastating
the island in the opposite direction.
Suddenly Wun Lung appeared beside the
Caledonia’s officers on the after deck : “ Wun
Lung tink some fellow wanty speaky you Horn
somewhele, ’ he said, addressing the Captain.
“ Little devil in glass case speaky muchy but no’
say anyting. Spalks fly plenty muchy.”
£ ' He means the wireless instrument is in
action,” said Jack excitedly. “I’ll go and see;
maybe it’s a message from Mr. Macalister.”
He rushed below, followed by Charlie, and
entered the cabin in which the wireless
telegraphic installation was fixed. The needles
on the dials were in violent motion and at once
Jack spelled out “C.Q.D.”
“That’s the code meaning ‘Called by Wireless
cried Charlie. “Answer quick, Jack, but be
careful. It might be a German cruiser that is
calling, and possibly it is the Defiance that is
wanted.”
Jack switched on the intensity coils and
tapped off an answering signal, and very soon
the needle on the dial beside him began to move
mysteriously again. “ Caledonia ,” it laboured out,
and Jack signalled that the message from space
was being received by that ship. Then
followed: “I hope to breakfast with you on
board this morning. This is sent from the


Defiance but 1 am leaving now for the shore.
Macahster. . j ■u i
With a yell of delight Jack tapped back
acknowledgment of receipt, and asked how the
caller had come to be on board the Defiance
But no answer was given, and although Jack
kept on calling for the Defiance for a long time
no response came. It was now close on sunrise,
and getting one of the crew to stand by the
instrument to watch for other messages the lads
went on deck and informed Captain Chester of
the news they had received. He laughed, and
told them they had been tricked by someone
still on board the Defiance, for certainly Andrew
Macalister had not been on board that ship with-
out the Adventurers knowing it. Sir James
assured the lads that the Captain spoke truly.
“ He has not put a foot on the Defiance since he
left it after our great quarrel,” he said. “ ihere
is not one of us who wouldn’t spot him at once
even though he was acting the role of Chinese
cook, or a trading native. Old Mac was a first-
class hand at those sorts of games and we ail
knew it.” . ,
“ But couldn’t he have gone on board alter you
left the ship?” asked Charlie. /‘A man could
nearly wade out to where she is lying were it
not for the sharks. The Defiance must have
been deserted last night, too, and surely to a
man like Mr. Macalister, the rest would be
6aS “ Anything is easy to Andrew Macalister, my


boy, except his confounded conscience. If he
had not been troubled with one of those strange
things, I don’t suppose you should have been
here, and the Adventurers would be in possession
of much natural German wealth in return for
their services.”
“ But you are a Briton yourself? ” said Jack.
“ How can you act as you are doing against
your own country ? ”
“ The Adventurers are of no nationality, my
boy, though members of most races are among
their number. lam British born, it is true, and
so are several others ; but there are also many
Americans, Germans, Japanese, Russians, French-
men, Greeks, and others amongst us, and as
Britain wouldn’t deal with us we had therefore
to make terms with the Power that would.
Possibly you know that Andrew Macalister was
once our Chief, but he was too much of an
Empire-building Briton, and—well—he left us,
though we all still like him, and—fear him.
But there comes the sun now, and I hope break-
fast will soon be ready, for I’m very hungry as
the result of this all-night experience. Captain
Chester, if I were you I should collect all those
sleeping beauties as soon as possible and place
them where they cannot harm you. I cannot
give my word for their conduct; they are only
paid men ; but I willingly remain answerable for
my comrades, the Gentlemen of the Twentieth
Century Adventurers, whom I expect to see at
any moment now. By the way, can anyone


oblige me with a match; my cigar has gone
out ? ” , ,
Mr. Dixon handed Sir James a matchbox, and
then departed with a dozen men to attend to the
asphyxiated crew of the Dejiauce. Wun Lung
and Ah Sing at the same time began to prepare
breakfast, and Crinkled Charlie, Henderson, and
some others examined their wounds casually to
see what damage they had suffered. Captain
Chester and Mr. Dixon had already forgotten
theirs. „ ,
The sun shot up over the edge of the eastern
sea and the world was tinged with the glory °f
its golden rays. Bird life awoke, and the forest
with the morning song of parrots and other
feathered denizens of the brightly-hued foliage.
But no Adventurers appeared, and in time the
men of the Caledonia began to care little
whether they ever came or not. “ What does it
matter to us ? ” growled a big fireman. “We
can fight the beggars if they are nasty, and if
they try any of the sleeping sickness tricks on
us, 1 guess our youngsters know as much science
as they do and will teach us how to play the
same game.”
In time eight bells rang out, and the men
went below to breakfast. The saloon breakfast
was not until 8.30, and Captain Chester and
most of those privileged to dine therein stripped
and bathed in the river. They were very much
refreshed thereby, but had scarcely got into their
clothes when a warning shout arose from the


man posted on the end of the gangway. Next
moment an army of powerful-looking and fully
armed natives appeared in the clearing. Their
Chief was with them, and they glanced only very
casually at the steamer. Evidently they were
not greatly impressed with the white man’s
“ fiery canoe,” and doubtless, thought it would
be theirs when they wished. They walked
round the pearling tables, and inspected the
block-house with some show of interest, but
those on board the Caledonia noted that some
of the ugliest looking warriors were not so
indifferent to the presence of the ship as appeared
to be the case. In fact, the redoubtable Chief
himself was observed by the boys to be examining
her lines critically, while his men were disport-
ing themselves in the water,
o , t _
“ I say, Captain,” said Sir James. “ I confess
to being somewhat anxious concerning the fate
of my comrades. After all they are white men,
you know, and they are cultured gentlemen. I
understand they meant to annex that fellow’s
village during the night, but neither he nor his
O O O 7
people look as if they had been beaten in a
fight” „
“ No,” Mr. Dixon admitted, “ I must say they
give me the impression that they had been the
winners, and that they now think they can lick
creation. We have no quarrel with them, though,
and they are surely at liberty to inspect our work
as long as they steal nothing.”
“ But don’t you think it would be a fair


thing to ask that Chief if he has eaten my
comrades or not ? We would do that much, at
least, for you.”
“We will inquire,” Captain Chester said. “ I
know the language of those parts and—Hullo !
What’s wrong with Wun Lung ? Lie low, men,
and keep the natives covered with your rifles ;
they can’t do much damage to us here. Confound
that Chinaman ! ”
Wun Lung had run down the plank which
formed the sole shore connection laughing like
a child, and yabbering in Chinese. He rushed
up to the great Chief and all expected to witness
a tragedy.
Captain Chester seized a rifle. “ I hate taking
life,” he said, “but I doubt that Chiefs will be
laid to my charge. He’ll strangle poor Wun
Lung without an effort.”
“Put down your rifle, Captain,” Sir James
laughed. “ That Chief is as soft hearted as
you or I. See, he is coming on deck.”
“ Look, Charlie ! ” cried Jack, “ he knows Wun
Lung ! Why, he is shaking hands with him, and
grinning all over his face ! ”
The mighty Chief strode up the plank gang-
way, and Wun Lung ran round the tables with
his fingers in the riffles. He did not seem to be
afraid of the natives, and indeed, some of them
sat down and laughed hilariously when they ob-
served his trick.
Meanwhile the Chief had reached the deck,
and he stood and glanced around interestedly.


Signs of the night fight were everywhere, and
he apparently read the evidences correctly, for
he smiled. Captain Chester limped to meet him
and in his best Mota language welcomed the
great Chief to all that the Caledonia could offer.
“ Good be your sailing, and happy be the results
of your ventures in love and war,” he said, as
nearly as can be translated. This was the
customary greeting among Chiefs, though the
Captain didn’t add the words which signified
that he hoped “ many heads would grace his
tapoo house.”
The Chief grinned and murmured the word
which meant he was friendly disposed.
“ Let not your soul be small,” continued the
Captain using the next expected greeting which,
stripped of its adornments, means “ don’t be
afraid.” The Chief listened in silence and the
Captain went on most learnedly, as the boys
who had joined the party thought. Then, to the
horror of all onlookers, the grim warrior silently
produced a formidable revolver from among the
long fibres of his kilt. For a moment he seemed
to hesitate and his eyes glanced around the deck.
Captain Chester as yet had not perceived the
action.
“Look out, Captain!” cried Mr. Dixon, and
Sir James laughed as if greatly amused. He
had also noticed that two men had just emerged
from the engine-room also hiding revolvers, and
with eyes fixed upon the native Chief. They
were not members of the Caledonia's crew.


They were two of the cleverest engineers in the
services of the Adventurers and probably had
been in the engine-room while their comrades
had been sent to sleep. They walked along the
deck making mysterious signs to Sir James on
the poop deck and which he seemed to answer
disapprovingly. They were now only a few
yards distant from the gangway where the
Captain was still airing his knowledge of the
great Mota tongue, and to which the Chief was
paying no attention.
Suddenly the men raised their weapons, but
simultaneously the Chief’s hand was also raised,
and Captain Chester sprang back as a couple of
shots whizzed over his shoulder from the Chiefs
revolver.
“ You traitorous old cannibal,” he roared
angrily, springing at the Chief. “IH teach
you some manners.” But he wasn t quite able ,
the wounds he had received during the night
had weakened him, and muttering some words
in his ear that made the Captain even less
capable of resistance, the Chief laid him gently
on his back on the deck. Of course, the Captain
did not know that the Chief had not fired point
blank at him, but the two men knew where he
had aimed when their weapons went spinning
in the air, and their wrists felt like as if a red
hot iron had been pushed into them. Y ith
yells of fury, and exclamations in their native
languages, they rushed at the Chief with long
gleaming knives in their left hands. The C hief


had little chance now, for he was still bending
over the Captain ■who had so unfortunately
taken away his attention. Mr. Henderson fired
at the risk of hitting the Captain; and Sir
James also sent a couple of shots at the
maddened men. C. P. H. and Mr. Dixon had
rushed along the deck to the assistance of the
Chief, and others ran from all points also. But
they would be too late, and as yet the Chief
did not appear to be aware of his danger. Jack
and Charlie were, however; they had seen and
understood the Chiefs actions, and they felt
they could not allow a gentlemanly native like
him to suffer for his confidence in coming on
board a British ship.
“ You tackle the fellow with the moustache,”
Jack said to Charlie, “ and I’ll attend to the
Russian chap.”
The men, evidently sons of Eastern Europe
or Asia Minor, were just on the point of leaping
upon the Chief—they did not seem to be con-
cerned with Captain Chester at all—when, like
tornadoes, the two lads hurled themselves upon
them and bore them to the deck. The men
yelled and cursed, and struggled violently, but
the Chief was now prepared to meet all enemies,
and C. P. H. and Mr. Dixon reached the spot
next moment and relieved the boys of their
prostrate charges.
The Chief raised Captain Chester to his feet
again and smiled sweetly. “I’m vera hungry,”
he said in a decided Scotch accent. “ A wee


bit o’ breakfast would be greatly appreciated,
Captain.”
“ Macalister! ” yelled Mr. Dixon, as the
Captain gripped the Chiefs hand, and a mighty
shout arose from all the Caledonia's men, and
also from some of the natives on shore.
The Chief grinned.
“Who do you imagine it could be?” asked
Sir James, coming forward. “ I knew him the
moment I saw him, as did also those two men
of ours. You ought to be ashamed of yourself,
Andrew Macalister, you, a Scotchman, masquer-
ading without any clothes on ”
“ Needs must, Sir James, when the —the
Adventurers drive. But you’ve lost this trick,
and those islands are now British. Not that
I care, or that Britain wants them, but because
I couldna’ stand the idea o’ my old comrades
selling themselves to any Power.”
“ But our annexation force, Mac ? ” cried Sir
James anxiously.
“Is quite safe, though perhaps no’ vera
comfortable. You see, we knew the boys were
coming, and were ready for them, and when you
give me your word that you admit you’ve lost
the game, they’ll be set free, entirely unharmed,
but I’ve no doubt vera hungry.”
“ Well, Mac, I give you my word that I
accept defeat,” said Sir James, offering his hand ;
“and, after all, I don’t know but that I’m glad.
I never felt whole hearted in the idea of our
people interfering in political matters, but the


scheme promised adventure, and therefore I
agreed.”
“If you are Mr. Macalister, sir,” broke in
Charlie, “ may I introduce myself as your
nephew ? This is my chum, and we both came
out to help you to work the pearl beds, although
we didn’t know your face was black.”
“ And your own faces are no’ just vera white,
my laddies, though I’ve nae doubt soap an’ hot
water will help to bring them to that state as
much as mine. I’m vera proud o’ ye, my boys.
I’ve had an eye on ye all the time, an’ I’ve seen
ye among the tree branches, although ye maybe
didna think so. I may tell you that most o’ the
tierce fighting ye saw an’ heard was harmless.
It was all done for effect, and when I saw that
my old comrades were not frightened by noises,
I fired the forest. But give us a shake o’ your
paws an’ we’ll talk things in general after
breakfast.”
“ But did you send off that wireless this
morning from the Defiance?" Jack asked as
familiarly as if he had known the great Macalister
all his life.
“ I did; some of my men and I went out to
her and they are on her now getting her off the
banks you so kindly drove her on. But, laddies,
ye’ll no’ leave me now, I hope ; I’ve tried ye gey
severely an’ ye have proved yourselves worthy,
an’ I see you havena’ done vera badly with pearl
shell. Ye’ve played a vera considerable part in
making this island British and ”


bit o’ breakfast would be greatly appreciated,
Captain.”
“ Macalister! ” yelled Mr. Dixon, as the
Captain gripped the Chief’s hand, and a mighty
shout arose from all the Caledonia s men, and
also from some of the natives on shore.
The Chief grinned.
“Who do you imagine it could be?” asked
Sir James, coming forward. “ I knew him the
moment I saw him, as did also those two men
of ours. You ought to be ashamed of yourself,
Andrew Macalister, you, a Scotchman, masquer-
ading without any clothes on ”
“ Needs must, Sir James, when the—the
Adventurers drive. But you’ve lost this trick,
and those islands are now British. Not that
I care, or that Britain wants them, but because
I couldna’ stand the idea o’ my old comrades
selling themselves to any Power.”
“ But our annexation force, Mac ? ” cried Sir
James anxiously.
“Is quite safe, though perhaps no’ vera
comfortable. You see, we knew the boys were
coming, and were ready for them, and when you
give me your word that you admit you’ve lost
the game, they’ll be set free, entirely unharmed,
but I’ve no doubt vera hungry.”
“ Well, Mac, I give you my word that I
accept defeat,” said Sir James, offering his hand ;
“and, after all, I don’t know but that I’m glad.
I never felt whole hearted in the idea of our
people interfering in political matters, but the


scheme promised adventure, and therefore I
agreed.”
“If you are Mr. Macalister, sir,” broke in
Charlie, “ may I introduce myself as your
nephew ? This is my chum, and we both came
out to help you to work the pearl beds, although
we didn’t know your face was black.”
“ And your own faces are no’ just vera white,
my laddies, though I’ve nae doubt soap an’ hot
water will help to bring them to that state as
much as mine. I’m vera proud o’ ye, my boys.
I’ve had an eye on ye all the time, an’ I’ve seen
ye among the tree branches, although ye maybe
didna think so. I may tell you that most o’ the
fierce fighting ye saw an’ heard was harmless.
It was all done for effect, and when I saw that
my old comrades were not frightened by noises,
I fired the forest. But give us a shake o’ your
paws an’ we’ll talk things in general after
breakfast.”
“But did you send off that wireless this
morning from the Defiance f” Jack asked as
familiarly as if he had known the great Macalister
all his life.
“ I did; some of my men and I went out to
her and they are on her now getting her off the
banks you so kindly drove her on. But, laddies,
ye’ll no’ leave me now, I hope ; I’ve tried ye gey
severely an’ ye have proved yourselves worthy,
an’ I see you havena’ done vera badly with pearl
shell. Ye’ve played a vera considerable part in
making this island British and ”


“ You are as long winded as ever, Mac,” put
in C. P. H. “Of course, the blamed mud bank is
British. Your natives in possession are of that
nationality, I suppose ? and your people of the
Caledonia have been first to establish any
industry in the place.”
“ Three o’ my warriors are British Australians,”
smiled Macalister, “one is an Irishman from
Dublin, two are from Boston, and one from Berlin,
and one from Constantinople ; the rest are real
natives borrowed from a friend o’ mine who is
a New Hebridean Chief. I may say 1 had
many friends among you fellows, but those two
fellows just removed below were my only enemies
that I know, and, of course, they spotted me the
moment they saw me.”
“We all did, Mac,” said Sir James. “We
all know you and your powers of originality,
and the Gentlemen of the Twentieth Century
Adventurers are now disbanded, unless you take
over the Presidency again.”
“We can’t make the thing pay honestly, I fear.
“Yes, we can, uncle,” cried Charlie. “We
can get hundreds of tons of pearl shell from
the surrounding lagoons, and we’ve already got
thousands of pounds worth of pearls.”
“ Vera well; if the boys will stay with me
I’ll lead ye back into the paths of righteousness,
but I’m gey hungry. Hullo ! Smith, ye young
rascal, have you got any sense yet ? I’m vera
pleased to see you here, Mr. Wilson, and I hope
your face will yet acquire the art of smiling.


Captain Cricklewood and Fiji Fred and C. P, H.
I am proud o’ ye, and you’ll meet all your old
comrades very soon; they’re all safe and sound
except for some wee bit cracks my natives gave,
accidentally ”
“One question, Mac,” broke in Sir James;
“ our fellows got on your track somewhere out
among the lagoons around here, and the Defiance
followed the old Pioneer into a New Hebrides
port, and sent two men on board to get into
touch with you. But you had disappeared, and
we thought that the typhoon which just then
struck the islands had got you. Now, we know
it didn’t. Where did you go ? ”
Macalister smiled. “ I landed at Port Vila,
and called upon my old friend, Chief Tamai, in
the interior—that’s the gentleman standing near
Mun Lung on shore. I arranged a scheme with
him which meant the borrowing of some warriors
on behalf of His Majesty the King of the
Britains and Britons throughout the world,
and some other things. I then went over to
Sydney on a French boat and enlisted Captain
Chester, Lieutenant Henderson, and some others
whom you know, in the same service. 1 also
got into cable communication with my nephew
in London, and entrusted certain matters to him.
After watching you fellows for a bit, I rejoined
Lamai, painted my skin, and came here, knowing
that Chester, Henderson, my nephew, and the
others could do the rest. They have done so,
Sir James ”


“Just allow me to yank out a line, boys, and
I’ll promise never to make poetry again,” pleaded
C. P. H. “It begins, ‘ Rule Britannia
“And let it end there, old friend,” said
Macalister, “unless you can also add in a
word for the land which hies the Stars and
Stripes. But just wait a minute, I see that
my old friend Lieutenant Henderson of His
Britannic Majesty’s Navy has just run up a
Union Jack on shore, so while waiting on a
much-needed breakfast I’ll just play a wee bit
tune on my pipes to make things in order.”
From the folds of his kilt the Chief brought
forth his strange pipes and “ God Save the King
was sounded out erratically on the morning air.
The Caledonia's men added their voices, then
cheered lustily, and the Adventurers on deck
joined. And the hag that braved a Thousand
Years hoated proudly on a pole above the pearl-
ing tables, and Wun Lung and the natives
danced around.
THE END
LORIMEK AND CHALMERS, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH.


S. W. PARTRIDGE & CO.’S
CATALOGUE
POPULAR ILLUSTRATED BOOKS.
Classified according to price.
LONDON: S. W. PARTRIDGE & CO.. LTD.


6s. each.
Large Crown Bvo, Cloth Boards , gilt top.
The Singer of the Kootenay : A Tale of To-day. By Robert
E. Knowles. Author of •• St. Cuthbert's of the West,” etc.
A Wife Worth Winning. By C. E. C. Weigall. 344 pages.
Twelve Illustrations.
The Letter Killeth. By A. C. Inchbold. 31c pages.
Japan : From the Old to the New. By R. G. Webster, LL.B.,
J.P. With 16 Illustrations on art paper. Demy Bvo.
ss. each.
“ Empire ” Library.
Demy Bvo. 432 pages. Illustrations in Colour. Handsomely hound in
* Cloth Boards, Olivine Edges.
“Not Cricket!” By Harold Avery.
Under the Wolf’s Fell. By Dorethea Moore.
„ The Boy Bondsman; or, Under the Lash. By Kent Carr.
In the Mahdi’s Grasp. By Geo, Manville Fenn.
“Not Out !” A Public-School Story. By Kent Carr.
Playing the Game ! A Story of School Life. By the same
Author.
Steve Young; or, The Voyage of the “Hvalross” to the Icy
Seas. By Geo. Manville Fenn.
Trapper Dan. A Story of the Backwoods. By Geo. Manville
Fenn.
A Lady of Mettle. By Dorothea Moore.
A Wilful Maid. By Evelyn Everett-Green.
/ Tested !By Amy Le Feuvre. Large crown Bvo. Cloth boards.
To Win or to Die : A Tale of the Klondyke Gold Craze. By
Geo. Manville Fenn. Large Bvo. Fully Illustrated. Cloth boards,
gilt edges.
Cuthbert Hartington; A Tale of Two Sieges. By G. A. Henty.
Large Bvo. Six Illustrations. Cloth boards, gilt edges.
The Two Baby Ions; or, the Papal Worship proved to be the
Worship of Nimrod and his Wife. With 61 Illustration 3 from
Nineveh, Babylon, Egypt. Pompeii, etc. By the late Alexander
Hisiop. Demy Bvo. Cloth extra.


New ss. Library.
Demy Bvo. Of special bulk. Well Illustrated. Bound in Handsome Cloth
Boards with full gilt Edges. 5/- each.
The Strait Gate. By Annie S. Swan.
' Mark Desborough’s Vow. By the same Author.
Tiie Better Part By the same Author.
The Three-Cornered House. By Evelyn Everett-Green.
Vashti Savage. By Sarah Tytler.
CU Hemy tHartington: A Tale of Two Sie § es - By Geo. A.
The Lady of the Forest. By L. T. Meade,
rue unto Death : A Story of Russian Life. By E. F. Pollard.
3s. 6d. each.
Darge Crown Bvo. Coloured and other illustrations. Cloth Boards, with gilt tot.
A Compleat Sea Cook. By Frank T. Bullen.
' P iGk and Dan : A Book Boys and Tom-
hoys. By Sir James Yoxall, M.P. *
Th ?nr^ ar i g ° u n e ’ or ’ The Lost Chief - A Story of Adven-
,ru 1 n the S ° Uth Seas ‘ B y Robert Macdonald. V
' iTP 0 B f )nda S e 0f Riches - By Annie S. Swan.
' V at: Shall it Profit; or, Roden’s Choice. By Annie S. Swan.
The Girls Next Door. By Christina Gowans Whyte.
o° yS . n°° k ° f Chlvalr y* By Hammond Hall.
The Boys Book of the Navy. By Cuthbert Hadden.
Through Surging Waters. By Harry Davies.
A Girl’s Stronghold. By E. F. Pollard.
The Boy’s Book of the Sea. By W. H. Simmonds.
U Tom S ße o van COntraband * A St ° ry of Russian Tyranny. By
An Earl without an Earldom. By Scott Graham.
A “ ° ld FranCe> By Deborah Alcock -
Just Percv A % i° Ve ; % DaVid LyaU> Twdve Illustra tions.
Thl rt Y ‘r> ° f DiCtOD Schook By H - & Whiting.
CasaL a C nd r ne f? d H ° USe ' By Evel Everett-Green.
F. M. Cotton Walked Tale ° f the French Reformation. By


3s. 6d. each ( continued ).
The Story of the Bible. Arranged in Simple Style for Young
People . Demy Bvo. 620 pages. Eight beautiful pictures in
colours, and more than 100 other illustrations. Cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
Gilt edges, bevelled boards. 4s. 6d.
The Pilgrim’s Progress. By John Bunyan. Illustrated with 55
full-page and other Engravings. Crown 4to. Cloth extra, 3s. 6d.
Gilt edges, ss. Padded \\ atered Silk, 6s. 6d.
Partridge s Children s Annual.
Conducted by the Editor of “The Children’s Friend.”
A handsome and attractive production, with cover printed in 10 Colours and
Varnished 12 Full-page Pictures in Colour, and every page containing
artistic coloured Illustrations. Short Stories by all the well-known
writers. Paper Boards, Cloth Back, 3s. 6d.
2s. 6d. each.
“ Girls' Imperial Library
By Popular Authors. Large Crown Bvo. 330 page!s. Six Illustrations
printed in photo brown. Handsomely bound in Cloth Boards.
(Books marked with an asterisk are also bound with Gilt edges, 3s. each.)
Study Number Eleven : A Tale of Rilton School. By Mar-
garet Kilroy.
A Daughter of the West : or, Ruth Gwynnett, Schoolmistress.
By Morice Gerard.
The Lucas Girls; or, “ The Man of the Family.” By Dorothea
Moore.
The Probationer. By A. M. Irvine.
Margot’s Secret; or, The Fourth Form at Victoria College.
By Florence Bone.
Far Above Rubies. By C. E. C. Weigall, Author of “ A Wife
Worth Winning.”
Old Readymoney’s Daughter. By L. T. Meade.
*A Girl of the Fourth. A Story for School Girls. By A. M.
Irvine.
♦ Her Little Kingdom. By Laura A. Barter-Snow.
*Evan Grayle’s Daughters. By Isabel Suart Robson, Author
of "The Fortunes of Eight,” etc.
*The Lady of the Forest. By L. T. Meade.
♦Cliff House. A Story for School Girls. By A. M. Irvine.
The Ways of a Girl; or, The Story of One Year. By M. F.
Hutchinson.


2s. 6d, each [continued).
11 GIRLS' IMPERIAL LIBRARY” ( continued ).
1 hose Berkeley Girls. By Lillias Campbell Davidson.
*The Heart of Una Sackville. By Mrs. George de Horne Vaizey,
*Carol Carew ; or, An Act of Imprudence. By Evelyn Everett-
Green, Author of “ The Three-Cornered House,’ 1 etc.
Gladys’s Repentance ; or, Two Girls and a Fortune. By Edith
C. Kenj-on.
Ursula; or, A Candidate for the Ministry. By Laura A. Barter-
Snow.
*Molly : The Story of a Wayward Girl. By Harriet E. Colville.
Love’s Golden Thread. By Edith C. Kenyon.
A Golden Dawn ; or, The Heiress of St. Quentin, By Dorothea
Moore.
The Fortunes of Eight; or, The House in Harford Place. By
Isabel Suart Robson.
The Little Missis. By Charlotte Skinner.
A Girl s Battle. By Lillias Campbell Davidson.
*A Girl in a Thousand. By Edith C. Kenyon.
Monica’s Choice. By Flora E. Berry.
The “ True Grit ” Series.
Large Crown Bvo. 320 pages. Fully Illustrated. Handsomely Bound in
Cloth Boards.
(Books marked with an asterisk are also bound with Gilt edges, 3s. each.)
Out with the Buccaneers ; or, The Treasure of the Snake.
By Tom Bevan.
* The Castaways of Disappointment Island. By H. Escott-
Inman.
Cap n Nat s Treasure ; A Tale of Old Liverpool. By Robert
Leighton.
* The Secret Men. By Tom Bevan.
. J? 6 ; B ° y ’, S 4? 0f Greathear t Lincoln. By W. Francis Aitken.
Dick Dale, The Colonial Scout By Tom Bevan.
Heroes of the Animal World : True Stories of the Intelligence
of Animals and Birds. By Jennie Chappell.
By Summer Seas and Flowery Fields. Bv T. Carreras
The Wild Life of our Land. By T. Carreras. Uniform with
the above.
Nature in all her beauty and fascination is depicted in these
two books by word-pictures and charming coloured and other il-
lustrations.


2s. 6d. each [continued).
THE "TRUE GRIT" SERIES [continued).
Dead Man’s Land ; or, The Adventures of Certain and Un-
certain Whites and Blacks at Zimbambangwe, the Ancient Home
of Gold. By Geo. Manville Fenn.
Jungle and Stream ; or, The Adventures of Two Boys in Siam.
By Geo. Manville Fenn.
*“Sandfly ” ; or, In the Indian Days. By F. B. Forester.
*The Master of the Rebel First A Story of School Life. By
J. Howard Brown.
A Hero King ; A Story of the Days of King Alfred. By E. F.
Pollard.
Stirring Sea Fights. A Book for British Boys. By J. Cuthbert
Hadden.
Sappers and Miners ; or, The Flood Beneath the Sea. By Geo.
Manville Fenn.
*ln Honour’s Cause. By Geo. Manville Fenn.
The Hidden City : A Story of Central America. By Walter C.
Rhoades.
The Lion of Wessex; or, How Saxon Fought Dane. By Tom
Bevan.
The Scarlet Judges. A Tale of the Inquisition in the Nether-
lands. By Eliza F. Pollard.
By Seashore, Wood and Moorland. By Edward Step, F.L.S.,
Author of " Wayside Flowers,” etc.
*Rob Harlow’s Adventures : A Story of the Grand Chaco. By
George Manville Fenn.
A Boy of the First Empire. By Elbridge S. Brooks.
Smoking Flax. By Silas K. Hocking. Twelve Illustrations.
Walks and Talks. By T. Carreras. Large crown
Bvo. Many Illustrations. Cloth boards.
The Boy’s Life of Nelson. By J. Cuthbert Hadden, Large
Crown Bvo. 300 pages. Beautiful coloured frontispiece, and eight
illustrations on art paper.
In the Misty Seas. A Story of the Sealers of Behring Strait.
By Harold Bindloss.
Two Barchester Boys. A Tale of Adventure in the Malay
States. By K. M. Eady.
*True Grit : A Story of Adventure in West Africa. By Harold
Bindloss. Six Illustrations.
The Yellow Shield ; or, A Captive in the Zulu Camp. By
William Johnston. Six Illustrations.
Crag: A Tale of the Smuggling Days. By G. Man-
ville Fenn. Eight Illustrations by W. Rainey, R.I.


2s. 6d. each (continued).
THE “TRUE GRIT” SERIES [continued).
The Parting of the Ways. By J. L. Hornibrook.
The Crystal Hunters ; A Boy’s Adventure in the Higher Alps.
By G. Manville Fenn.
First in the Field. A Story of New South Wales. By G.
Manville Fenn. 416 pages.
From School to Castle. Illustrated. Large Crown Bvo. By
Charlotte Murray.
The Adventures of a Dodo. By G. E. Farrow. With 37
Illustrations by Willie Pogany. Cloth gilt.
Come, Break your Fast; Daily Meditations for a Year. Ely
Rev. Mark Guy Pearse. Large Crown Bvo. 554 pages. With
Portrait. Cloth boards.
The Earnest Life. By Silas K. Hocking. Crown Bvo. 192
pages. With portrait and autograph. Cloth boards.
A Young Man’s Mind. By J. A. Hammerton. Crown Bvo.
Cloth extra, gilt top.
The Book of Books. The Bible, its Marvellous History and
Triumphs. By Charles F. Bateman.
Our Rulers from William the Conqueror to Edward VII.
By J. Alexander. Foolscap 410. Cloth gilt.
The Great Siberian Railway; What I saw on my Journey.
By Dr. F. E. Clark. Crown Bvo. 213 pages. Sixty-five first-class
Illustrations on art paper, and a Map. Handsomely bound.
Chaplains at the Front. Incidents in the Life of a Chaplain
during the Boer War, 1899-1900. By Owen Spencer Watkins.
Ferrar Fenton s Translations of the Holy Scriptures
in Modern English.
Cloth, 2s. 6d. each tut. Paste Grain, 3s. 6d. each net.
Vol. I.—The Five Books of Moses.
Vol. II. —The History of Israel.
Vol. 111. —The Books of the Prophets.
Vol. IV, —The Psalms, Solomon, and Sacred Writers.
Vol. V. —The New Testament.
The Complete Bible in Modern English, Incorporating the
above five volumes. Cloth extra, gilt top. 10s. net.


2s. 6d. each {continued).
My Bible Picture Book. Contains 16 full-page coloured and
many other Illustrations. With descriptive stories from the Old
and New Testaments. Size n by 8 inches. In bright cloth binding.
Following Jesus : A Bible Picture Book for the Young. Size,
13J by 10 inches. Contains 12 beautifully coloured Old and New
Testament Scenes, with appropriate letterpress by D.J.D.
Brought to Jesus: A Bible Picture Book for Little Readers.
Contains 12 New Testament Scenes, printed in colours. Size,
13J by 10 inches. Handsome coloured boards,
Bible Pictures and Stories : Old and New Testament. In one
Volume. Bound in cloth boards, with 89 full-page Illustrations.
Potters : their Arts and Crafts. Historical, Biographical, and
Descriptive. By John C. Sparks and Walter Gandy. Crown Bvo.
Copiously Illustrated. Cloth extra.
Victoria : Her Life and Reign. By Alfred E. Knight. Crown
Bvo. 384 pages. Cloth extra, 2s. 6d. ; cloth, gilt edges, 3s. 6d.
2s. each.
The Home Library.
Crown Bvo. 320 pages. Handsome Cloth Covers. Fully Illustrated.
(Books marked with an asterisk are also bound with Gilt edges, 2s. 6d. each )
Miss Elizabeth’s Family. By Kent Carr.
Hope Glynne’s Awakening. By Jessie Goldsmith Cooper.
The Call of Honour. By C. F. Argyll-Saxby.
Agnes Dewsbury. By Laura A. Barter-Snow.
A Lady of High Degree. By Jennie Chappell.
Pepper & Co. A Story for Boys and Girls. By Esther E. Knock.
Comrades Three ! A Story of the Canadian Prairies. By Argyll
Saxby.
The Fighting Lads of Devon ; or, In the Days of the Armada.
By Wm. Murray Graydon.
The Two Henriettas. By Emma Marshall.
Old Wenyon’s Will. By John Ackworth.
*A Little Bundle of Mischief. By Grace Carlton.
*By Creek and Jungle: Three Chums in the Wilds of Borneo.
By John K. Leys.
*A Gentleman of England : A Story of the Days of Sir Philip
Sidney. By E. F. Pollard.
*Dorothy ; or, The Coombehurst Nightingale. By E. M. Alford.


2s. each ( continued ).
THE HOME LIBRARY {continu'd).
"Three Chums ; or, The Little Blue Heart. By E. M. Stooke.
Neath April Skies; or, Hope amid the Shadows. By Jennie
Chappell.
Under the Roman Eagles. By Amyot Sagon.
*He!ena’s Dower; or, A Troublesome Ward. By Eglanton
Thome.
True unto Death ; A Story of Russian Life. By E. F. Pollard.
By Bitter Experience : A Story of the Evils of Gambling. By
Scott Graham.
Love Conquereth ; or, The Mysterious Trespasser. By
Charlotte Murray.
White Ivory and Black, and other Stories of Adventure by Sea
and Land. By Tom Bevan, E. Harcourt Burrage, and John
Higginson.
The Adventures of Don Lavington ; or, In the Days of the
Press Gang. By G. Manville Fenn.
Roger the Ranger : A Story of Border Life among the Indians.
By E. F. Pollard.
Brave Brothers; or, Young Sons of Providence. By E. M. Stooke.
The Moat House; or, Celia’s Deceptions. By EleanoraH. Stooke.
The White Dove of Amritzir : A Romance of Anglo-Indian
Life. By E. F. Pollard.
Neta Lyall. By Flora E. Berry, Author of “In Small Comers,”
etc. Six Illustrations.
The Better Part. By Annie S. Swan.
Leaders into Unknown Lands. By A. Montefiore-Brice, F.G.S.
Lights and Shadows of Forster Square. By Rev. E. H.
Sugden, M.A.
The Martyr of kolin; A Story of the Bohemian Persecution.
By H. O Ward.
Moining Dew-Drops: A Temperance Text Book. By Clara
Lucas Balfour.
Mark Desborough’s Vow. By Annie S. Swan.
My Dogs in the Northland. ByEgerton R. Young. 288 pages.
The Stl ait Gate, By Annie S. Swan.
L nder the Sirdar s Flag. By William Johnston.
Alfred the Great : The Father of the English. By Jesse Page.


2s. each ( continued ).
Library of Standard Works by Famous Authors.
Crown Bvo. Bound in Handsome Cloth Boards. Well Illustrated
(Books marked with an asterisk are also bound with Gilt edges, 25.6 d. each).
Harold : The Last of the Saxon Kings. By Bulwer Lytton.
Mrs, Overtheway’s Remembrances. By Juliana Horatia
Ewing.
Eric : or, Little by Little. By F. W. Farrar.
St. Winifred’s. By the same Author.
The Fairy Book : Fairy Stories Re-told Anew. By Mrs. Craik,
Author of “ John Halifax, Gentleman.”
Adam Bede. By George Eliot.
The Schonberg-Cotta Family. By Mrs. Bundle Charles.
Reminiscences of a Highland Parish. By Norman Macleod.
From Log Cabin to White House ; The Story of President
Garfield. By W. M. Thayer.
The Children of the New Forest, By Captain Marryat.
The Starling. By Norman Macleod.
*Hereward the Wake. By Charles Kingsley.
The Heroes. By Charles Kingsley.
The Channings. By Mrs. Henry Wood.
Ministering Children. By M. L. Charlesworth.
Ministering Children ; A Sequel. By the same Author.
The Water Babies. A Fairy Tale for a Land Baby. By
Charles Kingsley.
*Hans Andersen’s Fairy Tales.
The Old Lieutenant and His Son. By Norman Macleod.
Coral Island. By R. M, Ballantyne.
Nettie’s Mission. By Alice Gray.
Home Influence : A Tale for Mothers. By Grace Aguilar.
The Gorilla Hunters. By R. M. Ballantyne.
*What Katy Did. By Susan Coolidge.
Peter the Whaler. By W. H. G. Kingston.
Melbourne House. By Susan Warner.
*The Lamplighter. By Miss Cummins.
*Grimm’s Fairy Tales.
The Swiss Family Robinson : Adventures on a Desert Island.
*Tom Brown’s Schooldays. By an Old Boy.
♦Little Women and Good Wives. By Louisa M. Alcott.
The Wide, Wide World. By Susan Warner.
Danesbury House. By Mrs. Henry Wood.


2s. each ( continued ).
LIBRARY of STANDARD WORKS by FAMOUS AUTHORS {contd.)
Stepping Heavenward. By E. Prentiss.
John Halifax, Gentleman. By Mrs. Craik.
*Life and Adventures of Robinson Crusoe. By Daniel Defoe.
Naomi; or, The Last Days of Jerusalem. By Mrs. Webb.
The Pilgrim’s Progress. By John Bunyan.
Uncle Tom’s Cabin. By Harriet Beecher Stowe.
Westward Ho ! By Charles Kingsley.
“ Great Deeds ” Series.
Large Crown Bvo. 320 pages. Full of Illustrations. Handsomely bound
in Cloth Boards. 2s. each. (Also with Gilt edges, 2s. 6d. each.)
* Heroes ox the Darkness. By J. Bernard Mannix.
Stories of Self-Help, By John Alexander.
Famous Boys : A Book of Brave Endeavour. By C. D. Michael.
Noble Workers : Sketches of the Life and Work of Nine Noble
Women. By Jennie Chappell.
Heroes of our Empire : Gordon, Clive, Warren Hastings,
Havelock and Lawrence.
Heroes who have Won their Crown : David Livingstone and
John Williams.
Great Works by Great Men. By F. M. Holmes.
Brave Deeds for British Boys. By C. D. Michael.
Two Great Explorers : The Lives of Fridtjof Nansen, and
Sir Henry M. Stanley.
Heroes of the Land and Sea : Firemen and their Exploits, and
the Lifeboat.
Bunyan’s Folk of To-day ; or, The Modern Pilgrim’s Progress.
By Rev. J. Reid Ho watt. Twenty Illustrations. Crown Bvo.
Cloth extra.
Bible Light for Little Pilgrims. A Coloured Scripture Picture
Roll. Contains 12 beautifully coloured Old and New Testament
Scenes, with appropriate texts. Mounted on Roller for Hanging.
Bible Picture Roll. Contains a large Engraving of a Scripture
Subject, with letterpress for each day in the month. Mounted on
Roller for hanging.
The Story of Jesus. For Little Children. By Mrs. G. E.
Morton. Large Bvo. 340 pages. Eight pictures in best style of
colour-work, and many other Illustrations. Handsomely bound
in cloth boards.
Love, Courtship, and Marriage. By Rev. F. B. Meyer, B.A.
Crown Bvo. 152 pages. Embellished cloth cover, 2s. net.


Is. 6d.
each.
The Up-to-Date Library
Of Thick Crown Bve. Volumes. 320 pages. Many Illustrations.
Cloth Boards.
(Books marked with an asterisk are also bound with gilt edges, as. each )
One of the Tenth. A Tale of the Royal Hussars. By William
Johnston.
Wardlaugh ; or, Workers Together. By Charlotte Murray.
More than Money ! By A. St. John Adcock.
Norman’s Nugget. By Macdonald Oxley.
A Desert Scout : A Tale of Arabi’s Revolt. By Wm. Johnston.
The Red Mountain of Alaska. By Willis Boyd Allen.
Coral : A Sea Waif and Her Friends. By Charlotte Murray
The Scuttling of the “Kingfisher.” By Alfred E. Knight.
Robert Aske : A Story of the Reformation. By E. F. Pollard.
The Lion City of Africa. By Willis Boyd Allen.
The Spanish Maiden : a Story of Brazil. By Emma E. Horni-
brook.
*lhe Boy from Cuba. A School Story. By Walter Rhoades.
Through Grey to Gold. By Charlotte Murray.
The Wreck of the Providence, By E. F. Pollard.
Training. By Jennie Chappell.
Manco, the Peruvian Chief. By W. H. G. Kingston.
*Muriel Malone ; or, From Door to Door. By Charlotte Murray.
A Polar Eden. By Charles R, Kenyon.
Her Saddest Blessing. By Jennie Chappell.
A Trio of Cousins : A Story of English Life in 1701. By Mrs.
G. E. Morton.
Mick Tracy, the Irish Scripture Reader.
Grace Ashleigh. By Mary R. D. Boyd.
Without a Thought ; or Dora’s Discipline. By Jennie Chappell,
Edith Oswald ; or, Living for Others. By Jane M. Kippen.
A Bunch of Cherries. By J. w. Kirton/
A Village Story. By Mrs. G. E. Morton.
Eric strong : Not Forgetting his Sisters. Bright and Original
Talks to Boys and Girls. By Rev. Thos. Phillips, B A., of Blooms-
bury Central Church, London. With autograph portrait.


Is. 6d. each (i continued ).
THE UP-TO-DATE LIBRARY ( continued).
*The Eagle Cliff. By R. M. Ballantyne.
More Precious than Gold. By Jennie Chappell.
The Slave Raiders of Zanzibar. By E. Harcourt Burrage.
*Avice. A Story of Imperial Rome. By E. F. Pollard.
The King’s Daughter. By “ Pansy."
The Foster Brothers; or, Foreshadowed. By Mrs. Morton.
The Household Angel. By Madeline Leslie.
A Way in the Wilderness. By Maggie Swan.
Miss Elizabeth’s Niece. By M. S. Haycroft.
The Man of the House. By “ Pansy.”
Olive Chauncey’s Trust : A Story of Life’s Turning Points.
By Mrs. E. R. Pitman.
Three People. By “ Pansy."
Chriss/s Endeavour. By “ Pansy.”
*The Young Moose Hunters. By C. A. Stephens
Eaglehurst Towers. By Emma Marshall.
Uncle Mac, the Missionary. By Jean Perry. Six Illustrations
by Wal. Paget on art paper. Cloth boards.
Chilgoopie the Glad : A Story of Korea and her Children. By
Jean Perry. Eight Illustrations on art paper. Cloth boards.
The Man in Grey ; or, More about Korea. By Jean Perry.
More Nails for Busy Workers, By C. Edwards. Crown Bvo.
196 pages. Cloth boards.
Queen Alexandra: the Nation’s Pride. By Mrs, C. N.
Williamson. Crown Bvo. Tastefully bound, is. 6d. net.
William McKinley : Private and President. By Thos. Cox
Meech. Crown Bvo. 160 pages, with Portrait, is. 6d. net.
Studies of the Man Christ Jesus. His Character, His Spirit,
Himself. By R. E. Speer. Cloth, Gilt top. is. fid. net.
Studies of the Man Paul. By Robert E. Speer. Long Bvo.
304 pages. Cloth gilt. is. fid. net.
Wellington : the Record of a Great Military Career. By A. E.
Knight. Crown Bvo. Cloth gilt, with Portrait, is. fid. net.
James Flanagan : The Story of a Remarkable Career. By
Dennis Crane. Fully Illustrated. Cloth boards, is. fid. net.


Is. 6d. each ( continued ).
The British Boys' Library .
Fully Illustrated. Crown Bvo. 168 pages. Cloth extra
The Crew of the Rectory. By M. B. Manwell.
The King’s Scouts. By William R. A. Wilson.
General John : A Story for Boy Scouts. By Evelyn Everett-
Green.
Dick’s Daring ; or, The Secret of Toulon. By A. H. Biggs.
Through Flame and Flood. Stories of Heroism on Land and
Sea. By C. D. Michael.
Never Beaten ! A Story of a Boy’s Adventures in Canada.
By E. Harcourt Burrage, Author of “ Gerard Mastyn,” etc.
Noble Deeds: Stories of Peril and Heroism. Edited by C. D.
Michael.
Armour Bright. The Story of a Boy’s Battles. By Lucy
Taylor.
The Adventures of Ji. By G. E. Farrow, Author of “The
Wallypug of Why.”
Missionary Heroes : Stories of Heroism on the Missionary Field.
By C. D. Michael.
Brown A 1; or, A Stolen Holiday. By E. M. Stooke.
The Pigeons’ Cave ; A Story of Great Orme’s Head in 1806.
By J. S. Fletcher.
Robin the Rebel. By H. Louisa Bedford.
Success : Chats about Boys who have Won it. By C. D. Michael.
Well Done 1 Stories of Brave Endeavour. Edited by C. D,
Michael.


Is. 6d. each ( continued ).
The British Girls' Library.
Fully Illustrated. Crown Bvo. 160 pages. Cloth extra.
The Little Heroine. By Brenda Girvin.
Alison’s Quest; or, The Mysterious Treasure. By Florence E.
Bone.
A Mysterious Voyage; or, The Adventures of a Dodo. By
G. E. Farrow.
Little Gladwise. The Story of a Waif. By Nellie Cornwall.
A Family of Nine 1 By E. C. Phillips.
Alice and the White Rabbit: Their Trips Round about London.
By Brenda Girvin.
The Tender Light of Home. By Florence Wilmot.
Friendless Felicia: or, A Little City Sparrow. By Eleanora
H. Stooke.
Keziah in Search of a Friend. By Noel Hope.
Rosa’s Mistake; or, The Chord of Self. By Mary Bradford-
Whiting.
Zillah, the Little Dancing Girl. By Mrs. Hugh St. Leger.
Salome’s Burden ; or, The Shadow on the Home. By Eleanora
H. Stooke.
Granny’s Girls. By M. B, Manwell.
The Gipsy Queen. By Emma Leslie.
4 Picture Books,
Size, 10\ x 8 inches. With 6 charming coloured plates, and beautifully
printed in colours throughout. For bulk and quality these books are
exceptional. Handsome coloured covers, with cloth backs. Is. 6d. each.
Happy all Day !
Follow my Leader!


Is. 6d. each ( continued ).
Popular Biographies.
Large Crown Bvo. 160 pages. Cloth extra. Fully Illustrated.
J. G. Paton : The Man and His Mission. By C. D. Michael.
Timothy Richard, D.D., the Apostle of Literature in China.
By Rev, B. Reeve.
John Selwyn : The Pioneer Bishop of New Zealand. By Frank
W. Boreham.
James Hannington : Bishop and Martyr. By C. D. Michael.
Two Lady Missionaries in Tibet: Miss Annie R. Taylor and
Dr. Susie Rijnhart Moyes. By Isabel S. Robson.
Dr. Laws of Livingstonia. By Rev. J. Johnston.
Grenfell of Labrador. By Rev. J. Johnston.
Johan G. Oncken : His Life and Work. By Rev. J. Hunt Cooke.
James Chalmers, Missionary and Explorer of Rarotonga and
New Guinea. By William Robson.
Griffith John, Founder of the Hankow Mission, Central China.
By William Robson.
Robert Morrison : The Pioneer of Chinese Missions. By William
J. Townsend.
Captain Allen Gardiner : Sailor and Saint. By Jesse Page.
The Congo for Christ: The Story of the Congo Mission. By
Rev. J. B. Myers.
David Brainerd, the Apostle to the North-American Indians.
By Jesse Page, F.R.G.S.
David Livingstone. By Arthur Montefiore-Brice.
John Williams: The Martyr Missionary of Polynesia. By Rev.
James Ellis.
Lady Missionaries in Foreign Lands. By Mrs. E. R. Pitman.
Missionary Heroines in Eastern Lands. By Mrs. E. R. Pitman.
Robert Moffat: The Missionary Hero of Kuruman. By David
J. Deane.


Is, 6d. each {continued) .
POPULAR MISSIONARY BIOGRAPHIES {continued).
Samuel Crowther : The Slave Boy who became Bishop of the
Anger. By Jesse Page, F.R.G.S.
William Carey : The Shoemaker who became the Father and
Pounder of Modern Missions. By Rev. J. B. Myers.
Prom‘Kafir Kraal to Pulpit: The Story of Tiyo Soga, First
Ordained Preacher of the Kafir Race. By Rev. Hi T. Cousins.
Japan : and its People. By Jesse Page, F.R.G.S.
James Calvert ; or, From Dark to Dawn in Fiji. By R. Vernon.
Thomas J Comber : Missionary Pioneer to the Congo. By
Rev. J. B. Myers. 6 3
The Christianity of the Continent. By Jesse Page, F.R.G.S.
Missionaries 1 have Met, and the Work they have Done
By Jesse Page, F.R.G.S.
Bishop Patteson : The Martyr of Melanesia. By same Author.
John Wesley. By Rev. Arthur Walters.
Pcpular Biographies.
Large Crown Bvo. Cloth Boards. Fully Illustrated.
Women of Worth. Sketches of the Lives of the Queen of
Roumama (“ Carmen Sylva”), Frances Power Cobbe, Mrs. J. R,
ishop, and Mrs. Bramwell Booth. By Jennie Chappell.
Women who have Worked and Won. The Life Story of
Mrs Spurgeon, Mrs. Booth-Tucker, F. R. Havergal. and Ramabai.
By Jennie Chappell.
Noble W'ork by Noble Women ; Sketches of the Lives of the
aroness Burdett-Coutts, Lady Henry Somerset, Mrs. Sarah Rob-
inson, Mrs. Fawcett, and Mrs. Gladstone. By Jennie Chappell
F0 w„ N v ob J| Wom . e .!'„ an i i their Work; Sketches of the Life and
ran T CeS > VI “" d * A " nes Weston - Sister Dora, and Catherine
Booth. By Jennie Chappell.
Florence Nightingale : The Wounded Soldier’s Friend. By
P-liza F. Pollard. 3


Is. 6d. each ( continued ).
POPULAR BIOGRAPHIES (continued).
Four Heroes of India. Clive, Warren Hastings, Havelock,
Lawrence. By F. M. Holmes.
General Gordon : The Christian Soldier and Hero. By G.
Barnett Smith.
C. H. Spurgeon : His Life and Ministry. By Jesse Page, F.R.G.S.
Two Noble Lives; John Wicliffe, the Morning Star of the
Reformation; and Martin Luther, the Reformer. By David J,
Deane. 208 pages.
George Muller : The Modern Apostle of Faith. By Fred G.
Warne.
Life-Story of Ira D. Sankey, The Singing Evangelist. By
David Williamson.
Great Evangelists, and the Way God has Used Them.
By Jesse Page.
John Bright: Apostle of Free Trade. By Jesse Page, F.R.G.S.
The Two Stephensons. By John Alexander.
J. Passmore Edwards : Philanthropist. By E. Harcourt Burrage.
Dwight L. Moody : The Life-work of a Modern Evangelist. By
Rev. J. H. Batt.
Heroes and Heroines of the Scottish Covenanters. By
J. Meldrum Dryerre, LL.B , F.R G.S.
John Knox and the Scottish Reformation. By G. Barnett
Smith.
Philip Melancthon ; The Wittemberg Professor anchTheologian
of the Reformation. By David J. Deane.
The Slave and His Champions ; Sketches of Granville Sharp,
Thomas Clarkson, William Wilberforce, and Sir T. F. Buxton.
By C. D. Michael.
The Marquess of Salisbury ; His Inherited Characteristics,
Political Principles, and Personality. By W. F. Aitken.
Joseph Parker, D.D.: His Life and Ministry. By Albert
Dawson.
Hugh Price Hughes. By Rev. J. Gregory Mantle.
R, J. Campbell, M.A. ; Minister of the City Temple, London.
By Charles T. Bateman.
Dr. Barnardo : “The Foster-Father of Nobody’s Children.” By
Rev. J. H. Batt.


Is. 6d. each (continued).
POPULAR BIOGRAPHIES [continued) .
. Robertson Nicoll, LL.D. j Editor and Preacher. By Jane
Stoddart. J J
F. B. Meyer . His Life and Work. By M. Jennie Street.
J*. .in Clifford, M.A., B.Sc., LL.D., D.D, By Chas. T. Bateman.
1 birty ears in the East End. A Marvellous Story of Mission
Work. By W. Francis Aitken.
Alexander Maclaren, D.D.: The Man and His Message. By
Rev. John C. Carlile. 7
Lord Milner. By W. B. Luke.
Lord Rosebery, Imperialist. By J. A. Hammerton.
Joseph Chamberlain : A Romance of Modern Politics. By
Arthur Mee. J
Is. each.
The Chief Scout : The Life of Lieut.-Gen. Sir Robert Baden-
Powell. By W. Francis Aitken.
Letters on the Simple Life. By the Queen of Roumania, Marie
Corelli, Madame Sarah Grand, “John Oliver Hobbes,’’ Sir A
Conan Doyle, The Bishop of London, Canon Hensley Henson
~ T ir J; Crichton Browne. Rev. S. Baring-Gould, Dr. Robertson
Isicoll, etc. Crown Bvo. 160 pages. With Autographs of con-
tributors in fac-simile. Imitation Linen, 6d. net. "doth boards
is. net. (Not illustrated).
Golden Words for Every Day. By M. Jennie Street, is.
Novelties, and How to A\ake Them: Hints and Helps
occu pation for Children's Classes. Compiled by
Mildred Duff. Full of Illustrations. Cloth boards, is. Y
111 {?' e t enC t °i £ e Faith : The 01d Be tter than the New.
By Rev. F. B. Meyer. Cloth Boards, is. net.
Ingatherings ; A Dainty Book of Beautiful Thoughts. Compiled
by E. Agar. Cloth boards, is. net. Paper covers, 6d. net
Th L-^ e^ T ( r 00kery 0f Unproprietary Foods. By Eustace
Miles, M.A. 192 pages, is. net.
Nursing as a Profession, a helpful book to those about to
enter it is. net.


Is. each ( continued).
Books for Christian Workers.
Large Crown 16mo. 128 pages. Chastely bound in Cloth Boards. Is. each
The Home Messages of Jesus. By Charlotte Skinner.
Deeper Yet: Meditations for the Quiet Hour. By Clarence E.
Eberman.
The Master’s Messages to Women. By Charlotte Skinner.
Royal and Loyal. Thoughts on the Two-fold Aspect of the
Christian Life. By Rev. W. H. Griffith-Thomas.
Thoroughness : Talks to Young Men. By Thain Davidson, D.D.
The Overcoming Life. By Rev. E. W. Moore.
Marks of the Master. By Charlotte Skinner.
Some Deeper Things, By Rev. F. B. Meyer.
Steps to the Blessed Life. By Rev. F. B. Meyer.
Daybreak in the Soul. By Rev. E. W. Moore.
The Temptation of Christ. By C. Arnold Healing, M.A.
For Love’s Sake. By Charlotte Skinner.
One Shilling Reward Books.
Fully Illustrated. Crown Bvo. Cloth extra.
Crackers. The Story of a Little Monkey. By May Wynne.
Tommy and the Owl. By Evelyn Everett-Green.
A Fair Reward. The Story of a Prize. By Jennie Chappell.
Jeffs’ Charge : A Story of London Life. By Charles Herbert.
The Making of Ursula. By Dorothea Moore.
Jimmy : The Tale of a Little Black Bear. By May Wynne.
“Tubby”; or, Right about Face. By J. Howard Brown.
Alan’s Puzzle ; or, The Bag of Gold. By F. M. Holmes.
Auntie Amy’s Bird Book. By A. M. Irvine.
The Ivory Mouse : A Book of Fairy Stories. By Rev. Stanhope
E. Ward.
Billy’s Hero; or, The Valley of Gold. A Story of Canadian
Adventure. By Marjorie L. C. Pickthall.
The Straight Road. By Marjorie L. C. Pickthall.


Is. each ( continued ).
ONE SHILLING REWARD BOOKS ( continued ).
One Primrose Day. By Mrs. Hugh St. Leger.
The Reign of Lady Betty. By Kent Carr.
The Whitedown Chums. By Jas. H. Brown.
Sweet Nancy. By L. T. Meade.
Little Chris the Castaway. By F. Spenser.
All Play and No Work. By Harold Avery.
Always Happy ; or, The Story of Helen Keller. By Jennie
Chappell.
Cola Monti ; or, The Story of a Genius. By Mrs. Craik.
Harold, or, Two Died for Me. By Laura A. Barter-Snow.
Indian Lhe in the Great North-West. By Egerton R. Young.
Jack the Conqueror; or, Difficulties Overcome. By
Mrs. C. E. Bowen.
Lost in the Backwoods. By Edith C. Kenyon.
The Little Woodman and his Dog Caesar. By Mrs. Sherwood.
Roy’s Sister ; or, His Way and Hers. By M. B. Manwell.
George & Co.; or, The Chorister of St. Anselm’s. By Spencer
T. Gibb.
Ruth’s Roses. By Laura A. Barter-Snow.
Bessie Drew ; or, The Odd Little Girl. By Amy Manifold.
Norman’s Oak. By Jennie Chappell.
A Fight for Life, and other Stories. By John R. Newman.
The Fairyland of Nature. By J. Wood Smith,
True Stories of Brave Deeds. By Mabel Bowler.
Gipsy Kit; or, The Man with the Tattooed Face. By Robert
Leighton.
Dick s Desertion; A Boy's Adventures in Canadian Forests.
By Marjorie L. C. Pickthall.
The Children of the Priory. By J. L. Hornibrook.
lets and their Wild Cousins: New and True Stories of
Animals. By Rev. J. Isabell, F.E.S.
Other Pets and their Wild Cousins. By Rev. J. Isabell, F.E.S.
Sunshine and Snow. By Harold Bindloss.
Donalblane of Darien. By J. Macdonald Oxley,
Crown Jewels. By Heather Grey.


Is. each ( continued ).
Nature Subjects. By T. Carreras.
Copiously illustrated, hy Drawings and Photographs from Nature, by the
Author, and with Coloured Plate.
The Pond. \
The Wood.
The Hedge, i
The Meadow, j
Four books, is. each.
Partridge's Shilling Library.
Crown Bvo. 136 pages. Illustrations printed on Art Paper. A Splendid
Series of Stories for Adults.
For Coronet or Crown ? By Grace Pettman.
Friend or Foe ? By S. E. Burrow.
Nance Kennedy. By L. T. Meade.
Robert Musgrave’s Adventure ; A Story of Old Geneva. By
Deborah Alcock.
The Taming of the Rancher: A Story of Western Canada.
By Argyll Saxby.
“Noodle”: From Barrack Room to Mission Field. By S. E.
Burrow.
The Lamp in the Window. By Florence E. Bone.
Out of the Fog. By Rev. J. Isabell, F.E.S.
Fern Dacre ; A Minster Yard Story. By Ethel Ruth Boddy.
Through Sorrow and Joy : A Protestant Story. By M. A. R.
A Brother’s Need. By L. S. Mead.
Is. each net.
Crown Bvo. 192 pages. Stiff Paper Covers, Is. each net. Cloth Boards,
Is. 6d. each net. (Not Illustrated).
Partridge’s Temperance Reciter.
Partridge’s Reciter of Sacred and Religious Pieces.
Partridge’s Reciter. Old Favourites and New.
Partridge’s Humorous Reciter.


Cheap Reprints of Popular Books for the Young.
Crown Bvo. 160 pages. Illustrated. Cloth Boards, Is. each.
Jack, the Story of a Scapegrace. By E. M. Bryant.
Patsie’s Bricks. By L. S. Mead.
Kathleen ; or, A Maiden’s Influence. By Julia Hack.
Her Bright To-morrow. By Laura A. Barter-Snow.
Patsy’s Schooldays; or, The Mystery Baby. By Alice M. Page.
A Red Brick Cottage. By Lady Hope.
Dick’s Chum. By M. A. Pauli.
Mousey; or, Cousin Robert’s Treasure. By E. H. Stooke.
Carola’s Secret By Ethel F. Heddle.
The Golden Doors. By M. S. Haycraft.
Marigold’s Fancies. By L. E. Tiddeman.
The Thane of the Dean. A Story of the Time of the Conqueror.
By Tom Bevan.
Nature’s Mighty Wonders. By Rev. Richard Newton.
Hubert Ellerdale: A Tale of the Days of Wicliffe. By W.
Oak Rhind.
Our Phyllis. By M. S. Haycraft.
The Maid of the Storm. A Story of a Cornish Village. By
Nellie Cornwall.
Philip’s Inheritance ; or, Into a Far Country. By F. Spenser.
The Lady of the Chine. By M. S. Haycraft.
In the Bonds of Silence. By J. L. Hornibrook.
A String of Pearls. By E. F. Pollard.
Hoyle’s Popular Ballads and Recitations. By William Hoyle.
Heroes All! A Book of Brave Deeds. By C. D. Michael.
The Old Red Schoolhouse. By Frances H. Wood.
Christabel’s Influence. By J. Goldsmith Cooper.
Deeds of Daring. By C. D. Michael.
Everybody’s Friend. By Evelyn Everett-Green.
The Bell Buoy. By F. M. Holmes.
Vic ; A Book of Animal Stories. By A. C. Fryer, Ph.D., F.S.A.
In Friendship’s Name. By Lydia Phillips.
Nella ; or, Not My Own. By Jessie Goldsmith Cooper,
Blossom and Blight. By M. A. Pauli.
Aileen. By Laura A. Barter-Snow.
Satisfied. By Catherine Trowbridge.
Ted’s Trust By Jennie Chappell.
A Candle Lighted by the Lord. By Mrs. E. Ross.


Is. each {continued).
CHEAP REPRINTS OF POPULAR BOOKS FOR THE YOUNG
( continued).
Alice Western’s Blessing. By Ruth Lamb.
Tamsin Rosevvarne and Her Burdens. By Nellie Cornwall.
Raymond and Bertha. By Lydia Phillips.
Gerald’s Dilemma. By Emma Leslie.
Fine Gold ; or, Ravenswood Courtenay. By Emma Marshall.
Marigold. By Mrs. L. T. Meade.
Jack’s Heroism. By Edith C. Kenyon.
Her J™ S °, nS: A Story for Youd S MeQ and Maidens. By
Mrs. Charles Garnett. J
Rag and Tag. By Mrs. E. J. Whittaker.
Ihe Little Princess of Tower Hill, By L, T. Meade
Clovie and Madge. By Mrs. G. S. Reaney.
Ellerslie House : A Book for Boys. By Emma Leslie,
Like a Little Candle ; or, Bertrand’s Influence. By Mrs
Haycraft. J
The Dairyman’s Daughter. By Legh Richmond.
Bible Jewels. By Rev. Dr. Newton.
Bible Wonders. By the same Author.
The Pilgrim’s Progress. By John Bunyan. 416 pages. Eight
coloured and 46 other Illustrations. 6
Our Duty to Animals. By Mrs. C. Bray.
Everyone's Eibrary.
A re-issue of Standard Works in a cheap form, containing from 320 to
500 pages, printed in the best style, with Illustrations on art paper
and tastefully bound in Cloth Boards. Is. each.
Harold : The Last of the Saxon Kings. By Bulwer Lytton,
Mrs. Overtheway’s Remembrances. By Juliana Horatia
Ewing.
Self Help; Illustrations of Character and Conduct. By Samuel
Smiles.
Eric : or, Little by Little. By F. W. Farrar.
St. Winifred’s. By the same Author.
The Fairy Book : Fairy Stories Retold Anew. By Mrs. Craik,
Author of ” John Halifax, Gentleman. M 3


Is. each {continued).
EVERYONE’S LIBRARY ( continued ).
Ben Hur. By Lew Wallace.
Adam Bede. By George Eliot.
The Schonberg-Cotta Family. By Mrs. Rundle Charles.
Reminiscences of a Highland Parish. By Norman Macleod.
The Strait Gate. By Annie S. Swan.
Mark Desborough’s Vow. By Annie S. Swan.
From Log Cabin to White House. By W. M. Thayer,
The Gorilla Hunters. By R. M. Ballantyne.
Naomi; or, The Last Days of Jerusalem. By Mrs. Webb.
The Starling. By Norman Macleod.
The Children of the New Forest. By Captain Marryat.
Danesbury House. By Mrs. Henry Wood.
Granny’s Wonderful Chair. By Frances Browne.
Hereward the Wake. By Charles Kingsley.
The Heroes. By Charles Kingsley.
Ministering Children. By M. L. Charlesworth.
Ministering Children ; A Sequel. By the same Author.
Peter the Whaler. By W. H. G. Kingston.
The ChanningS. By Mrs. Henry Wood.
Melbourne House. By Susan Warner.
Alice in Wonderland. By Lewis Carroll.
The Lamplighter. By Miss Cummins.
What Katy Did. By Susan Coolidge.
Stepping Heavenward. By E. Prentiss.
Westward Ho ! By Charles Kingsley.
The Water Babies. By the same Author.
The Swiss Family Robinson.
Grimm’s Fairy Tales, By the Brothers Grimm.
The Coral Island. By R. M. Ballantyne.
Hans Andersen’s Fairy Tales.
John Halifax, Gentleman. By Mrs. Craik.
Little Women and Good Wives. By Louisa M. Alcott
Tom Brown’s Schooldays. By an Old Boy.
The Wide, Wide World. By Susan Warner.
Life and Adventures of Robinson Crusoe. By Daniel Defoe
Uncle Tom’s Cabin. Bv H. B. Stowe.
The Old Lieutenant and His Son. By Norman Macleod.


Is. each {continued).
New Series of One Shilling Picture Books.
Size 10\ by 8 inches. 96 pages. Coloured. Frontispiece and numerous other
illustrations. Handsomely bound in Paper Boards, covers printed in 10
colours and varnished.
Pictures from Playland, By Aunt Ethel.
Merry Moments. By Uncle Maurice.
Snowflake’s Picture Book. By Uncle Maurice.
Daisyland! A Picture Book for Boys and Girls. By Aunt Ruth.
Playmates. By Uncle Maurice.
Frolic and Fun : Pictures and Stories for Everyone. By Aunt
Ruth.
My Dollies’ A.B.C. By Uncle Jack.
Merry Madcaps ! By Aunt Ruth.
By the Silver Sea. By R. V.
Funny Folk in Animal Land. By Uncle Frank.
A Trip to Storyland. By R. V.
Holiday Hours in Animal Land. By Uncle Harry.
Animal Antics ! By the Author of “In Animal Land with Louis
Wain.”
In Animal Land with Louis Wain.
Scripture Picture Books.
Old Testament Heroes. By Mildred Duff.
Feed My Lambs. Fifty-two Bible Stories and Pictures. By the
Author of •* The Friends of Jesus.”
Bible Pictures and Stories : Old Testament. By D.J.D.
Bible Pictures and Stories : New Testament. By James
Weston and D.J.D.
The Life of Jesus. By Mildred Duff. 112 pages.
Gentle Jesus. A Bible Picture Book, beautifully printed in
colours, with descriptive letterpress.
Commendations from all parts of the world have reached
Messrs. S. W. Partridge & Co. upon the excellence of their
Picture Books. The reading matter is high-toned, helpful, and
amusing, exactly adapted to the requirements of young folks;
while the Illustrations are by first-class artists, and the paper is
thick and durable. Bound in attractive coloured covers, they
form a unique series.


9d. each.
Ninefenny Scries of Illustrated Books.
96 pages. Crown Bvo. Illustrated. Handsome Cloth Covers.
Daring and Doing : True Stories of Brave Deeds. By Mrs.
Crosbie-Brown.
The Children of Cherryholme. By M. S. Haycraft.
Twice Saved ! By E. M. Watenvorth.
Willie’s Battles and How He Won Them. By E. M. Kendrew.
Into a Sunlit Harbour. By M. I. Harrell.
Dick Lionheart By Mary Rowles Jarvis.
A Regular Handful : or, Ruthie’s Charge. By Jennie Chappell.
Little Bunch’s Charge ; or, True to Trust. By Nellie Cornwall.
Mina’s Sacrifice ; or, The Old Tambourine. By Helen Sawer.
Our Den. By E. M. Watenvorth.
Only a Little Fault ! By Emma Leslie.
Marjory ; or, What would Jesus Do ? By Laura A. Barter-Snow.
The Little Slave Girl. By Eileen Douglas.
Out of the Straight; or, The Boy who Failed and the Boy
who Succeeded. By Noel Hope.
Bob and Bob’s Baby. By Mary E. Lester.
Grandmother’s Child. By Annie S. Swan.
The Little Captain : A Temperance Tale. By Lynde Palmer.
Love’s Golden Key. By Mary E. Lester.
Mystery of Mamie. By Jennie Chappell.
Caravan Cruises : Five Children in a Caravan. By Phil Ludlow.
Secrets of the Sea. By Cicely Fulcher.
For Lucy’s Sake. By Annie S. Swan.
Giants and How to Fight Them. By Dr. Newton.
How Paul’s Penny became a Pound. By Mrs. Bowen.
How Peter’s Pound became a Penny. By the same Author.
A Sailor’s Lass. By Emma Leslie.
Robin’s Golden Deed. By Ruby Lynn.
Dorothy’s Trust By Adela Frances Mount.
His Majesty’s Beggars. By Mary E. Ropes.
Polly’s Hymn ; or, Travelling Days. By J. S. Woodhouse.
Frank Burleigh : or, Chosen to be a Soldier. By Lydia
Phillips.
Lost Muriel; or, A Little Girl’s Influence. By C. J. A. Opper-
mann.
Kibbie Si Co. By Jennie Chappell.


9d. each ( continued ).
NINEPENNY SERIES OF ILLUSTRATED BOOKS ( continued ).
Brave Bertie. By Edith C. Kenyon.
Marjorie’s Enemy : A Story of the Civil War of 1644. By Mrs
Adams.
Lady Betty’s Twins. By E. M. Waterworth.
A Venturesome Voyage. By F. Scarlett Potter,
Grannie’s Treasures : and how they helped her. By L. E
Tiddeman.
Faithful Friends. By C. A. Mercer.
Only Roy. By E. M. Waterworth and Jennie Chappell.
Aunt Armstrong’s Money. By Jennie Chappell.
The Babes in the Basket ; or, Daph and Her Charge.
Birdie’s Benefits; or, A Little Child Shall Lead Them. By
Ethel Ruth Body.
Carol’s Gift; or, “What Time I am Afraid I will Trust in
Thee.” By Jennie Chappell.
Cripple George; or, God has a Plan for Every Man. A Tem-
perance Story. By John W. Kneeshaw.
Cared For; or, The Orphan Wanderers. By Mrs. C. E. Bowen.
A Flight with the Swallows. By Emma Marshall.
The Five Cousins. By Emma Leslie.
How a Farthing Made a Fortune; or, Honesty is the Best
Policy. By Mrs. C. E. Bowen.
John Blessington’s Enemy: A Story of Life in South Africa.
By E. Harcourt Burrage.
John Oriel’s Start in Life. By Mary Howitt.
The Man of the Family. By Jennie Chappell.
Matties Home ; or, The Little Match-girl and her Friends.
Phil’s Frolic. By F. Scarlett Potter.
Rob and 1 ; or, By Courage and Faith. By C. A. Mercer.
Won from the Sea. By E. C. Phillips (Mrs. H. B. Looker).
6d. each.
Devotional Classics.
A New Series of Devotional Books by Standard Authors. Well printed on
good paper. Size by inches. Beautifully bound in Cloth Boards,
6d. each, net. ; Leather, 2s. each, net. (Not illustrated).
The Imitation of Christ By Thomas a Kempis.
The Holy War. By John Bunyan.


6d. each ( continued).
New Series of Sixpenny Picture Books.
Crown 4to. With Coloured Frontispiece and many other Illustrations,
Handsomely bound in Paper Boards, with cover printed in ten colours.
Our Tea Party ! By Aunt Ruth.
Little Miss Muffett. By Aunt Ethel.
Sunnylock’s Picture Book. By Aunt Ruth.
Ring o’ Roses. By Uncle Jack.
Two in a Tub ! By Aunt Ruth.
Little Tot’s A.B.C. By Uncle Jack.
Full of Fun ! Pictures and Stories for Everyone. By Uncle
Maurice.
Hide and Seek. Stories for Every Day in the Week. By the
same Author.
Little Snowdrop’s Bible Picture Book.
Sweet Stories Retold. A Bible Picture Book.
Bible Stories.
Bible Stories.
Stories of Old. Four Bible Picture Books with
Sunday Stories. coloured illustrations.
Coming to Jesus.
Sunday Stories.
Coming to Jesus.
Mother’s Sunday A.B.C. A Little Book of Bible Pictures,
which can be coloured by hand.
The “ Red Dave ” Series.
New and Enlarged Edition. Handsomely hound in Cloth Boards.
Well Illustrated.
"Be Prepared!” By C. F.
Argyll-Saxby.
A Double Victory. The Story
of a Knight Errant. By Maurice
Partridge.
Minnie’s Birthday Story; or,
What the Brook Said. By Mrs.
Bowen.
Elsie’s Sacrifice. By Nora C.
Usher.
Timfy Sikes: Gentleman. By
Kent Carr.
Greypaws : The Astonishing Ad-
ventures of a Field Mouse. By Paul
Creswick.
The Squire’s Young Folk. By
Eleanora H. Stooke.
The Christmas Children : A
Story of the Marshes. By Dorothea
Moore.
The Little Woodman and his
Dog Cassar. By Mrs. Sherwood.
Brave Toviak. By Argyll-
Saxby.
The Adventures of Phyllis.
By Mabel Bowler.
A Plucky Chap. By Louie
Slade.
Farthing Dips ; or What can I
do ? By J. S. Woodhouse.
Roy Carpenter’s Lesson. By
Keith Marlow,
Gerald’s Guardian. By Charles
Herbert,


THE “ RED DAVE ” SERIES
Where a Queen once Dwelt.
By Jetta Vogel.
Buy Your own Cherries.
Left in Charge, and other
Stories.
Two Little Girls and What
They did.
The Island Home.
Chrissy’s Treasure.
Dick and His Donkey.
Come Home, Mother.
“Roast Potatoes ! ” ATemper-
ance Story. By Rev. S. N. Sedg-
wick, M.A.
Red Dave : or What Wilt Thou
have Me to do ?
Almost Lost. By Amethyst.
Jepthah’s Lass. By Dorothea
Moore.
Kitty King. By Mrs. H. C.
Knight.
The Duck Family Robinson.
By A. M. T.
His Captain. By Constancia
Sergeant.
6d. each ( continued).
[continued.)
" In a Minute ! " By Keith Mar-
low.
Wilful Jack. By M. I. Hurrell.
Willie the Waif. By Minie
Herbert.
A Little Town Mouse.
Puppy-Dog Tales.
A Threefold Promise.
The Four Young Musicians.
A Sunday Trip and What Came
of it. By E. J. Romanes.
Little Tim and His Picture.
By Beatrice Way.
The Conjurer's Wand. By
Henrietta S. Streatfeild.
Benjamin’s New Boy.
Enemies : a Tale for Little Lads
and Lassies.
Cherry Tree Place.
Joe and Sally ; or, A Good Deed
and its Fruits.
Lost in the Snow.
Jessie Dyson.
4d. each.
The Toung Folds' Library
Of Cloth Bound Books.
found Books. With Coloured Frontispiece.
Well Illustrated. Handsome Cloth Covers
64 pages.
Little Jack Thrush.
A Little Boy’s Toys.
The Pearly Gates.
The Little Woodman.
Ronald’s Reason.
Sybil and her Live Snowball.
The Church Mouse.
Dandy Jim.
A Troublesome Trio.
Perry’s Pilgrimage.
A Bright Idea.
Nita ; or, Among the Brigands


3d. each.
New “ Pretty Gift Book ” Series.
With Beautiful Coloured Frontispiece, and many other Illustrations.
Paper Boards, Cover printed in sight Colours and Varnished, 3d. each.
Size, 6 by 5 inches.
Jack and Jill’s Picture Book.
the Sea.
Toby and Kit’s Animal Book.
“Pets” and “Pickles.”
Our Little Pets’ Alphabet.
Bible Stories-Old Testament.
Bible Stories-New Testament,
Lady-Bird’s Pictures and
Stories.
Playtime Joys for Girls and
Boys.
Dolly’s Picture Book.
Paternoster Series of Popular Stories.
An entirely New Series of Boohs, Medium Bvo. in size, 32 pages, fully Illustrated.
Cover daintily printed in two Colours, Id. each. Titles as follows :
“Noodle!" From Barrack Room
to Mission Field. By S. E. Burrow.
Two Little Girls and What
they Did. By T. S. Arthur.
The Little Captain. By Lynde
Palmer.
True Stories of Brave Deeds.
By Mabel Bowler.
Alice in Wonderland.
The Dairyman’s Daughter.
Robin's Golden Deed. By
Ruby Lynn.
The Basket of Flowers.
Buy Your Own Cherries. By
John Kirton.
Jennett Cragg : A Story of the
Time of the Plague. By M. Wright.
Rab and His Friends. By Dr.
John Brown.
The Scarred Hand. By Ellen
Thomeycroft Fowler.
The Gipsy Queen. By Emma
Leslie.
A Candle Lighted by the Lord
By Mrs. Ross.
Grandmother’s Child. By
Annie S. Swan.
The Babes in the Basket ; or,
Daph and her Charge.
Jenny’s Geranium ; or. The
Prize Flower of a London Court.
The Little Princess of Tower
Hill. By L. T. Meade.
Through Sorrow and Joy. By
M. A. R.
The Little Woodman and his
Dog Cassar. By Mrs. Sherwood.
Cripple George. By J. W.
Kneeshaw.
Rob and I. By C. A. Mercer.
Dick and his Donkey. By Mrs.
Bowen.
The Light of the Gospel.


THE BRITISH WORKMAN One Penny Monthly
HftD HOME MONTHLY. is. 6d. per annum post free.
Beautifully Illustrated. Annual Volume now ready.
The Right Hon Thomas Burt, P.C., M.P., says:—“lt is gratifying to see that
y u Ur i? a £ er i S 80 hI^T T I^ a T P preciated by working men—as it certainly deserves to be. I
should like to see THE BRIT ISH WORKMAN in the home of every working man M
A well-known Bishop writes :—“ The contents are admirable.”
th * ° k ! tr u e ,J ing about them >” sa ys one who has read THE
BRI I ISH WORKMAN for nearly half a century. .
“ Few books will be so popular as this old friend.”— British Weekly, Nov. 3, 1910.
THE FHMILY FRIEHD: in illustrated Magazine for every home
One Penny Monthly; is. 6d. per annum, post free anywhere.
THE FAMILY FRIEND has published some of the best work of
Annie S. Swan, Silas K. Hocking, Lillias Campbell Davidson
Katherine Tynan, Morice Gerard, Evelyn Everett-Green,
Scott Graham, and others. It is a companion and a help-meet for
every mother ; and the growing girl will delight in it.
A MAGAZINE THAT GOES ALL OVER THE WORLD.
THE CHILDREN’S FRIEND. One Penny Monthly.
is. Bd. per annum, post free anywhere.
" I really think the C.F. gets more wonderful every month, and I would never think
of giving up taking it."—Stamford, Feb., 1911.
“ I have taken in the C.F. for five years, ever since I was just nine years old. and I
think it gets nicer every year."— Maisemore (Glos.), Feb., ign.
“I have taken in the C.F. for nearly six years, and it always has been, and always
will be, my favourite magazine.”— Rugby, March, ign. 3
“We have tried a few other periodicals, but the C.F. stands supreme. I feel I cannot
do enough for it; it has done so much for me,”—A Scottish Reader, March, ign.
THE FRIEtiDLY VISITOR. One Penny Monthly.
A Magazine for the people, full of entertaining reading with sound
religious teaching in the form of story, article, and poem. Printed in
good type and fully illustrated. Just the paper for “the Quiet Hour.’’
THE inFSHTS’ MEGHZIHE. One Penny Monthly.
No other periodical can be compared with THE INFANTS’
MAGAZINE for freshness, brightness, and interest. Full of clever
pictures and merry reading to delight and instruct the little ones.
Easy Painting and Drawing Competitions.
THE BHItD OF HOPE REVIEW. jd. Monthly.
The Leading Temperance Periodical for the Young, containing Serial
and Short Stories, Concerted Recitations, Prize Competitions, etc.
Should be in the hands of all Band of Hope Members.
These Magazines are published in beautifully bound Annual Volumes,
at prices ranging from Is. to 2s. 6d.
Specimen Copies Post Free of S. W. PARTRIDGE & CO., Ltd., London, E.C.


.


/I/
/I 823 -2
/V? / 3'Syoe
(/V copy)




