

The Hew South Wales Soudan Contingent,
A FEW HISTORICAL NOTES,
R. BURDETT SMITH, M.P.
FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION ONLY.
SYDNEY: CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER;




fib ft
The lew South Wales Soudan Contingent,
A FEW HISTORICAL NOTES,
R. BURDETT SMITH, M.P.
FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION ONLY.
SYDNEY: CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.


»'v> * . *
.


PREFACE
/ t. \ c tbi
I have prepared this short pamphlet for two purposes—
First, to emphasize my opinion on the brilliant stroke of
patriotism and statesmanship made by the late Right
Honorable William Bede Dailey, P.C., M.L.C., in causing
a contingent of our local forces to be sent to the Soudan ;
and, secondly, to incorporate with my own remarks the
copy of a letter, probably the last written by him on any
public question, which I received only a few days before
his illness which terminated in his lamented demise.
This brief epistle is of historic value, as it illustrates the
purity of motive and “the completeness of soul” which
characterized the late Right Honorable Gentleman
throughout his public career.
I take a certain pride in the part I took in the Soudan
movement, as I was the first to sign the requisition to the
Right Worshipful the Mayor of Sydney to convene a
public meeting for the purpose of approving of the action
of the Government in that great undertaking, and of
founding a Patriotic Fund for the benefit of those who,
and so promptly, had offered their services in Egypt at a
critical episode in British History. I also attended and


addressed the great meeting at the Exhibition Building,
Prince Alfred Park, Sydney, when I delivered a speech,
of which the following is a copy, as reported in the
“ Sydney Morning Herald” of 21st February, 1885 :
Mb. E Bubdett Smith, M.P., who was received with cheers,
said that in supporting the resolution which had been so eloquently
submitted to them, he might be permitted to preface the few
observations he intended to make by referring to the genuine
practical patriotism which had always animated the breasts of
the native-born of the Colony —-[cheers] —and the vigorous
growth of public opinion of late years in our attachment to the
throne and Constitution of old England —[cheers] —or in our
affectionate loyalty to the gracious sovereign who ruled over the
destinies of the Empire. [Cheers.] We were in heart, soul,
and intellect devoted to our allegiance as men living in either
England, Scotland, or Ireland. [Cheers.] Has not the enthu-
siasm which a call to assist Grreat Britain in her hour of need
demonstrated the purity as well as the intensity of our loyalty ?
But while we rejoiced, nay exulted, in the spirit which animated
the members of the Hew South Wales contingent about to
embark for the Soudan—[cheers]— we should not forget that
most, if not all of them, left behind them “ hostages to fortune,”
in the shape of wives and children, or of fathers, mothers, sisters,
or other tender ties. They are now in some sense the wards of
the Colony, and those present were amongst the number of their
guardians. [Cheers.] It was on this fundamental principle—
the sense of moral responsibility —that the establishment of the
patriotic fund was based. Those who could not share in the
glory of the labours and dangers of our noble and brave volun-
teers could at least prove the sincerity of their opinions by taking
such steps as would mitigate anxiety in the minds of those who
went forth to the field of warfare. It was almost an insult to
the patriotic instincts and aspirations of the Colony to make any
pathetic appeal to its sympathies on an occasion like the present.
He was convinced they would accept it as a duty, and would do
all they could to make the patriotic fund a magnificent success.
[Cheers.] Animated by these sentiments, he most cordially
supported the resolution, perfectly convinced that its ultimate
result would be one of the most praiseworthy occurences in the
annals of Australia. [Cheers.]


In my place in Parliament and elsewhere, as will be
seen by extracts from speeches in the Appendix, I
defended the policy which inspired the undertaking, and
can bear personal testimony to the deep impression the
act made in the minds of the people of England.
Probably no other event in our history brought us into
such close touch with British sympathies. During my
visit to the Mother Country in 1886 the Soudan Con-
tingent of New South Wales was the constant theme of
praise and admiration in the various places I visited;
and I am sure my friends, both in the Colonies and in
England, will be pleased to have this simple souvenir of
a great historical event.
203, Macquarie-street North,
Sydney, 18th January, 1889.




APPENDIX.
Speech delivered in the Parliament of New
South Wales, 24 March, 1886.
(From the “ Parliamentary Debates.”)
Mr. R. Burdett Smith, M.P., said, —It was not my intention
to speak on this subject. I attended the meeting—the largest ever
held in Sydney—called together for the purpose of expressing
approval of the action of the Government, and for the inauguration
of a patriotic fund, and I there expressed my views. My name
appeared first in the requisition calling upon the Mayor to convene
that meeting. It was generally understood from the extended sphere
of the debate on Friday night that it would be impossible to then
come to a division; and at the request of a number of honorable
members I therefore moved the adjournment of the debate. It is
evident, I think, from the spontaneous enthusiasm which was dis-
played on the occasion of the departure of the troops, that the Colony
indorses the action of the Government. Ido not take exception to
opinions which have been expressed by honorable members in the
course of this debate, and I am sorry that I feel compelled to vote
in opposition to some of my esteemed friends. I shall support the
Government, because I believe they have acted in a spirit of pure
and enlightened patriotism, and in no autocratic or selfish manner.
I thill have occasion to refer to the opinions of professional fault-
finders outside of this Chamber. We have heard a great deal
about the violation of the Constitution, and of the so-called folly
of depriving our defence force of the services of 750 men. The
Government admit that they have technically violated the Consti-
tution, and they ask us to condone what has been done. It is said
that Parliament has been ignored, and that its ancient and his-
torical privileges have been slighted. How could any free country
be governed if the advisers of the Crown could not meet a crisis


by relying on the authority of Parliament, and the expression of
public opinion for their condonation afterwards 1 There is in
every country the necessity for sudden State intervention, and the
enrolment of the Soudan contingent was one of those momentous
occurrences. It has been argued with great force that there is no
constitutional precedent for the course adopted by the Government.
I do not suppose that in the history of this or of the mother
country a precisely parallel case can be found ; but I think I can
satisfy honorable members that in the mother country, as far back
as 1835, a case which is in some respects parallel occurred. Let
me refer honorable members to a speech which was delivered by
Lord Palmerston in reply to Lord Mahon, who had moved resolu-
tions condemnatory of the Government of which Lord Palmerston
was a member. Government had, without the authority or the
sanction of Parliament, given to British subjects permission to
enrol under the service of the Queen of Spain against Don Carlos,
who was regarded as a rebel. A legion of 12,000 men was enrolled,
and the Government of the day assisted in the enrolment, with a
view to support the throne and Constitution of Spain. Lord
Palmerston is reported in Hansard to have said :
The noble lord has said that there is no precedent for the course pursued.
I will not dispute with the noble lord on that point. I wish to found the
conduct which the British Government shall pursue, upon the circumstances
of the case, and upon the expediency of the time. If the Government be
wrong in what they have done, twenty precedents in their favour cannot
convert that wrong into right; if we are right, as I contend we are, it is
indifferent whether we are following a stream of former precedents, cr boldly
establishing a precedent ourselves for time to come; satisfied I am, that,
when similar contingencies arise, our example will be followed if we have
been right, and abandoned if we have been wrong. I therefore maintain
that the case is not of precedent but a question of right or wrong. I hold
that we are right— that we are acting in strict pursuance of the true interests
of England.
This is a case in point, where, as in the case under consideration,
there was a necessity for prompt action by the Government in the
enrolment of troops. After their offer had been accepted by the
Imperial Government, was it not expedient for Ministers to take
prompt and decisive action, but relying upon the good sense and
wisdom of Parliament to confirm and condone their action after-


wards? As has been pointed out both here and in the other
Chamber, had the Government waited for a meeting of Parliament
it would have been impossible to despatch the troops at the time
when they were despatched. What was the course pursued by
the British Government in the case to which I have referred?
Lord Mahon, in the course of a very exhaustive speech, used every
possible argument against the Government for violating the Con-
stitution in forming the Spanish legion without the authority of
Parliament; but what did the British Parliament do ? It indorsed
the action of the Government, as I am quite sure the large
majority of honorable members of the House will indorse the
action of this Government in regard to the Soudan contingent.
It has been argued by persons outside, who, I submit, with great
respect to some of them, do not understand the question, that the
Egyptian war is an unrighteous one, that the Mahdi is only fight-
ing for liberty, and that therefore the British Government ought
not to interfere. The same kind of argument was used by Lord
Mahon in his impeachment of Lord Palmerston. He contended
that Don Carlos was not in any sense a rebel, but was fighting for
his rights, and that although he tried to subvert the throne and
Constitution of Spain he could not be regarded in the light of a
rebel. Then again, anyone would suppose that the men who have
gone to the Soudan have been sent there compulsorily. Now it
is a well known fact that every soldier went voluntarily, and that
nothing like compulsion was used. It has been said also, and a
great deal has been attempted to be made of the assertion, that
the British Government only accepted our offer of troops out of
compliment to us. I submit that such a statement has been com-
pletely refuted. Not only has the British Government cordially
accepted the service of the troops, but her Majesty the Queen has
sent her thanks and congratulations to the Colony and the Prince
of Wales and the Loyal Family have also expressed approval of
the course pursued by New South Wales. The Commander-in-
Chief of the British army and the General in command of the
Egyptian campaign—the Duke of Cambridge and Lord Wolseley
-have both expressed, not only concurrence but admiration at


the action of this Government, and their willingness to accept the
services of our troops. Then, again, that august body, the House
of Lords, has unanimously by a vote of thanks expressed its satis-
faction, and the Lord Mayor of London and the Corporation of
that great city have also approved of our action. The leading
public men of England, representing all shades of political opinion,
and representing also art, science, and literature, have all expressed
approval. And, lastly, the people of England as a whole are now
expressing their concurrence, for we find by late cablegrams that
an address is being signed throughout the United Kingdom in
which the Colony is thanked for its offer of troops. Therefore, I
contend that the Imperial Government have not accepted the
services of our troops merely out of compliment to us. Then,
again, all the adjoining colonies have approved of the action taken.
Perhaps my honorable friend at the head of the Opposition will
pardon me if I make some slight reference to the part he took at the
embarkation of the troops. I have referred to the unbounded en-
thusiasm which animated all who were present on that great occasion;
but could there be a more unmistakable illustration of the general
enthusiasm than the patriotic conduct of the Nestor of the Assem-
bly, our honorable and distinguished friend, Sir John Robertson
who, in the fervour of his feelings, mounted the rigging of the
steamship “Namoi,” where he appeared waving a last farewell to the
departing troops. The sight was observed by thousands of people
to whom it gave the greatest gratification. That is one evidence
apart from many others, I could cite of the admiration which seemed
to fill the minds of many persons at the departure of the troops.
This accomplished fact has brought us nearer to a close and sub-
stantial imperial connection than any other occurrence on record.
I will not deny that many able speeches have been made against
the action of the Government, and I may refer to the speech of the
honorable member for Morpeth as being for the most part logical
and terse in expression, and one of the best utterances the honor-
able and learned member has made in this House. I think that
if any honorable member wavered at all in his adhesion to the Go-
vernment the speech of the honorable and learned member would


to a certain extent have converted him. That speech, however,
was marred by one or two references which I think would have
been better left out. It is quite a mistake for the honorable and
learned member to assume that the troops which have been sent
away were undisciplined, and that they had no military experience.
I know that it was the desire of the Government to send no
persons except those who had had a previous military experience.
An educated young man, who had passed his examination as an
officer on one of the mail steamers, came and asked me to give him
a letter of introduction to Colonel Richardson. I asked if his
friends objected, and he told me that he only had a sister, who
was not likely to do so. He waited on Colonel Richardson, but
that gentleman declined to take him because he had not had
any military experience. The same young man made a second
attempt to get enrolled, but was again refused for the same
reason. I mention this to show that the statement of the
honorable and learned member is not correct. The troops
that we sent to the Soudan had been well drilled, and they
executed their evolutions in a manner that gave satisfaction to
those who are competent judges in military matters. lam in-
formed on the best authority that these troops consisted of veteran
volunteers and men who had served in the British army, and I am
sure that they will give a good account of themselves whenever a
call to duty shall put them to the test. One might suppose from
what some honorable members said, that we had no interest in
the protection of British commerce, and that we should sit quietly
by whilst the great nation from which we sprung is being assailed
on many sides. I believe that no feeling other than one of the
purest patriotism induced the Attorney-General to make the offer
of troops to the British Government. A great deal has been said
about the honorable and learned gentleman wishing to promote
his own advancement, and that he made this offer of troops for
no other purpose. I have had the privilege of knowing the
Attorney-General for some twenty-nine years—in fact, since I
was a mere lad. I recollect the time when he opposed at an
election one of the most estimable and influential men in the


Colony, the late Mr. Fairfax, and defeated him. On entering this
Chamber the honorable and learned member took a leading
position among the gentlemen here, and soon afterwards he rose
by the force of his abilities to the position of Solicitor-General,
the duties of which office he discharged with great ability, and to
the satisfaction of the public. Subsequently a sum of £5,000 was
yoted for the employment of immigration lecturers in England,
and Mr. Dailey was unanimously appointed one of the lecturers
by this House. He reluctantly accepted the position, and went
to England, where he remained for some time. On his return
subsequently he again occupied a place in the foremost rank of
our politicians. From that time up to the present the honorable
gentleman has occupied a prominent place in £>litical life. Nine
years ago he was offered, and refused, the position of judge of the
Supreme Court, that position which is now so worthily filled by
Sir William Manning. How can it be said then that he has been
actuated by any other than pure motives 1 It has been said that
a desire to secure a title was the mainspring of the Attorney-
General’s action ; but I deny it. I believe that if the honorable
and learned gentleman had wished it he could have had a title
years ago. I believe that he was actuated by pure motives in
offering the services of our troops to the mother country. The
Attorney-General has been so assailed that I thought that I ought
to make these few remarks. It cannot be said that the honorable
gentleman was influenced by personal motives, or by vanity, or
ambition. It might be supposed from some of the arguments
used that there was no enthusiasm on the part of the men who
formed the contingent; but we know that the greatest enthusiasm
prevailed amongst them, and that they were most anxious to go to
the Soudan. None of them were forced to go, and none refused
to obey the orders of the officers. I think that for the expedition
shown in making all the preparations for the despatch of the con-
tingent the Government deserve, instead of condemnation, the
gratitude, and the thanks of the community. Such a fact has
scarcely been known in the history of any country. In little more
than a fortnight ships were engaged and got ready, horses were


selected and purchased, the corps were formed, and all prepara
tions for the embarkation were completed, without any fiasco or
hitch of any kind. I believe that the transmission of troops to
the Soudan will be followed by results which will repay us in a
manifold degree by bringing us into a stronger light before the
whole civilized world, and by binding us closer than heretofore to
the empire. Honorable members may have read a short time ago
an extract from an English newspaper, in which Sydney was de-
scribed as a small village near the city of Melbourne, in the colony
of Victoria. Ido not think that such a mistake is likely to occur
in future. The British public will have evidence of the import-
ance of New South Wales, and Sydney instead of being regarded
as a small village near the city of Melbourne, in the colony of
Victoria, will be known as the queen city of the south, as a mari-
time centre of great importance, containing something like 250,000
inhabitants, and as being the capital of the most important colony
in the Australian group. Objections have been raised by some
honorable members to the formation of the patriotic fund, on the
ground that they do not approve of the action of the Government.
That spirit did not animate the leading minds of England when a
patriotic fund was being formed at the time of the Crimean war.
I may refer to the action of the party called the peace party in
England, composed of men who disapproved entirely of the war
and did all in their power to prevent it, yet they assisted in the
formation of the patriotic fund, and subscribed largely towards it.
I would ask the attention of honorable members while I read a
short extract from a speech made by Lord John Russell at the
Mansion House, London, in November, 1854, with reference to
the patriotic fund. In the course of his speech he said :
If the war were altogether in error, we should not be the less inclined to
support these brave men who, at the call of their country and desire of
their Queen, had gone forth to the East to distant climes, to brave every
privation, to submit to'every disease, to encounter every enemy that might
be found. This is not a question depending on the general policy of the
war ; it is a question that depends upon the judgment that you are about
to pass upon your countrymen in arms. And upon this topic I think that
whatever may be said with respect to the war—upon which I think the
people are nearly unanimous—upon this subject public opinion will be quite
unanimous.


And further on the noble lord said :
It is to the voluntary zeal, to the voluntary liberality of the people of the
country that we must look to supplying the necessities of those widows and
orphans, and to give that last consolation which a man dying on the field of
battle, or expiring on the bed of sickness, can have; that though his arm
may be wanting, that his family may yet look to the gratitude of his country
for the comfort of their future life.
What a different spirit animates some leading lights outside this
Chamber with regard to our patriotic fund 1 They have done all
that they can to prevent its success ? but notwithstanding their
opposition I, as a member of the committee, can say that the fund
is in a very prosperous condition. At this moment the committee
have a sum of nearly £30,000 at deposit, and they hope that in a
short time the total amount of subscriptions will reach at least
£50,000. It is not my intention to occupy the time of the House
further on the subject. But in conclusion I would venture to ex-
press the hope that those honorable members who, although pro-
testing against the action of the Government, have intimated their
intention to vote the necessary supplies and also the Indemnity
Bill, will now gracefully yield to the majority and allow the
address to be carried on the voices without a division, a course
which I know many honorable members on the Opposition side
are desirous of adopting.
Despatch op N.S.W. Troops to the Soudan.
[Extract from Speech of Mr. It. Burdett Smith, M.P., delivered
at a banquet given to him by his constituents at Kempsey, Macleay
River, Hew South Wales, on 7th May, 1885, and as reported in
the newspapers published in the district.]
He would now refer to the action he took in the Soudan affair,
a subject on which opinions differed greatly, but on which all
reasonable men “ agreed to differ,” namely, the transmission of
the N.S.W. Contingent to Egypt. In that movement he took a
somewhat prominent part and was not ashamed—nay, was proud
of it. When the news of the treacherous assassination of that
glorious Scottish Christian hero General Gordon became known,
bitter grief and indignation smote the heart of the community,


and in that mingled feeling he participated. The shock the foul
deed occasioned must have made every loyal British subject
desirous to bring a nefarious rebellion to a speedy conclusion. It
had ceased from being a question of putting down the slave trade?
and had become one of maintaining the honour of the Empire.
In the whole Dominion, New South Wales was the first Colonial
possession that showed it possessed the spirit of the race from
which so many of its citizens sprang. India, thousands of miles
away, caught the echo of this patriotic enthusiasm. Was it sur-
prising then, that Australia should feel a similar thrill, and show
it was not less loyal than chilling Canada or burning India ? Mr.
Dailey, who knew how to interpret the temper of his countrymen
correctly, took note of the public feeling—he did more, he acted
in full accord with his colleagues in a manner which had already
won the admiration of the whole civilized world. (Loud and pro-
longed cheers.) He took in the situation at a glance. His love
of and gratitude to the mother country probably first stimulated
him to think of some means to give evidence of both—not on his
own account or to gratify his own feelings, but to prove that the
Colony was loyal to the core. He saw his opportunity and seized
it; he knew the people and he trusted in their approval of his bold
conduct. To delay was to frustrate the whole scheme—grand object
in view. He made an offer which England, Queen, Ministers,
Lords, and Commons, and the great bulk of the people received
with intense satisfaction. When the offer was accepted they felt
here in New South Wales that they were, in a higher sense than
constitutional relations, an integral portion of the British Empire.
Speaking for himself, he (Mr. Smith) felt that he was as much a
member of that great nation as if he had been born in. Yorkshire,
the county of Cork, or in one of the Cromartys, that dot Boss-
shire. (Cheers.) Animated by those sentiments he at once gave
his adhesion to the movement that was initiated for the establish-
ment of a Patriotic Fund, and he was the first to sign the
requisition to the Mayor of Sydney, requesting him to call a
public meeting in order to elicit public opinion on the whole sub-
ject. That meeting was convened accordingly, the largest ever


held in Australasia, in which some 15,000 persons attended, and
at it (by special invitation) he spoke. The words he then uttered
would best convey to them a just notion of the motives which
influenced him. With their permission he would read a brief
report of what he then said, taken from the Sydney Morning
Herald, of the 21st March. [Extract read.] Whatever technical
objections could be validly used to the action of the Government
in sending the contingent to the Soudan they were submerged in
the flood of enthusiastic approval which swept over the country.
Parliament, when called upon, absolutely condoned “ the noble
precipitancy” of the act, and people of all shades of political and
religious opinion warmly approved of the Parliamentary approval.
The state of the Patriotic Fund was an evidence of the truth of
that statement. One of the first to signify his sympathy was
Archbishop Moran, who was followed by several of his clergy.
The list published would, by the very names recorded, show that
the native-born of the “ Three Kingdoms”—England, Ireland and
Scotland—settled amongst them had endorsed the action of the
Government by relieving it from the responsibilities of providing
for the possible widows, orphans, or other near relations of those
who voluntarily joined the contingent. (Cheers.) Irishmen
might especially be. proud of the event. They had completed a
parallel in European history perfectly unique. Just as their
illustrious countryman the Great Duke of Wellington led the
armies of Europe in the perilous days of the opening of the present
century, so is their distinguished countryman, General Lord
Wolseley, now commanding the expedition under which “our
boys” serve, with that valour and foresight for which he made
himself famous throughout the world. It was needless to say
much more on that theme. Those who did not, or could not, feel
the thrill of satisfaction which animates all who approved of the
action of the Government in the Soudan affair, would not be
converted from their matter-of-fact conclusions. Those of their
brave soldiers who had gone forth to fight in England’s battles
would, he trusted in God’s mercy, return to them safe and sound,
covered with glory, real and not “painted soldiers,” but if any


fell, as they must fear some would, theirs will be the brightest
laurel and the highest reward ; they fell fighting for their Queen
and country, and their memory would be for ever consecrated in
the affections of the British nations. (Great cheers.)
Extract from Speech Delivered in the Parliament of
New South Wales, 23rd September, 1885.
(From the “Parliamentary Debates.”)
Mr. It. Burdett Smith said : “As this debate has been
protracted to unusual limits I shall not detain the House at
any considerable length. I deem it my duty, however, not to give
a silent vote with respect to some of the important matters men-
tioned in the Governor’s speech. I shall briefly refer in the first
place to the despatch of the contingent to the Soudan. The action
I took with reference to that important occurrence is well known.
I supported the movement from first to last, believing that it
originated in a spirit of true patriotism. Nor was the wish to
assist the mother country in the hour of her peril confined to this
Colony; it sprang up spontaneously in Canada, India, and in other
British possessions, and I venture to think that the result will be
to the permanent advantage of the Colony. I do not think that
I need refer at any greater length to that matter. In the speeches
I have delivered upon it—the first at one of the most important
meetings ever held in the Colony, at which I believe there were
no fewer than 16,000 persons present —and also in the speeches I
have delivered in this Chamber, I have expressed my views, and
they are pretty well known throughout the Colony. I have since
also been before my constituents, and at every place to w r hich I
went my action was approved of. Of course I am aware that
hon. members with whom I am associated on this side of the
House differ from me with reference to that subject, and some of
them have even ventured to predict that those members who sup-
ported the movement will be ostracised from public life at the next
general election. I may be one of those unfortunates ; but I am
quite willing to take my chance before my constituents. I have


no doubt that they will thoroughly indorse my action at the baliot-
box. But there are some honorable members who are associated
with me who also supported the movement, among them being my
esteemed and venerated friend, the honorable member for Mud see
(Sir John Robertson), whose absence from the House honorable
members on both sides deplore. The honorable member for
Monaro (Mr. Badgery) and the honorable member for Yass Plains,
both of whom sit on the Opposition side of the House, supported
the movement; and the honorable member' for Camden (Mr.
Garrett) has told us that if he had been in the House at the time
the matter was discussed he would also have supported it.”
Extract from speech delivered by Mr. R Burdett Smith, M.P.,
at a banquet given by the citizens of Sydney and Members
of Parliament to him, on the eve of his departure for
Europe, sth April, 1886, in reply to the toast of his health.
Mr. R Burdett Smith, M.P., said,—There is another point to
which I must refer as briefly as possible, and that is the part I
took in the vindication of the patriotism and loyalty of sending
a military contingent to the Soudan. In the matter I feel neither
regret nor shame. (Cheers.) We proved to the civilised world
that we were loyal to the mother country, and that as we rejoiced
in her greatness so were we prepared to assist her in her troubles.
(Cheers.) The Soudan movement was, apart from its intrinsic
merits, a very good thing for New South Wales. It brought this
Colony into the light of an Imperial recognition, which she could
not otherwise expect to attain for many years to come. From the
Gracious Sovereign on the throne, —(cheers) —from the Houses of
Lords and Commons, from corporate bodies, from the British
people generally, we have received complimentary acknowledgments
which should make every heart in the community thrill with
delight. (Cheers.) Yes, on that occasion we did a great thing
and a good thing, and did it without any needless delay. (Cheers.)
Again I glory in the Soudan Contingent, and maintain that our
soldiers did the Colony and the Mother Country a real service


(Cheers.) Although I have been put to some inconvenience for
my opinions on this subject, in fact, met with opposition at the
late General Election mainly on account of my Soudan views, still
I have not modified them in any respect, and maintain that as we
are part and parcel of the Empire, for weal or woe, we should
never forget our responsibilities, which are included in our
allegiance, nor should we cravenly shrink from aiding Old
England in her hour of need! (Cheers,) We shall never be
such recreants. (Cheers,)
\Letter to Mr. Dailey. ]
203, Macquarie-street, Sydney, 1 October, 1888.
My dear Mr. Dailey,
There is in display at the New South Wales Court,
Melbourne Exhibition, a large portrait cabinet of the whole of the
Soudan Contingent, which. attracts considerable attention. As
you took such a prominent and energetic part in promoting that
expedition, I venture to think it would be appropriate if your
portrait appeared at the head of the cabinet. Permit me, there-
fore, to ask you to favour me with a large sized photograph, with
your autograph, which I will cause to be framed, and placed in
the best position.
Believe me to remain,
Yours very sincerely,
R. BURDETT SMITH,
Bight Honorable W. B. Dailey, P.C., M.L.C.
[Letter of Mr. Dailey .]
“ Annery,” Darling Point, 3 October, 1888.
My dear Mr. Burdett Smith,
It was like your characteristic courtesy and thought-
fulness to suggest the attachment of my portrait to your historical
picture of the Soudan Contingent at your Exhibition in Mel-
bourne. But as you know in the performance of that act, which
has done more to elevate these Australian Colonies in the eyes of


the universal world than anything which has taken place since
their foundation, I have only tasted suffering, the grossest mis-
representations, and have been charged with every kind of offence
in the gratification of a selfish and inordinate ambition. I now
scarcely ever open my mouth about a subject in which I thought
I should have shared in the glory of our country in its achieve-
ment. You will understand how reluctant lam to take any step
to give the least justification for suggestions that I had any
personal purposes to serve in an action which you, at all events,
do not require to be informed, was undertaken in the purest
spirit of devoted unselfishness, and the labour attending which,
added to that which I undertook for my poor dear friend Stuart,
has ruined my constitution and wrecked my life. I write thus
frankly to you, as an old friend whom I knew so long ago, and
have always respected so much, so that you may not misunder-
stand my disinclination to send my portrait.
Yours very sincerely,
My dear Mr. Burdett Smith,
WILLIAM B. DALLEY.
R. Burdett Smith, Esq., M.P.,
Executive Commissioner for New South Wales
Centennial International Exhibition, Melbourne.
[Letter in reply to Mr. Dalley.\
203 Macquarie-street, Sydney,
4 October, 1888.
My dear Mr. Dailey,
I have just received your extremely kind note of the
3rd instant, and although I very much regret that you have not
permitted me to attach your portrait to the historical cabinet of
the Soudan Contingent, now being exhibited in Melbourne, I
must, however, express my deepest sympathy with the circum-
stances which have induced you to come to that conclusion. One
thing must afford you true consolation, namely, that history will
vindicate your patriotic action in reference to the Contingent, as
well as every other act of your brilliant public career. It gives


me great personal satisfaction to know that on every occasion,
both in England and Australia, I eulogised your farseeing, states-
manlike, and unselfish conduct in proving by unquestionable
evidence the devoted loyalty of New South Wales to the British
Crown. I can emphatically vouch that that great undertaking has
done more to improve the friendly relations of the Mother
Country with Australia, and bring the latter into greater promi-
nence before the Empire, than any event that had previously
occurred.
Trusting that you will soon be restored to perfect health,
Believe me, my dear Mr. Dailey,
Yours very sincerely,
R. BTJRDETT SMITH.
Right Honorable W. B. Dailey, P.C., M.L.C.
Sydney: Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lBB9.


TAFp
BISUO
fisv^rt


1508
01213708


