









THE
Wairarapa Wilderness,
IN WHICH WILL BE FOUND,
THE WANDERINGS OF THE PASSENGERS
ON THE
FROM
AUCKLAND TO THE SOUTH SEA ISLANDS AND BACK.
DURING
THE MONTH OF JULY, 1884.




THE
Wairarapa Wilderness,
in WHICH WILL BE FOUND,
THE WANDERINGS OF THE PASSENGERS
OH THE
FBOM
AUCKLAND TO THE SOUTH SEA ISLANDS AND BACK,
DDEXNS
THE MONTH OF JULY, 1884.


LOG of the
STEAMSHIP “ WAIRARAPA’S ”
SECOND EXCURSION TO THE SOUTH SEA
ISLANDS, STARTING FROM
AUCKLAND, NEW ZEALAND, MONDAY, 7th JULY, 1884, ARRIVING BACK AT AUCKLAND, SATURDAY,
2nd AUGUST, 1884.
Extract from the Log Book, giving a record of the Ship's daily position, also hours of arrival and departure at and from all places of call, etc.
Port
Day of
Week.
Date.
Hour.
Latitude,
Longitude.
Distance.
Daily
Bun.
Thermo-
meter.
Baro-
meter.
State of Weather, Direction of Wind, and
Bemarks.
Left
Auckland
Monday ..
July
7th
5*20 p.m.
Light N.W. breeze, clear weather, and
smooth sea.
Tuesday ..
8th
, #
33° 3' S.
175° 18' E.
239
56°
30-40
Light westerly breeze, clear weather, and
smooth sea.
Wednesday
9th
28° 4' S.
176° 34' E.
310
62°
3G-40
Light westerly breeze, calm, clear weather.
and smooth sea.
Thursday
10th
® e
23° 4' S.
177° 17' E.
296
68°
30-30
Variable easterly airs, dull and overcast
weather, and sea smooth.
Fiji Group.
Arrived ..
Suva
Friday
11th
1*50 p.m.
300
76°
30-20
Brisk easterly breeze, dull and overcast
weather; sea moderate.
Laying @
Suva
Saturday..
12th
••
82°
30-15
Light E.S.E. breeze; cloudy weather.
Left
Suva
Sunday ..
13th
9-40 a.m.
..
79°
30-25
Light south-easterly breeze; fine and clear
weather.
Arrived ..
Levuka ..
99
2*10 p.m.
56
79°
30*15
Laying @
Levuka ..
Monday ..
14th
79°
30-20
Light south-easterly breeze; fine and clear
weather.
Left
Levuka ..
Tuesday ..
15th
7*20 a.m.
••
••
••
Arrived ..
Yuna Pt., Taviuni
2-20 p.m.
78
78°
30-20
Wind moderate and light, east-south-
easterly; clear weather.
Left
Vuna Pt., Taviuni
99
IJ
4 a.m.
••
••
••
••
••


Arrived ..
Mango Island
Wednesday
16th
11 a.m.
78
O
CO
30*25
Wind moderate and light, east-south-
Left
Mango Island
Thursday
17th
6-30 a.m.
79°
30*25
easterly ; clear weather; sea moderate.
Wind fresh, south-easterly; clear weather;
At Sea ..
Samoa or Navigator
Friday
Group.
sea moderate.
Arrived ..
18th
••
15° 24' S.
175° 2' W.
297
78°
3020
Wind fresh, south-easterly ; clear weather;
sea moderate.
Apia
Saturday..
19th
9 a.m.
286
84°
30-20
Wind fresh, south-easterly; clear weather;
Laying @
Apia
sea moderate.
Sunday ..
20th
* ,
, ,
88°
30*15
Wind moderate, E.S.E.; weather fine
Left
and clear.
Apia
Monday ..
21st
5 p.m.
87°
30-20
Wind moderate, E.S.E.; weather fine
Arrived ..
Pago Pago
and clear.
Tuesday ..
22nd
7*30 a.m.
82
88°
30-20
Wind moderate, E.S.E.; weather fine
Left
Pago Pago
and clear.
Wednesday
23rd
10 a.m.
m m
79°
30-20
Wind moderate, E.S.E.; weather fine
At Sea ..
and clear.
Thursday
24th
, ,
78°
30-20
Wind fresh, S.E.; weather cloudy, with
showers of rain, and S.E. swell.
Arrived ..
Tongan or Friendl
v Group,
Yavau ..
Friday
25th
8-20 a.m.
330
78°
30*20
Wind fresh, S.E.; weather cloudy, with
Laying @
Yavau ..
showers of rain, and S.E. swell. *
Saturday..
26th
••
81°
30-25
Light S.E. breeze; fine and clear weather.
Left
Yavau ..
Sunday ..
27th
7 a.m.
79°
30-20
Light S.E. breeze; fine and clear weather;
Arrived ..
Tongatabu
smooth sea.
Monday ..
28th
9*15 a.m.
180
88°
30-20
Calm and easterly airs; weather cloudy
Left
Tongatabu
and fine.
Tuesday ..
29th
3 p.m.
, ,
82°
30*15
Moderate south-easterly breeze and cloudy
Wednesday
weather.
80th
..
24° 18' S.
178° 6' W.
281
70°
30-25
Variable easterly and southerly breeze;
Thursday
31st
weather cloudy and showery.
..
28° 28' S.
178° 52' E.
320
62°
30*20
Variable easterly and southerly breeze;
Friday
Aug.
weather cloudy ; sea moderate.
1st
..
32° 29' S.
176° 9' E.
291
59°
30*15
Variable southerly moderate breeze;
Arrived .,
Auckland
weather and sea moderate.
Saturday..
2nd
10 a.m.
• •
9 •
308
55°
30*15
Moderate S.W. breeze ; cloudy weather ;
smooth sea.
3,732


¥PE OF
THE UNION STEAM SHIP COMPANY’S
JS.JS. “Wpi^TOP/L”
Captain— H. W. H. CHATFIBLD.
Chief Officer— JAMES STOTT. Chief Engineer— W. M. MOWATT.
Second Officer— R. B. MONKMAN. Second Engineer— W. LODDER.
Third Officer —A, ANDERSON. Third Engineer— D. PATON.
Fourth Officer— H. ROWNSLEY. Fourth Engineer— W. TITCHNER.
Extra Officers:
V. NIGHTINGALE. | J. LUCE.
Purser— H. C. TAYLER.
Chief Steward—E. BABBITTS. Stewardesses—Mrs. NELSON and Miss PHELAN,
ME. W. F. WHEELER accompanies the vessel as representative of the Company,
and will take a personal interest in the arrangements for the comfort and social enjoy
ment of passengers.


DIIp(MONS.
The following General Directions for the Cruise are extracted from the Company's
special handbook:—
Meals. —Tea and Coffee will be served from 6 to 7 a.m. Breakfast :
At any time from Bto 10 a.m.; Entrees being served from tbe pantry,
and Grills to order. Luncheon : At any time from 12.30 to 2 p.m. After-
noon Tea; At 4 p.m. Dinner: Table d’Hote at 6.30 p.m. at sea, and 7
p.m. in port. Wines, &c., required to be iced to be ordered at least one
hour prior to meal being served. In ordering Wines or other Befresh-
ments, passengers are requested to sign Wine Cards, which will be presented
for settlement once a week.
The Ship’s Barber will be in attendance upon gentlemen requiring his
services every morning in the barber’s shop on the fore-deck.
Extra Boats have been provided for the use of passengers, and every
facility will be given for landing and exploring at the several places of call.
Every boat will be in charge of an officer, who will have sole control of the
boat’s movements, and will fix the hours at which passengers must be on
board to return to the steamer.
Lights will be turned off in the Saloon, State-rooms, Smoking-room,
and on Deck at 11.30 p.m., unless otherwise permitted by the Captain.
The Bar will be closed at 11.30 p.m.
The Baggage-room will be open each day at 7.30 a.m. when at anchor,
and at 4 p.m., when at sea. Passengers requiring their luggage are
requested to give previous intimation to the Purser.


OQR P^gEpEl^
Betham, Mr. C. G. de England Kidman, Mrs, Sydney
Bloomfield, Mr. G. E. Auckland Kidman, Mr. A. Sydney
Bloomfield, Mr. L. R. Auckland Kidman, Miss Sydney
Buckland, Mr. H. Auckland
Burton, Mr. A. H. Dunedin Macdonald, Dr. Dunedin
Macdonald, Mrs. Dunedin
Campbell, Mr. D. Melbourne Macdonald Miss Dunedin
Carnegie, Hon. C. Scotland Mair, Major Auckland
Chambers, Mr. W. K. Gisborne McLaren, Mr. H. England
Crossman, Mr. E. V. England McLaren, Mr. J.S, England
Crossman, Mr. J. H. England McLean, Mrs. G. Dunedin
Millar, Mr. E. Scotland
Donner, Mr. P. W. Gisborne Motion. Mr. W. Auckland
Downes, Mr. D. Eeilding
Drummond, Mr. D. Dunedin Patch, Mr, J. England
Payne, Dr. Thames
Ewing, Mr. E. Dunedin Payne, Mrs. Thames
Ewing, Miss Dunedin Popham, Mr. F, A. L, England
Prudhoe, Mr. W. Christchurch
Farie, Mr. E. Melbourne
Field, Miss United States Eishworth, Eev. E. S. Oamaru
Finlay, Mr. W. Wellington
Forsyth, Miss Dunedin Sanders, Mr. O. G. Sydney
Fraser, Hon. Capt. Dunedin Seed, Mr. W. Wellington
Fraser, Mrs. Dunedin Shaw, Mr. J. M. England
Singleton, Mr. H. F. - Melbourne
Gardener, Mr. H. D. Lyttelton Smillie, Mrs. A. Oamaru
Gerard, Mr. G. Christchurch Smith, Mr. E. Christchurch
Gerard, Mr. W. Christchurch Smith, Mr. E. F. England
Gerard, Mrs. Christchurch Still, Mr. W. T. England
Gerard, Miss Christchurch
Gething, Mr. H. England Tebbutt, Eev. Canon England
Gibbs, Mr. V. Melbourne Tebbutt, Mrs. England
Good, Mr. J. H. England Thompson, Mr. J. Dunedin
Gowring, Mr. G. H. England Tombs, Mr. W, Christchurch
Twentyman, Mr. J. H. Christchurch
Harris, Mr. C. A., Jun. Auckland Twentyman, Miss Christchurch
Henderson, Mr. E. Scotland
Hirschberg, Mrs, Wellington Whatman, Mr. C. M. C. England
Hirschberg, Miss Wellington Whatman, Mrs. England
Wheeler, Mr. W. F. Wellington
Icely, Mr. T. E. Sydney Wilson, Mr. C. J. Christchurch
Inder, Mr. W. Maseby Wilson, Mrs. W. Christchurch
Inwood, Mr. A. K. Southbridge Wilson, Miss Christchurch
Wilson, Miss M. Dunedin
Kane, Mr. B. W. Wellington Wright, Mr, J. T. Dunedin
Kidman, Mr. Sydney
20 from England and Scotland 6 from Sydney
17 „ Otago 4 „ Melbourne
14 ~ Christchurch 2 „ Gisborne
8 „ Auckland 1 „ United States
7 „ Wellington
Total ... 79.


THE
Mliui;iiva|iii ®ili(nnw t
Published at ail sorts of irregular intervals.
No. I.] FRIDAY, JULY 18. [lBBl.
This paper is intended for the use of any of the passengers who care to look at it. It is
not to be taken out of the public rooms of the ship; and it is particularly requested
that great care will be taken if it is read on deck in a toind. The printer's devils,
suffering much from the heat and confinement below, would probably refuse to re-pro-
duce any portion that might be lost overboard.
EDITOIR/lli PREE^CE.
WELCOME, little stranger ” is the conventional expression with
mimm which human beings are ushered into the world, and we
hope the same kindly sentiment will he entertained by all
its readers towards the Wairaeapa Wilderness. We can-
not pretend that this is a “ fine little boy ” —indeed, the child is rather
weakly, and will require the active assistance of kind friends before it
can run alone.
A newspaper has but the short life of a butterfly—passing to and fro for
a day, and then perishing. Let us hope, at any rate, that the existence of
the Wairaeapa Wilderness may prove the truth of the adage, “ A short
life and a merry one.”
We want everybody to help to produce this desirable result, for we
candidly confess that the Editor is a dull drudge, and expects to have all
the joking done by contributions put into the letter-box. However,
though dull, he is thoroughly trustworthy, or we should not have engaged
him and paid him so heavy a salary. Everyone can therefore depend on
the most inviolable secrecy, and can indulge their humour and pass from
grave to gay, from lively to severe, without the slightest risk of being
found out.
On the 7th of July we started on this notable Expedition to the South
Sea Islands, and up to the time of writing have been fortunate in escaping
the usual horrors of the sea; and whatever else has been neglected, we
fancy very few if any of the passengers have missed then* meals. The
usual ship-board amusements of bull, quoits, etc., etc., have combined to
make the time slip away with great rapidity, and added to this the activity
of Mr. Wheeler has led already to a ball, two concerts, and some sports,
which we will refer to in detail.


B.S. WAIRARAPA.
GENERAL AMUSEMENT COMMITTEE.
©fitters.
Chairman —C. G. De Betham.
Judge —Capt. H. W. H. Chatfield.
Starter —Chief-Officer James Stott.
Secretary and Treasurer —W. F. Wheeler.
Committer.
Bloomfield, L. R. Gowring, G. H. Popham, F. A L.
Drummond, D Inwood, A. R. Still, W. F.
Finlay, W. Kane, E. W. Smith, R. F.
Gething, H. Kidman, jr., A. Gibbs, V.
©mat ibt Cxrmmithr.
De Betham, C. G. | Gowring, G. H. | Popham, F. A. L.
The object of the Committee is the arranging of Concerts, Athletic Sports, and any
amusements which may be agreable to the passengers generally.
Subscriptions not exceeding 2s. 6d. are invited towards Prizes for the Athletic
Sports.
C. G. De Betham,
Chairman.
At Sea, 9th. July, 1884.
A CONCERT
Was given on Tuesday Evening, the Bth July, the following being the
programme :
n T .»TA nmni c ■i. tx » (Mrs.C.Whatman
PIANO DUET-*' Spanish Dance” , M iss Hirschberg
RECITATION—“ The King of the Cats ” Mr. A. H. Burton
SONG —“ Trusty as Steel” .. Mr. A. Kidman
SONG—“ The Veiled Picture” Mr. C. G. de Betham
RECITATION—“ How we beat the favorite ” Mr. Y. Gibbs
SONG—“ The Three Sailor Boys ” Mr. G. H. Gowring
SONG—“ The Mermaid ”j Mr. A. R. Inwood
PIANO—“ Duets,” by Mendelssohn Mr. A. Kidman
SONG—“ I fear no foe ” .. Mr. E. W. Kane
RECITATION—Gemini et Virgo .. . .Mr. 0. G. de Betham
PART SONG—” Drink to me only ” Six voices
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.
The opening duet was much applauded, and it was a matter of general
regret that there was no second piece by the same ladies. Mr. Burton re-
cited a comic piece, “ The King of the Cats,” in a way which showed he
was no novice. Mr. Ctibbs gave the “How we beat the favorite,” and
though he broke down in the middle, yet the quality of the piece selected
atoned for the defective delivery in the ears of a good natured audience.
Mr. Betham was unfortunately not loud enough, so that many of the
Witticisms of C.S.O. (whose recent death is a real blow to lovers of good vers


de societe) were lost on those at the far end of the saloon. The rest of the
programme was carried out to the evident appreciation of the large audience.
We may conclude this brief notice with the hope that we shall not have
entirely to forego the pleasure of hearing the softer voices of the softer sex.
ATHLETICS.
A pew events were carried out on Wednesday afternoon, July 9th, with the
following results:—
SACK RACE—First, Mr. A. Kidman; Second, Mr. F. A. L, Popham
COCK-FIGHTING—First, Mr. J. S. McLaren; Second, Mr. 0. G. de Betham
POTATO RACE—Mr. C. G. de Betham, Mr. G. H. Gowring. Dead heat
PIG’S EYE AND TAlL—First, Mr. 0. G. de Betham; Second, Mr. G. H.
Gowring
In the Sack Race the competitors seemed to have assumed for the nonce
the method of locomotion of the adult kangaroo. Mr. J. S. McLaren
proved himself a cock of no ordinary toughness. Though divers and
cunning devices were relied on for hitting off the pig’s eye and tail, and no
captain ever felt his way more carefully amid coral reefs than did several of
the combatants in this event feel their way about the deck, yet the latter
were considerably astounded on seeing how far they had got out of their
reckoning.
On Sunday, July 14th, Divine Service was conducted in the Saloon at 11
a.m., and also at 8.15 p.m. in the Drawing-room, by the Rev. Canon
Tebbutt.
A SECOND CONCERT
Was given on the Hurricane Deck on Tuesday evening, the 10th July:—
PIANO SOLO—“ Mazeppa ” Mr. A. Kidman
SONG—“ Good Company ” Mr. E. W. Kane
READING—“ From Henry V.” Mr. A. H. Burton
SONG—“ The Village Blacksmith ” Mr. J. Patch
RECITATION—“ Wreck of the Hesperus ” Mr. Y. Gibbs
SONG—“ The Skipper’s Wife ” Mr. J. Thomson
SONG—“ The Twins ”.. .. Mr. R. F. Smith
PIANO AND VIOLIN DUET— .. Mr. A. R. Inwood and Mr. Christensen
RECITATION—“ The Hawk’s Nest ” Mr. V. Gibbs
CHANT, WITH CHORUS—“ Massacre of Phairshon ” ..Hon. 0. Carnegie
GLEE—“ Ye Banks and Braes ” Four Voices.
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.
Where all was so good, it is invidious to pick out individuals, but the
Piano and Violin were intensely popular, and that very funny Chant, “ The
Massacre of Phairshon,” was long and loudly encored, but Mr. Carniegie
could not be induced to come forward again.
WARNING TO SMOKERS.
May never lady press his lips,
His proffered love returning,
Who makes a furnace of his mouth,
And keeps its chimney burning ;
May each true woman shun his charms,
For fear his fumes might choke her,
And none but those who smoke themselves,
Have kisses for a smoker.
Ella.


FIJI.
TOT||jHE group of islands in the South Pacific, named the Fijian Archi-
pelago, lies about 1,100 miles to the north of New Zealand, and
1,760 miles north-east of Sydney, and is situated between latitudes
15° 43' and 19° 48' south, and longitudes 176° 51' east, and 178° 12'
* west. The group comprises 225 islands, of which 80 are in-
habited, and the aggregate area is estimated at about 7,400 square miles.
The following are the names and areas of the principal islands ;
Yiti Levu (or Great Fiji), 4,112 square miles ; Yanua Levu (or Great
Land), 2,482 square miles ; Taviuni, 217 square miles ; Kandavu, 124 square
miles ; Koro, 57 square miles; Angau, 46 square miles ; Ovalau, 42 square
miles; Moala, 28 square miles ; Eambi, 28 square miles ; Quamea, 26
square miles ; Loma Loma, 24 square miles ; Mango 10 square miles.
Most of the islands are high and mountainous, rising abruptly from the
sea, the peaks of the mountain ranges attaining an altitude of from 2000 to
5000 feet. The islands, which are in nearly all instances almost sur-
rounded by reefs of coral, are mostly of volcanic origin, are thickly wooded,
and well watered by numerous rivers, while the soil is exceedingly fertile.
Population. —Whites, 2,500; Natives, and coloured immigrants, about
125,000
Race.— The Fijians are a branch of the Papuan race, and are a fine,
well-made people ; dark complexion, good physique, and fairly intelligent
cast of countenance. Their great pride is their hair, which is remarkably
thick and wiry, and naturally assumes a bushy form.
Government.— Fiji was ceded to the British Crown by King Cacabau,
on 80th September, 1874, being on that date formally surrendered to Sir
Hercules Robinson, C.M.G., Governor of New South Wales, as representa-
tive of the Queen. Sir Arthur Gordon, G.C.M.G., the first Governor,
landed at Levuka, Ovalau, on 24th June, 1875. He was succeeded by the
present Governor, Sir Geo. W. Des Vceux, K.C.M.G. The Governor is
assisted by an executive council and legislative assembly, both nominated
by him.
Exports. —Sugar, maize, coffee, copra, and fruits. Cotton was at one
time largely exported, but the low price that has ruled in England for the
last few years has caused planters to discontinue cultivating it.
CRICKED.
SipjtyN the arrival of the " Wairarapa " at Suva, the passengers, as might
have been expected, wandered about anxious to see the sights
of a country so lately admitted to the benefits of civilization. The
Vfxyf questions to be asked were, how far has contact with Europeans
"y ' affected the natives, and has the native Fijian the capacity to adapt
himself to the higher civilization of the British race ?
Whilst meditating on these deep problems one of our party was heard to
exclaim, " I see a human cricket bat." Here then indeed was a crucial test.
Cricket, that enobling game, existed in Fiji. No surprise this, for cricket
follows the Anglo-Saxon all over the world ; but had the native race the
talent to adapt itself to a game as different from their native sports as the
chimney-pot hat of Pall Mall from the style of head gear adopted by our
Polynesian brethren ?


The question was soon solved by the unexplained though unerring laws
of national affinity. Most of the cricketers of the " Wairarapa " (and any
one who has ever loved the game, however old or crippled, may be counted
still a cricketer) found themselves, within an hour or two of their landing,
looking with admiration at two natives of splendid physique, who were
bowling in most orthodox fashion at a regularly pitched wicket.
What might have been naturally expected followed. Mr. Wallington,
secretary to the High Commissioner, at once challenged the visitors to bring
an eleven to play against his promising pupils. To refuse this would have
been to show a most uncricketlike spirit; and though at the last moment it
was found that illness and indisposition had deprived the "Wairarapa"
eleven of some of those from whom most was expected, still, calling out the
reserve forces, enough were got together to enable the challenge to be
accepted.
The temptation of seeing an eleven, of which eight were native Fijians,
in the field was sufficient to draw together enough lovers of the game
to do all in their power to help the progress of the noble art in the new
country.
About the performance of the " Wairarapa " eleven little need be said.
A scratch team even of men in practice rarely works well together, and in
this case there was no exception to prove the rule. The interest of course
centred in the form shown by the native Fijian cricketers, and it is much
to be regretted that time did not permit the innings of their side to be
completed. Enough was seen, however, to enable a cricketer to form a
decided opinion. There can be no doubt that the native Fijians have a very
great natural capacity for cricket. Their fielding on ground, very different
from the well levelled cricket grounds of England, was all that could be
desired ; their bowling was full of promise. It was also observable that
there was no lack of change bowlers. And of their batting it may be said
that the good training by Mr. Wallington had not been without its reward,
as there was none of the ungainly mowing so commonly seen in village
green elevens; but every man seemed to play with a good upright bat, and
was able in addition to hit hard if opportunity offered. The result of the
match may be summed up thus ;• —The " Wairarapa" eleven, though
thoroughly beaten, returned to the ship in a most happy state of mind.
They themselves spent a pleasant afternoon, and felt that they had really
given a helping hand to the laudable efforts of Mr. Wallington to render
cricket a success in Fiji, amongst that noble looking race who are the last
and certainly not the least addition to the subjects of the Queen, on whose
Empire the sun never sets.
Suva, Saturday, 12th July, 1884.
¥JIE Ji(mm E£CHI^ION
(l/jf * HIS excursion being the only one which is mentioned in our pro-
gramme as a river excursion must of necessity present different
forms of adventure to any of the other boating expeditions.
Owing to the presence of sand-banks and other obstacles, besides
that tide which waits for no man, there was considerable pos-
sibility of our not being able to regain our floating home before dark-
ness set in. As it happened, all went as well as could be expected, for
although trivial delays occurred owing to the difficulties of navigation,
the trip was a pleasant and successful one. The morning was overcast
and showery, hut soon cleared.


A light-draught steamer, the “ Thistle,” having been chartered, she
started from the ship at 7 a.m. on Saturday, 12th July, with some thirty-
five passengers on board and five of the ships’ boats in tow, which she took
right up the river to the sugar mill, a distance of eight miles from the
mouth of the Eewa Eiver, and eleven miles on. Our destination was
reached at II a.m. Being obliged to save the tide the “ Thistle ” had to
return at once to the sea, leaving us and our boats. The works having
been visited, ample justice was done to the lunch which the ship bad sent
with us, and the return sounded at 1.80 p.m. The labour of rowing down
the river was much lightened by the kindness of the officials at the mill,
who put a launch at our disposal, which towed us down as far as the native
village of Eewa, where we lauded for a short space. Soon after re-embark-
ing it was found necessary to take to the oars again, as owing to the
shallowness of the water the launch could not assist us any farther. The
boats were therefore made fast one to another, and we proceeded in a
string towards the “ Thistle,” which was waiting just outside. We had to
cast off when near her and let each crew work their own way, more or less
difficulty being experienced by all, the water being very shallow in places, and
the channel not clearly defined. But having at length got safely on the
steamer, and the boats being taken in tow, we thus proceeded till the
“Wairarapa” was nearly reached, when, by some mistake, we ran
aground, and had once more to take to our boats, reaching our own ship
when the light had quite departed—but what mattered that when we were
just in time for dinner ! Our day had been an interesting one. Plenty of
fruit was obtainable, such as bananas, yams, kumaras, taros, and, of
course, cocoanuts. We were more fortunate than were those who came on
the first expedition, for then being disappointed in obtaining a steamer
from Suva, the ship’s launch had to be used to tow them up to the mill,
and besides being hardly powerful enough to tow up so many boats in the
available time, she is also unsuitable owing to the depth of water she
draws.
Those passengers at Suva who did not go up the Eewa, chiefly went
across the bay, about two miles, in the ship’s boats ; as the water was very
shallow on their return, the boats had to he a long distance out from the
shore, more than a quarter of a mile, the wading and carrying causing
much amusement. Some time was spent at the native village where they
landed.
Suva, Saturday, 12th July, 1884.
jm LEvaKTL
WMEYUKA was reached on Sunday afternoon, 13th July. Mostof the pas-
Hl ofs seil g ers contented themselves with a quiet stroll along the shore for a
Im^e an h a half, and then turned up the hill to a pretty little waterfall.
yYY: Going a little higher up a good view was obtained of the harbour. The
4 seat of the British Government was formerly at Levuka, which is situa-
ted on a small island called Ovalau, but as the hills rise close at the back
there is no room for the town to extend, consequently the seat of govern-
ment was moved. The entrance to the harbour is far superior to that of
Suva. In fact, there are several entrances besides this chief one, so that
vessels can get in with any wind. The approach to the island is very
pretty, the hills being higli and of fine outline. One lofty detached rock,
conical in shape, particularly attracted attention. Sailors call it " The


jDevil's Toothpick," hut the native name is Korokorotokau. Some five of
us thought we should like to climb up to it, and accordingly started
immediately after breakfast and walked along the shore in the direction of
its base. We were fortunate enough to meet a young native man who
understood a little English; he told us that the " big stone" belonged to
him, and at once understood that we wished to go there. There is a
capital path all round the island which we followed for seven miles, passing
through several villages by the way. We went into one house and were
given plenty of bananas to eat, and received with quite a friendly
hospitality. The pigs are amusing—they are evidently reverting a good deal
to the wild boar type, and brown seems to be the commonest colour.
When we struck off the shore path the ascent began with our going through
a little glen. There was a track, and every here and there cultivated
patches of bananas, yams, and other eatable fruit; the cocoanut and
breadfruit trees being everywhere abundant without any help from man.
After ascending this track for some time it terminated at the foot of a huge
rock, round the base of which we forced our way through dense tropical
thicket, sometimes having to use our knives to cut ourselves free from the
clinging parasites. One of the party in a large straw hat used it with 110
small success in pushing things aside ; no deer's horns or snow plough
could have been better. The lack of good nails in our boots was much felt.
When we reached the corner of the rock (which was not our goal) by
climbing up it a short distance, a good view was got in both directions, but
we pushed on, without waiting more than a few minutes, towards our peak,
there was now a very nasty bit of slippery rock to get over, which we
would never have done had it not been for the shrubs which every here and
there gave us a hold. Having at length reached the peak, one of our party
was too much exhausted to get any farther, and another therefore stayed
by him. Then came a very stiff bit of climbing, the stones in the rock
being sometimes too loose to trust to. The highest point reached was
about half way up this final peak. Only one white man, a sailor of course,
has ever been to the top, and much of our climb was where no white man,
save that one, had ever been before. Our climb was rewarded by a
magnificent and enchanting view all round—only marred by the suggestion
of one member of our party that twenty years ago it would have been all
Lombard Street to a china orange that our bones would have been picked
by the cannibals in as few hours as it had taken us to come up.
The sea from this height was a perfect blue, with different shades inside
and outside the coral reef. Other islands were plainly to be seen all around.
Below us was the dense bush, and lower down the cultivated patches.
We determined to force our way straight down into the valley 011 the other
side to which we had come up, on the principle that even a haggis can
charge down hill, and after a bit of struggling, and some falls and slight
cuts, found ourselves in the bed of a dry watercourse. Here was gathered
a lovely flower which puzzled us, but which we afterwards found to be the
wild pineapple. It was of a bright pink, shaped like a fir cone, with small
blue petals coming out of it. A halt was made by some cocoanuts trees,
one of which our guide walked up as easily as a cat, and sending us down
some nuts, we refreshed ourselves with its delicious milk, and made our light
lunch off the nut itself. A short distance below this we came on some good
water. The way now became gradually easier, aud we were glad, instead
of having to pick every step, to be able to look about us as we walked
through a perfect tropical glen. Many a time we wondered whether we
were really seeing nature, or only in some huge conservatory of tropical


plants. But here there was none of that nasty steaming atmosphere of
the hot house, but instead a nice breeze generally blowing. With the ex-
ception of a bird of the hawk tribe, and a heron, all the life we saw was in
the shape of several enormous spiders.
Our guide, Sovita Baleinabuli, a relation of the ex-king of Fiji, is as
delightful a man as heart could desire. His manner was charming, so
simple and so courteous, and it was with regret that we took leave of him
on board the ship, which he was anxious to see, and where he took a rough
meal.
On our return we met most of our fellow passengers laden with Fijian
curiosities, there having been an auction in the town for our special
benefit.
LOST AND FOUND.
TWO SHILLINGS AND SIXPENCE EE WARD
LOST, dropped in the Smoking-room, a half-sovereign attached to an anchor sweep. The
person who has the same will oblige by returning it to “ Noodle,” care of Editor.
FOUND, a lady’s glove. She can have the same returned without the Gon application
to the proper quarter.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Anxious Enquirer. —We do not consider ourselves in any way bound to answer your
questions, yet we will not refuse you this once. Of course the ladies send us contributions.
Vide any of the back numbers of the Wairarapa Wilderness, and on page 9 of this issue
certain verses which perchance you may be able to apply.
Fly Hater. —Try wearing a tall hat smeared all over with treacle.
One Who Knows. —Your question shows that you should rather have signed yourself
“ One who would like to know.”
Mango. —Your little fable entitled “ The Sugar-cane and the Cocoanut,” has evident
point in it. Surely you have made a mistake in calling it a fable, for it strikes one all
through that you have some real person in your mind. Therefore, for fear of being
personal, we dare not print your contribution, which we the more regret as you bring in
the moral so neatly—“ Kings are often not what they seem to be.” Let us hear from you
again.
To the many enquiries “Is the paper out yet ? ” —No. Certainly not. We do not
mean it to be out yet. It is only just lighted, and we hope to make a huge bush fire of our
wilderness.
CHESS.
pEOBLEM ; ORIGINAL, BY A PASSENGER.
WHITE. BLACK.
K, at Q. Kt. 4. K. at K. B. 5.
Q. at Q. Kt. 8. R. at K. 6.
E. at Q. 6. B. at K. 2
E. at Q. E. 5. P. at K. Kt. 6.
B. at Q. 2. P. at Q. B. 3.
Kt. at K. E. 6.
Kt. at K. B. 3.
P. at K. Kt. 2.
White to play, and Mate in two moves.


Cjje lEairarap MHbtrncss.
No. 2] WEDNESDAY, JULY 23. [lBB4.
Levuka at 7 a.m. on Tuesday, 15th July, and passing by
various islands of the Fijian group, the “ Wairarapa ” anchored
°ff Vuna Point, in the island of Taviuni, at 2.80 p.m. Nothing
of particular interest was to be seen. The officials at the
sugar-mill, by which we landed, very kindly sent us up some
three miles into the island on the steam tramway trucks. All the
country through which we passed was covered with sugar-cane. At
the end of the tram-line came the bush ; but after what we had seen at
other islands it did not strike us very much, and, indeed, it was tamer than
anything we have visited either before or since this excursion. Though the
anchorage was not good, the weather was calm enough to allow of the ship
remaining the night at Yuna Point, some of those who lived on shore, and
who had showed us kindness in the afternoon, coming off to the
“ Wairarapa” for dinner, and spending the evening on board.
At 4 a.m. on Wednesday, I6th July, we got away, and again passing
many islands, and having to make a wide detour to avoid the coral reefs,
anchored off the island of Mango at 11 a.m. Lunch being at an early hour
we were able to have a long afternoon on shore. On the opposite side of
the island was a fine lagoon, to which were despatched two boats containing
the ladies, and some few privileged gentlemen. Others landed at once
from the ship and walked overland to the lagoon. The boats had to return
almost at once to the ship, for their only way was by a narrow channel
which had been blasted in the coral reef, and which was only passable at
certain states of the tide.
The planters who came down and met us showed us great civility. A
luncheon had been prepared for us by them, but most of the passengers had
taken in their stores ere they left the ship. Some considerable time was
spent at one of their houses, and comfortable enough it appeared, with its
pretty garden. Many of us seemed to think that we should be happy
enough in such a place—monarchs of the whole island, —yet the loss of
society must be deeply felt at times. The latter part of the afternoon was
utilised in various ways, but the majority of the passengers walked through
a coffee plantation to a bungalow on the top of a hill, whence a good view
was obtainable. Here more refreshment was provided. Retracing our
steps for about a mile or more we broke off towards the ship, which was
reached at dusk, the last part of the walk having been through shady
cocoanut trees. Some of the planters came off to dine on board, and left
with many expressions of friendship.
wap, i^it^ND]s.
OPHIS Group .lies about 630 miles north-east of Levuka, and is situated
A ■ between 13° 30' and 14° 30' south latitude, and 169° 24' and 172° 50'
wes £ longtitude. It consists of four large and several smaller islands,
of which the following are the principal:—
Savaii, 700 square miles ; Upolu, 560 square miles ; Tutuila, 240 square
miles ; Manna, 100 square miles; Olosenga, 24 square miles; Of'u, 10
square miles; Manono, 9 square miles ; and Apoiima, 7 square miles.


]?rom the verge of the water the land rises in gentle undulations to a
height of about 4000 feet, and is eovered from base to summit with
luxurious vegetation. The group is regarded as one of the loveliest, most
agreeable, and productive of all the South Sea Groups.
Population.— About 35,000, of which 4000 are Wesleyans, 4000 Roman
Catholics, and 27,000 are connected with the London Missionary Society.
Race.— The Samoans are a branch of the Sawaiori or Mahori race, of
which the New Zealand Maoris are also representatives. They are of lofty
stature, broad-shouldered, and have well-shaped figures. Their features are
regular and handsome, with a very pleasing expression. The nose is either
straight or aquiline, and not of the negro type, neither is the mouth large
nor thick-lipped. They are of a light brown colour, and said to be the
fairest of all the Polynesian races, and although not so much advanced in
the arts and manufactures as some of their neighbours, they are superior
to them all in many of the characteristics of true civilization. They are
hospitable, courteous, and extremely good tempered. Their language is
very musical, and sounds not unlike Italian, every syllable ending with a
vowel, with the accent on the last syllable but one.
Government. —The Samoans are governed by a king—Malietoa—
assisted by a Council of Chiefs. At Apia, the chief town of the Group,
affairs are managed by a Council formed of the English, American and
German Consuls.
Exports. —These consist chiefly of cocoauuts, copra, coffee, and
maize.
Apia, in the island of Upolu, is the chief town of the group. The
harbour is very beautiful, and is formed like all others in the South Seas
by a coral reef running for almost the entire distance across the mouth of a
large bay. The entrance is narrow, but the reefs are plainly discernible.
In 1850 Apia was almost entirely destroyed by an earthquake.
Savaii is the largest island of the group, but very little is known of the
interior. It possesses many extinct craters, chief among them being the
lofty peak Mua, which rises to a height of 4000 feet.
Tutuila, the easternmost and smallest of the three principal islands, is
36 miles from Upolu, and possesses in Pango Paugo, the most perfect land-
locked harbour in the Pacific Ocean. The hills rise abruptly round the bay
from 800 to 1,000 feet in height. They are covered from base to summit
with a luxuriant growth of evergreen foliage and little valleys which nestle
at their bases, and the narrow belt of land which skirts the shore is densely
covered with cocoanut groves, bread fruit, banana, orange, and lime trees,
and a variety of tropical plants.
Pango Pango is distant from Auckland 1577 miles, from Levuka 630
miles, from Tongatabu 475 miles, from Tahiti 1250 miles, from New Cale-
donia 1445 miles, from Sydney 2410 miles, and from Melbourne 2864
miles.
Samoa excels in the production of ferns and plants.
Leaving the pretty little island of Mango at 6.15 a.m. on Thursday, the
17th July, for Apia, the capital of Samoa, a distance of 591 miles, we were
met by a head sea, and some slight pitching ensuing, a few of the passengers
were disconcerted, but were able to have a small athletic meeting in the
afternoon.
A new monster was first sighted on Friday evening, 18th July, in the
shape of the first copy of the Wairarapa Wilderness, and on the same
evening a concert, the third, was given in the drawing-room.


Saturday, the 19th July, at 9 a.m., saw us safely anchored at Apia and
all were soon on shore. Many of the natives were ready on the pier to
receive us, and very anxious to go on board and examine thoroughly into
the various mysteries of the ship. Probably the two greatest marvels were
ice, and the electric light. All of us will bear in our minds the many
handsome faces, framed in as many portholes, as they gazed on the beauties
and the beasts feeding.
Some passengers strolled one way and some another, others rode into
the country. One party worked through very rough bush, with much
fallen timber, to the Sliding Eock (a distance of eight miles), so called
because a delightful slide may be made down it into a deep pool of water
twenty-five feet below. Many traces of habitations, walls, and probably
fortifications, were found all about the bush, now grown over. Nothing
much seems to be known about them as yet. All were composed of large
round stones from some watercourse. Whoever used these rough places
must have long since migrated.
Several delightful fresh-water bathing places were found, which were
largely patronised by the ship’s company. Various mekemekes were got
up by the natives (some of the passengers having also given similar enter-
tainments on board). The German Consul took a party to the house of a
Chief, but he being away, his wife hospitably entertained the strangers,
kava being there and then prepared, to which ample justice was done.
Cricketers delighted in seeing the natives, from mere children upwards,
playing cricket—here, as at Suva, evidently understanding and enjoying
the game. One youthful game was played with limes for balls, and cocoa-
nut palm branches for bats. It was with many feelings of regret that we
were unable to accept a challenge from the natives—by no means because
of our defeat at Suva, but only because of the overpowering heat.
On Sunday, the 20th July, Canon Tebbutt conducted Divine Service in
the church on shore at 10 a.m., aud also in the drawing-room of the ship
at 8.80 p.m. Mr. Inwood kindly gave his invaluable service in playing the
harmonium and piano. Several natives of the French mission came on
board in the evening and sang sacred songs very prettily, with much action
of the hands after their manner.
On Monday, the 22nd July, the passengers busied themselves with their
last purchases at Apia. A few went to a Samoan luncheon, of which a
longer notice will be found.
At 5 a.m. the ship started for Pango Pango.
The harbour at Apia is a bad one, abounding in rocks, besides the coral
reefs. Excursions have been made to the reefs, at the various places, in
the ships’ boats. The Samoans are a fine race, and it seems to be a
question whether they or the Fijians are the favourites. One thing struck
us about both—that though the ship was crowded with them, and they
poked into every hole and corner, yet nothing was ever missed by any
passengers of the many attractions which lie about.
Pango Pango was reached at 7.30 a.m. on Tuesday, July 22nd. Almost
everyone spent the day in going to different parts of the harbour in the
ship’s boats. A very pleasant day was thus spent. Some climbed up to
the tops of the hills, but the trees aud herbage was so thick that it was
difficult to obtain a view. The natives were disappointing after our previous
experience. Many of them were ai bad beggars as one would expect to
find in a large city, aud they were not all averse to playfully picking pockets
of handkei chiefs and small articles.


The scene outside the ship was indeed a picturesque one. The lovely
land-locked harbour, and the vast number of canoes, with two or three of
the large war canoes, combined with the hundreds of dark bodies, made up
a picture which must surely refresh the most bored of globe-trotters.
Some of the ship’s company and passengers tried their skill in canoeing,
an unintentional bath occasionally resulting. This island of Tutuila was
left at 10 a.m. on Wednesday, July 23rd, for Yavu, in the Tonjan group
of islands.
Good Bishop Heber’s thesis on the Pacific Isle,
Is, “ every prospect pleases, and only man is vile.”
Now, man, though still a sinner, in orthodoxy’s view,
Does not eat man for dinner, though vile mosquitoes do.
ATHLETIC SPORTS.
THURSDAY, 17th JULY.
POTATO AND SPOON RACE (Spoon in mouth) —First prize 55., W. Gerard.
Second prize 2s. 6d., P. W. Donner.
COCK FIGHTING (Hook the Marine) —First prize 55., J. S. McLaren. Second
prize 2s. 6d., P. W. Donner.
POINTING AT THE QUOIT —First prize 55., Miss Twentyman. Second prize
2s. 6d., Miss Hirschberg.
A THIRD CONCERT
Was given in the Drawing-Room on Friday, the 18th July :
PROGRAMME.
EE CITATION— Mr. Kerakoose.
SONG—“ The Vagabond Mr. J. Patch.
EECITATION—“FIynn of Virginia ” Mr. V. Gibbs.
EECITATION (From Shakespeare) Mr. A. H. Burton.
SONG — Mr. A. E. Inwood.
SONG —“ Let me list to the Billows ” Mr. C. G. De Betham.
READING—“King Robert of Sicily” Canon Tebbutt.
SONG—“ The Old Brigade ” Mr. E. W. Kane.
SONG—“ Peter Pipei ” Mr. E. F. Smith.
EECITATION—“ A Sea Dirge ” Mr. C. G. De Betham.
CHANT—“ The Massacre of the Phairshon ” (By request) Hon. C. Carnegie.
GLEE—“ The Chafers ”.. .. Four voices.
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.
ppip,
Monday, July 21.
the description of the banquet of Nasidienus, given by
® orace > °f feast after the manner of the ancients in
" Perigriue Pickle," we doubt if the imagination of man lias
conceived a more extraordinary combination of victuals than
that set before ns by the landlord of the International Hotel at Apia.
The table was prettily laid out. A cocoa-nut with the top broken
off, full of the most delicious milk, was placed opposite each person,
whilst all over the table were some mysterious-looking parcels done
up in green leaves. There were also some fish, and two birds which
on close examination turned out to be fowls, though so contorted in shape
that they might have been the acrobats of the gallinaceous race suddenly


cut off whilst turning themselves inside out. There were moreover some
saucers on the table containing things of which it might with truth be said
that they were more curious than pretty, and only the knowledge that we
had to eat them prevented one speaking our thoughts about them. One
of the whitest, and consequently least nasty-looking of the dishes probably
was octopus, but it was too tough to get a knife through, to say nothing
about teeth. We dare not give our readers full particulars of the black
and grey snails that were put before us ; or, at all events, let us wait till
the ship is quite still in harbour. There were some large fish which,
though soft and flabby, were at any rate human food. The various
mysterious parcels in the green leaves were carefully opened, generally to
be closed with great haste, or passed on to our neighbour. One parcel
contained a vegetable of a " greenery yallery " hue, which tasted like
decayed seaweed. The fowls, which had simply been thrown on an open
fire, though burned in places, were eatable, as were also the yams and
other vegetables. We imagined we were going to end our banquet with
the fruit we saw before us when suddenly there appeared the piece de
resistance. This was the carcase of a pig, about a year old, roasted whole.
He was lying on his hack, and stuffed with green leaves. Those were
removed from his interior, together with a lot of stones which had been put
into his inside to assist in cooking him. But few touched the pig, as we
had all had enough already of the other viands, and there is no novelty
in pig, however badly cooked. One large shell fish ought to have been
mentioned. Every one offered it to his neighbour, and it was long before
it could find an owner. At last one heroic individual opened it and tasted
it, pronouncing it eatable enough ; but it did not look nice.
The short notice prevented our host from providing several other deli-
cacies that he had hoped to give us ; they were on their way, but more
novelty would have been too much pleasure, so we went away in a con-
tented frame of mind, and feeling that we had done our duty. All were
as well as could be expected.
Here is a chunk of what a cynical passenger has been pleased to
“ sling” us, as he calls it. Want of space and time (for such stuff) pre-
vents our publishing several yards of similar doggerel:—
“ Those niggers surely think our wants can be but few,
To judge by class of business that they try to do ;
For clubs made of the hardest seasoned woods
Would seem to be the stable market goods.
And then how sweet the compliment conveyed
By all besieging us with fans for trade.
Does this imply (the doubtful credit grant them)
That in another sphere we all shall want them ?”
An impromptu reply to “ Ella,” by a single smoker. —D. M.—
In warning smokers Ella clearly shows,
Our days of trial now draw to a close.
No longer subject to alluring charms,
The swan-like neck, the shapely arms,
The melting eye, the kissing mouth,
Flesh tinted with the sunny South,
Will each and all a lovely picture make
That we can contemplate without a quake.


No fearful prospect now can rise
Of butchers’ bills, and babies’ cries,
Of dear old friends through marriage lost,
Of relics rare in fire-place tossed.
This last, the worst of woman’s foibles quite—
This art of putting all things out of sight;
By them miscalled, and by them misapplied,
Tidy with them’s synonymous with hide.
Then thank thee, Ella, for thou dost display
The easy way we may escape the fray,
Wherein the stronger loses all his strength,
The weaker, by her weakness, wins at length.
So let us hope your verse all single men will read,
Then shall we count by scores the converts to the Weed !
[We trust some lady will answer this virulent effusion in our next
issue.—Ed. W. W.]
gWOT PQiiMCjS.
from the Samoan Times , March 80th, 1878, gives an insight
•Hif 3n * io 3e s J s^em °f government:—''From 1874 to 1878 there were no
A* / less than five different forms of government, some of which appear
to have given satisfaction to the various native factions. The first
of these was formed about the month of August or September, 1878, and
consisted of 7 Taim.ua and about 200 Taipule. This was carried out f6r
about fifteen months. The natives were then tired of the republican form
of government, and were desirous of making a kingdom of their own
country. Consequently the question of who should be king arose, and two
parties were put forward as having the proper amount of royal blood to
enable them to wear the crown. After some discussion upon the matter,
in consequence of the equality of power held by the contending parties, two
kings were elected to hold sovereign sway over the two islands, together
with fifteen Taimua, to form as it were the House of Lords, and the same
of Taipule as in the previous form, to constitute the House of Commons.
The two parties elected as Kings were Malietoa Laupepa and Pulepule.
" This second form of Government had but a very short existence, for in
April of the same year the third Government was formed with only one
King—Malietoa Laupepa—Steinberger as Premier, fifteen Taimua and one
Taipule for every 2000 of the population. After an apparently flourishing
existence of some ten months this Government terminated its course, by a
difference which arose between Steinberger and the King, resulting in the
deportation of the former, by Captain Stevens of the " Barracouta," and
the deposition of the King by the Taimua and Taipule.
" The Government was then carried on for several months by the Taimua
(some twelve or thirteen in number, one having been killed in the fight with
the "Barracouta," and another having died), and Taipule (also about
thirteen, one also having been killed in the above-mentioned fight), at the
beginning of 1877, thus merged in into the present form of Government.
The number of the Taimua being increased to fifteen, and the Taipule
being increased indefinitely. What keeps it up so long is a mystery, for
they have done nothing for the benefit of the country since they have been
in existence. Laws have been made, but collections of taxes is simply a
farce. A man is brought before them for an offence against a foreigner,


and may be he is fined ; but the fine is rarely paid, and why? because if he
happened to be a man of the least noble or chief family he simply declines
to pay, and the G-overnment, for fear of offending and thereby loose the
support of that man's family, dare not attempt to enforce the payment.
" The natives have not stability enough in themselves to form a good and
lasting Government, and they do not know their own minds any time
together; this is proved from the fact that in 1877 they sent a deputation
to Fiji to endeavour to get British protection through Sir Arthur Gordon,
and before any reply could be obtained to this petition they signed three
months afterwards a treaty with Germany, offering that nation the same
privileges as the most favoured nation, and two months later Mamea was
sent to effect a treaty of protection with the United States. This haste to
place themselves under the protection of some foreign power is evidence of
their weakness and inability to govern the country alone."
SAMOAN CHARACTER.
It is a question whether the true Samoans have any more gratitude or
honour in their composition than the majority of semi-savage races. Any
effort at trying to soften the natives by kindness is in too many cases labour
in vain. They construe kindness and leniency into fear, and need at all
times to be dealt with by a firm and strong hand.
JiHXD (JUESTUOX.
grave disputes have taken place between the natives and
foreigners in respect to the title of their land, in one or two cases
where the holders have held in peaceable possession for a number
y }pifi| of years, they have had their titles disputed. The natives desire
to get their lands back ; and wherever the party who sold the land
to the foreigners happens to be dead, the surviving portion of the
family state that the deceased one had no right to sell.
British Consul Swanston, in 1878, spoke as follows at a meeting of the
Taimua and Yaipule : —•
" There were some land disputes which he had taken some trouble in
investigating. He had made it his business to go into the details connected
with them, and he found it impossible to deal with the matters in dispute.
He was at a loss to know who could and who could not sell lands. In
Manono there are now living three Leatanas—each man claiming the head-
ship of the family with its privileges. At Lelepa, on Upolu, there are at
the present time two Magogis, each one asserting that he is the rightful
owner to the name and privileges. There are two Tofainos of Yaiala,
three or four Sei Ulis, two Fuaolefans, and two Malieatos, every one of
these demanding to be received as the sole and only representative to the
title. Under these circumstances he, as British Consul, declined to
enter into investigation of land titles until the Sainoan Government has so
organised itself as to be able to propose some Commission of Enquiry,
which will be of a nature that England could recognise.
" In the meantime he will support the claims of British subjects to such
land as they hold under deed and of which they are in possession ; and
when the Samoan Government were prepared to go into this enquiry in a
regular manner, they might depend that England would do them all
justice."


This applies equally to the present day as it did in 1878, and as further
bearing on the land question it may be mentioned that at a Consular
meeting held at Apia on 28tli August, 1878, it was resolved that a public
announcement should be made to the effect that the representatives of
Germany, the United States, and Great Britain would not require the
Samoan Government to recognize any future land sales unless such sales
were registered in the Consulate of the purchaser.
The Population of the group (Native) is stated to be 35,000, and the
Acreage of the chief islands (in square miles) as follows: —Savaii, 700 ;
Upolu, 560 ; Tutuila, 240 ; Tau, 100 ; Olsosinga, 24 ; Ofoo, 10; Manono,
9; Apolima, 7.
Lands claimed by subjects of the following powers : — Great Britain —
McArthur & Co., Auckland—3oo,ooo acres (chiefly in Savaii) ; others—
about 5,000. Germany, 200,000 acres (chiefly in Upolu); America—
-120,000 acres (very doubtful).
Shipping Import and Export Returns, 1883 :
No. of Vessels Arriving. Tonnage. Imports. Exports. Country.
35 3,799 9,108 £l,lBO British.
92 19,396 50,358 £50,894 German.
18 2,776 26,146 Nil. American,
The 35 British arrivals were made with 16 vessels ; the 92 German arrivals
(including traders, locally) were made with 36 vessels ; the 18 American
arrivals were made with 9 vessels.
Of the German imports £B,BOO was cash, of which £6,600 cash, also
goods to the value of £35,811, were re-exported. Of the American, £l,OOO
was cash, and a considerable quantity of goods are re-exported, but no
account is procurable. Cotton, as raised in Samoa, to the value of £17,400
was exported to Hamburg ; Cobra, ditto, £37,967. The above values are
declared by the merchants.
Debts owing by the Samoans :— British claims, £5,171 ; German claims,
£13,600 ; American claims, no record obtainable.
Climate. — The climate has been spoken of as mild and agreeable by
foreign residents. At Apia, the temperature never goes below 60° nor
above 90° —these are the rare extremes. The mean temperature, according
to various authorities, is calculated at 78° to 81°. The coolest part of the
day is looked upon as between 3 and 4 a.m., the warmest between 8 and 9
a.m. Copious rains fall from the beginning of December to March ; in fine
weather much dew falls during the nights, which are invariably cold. June
and July are the coolest months, and September and October may be said to
be the hottest, though not so sultry as the succeeding month. The S.-E.
trade winds blow steadily from April to October, being strongest in June
and July. A severe gale is generally looked for in January. March is
usually the worst and most boisterous in the year, generally blowing from
N. to N.-W. "
Soil. — The general character of the soil throughout the Group is very
rich, deep loam, loose and porous, of a chocolate colour; near to the beach
it is more or less mixed with sand and coral debris.


Ck Utairarap Wlkrmss.
No. 3.] THURSDAY, JULY 31. [lBB4.
n¥lfi OPOM, jSfIJKOTL
FAIE-O-LE FE'E—THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRIT.
■HE mountainous country behind Apia which culminates in the peak
of Tafua, 2,500 feet high, embraces many points of interest to the
visitor. Samoa is one of the most lovely of all the South Sea
jWy Islands, and through its fertility has become an important
t commercial centre. The narrow belt of laud between the moun-
tains and the sea is exceedingly beautiful through the lofty groves of cocoa-
nut and banana and other tropical plants, in the shade of which are many
native houses. A pleasant walk extends along the coast, and in the hottest
weather the visitor can saunter with comfort in the luxuriant groves.
Far up the River Yai Sanagu, which enteis the sea not far from Apia,
and deep amidst the recesses of the mountains, the Fale-o-le Fe’e, or the
house of the Spirit is situated. It was a famous place of resort in the old
days of war, when the Chiefs went to consult their war god, the cuttlefish
(octopus), to ascertain if he was in favour of their intention or not. This
house is even now regarded with veneration and awe by some of the older
natives of Samoa, and some of them even at this day have been known to
undergo the hardships of paying a visit to the spot to petition the spirit.
The Samoans, like the Greeks of old, had several divinities, and every
village had its own special one generally represented by some fish or bird,
such as the eel, the shark, the owl, &c ; but the cuttlefish seems to have
had the pre-eminent place as the war god. War having ceased for many
years in the Island of Opulu, the way to the Fale-o-le Fee is almost unknown
save to a few natives, and as the mountains are covered with trees and
thick growth of plants, it is a matter of some difficulty to reach it.
In spite of the friendly warning of Legationsrath Steubel, the courteous
German Consul General, who tried to dissuade me from the attempt, I
started at 6.30 a.m., 20th July, 1884, from Meredith’s Hotel, on horseback,
with a guide. The morning was clear but sultry, not a breath of wind,
and after passing through Apia and crossing the small stream by the
Catholic Mission, about half a mile on we turned sharp to the right up a
pleasant grassy glade of a mile, in which we met several natives on their
way to town. We then crossed the River Yai Sanagu, which was cool and
refreshing to the eye, for the sun was giving rapid proof of his power, and
soon reached the German cotton plantation a little beyond, when we entered
the clean and well-arranged village of Mangnaui, where we dismounted and
enjoyed for half an hour the hospitality of the Chief and his family, while
two men were selected by the Chief to accompany me on my journey, and
my Apian guide returned.
My guides were splendid Samoan types, and perfect specimens of
physical development. One Apoa (Aphor) stood at least 6ft. 2in, and the
other, Anelu, strongly made, lithe and energetic. Apoa and I mounted
our horses while Anelu on foot in front, with a broad knife in his
hand, soon left the village behind and entered the thick bush. To the
inexperienced eye scarcely any path through the plantation or forest was
visible, but Anelu went steadily on, cutting with his knife right and left all


branches and twigs which intercepted him. Numerous dead trees lay
across, which our horses stepped over with ease, as if no obstruction ; and
those which were over three feet high they surmounted with a slight jump.
The bush at last became so blocked up with these fallen trees (the result
of a hurricane in 1882) we were compelled to dismount and leave our
horses behind, carefully unsaddling them and tethering tliem to trees, it
was now 9*Bo a.m., and we started off in single file, Anelu in front with
his ever dexterous knife clearing the path. We were in a thick green
luxuriant and tropical forest, the variety of trees and plants and weeds
being astonishing, some of them —especially an enormous mangan tree-
being remarkable for size and beauty. Nothing could be seen on either side
but dense bush, while above the blue sky only amidst the tops of the trees.
No view of country except when we came to the ridge of the hill up which
we were gradually ascending ; we looked down upon a deep ravine, and so
walked on, resting at times for a few minutes. Before quitting the cocoa-
nut trees Anelu climbed up one in the usual way, and provided us with a
dozen nuts, and as it was 11 a.m. and the heat terribly oppressive the
refreshing nature of the milk was never so realized by me as at that
moment. While reclining on the cool fern leaves, enjoying my drink, I
was interested in watching my guides obtaining a light for their cigarettes.
Taking a piece of the Fona-fona tree, and cutting the bark off it, they cut
another piece rather pointed and then rubbed it with great quickness and
pressure in the groove of the other, producing a fine fibrous powder which
soon from friction took fire. After continuing our path until 12.30 we
came to the end of our ascent. We had been ascending at times places of
great steepness ever since we left the village, and had passed points with
a local history, such as Manakou, on the ridge of the mountain, the scene
of a great battle not very long ago, and a spot called Inifi, the meeting
place of the natives before fighting, to both of which my guides drew my
attention with an animated gesture, as if they themselves had been per-
sonally engaged. The spot we had now reached was a shady grassy
plateau, on the verge of a precipitous descent, and, as already I began to
feel the fatigue incident to such a long walk, I felt some hesitation in
continuing, as I knew I should have to return by the same route. How-
ever, after a few moments rest I started again, and down the steep moun-
tain side we went, clinging on to trees, branches, and ferns, and placing
our feet on the transverse roots which alone gave us foot hold, for the earth
was saturated, and the water oozed out and down, so that by the time I
reached the bottom I was wet through. Apoa had to carry me over a
muddy swamp, and then a little further on I found myself standing on
the side of a mountain torrent, the Vaisanagu of Apia. After the fearful
sultry walk of the day, the cool refreshing sound of the stream exhilirated
me as it darted along over the black boulders, with the lofty green waving
branches of the palm and the wild banana trees on either side over my
head screening me from the burning sun, while far above, as if in mid-
heaven, the tree-clad mountains raised their heads, and their green sides
formed dark and gloomy vales. I sat down and revelled in the delicious
silence and loneliness of the place, and thought of the strangeness of my
position, alone and far away from the living world, with only my two
Samoans gazing at me with a sort of curious wonder, for we could only
converse by signs. After walking about a mile up the stream, we reached
a small waterfall, and, about half a mile further on, another 50ft. high ;
and, a quarter of mile beyond this, we left the torrent and entered a valley
by the dry bed of a tributary stream, the stones of which were covered with
a beautiful small green soft moss. This we walked up about a mile and


then entered the bush. The rain was now falling fast, the bush seemed
impenetrable, audAnelu proceeded but slowly, cutting his way vigorously.
The ground was inches deep with slush, the heat overpowering, the
vegetation rank, wild, and tropical beyond conception. We were sur-
rounded by lofty mountains, and were within one mile of the object of
my journey. I had gone about a mile into the bush, and I became so com-
pletely exhausted that I lay down on the wet ground regardless of every-
thing. I sent my guides on to ascertain how much further the Fale-o-le-Fe’e
was, and I remained nearly half an hoar m the lonely spot before they
returned. They pointed out the place where the house of the god stood, down
the steep side of the hill, and close to the river, and as it was now nearly
2’30 p.m. it would have taken me until 4 p.m. to have reached it, and to
have returned to where I was, I felt compelled to abandon the attempt, and
motioned to my guides my desire to go back. They gave me a look of
inexpressible pity, and were anxious that I should go and sleep all night in
the “House of the Spirit,'' and go back to Apia in the morning. It was
a romantic suggestion, and if I had had a companion with me I would have
gladly risked it. A night spent in the very house of the spirit in that
lonely mountain valley, with all its past associations, would indeed have
been a new experience. The stones —“ awful memorials, but of what we
know not ” —would have spoken to us in the lonely night in that tropical
forest, and probably our imagination would have brought us in our dreams
some terrible visions of the chiefs and their octopus god. Slowly and
sadly I turned my back on the spot. I, however, was able to form a very good
idea of the country and its peculiar wildness which induced these men to
erect the god’s house in such a spot. I could well imagine the gloomy
horror and awe with which the minds of the chiefs who went there would
be filled—the everlasting and never-ceasing roar of the torrent at their
feet —the glorious mountains rising abruptly a thousand feet above them,
and the steep sides which they were obliged to descend, the long walk up
the valley—all tended to increase the mysterious solemnity of their journey,
and the veneration for it in the superstitious minds of the natives of the
country.
The house is neglected and in ruins, and few traces of it remain. It
was built entirely of stone —a dark grey basaltic stone —about forty feet in
diameter, and being almost circular. Outside is a stone slab with a stone
pillar, on which the god was supposed to repose. The Chiefs sat inside
and round facing each other from sunset to sunrise in perfect silence until
one said he “ heard the spirit whisper ” to him ; but if no one spoke before
daybreak, then they adjourned until the next night—so the decision of the
oracle was very much in the hands of any Chief who was very ambitious to
carry out his own wishes.
We now retraced our steps, and as the sun was rapidly declining and
the shadow of the mountain was falling on the valley, we hastened down
the bed of the torrent until we reached the bottom of the steep ascent
which we had previously descended with so much difficulty. I little thought
what was before me. It was now nearly 4 p.m. Imagine a slimy and
muddy bank, almost, perpendicular, covered with thick vegetation and
trees, nearly 1000 feet of ascent, and you will then form some notion of
what I had to ascend, already worn out with fatigue. My guides were as
fresh as when they started, and regarded my collapse with surprise, but
with courtesy Anelu went before and strewed large banana leaves for me to
recline on, and Apoa pulled me up nearly the whole ascent. When I
reached the grassy plateau the cocoanut milk was as the Nectar of the gods.
The difficulties of my journey were now over, and after three hours through


the dark forest, for night with all her stars had come over, we reached our
tethered horses, and soon were surrounded by the friendly natives of
Mangnani.
It was wonderful to observe the power of Anolu in finding his way through
the bush in the darkness. I was a novice—stumbling over trees and roots,
and falling headlong into the damp bush —and had I been left behind one
moment, would have lost all trace of the path. I reached Meredith's
Hotel at 7.30 p.m., having thoroughly enjoyed my first experience of a
South Sea Island forest.
mmn m IJSIrfINDjS.
Tongan Archipelago lies 250 miles south-east of Fiji and 350
miles south of Samoa, and is situate between 18° and 20° south
latitude, and 174° to 179° west longitude. The islands number
about 100, and are divided into three sub-groups by two narrow
¥ channels. The three islands of Tonga-tabu, Yavau, and Eoa are
alone of any extent, which is from 15 to 20 miles in length. Six others,
namely, Lato, Tofua, Kao, Namuka, Lefuga, and Huano are from five to
seven miles in their greatest extent. The rest are much smaller, many of
them being only banks of sand and coral covered with tufts of trees.
The friendly Islands w T ere discovered by Tasman in 1643, and visited by
Captain Cook in 1777. They are all low, consisting either of raised coral
or volcanic deposits, and there are still several active volcanoes among
them.
Tonga is in a very satisfactory condition. The soil is inexhaustibly
fertile and industriously cultivated, and intersected by good roads.
Population.— About 30,000, all Christians.
Eace.-— The Tongans, like the Samoans, belong to the Sawaiori or
Mahori race, and surpass all other South Sea Islanders in mental develop-
ment, in the structure of their dwellings, and preparation of their imple-
ments, weapons, dress, etc., betraying considerable skill and dexterity.
They are admirable boat-builders and sailors, and visit all the adjacent
groups in their fine canoes. They have been styled the Anglo-Saxons of
the South Pacific, and enjoy the reputation of being the most civilised of
the South Sea Islanders. The Tongan dialect is harsher than the Samoan,
and is supposed to have been influenced by contact and intermixture with
the Fijians.
Government.— A monarchy under King George, who is assisted by a
council or parliament of chiefs. On each of the principal Islands there
resides a governor.
Exports. —Timber, cocoanuts, and coir.
Leaving Pango Pango on Wednesday, the 23rd July, at 10 a.m.,
nothing of particular moment occurred till we reached the island of Yavau
about dusk, on the evening of Thursday, the 24th July. It being too late
to work through the long channel and the many reefs that night, we lay to
under the lee of the island till daybreak on the 25th July, when we pro-
ceeded up the harbour to Vavau. Anchoring some distance up we waited
two hours for pratique, considerable anxiety being felt as to whether we
should be allowed to land at all. About noon, however, cheers proclaimed
throughout the ship that we could land. Luncheon being ready from noon
onwards, no time was lost in getting on shore. We noticed a large crowd
by certain orange trees, and on approaching found that certain of the
passengers were keeping up their fielding and catching by hurling oranges


at one another. The natives joined in the game heartily ; indeed, signs are
not wanting that a South Seas eleven will ere long travel to other lands
and make a good fight with any cricketers. At 2 p.m. the ship's launch
with a pilot on board and two boats in tow, proceeded to a cave in one of
the islands. The entrance was just large enough to admit the launch.
The cave was thoroughly explored by all the gentlemen of the party. That
outer portion to which the water always has access is about 40 feet high
and 70 feet in diameter ; the bottom is plainly to be seen in every part,
through some 30 feet of blue water. One boat load stayed here to bathe,
whilst the launch, with the other boat, proceeded round the harbour, pick-
ing up the bathers on her return to the ship, which was reached at 6 p.m.
On Saturday, July 26th, most of us "were on shore betimes, amusing
ourselves with walks in different directions. Many went to the top of
Pudding Mountain, from which a view over the island, with its harbour,
bays, and the many reefs well repaid the ascent. A few found their way,
some on foot, some riding, to a cave in the interior, about four and a half
miles from the ship. This cave, or rather these caves —for the first one
opens into another of greater depth—supply the whole of the water for the
large native village near them, and for a considerable distance round as
well. Water being difficult to obtain in the island, these never-failing sup-
plies were of the greatest importance, consequently large earth-works guard
the entrance. The first cave descends about 100 feet, and is about 300
feet in length, The second one is much deeper, and the rock being slimy
is also far harder to explore. We had five native ladies as our guides, and
a German (who had a kind word and a joke for every one), with us. The
latter brought us on our way from the ship to the native village, and being
well acquainted with the language was of the greatest service to us, let
alone the continual amusement he caused. Babel gone mad could hardly
have surpassed the noise made by our guides and their friends and relations
who were all congregated at the mouth of the cave waiting for a lantern,
the echo adding to the discordance. Truly they " with vocal voices most
vociferous did out vociferate e'en sound itself." There is nothing remark-
able about the cavern but the fact of its being one of the chief water
supplies. Considerable time is taken up in fetching water from this difficult
place. Our party returned to the light of day without mishap of serious
nature, though one gentleman cut his head against the roof; but the
clothes of all showed that no one had kept on his feet the whole time.
Very few Europeans have visited these caves ; they were considered of too
great importance to let people know where they were.
On our return to the harbour we found that Prince Wellington would
hold a reception on the pier at 4.30 p.m. His full name is Wellington
George Tubou Malohi. He is grandson of the present King George, who
was too old to see us, as he would have liked to have done. Prince Welling-
ton, who is the governor, did us the honour of dining with us on board the
ship, and Mr. J. H. Grossman having proposed his health in felicitous
terms, he returned thanks in a speech which showed how highly he esteemed
English friendship. Indeed, he said that he desired no greater honour than
to be considered an English gentleman. The Prince at first spoke in
English, but afterwards requested that he might speak through Mr. Baker,
an interpreter. It is needless to say that the toast was drunk with great
enthusiasm. Many of the natives were shown over the ship, and manifested
their wonder at the marvels presented to their sight. The harbour of
Yavau is very pretty, though it lacks high hills in the back ground. The
trees and herbage are much of the same kind as at Apia, except that at the
latter place there are not so many orange groves.


55 Y1J315? ¥0 TJIE DIYIJSG O^YM.
■)HANKS to the courtesy of Mr. Baker, Premier of the Tongan
| Government, a small party from the “ Wairarapa ” was provided
f ’• with a boat and a boat’s crew for the purpose of visiting the
Aua-uku or diving cave. The cave is situated nearly opposite the
1 ¥ entrance to Yavau harbour, about seven miles from the anchorage,
and is only accessible by diving. On our way down the harbour we stopped
to look at the Mermaid’s cave, which like most other places described by
peripatetic bookmakers, we thought much over-rated. From there we went
to the island on or under which the cave is situated, and having told some
natives to meet us and act as guides, rowed round to the entrance of the
cave. Under a small cliff from fifteen to twenty feet high our boat was
made fast, but the strictest search did not reveal the entrance to the cave.
And now came what to a stranger appeared very startling. From a
point of rock about fifteen feet above the boat the natives who had come to
meet us sprang one after another into the sea and disappeared “ from mortal
ken, from light of day.” After the lapse of a few minutes copper-coloured
bodies were seen shooting out from a hole in the cliff about six feet below
the surface, and as they rose one after the other dared us to venture the
enterprise.
After disrobing, one of the party took his stand on the gunwale of the
boat, and told a native to show the way, and as soon as the native’s head
was under water, sprang after him, plunging immediately into a dim
obscurity, being guided by the gleam of a yellow pair of heels in front of
him. Now that one was fairly launched on the enterprise, a most peculiar
and unpleasant sensation arose. It was as if your breath could not possibly
last more than a stroke or two farther, and from that feeling a desperate
desire to break the record and get in first arose. So strong was this feeling
in one of us that he gained on his guide and got a smack in the face from
his heel for his pains. The suspense was not very prolongued, however,
for in about fifteen seconds the guide stopped, and by a touch on the arm
directed the adventurer to ascend, a most welcome signal. The tunnel is
from twenty-five to thirty feet long.
Through the dim gloom one saw a rope dangling from a point of rock
to which one was directed to hold on by and rest, the only other support
being a jagged incline at the far end of the cave which European feet could
hardly endure.
After a few minutes observation the return journey was made, and here
came the difficulty to many. This was, that in the cave there was no stand
point to dive from. You had to dive in the water, and swim down perpen-
dicularly four or five feet to reach the entrance to the submarine tunnel
through which we had entered; having done which the rest was easy, as
the light was in front and gave one heart.
The next of our party who went, being determined not to bark himself
as the first had done, dived down plumb for over two fathoms, and then
turned very slowly in the entrance to the cave. This bad start so alarmed
those in the boat that they shouted to the Tongans to follow him. They
immediately sprang from the rock one after the other (a very pretty sight)
and disappeared. Shortly after one of them returned and gave the welcome
news that all was right.
The third of our party who went in was the most unfortunate, as he
returned rather badly scored on the head and back, having struck the roof
of the tunnel in coming out.


The cave itself is not interesting, being apparently merely a bubble in
the lava. It is nearly circular, the roof dome shaped, about fifty feet
across and as many high. There was a slight incrustation of lime on the
roof in places, and a few small stalactites. The only light in the cave is
transmitted through the water, and as the sun was shining directly on the
entrance, I suppose we saw it at its greatest brilliancy—or rather, least
gloom. A peculiar thing was observed by one of our party, which I think
goes to show that the cave is nearly air-tight, viz., that as each swell
receded from the cave a slight mist appeared above the surface of the water,
which must have been produced by the varying density of the air in the
cave. The colour of the water was very beautiful where the reflected light
shone through it, varying from every shade of blue to yellowish flashes as
the swell advanced and receded.
The tradition of the discovery of the cave is that a Tongan in pursuit of a
wounded turtle dived into the entrance and followed it into the cave. Such
a courageous action well deserved the reward which followed. The story
goes on to say that the discoverer kept the secret of the Ana-uku, and
shortly afterwards, having gained the affections of a lovely maid of high
rank, he induced her to elope with him, and hid her in the cave till the
Chiefs consent was gained to their union. Fortuna favet fortibus.
The only Europeans known of who had visited the cave before our party
were Captain Luce, of H.M.S. Esk, who in leaving the cave received
injuries that eventually caused his death, two other naval officers (names
unknown), and two European residents of Yavau.
PROGRAMME OF CONCERT
Given by the “ Wairarapa ” Minstrel Troupe, on Thursday, the 24th
July, at 8.15 p.m.
Part I.
SELECTION (Piano and violin)
OVEETUEE —“ Imperial Galop ” Band.
OPENING CHOEUS—“ Emancipation Day ” The Company.
SONG—“ The Light Guitar ” .. .. E. Dukelow.
COMIC SONG—“ The Eustic Damsel ” G. Crichton.
SONG—“ Green Leaf in the Bible ” J. Stanley.
COMIC SONG—“ We are, we are, we are ” W. Grubbe.
SONG—“ The Vacant Chair ” (By request) .. A. Woods.
COM.IC SONG—“ Double Breasted Mansion ” G. Crichton.
SONG—“ The Empty Cradle ” W. Jones.
COMIC SONG—“ Dem Golden Slippers” W. Grubbe.
INTERVAL OP TEN MINUTES.
Part 11.
SELECTION (Piano and violin) - _
SONG—“ Ear Away ” A. Woods.
COMIC SONG—“ Eighteenpence ” W. Grubbe.
CHAEACTEE SONG—“ Funny Old Girl ” G. Crichton.
SPEECH of “ Sergeant Buzfuz ” J. Hammill.
CHAEACTEE SONG—“ Seedy Young Man”, J. Stanley.
DANCE—“ Highland Fling ” J. Arnott
CHAEACTEE SONG—” The Major ” .. E. Dukelow.
VIOLIN SOLO— V. Christiensen.
COMIC SONG—“Very well Mary Ann ” E. Essex.
SONG—“ The Eobin and Thrush” W. Jones.
FINALE—“ Auld Lang Syne ” The Company.
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.
Bones—G. Crichton. Violin—V. Christiensen. Tambo—W. Grubbe,
Interlocutor—E. Essex.
The Company.


ON Sunday, July 27th, Canon Tebbutt conducted services on the hurricane
deck, in the morning at 11 a.m., and in the evening at 8.80 p.m. During
the day we passed Lette—an active volcano—Kan, and other mountainous
islands. At night the ship lay-to off the island of Tongahogan, the naviga-
tion being too dangerous to attempt to get into Tongatabu before morning.
Tongatabu was reached at nine a.m. on Monday, July the 28th. A
totally different appearance did this land present to any other visited on the
trip. The land is so low that none of it rises to a height of above sixty feet,
and the palm trees that grow at the water's edge seemed to be on the sky
line. The harbour of Nukualofa is difficult of navigation, owing to reefs
that run out in various directions. Passengers were landed at an excel-
lently built pier which ran out to the edge of a coral reef, and left to wander
at their own sweet will. To the right at a little distance from the sea is the
King's palace, looking very like a modern English villa; and by its side is
being built the Kings church, but it has not yet been decided to what
denomination it shall belong. Like the palace it is built of wood, and has
some fair pretentions to Gothic architecture, not enhanced in the interior
by patches of bright colours, said to be for the purpose of attracting the
natives. Further on stands the old Wesleyan church, on the only eminence
in sight, and that bare of trees. The building is spacious with an excellent
roof of an elaborate network of cocoanut wood hound together somewhat
after the nature of a close trellis work with cords made of cocoanut fibre,
and supported on huge pillars of iron wood. Behind the mound is the
College, of which Mr. Moltou is head. To this on Tuesday several people
were invited, and were delighted with the excell nt singing, led by Mr.
Molton, who is much aided by his daughter. They witnessed also one of
the hardest propositions of Euclid proved by a lady, found that the
natives excelled most white men in mental arithmetic. Near the sea still
further to the right is the English Consul's house, an ideal native abode
with lawns in front and behind. It is beautifully lofty and cool, with
French windows, and a roof every bit as fine as that of the church. Away
from the sea, just behind these superior buildings, are the natives' houses.
They are very comfortable, and the inhabitants are hospitable, the daughters
in some of the houses being able to entertain the guests with music on the
harmonium.
On Monday in the forenoon the good steam-launch Kate took many of the
passengers by a circuitous route through the reefs to Mua to see the mighty
Banyan tree and the burial place of the Chiefs. Unfortunately the visit
could, be but a short one, and people were not able to see both. A whole
day could well have been spent here.
Some few rode or drove through Bea, an intrenched township, renowned
for its resistance to the the King some twenty-two years ago, on to Mua and
the three wondrous stones, of which we publish a detailed account.
Owing to an early start on Tuesday afternoon nothing much more than
a stroll, and a visit to different houses was on the tapis for the morning.
Several of the college young ladies came on hoard and sang some songs
after lunch. The anchor was weighed at 8 p.m., and all boats hut the
pilot's had put off from the ship. 1 There were few of us, as we answered
the cheer given us, who did not regretfully leave the South Sea Islands
where we had spent such delightful times.


a
d
03
d
d
c3
XJ
eg
5
cj
g
'H
03
a
03
,3
a
cc
5m
d
c3
03
3
o
d
d
hi
eg
U
0
o
hi
£
o
CJ
>
&J
o
5h
u
a
1-5
o
ft
£
Ph‘
£
s
>
eg
o
a
w
hi
O
a
CQ
hj
Ph
d
fl
eg
CO
6
d
®
H
W
d
d
£
a
o
a
§
u
§
§
§
5h
a
5h
a
£
a
5h
a
hJ
S
o
£
O
hi
eg
h
Q
o
H
Carnegie, Hon. C
0 0
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
11
11
1 1
18
2
0
18
Chambers, Mr. W.
11
—
0 0
0 x
0 1
1 0
1 1
0 x
0 1
1 X
1 0
Crossman, Mr. F. V.
0 0
1 1
—
I 1
4 1
0 1
i i
1 1
1 1
0 1
0 1
14
5
1
144
Crossman, Mr. J. H
0 0
1 X
0 0
1 X
1 i
I 1
1 1
1 1
1 0
0 0
Donner, Mr, P. W.
0 0
1 0
i 0
0 X
—
i i
1 1
0 1
1 1
1 1
1 0
Gibbs, Mr. V
0 0
0 1
1 0
o 1
0 0
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
0 1
11
8
1
114
McLaren, Mr. H. ..
0 0
1 1
0 0
0 0
0 0
e o
—
0 1
0 1
1 1
0 0
2
14
4
4“
McLaren, Mr. J. S.
0 0
1 X
0 0
0 0
1 0
0 0
1 X
__
1 1
0 0
Popham, Mr. F. A. L.
0 0
1 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
) 0
1 0
0 0
i i
0 0
2
16
2
3
Sanders, Mr. 0. G.
0 0
0 x
1 0
0 1
0 0
0 0
1 h
1 X
1 1
0 0
Twentyman, Mr. J. H, ...
0 0
1 0
1 0
1 1
0 1
1 0
I 1
1 1
rl
1 1
14
6
0
14
X
N01
PLAYED.
Translation of an ancient Tongan inscription in the village of No
Ou^a;—
The Friendly Isles, the Friendly Isles,
Where Captain Cook was met with smiles ;
What gloomy faces now we meet,
How few the stranger come to greet.
That flannel shirt, that flannel shirt,
That seems inclined to hold the dirt;
Is not this boon to Tongan race
Dear bought by loss of cheerful face ?
The Tongan race, the Tongan race,
Perhaps is full of inward grace ;
Yet sure ’tis hard to count as sin,
The friendly smile, the cleanly skin.
THE TOUENAMENT.
SOLUTION OF PEOBLEM IN No. I;
1. E. to Q. E. 4. 1. P. to Q. B, 4—check.
2. K. x P. —discovers mate.
(A.) 1. B. xE.
2. K. to Q. E. s—discovers5 —discovers mate.
(B.) 1, KtoK. 5.
2. K. to Q. B. s—discovers5 —discovers mate.
(C.) 1. B. to K. B. 3.
2. E. to Q. E. 4—mate.
-McPoETl^¥.^
The world is very full of beauty;
Whatever meets the eye—
On earth, or sea, or sky,
Is but the indication
Of mysterious creation,
Springing from where no human thought can pry.
Unknown, unfathomable, unseen,
Whatever is may be defined
As the radiation of an eternal mind,
Piercing the darkness of illimitable space
With the dazzling brightness of His heavenly face
Calling to life and being things yet unborn,
To whom death brings in turn an everlasting morn.


-*^PoEs^¥.ilH-
'Tis said, when Noah ruled his Ark with all hia motley crew,
He never slept one wink at all, he had so much to do ;
The lions and the elephants looked down on all with pride,
While the monkeys and hyaenas with laughter split their sides,
And the sulky Polar bears with deep envy nearly died.
It cannot, therefore, be so strange, that in a ship like this,
With as mixed a group as Noah’s, things should sometimes go amiss ;
For human beings are like the brutes—they scratch, and smile, and roar;
If they do not get all things they wish, they’ll stamp upon the floor,
While ploughing the tempestuous seas for twenty days or more.
One hundred human strangers—all strangers to each other —
At first do eye each distantly, and their warmest feelings smother;
But when the ship is free at sea, and her swan-like sails unfurled,
The hundred strangers realize they form themselves a world,
And slowly they all blend together, and their thoughts are then uncurled.
How sweet it is when once the icy barrier is broken,
And softest words from lips of those whose eyes have only spoken
Do fall upon the listening ear from morning until night,
Upon the ever moving waves, with not a speck in sight.
Ah ! the centre of the heaven, it seems, the perfection of delight,
(To he continued next voyage.)
IrflB0UI? IJSI ¥JIE PACIFIC,
and Trade in the Pacific have lately attracted a great deal
HI of public attentions the difficulty of obtaining the former having
retarded the development and extension of the latter. Until very
recently, forcible seizures of harmless natives by unscrupulous men
$O3 —many of whom, I blush to say, were Englishmen—was a common
practice, and the sale of the poor captives as articles of com-
merce was openly carried on, the profits arising from such risky and
cruel work being so great as to induce men of no principle to engage in it.
When these scoundrels lost their lives in their inhuman work the natives
were generally blamed, and sometimes “ the horrible outrages on Europeans ”
were punished by one of H.M.’s ships shelling the village, and killing several
who had merely acted in self-defence. The following story will give the
reader some idea of the labour traffic :
In 1878 I was at Sydney, and out of employment. I had been walking about for
some days, and was becoming quite disheartened, having very little left in my purse.
About six o’clock one evening I suddenly ran against an old shipmate whom I had not
seen for two years. After a few words of greeting and explanation I went with him to
his room, and he then unfolded to me a plan he had of “ going for labour,” as it was
termed, amongst the Solomon, New Britain, New Ireland, and surrounding groups.
Captain Mile explained to me that the work -was very risky, and involved considerable
danger, but that if I would consent to go at all hazard, he would take me as the second
mate. I was somewhat taken aback at the horrible nature of the employment, for it
was only tantamount to slave taking, in its worst form, but what could a poor starving
fellow do, without any prospect before him ; so I gave him my hand, and consented to
his terms. “ And now,” said Captain Mile, “you must get me three or four willing
hands at once, as we must leave in a couple of days.” “All right,” I replied. “The
‘ Dancing Wave’ is lying off the North Shore,” Captain Mile said, pointing significantly
over his left shoulder in the direction. During the night I managed to pick up the men
—all daring, and capable of any atrocity—for one does not drift about the world, as I
had done, without making curious acquaintances. All I had to tell them was, that “ I
could put them on a lay,” and then they agreed without any question. The “ Dancing


Wave" was a smart schooner of 90 tons, and the crew consisted of Captain Mile, the
first and second mate, and eight sailors. Our instructions were to pick up sixty men.
When at the Islands we succeeded in rapidly getting fifty-two of the number. The
taking of these was effected in a very simple way : —We always took two boats, one of
which went to the shore, and the other kept within rifle distance, so that if the natives
showed hostility, the shore boat could row off under the protection of the guns. We
inveigled the men by every unfair means in our power on board, by bribes and induce-
ments, and when once on deck we easily placed them in the hold of the vessel, from
whence escape was impossible. We were deaf to their heartrending cries, and their
terrible sufferings—it was and became a matter of absolute indifference to us. As we
could not make up the full number we sailed off to the coast of New Guinea, which we
reached in a few days. The weather was hot and calm, and we were at anchor off a
quiet part of the coast -—no town near. We were sitting under the awning, smoking,
after dinner, and anything more peaceful than the scene could not be imagined. The
Captain all at once remarked, " If I could only make up sixty I would clear away."
There were two villages, one about a mile to the west, and the other about two miles to
the east, from where we saw the smoke from the fires rising straight up in the clear
evening light, a perfect picture of rural quietness, and ever and anon we could hear the
natives singing and laughing. Captain Mile asked me if I would go ashore at night with
two boats, and see what could be picked up —as many as possible. I agreed to go in
command of a boat and six men, when it was dark, and to approach the village to the
east, while the other boat, in charge of the first mate, rowed to the west to divert the
attention of the people there. The night was pitch dark, the country hilly, with dense
bush close to the beaeh. Our oars were all muffled, and we rowed in strict silence along
the shore, until within fifty yards of the village, and about twenty yards off the land,
when suddenly we saw a fire close at hand, with six or seven natives crouched round.
I beached my boat sixty yards to leeward of them, and left two native boys in charge of
her, with orders to keep her afloat, and taking my men, all armed with muskets and
revolvers, we'went about twenty yards into the hush and proceeded in single file to the
place where the natives were, none of us speaking, or even whispering. The bush was
so thick and dark we could not see an inch before us. and were only guided by the lurid
light of the fire. And now began our troubles. As we were advancing carefully, I
suddenly stumbled over something soft, and the man behind fell on the top of me. I
felt at once that some natives were lying outside the fire circle, for in a moment the man
upon whom I fell sprang up and gave an alarm. I called out to my men. " back to the
boat." In the midst of the confusion and excitement I managed to crawl into the bush
adjoining, although I had the misfortune to lose hold of my gun, and being so dark
could not touch it again. However, I lay down quietly in my position, and drew m y
revolver to defend myself. The natives had all rushed off after my men. When in about
half-an-hour I heard the noise like the click of a rifle, and a footstep with boots. I
softly called out, •' Who is that ? " "Is that you, mate?" in reply, came softly to me.
" Yes, keep quiet and don't move, as some may be around." He came under my bush,
and we talked in a whisper till daybreak. I fortunately found my gun, and we then
crept under a very thick bush which was some little distance off. Before going, I asked
my man to take off his boots, as the natives would track their marks. He said his feet
were so tender, and refused. We determined to lag thus until we heard some signal
from the ship, or to escape during the night. We had been lying for two hours when we
heard voices approaching, and we soon saw a crowd of natives standing a short distance
from us—l had made my man walk backwards, so as to deceive the natives. —They stood
talking and pointing around, explaining how they had been disturbed, all their move-
ments and gestures being excited. Suddenly, to my horror, I saw a boy looking very
closely at the ground, and begin to draw near to our place of concealment. He was on
the track of the boots. He followed up the track to our bush. I fixed my revolver. He
came within three feef of me, and gazed into the bush, and immediately yelled out,
" Here are the white men!" In an instant the whole crowd —about ten—rushed to the
spot; but as soon as the boy called out I gave him a shot for his trouble, and said to
Scotty, my companion, " Come, let us bolt, for the natives will fire their arrows into us,"
We ran towards the beach, getting a few moments' start, the natives in hot pursuit.
After running for some few minutes, I cried out. " Turn and fire." We fired about three
shots eaeh, and dropped two natives. They returned spears, but fortunately did not bit
us. We soon turned again and dropped three more. Scotty complained of being tired,
so I stopped to assist him ; but as the ground was covered with creepers, his foot got soon
entangled, and down he went, his gun going some distance away. I said, " Get up quick
and run for a clump of bushes right ahead when we will make a stand." I looked round
and saw a native aiming to shoot Scotty, so I fired at him all the chambers of my revolver
and wounded him in the shoulder. This gave Scotty time to get up, but after running a


few yards he fell and exclaimed, “I am done; they have shot me.” I looked and saw an
arrow sticking in his back, and very soon his head was seized by a native and I heard a wild
scream, at the same time I felt a sudden pain in my side, but pulling my belt very tight
I turned again and fired upon those who were pursuing me. One of them had Scotty’s
gun, so I aimed at him and he fell. Imagine my dismay when on firing again the
cartridge stuck and my gun was useless. I rushed into the thickest part of the bush and
drew my large knife, and laid down behind a fallen tree. They soon came up to me, one
of them carrying Scotty’s head. I suddenly jumped out upon him, and struck him, and
he fell. Another held up his tomahawk and came towards me, and siezed my gun which
I held towards him, and he also fell before my knife. I then siezed the tomahawk, and
two natives coming up to me I cut one down and stabbed the other with my knife, after
wrestling with him for some minutes, for I. fixed my teeth in his shoulder which caused
him to relax his grasp of me. I was able to hide myself for some time, and gradually
reached the beach, when my white skin attracted their attention on board, and I was soon
in safety, having lost only one man.
This kind of work was carried on until very recently, and this descrip-
tion conveys a very mild idea of the cruelty perpetrated on the natives of
the South Pacific Islands. If everyone on board of the “ Dancing Wave ”
had been killed no one would have regretted their fate.
OF mWKW jS!PO]SEJS WM ©E
, KOLO6O TOJS6/I CALLED KOE jifi jijimjl Jl ja^ai.
(v J • .
i\T EAE the village of Kologo, which is situated about fifteen miles from
)l\ Nukualofa, the principal town in the Island of Tongatabu, is to be
seen the remarkable ancient monument, which seems to show that
the religion whatever it may have been which caused the erection of the
temples at Stonehenge, Karnac, and many other places in Europe, was also
prevalent in at any rate some of the islands of the Pacific.
The monument consists of three large blocks of stone composed of a
limestone conglomerate, in which may be seen much fossil coral and many
fossil shells. At first sight it might appear that the upper stone was not of
quite the same nature as the lower ones, but careful examination led all our
party to conclude that it really was of the same nature only less weather-
worn and more dressed by hand. The shape of the monument at first sight
appears to be identical with the form so well known at Stonehenge, namely,
two upright stones, with a third one lying across the top of them; but a
moment's observation shows a very marked difference. Instead of the upper
stone being merely superimposed, in this case it is carefully inserted into
the other two, a groove about two feet wide has been cut in each upright
stone, and the upper stone, which has been carefully cut to the right size,
has been placed in it so that the ends are about flush with the outside of
the perpendicular stones, whilst the top is about flush with the top of the
stones, though owing to the easternmost stone being a little lower than the
other one, probably from breakage, it rises a little above it on that side.
The horizontal stone lies east and west, and it is noticeable that either by
accident or design there is a slight though perceptable inclination of the
faces of the perpendicular stones towards the north, i.e., the north end of
the opening between stones, is slightly narrower than the south.
On the centre of the top of the horizontal stone, a hollow has been
scooped out about the size of a cocoanut shell, and about an inch and a-half
deep, though whether this hollow has been part of the original design, or


has been made at a subsequent period, it is impossible to say. Owing to
the pressure of time and the absence of any correct tape or ruler, the
measurements taken must be considered to be approximate; they are
however, roughly as follows: —Height of perpendicular stones, 14 to 15
feet; depth of horizontal stone, 4ft. Gin.; distance between perpendicular
stones, 10ft.; base of perpendicular stones, N.-E. side, 4ft.; base of perpen-
dicular stone, N.-W. side, about 12ft., probably less ; breadth of
perpendicular stones at the top of E. and W. sides, about 7ft., probably
more.
It will thus be seen that the space contained between the three stones
is nearly a square if not absolutely so, as possibly accurate measurement
would find it to be.
The stones, especially the western one, are much weatherworn, and there
are several plants growing on them, which, though they add much to the
picturesque appearance of the monument, are, I fear, hurrying on the work
of destruction. Owing to the limited time at our disposal we were unable
to make any but the most cursory examination of the ground on which
these stones stand, especially as, with the exception of the roadway, it is
covered with thick bush. It seemed, however, that there were some indica-
tions of a trench on both the north and south sides of the stones, and also
that the trenches were part of a large circle, the stones being at the northern-
most end (the end nearest the sea), but these indications are so faint that,
without further examination, it would be impossible to pronounce with any
certainty upon this. The stones are situated about eighty yards from the
sea shore.
Our stay being so limited makes it impossible for us to know whether
these stones could or could not have been cut from the rocks or reefs of the
island, but what little tradition there is concerning these stones (and there
is next to none) indicates a belief that they were imported. Further exa-
mination would also be required to say if they were identical in composition
with the large blocks of stone (some of which were probably quite as large as
the horizontal stone, if not larger,) which are to be seen at the Pyramidal
Graves about seven miles off, but it is suggestive that when the passengers
on the first trip of the “ Wairarapa” were allowed to laud at the uninhabited
island of Fafa in the same group (having been prohibited from landing at
Tonga Tabu owing te quarantine regulations) some of them saw on the
beach, but below high-water mark, about half-a-dozen stones, evidently
hewn, their size being about 7 to 8 feet long, 3 feet broad, and 1 deep.
These stones were lying in an irregular manner, but all together; no marks,
however, of any place from which they had been quarried were visible.
Before concluding this notice it may be interesting to state that the
British Consul told the writer that he had been present at the opening of
some barrows on the island (there are evidently many of them) and also at
the opening of some in the South of England, and that the similarity of the
form of cists and the shape of the stone implements was quite remarkable.
It is evident that there is a considerable field for our antiquarian research
in the Tongan group. The Pyramid graves before mentioned, of which the
writer was only able to make a most cursory examination, alone would be
worthy of careful investigation. It must, however, be remarked that inter-
ments there have been quite recent, if not indeed still continuing. Indeed
one most perfect barrow is evidently used as a modern cemetery. It would
be therefore plainly impossible to carry out research in the manner in which
it can be done in European countries.


JPHE W WH-
WBF&
'4pHE same day of our arrival at Tongatabu the " Kate ' conveyed the
,jk majority of us to the township of Mua, this being the part of the
island containing most objects of interest. After many a turn and
twist in the manner of a snake in an agony, necessitated by the tortuous
narrow channel that ran between the reefs, we reached Mua, and were told
we could only be allowed an hour in which to explore. The guide—by
name George Tukuhao, son of a mighty Tongan Chief —told us the two
places of interest we had a chance of reaching were the great Banyan tree
and the Burial ground.
The majority went to the former, but there were two or three, archaeolo-
gists at heart, who thought the latter would have the greater interest. The
road to them lay through the township on the left of the landing place—the
main road through the island in fact.
We got hold of a lad and were doing our best to make him understand
where we wanted him to go, so little English are the Tongans taught,
when we fell in with some from the " Wairarapa " who had ridden over with
a white man as guide, and he quickly explained -what we required. The
boy led us for about a mile along the high road, and then turned sharply
off to the left by a small path into the bush. We had scarcely gone one
hundred yards when we came upon two of the burial grounds ; the rest are
on the right, some sixty yards further along the road. They have been
called pyramidal, but this term rather requires explanation.
In the middle of the thick bush, we saw what appeared to be three huge
steps in front of us, wrapped in a covering of trees and undergrowth. On
further examination we found that they extended round the sides of a
parallelogram, three tiers one above the other, so that they may perhaps be
more correctly described as pyramidal bases with level surfaces.
The first one we came to, for there are nine of them, has its low r er step,
as far as we could roughly calculate, eighteen inches in height, the step
above four feet, and the topmost one foot. The stones are of coraline and
of different lengths, varying somewdiat in thickness : some of the largest we
measured are from 15 to 18 feet long and about eighteen inches or two feet
in thickness, in height varying with the step. These steps varied much in
the different pyramids, the first being sometimes considerably higher than
the others, and vice versa. The surface of the step, that is the space between
the tiers, sometimes three feet, sometimes more, had been carefully levelled
and covered with coral gravel, if the substance can so be called. The stones
fit very closely, and are very regular at the top and bottom : this holds
good with each tier. The corners of the first tumulus are formed by huge
rectangular stones, which seem to have been put in their position before
they were finally faced. We noticed that the corners are not always exactly
right angles.
We measured the external dimensions of three of the bases, and found
them to be about two chains in length by a chain and a half in breadth : a
fourth is even larger.
It was impossible to make anything like a careful examination of the
surface owing to the thick growth of shrubs and trees which envelop these
tumuli, their roots creeping down in places in a wonderful natural network
over the stone terraces. The second ground we saw seemed the most
interesting; the steps of this are respectively eighteen inches, two feet and
three feet in height: in the centre of each side are broad fiat stones, either
so placed, or fallen from their original position, in such a way that they


might act as a kind of passage for the ascent, rendering it less difficult than
the steep abrupt steps, if ever this ground were used for sacrificial purposes.
In the middle of the mound lies a large flat stone, some five feet six inches
square, its surface level with the gravelled surface of the tumulus. This is
the only stone we could find in our necessarily cursory examination any-
where but at the sides of each burial ground.
The seven grounds on the right differ in one or two points from the
other two. The sides of one burial place are surrounded by only one layer
of stones, while there are four layers to at least two; also besides coraline
slabs there are huge stone slabs of volcanic formation, placed indis-
criminately side by side with the others.
The largest stone we measured is twenty two feet long, between seven
and eight feet above the ground, and two feet in thickness. This is at the
centre of the bottom step of one of the sides and considerably higher than
its neighbours. It had become split in two, but the chief peculiarity in it is
a deep hollow, the size and shape of a large chemist's mortar, perfectly
smooth. It is impossible to say whether this is formed naturally or
intentionally, if the latter, it has been suggested that it may have been a
large washing stone with hollows, belonging to the great man buried there,
and set up in honour of his grave.
The last tumulus we visited is on ground that rises abruptly to some
four or five feet before the stones are found, and so hard and slippery that
the sloping surface seems beaten down. This is immediately beside the
modern burial ground which is on the right of the highway. As we left the
tumulus, the boy, our guide, raised the green growth which covers one of
the volcanic stones at the corner calling our attention by some remark,
which unfortunately we could not understand, from its appearance there
was nothing to render it remarkable.
The great mystery is as to whence these stones came and who put them
there; as far as is known there are no quarries in the immediate neighbour-
hood. There are no reliable traditions about them. That these places are
of great antiquity there is no donbt, and the large bush trees .and shrubs,
which have grown there now so long undisturbed, are a proof of this ; some
of the trees are many feet in circumference, and have succeeded in displac-
ing and overthrowing many of the slabs. It is maintained by some that
these are the burial places of the old kings of Tonga, by others the graves
of some old prophets, and this seemed to be George Tukuhao's idea, for he
said there were " old missionaries long before these (i.e., the present)
came." Possibly the occupants in their life time discharged both the
offices of kings and prophets. It is not unlikely that sacrifices were offered
on some of these pyrimidal erections, the stone in the centre of the second
one pointing to a possible altar.
The native name for these structures is " Langi," which means " sky or
heaven," where they hope the good missionaries of olden days have gone.
There are no inscriptions on any of the stones we saw, but doubtless other
similar structures are to be found in other Islands, such as Java or Easter
Island, which will throw light upon the matter when excavated, and prove
these burial places to be the work of some greater nation than ever the
Tongans were, and connect them with the great three-stoned structure to
be found seven miles beyond Mua.


IgliHP YlglTg pw W M END.
■2N Tuesday, the 29th, we raised anchor for the last time, and headed
| for New Zealand. Favourable weather followed us, and after a
a speedy run of three days eighteen hours we, at 10 a.m. on
Saturday, 2nd August, steered abreast of Auckland wharf. We
if felt more than ordinary sorrow that our allotted time had run out.
Earely has it fallen to the lot of pleasure-seekers to meet with so many
advantageous circumstances, lasting without interruption for twenty-six
days. No rain to hinder our rambles ashore, no sickness, not even so
much as a mental biliousness to raise either a growl or a quarrel other
than a wish the time could have been extended.
On the eve of arrival, congratulatory expressions were given, and the
Hon. C. Carnegie, rising at the close of dinner, said :—“ Ladies and Gentle-
men, —This most pleasant trip of ours, a tour which I think we all agree, is
only too short, is now drawing to a close, I think before we separate, we
should make some acknowledgment of our obligations to the officials of the
Union Steam Ship Company, under whose auspices this trip has taken
place. While we have been enjoying ourselves, others have had a time of
considerable anxiety. I must say that during this trip I have not envied
the lot of the captain of this vessel, who has had a most anxious time. To
Captain Chatfield we are indebted for the skill with which we have been
piloted through the difficulties of our trip, and, I think, we should give him
our thanks for the ability with which he has managed his vessel. There
have not only been trials by water, but there have been trials by land,
which have also been successfully surmounted, I think that had it not been for
the untiring energy displayed by Mr. Wheeler, this tour would have been
far less successful. (Loud applause.) Mr. Wheeler has not spared himself
in his anxiety to make the trip a success. To be called upon to answer
twenty questions at once, some controversial, and to do so, pleasing all and
offending none, shows a serenity of temper which unhappily falls to the lot
of few. As to Mr. Stott and the other officers of the ship, they have been
working while we have been playing; hard work has been their lot. I
think we all agree, when I say they have proved themselves kind and courte-
ous under trying circumstances. I believe it is far easier to have a lot of
sheep to manage than to herd a lot of men and women. (Laughter.) I
now call upon you to drink the health of Captain Chatfield, Mr. Wheeler,
and the officers of the ship ‘ Wairarapa.’ ”
The toast was drunk with enthusiasm.
Captain Chatfield replied : Ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of myself
and my officers I beg to thank you sincerely for the kind wishes you have
expressed, and I trust it will not be the last time we shall travel together,
but that it will not be on a trip to the South Sea Islands. (Applause).
Mr. W. F. Wheeler said: Ladies and gentlemen, I cannot but express
to you my thanks for the kind manner in which you have alluded to the
very small part—(cries of no, no) —I have taken in furthering your pursuits
after pleasure. When called upon to accept this post, I did so with con-
siderable misgiving, feeling I was knowingly placing myself in the anomalous
position of a blind man attempting to lead sightseers (Laughter). You have,
however, made my task a pleasant one, so much so that I now esteem it
a privilege to have had the opportunity of being placed amongst you.
Permit me to say that, if meeting with encouragement, the company pur-
poses continuing these trips, making either one or more every year, not
exclusively to the places we have visited, but possibly to other islands of
even greater interest and importance. (Applause).














“ WAIRARAPA WILDERNESS.
STATEMENT OF ACCOUNT UP TO 9th SEPTEMBER,
1884.
1884.
August 2. Subscriptions .. .. .. .. £16 10 0
1884.
September 8. Lyon and Blair’s
Account for
,, Balance Athletic Fund .. .. 5 18 0
Printing
.. £20 5 0
,, Extra Subscriptions .. .. .. 0 0 6
,, Balance
2 12 6
£22 17 6
£22 17 6
The greater part of the balance will be required for Po,
,tages ; what remains, together with any future Subscriptions,
will be handed over, as decided on board, to the Mercantile Marine Service Association of Australia.
There are a few copies left, which can be had by subscribers at Is. each on application
to Mr. W. F. Wheeler,
Wellington.
Wellington, 9th September, 1884.
C. G. DE
BETHAM,
Editor.






