

wag
©7TOII




Evolution of the Lamp
1 )HEN the caveman first dis-
covered fire, great must have
been his joy. He found that it gave
him not only agreeable warmth but
a pleasing and cheerful light that
made his cave a true haven of
refuge from the darkness and terrors
of a pre-historic night.
What a far cry indeed from the
smoky, sticky and odorous torch
of our pre-historic ancestors to the
bright, clean, steadily burning lamp
of to-day.
Light has had a material effect
on civilization, and in the following
pages we trace the evolution of the
lamp from the earliest times.


(s volution of the Lamp
earliest class of lamps known are
-A'P' J those of the period about 3000 8.C.,
which were discovered amongst the ex-
cavations of Babylonia and Assyria. Ihese
were fashioned in a very crude manner of un-
glazed terracotta and took such forms as birds,
hands and feet. The ancient Greeks used
lamps in their premises in 950 B.C. These
lamps were of more ornate style, being made
of pottery or metal and were carved or de-
corated on the handle and the bowl. The fuel
used was Olive Oil on which the wick floated.
‘Che Earliest Class of Lamps knorvn about 3000 P.L.


‘Page f?hret
c Chc Graceful Larrps of Greece
It was the custom of the Grecian maidens to
set such lighted lamps before the Oracles when
they consulted them. These lamps were used
extensively by the ancient Greeks and the poet,
Homer, sings of “A festival of lamps.”
In 64 A.D. the lamps took on new glory.
Magnificent stands holding six or seven lamps
adorned the homes of the wealthy. The lamps
were still on the same principle— a floating
wick in a bowl of Olive Oil. This gave off an
offensive odour and the better class people
mixed perfume with the Olive Oil to endeavour
to counteract the strong smell.
In the middle ages, 400 to 600 A.D., the
design of lamps followed the early Roman


‘Page Four
style, the later Roman style of ornamentation
having disappeared, and in the period in ques-
tion lamps were crude and were not in general
use. Torches, rush lights, and crude candles
made of tallow were the mam illuminants. The
fuel then used was animal oil which was of a
very unsatisfactory nature and gave a very poor
light.
The lamps of the sixteenth century were
very primitive and until the Dutch in 1610
A.D. produced a metal lamp made of tin or
copper, the lamps were of a very crude nature
and still used animal oil as fuel.
It was not until 1783 A.D. that Monsieur
Picturesque Lamps of the Tinmans


‘Page Fide
Lamps of the j4ges, 400-600 A.D.
Argand, a Swiss chemist, introduced a glass
chimney and a burner, using a circular wick.
The discovery of the chimney was due to an
accident. One of Argand’s workmen was hold-
ing a bottle over the flame when the bottom of
the bottle fell out. Owing to the heat of the
bottle the workman dropped it over the burner
thus acting as a chimney. This was immediately
observed to give a better and steadier light.
Experiments were then carried out which
evolved the principle of the present lamp
chimney, but unfortunately it did not solve the
fuel problem.
Prior to this many attempts had been made
tc improve the lamp, one of them being the


‘Page S : x
c Chs Primitive Lambs of ths PfetherlanJs, XVII. Century
English [Bull's £ye Lamp of 1750 A. D.


“Page Seven
First Impiooed Lamps, 1783 A.D.
introduction on both sides of the wick of bull’s
eye glasses, which, while they brightened the
light did not overcome the flickering, smoky
wick which was still in evidence.
In 1843 A.D. experiments were being made
in America to improve the fuel and produce a
fluid to take the place of animal and seed oil
then in general use. Oil of turpentine was
purified by distillation over quicklime and was
called Napthene. This was placed into service
for a time but on account of its dangerous
nature it soon went out of favour.
In 1838 A.D. the lamp commenced to come
into its own. About that time kerosene was


‘Page (Sight
‘Uhe Lamp of


‘Page ZAfine
successfully distilled from crude oil and was
used as a fuel for lamps. As the distillation of
kerosene was gradually perfected the lamp de-
sign kept pace with it and gradually improve-
ments were made both to the kerosene and to
the lamps, which gave to the world a lamp
design which would satisfactorily burn kerosene.
Attention was then turned to the improve-
ment of kerosene itself, and for many years
past the quality of kerosene reached a high
stage of perfection equal in its field to electric
light, and yet infinitely softer and better for
the eye-sight.
-Hi-
Kerosene Lamp
The kerosene lamp is depended upon to pro-
vide illumination in many thousands of homes
in Australia and New Zealand. A good lamp
(riled with kerosene of the highest quality gives
a light which is ideal. Its soft, soothing glow
is most restful to the eyes of both young and
old alike.
The quality of the light produced is intim-
ately associated with the quality of the kero-
sene used. A low grade kerosene can only
produce a poor illuminant. A high grade


‘Page ten
kerosene, such as Laurel gives a light which
burns steadily and brightly to the last drop,
without flicker, smoke or odour, and feeds
freely to the wick without charring. It is well
known as the “soft white light.” It is not
only an ideal illuminant; it also gives best re-
sults in oil heaters and oil cook stoves.
LAUREL is refined from the highest grade
petroleum, every care being taken in refining
to conform to a fixed high standard of speci-
fication. Thus its purity, uniformity and
excellent burning qualities can be fully
depended on.
For many years the high quality of LAUREL
KEROSENE has made it the standard of ex-
cellence throughout Australia and New Zealand.
LAUREL is the recognised favourite with
housewives. This high standing has been won
on the basis of real merit.
Yacuum 053 Compamy Fly, ILtdl,
throughout jJustralia and ZACeW Zealand




