

m
jf Jte- -r ifck ,> rfOBHRl' ' : '
m M
jirr . y'
jl ? jsaf
9 v *9 - -
i y ?hl z ?
i
t
J i�S|i
I
?
? 1 Ma^
1 ID




THE CASTAWAYS


By the same author
Jungle Vagabonds
Valley of the Lost Trail
Novels
The Third String
V/hite Man, Brown Woman
(with T. L. Richards)
Collits? Inn
(Australian Musical Romance)


The
Castaways
T. STUART GURR
WITH TH*E EDITOR?S COMPLIMENTS
RETAIL price .
CONSOLIDATED PRESS LIMITED
SYDNEY


SET UP BY
CONSOLIDATED PRESS LTD.
AND PRINTED AND BOUND
IN AUSTRALIA BY
W. E. SMITH LTD., SYDNEY
FOR THE PUBLISHERS
CONSOLIDATED PRESS LTD.
SYDNEY
1944
REGISTERED AT THE G.P.O.
SYDNEY FOR TRANSMISSION
BY POST AS A BOOK.


Dedicated to my dear grand-daughter
JENNIFER


CONTENTS
Chapter a S e
I What's In A Name?
II Hullo, Rube! 12
111 A Mullet Falls From A Cart 21
IV A Treasure Hunt 26
V Aunt Agatha 31
VI The Castaways 37
VII The Diary 45
VIII The Chinese Chest 55
IX A Visitor Calls 63
X The Smugglers 71
XI Rags Makes A Voyage 81
XII The Search - 90
XIII Characters Cleared 99
XIV Good-bye To The Tropical Isle 107


Ci67o<
2 4 JUL 194
CHAPTER I
WHAT?S IN A NAME?
Ringer opened his eyes very gradually. He knew, by the sun
on his face and the activity of the flies, that it was time to get
up. Getting up was always a hateful business on school days,
although easy enough on Saturdays. In those few precious
moments of tranquillity before jumping out of bed he thought
of many profound things. For instance he firmly believed life
would be pleasant enough for the average boy if he w r ere per-
mitted to get up w?hen he liked and every school was bombed
out of existence.
Now he lay still, nervously awaiting the sound of that voice
?which to him w'as like the voice of doom. It was as regular
as the clock. At half past seven it said "Arthur!? then "Arthur!??
a little more loudly, and finally "ARTHUR!? with such a screech
of exasperation that he leapt out of bed and said, "Right-o,
mum!? And so his day began.
Sometimes, though not often, he pretended to be asleep even
after the last phase of the alert, and then his father, in an
extremely pleasant voice, would say "Arthur!? and it acted like
dynamite. No voice, he w-as sure, could be so loaded wdth
meaning and menace. Dad was a great fellow and a fine sport
in many but a stickler for instant obedience. Whether
this was a hobby or a weakness, Ringer had not yet been able
to decide.
All his school pals called him Ringer. There was a play
called that, and as his surname svas Ringrow?well, that was
all there was to say about it. But his parents stubbornly refused
to substitute it for Arthur, and he felt convinced, by their choice
of Arthur as a name for him, that they had borne a grudge
against him from the very first. Once, w T hen he complained
about it, his mother had replied that many famous men had
been called Arthur and then, just to excuse herself, had quoted


something that Shakespeare had said about "what?s in a name???
He did not know why people wanted to quote a fusty old gentle-
man, w'hose proper place was in history' books, when they wanted
to dodge an argument.
His name ?hateful and sissy?was his most serious handicap.
He lived in the hope that, when he was a big hulking chap of
eighteen, and in the army or the navy or the air force, or doing
something sissies never think of doing, his father would call
him Ringer and give him the biggest thrill of his life.
Ringer was not exactly handsome. His hair was as unruly
as a coir mat, and his round head a bit bulgy over the ears.
Somebody had once said, in his hearing, that he had nice grey
eyes, and that was the only compliment to his features he could
remember. Whenever his sister Flora ?and thank goodness she
was his only sister, and would soon be old enough to get mar-
ried ?referred to his mouth she called it a gash. At one time
his face troubled him a lot. His nose tilted a bit, and he spent
long hours trying to caress it into greater shapeliness. A few
months ago his personal beauty gave him particular concern.
It w T as about the time Mary Lou came to live two houses away
on his side of the street. Until then he had not taken much
notice of girls, his sister having given him a distinct prejudice
against them as a class. But somehow Mary Lou was different.
Whenever he looked at her, his blood rushed to his head and
he wanted to say and do silly things. Mary Lou must have
been different, for every boy in the school thought her just as
wonderful as he did. The way they hung round just to catch
sight of her made him really angry. There was Dicky Rowe,
with long black hair always neatly brushed, and blue eyes ?a
real stunner; and Peter Dent, wdth a green jersey that made
him look like a cove on the pictures. They tagged round and
didn?t give the rest of the blokes a look in, those two. Yet
what happened to these dreaded rivals? Mary Lou went to a
girls? college in the Blue Mountains and left them sorrowing?
all except Ringer. "Good-bye, Ringer. You?re the nicest boy
I've ever met,? she said, and then ran inside the gate. That
had bucked him up a terrible lot.


To-day, the morning meal passed quite harmoniously. To
begin with Flora, who had just left college, was holidaying with
her aunt in Orange; and his father, with the morning paper
propped against the milk jug, was too absorbed in the new'S
to pay much attention to him.
Mr Ringrow looked terrifying in the mornings?so clean,
brushed-up and business-like, and smelling delightfully of
shaving soap; while his poor mother, trying to fry the bacon
and eggs and make toast at the same time, was invariably
worried and short-tempered. Whenever the toast got burnt she
would tweak his ear for not watching it, yet she never said
anything to dad, w'ho w?as surely big enough to take all the
blame. Dad always drank his tea just before leaving the house,
then wiped his toothbrush moustache on mother?s forehead.
After that Ringer felt a great oppression lift from his heart.
Mum said, "Revise your homework!? and away went Ringer ?
to have a little innings with Rags.
His wdre-haired terrier shot round the corner as he strolled
into the backyard. A wdld leap sent Ringer sprawling, but he
picked himself up and sat on the steps near the veranda door,
and Rags jumped into his lap and, whining with delight, licked
stray bits of breakfast off his face. Ringer put his arms round
him and hugged him, satisfied that he was an understanding
and most attractive dog. With his inviting eye, and his quaint
habit of lifting left brow' and left ear at the same time in a
questioning manner, Rags w?as clearly intelligent and communi-
cative. Now, for instance, whining a little and barking a little,
he told his young master all he had done since dawn, and
Ringer felt sure that he understood and, laughing, called him
"Good dog!? as he patted him. But sometimes Mr Ringrow,
when he heard about Rags?s escapades from long-suffering
neighbours who w'ere garden-lovers, would storm about the
house and declare he would have him sent to the dogs? home.
Rags?s kennel was placed in a cosy corner of the tool shed,
a corrugated-iron structure made beautiful and fragrant with
eglantine. Here he slept wdth his senses alert for intruders.
He never had a really sound, unbroken sleep. The dustman,


who came once a week, always selected an early hour when
Rags most hated to be disturbed. He had barked, growled, and
even shown his teeth in an effort to persuade him to pick a
more convenient time, but the dustman never changed his annoy-
ing custom. Here was a man who regularly stole from a big
tin everything his mistress diligently stored in it, and did it
blatantly. True, he brought back the tin, but what of the
precious contents ? Well, it hurt Rags even to think of it.
The big boss had risen one dark, wintry morning, after the usual
incident with the dustman, and had growled and sworn, and
even swiped at him with the switch he occasionally used on
Ringer. Grown-up men, Rags concluded, had very little common
sense.
It was all very well for people who snuggled under cosy
blankets and slept under his protection to yell at him when he
barked. They did not realize that a dog has his responsibilities
and worries too. Sometimes he had to fight off a prowling dog
from the garbage tin, but the cats were the worst offenders.
They fought and scratched, especially if they found something
toothsome. He could understand an animal scrapping if he
were really hungry. An unfed cat had his sympathy, too; but
when two of them, shoulder-to-shoulder, went down the primrose
path to sing a duet behind a rosebush, it was more than any
self-respecting dog could stand.
Then there were other worries and intrusions. Possums, for
instance, who scampered up and down the ridge tiles of the
bungalow; and bandicoots who dug worms out of the garden
with their long snouts, and made nasty little grunts while they
did it. Ringer?s father would look at these holes in the lawn,
as he took his morning stroll round the garden, and then glance
at Rags with a reproachful eye. When the grapes ripened on
the vines, all sorts of bush rats and other creatures held a
reunion and made whoopee. All these things went on in his
hearing and kept him up, and then, if he snatched a quiet
snooze during the day, someone was bound to remark on the
amount of time a dog spent sleeping. Very few humans could
get a dog?s point of view.


But, with all his worries, Rags found life worth while,
especially when he was with Ringer. So he jumped three feet
over a stick, sat up and begged, walked on his hind legs, and
showed off generally, during the few minutes between the end
of breakfast and Ringer?s departure for school.
When Ringer kissed his mother before leaving, she always
said the same thing: "Know your home-work, Arthur? And
he would answer, "You betch-yer! Know it by heart, mum,?
and then feel a little conscience-stricken at the thought of what
the teacher would have to say about it later during the day.
At the end of the year his father always read the school report
with a scowl, and remarked in that annoying, cynical way, I see
you?re maintaining your position in your form, Arthur. And
mum would add, Strange ?especially as he always says he knows
his homework by heart.? Of course that called for some sort
of explanation, but Ringer was never able to think up anything
except the old gag that That report s all rot. Old Dedman s
got me set.? This invariably put dad into a nasty mood, but
good old mum would come to the rescue by saying, Some
schoolmasters do have favourites. We?re hoping you?ll be one
some day, son.? And then the curtain -would be rung down
on another year of worry and brain-fag.


CHAPTER II
HULLO, RUBE!
A friend from New York once said to Ringer?s father, as he
looked out of the lounge, "Ringrow, you?ve got a million-dollar
view from this window.? And indeed, before them lay the
glorious panorama of one of the world?s most beautiful har-
bours, while the fragrant Australian bush swept up to the fence
of their " house of the green windows.? Ringer escaped
into it through an opening in the fence, and wandered among
great gums, she-oaks, banksias, wattles, broom, flowering shrubs
and creepers. Twittering and fluttering in the branches of the
trees, was a colourful and confusing variety of birds; and below
him, the spacious waters of the cove danced and sparkled in the
sunlight.
Ringer could see the cove, and the dense bush that fringed it,
from his chair in the breakfast-room, and it gave him the
illusion that he was on board a sailing ship, enjoying a meal
in the saloon, as it swept majestically past some tropical isle.
He had no idea what Barbados or the Bahamas looked like, but
he was sure they could not have afforded better shelter for
pirates than this cove. The rocky foreshore with its little caves,
the forest and thick undergrowth above it, made it an ideal spot
for smugglers and buccaneers. Sometimes great ocean liners
anchored off the foreland and swung with the tide, coming so
close to the edge of the lawn that Ringer felt he could easily
knock off the captain?s hat with his catapult as he stood on
the bridge. The tankers and freighters rather spoilt things.
He would have preferred to see a murderous-looking barque with
mast shot away and sails and shrouds blown into shreds, battered
and somewhat waterlogged, but still defiantly flying the Jolly
Roger.
At the head of the cove a little stream prattled down the
valley, and at low tide threaded its way through a beach of


golden sand towards the shark net. But the whole cove, for
Ringer, had merely been a nice picnic- and playground until
he had met Rube. It was he who told him that when Sydney
was a new and sprawling town wfith no docks, they careened
whalers and coasters in that little bay. It was easy to do, so
Rube explained. From deep water one ran into a lovely shelving
beach. Rube would stand on the diving rock, and point to that
purple-green line where the beach fell sheer as a precipice. A
fringe of seaweed indicated the line beyond which it was danger-
ous to go, even if there were no sharks around.
Ringer remembered the day when Rube first came to school
and took a seat in his form. The boys sniggered and nudged
each other at the apparition, but Rube sat down with a solemn
face and, turning, gave them a prodigious wink. Rube had no
shoes or stockings. His old grey pants were patched and
darned, and his grey flannel shirt showed his left shoulder-
blade. He was clean enough?someone, apparently, had towel-
led his face until it shone?but his brown, tousled hair looked
as if it had not been cut for months. It hung about his ears
and fringed his shirt collar. His right eye was bruised, and
his left half closed; but even when these after-effects of a recent
battle had vanished, Ringer learnt that Rube?s left eyelid had
a droop. This gave him a quaint appearance, keeping people
on tiptoe for the wink that did not, necessarily, come.
In a suburb of civil servants, business and professional men,
?where most of the boys who attended the fine public school
were well dressed and highly respectable, Rube looked like some
odd stray. There was something peculiar about him. It may
have been his funny eye, his tousled head, or his shabby clothes,
but wherever he went all eyes followed him. At first sight
Ringer, and every other boy in his form, determined they would
have nothing to do with this ruffianly brat; and they kept on
feeling that way until Rube gave his memorable wink. The
form burst out laughing, but Rube stared in front of him,
solemn as an owl.
In the lunch hour Rube sat apart, with his back to the school
fence, and voraciously devoured two thick slices of bread and


jam. Then he produced from his lunch case a cardboard box
with holes punched in the lid, and loosed a small frog. Draw-
ing a chalk line on the asphalt, Rube placed the frog upon it
between his two fingers. The frog gave a leap which was duly
marked. It was then brought back for another go. Before
long, Rube had a gang of boys round him.
"What you got there?? Ringer asked.
"A jumpin? frog,? said Rube. "I?ve got two. Any one of
you can have yer pick, and I?ll bet him a coupla marbles my
frog will jump farther?n his.?
Ringer picked his frog. It jumped gamely, but Rube?s always
beat it by a few inches. When Ringer had lost eight marbles,
Ginger Dawes took a hand and selected Rube?s frog. He won
the first jump, but lost steadily afterwards.
The crowd increased every minute. There was always some-
one ready to challenge Rube, until both his trouser pockets
bulged with the spoils. "We 11 call it a day, said Rube, and
collected his frogs and put them back in his lunch case.
And that is how Ringer made the acquaintance of Rube.
Rube afterwards declared that he had winked straight at Ringer
on his first appearance in class, which gave Ringer the title to
being his oldest school friend.
It seemed to Ringer, when he looked back, that a new life
began after that memorable meeting. Before it, he had trudged
alone to and from school every day, bearing with ill grace the
boredom of being educated, and the withering cross-fire of
family sarcasm. Now Rube engrossed his thoughts. Rube was
always waiting at the street corner to accompany him to school.
They always broke into step, Ringer?s heels banging on the
concrete footpath, and Rube trudging by his side as silent as a
ghost. Rube always had some wonderful bit of news to give
him, or some story to tell, or great scheme to unfold. It was
curious how real everything was that Rube described. He never
seemed to say a dull or wearying thing, and he was always
cheerful. Sometimes he was hungry. "Well, if you?re not
wanting it,? he would say if food were offered to him, 111 not
let it go to waste.?


Rube might have been shabby and neglected-looking, but he
had brains. He wasn?t much good at arithmetic, but in every
other subject he topped the form. His memory was remarkable.
As far as the teachers could learn, Rube had no criminal in-
stincts, but his background was indefinite. A Miss Agatha
Williams, who caught the early ferry in the morning to the city
and lived in a rather dilapidated old four-roomed weatherboard
cottage near the cove, was supposed to be his aunt. Agatha,
so Ringer discovered in the course of time, had very poor
eyesight but was fond of books, so Rube spent at least an hour
every evening reading to her.
One Saturday morning in mid winter, as they sat on a flat
rock and idly traced designs in the sand with a stick, Ringer and
Rube had a very serious talk about fathers in general. Ringer
did not like to appear a groucher, but there were certain points
about his stern parent that he did not quite approve. For
instance, he always chose a Saturday morning, when Rube and
he had some great project afoot, to ask him to weed the garden
or paint the fence or run some errand, which cut right across
his own plans. Then again, he thought he w r as unnecessarily
severe on his dog. That threat to send Rags to the dogs? home
completely unnerved him.
"Where?s your old man?? Ringer finally inquired.
"The last I heard of him,? Rube said casually, "he was in
Canada having a little vacation. He?d just come back from the
Hudson Bay territory.?
Ringer?s eyes goggled. "What was he doing there??
"Trappin?,? said Rube. "He used to have a big fur business
in Winnepeg, but he?s always movin? round. My pop?s got one
big kink?makin? money.?
"Does he send you much??
"No,? said Rube, having a pot with his catapult at an old
petrol tin washed up from the bay. "You know, it?s not that
he?s selfish or thoughtless, Ringer, but just a little careless.
Aunt Agatha says it?s carelessness, but I?ve got a new angle on it.?
"What??


"He wants me to grow up tough and independent. He had a
hard life himself, as a boy. He was born in Lonsdale Street
in Melbourne, and sold papers when he was seven. Poor old
dad! But he said it made a man of him ?and sure it did.
He?s had a wonderful time since.?
"But, Rube, if he?s making such pots o? money, surely he
could spare some for you??
"Look here, Ringer,? said Rube a little sternly, "you mustn?t
talk about my pop like that. He does send me money. Sup-
posin? he sent me, say two quid a week, what?d happen? I d
be wantin? to live in picture shows instead of makin? my own
fun, and rottin? my stomach chewin? sw r eets, and gettin? to be
a soft-drink sozzler. I ain?t complainin?.?
After that, Rube?s father was a favourite subject of conver-
sation. He must have been an extraordinary man, leading a
colourful life, and Rube was more proud of him than any boy
in the school was of his father. Several of them had quite dis-
tinguished fathers, too. Ginger Dawes?s dad, for instance, was
the editor of an evening paper, and Bill Jessup?s old man was
a judge.
One day?it was spring then, and the days were getting
glorious and warm?Rube invited Ringer to his shack, as he
called it. The tide was out, so they crossed the sandy beach
and took the little path that skirted the cove to the foreland.
Ringer?s home, built on a terrace below the street level, the
outside w?alls calcimined white, the many windows painted green,
the doors a lovely pointsettia-red, looked swanky and conspicu-
ous. Ringer pointed out the little glassed-in veranda where he
slept, and the red geranium bush near which he sunned himself
every morning.
"It?s a swell place,? said Rube, "but you know, it?s like so
many swell places about here. I like the style of it,? he said
condescendingly, "but I wouldn?t change it for mine.?
It was a great privilege to be shown where Rube lived. "You?re
the only bloke I?ve ever asked inside. Ringer,? he said, as he
scrambled up the stony path to the front veranda. It was an


old and ordinary little cottage, sadly in need of painting, the
guttering ventilated with an excessive number of holes.
"Now,? said Rube, "I ask you, can you beat that view??
And he stood squarely with feet apart, and waved his left hand.
It was rather difficult to discover the view. Two clumps of
plantain rather overshadowed the elegant edifice, and the privet
hedge was as unruly as Rube?s hair. The shack, perched on
the edge of a little gully, was almost hidden in bush. Straight
in front was the reserve, and more bush. However, with a little
dodging and direction, an aperture was found in the foliage
through which, like a peep show, one could see the harbour,
and the movement of great streamers, perky coasters, meddlesome
tug boats, or sometimes a ship-of-war slowly steaming to an
anchorage near Farm Cove. It was not exactly a view that
thrust itself upon you. It had to be searched for, and of course,
when found, was appreciated.
Rube ran his hand along the veranda beam and found the
latch key. The door swung open and, taking off their hats, the
boys went inside. The passage-way went through to the back.
Opening a door, "There?s the lounge,? said Rube.
It was a small room wdth an open fireplace. A rattan table
with a pile of books upon it stood near a wide casement window.
A chair stood beside it, and a rocking chair on the other side.
A small bookcase stood against the wall, and opposite to it was
a rather ramshackle sofa with rebellious upholstery. A few
prints, cheaply framed, hung from a wallpaper of rosebud
design.
"Aunt Agatha sits there,? Rube said, pointing to the rocker,
"and I sit here. Gosh, what a wonderful time we have! I
remember when I first read Treasure Island to her. I used to lie
awake all night expecting to hear the tap, tap of Long John
Silver?s wooden leg. As I read, I?d kind o? lose sight of this little
room, and Aunt Agatha, too. I was in the stockade on the
island, fightin? mad.?
He sighed deeply, and sat down. Lovingly his hand caressed
the pile of books. "Here?s old Robinson Crusoe, and there?s
Westward Ho! I?ve read ?em again and again?and lived ?em,


page by page. You don?t notice it?s cold or your stomach?s not
overful; you don?t worry because you?ve got no boots or your
trousers don?t seem as if they want to hang together?? He
stopped suddenly. "I?m talkin? a lot o? silly rot. Ringer. Come
on, I?ll show you where I doss.?
"No,? said Ringer. "I want to sit near this window and
hear you talk ?and could I come up sometime and see Aunt
Agatha??
"Yes,? said Rube brightly. "You?d love to meet her. She
ain?t much to look at. I mean, she?s thin and she?s always tired.
Tou see, she?s got a big job in the city, and she comes home
fagged out.?
"What does she do??
"She visits barristers and solicitors and people like that. I
wonder how she can put up with me after talkin? to all those
big pots. After dinner we come in here and I read. Auntie
goes to bed about nine. She likes to get into town early.?
They strolled to the back to Rube?s room. The window had
a pane out, and there was no covering on the floor. Near the
camp stretcher stood a little table, and in a corner a cane chair
with a hole in the seat. On a peg hung Rube?s school bag.
"Where d?you keep your clothes?? Ringer inquired.
"I?m not great on havin? a lot of clothes,? said Rube. "Come
round and see me cave.? He slammed the door of the room
behind him and led the way to the side of the house, where a
cavern in the sandstone bank gave just that sort of shelter that
appealed to a boy.
Here Rube had hung a hammock, and housed a cask with a
stave out of it in which he kept fishing tackle and odds and
ends. Suspended over the entrance to the cave and looking
very terrifying was the skeleton of the gaping jaws of a giant
shark with its sharp, cruel t�eth.
Ringer gazed at it, speechless with envy. "Where did that
come from, Rube?? he asked.
A fisherman gave it to me for cleaning out his boat every
Saturday for six weeks. Two of us could put our heads in the
jaws at once. Jack Hawkins?the bloke who gave It to me?


said it?d swallowed six people as far as he knew. Then he
caught it with a great hook baited with a barracoota.
"How could he know it had swallowed six people?? Ringer
said incredulously.
"I didn?t ask him that. You can?t ask Jack Hawkins too
much. He?s one of those chaps who beats his wife.?
They strolled across the sandy beach as it was getting late.
Ringer envied Rube his cave, his cask, and particularly the
shark?s jaws, but every time he thought of his shabby, uncom-
fortable room he could almost feel a lump in his throat.
Presently Rube asked, "What?s your mother like, Ringer??
"Aw, not so bad,? Ringer said. "She?s a bit of a nuisance
sometimes, and chases me round a lot, but she?s really not too
bad.?
"Is she beautiful??
"Well,? said Ringer, "I think she?s better looking than the
queen ?and she?s a stunner ?but it ain?t that.? He thought hard
for a few minutes. Never before had he been critical of his
mother, and he did not want to be disloyal. "Rube, she?s a
marvellous cook. Her tarts just melt in your mouth, and the
cake she makes every week-end??
"Is it a big cake with plenty of plums and currants in it??
?Yairs. It?s about this high and so round. But, Rube, you
should taste the ice-cream she makes.?
?I didn?t know people who live in houses made ice-cream.?
"Oh, yes. Mum makes it in a refrigerator.?
Rube did not know what a refrigerator was, and so let the
subject drop.
"Where?s your mother, Rube??
"She?s dead.?
"Did you ever see her??
"Can?t remember. Aunt Agatha says I was a baby when she
died.?
"I bet she was beautiful, Rube!?
"She was lovely,? said Rube, coming to a halt and gazing
across the harbour with a far-away and wistful look. "You
know, Ringer, some people think these glamour girls in the


pictures are beautiful. My little mum made ?em all look ten-a-
penny. Aunt Agatha says they still talk about her way back in
Molong, where she was born. Dad met her there.?
"Love at first sight, Rube??
"Yair,? said Rube, his imagination hard at work. "Mum?s
parents were station people. Dad was a commercial traveller
then. You know, Ringer, all commercial travellers?ve got to be
slick, very handsome and well dressed. Dad could sell any-
thing to anybody. But mum?s people thought he wasn?t good
enough, and told him to sheer off.?
"I know what happened then, Rube,? said Ringer, breathless
with excitement. "He ran away with her.?
You?ve got it in one. She stole out of the house in the
dead of night, and dad packed her into his car and whisked
her away. They chased them right over the Victorian border.
One of these days,? said Rube in a burst of irrepressible en-
thusiasm, "I?ll write a book about it. My word, that was a
romance!?
"Then what happened??
"No one talks much about mum. It?s too sad. Aunt Agatha
says she?s buried in an old churchyard near Bathurst. One day,
when I grow up and earn some money, I?m goin? back there to
put a great bunch of red roses on her grave. Red means love,
and you don?t know how I love her, Ringer?her and pop.
Now I?ve only got pop. It?s worth puttin? up with a lot hopin?
to meet him some day. Perhaps we?ll go to that old Bathurst
church together.?
Ringer looked up at his chum sharply, and saw that there
was a strange moisture about his eyes.
Abruptly Rube turned on his heel, and said, "So long. Ringer.?
"So long, Rube.?


CHAPTER 111
A MULLET FALLS FROM A CART
Rags, lying on the lawn in the shade of the row of seed boxes,
had been trying to drift into a doze for some time. He was
up and about at daybreak, long before the house bestirred itself.
Early-morning exercise?and no dog neglected it?was taken
in the freshness and the dew of a new-born day. Dogs then
had the streets and the footpaths and the parks to themselves,
and could do what they liked without interference.
After Ringer went to school there was a terrible commotion
in the house. There was a shifting about of furniture, the hum
of the carpet-sweeper or the vacuum cleaner. Mats and rugs
?were hurled out into the backyard to be beaten and brushed,
then taken in again. The tradesmen called, the telephone rang.
But round about half past ten there sounded the clatter of
teacups, and Rags knew that the turmoil was over, and that he
could expect a pat and a biscuit from his mistress. After that
he crawled under the hedge and really did manage to get forty
winks, and dream rapturously of his morning?s adventures.
He was always awakened at the first streak of dawn by Jock
McLeod, who lived four days away. He poked his nose round
the corner of the house, and then Rags saw his bright greeny-
looking eyes and straight alert ears. Jock had a longish body
and a tail like a plume, which he carried with the gay abandon
of a banner-bearer. His coat was a bluey-grey, and his hair just
long enough to lie straight and not get tousled. One could not
call him handsome, but he certainly was an odd-looking dog.
Jock walked briskly, as though he had a great deal to do,
most of it very important. He once overheard someone say he
was a bit of a cattle-dog. After that he used to round up the
pack and snap at their heels until Boggles, the big black lurcher,
told him not to be a fool, for anyone could see his father was
a pom.


Of course Jock had his views on Boggles. He was entirely
black and of imposing size, with a long, rather thin tail. His
eyes were of a yellowish-brown, and Jock thought his face was
as round as the moon, and that he looked rather stupid. How-
ever, Boggles was very good-natured, and did not growl and
show off by kicking up the dust with his hind legs when he
met another dog. Jock liked Boggles, because he was easily
bullied, but they had one serious difference of opinion. Boggles
always asserted his father was a bulldog, though not one of the
nasty sort with an undershot jaw and a face that looked as if
it had collided with a tramcar. Jock, however, was certain
Boggles?s father was a greyhound.
Boggles, for his part, was privately very jealous of Jock?s tail
and, although he never mentioned it, he was sure Jock?s father
was a jackal.
Jock clearly remembered how he had first met Rags. He was
having a little siesta on the lawn when Boggles ?always as
graceful and agile as a baby elephant ?came lumbering up.
Jock sleepily opened his eyes and gave ayyarn.w r n. There was a
look of adventure in Boggles?s eyes, to which Jock instantly
responded. The fox terrier in the Californian bungalow had held
himself aloof for a considerable time, and the suggestion was
that it was time they made a social call and got to know him.
Jock sprang to his feet, and first sniffed around Boggles with a
disapproving tilt of his nose. Boggles smelt not in the least
as a healthy dog should, but of phenyle and carbolic soap.
Jock disdainfully turned and moved towards the gate. Boggles
followed, feeling in dire disgrace.
The visit they were about to make was long overdue. The
fox terrier was a neighbour, and yet consorted with a nondescript
push a block farther along. Jock ran cautiously down the forty
steps to the terrace of the Californian bungalow, and peeped
from behind a tree-fern growing at the foot of the bank. Not-
ing that all was clear, he sneaked along the garden path. There,
on the back lawn, he saw a terrier sprawled under the shade
of a honeysuckle vine, near a tool shed. Beside him lay a
much-chewed leg-of-mutton bone. Jock blinked unbelievingly


at a dog who did not instantly bury a bone he had not quite
finished with. He was either dull or grossly overfed. Jock
thought he ought to rectify that undoglike trait by burying the
bone himself.
Just as he was about to grab it, Rags jumped up and made a
vicious snap at him, which stampeded Boggles who was still out
of sight. Jock dropped the bone and looked rather offended,
hoping this would convey to the vicious terrier that he was merely
looking after it while its owner slept. But Rags distrusted his
intentions and, grabbing the bone, rushed into the side veranda
and hid it under Ringer?s bed. Meanwhile, Jock stretched
himself out with his head between his front paws, his green
eyes sparkling. A little later Rags emerged, obviously in a
nasty temper. At that precise moment Boggles came round the
corner, looking somewhat shy and confused.
Rags looked at the black lurcher critically. He had both
seen and heard of Boggles, whose reputation had once filled
him with envy, for Boggles held the championship for frighten-
ing motor-cars. He ran so fast that few could outpace him,
and on several occasions he had growled so fiercely that the car
had come to a standstill. That the owner wrathfully emerged
and pelted something at him, was not recorded.
Jock, too, had been a strong runner-up for honours, but
unfortunately a car had once smacked him on the rump with a
mudguard and rolled him over in the dust. He had been sore
for a week afterwards. Now he left car-chasing to Boggles, and
was content to snap savagely at a tyre if he caught a motor-car
parked in the street.
Despite his fame Boggles looked a modest sort of dog, his
lolling tongue and dangling ears likewise denoting that he was
good-natured. Rags boldly advanced and sniffed. Boggles
looked uncomfortable, and threw himself down and pretended
to be chasing a flea, but he could not mistake what Rags w T as
thinking?carbolic.
It was all very unfortunate. For a long time Boggles had
nursed the idea that he would call on Rags and do it impressively.
The previous day he was meandering along the street when he


ran into a mullet which had fallen off a fishmonger?s cart and
been kicked into the gutter. How long it had been there he
could not guess, but long enough to be smelt from afar off.
To hook it with his paw from the kerb and place it in a position
favourable for rolling over it took a moment or two. The flies
resented being disturbed and buzzed round him fiercely, but
Boggles persisted until not a square inch of him remained
unscented. Excitedly he rushed home to give the family a treat,
but to his horror and disgust he was captured, tied up, hosed
down, and then washed in hot water milky white with phenyle,
and carbolic soap. Now he smelt so vile that he wanted to run
away from himself.
Suddenly a happy thought occurred to him. In all probability
that decayed mullet was still there. If he could introduce Rags
to it, he would earn his eternal friendship and respect.
Boggles jumped up with a "follow me? expression, and
Jock and Rags paced him up the forty steps. Rags felt a bit
diffident about the whole business, not quite sure if he were
doing the right thing in knowing his disreputable neighbours.
They kept to the footpath, out of the way of motor-cars.
About the middle of the second block Jock sniffed hard and
broke into a run. Rags and Jock sniffed too. There is no
mistaking a well-matured mullet. It is as distinctive as Gorgon-
zola cheese. They made a race for it, but Boggles, with his
long legs and alleged greyhound ancestry, reached the treasure
first. Someone had kicked it under a fence, but Boggles placed
his paw through the palings and skilfully hooked the decayed
mullet on to the footpath. Growling to keep his two pals off
until he had thoroughly indulged himself, he rolled over it
sideways and then on his back, until every hair on his body
must surely have made contact with the smelly mess.
After that, Jock rolled over it, kicking his legs in the air
with sheer delight. Then Rags, after a patient wait, rolled
over it too. The flies buzzed around him savagely, angry at
being disturbed.
Then a bright idea struck Boggles. After smelling his two
pals and making sure that they w T ere as heavily perfumed as


possible, he picked up the fish, dodged behind the hedge, and
buried it. This important business over, the three dogs formed
up and, with noses in the air and tails erect, they moved off,
three gallant comrades proud as kings. Rags felt this sacred
rite had cemented a deep and abiding friendship.
Several dogs came running up with covetous and expectant
eyes, but Jock gave them a haughty look, and when they per-
sisted Boggles chased them off.
Rags hung round the garden, determined to give Ringer the
first treat when he came home; but, to his horror, the boy pushed
him off with his foot and said, ?You filthy little beast! And,
worse still, he was later grabbed and tied up, when came the
dread sound of an approaching bucket, steaming with warm
water and smelling hatefully of phenyle.
Rags looked utterly dejected and bewildered. Mutely he kept
saying, ?What a world?what a -world!?


CHAPTER IV
A TREASURE HUNT
At daybreak Rags wakened and saw Jock?s pointed nose round
the corner, and then his little green eyes dancing with mischief.
Rags had not slept very' well. The possums had been particularly
active.
"Come on, lazy bones.? Jock?s eyes flashed. "Boggles is
waiting for us.?
There was no mistaking it was Jock. He smelt divinely of
mullet, while Rags, so self-conscious that he felt like running
indoors, reminded one of a chemist?s shop. Jock, keeping at a
discreet distance, led his new friend to where Boggles, asleep
on the lawn, was dreaming of a whole cartload of stinking mullet
lying in the middle of a sunny street. Instantly he awoke. He,
like Rags, was perfumed with phenyle, and each gave the other
a sympathetic look and omitted the ritual of sniffing. Jock,
smelling like a fishmonger?s dustbin, looked radiantly
triumphant.
Boggles?s big eyes almost melted Rags?s tender heart. One
never knew when Boggles was likely to burst into tears. Well,
one could hardly expect an entirely black dog to have anything
but a gloomy outlook. They scrambled up the steps in silence.
Each had the same purpose in mind as they approached the
spot ?where the treasure trove was hidden. Boggles, impatient
to retrieve his reputation and smell once more as a self-respecting
dog should smell, broke into a run. He reached the cache first,
and was just about to dig up the ancient mullet when a milk
cart pulled up dose by. Boggles immediately sauntered to the
open gate to admire the harbour view. Later, the cart moved
aw'ay and Boggles got seriously to work. Earth and stones flew,
until he realized that someone had desecrated the grave.
He stopped digging, and Jock and Rags instantly came up
to investigate. They knew by Boggles?s tragic expression that


the fish was gone. Jock sniffed around. Someone had un-
doubtedly been here before them, and the odour of his tracks
indicated that it was a tom cat.
Jock was wild-eyed with wrath. "I?ve always hated cats,
curse ?em! They?re nothing but thieves ?slim, sneaking, mew-
ling thieves. As a matter of fact, they?re?they?re?cat burglars.?
Then, as he looked up at the sky, Rags and Boggles knew he
was registering an oath to wage war on all cats, be they plain
cats, tigers, leopards, cheetahs, jaguars or pumas, and wipe out
the whole cat tribe big and small.
Rags and Boggles looked suitably impressed.
Just then they caught sight of a big tabby coming in at the
gate, and with a fierce bark Jock started in pursuit, with Rags
close at his heels. The cat took refuge in a geranium clump,
and in their efforts to dislodge him they made such a wreck
of the plants that even Jock looked conscience-stricken. The
owner rushed out with a stick, and Rags and Jock hastily left the
premises. Boggles, however, followed the cat over a back fence.
Presently the morning stillness was broken by a series of
agonizing yells and yelps. "That?s Boggles,? thought Jock,
looking calm and collected, "having an argument with the tom
cat over that mullet. The cat must have lost his temper.?
Boggles now emerged at a breakneck pace, emulating the grey-
hound parent with which Jock had credited him. His pudding
face was badly clawed, and he looked very annoyed.
"So you bolted!? he as good as told Jock reproachfully.
"You can fight the rest of your cat war alone. In future I?m
all for appeasement.?
Presently he had an attack of sneezing. His nose was full
of flea powder, and he could not get the taste of it out of his
mouth.
They moved away through a little park towards a pretty road
that skirted the foreshore. After a short nap Boggles, feeling
despondent, thought he would go home. Jock, however, urged
another hunt for the stolen mullet.
The search was not so easy to conduct as it was in the early
morning. Someone hurled a broom at Boggles as he was nosing


round a backyard, and he came out looking more doleful than
ever. Then Rags had the bright idea that Boggles should bathe
his scratches in salt water, so they all toddled down to the wharf.
Rags always enjoyed going there. He remembered how for
some time he had been curious to learn why so many people
trooped down to it between the hours of eight and nine. It
must have been something very exciting, for no one wanted to
miss it. Of course he soon discovered it was the morning rush
of warehouse and office people to catch the ferry boat to the
city. It was always exciting to speculate if the ferry would
manage to get away from the wharf before the last perspiring
young man or woman leapt aboard after the gang plank was
removed. Mostly the ferry boat won.
Rags led the way to a little jetty close to the wharf, where it
was shallow enough to paddle about. By this time the eight
o?clock warehouse shock troops came charging down the hill to
storm the ferry boat. The sight of it gave Boggles an idea.
Let s go for a cruise, ? he thought, making for the gang
plank.
Jock hesitated, feeling that if he started on such an uncertain
voyage he may never come back. Boggles continued showing
his adventurous spirit, but his daring attempt to travel to foreign
parts ended disastrously when a ferry hand threw a bundle of
morning papers on the wharf, which Boggles could not dodge.
Once more he gave a series of yelps.
Your bad day!? thought Jock, his tail wagging farewell
to the departing ferry.
The wharf soon began to fill with people again. With them
came an assortment of dogs, big and little, and mostly of a
ruffian class, who ran in and out among the waiting people,
and found that so many human legs rather cramped their
opportunities of free manoeuvre.
Boggles regarded the invasion of this dog push with some
nervousness. He had had enough fight for one day, and besides,
when it came to a ding-dong battle he liked to class himself
with the conscientious objectors. A big, rather fierce-looking
dog, with a bluish flea-bitten coat and a mouthful of big teeth,


was frisking about, plainly bent on picking a quarrel. He kept
looking at Boggles in a menacing way. Boggles hurried out of
the crowd.
Bluey was spoiling for a fight. He chased Boggles up the
steps and moved round for a favourable position to start a brawl.
Then Rags bobbed up, and seemed an interested party. Bluey,
disregarding Boggles, snarled at Rags. Meanwhile, Jock was
being followed by a procession of envious dogs, lured by the
perfume he dissipated with every step.
When it came to a real battle Rags could hold his own
with the best. A recent ancestor must have been a bull terrier,
for Rags always found, when weight and strength were against
him, that it was better to select a good hold and hang on grimly
until his opponent had had enough. He always remembered the
first really exciting thing that happened in his life. He was a
small puppy then, and Flora, who was visiting a nearby friend
one evening after dinner, decided to take him for a walk.
The street looked quite deserted and Flora, properly enough,
took little notice of him. But as they turned a street corner,
there loomed out of the darkness the biggest dog Rags had ever
seen. It was a huge alsatian pup off the lead and, spotting
Rags, he rushed up in a most aggressive manner.
Something in the little fox terrier suddenly spurred him into
action. Until then he had lived a secluded and protected life,
but now he was confronted with danger. The position gave
him no time to think, but generations of well-bred dogs had
given him spirit and fearlessness. Instinctively he knew that to
display fear invited disaster. Better to put on a bold front and
attack.
Eluding Flora, he boldly charged, barking fiercely, and an
amazing thing happened. The alsatian stopped, hesitated, then
turned on his heels and ran, with Rags in pursuit. The man
who owned the big dog stood in the middle of the footpath
and laughed until his eyes streamed. Rags returned triumphant,
but the alsatian was nowhere to be seen.
Remembering that experience, Rags faced Bluey with that
cool courage he always displayed. Jock stepped up loyally,


ready to join in the fray. Boggles, seeing that victory was with
the big battalion, now began to behave quite truculently. Sud-
denly Bluey wagged his tail. The crisis was over.
It was a stirring end to a day of great happenings, and further
cemented the friendship between the gallant three. Boggles
forgot his scratches and the infamous cat who had stolen his
mullet.
Near his own back gate Jock bade his friends adieu. Rags
had given evidence that he was a dog of spirit, but as both he
and Boggles still reeked of carbolic, Jock was still the envy of
the dog world.
Feeling rather proud of himself he ran indoors, to be greeted
by his mistress with a steaming bucket of water which reeked
of phenyle.


CHAPTER V
AUNT AGATHA
Miss Agatha Williams rose when an alarm clock made a
tremendous dang by her bedside. She sat up, came to her senses,
and clambered out of bed. On winter mornings her joints were
a bit stiff and sometimes ached, but she had little time to feel
sorry for herself. While Rube lit the fire, she dressed, hastily
prepared breakfast, and started on her daily pilgrimage to visit
barristers, lawyers, doctors and the professional elite of the city.
Aunt Agatha made no secret of her daily occupation to Rube.
She was an office-cleaner, and as such hunted through the waste-
paper baskets for foreign stamps for Rube?s collection. Rube
did not see a great deal of her. He was still at school when she
made her second visit to the city. If she got home earlier than
usual, Rube read to her till bedtime. On Sunday afternoon
he entertained her from four to six, and then they had tea
together. Saturday evening was picture night for Aunt Agatha,
and usually she thought Rube looked too tired to accompany
her.
Aunt Agatha was very fond of Rube. Even when he exas-
perated her she comforted herself with the thought that he was
all she had in this world. But Rube, like all her possessions,
was not secure. Aunt Agatha always believed in expecting the
worst, so that if the worst did happen she would be more or
less prepared for it. She had a hunch that some day Rube
would be taken away from her. With him would go an income
of thirty shillings a week, and she had not made up her mind
which she would miss most.
Nothing had gone right with Agatha since she was born.
Never had she known anything except struggle, frustration, and
loneliness; and as the years went by she yearned for someone
to love and cherish. Then, in a most miraculous way, Rube
came into her life.


She had bought a little confectionery business in Orange when
it happened. There was not much money in it, but it paid the
rent and kept her in a reasonable degree of comfort. One
night, after she had closed the shop, someone knocked at the
door and a kindly though rather haughty-looking woman asked
if she were Miss Agatha Williams. Agatha took her into the
kitchen, dusted a chair and begged her to be seated. The
visitor came to the point quickly. Would Agatha be prepared
to look after a little baby boy, whose mother had died and
whose father was going overseas? She was not asked to adopt
the baby, but merely to look after it. Thirty shillings a week
would be paid regularly, with an allowance each year of �2O
for clothes, as long as Agatha looked after the child properly.
Agatha said she would think it over, and in the meantime would
like to see the baby. The infant looked irresistibly quaint, and
one peep at it settled her mind. Here was an opportunity to
earn money, and at the same time to satisfy her maternal instinct.
In due course Agatha came to Sydney. She found that office-
cleaning suited her, and as she was very thorough she had all
the work she could do. Rube was sent to a preparatory school
and, as he was a sturdy, independent little chap, he was left to
look after himself a good deal. She never let his upkeep strain
her resources. As a matter of fact, the regular weekly pay-
ments and the lump sum for clothing at Christmas, added quite
substantially to the nest egg that she hoped would keep her out
of a benevolent institution, when too old to work any longer.
The tumbledown cottage in which she had lived for some
years had only a low rent to recommend it. It got little sun,
hidden as it was in the valley and the bush; but Rube loved it,
and any suggestion to leave it met with a vigorous protest.
He spent every moment he could out of doors, on the sunny
beach, or swimming when the tide w-as favourable. He fished,
too, off the point, and unless the catch was large he cooked and
ate it before going home; for Rube was chronically hungry.
All his life he seemed to be nosing round for food. At break-
fast he and Aunt Agatha would both look at the last slice of
bread with its scrape of butter, and wonder whose turn it was


to be unselfish. But he knew how to boil fish in a petrol tin,
or how to broil a leatherjacket or a jewfish and bake potatoes
at the same time in hot ashes; and he could always depend on
earning a nice hot loaf by delivering bread for the baker on
some steep part of his rounds, or a pound of potatoes by carrying
a parcel for the greengrocer. Soon after Agatha left in the
morning he started on a round with the milkman, for which
he was rewarded with five good shillings each week; but he
kept his earnings a secret from Agatha, fearing his home rations
might be reduced if she found out that he was already spending
so much money in the cause of filling that large hollow space
inside him.
Although Rube had always found life an interesting and
exciting business, it had certainly had more spice in' it since he
met Ringer. Soon after eight on Saturday mornings he would
hear a piercing whistle, and, sure enough, would find Ringer
and Rags waiting for him. Ringer looked more companion-
able on Saturdays, barefoot and in an old suit. If the set of
the tide were right, they would go fishing; if not, they would
paddle about, and have a swim if there were enough depth
behind the shark net, and then sit in the sun. Ringer had an
inquiring mind, and seemed tremendously interested in Rube?s
father and his wonderful adventures, feeling that he must be
a sort of Tarzan or Speed Gordon.
Ringer?s own father was the head of a firm of public account-
ants. Occasionally he went into the country, but otherwise he
did the same thing every day. He caught the ferry boat at
Musgrave Street wharf at nine o?clock in the morning, and
arrived home at a quarter to six in the evening. When he
looked at his son, Ringer got the impression that he was adding
up his misdeeds for the day and preparing a balance sheet, and
felt sure he was always on the wrong side of the ledger. He
had made up his mind he would never be an accountant. Rather
would he choose some desperate calling, like being a member
of a submarine crew or of an international spy ring. Rube said
the world had never been the same since the last pirate w r as
hanged. Piracy was a clean, healthy form of sport. One had


plenty of salt air, and the sort of good food that boys relish?
food that fairly stings with spices and sauces. Other rewards
of piracy were flagons of wine, and beautiful damsels to comb
a buccaneer?s hair as he lounged on the hatch in a tropical sun.
Yes, all romance had gone since pirates and Red Indians had
disappeared.
Ringer envied Rube his father. He thought all fathers should
go abroad, and stay there until their sons were old enough to keep
them in their place. His father interfered, not only with him,
but with everything in the house. Everything, that is, except
Flora. In Ringer?s opinion, any self-respecting father would
rise in wrath and squash a daughter wTo delighted in annoying
the only son of the family, but his did not. On the contrary,
he encouraged her to be as nasty and find as many faults as
possible. That sort of thing was frightfully unfair to mum, too.
Ringer hated distressing her, and Flora was always trying to
undermine her faith in her boy and prove him a hypocrite and
a cheat.
To make matters worse dad was for ever boasting about what
a wonderful young fellow he had been. No one ever drove
him to his lessons, or had to tell him the garden needed weeding
or the fence painting, or that a load of manure wanted shifting
forty steps down from the gate where the independent carter had
left it. One of the great moments in Ringer?s life had been
when he heard his mother remind dad that the good die young,
and that his hair was getting grey round the temples.
There was something decidedly awful about a human being
who always did the correct and righteous thing. People like
that ought to be turned into statues of stone to decorate crypts.
In his long experience with his parents, Ringer could remember
only one occasion when his father really merited his approval.
He was making a light lattice for a lovely pink-blossomed runner,
and had just about finished it when he overbalanced as he stood
up, and put his foot right through it. He swore?not in a
W'hisper, but as if he really meant it. Best of all, he knew that
Ringer had overheard him, and it somehow improved their
normally strained relations.


He did not like to be too hard on his father, but compared
with Rube?s pop he really was rather a poor affair. Respectable
people always were?like the fathers of all the stuck-up, starchy
boys in his form. These all cleared off every morning to govern-
ment buildings ?civil servants they called themselves ?or to
suites of offices where they sat behind glass-topped desks. Some
of them looked as if a spot of grease or a blob of half-boiled
egg on their waistcoats would make them hysterical.
Rube?s pop, on the other hand, had lived a worth-while life
since the moment he left Australia, broken-hearted. No staying
in one place for him. He had gone exploring in central Africa,
and had shot hippopotami in the Ujiji Delta, and lions in
Kenya, according to Rube?s vivid accounts. In one picturesque
period of his adventures he had been an ivory merchant in
Zanzibar. Once he was lost in the Sahara Desert for five weeks,
and just managed to stumble into an outpost of the Foreign
Legion before he collapsed with hunger, thirst, and exhaustion.
Rube?s pop must have had a weakness for deserts, because a
year later he was hunting Chinese bandits in the Gobi Desert,
and made such a good job of it that the Emperor of China made
him a mandarin, with the privilege of wearing a pigtail two
yards long. After that Rube?s pop, for a short time, became
commander-in-chief of the army of a rajah of one of the smaller
Indian States, and in a few months? time won the distinction
of being the all-India champion shooter of man-eating tigers.
After that he seemed to have toned down a little, and cleared
off to London as the correspondent of a big Persian daily news-
paper.
Rube admitted he had had very little news since he had last
heard of him in Winnepeg, but "somethin? was always doin?
when pop appeared to be lying low, and Rube expected to hear
from him again as the president of a South American republic.
"Pop loves stirrin? up revolutions,? Rube said. "I think it
must be due to his early training as a salesman. He?d just walk
into a place and tell the people they?d got a blob for a presi-
dent and the trouble would begin. I?m lookin? for some real
excitin? news when the next mail from South America comes in.?


Ringer talked to some chaps he knew and they would not have
a thing to say worth listening to. But Rube?s interest extended
far beyond the limits of their suburb. Ringer often thought
how splendid it would be if he could talk about Rube to his
family, or if he dared bring him home; but he knew all too
well what Flora?s reception of him would be, and how she would
afterwards lecture her young brother about his depraved taste,
his rascally friends, and his firm intention of bringing eternal
disgrace on the family.
Ringer resolved, however, that he would some day introduce
the subject of Rube to his mother. When everyone else failed
him, mum could always be depended upon. She had an under-
standing mind. Sometimes, when Flora was not looking and
dad was out of earshot, she would give Ringer a great hug, and
say with a queer, shy look in her eyes, "My baby!?


CHAPTER VI
THE CASTAWAYS
They had just swum back to a rock, shivering a little in a
southerly which had blown up, when the bright idea came to
Rube. About fifty yards away was a yacht at anchor, bobbing
about, straining at its cable, and looking devilishly rakish against
the wooded fringe of the cove. The swim to it and back was
dangerous, as everyone was warned against sharks. Rube, sitting
upright, stared at the yacht, fascinated, and then registered a
look of such woe and calamity that Ringer wondered what could
have gone wrong.
Rube sprang to his feet and Rags, startled, looked up sharply
and began to bark.
"We?re wrecked," Rube said dismally, "and cast up on a lonely
tropical isle, Ringer. It looks as if we must perish from hunger
and thirst.?
"Or,? said Ringer, who had finished reading Robinson Crusoe,
"be eaten up by savage cannibals.?
"That w r as a terrible sw'im,? said Rube, dramatically. "Three
times the backwash of that heavy surf s-wept me off my feet.
I thought I was gone. I was nearly drowned. Oh, Ringer, all
my sins, all my horrible past went through my brain like I was
lookin? at a movie picture, and then, just as I hadn?t another
breath left in my carcase, my feet hit the sand and I struggled
to safety.?
"Same here,? said Ringer, feeling he could do no better in
describing his own harrowing experiences. "I think we oughter
kneel down and give thanks.?
"It was a terrible storm,? said Rube, ignoring that suggestion.
"I knew we hadn?t a chance from the first. Still, we?re lucky
being alive. What d?you think happened to the rest of the
crew??
"Down in Davy Jones? locker, I think,? said Ringer hopefully.


"The poor blighters!? Rube remarked. "Anyway, here we
are. I suppose the first thing we ought to do is look for a cave.?
"After getting dressed,? said the more practical Ringer, whose
teeth were beginning to chatter.
Rube had been scouting round since daybreak, and quite by
accident had discovered a small cave, almost immediately above
them. He felt quite certain he was the first person in the world
to seek shelter within it. A thick belt of lantana completely
screened it from the sea, it was completely hidden from the
little bush track, and was inestimably more thrilling than even
his old cave with the shark?s jaw at its entrance. He had been
itching to tell Ringer about his find, but had waited for the
right moment to dramatize the great news.
He now led the way. By the expression on his face one could
see that finding a place of refuge was a matter of great urgency,
and Ringer also managed to look dreadfully alarmed and anxious.
He sniffed hard as he followed Rube.
"Halt!? Ringer said in a hoarse whisper. "I can smell ?em.?
"Smell what??
"Savages.?
"Oh,? said Rube, "I?ve been smellin? ?em since we left the
surf. Keep together. If they attack us we must fight back to
back.?
But the savages were either in ambush or retreating, as they
advanced. Anyway, they were not hiding in the lantana. As a
matter of fact, Ringer thought nothing but a snake could wriggle
through such a thicket. However, Rube piloted the way on his
hands and knees to a spot where they managed to force a passage,
after ignoring rents and scratches. Barbed wire could not have
been worse.
It was worth all the hardship and suffering to reach the cave
at last. It was quite a roomy hide-out?about eight feet wide,
and quite six feet in height and the same in depth. A Moreton
Bay fig-tree grew directly in front of the entrance, which it
partially closed. Rube pointed out that the massive, twisted,
snaky-looking trunk and roots gave the cave protection against


the weather, and made it a strong post that could be easily
defended. Its spreading branches also made an excellent look-
out from which they could watch for savages and any ships
that may pass their island refuge.
Ringer looked at the cave critically. Robinson Crusoe could
not have picked a better. He timidly stepped into it, and was
immediately translated to another life. His father, the school
teacher, Flora ?in fact everything that tied him to a laborious
and cramped existence ?were forgotten. He was so entranced
with it that he had not noticed a rent in the seat of his pants.
"We?ll have to build a row of palisades to keep off our
enemies and the wild beasts,? he said with a thoughtful look.
"Let?s see what?s inside.?
Rube led the way.
Except for a thick carpet of leaves, the cave was clean. The
sides were smooth ?"All ready for -wallpaper, if we had it,"
said Rube. They could stand upright within it.
"Better sweep it out,? Ringer suggested. "Nothin? like bein?
tidy.? He had a vision of proudly exhibiting this bush residence
to Mary Lou some day.
Leaves and dust flew as, with improvised brooms, they tackled
the job. The dust settled on their sweaty faces, and made them
look in truth like castaways. When the atmosphere cleared
they went inside and stretched themselves out.
"I?m too exhausted after swimmin? in that terrible storm to
do much more,? said Rube. "I?m terribly hungry, too. You
didn?t stick any grub in your pocket, like a ship?s biscuit, before
you jumped overboard, did you??
"No,? said Ringer. "I just had time to save me life. I
think we oughter have a little sleep and freshen ourselves up,
then look for some food. P?raps we?ll be able to trap some big
game.?
They threw themselves down, and for at least five minutes
appeared to sink into the deep slumber of utter exhaustion.
Then Ringer said,
"We?ll have to get an axe of somethin?, to cut a way to the
cave, Rube.? He was beginning to feel anxious. His fingers


passed over every square inch of his short pants until they slid
into a rent. "Oh,? he groaned.
What s happened? said Rube. "Have you put your hand
on a snake??
"Worse?n that. I struck a hole in me pants.?
"Oh, is that all! I?ve got so many in mine that I don?t take
any notice of ?em.?
"You haven?t got a father like I have, Rube.?
"He wouldn?t punish you for that, would he? Besides, it
wasn?t your fault. You didn?t plant the lantana.?
I didn?t think of that,? said Ringer, feeling very much re-
lieved. "Guess you?re lucky, Rube, keeping your old man in
Argentina.?
"I expect he?s in Peru by this, or tryin? to discover the source
of the Amazon. Gee, Ringer, I?m gettin? hungrier every minute.?
Meanwhile, Rags eyed them both with expectancy. He was
having the time of his life, and had not even missed the com-
pany of Jock and Boggles. The swim to the yacht and back
had chilled him a little, but he was now in great form. He
had chased a bush rabbit up the hill, and had an argument with
a big frilled lizard in the lantana. He had joined in the cave
clean-up by scratching the dried leaves into a flurry, and now,
feeling hot, grimy and choking with dust, waited for the next
move.
Rube looked at him with an appraising eye. A bright idea
came to him. "Ringer, old Robinson Crusoe had a goat, didn?t
he? Let?s make Rags the goat.?
Rags looked at him sharply.
Ringer had a feeling he would rather resent being made a
goat. "I don?t think we could do that, Rube,? he replied. "You
see, Robinson Crusoe used the goat for milk. From it he made
butter and cheese. D?you think we could expect Rags to spark
up to that sort of thing??
There ended that argument. However, Rube remembered
that a dog had been rescud from the wreck not long after Crusoe
came ashore, and died at a ripe old age. It was agreed, until


things improved, that Rags should be both dog and goat, and
so, with great solemnity, he was initiated into the dual role.
The hole in his pants was now beginning to cause Ringer a
good deal of disquiet and he felt he would like to go home and
get it over as soon as possible. Ringer, so his father averred,
was the most untidy and careless whelp he had ever met.
"There?s a lot of things we need in our cave,? said Rube, as
they tramped homeward. "An old kettle, or a saucepan or two,
and things like that. Gee, if we only had a sea chest! Wouldn?t
it be grand!?
"Sometimes mum throws out things she doesn?t want. I?ll
keep my eye open, Rube.?
"Another thing we oughter get at once is an exercise book
or something, to keep a diary. What s the good of being
stranded on a lonely island if we don?t tell the world about it,
when we?re saved? Any good at writing, Ringer??
"Well, you oughter know, Rube. I always come about tenth
in dictation and ninth in composition. That s not so bad, is it?
But you?re pretty good. Let?s do it together.
Rube halted suddenly. We can t both be Robinson Crusoe,
Ringer. You see, as I found the cave I?ll have to be old R.C.,
and you can be Friday. You look more like a cannibal than
I do.?
Ringer looked a bit offended. Hold hard, Rube! My people
aren?t savages.?
"And mine weren?t Eskimoes, so what docs it matter??
After all, that seemed a fair adjustment, and Ringer very
willingly consented to wear the mantle of Friday.
Aunt Agatha, waiting for Rube, was not in a very good tem-
per. On Saturday they had lunch promptly at twelve thirty,
and it was now a few minutes past one.
"Where?ve you been?? she said with a snort. How many
more times am I to tell you we lunch at ?alf past twelve??
"I?m sorry, auntie,? said Rube, sidling into his chair. Didn t
know what the time was. Guess I?ll have to get a watch.
"A watch!? she screamed. "I never heard of such extrava-
gance. What else would you like?? she asked sarcastically, as


she plumped a fried sausage and a dab of mashed potato on a
plate for Rube.
Aunt Agatha was not in a frivolous mood. She felt sleepy,
tired, and generally out of sorts. A look at her bank balance
had disappointed her. It was not growing regularly, as it had
in the past, by quite a few shillings every month. She had not
been guilty of any extravagance, and it dawned on her that
Rube was becoming a greater financial burden every month. He
ate more and was harder on clothes.
Nov and again she took stock of herself. Recently her knees
had been a little stiffer, and there were other signs that years
were creeping upon her. Life was clearly a race between old
age and her bank balance. Every time she pictured herself as a
poor, decrepit old woman unable to work and too proud to accept
charity, she wanted to scream aloud. The future was full of
terror, which her right to a small old-age pension did little to
alleviate.
Rube sensed her mood, but he was feeling rather reckless
and somewhat independent. If Agatha ordered him out of the
house he, at least, had a cave for a shelter.
He rose from his chair and, like a mannequin, gracefully
pirouetted around. He stood with his back to Aunt Agatha and
his head craned over his left shoulder, while his finger made an
excursion round the seat of his pants, pausing at every rent or
patch. I think, Aunt Agatha, I d like a new pair of pants.?
And with this request he sat down again.
' I?m always buyin? you pants,? she said heatedly. "What you
do with them, I can?t think. You must sit on ?em too hard,
Rube, or somethin?.?
"The teacher told me yesterday me pants had reached the
limits of human decency, ? said Rube. "I remember exactly what
he said. I thought the language was rather fine. He told me
that I couldn?t come to school until I got a new pair.?
Aunt Agatha flared. What does he think I am?a million-
aire, or a lottery-winner ? Where does he suppose I?m to get the
money? I?ll human decency him! I bet he buys himself a
new suit every three months. What does he know about people


like us, havin? to scratch and save to keep body and soul to-
gether? Does he think we prefer dripping to butter, and stoos
to joints?? Her voice got more loud and shrill.
Rube thought he ought to placate her a little. D you think
they?ll stand another patch, auntie!? he suggested, pained to
see her so upset.
"Of course they won?t,? she said savagely. "It means a new
pair.? And she burst into tears.
Rube went to her and placed an arm lovingly around her neck.
"Don?t cry, auntie,? he said. Soon as I can 111 leave school.
Then I?ll earn enough to keep myself and buy you a new dress
now and again. Some day we might live in a nice flat, and I?ll
be able to get you a beautiful satin dress for evening wear, and
all sorts of clothes. I?ll even get you a pair of slacks, he
added, not very encouragingly, "if you like em. For dinner on
Sundays we?ll have roast duck, new potatoes, green peas and
apple sauce, and finish up with an apple pie. We?ll ??
"Stop!? said Aunt Agatha. "You?re puttin? me off me food.
You?re talkin? nonsense. You always have talked nonsense,
imaginin? all sorts of things. You?re like a beggar makin
?imself believe he lives in a palace. I never saw the likes of
you, Rube. Sometimes I think your a bit mad.?
The sun shining through the kitchen window suddenly ceased
to dapple the ragged little tablecloth. Rube had eaten his sausage
ravenously and was now wolfishly regarding the last crust of
bread; but Aunt Agatha stretched out her hand first.
Rube stood up as she finished the last crumb and murmured
the usual short prayer of thanksgiving. "Don?t worry about a
new pair of pants, auntie,? he said at its conclusion. "I?ll just
keep away from school.?
Aunt Agatha came to earth. Keeping Rube away from school
would lead to an inquiry. The policeman would want to know
the reason. She was helpless. A pair of pants would have to
be bought. It would not do for people to know she got an
allowance for keeping Rube.
She heard him whistling as he went down the narrow path
from the front gate to the track below. Sometimes she felt


cruel and mean when she knew he left the table unsatisfied as
he had now; but she comforted herself with the assurance that
he looked well and was cheerful. Like Rube, she often won-
dered if his father would ever come back and claim him. He
must have been a man of some means and education. At least
he did not leave his baby to starve?or did he?
Rube, whistling brightly, had reached the asphalt path that
led towards the main road to the shopping centre A bridge
carried it over the little valley that debouched on to the beach
and the head of the cove. In the centre of the bridge something
round and shiny attracted his attention, and Rube swiftly pounced
on a shilling.
"God never forsakes me!? he said jubilantly, breaking into
a run for the nearest hot-dog shop. "I bet I?ll get me pants
too. Y?pee!? 5 F ?


CHAPTER VII
THE DIARY
About the beginning of summer Flora came home. Ringer had
dreaded her arrival and inevitable criticisms. He was satisfied
with himself. He admitted he was a bit of a disappointment
to his father educationally, but comforted himself with the
knowledge that many great men had not been bright at school.
Indeed, there were times when he believed he could actually
catch a glimmer of future genius. As for his looks ?well, so
long as they were good enough for Mary Lou, he could afford
to ignore Flora.
Strangely enough, Flora came back so changed that he hardly
knew her. She was accompanied by a tall, well set-up chap
from the country, whose father owned a big sheep station.
Ringer did not quite approve of his Christian name, Geoffrey,
but grudgingly admitted that as a bloke he was not too bad.
Flora had developed from a gawky sort of girl into a lovely
young lady, with hair permed until it was a mass of curly
wrinkles, and who used lipstick and other make-up so effectively
as completely to have disguised herself. When Ringer saw
her stalking down the front path in her high-heeled shoes, like
a fairy on stilts, she took his breath away. And then she caught
Ringer to her bosom and enthusiastically kissed him.
"I?ve heard a lot about you, Arthur,? said Geoffrey, which
depressed Ringer a good deal for the moment. But later, when
he discovered what an exemplary character Flora had given him,
he felt a positive sissy.
Never had he seen the household on such good behaviour.
Dad called mum "dear? at least six times a day, and mum
forgot herself to the extent of calling him "darling? now and
again. As for Flora, she called dad "pet,? mother "pet? and,
to cap it all, she even called Ringer "pet.? This, he thought,
was going a little too far.


There were no arguments at the table, and dad even gave up
reading his morning paper at breakfast, and always used the
butter knife and a proper jam spoon. If Ringer did anything
that demanded correction, dad would smile amiably, raise a
finger and breathe softly, "Now, Arthur.? Dad kissed mum
without fail before he left home for business, and also when
he came home. Flora was ready with a needle whenever a
button needed sewing on, and even went so far as to place a
cushion behind dad?s head, as he sank into his easy chair after
dinner; and not only did she bring him his slippers ?an un-
heard-of proceeding ?but also demanded that she should help
him off with his shoes. Never had Ringer seen so many delici-
ous cookies on the table, for which Flora got all the credit.
She even insisted on cooking the dinner at least twice during
the week when Geoffrey was caught to the family bosom. Mean-
while, it was an open season for Ringer. No one asked him
about his homework; there was really no need. Every school day,
almost immediately after dinner, he went to his room and got out
his books. Dad, who looked in, beamed with joy at this display
of industry, and probably thought Ringer was doing his part in
the family reformation. As a matter of fact that week was a
record of dismal failure, and the schoolmaster had said despair-
ingly, "Your mind is not on your work, Arthur. In fact, I?m
beginning to doubt if you have a mind.?
And yet he had been more industrious than he ever remem-
bered. No one knew it, but he had made a start on a diary
which one day would be embodied in a book that would make
Robinson Crusoe read like hash. Rube had said that it was
important to keep the diary, as the human mind forgot things
very quickly. Ringer did not dispute that. It was hard for
him to remember even what he had learnt the day before. Rube
believed that, if they recorded their impressions now, they could
later collaborate and write a book that would stun the wmrld.
Before Ringer had written the first hundred words he knew
for certain that one day he would be a great author. Until
then he felt pretty positive he was an undeveloped genius, but
now he knew exactly what form his genius would take. Writing


was not easy, but a slow laborious process, in which scratches
and blots bore evidence of his painstaking efforts to achieve
perfection of expression. He made the rough draft, and then
Rube got to work on it and made it read like a real book.
The diary started like this:
On this day, 21 October 1936, I, Robinson Crusoe, a terrible
and sinful bloke who had driven my mother to an early grave
and my poor father to foreign parts, was cast ashore from the
good ship Saucy Anne on this tropical isle, and well I deserved
it, too.
Since my childhood I was an awful person. I did not go to
Sunday school, and swore very horrible when adult people were
not near. Every week I wagged it from school and lied to the
schoolmaster, telling him I had a nasty bellyache w?hich made
me writhe in agony. However, being a bit of a genius, I learnt
to write, as this testifies.
My sins and mischievous pranks caused great disquiet to my
neighbours and others, not a few swearing that some day I
should be hanged. To escape this fate I stowed aboard the four-
master ship Saucy Anne, and we sailed for Jamaica.
Having me on board was worse than shooting an albatross
with a crossbow. The whole of the voyage the sea was rough,
and we sprang a leak every day. The first mate fell off a yard-
arm, and was afterwards heaved overboard with a label and
an iron bar tied to his chest, while the captain sang that beautiful
hymn "For those in peril on the sea.?
Finally, all the ship?s biscuits got weevils, and the salt pork
got maggoty, and the sea water got into the fresh-water tank.
We all dying of scurvy when the greatest cyclone that
ever happened sprang up and blew two of the masts down.
Not being able to make headway against the terrific wind, we
were driven towards this island, and there wrecked.
Needless to say, Rube was largely responsible for the com-
position. This early part of the diary took over a fortnight to
complete and copy neatly. In the meantime the cave had really


begun to look inhabited. It was furnished with two butter boxes,
a petrol tin with a handle, two old aluminium saucepans, and an
old iron kettle which had long reposed in the cellar, two old
toothbrushes, and a hairbrush which had moulted badly and
never recovered. A few yards away, in the lantana, the boys
had dug a hole and secreted a biscuit tin, in which they kept
their fishing gear. Rube had decided they could never do all
the things Robinson Crusoe did, and that, in any case, they
were more modern than he was.
They composed most of the diary sitting on the rocks at the
foot of the cave, with a fishing line between their toes. The
writing in pencil was small, to save paper. Sometimes they had
heated arguments about it, but mostly the collaboration was har-
monious. A fortnight after Robinson Crusoe was swept ashore,
a fierce gale with rain blew up from the south. When the weather
cleared Ringer, by arrangement with Rube, rushed round to the
cave to see if it had suffered any damage. Everything was in
order. They went down to the shore to see what the storm had
cast up, and saw something that looked like a submerged and
overturned boat drifting past.
Rube fairly leapt out of his new pants, skinned himself of his
shirt, and dived after the wreck. Ringer followed, and between
them they dragged ashore a light canoe, a bit battered but not
exactly beyond repair. The following entry in the diary des-
cribes this important event:
Nov. 6. A great storm blew up yesterday. I was much afraid,
and lay in my cave trembling while my stomach rumbled con-
tinually. At dawn it abated somewhat and, going down to the
beach, I saw some wreckage drifting to the shore. With my
spy-glass I saw a wretched man clinging to un upturned boat,
and shouted, "Hullo there! How are you doing?? but got no
reply. Later, the boat drifting closer, I swam out to the rescue.
The person proved to be a cannibal from the distant mainland,
who, for his sins, was about to be cooked when he bolted and,
reaching the canoe, paddled away. Of course I did not learn
this until he had recovered and was taught English, which he


learnt very quickly. I called him Friday. With his help we
mended the dugout, and from that day on caught many fish, all
of which were mighty good eating.
The canoe had a hole in its side, and it took four hours on a
bright Saturday morning to repair it. Ringer extracted from
his father?s tool chest a chisel, a hammer, a small saw, a screw-
driver, a gimlet and some screws. The repairs they made were
quite good, but Rube, who had found on a municipal rubbish
heap some zinc that looked like the side of an old washtub,
was not satisfied until he had nailed a strip of it inside and out.
They christened the canoe the H.M.S. Nelson and painted the
name on the bow. It proved quite seaworthy and they paddled
along the cove, even voyaging as far as Bradley?s Head, taking
care to hug the coast in case the repairs did not stand up to the
bufferings of the waves. Now their cup of happiness was full.
They made occasional good catches of fish, and gorged them-
selves until they could scarcely move. Ringer was living in two
worlds: one of discipline and respectability, another of high
adventure and utter freedom from care.
It did not take long before the school learnt about H.M.S.
Nelson. Ringer and Rube had become not only very friendly,
but also very mysterious. They addressed each other as R.C.
and M.F., intials which utterly baffled the other pupils, and
they resolutely refused to let any other boy into the circle of
their friendship. Sometimes, as boy acquaintances hunted for
sea-eggs in the rocky shallows of the cove, they would paddle
past with all the pride of an admiral of the fleet.
All this time Rube, in some strange way, maintained his repu-
tation as a good scholar, showing brilliance in English and com-
position; while Ringer had not only ceased to make progress,
but was slipping back. Bradshaw, his master, did not approve
his friendship "with Rube. They were an ill-assorted pair, and
Bradshaw was certain that no boy who ran about barefoot and
invariably had holes in the seat of his pants, could be respectable.
He had made inquiries about Rube from the police sergeant,
Reardon, but learnt that the woman with whom he lived was


his aunt, and that she was hard-working and quite honest.
However, he thought it his duty to tell Ringer?s father than his
son was making little or no progress, and gave his association
with Rube as the reason.
Flora?s young man, Geoffrey Driscoll, had returned to the
country after buying her a lovely diamond ring, and also a
cricket bat for Ringer signed by Don Bradman.
The family, relieved of the strain of his presence, immediately
returned to a normal way of life. Flora snapped at her mother,
was impudent to her father, and dad read his paper at the
breakfast table. Ringer viewed Geoffrey?s departure with mis-
giving. Dad immediately showed a disagreeable interest in
Ringer?s homework, and that greatly hampered nis repeated
attempts to keep up the diary.
"It?s no good, Rube,? he said despairingly. "As soon as I
get down to work someone comes into the room. We?ll have to
make up for lost time during the holidays.?
Meanwhile, Mr Bradshaw, becoming more concerned about
Ringer and more antagonistic to Rube, dropped Mr Ringrow
another note. The effect of this was disastrous to the peace
of the home.
Ringer?s father always chose dinner-time to air his grievances.
More family brawls took place then than at any other time of
the day. Of course it spoilt the meal and gave everyone indi-
gestion, but it was one of dad?s hobbies.
They had just finished soup, and while the next course was
being served dad said, in his pleasantest voice, "How are you
getting along at school, Arthur??
"Pretty good,? said Ringer. "I?m goin? to work on a news-
paper when I grow up.?
"I thought you were training to become an editor. You seem
to be in the throes of composition every time I see you doing
your homework.?
"Yes,? said Ringer quite cheerfully, although he felt rather
sick in the stomach. "You know, mum,? he went on, as his
mother placed a plate of food before him, "some day I?m goin?
to write a book.?


"Are you really, Arthur dear??
"Yes. That oughter make you proud of me, mum.'?
"Your schoolmaster,? said dad, acidly, "does not seem to be
so enthusiastic about your future. He tells me you never know
your homework ?in fact that you?re just a fathead.?
"That?s what I always thought,? said Flora.
"You leave Arthur alone,? said mum. "Your father and I
can give him all the correction he needs. You were not so
brilliant at school yourself, Flora.?
"I?ve never seen Arthur work so hard as he?s been doing
lately, and yet I?m told he doesn?t learn a single lesson he?s
been set,? said dad with mounting anger. "It seems that the
harder he works the less he knows.?
"It?s brain-fag, dad, that?s what it is,? said Ringer. I?m
trying mighty hard.?
"Who is this boy, Rube ?this barefooted youth who runs
round with the end of his shirt sticking out of his pants??
"He?ll be dux of the school, for sure,? said Ringer.
"I don?t want to know what he?s going to be. Like you, he
probably says he?s going to be an editor some day, but what
is he now? Is he a pal of yours??
"Er?yes,? said Ringer. "We?re kinda friends.?
"And if you could find anybody more disreputable you?d chum
up with him. Now listen, Mr Editor, you give up Rube and
your low ideas and stop disgracing your family!?
"But,? Ringer objected defensively, "Rube?s a fine chap. All
the boys would give anything to know him.?
"Yes, and he?s so exclusive he won?t have anything to do
with any of them but you,? said dad. "Oh, when are you
going to get a few brains and some common sense? Can?t you
see none of the other boys will have anything to do with him?
What do you know about him? He may be a criminal, a pick-
pocket?anything.
Ringer?s eyes flamed. "Rube?s the finest chap I?ve ever met
in my life,? he declared.
"According to your standard?which is not very high, ap-
parently,? dad retorted. "Anyway, you give up this street brat


and mix with boys of your own class. Either that, or I?ll take
you away and send you to another school.?
A yell of anguish and resentment from Ringer disturbed any
further parental remarks. It brought mum to her feet in
exasperation and defence of her offspring.
"Why can?t you leave the boy alone, David?? she shouted.
"You?re always nagging at him. I don?t say he doesn?t need
correction, but why do you always pick dinner-time to do it??
"I?ll pick any time that suits me,? dad asserted doggedly.
He turned to Ringer. "Leave the table at once, you great cry-
baby, and get down to your work. From now on you?ll under-
stand what discipline means.?
Ringer rose and turned on him. "I?ll run away from home,
that?s what I?ll do. No one ever leaves me in peace. I can do
Jots o? things in the country ?pick beans and peas and apples,
and things like that. I won?t stay here and be bullied.?
' Go off to your homework!? his father sternly commanded.
?1 want no back-chat from you.?
Ringer stood his ground. "What?s wrong wdth me? If I?ve
got no brains ?well, you?re my father, ain?t you? But I tell
you, one of these days I?ll be an editor, and then I?ll tell the
world what I think of fathers.? His temper rose under the lash
of injustice. "You might think I?m a fool, but you won?t make
me believe it.?
Ringer got no farther. A slap across the face and a heave
from behind sent him ignominiously out of the dining-room.
? Get out, you insolent little beast! When you?ve calmed down
you can come back to me and apologize.?
Ringer slumped into his room and drew up a chair to his
work table. Under old exercise books was a sheet of paper
bearing the first sentences of another instalment of the diary.
He read it, and the tears welled. His father?s command about
Rube meant that his sojourn on the tropical isle was over. He
would have to part company with Robinson Crusoe and give up
the role of Friday. Rags could no longer be their dog or goat.
In fact, the very foundations of the joy and happiness that life
had hitherto held for him, were undermined.


His head dropped on his arms, and he started to sob. What
would he do without Rube? Only now did he realize fully
what Rube meant to him. There was no one else who under-
stood him so completely and who loved him so faithfully. Part-
ing with Rube would be the end of his hopes, his visions, the
destruction of every romantic idea they had materialized together.
The prospect of being debarred from entering the cave or
sharing the canoe was too awful to contemplate. No more
swims or rambles through the bush, no more fishing, no more
sitting round the petrol tin watching a catch of fish boil, a
heavenly smell coming up with the steam. No more outdoe'
picnics with Rube telling stories about that father of his.
About nine o?clock his mother came into his room, sat down
and called him over. She hugged him close and kissed him, and
he wept a little on her shoulder. "Dad is trying to do the best
for you, Arthur,? she said. "You must trust him and his judg-
ment.?
"Does that mean I?m not to speak to Rube again??
"I?m afraid it does. You must respect your father?s wishes,
my son. Now go and apologize to him for your rudeness.?
Ringer stood up, wiped the tears from his eyes with his coat
cuff, and, his lips set without another word, he walked into the
lounge where his father, sprawling in his easy chair, listened to
the radio.
He looked up as Ringer entered. "Well, son?? he said kindly
enough.
Do you forbid me to speak to Rube again?? Ringer asked
"Yes, absolutely.?
"Why??
"I?ve already told you. He?s an undesirable type of boy, and
you must not be seen about with him.?
Ringer stepped up to his father, his eyes flaring. "Is it
because he?s poor?? he inquired.
"Look here, Arthur, there?s a number of boys of good family
?people we know ?that you could pal up with. Why must
you choose a barefooted ruffian like Rube??


"Rube isn?t a ruffian,? said Ringer speaking as one inspired.
"He never says or even thinks anything that all the world
couldn?t know about. He doesn?t use the language or say the
things most boys do. His clothes mightn?t be very smart, but
he?s got a clean mind. That?s the sort of bloke Rube is.?
"An excellent character, but it doesn?t square with the one Mr
Bradshaw has given him. I?m afraid you must rely on his judg-
ment, and mine.?
"Rube is the top boy of the class. They can?t keep him down.
What Mr Bradshaw has against him I don?t know. Mr Brad-
shaw?s a squib. All he?s got against him and all you?ve got
against him is that he?s poor and barefooted. That makes him
a sorta criminal. You?re trying to make me a snob.?
"You?re trying to aggravate me into giving you the biggest
hiding of your life, and I thought you?d come here to apologize.?
I?ll apologize to you, dad, if you tell Mr Bradshaw to apolo-
gize to Rube.?
Mr Ringrow sprang from his chair, but just then Ringer?s
mother entered the room.
"The boy?s overwrought, David. Leave him alone. Arthur,
go to bed at once!?


CHAPTER VIII
THE CHINESE CHEST
It was a beautiful, warm, summer morning when Mr Basil
Pickering arrived with several drums of a pungent-smelling mix-
ture, a hand pump and a long length of rubber hose. The
cicadas in the adjoining allotment chirruped so loudly that the
whole world seemed to vibrate with the sound. Sydney harbour
was placid as a lake, blue as turquoise, and emerald-green in
its reflections. The ferry steamers shuttled through the busy
harbour traffic, and a freighter, anchored off Athol, rumbled
as she was being mechanically coaled from a hulk lying along-
side. Best of all sights, an Australian cruiser slid past to its
anchorage in Farm Cove.
Ringer, with Rags at his heels, expectantly watched Mr Picker-
ing and his assistant lugging the drums down the steps and
then lining them up for action in the backyard. He said good
morning very cheerfully, and Mr Pickering, rather long and
lank, with a leathery face, mopped his steaming forehead and
replied suitably. Encouraged by his geniality, Ringer made an
examination of the pump, and worked the handle. At that
moment Mr Pickering was about to uncoil the hose, and an oily
liquid in the form of a spray changed his complexion in a
moment.
' Sorry, Mr Pickering,? Ringer said.
"Quite all right, sonny. It does the skin good, and doesn?t
stain wallpaper or the most delicate silken fabrics. If you?ve
got a cold, like I have just now, an inhalation cures you almost
instantly. You simply can?t get a cold with my mixture about.?
"Then how did you manage to get one?? Ringer asked.
"Been on holiday, of course. Is your ma in??
A couple of days before, Ringer had discovered several holes
in a flooring board behind the loughboy. Dad said they were
due to white ants or borers, but very probably white ants. So


mum looked up the Classified Telephone Directory, and there,
in a fairly large advertisement, saw that Mr Basil Pickering was
an expert at annihilating white ants, borers, silver-fish, and every
other kind of pest that existed to keep him in business.
One could not resist giving Mr Pickering the job. He was
so genial, merry-looking and friendly. Besides, he knew all the
best people and did a lot of government work. He told the
story, obviously one of his king hits, of how the Governor-
General?s wife had said to him, "My dear Basil, I think if we
had not met you, Admiralty House would have crumbled about
our ears.?? Well, if Mr Pickering could save royalty from dis-
aster, it stood to reason he could be of considerable service to
the Ringrows.
Mum had asked Ringer to keep an eye on things while Mr
Pickering and his mate were looking round, so a morning visit
to the tropical isle was postponed until the afternoon.
Basil thoroughly inspected the place, crawling under the house,
probing here and there until he must surely have learnt if
there were any borers in the family skeleton. Several occasional
tables on the veranda were condemned as active focal points of
further infestation. Three shelves in the linen cupboard were
torn out for destruction by fire, and, to mum?s huge grief, Basil
ordered out of the house a carved Chinese chest which, in girl-
hood days, had been her glory-box.
There was no doubt it was riddled with borers, and the hinges
were showing signs of old age. Basil was adamant that it should
be instantly destroyed. Disregarding Mrs Ringrow?s tears, he
was about to hew it into fragments with an axe when Ringer
asked his mother if he may have it.
I wouldn t let him play with it,?? said Basil. "Either set it
on fire or sink it in the sea. It might be the means of infesting
the whole suburb.? After those remarks Mr Pickering, with
the righteous air of one who has saved a whole city from being
gradually chewed up, retired into the cellar to commence opera-
tions. Ringer immediately picked up the chest and hid it under
a clump of broom in the next allotment. After the canoe, this
was undoubtedly the greatest prize he and Rube had secured.


Meanwhile, Mr Pickering sprayed his exterminating mixture
on the flooring boards, squirming into spaces which only a man
of great determination could reach. His mate worked the pump
vigorously. The cellar completed, he replaced several ant-eaten
boards and then stormed into the inside of the house. He
squirted his mixture on the wooden ceiling of the veranda, and
when Mr Ringrow looked horrified at the pools of it on the
carpet and on the couch, he gave a superior smile and said his
mixture improved everything it touched. As a matter of fact
the only after-effects of this anointing was a pungent, chemical
smell that hung round the house for nearly a fortnight. Mr
Ringrow said he was not at all surprised that the treatment
killed white ants and borers; it had gone a considerable distance
towards killing him.
Somehow, one felt a keen sense of loss when Mr Pickering
finally said adieu. His memory was strong, at least for a fort-
night. The stories he told about his professional experiences
were almost as unforgettable as those of piracy. He left little
doubt that his calling was one of great excitement and romance.
For instance, he told of all the troubles and entanglements
entailed by a missing will, and how, just when the family con-
cerned was reduced to utter penury, he w-as entrusted with a
job in their home. Pulling up some riddled flooring boards
in a bedroom, he discovered an old biscuit tin, and inside it
was the will.
Perhaps the most humorous was the one about the sly old dog
w'ho used to hide his money from his wife. This time Basil
had been treating a -writing desk for borer, and accidentally
touched something which opened a secret drawer. Inside, Basil
found over �2OO hidden away in gold and notes. He immedi-
ately informed the good lady of the house of his find.
Later the husband came home. "Have you lost any money??
she asked. "No,? he replied. "You?re not hiding any from
me?? she pressed. "No. God forbid!? he said fervently.
"Then,? said she triumphantly, "I?ve found �2OO hidden in the
house, and I?m taking a trip to England.? It -was really ex-
hilarating to hear Basil guffaw when he told that one.


The position regarding Rube had remained very much the
same. It was clear to both of Ringer?s parents that the boy
was greatly distressed, and they decided not to interfere with
this friendship until the new year. In the meantime, arrange-
ments were to be made for Ringer to continue his education
in the college that had produced so successful and fine a character
as his father. Mrs Ringrow, who managed to induce Ringer to
speak, though guardedly, of his chum, invited Rube to join them
at an afternoon picnic in the cove.
Rube did not accept the invitation readily. He always looked
for traps. Perhaps it was just a ruse to probe him about Ringer.
So many people had tried to trick them and spy upon their
activities. However, after reminding Ringer of his secrecy vow,
he said he would love to meet his ma. Ringer had told him
wonderful things about her. Surely she must be the most beauti-
ful and kindly woman who had ever Jived; and when Ringer
spoke of the scones, cakes and tarts she made, Rube felt she was
truly irresistible.
He put on a clean shirt, sponged his trousers, and gave his
feet in particular a thorough scrub. Lastly, he combed his hair.
At first sight Ringer scarcely knew him. "What you been doin?
with your face?? he commented, almost horror-stricken, and
then realized that his chum?s unruly hair had been laid to rest.
Mrs Ringrow smiled as Rube walked up to greet her. She
noticed the quaint little droop of his left eyelid, and that his
features gave promise of future handsomeness. Rube smiled
with his generous mouth, and his blue eyes lit up. He was a
little shy but not awkward.
How are you, Rube??? Mrs Ringrow said, and extended her
hand.
I m very well, ma?am,? he answered politely. "It was very
kind of Ringer to invite me to meet you.?
Ringer? Is that what you call him?? Then, after a short
verbal skirmish, she asked, "Where is your mother, Rube??
She s dead, he replied solemnly. Aunt Aga:ha says she
died soon after I was born. She?s lying in an old churchyard in


Bathurst. Some day I?m going to Bathurst, to put a bunch of
red roses on her grave.?
"And your father??
"He?s away somewhere in South America, I think.? Rube sat
on a rock close by. He found Mrs Ringrow a lovely and sym-
pathetic woman, and understood why he loved Ringer so much.
"I often think of him. Somehow I believe it won?t be long
before he?ll come back to me, and then we?ll go and see my
poor mum?s grave together.?
He spoke with engaging frankness and poise. He mentioned
his love of reading and the books he had read. Ringer looked
at him open-mouthed. Rube unbent a little after they had boiled
the billy and made the tea. He looked at the white tablecloth
spread on the clean dry sand, and the delicacies upon it, and his
eyes goggled.
Mrs Ringrow found he required little persusion to eat, and
saw how unaccustomed he was to the fare she had provided.
The afternoon tea over, the boys cleared off to prowl round the
rocks, and she settled down to a good novel. Arthur, she
realized, did not select his friends as thoughtlessly as his father
believed.
The carved Chinese chest was triumphantly and secretly car-
ried to the cave one moonlight night. Dad and mum had gone
to the theatre and Flora was spending a week-end at Palm Beach,
thus giving the two boys a golden opportunity for the trans-
planting of their treasure. The chest was given a special entry
ir the diary, and this was it:
Nov. 28. On this day blew up a great storm with much
thunder and lightning. We were roused by a cannon shot, and
from our look-out, on the top of the fig-tree, saw a great ship
stuck fast on a coral reef. Friday and I ran down to the beach
and lit a fire, but we could not take off in our canoe, as the
sea was too rough. The gale raged through the night. In the
morning the ship, greatly battered, Had heeled over, but the
wind had died down and the sea was more calm.


About midday we paddled to the wreck, but the surf was too
strong to venture aboard. The ship was breaking up, and there
was no sign of life. Later, some barrels of gunpowder and
good Spanish wine were cast up on the beach. Finally, a chest
floated ashore with some wreckage. It was beautifully carved
with sunflowers and fierce dragons and, forcing open the lid,
we found one thousand pieces of eight and two hundred gold
doubloons.
How a chest had floated with such a weight of treasure was not
explained. However, Rube thought this entry particularly fine.
A copy of an unabridged version of Robinson Crusoe was
thumbed vigorously to complete the masterpiece. Ringer acknow-
ledged that Daniel Defoe could not have written it better.
Somehow the cave now looked almost completely furnished.
Rube had rolled up his barrel, which stood in a corner; and
although the contents of it, mostly fishing gear, were clear for
all to see, he placed a great label upon it: GUNPOWDER.
Ringer had contributed a stone jar, in a woven net, which,
covered with clay and mildew, had to be dug out of the cellar,
and this stood in an opposite corner, marked RUM, with a sub-
heading Nelson?s Blood. The chest was placed in the darkest
nook of the cave, and in it lay the old hair- and toothbrushes.
A copy of Robinson Crusoe, and various magazines, were also
reverently placed inside, and underneath them all was the pre-
cious diary, which now began to look quite important.
Although they spent a good deal of time paddling and swim-
ming, or making voyages up the coast in the dugout, and kept
a constant watch from a great branch of the Moreton Bay
fig, no barque, frigate, schooner, corvette, pirate or ship-of-war
ever approached near enough to heed their frantic signals. It
became apparent that they were destined to spend many long
years, if not their whole lifetime, on this lonely tropical isle.
Sometimes they got quite gloomy over the prospect, and sat
on the chest together, staring hopelessly at the gunpowder barrel,
and speculating as to their fate when it was empty. Then Ringer


would show his mettle and say, "Cheer up, R.C.! While there?s
a fish in the sea we can?t die of starvation, and anyhow, if the
worst comes to the w'orst, we can eat the goat. This frank
and brutal expression of their intentions used to disturb Rags a
good deal, and he always saw that there was a lizard to chase
in the lantana, until Crusoe and Friday had recovered from
their bloodthirsty mood.
After some time, as the gunpowder got lower and lower, they
decided to add to their herd of goats, and Ringer induced
Boggles and Jock to join up with the party. Once introduced
to the cave, both dogs came round to Ringer?s home at about
half past nine every Saturday morning. Rube thought they
should be rechristened, otherwise they would spoil the whole
show. Rags was therefore renamed Potiphar, Boggles Beelze-
bub, and Jock, because he looked so cute, Solomon. Standing
together at the entrance of the cave, they made an imposing
array, and Rube, feeling Boggles all over, would say, "He?s
fattenin? up, Ringer. I think I?ll cook him barbecue fashion.?
Beelzebub, alias Boggles, who rather liked being stroked and
tickled, looked amazingly placid at the prospect, and wagged his
tail with great delight.
Soon after they were washed ashore, Rube thought they
ought to have a parrot. After many trips to the municipal
rubbish tip, he found there, one morning, a battered old cage,
which he pounced upon as a great treasure. Some of the wires
were knocked about, but, these being straightened, and the whole
cage given a coat of paint, it looked a fitting habitation for a
bird of paradise. They now set about trying to snare a parrot
from a small flock which regularly settled on the Moreton Bay
fig, but nothing they did would induce one of them to be
trapped and join in the fun. However, Ringer cut out a fine
illustration of a parrot from a coloured advertisement, and stuck
it on cardboard, then suspended it so that, looked at from the
right angle, the parrot seemed to be sitting contentedly on its
perch.
It was good to sit on the branch of their fig-tree, cool even
when the sun shone fiercely and the cicadas tried to drum up


the temperature. The smell of the lantana was intoxicating,
especially if mixed with dust that the herd of goats raised as they
barked, scratched, scurried, and altogether behaved in most un-
goatlike fashion. While straining their eyes towards the dis-
tant horizon, hoping against hope to be rescued, Crusoe and
Friday thought of their evil pasts with great sorrow, and deter-
mined to mend their ways when they returned to the fleshpots
and the bright lights of Sydney.
Here is an entry in the diary which clearly describes their
state of mind:
Nov, 30. We, that is, Robinson Crusoe and Friday?the latter
has now grown into quite a decent sort of bloke who can speak
English without too many mistakes in syntax and prosody ?
have now lived on this lonely island, undisturbed except by
cannibal hordes, whom we have destroyed in great numbers, for
sixteen years. It seems to us that we are being justly punished
for our sins. Every day we sit in the blazing sun on the rock
of repentance, hoping thereby that we shall be purified even as
the dross is removed from the gold. Our hearts are full of
gratitude. All things tend to show, more and more, that our
condition, far from being miserable, is one for which we should
daily render thanks. How long we shall live here, the Lord
knoweth. In the meantime, our herd of goats has multiplied
from one to three. We also have one parrot in a cage, and a
large number living contentedly with us in the branches of our
look-out. Our beards have grown to below our hunting belts,
and both of us look mighty ferocious and terrifying to meet
on a dark night.
However, it ought to be recorded here that Ringer?s parents
and Rube?s Aunt Agatha saw little change in their appearance,
except that they seemed dirtier, untidier, and certainly more
thoughtless than ever. What they were both up to, no one had
been able to discover.


CHAPTER IX
A VISITOR CALLS
Sunday was always properly observed by Aunt Agatha. She
slept in until nine o?clock, then leisurely prepared herself for
church. Rube, who made no protest, was left at home, mainly
because he did not look respectable enough to sit in the same
pew with her. Arrayed for worship, Aunt Agatha looked quite
imposing. She favoured black with a touch of red, provided
by a string of beads which had come all the way from Fiji; and,
despite her rheumatics, she walked erect and with great dignity?
just as she might have done had she been a duchess.
No one quite knows why a duchess is supposed to be the
hallmark of good breeding, dignity and grace, but there it is.
Agatha, when her mind drifted to her aristocratic ancestors,
had decided that, if she inherited the estate in Chancery, she
would like to be called the Duchess of Daventry. The title had
a real swing to it, and altogether Aunt Agatha liked it.
During all the years she had lived in her little bush shack,
no one of any consequence had called upon her. Her colleagues
m the city were right enough to pass the day with, but
anything more. She did not believe in entertaining, principally
because it was too expensive; and besides, she w'as perfectly
satisfied with her own company and Rube?s.
One Sunday morning, fortunately just after she had arrived
home from church, she saw a w'ell-dressed woman struggling
up the path to her front gate. The visitor was of middle
slim, about thirty-five years old, and carried a walking stick.?
She strode up to the veranda with a decided swing, and smiled
pleasantly at Aunt Agatha as she said good morning.
Miss Agatha Williams?? she queried.
. Yes >? replied in her best manner, "I am Miss Agatha
Williams.? A glance satisfied her that her visitor was a ladv
nice-looking, and of agreeable personality.


"My name is Dorothy Marsden. I have come to Sydney
from the west particularly to see you.?
"Come in,? said Aunt Agatha and took her into the little
sitting-room. She was never ashamed of that room. Books and
papers gave it an atmosphere of refinement and culture. The
sun w'as streaming through the window just then, and the room
looked bright and cosy. Miss Marsden sat down and, after a
quick appraising glance, again smiled at Agatha, wdio now
began to feel slightly uncomfortable.
"I w'ant you to be perfectly frank with me, Miss Williams.
I only knew of your existence a few weeks ago, from my mother.
Over ten years ago a baby was left in your charge ??
"That is correct.?
"In terms of an agreement, you have since been receiving a
w'eekly allowance for the child?s upkeep, on the understanding
that these payments continue until the boy is seventeen.?
"That is correct,? Aunt Agatha replied in a low, tense voice.
She was now genuinely alarmed. This visit meant an investiga-
tion. Perhaps Miss Marsden had already been prying into her
affairs, and had learnt facts about Rube to her discredit.
"Where is the boy?? her visitor asked.
"Out enjoying himself in the fresh air. He?s all for the
great outdoors,? Aunt Agatha replied in her best manner, fer-
vently hoping Rube w?ould not put in an appearance before the
visitor had left. "I don?t expect him back for some time.?
"What a pity! I wanted to see him. What sort of a boy
has he grown into??
"A clever boy,? said Aunt Agatha. "A very clever boy. He?s
always got his nose stuck into a book.?
"I suppose you are wondering what right I have to make
inquiries. I?ll explain that. What did you call the boy??
"Ruben ?Rube Hill. Hill w ; as my mother?s maiden name,?
said Aunt Agatha. "He was a quaint little boy?cute as you
make ?em.?
"I?m quite impatient to see him. Rube is really my nephew,
and his proper name is John. My brother, his father, was a
medical student, but very foolishly got married secretly, and


spoilt his career. Rube?s mother died soon after he was born.
My brother John was heart-broken. He was afraid to tell my
father of his marriage. However, he confided in my mother after
his wife?s death. She has been responsible for the payments to
you.?
Aunt Agatha sat straight up, pale and rigid. "What became
of his father?? she asked.
"He went to South Africa before taking his medical degree.
I'm afraid John wasn?t very studious. After a year or two the
family lost track of him, and we believed he was dead. Over
a month ago my father passed away, and left his property ?a
fine sheep station ?to John, if he were still alive. My mother
was always anxious to take charge of Rube, but she did not dare
do so while my father lived. He never knew he had a grand-
son.?
Aunt Agatha crumpled up. Her great brown eyes stared
beseechingly at her visitor. This was the greatest blow ill-
fortune had ever dealt her. She was to be deprived of nearly
thirty shillings a week and, more than that, of a boy who had
endeared himself to her.
Miss Marsden rose, alarmed at the woman?s obvious distress.
She took Agatha?s hand, "I can see this is a great blow to you,
Miss Williams, but please don?t be alarmed. I think everything
will work out for your happiness, and Rube?s too. I can?t
discuss the future until my brother returns. He is now on his
way home, and looking forward to meeting his family. He did
not marry again. We expect him to land in Sydney in three
weeks? time.?
"Yes,? said Aunt Agatha weakly. What else could she say?
Life was not worth living now. She was losing Rube, and had
nothing to look forward to but old age, poverty, utter friend-
lessness, and remorse that she had not been more generous to the
boy with clothes and food.
"Although you are distressed at the moment,? said Dorothy
Marsden, as she rose and extended her hand, "I know you will
realize that this is for the best, and will mean a great change
in Rube?s future.?


Agatha?s eyes welled with tears, but she held herself in con-
trol. "I?m feeling very upset, of course, because Rube will be
taken away from me. After all this time?and I?ve had him
since he was a baby?l almost think of him as my own son,
though I did expect that his proper relatives would turn up
some day.?
Miss Marsden smiled encouragingly. "There?s no need to feel
unhappy about his future, or yours. I hope you?ll not be separ-
ated. I?m going back home on Thursday, and I?d like to see
my nephew before I leave. I?m stopping at the Astor. Could
you arrange to let Rube call on me and have afternoon tea on
Wednesday??
"That can be arranged,? said Agatha, not very cheerfully
as she thought of Rube?s wardrobe.
"If you mention my visit, please say I?m an old friend of
yours interested in him. Don?t mention our relationship or his
future. I think it would be unwise to do that until my brother
comes home. He, naturally, will settle the boy?s future.?
The visitor had not been gone more than a few minutes when
Rube came in. "Who?s been here?? he asked.
"Who told you anyone?s been here?? Aunt Agatha demanded.
"I can smell her,? said Rube, sniffing. "My, what a delicious
smell! Who was it, Aunt Agatha? Was it Mrs Ringrow??
"No. Someone from the west I used to know once. She?s
anxious to meet you, Rube. She?s invited you to tea on Wednes-
day, at the Astor in Macquarie Street.
"Gee, I couldn?t go there, auntie! It?s such a swell place, and
I?well, you see I ain?t got any boots.? He looked up at Agatha
and noticed how pale and disturbed she looked. Solicitously
he moved towards her. "What?s the matter? Ain?t you well?
What?s happened?? he asked.
"Nothin?, Rube dear. Perhaps I?m excited seeing Miss
Marsden after so many years. I promised you?d go to tea.?
"But what about school?? said Rube, searching for some reason
to defeat the project.
"You?ll take a holiday on Wednesday afternoon, and one on


Tuesday afternoon, too. I must get you a nice suit, shoes and
a hat.?
Rube laughed. "What?ll I look like all dressed up ?a scare-
crow or a stuffed guy? It seems so silly spendin? all that money
just to swank up for one afternoon tea. Just tell her I can?t
come.?
"No, Rube, you?ve got to go. I don?t ask you to do many
things for me, but you must have tea with the lady. I?ll teach
you how to behave.? With that ultimatum, Aunt Agatha went
into her room to change her black dress.
After dinner, Rube strolled along the beach until he reached
the diving rock, and, perching himself upon it, looked across
the cove towards the channel. His mind was working furiously.
This sudden intrusion of a Miss Marsden into their lives was
of more consequence than Aunt Agatha admitted. He felt he
was on the threshold of great happenings, and was not feeling
very happy about it if it meant any disturbance of his present
mode of life.
Straight across, behind the barrier of that lantana patch, was
the cave of his tropical isle. When he and Ringer entered it
the world changed like magic. Whatever happened, he was
sure he would never know such happiness again. Sitting on the
look-out he forgot all his troubles, his lack of clothes, and many
other things that most children set great store upon. He could
not leave Ringer. If he did, the wonderful diary would never
be finished. So much crowded into his mind as they sat to-
gether, waiting for the sail to bob up over the horizon?the
sail that would take them back to civilization?and secretly hop-
ing the ship would be wrecked before it got close enough.
It looked as if that sail was not far off now.
On Tuesday morning he told Ringer he would be going home
in the afternoon, and left his pal completely astounded by the
news. At three o?clock Aunt Agatha and he arrived at a big
George Street store, and there he was fitted out with such
magnificence that Rube had hot flushes, and felt generally so shy
and uncomfortable that he wanted to run away. The suit w-as
a nice grey, the shirt a light blue, with a gorgeous striped tie,


and the hat a straw boater that threatened to bounce off his head
and spin under the first tram they met, unless he held it on
securely.
He looked about cautiously as he walked with his aunt to the
ferry, hoping no one he knew would spot him looking so
respectable and gawkish. He escaped observation until they
dropped off the bus near home, and ran right into Ringer and
his mother. Ringer looked at him for a few minutes without
recognizing him; and it was only when Rube lifted his hat
courteously and said, "Good evening, Mrs Ringrow,? that she
smiled back and answered, "How are you, Rube??
Ringer seemed too bewildered for speech. He merely looked
back and waved, and Rube gave him a tremendous wink.
"How nice Rube looked!? Mrs Ringrow said; but Arthur
could only exclaim, "Gosh!?
After a few moments, "I think he must be goin? to a fancy-
dress ball,? said Ringer.
"But why? He?s only dressed nicely, as boys should dress.?
Ringer did not reply. Rube had not been straight ?with him.
He must have known he w'as going to get all those new clothes
and had not mentioned it. What w r as behind it all? For the
first time he felt distrustful. If Rube had suddenly become
respectable, what was going to happen to their tropical isle?
A dressed-up Rube with ideas was a very different boy from the
one to whom he had been so loyal and devoted.
Much to his relief, Rube arrived at school next morning with-
out his disguise. His hair looked more unruly than ever, and
his clothes, if anything, more untidy.
"What happened to you?? Ringer inquired. "Did your
auntie win the lottery, Rube??
"You didn?t tell anyone you saw me all guyed up, did you,
Ringer ??
"No, of course not. I know w'hat happened. You went to
the dentist??
Rube shook his head. "I don?t know what came over my
aunt. She took me to towm and got me that new rig. I?m having
another half holiday to-day.? v


"Snakes!? said Ringer. "Something?s happened, Rube. Tell
me.?
"I?m havin? afternoon tea at the Astor with a beautiful lady
from the west. That?s all I know.?
"I wouldn?t be surprised to hear next that your old man?s
back from Peru,? said Ringer immediately.
Precisely at three o?clock Rube, in his new suit, was ushered
into Miss Marsden?s presence. She stared at him for a moment
or two before she spoke, obviously surprised at his appearance.
He looked exactly like her brother when he was a boy, even to
the odd little droop of his left eyelid, except that Rube had
more character. Unable to restrain herself, she caught the boy
in her arms and kissed him. "My dear!? she exclaimed, thrust-
ing him at arm?s length, admiration in her eyes.
Rube looked puzzled. He was unaccustomed to demonstra-
tions of affection, but he liked this sweet-faced woman and her
low, charming voice, and the kiss she had given him. He did not
know what to say.
Quickly she drew him beside her on the settee. "Aunt
Agatha told you of my visit??
"Yes,? said Rube. "You?re an old friend of hers.?
"Yes, my dear. She said so many nice things about you that
I thought I?d like to see you.? She touched a bell, and a maid
wheeled in a traymobile. "I want you to tell me all about
yourself, but first of all we?ll have tea. Do you like tea??
"Very much,? said Rube, "but without milk. I like three
spoons of sugar.?
"A sweet tooth, eh?? she said, and tea began.
Dorothy Marsden not only placed him completely at his ease,
but soon won his confidence and affection. She was very in-
terested in Ringer and the cave, the Chinese chest, the parrot,
and their herd of goats, and laughed until the tears ran down
her cheeks. As for the diary, she thought the idea splendid and
clever, and made Rube promise that some day she should be
permitted to see it.
"I?ll have to ask Ringer first, of course,? he replied.


He spoke with strong affection of Aunt Agatha; and Miss
Marsden, seeing him look so clean and spruce, was quite satis-
fied he had been in good hands all these years.
"Your aunt tells me you are doing very well at school.?
I?m good at English and all that sort of stuff, but not so
good at mathematics,? said Rube.
And I suppose you?ve made up your mind what you?re going
to be w r hen you grow up??
I?d like to be a pirate, but there aren?t any prospects for that
kind of thing now. Most boys want to be airmen. D?you know
what I feel I?m going to do some day??
"Tell me.?
"Be an editor and write books,? Rube said, whereat Miss
Alarsden, in her delight, kissed him again.
Just before he left he spoke of his father. "I know he?ll come
back some day, he said, and 111 be proud of him. I expect
Aunt Agatha has told you all about him. If often imagine all
the brave and wonderful things he must be doing. Poor dad!
It must have been terrible for him when my poor little mum
died. Aunt Agatha said she was just a girl, but oh, what a
sweet and beautiful girl! Some day dad and I will go to
Bathurst together, and place a great bunch of red roses on her
grave.?


CHAPTER X
THE SMUGGLERS
Sometimes at night or in the early morning?it depended upon
the tide?Ringer was awakened by voices in the cove below.
Then, if he were properly awake, he would kneel up in bed and
look out of the window to see what was happening. Usually
the voices were those of Italian fishermen who, after dragging
the cove, hauled their nets on to the shelving beach to sort out
the catch in the glare of their lanterns. If the catch was good
they would sing excerpts from Italian opera, their voices blending
sweetly and harmoniously in the stillness. If fish were scarce
the fishermen kept away.
Rube did not like the depredations, as he called them, of
these fishermen. He enjoyed their singing, which he also heard
very dearly, but it spoilt his sport. On Friday nights the boys
listened anxiously, especially if they had arranged for a fishing
excursion next day. They regarded the cove as their own re-
serve, and netting fish as an outrage to all anglers.
One morning long before daybreak?Ringer never knew the
time at night ?he awoke and looked out of his window. It was
very dark and quiet. From a point about a hundred yards from
the beach a light flashed, and a minute or two later it flashed
again a little closer in. A curious thing now happened. A
flash answered it from among the trees at the head of the cove.
Later he heard the boat ground and the oars being shipped.
Someone had met that boat, because soon after it pulled away
with muffled oars.
At breakfast Ringer excitedly related what he had seen.
His father, busy crunching toast and reading his paper, looked
up. "Say that again,? he told his son.
Ringer repeated his story.
"I saw Smithers yesterday,? his dad said. "From where he
lives, a block farther along, he?d seen something suspicious like
that two weeks ago. I think I?ll mention it to Sergeant Reardon.
It looks like smuggling to me.?


"Smuggling what? Rum, or French wine and silk lace??
asked Ringer.
"No, they smuggle something more valuable than that in
Australia?opium or cocaine.?
"Then,? said Ringer, "the smugglers are Chinese.?
His father laughed. "Not necessarily. However, if you
notice anything again, wake me up, son.?
"I wouldn?t take the risk,? said mum, and Flora chortled.
It was getting near break-up. The examinations were over.
Ringer breathed again. Little or no homework w'as being set,
the scholars discussed where they were going or what they were
doing for the Christmas holidays, and Ringer, mentally ex-
hausted, felt that he needed both a tonic and a change. On the
morning of the examination he had known how a murderer
felt on the day he was to be hanged. He had slept badly, and
eaten little or no breakfast. All the way to school he lamented
not having paid more attention to his studies. Rube, the cave,
the tropical isle, and even the diary receded into the background
a� inconsequential. Pale, haggard, and scratching himself in
his nervousness, he sat down to his first paper. A glance at it
filled him with despair. Two forms separated him from Rube
and all hope of friendly assistance. Around him sat boys who
knew less than he did. However, he remembered his father?s
advice of the day before; "Whatever you have to do, do your
best. One can?t do more than that.?
He began that history paper dispirited and hopeless. A few
encouraging winks from Rube helped him to recover from his
nervousness. Old Robinson Crusoe, with his ears back, was
writing hard, and it was up to him to follow suit. Presently
he began to fell a little more confident. "Take what you know
first, and leave the hard questions to the last, when they won?t
look so hard,? was the advice Rube had given. Mr Bradshaw'
snooped round, paying Rube a lot of undeserved attention.
Ringer heard him say, "What! Are you finished already??
And Rube, as sweet as an angel, replied, "Yes, Mr Bradshaw.?
When it was all over Ringer felt a little more confident.
His father?s usual caustic remarks about his school report had


loomed in the foreground of his mind throughout the ordeal;
but at least, he had done his best. Next year he really would
stick his toes in and show his parents what he could go.
He told Rube about the smugglers.
Rube?s face lit up with excitement. "Gosh!? he cried.
"You?ve got something there, Ringer. They?re not fishermen.
The dagoes don?t signal like that. Why should they? They?re
honest folk ?those ones, at least?and my word, they can sing!
People who sing so the world can hear, don?t do crooked
things. They?re smugglers all right, and you and me are goin?
to lay ?em by the heels.?
Ringer was glad they had a new interest. It seemed to him
that since Miss Marsden had asked Rube over to tea, he had
changed somewhat. Ringer had not recovered from the shock
of seeing his pal so smart that he looked like a fashion block
in the newspaper advertisements. He had looked positively dig-
nified dressed up. Perhaps it was because it was such a con-
trast to his usual style of getting round. Anyway, he had seemed,
since, very thoughtful about something.
"How did the party go?? Ringer had asked.
"She was a lovely dame,? Rube said, "and sittin? next to her
made me feel awfully nice. She must have money. I never
saw such a beautiful room. A maid all decked up brought in
the tea and the grub. What a tuck-in I had!?
"My! Aunt Agatha is a surprise packet havin? a friend like
that,? Ringer commented.
"She?s classy, I think,? said Rube. "Isn?t it funny how things
happen? D?you know what I think is goin? to blossom next??
"Search me!? said Ringer.
"Me pop?s goin? to turn up.?
Ringer?s spirits had slumped. Rube certainly had a picturesque
pop, but Ringer hoped he would not turn up before the diary
was written. To be separated from Rube w T as one of the saddest
things he could imagine.
Rube could not get a clear view of the cove through the trees,
and this rather hampered his effort to keep watch on the smug-
glers. He and Ringer made a survey of the position, and decided


to lop oft a few branches that obstructed the view. Once more
Ringer borrowed his father?s cross-cut saw, and a busy morning
made a sufficient opening through the foliage for Rube to keep
an eye on the beach if nocturnal landings were made.
Christmas Day passed quite uneventfully, except that dad
announced he had to go to Brisbane in a couple of days? time,
and proposed to take mum with him. Flora did not look very
pleased, but could not say much, as she had been promised a
short holiday in Orange about the middle of January. She did
not relish looking after the house and Arthur during the festive
season. But Ringer regarded the whole arrangement as a heaven-
sent opportunity to spend most of the holidays on his tropical
isle.
In that week of unrestrained and unalloyed happiness Ringer
ran absolutely wild. Flora left him largely to his own resources.
She went out every night, coming home from parties and dances
at a late hour, and often slept in, leaving Ringer to make his
own breakfast. Never before had Ringer?s opinion of his sister
been so high.
Apart from presents ?mostly of the useful variety, such as
pyjamas, socks, handkerchiefs and books?certain of his rela-
tions had very wisely sent him a few shillings each, which
amounted to the magnificent sum of twenty-three shillings and
sixpence, to spend as he wished. Ringer immediately pooled it
with ten shillings Rube had received from Miss Marsden, and
this fund enabled the two castaways to survive what was des-
cribed in the diary as "a slim time.? Through strange circum-
stances such as the set of the current, and bad weather, the
turtles had deserted the island, and wild goats and pigeons grown
shy. However, two days after Christmas, according to the diary,
a hunting expedition supplied them with the following fare:
Sausages
Chops
Steaks
Pish and chips
Potatoes baked in ashes
A large variety of cakes, sweets, nuts
and fruit (Dessert)


The diary at first failed to explain how certain delicacies had
been obtained. After a great deal of discussion, however, the
following entry was made:
Dec. 28. We were about to sit down to a great feast as des-
cribed above, when behold, we saw a barrel being driven toward
the shore. Friday, casting off his shirt and pants as he ran,
plunged into the mountainous waves and, with great skill and
daring, brought the barrel ashore. On opening it we found it
was lined with lead, and inside was a great assortment of goodies
of all kinds. In a big box of bonbons was tucked a little note
that smelt deliciously of violets, written in a round, maidenly
hand (this was obviously Ringer?s inspiration) and read: "A
Christmas present to the lonely castaways. Know that my heart
is breaking for you, Friday, and longing for your return. Your
loving friend, Mary Lou.?
What gorges they had while the money lasted! They fried the
sausages or grilled them, and ate them straight from the pan,
without the aid of knife or fork. A great pocket knife was all
the cutlery they possessed or wanted, and grimy faces and hands
only added to their enjoyment. Sometimes Rube would disappear
over the distant ridge to hunt for food, and wxrnld return post-
haste, not with pigeons or turtle eggs or a young kid, but with
a great steaming loaf of bread or a bag of hot rolls. They
boiled saveloys, and made them into hot dogs with plenty of
butter and stinging mustard. They sailed their canoe and swam
off the rocks or in quiet inlets, and in the heat of noonday
sprawled in the cave or perched themselves on the look-out in
the Moreton Bay fig; and in between times they kept ears and
eyes open for any clue that might help them to run the smugglers
to earth.
I got a hunch,? Rube said one afternoon, after manfully
getting through a pound of steak and a couple of rolls, "about
the smugglers.?
'What kinda hunch, Rube??
'?They?ll be up the cove to-night.?


"What time??
"Round about two in the mornin?. I think we oughter keep
a watch, Ringer. What?s Flora doin???
?Goin? up Hornsby way to a dance. Won?t be home till
mornin?. Anyway, she never looks me up wdien she comes in.?
"I?ll whistle you up about ten o?clock,? said Rube. "Aunt
Agatha?ll be well asleep then. You wouldn?t funk bein? up all
night, would you, Ringer??
"Many?s the night I?m up nearly all night, specially since I
saw those smugglers,? Ringer retorted with a swagger.
Some time after ten Ringer, who was finding it very difficult
to keep awake, heard Rube?s whistle. By arrangement they wore
coloured shirts and pants. The night was warm and very dark.
They scrambled down the steep, rocky hillside, disturbing
possums and bush bandicoots, and an old owl hooting peacefully
after a successful hunt. The tide was beginning to run in, and
the sand on the beach was hot and dry under their bare feet,
until they reached the little rivulet that dribbled towards the
sea. Not a soul was about. They walked as silently as Red
Indians, cautiously stopping to look and listen before they went
on. Under an overhanging tree Rube produced a tinful of
burnt corks, and changed the colour of every bit of visible
skin. Ringer, looking at Rube, started to whistle "Way down
upon the Swanee River,? and was immediately crushed.
"Shut up!? said Rube. "The smugglers are bound to have
scouts about. D?you want to be murdered??
They stayed under the tree for an hour, and nothing hap-
pened. Both began to feel a bit sleepy, so they decided to hit
the trail. A track just above them led to Athol, and they de-
cided to reconnoitre, and duck into cover if they heard anyone
coming. Things slithered about or moved in the bushes, and
Ringer?s courage began to fail him a little.
"D?you think they?re snakes, Rube? We?ve got bare feet,
y?know.?
"No,? said Rube, "Snakes go to bed as soon as it gets dark,
and don?t move about till the sun thaws them in the mornin?.
A snake?s got cold blood like a fish.?


Ringer could not dispute that statement, but derived a lot of
comfort from it.
They came back to their starting place. It commanded the
best view. By this time the houses around the bay were com-
pletely dark. Social revels for the night were over. The tide
was coming in fast. The seagulls, hunting for crabs, quarrelled
among themselves as sandpit after sandpit disappeared from
sight. The sea began to lap against the rock on which they
were perched.
"We?ll climb up the tree,? said Rube. "From there we can
see a boat come in. If anyone goes to meet it, he?ll have to
pass right under us.?
The air now became rather chilly. Whether it was that or
nervousness, both boys began to shiver. However, when they
reached a big branch right over the track, giving them a splendid
view of the cove, they were not only warm but full of fight.
"If it comes to hand-to-hand fightin?,? said Rube, testing the
edge of his knife, "use your pocket knife.?
They were now very alert, and glad they had come.
Presently Rube kicked Ringer. "Someone?s movin? towards
us.?
Two figures, walking as silently as policemen can walk in
sandshoes, came up the track. They stood beneath the tree
on which the boys were perched.
"Where?s Gordon?? said Sergeant Reardon
"Near the steps on the other side. His mate, Clarke, is
farther round.?
"Good!? said the sergeant. "We can wade across if they
want help, but I think they?ll land on this side.?
They wandered away, and disappeared into the night
Ringer?s teeth started to chatter. "Don?t you feel terribly
lonely, Rube, now they?ve gone??
"A bit,? said Rube, rubbing his hands together. "But I?d
have felt worse if they?d stayed.?
Soon after the tide was full. A wind sprang up ?a gentle
wind, that fluttered the leaves and filled the night with strange
whisperings.


"Something?ll happen soon,? said Rube. And, as if to justify
that belief, their sharp ears picked up the muffled strokes of
oars. These stopped suddenly, and the incoming boat drifted
in with the tide. It was too dark to see anything, but the cove
threw back every sound. As the boys strained their eyes in that
direction they saw the flash of a torch.
"Here they come,? whispered Ringer. "Sit tight. D?you
think they?ll murder us if they see us up here??
"They won?t see us,? said Rube.
After that flash the very atmosphere became tense. All their
senses grew abnormally acute. They heard the little waves
slapping against the side of the boat, and every rustle in the
grass or in the leaves above them. A mopoke gave its mournful
hoot, and somewhere, in the warmth and safety of a house
above them, they heard an infant crying. A mist had started
to drift in from the south, and obscured the stars, making it
darker than ever. Then wakeful Rags gave a short bark, and
Ringer knew that he had sensed something was happening and,
with tail erect and shaggy coat bristling, would be standing on
the edge of the lawn of the house with the green windows,
listening. With the mist came the smell of the sea.
Soon after the torch flash they heard approaching footsteps,
slithery and cautious. A man passed under them, moving warily.
He disappeared round the bend of the track, and all was quiet
again. The torch flashed again, from the beach. A man from
the boat was wading ashore, and someone was wading towards
him. They met, and one man came ashore while the other
returned to the boat.
For fully five minutes there was no movement or sound. The
cove seemed full of listening ears and watching eyes. Then the
silence was broken by a shout and running feet, and the quiet
dip and pull of oars. Round the foreland at the head of the
cove, the boys heard the leisurely chug, chug of a motor-boat
beginning a patrol, obviously with the intention of capturing
the boat or driving it ashore. Sergeant Reardon?s voice, like
the bellow of a great beast, shouted, "There he is!? And back
along the track a man came racing. He halted beneath the


tree, making up his mind whether he should dive down the
bank and hide among the rocks, or take to the water and wade
across to the other side. The boys heard him breathing hard,
his hands against the tree trunk. For a moment they thought
he was going to clamber up, but he turned and raced up the
hillside, dodging behind bushes as he ran. He just got away
in time. The police sergeant and his mate came puffing up,
heard their quarry stumble and fall, and made after him.
Meanwhile the motor-launch, with ever increasing speed,
came dashing up to the boat, and cut it off before it had a
chance to run aground. A voice yelled, "Stay in the boat or
we?ll open fire!? Another said, "0.K.!? And the launch came
alongside.
"Ain?t you glad you came?? said Rube. ''Gosh, what a lot
we?ll be able to stick in the diary after this!?
"It?s great,? said Ringer, feeling more relieved now that the
main rumpus was over. About half an hour later Sergeant
Reardon returned with two constables, and there was a good
deal of talk among the police patrols while they used their
torches, concentrating unpleasantly close to the tree where the
boys had perched themselves.
"Perhaps he dropped the parcel in the water,? one said.
"No, he got ashore with it,? another argued.
"He must have taken delivery of it, then, for he scrambled
up the bank quite leisurely, and only hustled when the sergeant
shouted. I thought he?d take the little track where I was waiting
for him, but he was mighty careful.?
They searched the grass, and every bush and tuft, scrambling
up and down the rocks and boulders, looking diligently in every
crevice. The sergeant slipped down the bank, crashed into a
shrub, and swore roundly at all smugglers and disturbers of the
peace. The fall seemed to knock a great deal of enthusiasm
out of him, although he gamely declared he was not a bit
rattled.
"I think we?ll wait for daylight and continue the search then,?
he said. "It?s a pity we didn?t catch our man, but we?ll learn
who he is from the boat?s crew.?


With this remark they disappeared. Once more peace descended
on the cove. The boys were cold and stiff, and had had enough
of the tree. The problem was to get home without being seen.
"If the police spot us with our faces blacked, they?ll think
we?re in with the smugglers,? said Rube. "As soon as it?s light
we?ll scrub ourselves with sand and have a swim, and get back
home for breakfast.?
At the first twitter of a wakening bird the boys clambered
down. Rube came first and, as his foot reached for a hold on
the lowest limb, something fell to the ground with a dull thud.
He picked it up, and his heart began to thump furiously. It
was a parcel closely bound in wax cloth, about nine inches long,
and six inches wide and deep.
"What is it?? Ringer asked.
"The parcel. The smuggler stuck it in the crotch of that
lowest branch. Come on, let?s run for it! He?ll be back for
it soon.?
They scampered down the bank and across the wet sand. The
mist, as thick as a fog, blanketed the harbour and limited vision
to a few yards. Crossing the cove, they hid the parcel while
they stripped and, with sand and sea water, removed most of the
cork black.
"I think I?d better go home now, Rube,? said Ringer.
"What?ll we do with the parcel??
"Take it with you. This afternoon, put it in a picnic basket
and bring it to the cave. I?ll meet you there about two o?clock.
We?ll hide it in the chest.?
"Supposin? the police catch me with it??
Rube laughed. "You don?t look like a smuggler, Ringer.
We?ll keep it until they offer a reward. Maybe we?ll tell the
police we found it. I don?t just know what we oughter do.
I?m feelin? awfully sleepy.?
Ringer picked up the parcel as cautiously as if he were handling
a bomb. Then he tucked it under his arm and turned for home.
"So long, Rube.?
"So long, Ringer.?


CHAPTER XI
RAGS MAKES A VOYAGE
Rags, like his master, lived a dual life. During the greater part
of the week he was just an ordinary, decent unit of the com-
munity, but at the week-end he abandoned civilization and its
comforts for the hardships of a lonely tropical isle. There he
gave up all pretensions to being a dog, and preferred to be
numbered as one of a small herd of goats. The visits to the
cave, and all the excitement of sharing the adventures of Ringer
and Rube, had drawn him even closer to Jock and Boggles.
In fact the three had become inseparable. They formed them-
selves into an exclusive push, and in the early morning strolled
one behind the other, noses and tails in the air, looking most
superior whenever they passed other pushes on the road.
They always avoided getting mixed up in any brawls. As a
matter of fact Boggles had discovered a quiet walk through the
bush, which brought them to the main entrance of the Zoo,
and along this sylvan path they rarely had any disagreeable
incidents. Boggles was all for peace.
Jock, however, kept up his feud against cats, and harried
every one he met. If he saw a cat in the middle of the road,
it would be a case of "All together, boys!? and the three of them
would charge, continuing the chase until the cat either escaped
or decided to make a stand. As soon as their quarry arched its
back and growled, they would halt and stroll away, as if it had
entirely disappeared.
Boggles never allowed his friends to forget the day he had
been so badly mauled by the cat who had stolen their fragrant
mullet. The mere thought of it drove him into a frenzy, during
which he scattered leaves and dust with his hind legs and looked
really ferocious. Then Jock would comfort him with the assur-
ance that the day of vengeance was not far off. Rags, remem-
bering the great oath Jock had taken, hoped for the best.


As a matter of fact, Jock ultimately developed an amazing
contempt for cats, coming to regard tigers, lions, black panthers,
ordinary panthers, cheetahs, pumas, and everything that could
be classed among the higher order of cats, as more worthy of
his prowess. He used to hear the tigers and lions roar during
the day, about dawn and at feeding-time, and if his two
pals were near by, he would look so fierce that there could be
no mistake about his inwardly declaring that, "One day, my
beauties, I?ll wring your necks!?
On one occasion they made an earnest attempt to scale the
Zoo wall. Finding that beyond them, they looked for a spot
where they might be able to squeeze through. Baffled at the
low Cl entrance, they continued until they reached the main one
near the tram stop. Boggles, tired out, flopped down with a
lolling tongue, ready to call an immediate truce in the war they
had declared on tigers.
Jock, however, was persistent. He had determined to force
his way into the Zoo, but every time he tried to get .through the
turnstile a man in uniform kicked out at him and swore in a loud
voice. After many efforts, one afternoon while a bigger crowd
of visitors than usual was filing through the various turnstiles,
he sneaked in behind a stout old lady carrying a big luncheon
basket. Surprised at his good fortune, he foolishly left cover
to peep round and see what luck Rags and Boggles were having,
when a keeper detached himself from his post and dashed
headlong at him, using very offensive language indeed. But
Jock, soon outpacing him, hid behind a shrub, and the excite-
ment died down.
At every turn there was a notice No Dogs Admitted, which
made the visitors decidedly dog-conscious. "Wonder how he
got in?? they would remark as Jock walked past with his tail
flaunting defiantly. Jock afterwards admitted that all this at-
tention had been rather flattering. To get into the Zoo was
obviously a feat.
Triumphantly Jock made further progress amid a colonnade
of legs.


He's in,? thought pessimistic Boggles. "But only Hitler
knows when he?ll come out. I wouldn?t be surprised if we?ve
seen the last of him. A lion would swallow him as an appetizer.
I?m off!? And with that he rose and prepared to go home.
"I?ll wait for the killing,? thought Rags. ''He?ll go straight
for the tigers first.?
Boggles flopped down. After all, he did not mind listening
to a fight with an eight-foot wall separating him from it.
It did not take long for Jock to find the tigers, his nose
directing him. He saw a crowd of people watching two mag-
nificent specimens who paced about leisurely, looking quite bored.
A low iron fence separated the visitors from a strip of turf
which flanked a wide, deep pit. The tigers were on the other
side. Jock, with a ferocious growl, scaled the fence and got a
clear view of the poor victims of his wrath.
"Ah!? he muttered between his teeth. "So I?ve run you to
earth at last!? With which unnerving remark he immediately
bared his fangs and looked frightful indeed. Candidly, Jock
had not expected a tiger to be such a whopping kind of cat,
but he remembered his oath, and challenged the pair, either
separately or conjointly, to mortal combat. He growled and
barked until his flews were covered with the froth of passion.
He found that the crowd was taking a very lively interest in the
progress of the battle, singing out such things as, "Sooi him!?
Go it, boy!? 'Ten to one on the pup!? "By gad, that dog
has spirit!? Encouraged by these incitements, Jock?s fury had
"axed so high that a leap over the other side of the ditch
seemed, to his admirers, more than a probability.
The crowd was thoroughly enjoying itself. Nothing so in-
triguing had happened in the Zoo for a long time. They cheered,
and rocked with laughter, and Jock responded like the game dog
he was. But at the very height of the excitement a keeper
forced himself to the front, got over the fence, and grabbed
Jock by the collar.
"Got yer, yer little beast!? he muttered, tying his collar with a
bit of yarn. "I?ll learn yer to bark at tigers!? And he jerked
him over the fence and dragged him off.


Rags and Boggles had heard Jock doing his piece, and had
really begun to feel proud of him. Then suddenly the barking
ceased.
"He?s killing the tiger now,? thought Boggles, looking awe-
stricken. "Wish I were there to see it.?
Then the tigers began to roar, smelling the meat that the
keeper was bringing them for their daily meal.
"He?s not settled them yet, quite,? thought Rags, beginning
to fear the worst.
Jock, dragged along, despite protests, had no time to admire
the monkeys, the pelicans, or any other of the Zoo?s attractions.
Hydrangea clumps, masses of pink and red geraniums, the floral
clock, the beds of phlox and petunias, slid past him in one
riband of colour as the keeper moved wrathfully toward the
entrance. When Jock got tangled up with people?s legs, the
keeper relieved the position with a jerk, and Jock continued
his swift passage to the great beyond.
Rags and Boggles witnessed his final ejection. The keeper
untied the yarn from his collar, then held him firmly and gave
him so sound a pat on his rump that Jock lost his balance and
fell yelping in the dust. However, he soon recovered his stance
and his assurance, and joined his friends.
Boggles greeted him with an inquiring look.
"Of course that fool had to interfere and separate me from
the tiger,? Jock sniffed. "All the same, I don?t think that great
hulking cat will live. Now let?s forget about it. It?s a fine day.?
After this passage Jock thought they ought to leave the Zoo
alone for fear of frightening the inmates overmuch, and Boggles
heartily commended his good sense. Rags said he found music
very much more soothing and entertaining, so they arranged to
go to the wharves next morning and hear the mendicants play
their various instruments, and watch travellers getting on and
off the ferries.
It was round about nine o?clock ?the time when the xylophone-
player was at his best, and when bank managers, business execu-
tives, editors of papers, and high-ups of the civil service sauntered


down with tremendous dignity to catch the ferry to town. A
school of fish the size of fourpenny sardines was swimming
round the piles of the wharf, and half a dozen little boys were
busy with hook and line, pulling them up.
Here the three dogs sniffed round, thoroughly enjoying them-
selves. The wharf began to fill with people as the ferry came in.
"Let?s go aboard,? Jock suggested. "We might get past the
ferry hands if we?re slick.? He w r as bursting with spirit after his
Zoo episode.
As soon as the gang plank went down, passengers surged over
it. Boggles got through first, and a little later Jock and Rags
followed. Boggles was immediately chased by one of the crew,
while another attended to Jock, with the result that, after a short
playful romp round the lower deck, they were pushed over the
gang plank back to terra firma with zeal rather than tenderness.
Rags, more of a tactician, sneaked under a seat and lay doggo.
His mates looked round for him, but he was nowhere to be
seen.
'They?ll pitch him overboard for certain,? said Jock. So
they w r ent to the edge of the wharf to watch him swim ashore.
But Rags was well away on his adventure.
He lay under the seat, peering out from behind two shapely
legs in silk stockings and feeling a little drowsy. A bump and
a hasty scramble warned him that something had happened and
that he should bestir himself. To his joy and surprise he found
he w y as at a "wharf again, and ran down the gang plank fully
expecting to see Jock?s alert eyes and Boggles?s moon-face. These
were not to be found, so he followed the crowd through the
gate, ignoring the turnstile. A couple of people made an effort
to grab him, but he eluded them, triumphantly crossed the tram
track at Circular Quay, and made straight for Martin Place.
He was now really beginning to enjoy himself. It was a lovely
day, and he felt sure something important must be on, for such
a big crowd was hustling along to see it. Some men, the high-
ups, strolled leisurely by, others walked more briskly, and a few
typists, running late, hurried along the footpath so spiritedly


that Rags chased after them, barking furiously. Everyone seemed
friendly enough, and no one interfered with him. At Martin
Place the human traffic from the quay seemed to disperse, so
Rags went along to examine the general post office.
He did not like the noise of the road traffic?the deep roar
of the trams, and the staccato contribution to this by numerous
motor-cars that dashed about, perhaps fearful that a lurking
Boggles might spring out of ambush somewhere and bite a piece
out of a tyre. After a stroll down the post-office colonnade,
Rags returned to Pitt Street. From this point he lost all sense
of direction. He went north, south, east, west and finally found
himself near King?s Cross. He was growing very tired and
thirsty now. A shady corner, near the pilaster of a large build-
ing, looked inviting and, ignoring the traffic, Rags sank down
and was soon asleep. Here he rested peacefully until his thirst
became unbearable, when he sallied out to see where he could
quench it.
He reached a hotel where men moved in and out through
swing doors, and Rags followed one in. He saw a crowd there
all talking at once, some laughing, others arguing, and a group
in a corner quarrelling violently. Some pieces of bread and
ends of sausages were thrown about the floor, and Rags dived
for the meat; but he had just swallowed a mouthful when a
man rushed at him with a murderous yell. Rags bolted, and
did not stop running until he came to a quiet little park.
King?s Cross seemed an unfriendly place, so he moved off,
feeling more than ever tired, thirsty, and hungry, too. As the
sun dipped he knew it was dinner-time. He had failed utterly
in all his attempts to find Ringer and his home; but, resolving
to persevere, he started off again. At eight o?clock dusk was
falling, and for the first time he felt really homeless and fright-
ened. Motor-cars, with lights ablaze, charged up and down the
street, bewildering him with their noise and glare. A gate stood
invitingly open. Rags timidly went in. The lawns were neatly
mown, and the flower beds were heavy with perfume. His
head began to feel a bit muzzy as he surveyed the veranda,
wondering if he should take shelter there, when a great red


Irish setter rushed round the corner of the house. Rags flew,
but the setter came up with him on the footpath and opened
a murderous attack. The battle, after scattering the people on
the sidewalk, spilt over on to the road. Thirsty, exhausted, the
little wire-haired terrier knew that his only hope was to find a
hold and hang on. He therefore got his teeth into the setter?s
left ear, and clung to it. In the rough-and-tumble that followed,
he resisted every effort to batter him into releasing his grip.
The fight was holding up the motor traffic. An exasperated
driver, running late, scrambled out of his car with a spanner
and, with one blow, sent the setter howling back to his own
gate. Rags bolted, and the excitement subsided.
His right foreleg hurt him a good deal, blood poured from
a gash above his ear, and the back of his neck felt as if it had
been mangled. He was thirstier than ever now, and his little
paws did not move so briskly.
Night had fallen. Rags wandered down a little side street
and managed to squeeze himself under a heavy wooden gate.
It was a quiet, deserted coalyard and, sinking down near the
front of the shed, Rags closed his eyes.
All through the night he dreamt that he was thirsty, and that
every time he got near to a clear, sparkling pool of water
someone chased him away. At dawn a man came into the yard,
saw him sleeping there and heaved a lump of coal at him.
Rags crawled under the gate once more, as pieces of coal
crashed about him. Memories of the red setter spurred him to
move as far away from this neighbourhood as possible. The
streets, except for milkmen, were practically deserted. At home,
he would just be starting off with Jock and Boggles on a sort
of aldermanic tour of the municipality.
A woman in a little suburban shopping centre, through which
he passed, was busy cleaning some steps, and slushed them with
a bucket of water. As it ran over the pavement, Rags eagerly
licked up what he could, but the woman threw the bucket at
him and he ran for his life.
Poor Rags was becoming delirious now. The need for a
drink drove him from house to house. In the porch of one


backyard he discovered a billy half full of milk, with the plate
over the top of it. Rags pushed the plate off, and was settling
down to a good drink when the mistress of the house, having
heard the plate smash, rushed out and made a violent kick at
him.
"You dhirty, skulking baste!? she shouted. "I?ll tache yer
to thave me milk!? She chased Rags down the street, and a
couple of boys rushed out of a garden and pelted him with
stones.
By midday he felt he could not go much farther. This was
a world to which he was entirely unaccustomed. People not
only did not want him, but sought every opportunity of being
cruel to him. He was about to throw himself down anywhere
when he suddenly sighted the sea. He was overlooking Bondi.
Seeing the water cheered him immensely. Once near it, he
knew he could not be far from home. Only a little way, per-
haps, and there would be the cove, the wooded hillsides, and?
last and most important ?the cave in the tropical isle, and
Ringer and Rube. Right across the strip of water he would see
his home.
It took him a long time to stagger down to the beach. He
was now so ill that he was losing all sense of time and space.
Several times he escaped death only by a hair?s breadth, as he
crossed the esplanade, for he could not be bothered dodging
motor-cars. Everything had become dull and hazy, his body
was racked with pain, and the blood seemed to boil in his veins.
It was good to sink down at last in the soft, yellow sand at
the foot of the ramp. It had needed a supreme effort to struggle
down the flight of stone steps to reach it. The beat and rustle
of the breaking surf, the glad shouts of men, women and child-
ren, did not disturb him. He wanted only to sleep and sleep
until Ringer came and took him up in his arms.
A few people saw him huddled up, and wondered why he
did not move or waken when they spoke to him. One girl said
she thought he was ill, another wondered if he were lost, but
none thought he needed a drink or a mouthful of food. The


surf was running well, with the chance that a southerly might
blow up at any moment and make it too cold for swimming,
so no one wasted time on a sleeping wire-haired terrier.
The southerly blew up about nine o?clock. Rags shivered
with the cold, and opened his tired eyes. He heard distant
voices upon the esplanade, and the sky was full of great shining
stars. He closed his eyes again.


CHAPTER XII
THE SEARCH
About midday after the smuggler incident, Ringer?s father
came home unexpectedly. He found his son in a deep sleep,
and immediately roused him to inquire if he were ill. Ringer
rubbed his eyes, wondering if it was a policeman, the smuggler,
or the schoolmaster standing beside his bed. Recognizing his
father, he quickly collected his senses.
"I was havin? a little rest, dad, and muster dozed off. Is
mum back, too??
"No, I had to hurry back on some urgent business. You?d
better tidy yourself up, son. We?ll have lunch soon.?
Brightening up after a wash Ringer grew anxious about the
parcel. He had stuffed it into a dark and almost inaccessible
spot in the cellar, where his father was not likely to discover it.
In fact, he was sure it would be safe from the prying eyes of
everyone in the world except Mr Basil Pickering.
Mr Ringrow was in a great hurry to return to town, and his
offspring was just as impatient to see him get there. During
lunch, Ringer found the inevitable cross-examination particu-
larly trying, and was nervous lest the unusual event of his having
been found asleep during the day should lead his father to
press home any awkward questions. This did not happen, how-
ever ; and Flora, to his surprise and relief, ignored him altogether.
After lunch, she intimated that she was going to a symphony
concert. Ringer could scarcely believe his good fortune. As
soon as she had gone he packed a wicker hand basket with a
few odds and ends of food which he considered would not be
missed, and pushed the parcel well underneath. Then he made
a wary trip through the bush in the direction of the cave.
He found Rube there, sitting on top of the carved Chinese
chest and looking very drowsy. "Did you bring it?? he asked,
brightening up.


"Yes,? said Ringer after a cautious glance round. He sat
beside Rube and unearthed the parcel.
"Anyone see you coming here?? asked Rube.
"Just a woman with three or four kids, out for a walk along
the bush track.?
"You didn?t make a guilty start or do anything of that kind
and give yourself away, did you, Ringer ? ?
"No. I looked like I was going to a Sunday-school picnic,
Ringer replied.
"Wonder what?s in it?? said Rube, smelling the parcel.
"Opium, for sure. I think it?s pretty poisonous stuff. I
wouldn?t smell it too hard if I was you, Rube.?
"Best thing is to leave the parcel as it is till we hear they?re
offering a reward. They wouldn?t pay so much if they thought
we?d monkeyed about with it.?
So they placed it in the Chinese chest, and heaped a lot of
rubbish on top of it. During this process the diary was
excavated.
"Better take that home with you, Ringer,? Rube suggested,
"till this business has cleared up. We won?t be adding to it
till after the holidays.?
The Chinese chest was then locked, and Rube took charge of
the key. Lowering their voices they reviewed their adventures
of the night.
"D?you think you could recognize the crook who took that
stuff from the smugglers?? Ringer asked.
"No,? said Rube. "I got a good idea of his height and
build, but it was too dark to see his face.?
"He muster been an old hand at smugglin?. It was pretty
smart of him to push the parcel into the fork of the tree with
the police right on his heels.?
"He didn?t think we were there, did he, Ringer? I?d like
to have seen his face when he came back for that parcel, wouldn?t
you ??
"Yes. I bet his chin hit his chest,? said Ringer, and both
laughed so much that they had a job pulling themselves up.


"I was in the town this mornin?,? said Rube, "buyin? meself
a coupia hot dogs. You know Wung Li, who?s got the fruit
shop almost next door to the ham-and-beef ??
Ringer nodded.
"Well, I saw Sergeant Reardon there.?
"Ah, so that old Chinese scamp is mixed up with the
smugglin?!?
'"He might be. They say Chinamen are always smokin? it
Don?t know what they see in it.?
" Did you see Wung Li??
" Yes. He was jumpin? about on the sidewalk like a scalded
cat, and gabblin? away as hard as he could. I didn?t like to go
too close to the sergeant, but I asked a bloke what all the row
was about, and he said someone had broken into Wung Li?s
shop and stolen some money and a box.?
That?s just a blind,? said Ringer, "to throw the police off the
scent. Perhaps,? he continued as if inspired, "the police ratted
his joint themselves, lookin? for the opium.?
"By gee!? said Rube. ?1 never thought of that.?
A little later they scrambled up into the look-out and swung
their feet, enjoying the cool breeze that had blown up. The
tide was in, and on the beach side of the shark net swarms of
children, with their grown-up relations, paddled and swam.
They floated about on rubber seahorses, swordfish, and other
monsters of the deep. Canoes and all sorts of improvised rafts
wove their way through the happy throng, whose bright and
varied swimming costumes splashed the water with colour. A
couple of fourteen-footer sailing boats tacked in the narrow arm
of the sea, straight in front of them.
They could see the bush track here and there as it wriggled
along the foreshore, and heard the shouts and laughter of happy
youngsters on their way to enjoy a swim. Presently Rube saw
a man in blue, standing almost below them in a little clearing,
watching the road.
He stood behind some furze, perfectly motionless, as if on
the look-out for somebody. Fascinated, the boys watched him,
themselves rigid and silent. For over an hour the policeman


did not change position, and then he dropped down to the track
and disappeared towards Athol Bay.
"They haven?t caught him yet,? said Ringer with bated breath.
''They?ll never let up till they do,? said Rube. "I?d hate to
do anything really wrong. The police always get you in the
end.?
"D?you think we oughter bury that parcel, Rube??
' No. It might spoil with the rain, or an animal might dig
it up. We?ll keep it in the chest, where it?s safe. No one?ll
ever discover the cave. When the police offer a reward, we?ll
hand it over.?
Ringer packed the precious diary in the basket, and with great
stealth they crawled through the lantana and reached the bush
track farther along.
In a moist little bend where the sun did not penetrate, Rube
examined some big footprints recently made. "Reardon?s been
on the prowl, too,? he said.
Now they looked straight down on the crowd of people in
the water. The tide was beginning to run out, and several
dogs chased one another, barking furiously.
Rube came to a halt. "Where?s Rags? D?you know, I didn?t
miss him or the other two till just now.?
Up to no good!? said Ringer. "Bet he?s been down Mosman
Bay listenin? to the Bohemian band. I never saw such a dog
for music. When Flora plays the piano he sits in the middle of
the floor lookin? as if he?s in a trance.?
Hope he s not lost,? said Rube. "See you to-morrow, Ringer.
I?ll be in bed early. Say, did your school report come in yet??
"I don?t think so,? said Ringer, feeling that the last dregs of
happiness had been emptied out of life.
Ringer dragged his feet up the hillside. He had suddenly
become very tired and depressed. He knew that Aunt Agatha
must have got Rube?s report and that he had done well, but
Rube would not mention or skite about it. If the postman
delivered his report this afternoon, his father would make the
usual scene, taking particular advantage of his mother?s absence.


Perhaps he was not giving his dad a fair deal. He did waste a
lot of time fooling about; but he was awfully happy, and it did
seem hard that with all the good things life provided, especially
such a friend as Rube, he should have to pore over books, learn-
ing a lot of stuff that would not be an atom of good to him.
He felt really sorry for himself.
He wished his mother had come back with dad. Funny how
a bloke missed his mum. Then, he had expected Mary Lou to
be back for Christmas. If she had already returned home, she
must definitely be trying to avoid him.
Now he was dose to the back fence, and gave the shrill
whistle that always brought Rags out of the back gate like a
bolt. But there came no sight or sound of that tousled body
scampering through the grass and undergrowth, and whining
with joy. Ringer?s heart gave a thump and stood still. A
dreadful premonition gripped him. Rags was lost.
He ran into the house whistling and calling, and almost sick
with worry. He hastily dropped the diary into a bottom drawer,
and shot up the steps to the street level. There he saw Boggles
and Jock sprawled on the pavement under the shade of a red gum.
They ran up to him, wagging their tails, and followed him to the
Mosman wharf. The musicians had gone home, but at the book-
stall he was told that Rags had not been round that day. Every-
body seemed to know Rags.
A ferry boat was just about to leave for the Musgrave Street
wharf, so Ringer jumped aboard. Rags divided his time fairly
equally between the two wharves, preferring Mosman when the
Bohemian band was performing. But no one seemed to have
seen Rags that afternoon, although Ringer learnt that he had
visited the wharf with two other dogs around about nine o?clock.
"He might have run on to the ferry boat and been carried
across,? the lady at the bookstall suggested. 111 make inquiries.
Sometimes the boat hands bring the dogs back, if they manage
to catch them.?
Of course a hundred and one things might have happened
to poor old Rags, thought Ringer as he walked up the hill.


tears very nearly welling over. Someone may have stolen him,
or he may have been trapped in a garden with a swinging gate,
or ?worst of all?a car may have injured or run over him.
Ringer broke into a trot, sharply searching the roadway from
side to side as he went up first one street and then another.
Near the police station he met Sergeant Reardon, looking tired
and irritable, his boots and the ends of his trousers plastered
with mud, anticipating a cup of tea and a quiet rest. He had
had a busy day.
"Did you see my dog anywhere, sir?a rough-haired terrier??
Reardon stopped. The anxious face and tearful voice aroused
his ready sympathy. "No, sonny, although I?ve seen a lot of
dogs to-day. What was he like exactly??
Ringer described him.
Reardon caught his lower lip between thumb and forefinger,
and shook his head. "He?ll turn up, never fear!? said the kindly
sergeant. "Dogs are like boys. They get up to mischief now
and again and sometimes play truant. However, I?ll have in-
quiries made. If I do see or hear about him I?ll give you a
ring. What?s your address and telephone number??
Ringer felt happier after leaving the sergeant. He did not
know that policemen were so kindly and tender-hearted. Why
did people always make boys afraid of the men in blue?
After scouring the neighbourhood, Ringer called on Rube and
told him what had happened.
"If I don?t hear from you that he?s found. I?ll search for him
after dinner, Ringer. You?ll have to advertise that he?s lost in
the papers, and tell the police.?
"I?ve told Sergeant Reardon. I met him just now.?
"Gosh!? said Rube. "You spoke to the sergeant? You
weren?t scared, were you, Ringer??
"No. I don?t think he knew it was you and me that belted
a stone through the police-station window last year. He?s a
great bloke. He?ll find Rags, I bet?if he?s still running around.?
"Of course he?s running around. Did you hear the latest
about Wung Li??
Ringer shook his head.


"He went to a wedding at the Haymarket where all the
Chinese live, and while he was away some thieves broke into his
shop, ratted the till and stole a lot of curios. He had some
valuable things in a Chinese carved chest, and they got away
with that, too.?
I bet it?s something like the one we?ve got in the cave,? said
Ringer proudly. "Now I?ll buzz off. Dad?ll be home by now.
Cheerio, Rube.?
So long, Ringer. I?ll find Rags, so don?t w r orry about him.?
Mr Ringrow was seated in the lounge, looking very severe
as he stared at Ringer?s school report, which he had just ex-
tracted from the envelope. Flora, who was cooking the dinner,
gave her brother a warning look, and he knew he could anticipate
the worst. But he wasn?t in the mood to stand up to a row
just then.
Quietly he sneaked into his room, but his father called to him
in such honeyed tones that Ringer knew he was in for it.
Congratulations, Arthur!? said Mr Ringrow, as his son came
into the room. "You can guess what I hold in my hand. It?s
your school report. Please sit down.?
With a crab-like movement Ringer gently slid into a chair.
You appear, from this report, to have maintained your repu-
tation as a scholar, Arthur. In every subject but English your
marks bring the sweat of despair to my brow. And here are
the headmaster?s comments: 'Arthur is lazy, careless, and heed-
less. His head is always in the clouds. Makes no effort to use
his brain. Do you think he has done you full justice, my boy??
"He?s a bit hard,? said Ringer, rebelliously.
As usual his fault, not yours. What, precisely, do you see
when your head is in the clouds, Arthur??
Ringer looked away, his lips set and grim.
"Won?t you answer me??
Ringer salt bolt upright. "What can I say??
"Nothing that would convince me that you?re not a lazy,
indolent scamp, determined to disgrace your mother and me.
You want a lesson?one that you?ll not forget. I haven?t given


you a good hiding for some time, but I?m going to hand you
out one now.?
Ringer faced his father. "I?m willing to take it, but not
to-day?not till I find Rags.?
"What?s up with Rags?? his dad asked, concern in his voice.
"He?s lost. No one?s seen him since nine o?clock this morn-
ing. I?ve searched for him everywhere ?? And poor Ringer
broke down.
His father put his arm round his shoulder. Don t cry, son.
He may be wagging it. In any case we 11 soon find him. Just
where have you looked??
Mr Ringrow kept the telephone busy until dinner-time. There
were calls to the ferry company, to police stations, to R.S.P.CA.
centres, to dog homes, to wherever it was possible for a wander-
ing dog to be traced. Then they sat down to their meal. But
no one seemed to have much appetite, and as soon as it was
over, Mr Ringrow took charge of the campaign to find Rags.
The school report was forgotten.
"I?ll go to town and search round Circular Quay,? he said.
"The little scamp is bound to come back there and try to get
aboard a ferry boat, but of course he might scramble on a wrong
one and find himself at Manly or Watson?s Bay. You, Arthur,
keep cruising round the neighbourhood. Flora, you stay at home
for any phone messages. To-morrow, when the advertisements
appear, we?ll soon find out where the silly little blighter has
-wandered to.?
At nine o?clock Ringer, utterly hopeless, dragged his tired
feet homeward. Both he and Rube had covered a lot of ground
and made numerous inquiries, but the mystery of Rags?s dis-
appearance merely deepened.
"If you don?t hear about him to-morrow,? said Rube, "I?m
goin? over to town. Somehow I got a hunch we?re goin? to find
him at Coogec or Bondi or some of those beaches. If he got
bogged in the city, he?d make for the beaches and the sea for
sure.?
With a sad heart, Ringer parted from his pal. He was tired
and so unhappy that he could not trust himself to speak.


Not far from his home, a gate opened and a girl came out,
looked towards him, and moved forward. Ringer did not
recognize her until he looked right into her great shiny eyes.
Ringer, she said shyly, almost breathless, I waited up to
see you. I only came back to-day.?
She held out her right hand a little timidly, and Ringer
caught it. he tried to speak, but his lips trembled and no
v. ords came. The tears welled over and ran down his cheeks.
"Why, you?re crying, Ringer. What?s the matter?? she asked
with tender concern.
" I ? er ~? Ringer sobbed. "I?er?lost me dog, Mary Lou.?


CHAPTER XIII
CHARACTERS CLEARED
Morning dawned, and long before the usual household time of
rising, Ringer, after a restless feverish night, hastily dressed him-
self and started off on another search. He had heard many
stories of the sufferings of lost dogs, and he feared his pet had
undergone all of them. At a cross street he heard a cheerful
whistle, and saw Rube with a small can of milk emerging from
a gate.
"Any luck?? Rube shouted.
"No. Have you sighted him??
"No. But I?m keeping my eyes skinned.?
"Are you delivering milk?? Ringer asked, round-eyed with
amazement.
?1 often do this to earn a few bob, Ringer. I?ll be through
about seven o?clock, and then I?ll join you in the search.?
He ducked into the next gate, and Ringer went straight on.
The streets seemed deserted, except for milk carts and dogs.
Ringer worked up Bradley?s Head Road to the Zoo, whistling
as he went, but returned home for breakfast too disappointed for
speech.
His father was busy on the telephone. "No luck yet, Arthur,?
he said cheerfully. "But don?t lose heart. The advertisements?ll
bring him to light.?
"You didn?t hear anything about him in town, did you, dad??
"No, son. I motored over the best part of the city up till
midnight. Anyway, I?m still full of hope.?
Despite this effort at brightness, a deep gloom had settled
over the Ringrow household. Flora walked about almost on
tiptoe, and laid the table silently instead of rattling the cutlery
and rapping the plates down. Moveover, her eyes were red.
"I only hope the poor little blighter is getting some food,?
dad said, whereupon Flora wailed,


"Don?t suggest such things, dad. I can?t stand it.?
There were no phone calls up to the time Mr Ringrow left.
Ringer returned for lunch, weary and hopeless. At six o?clock
that evening the position was unchanged.
"I?ve done everything I can think of,? said dad. ??Somehow
I don t think anything serious has happened, but I?m beginning
to believe someone?s stolen him and tied him up. If he slip's
his collar, you can bet he?ll run straight home.?
Rube and Ringer had another chase round after dinner, but
without success.
Rube placed his arm round his pal?s neck as he bade him good
night. D you know what I m goin? to do to-morrow mornin?
first thing? I m not on the milk job. I?ll move straight over to
town and take the tram to Coogee. Then I?ll look Bondi over.?
Think its much use, Rube?? Ringer asked tearfully.
Of course it is. We gotter keep tryin? and workin?. Guess
if Rags was fightin his way to find us he?d never quit so whv
should we?? M 7
He went off home through the dark bush whistling "Tipper-
ary,? and Ringer, almost too weary to take another step, went
indoors and slumped into bed.
At daybreak Ringer was on the job again. Just before break-
fast, while he was still out, Sergeant Reardon knocked at the
front door.
Mr Ringrow admitted him. "Come in, sergeant. What?s
happened? Any news of the dog??
I w r ish that w r as all I d come to see you about,? said the
sergeant in his gruff, deep voice. "No, there?s no word of the
dog. He sat down in an armchair and looked professionally
serious.
Flora, a little alarmed, peeped round the door and then scur-
ried into the kitchen.
What s up? Mr Ringrow asked. "You?re looking gloomy.?
It s about your son. Jffe s been going about with a young
scamp, Rube Hill, for some time. The schoolmaster, Brad-
tells me he?s a real bad egg. It looks, now, as if he?s in a
spot of trouble.?


"I think the boy?s a decent enough chap, although not quite
in Arthur?s class.?
?They?re inseparable, them two,? said the sergeant. ?For some
months they?ve been seen a lot together near the cove.? Here
the sergeant gave an important cough. "We?ve been engaged
on an opium-smuggling case for some time, and two nights ago
we set a trap. Someone from this end of the cove has been
receiving the parcel.?
Mr Ringrow related what he had seen of suspicious movements
in the cove on dark nights.
?We had taken our positions,? resumed the sergeant, ?when
the boat came ashore. Someone met it, and gained the track
round the foreshore, but bolted as we closed in. The police
patrol boat caught the smugglers, but they won?t confess who re-
ceived the parcel of opium. The scoundrel came from the direction
of the little shack at the top of the cove, where Rube Hill lives.?
?You don?t think it?s Rube, surely??
?I don?t know for sure. The chap we chased ran like a hare
straight up the slope. We believe he doubled on his tracks and
hid the parcel somewhere in the bush. Constable Dawes, a
Mosman lad, has been hunting for it ever since. Late yesterday
evening he made a find.?
?Well??
?He crawled through a dense clump of lantana scrub and
found a small natural cave?the sort of place boys would fre-
quent. Perhaps you heard that the Chinese fruiterer, Wung Li,
had his shop burgled the other night? Some money, curios,
and a quaint carved Chinese chest w'ere stolen. In that cave
Dawes found the Chinese chest.?
I don?t believe young Rube would do a thing like that.?
?But wait. What do you think we found inside the chest,
with a lot of rubbish that only boys would hoard up ? The
missing parcel of opium.?
What else was in the cave, and inside the chest?? asked
Mr Ringrow, now thoroughly impressed.
Oh, an old parrot?s cage w r ith a picture of a parrot hung


from the top. Looks to me as if the boys were playing Robinson
Crusoe.?
"More than likely. However, the opium looks bad. You
feel certain it was Rube??
"Moderately certain.?
"Then why not arrest him??
"I went down early this morning to do that selfsame thing.
His aunt was just leaving for town. She said Rube must have
left very early, and that she didn?t know where he was.?
"I expect he?ll be back soon ?and I think you?ll find he?s
helping my boy look for the dog.?
"I don?t -want to see your boy mixed up in this affair, but
I?ll have to question him if Rube doesn?t turn up to-day. In
the meantime, don?t mention I called. Both boys may be quite
innocent.? With an air of tremendous importance and authority,
Sergeant Reardon bowed himself out.
Ringer did not return home until long after his father had
gone to the office. Flora had been told not to mention the
sergeant?s visit.
"Any word?? he inquired as he pulled up his chair to the
breakfast table.
Flora shook her head.
"I?ve given up hope,? said Ringer, and, dropping his head
on his arms, he wept unrestrainedly.
"I don?t think I?d tramp about much more, Arthur dear,?
said his sister, placing her arm around him. "You?re just mak-
ing yourself ill and doing no good. Better be patient now, and
wait. We?ve all done our best.?
She was positively aching to ask Ringer a few questions about
the cave. He was a mischievous and careless brat of a boy, but
she felt sure he would not be persuaded to do anything seriously
wrong. Mother always declared that he chose his friends with
discrimination; and, indeed, he had never been one to belong
to any sort of push or gang.
Dad -was late coming home for dinner, and seemed bad-
tempered. Sergeant Reardon?s visit had weighed on his mind


all day. He did not once refer to Rags during dinner. After-
wards he smoked a pipe and read the evening paper. Eventually
he called Ringer to him.
"I think we?ll have to think of someone else besides poor
Rags now, Arthur. Yourself, for instance. Your school report
has given me a bad shake-up. However, I?ve discussed that.
We must now think of what is to happen when you go back to
school again.?
"I?m going to work hard and make up for lost time, dad,?
said Ringer enthusiastically.
"Well said! However, the most important thing is to re-
adjust yourself and alter your environment. For instance, if you
have a friend or friends who take up too much of your time and
thought, just give them up. Let?s take Rube Hill, to begin
with.?
?Oh, he?s all right, dad. I wish I were as good a scholar
as he is.?
''Perhaps so. But he?s not in your social class, Arthur. Tell
me, is he an entirely honest sort of boy??
"Of course he is,? said Ringer indignantly. "Rube would
never do a mean or rotten thing.?
"What do you two chaps do to amuse yourselves??
"We fish and swim, and things like that, dad.?
You?re very fond of Rube, aren?t you??
"Yes, dad. He?s a wonderful chap.?
Just then the bell rang. Mr Ringrow went to the door.
Sergeant Reardon stood in the porch, and behind him a boy
carrying a dog. "Sorry to disturb you again, Mr Ringrow. I
picked Rube up in the street and brought him along with me.
He found your dog.?
"Come in, sergeant, and you too, Rube,? said Mr Ringrow
as he looked at poor Rags, lying limp and still, and shook his
head.
Rube entered, looking puzzled and somewhat nervous. Ser-
geant Reardon had been waiting on the wharf, and immediately
placed his hand on his shoulder and asked him where he was
going. Rube had explained.


"I?ll go up with you to the Ringrows, and then you?ll accom-
pany me to the police station, me boy. I?ve got a little bone to
pick with you.??
At the sight of Rags lying weak and helpless in Rube?s arms,
Ringer gave a little cry. "He ain?t dead, is he, Rube??
"Just about. I found him in Bondi, at the foot of the ramp.
I don?t think he?d had food or drink since he was lost. I gave
him a little milk and brought him home.?
Rube laid Rags on the hearth-rug, but the little terrier res-
ponded neither to words nor to caresses. Mr Ringrow, on the
telephone, hastily summoned a vet.
"Try him with some warm milk and a bit of brandy,? said
practical Rube, "and keep him warm with a hot-water bottle.
He?ll be right in a day or two.?
Rube?s face and legs were dust-covered. His hair was wind-
blown and untidy. He looked hungry and tired, but no one
thought of asking him if he wanted anything to eat. Attention
was concentrated on the dog.
"I?m very gratified for what you?ve done, Rube,? said Mr
Ringrow. "Come round to-morrow and see how the dog is.?
"Well,? said the police sergeant, "I?m afraid I?ll have to take
Rube away. There?s a lot we?ve got to talk about.? He again
placed a hand on Rube?s shoulder, and they went out into the
darkness.
"So long, Rube,? said Ringer.
"So long, Ringer,? said Rube, rather sadly. He looked some-
what bewildered, but his chin was still up.
"What?s the matter with Rube?? Ringer asked nervously,
when their footsteps died away.
"He?s got himself into some trouble, I expect. Listen, son,
do you know anything about a carved Chinese chest that belonged
to the Chinese fruiterer, Wung Li??
Ringer hesitated. He looked at Flora, attending to poor Rags,
who was showing only some slight degree of animation. "Yes.
Rube told me someone had stolen it.?
"You and Rube had a little cave somewhere near the cove, 1
believe??


"Why?yes, dad. We found it at the back of some lantana
scrub. Rube and I have used it for a long time. We go there
every Saturday, and play at being Robinson Crusoe.?
I see,? said Mr Ringrow, with a faint smile. ' Did you
have that Chinaman?s chest in it??
"No?not his chest. The white-ant man threw out mum?s
old glory-box?don?t you remember??and I asked her if I
could have it. We took it to the cave. We had a lot of rubbish
in it. Rube found an old parrot?s cage,? he ran on excitedly,
" and we hung the picture of a parrot in it. We couldn?t trap
a real parrot, you see.?
Dad laughed. " You?re a pair of nuts. But now,? he added
more seriously, "do you know anything about a parcel inside that
chest??
So Ringer told his father the full story of their experience
with the smugglers, whereupon dad did a strange thing. He
put his arms round Ringer and gave him a good hug.
We?re going straight up in the car to the police station, my
son. Sergeant Reardon suspects Rube of stealing the Chinese
chest and being one of the opium-smugglers.?
Guess Rube II feel mighty thrilled when he hears that, dad.
We?ve got a diary, and we wrote something about that Chinese
chest the day we brought it to the cave. Shall I bring that as
evidence??
"'Yes. And now let?s hurry along and get Rube out of
trouble.?
Rube was in the middle of a severe cross-examination?"going
through the third degree,? as he afterwards described it?when
Ringer and his father came in. But in half an hour?s time after
that, the whole atmosphere changed. Extracts from the diary
were being read, and the sergeant laughed until he was helpless.
You re a pair of comics, all right,? he said. "And what?s
more, you ve got a lot of grit. I think we?ll soon find out who
left the parcel in the crotch of that tree. I?m going to see that
both of you are rewarded.?
Mr Ringrow drove Rube home and explained to his aunt
what had detained him, and then took him back for supper.


By this time Rags had been attended to by the vet, and was
actually able to wag his tail a little.
At supper, dad was like a schoolboy himself. He told Rube
and the family some of the tricks he used to get up to, and by
the time he had finished relating his boyish adventures, Ringer
began to think he was a human being after all.
It was eleven o?clock before Rube left to go home, with an
affectionate pat on the head from Mr Ringrow.
Ringer believed that that was the happiest evening he had
ever spent.


CHAPTER XIV
GOOD-BYE TO THE TROPICAL ISLE
About the second week in the new year, Ringer?s mother came
home. Everyone was glad to see her, and none more so than
her son. He now was perfectly happy. Rags had completely
recovered, and resumed his morning strolls with Boggles and
Jock. It seemed probable that, in some w r ay, he had imparted
to his cobbers the terrible experiences that followed his journey
in a ferry boat, because they were rarely seen on the wharf
again. As a matter of fact, Ringer?s father had handed a good
tip to the wharf attendant to drive Rags away whenever he saw
him there, and if necessary to use a switch; and maybe he carried
out these instructions with some zeal, for Rags lost all interest
in ferry boats.
Rube was a welcome guest, and a great favourite with dad.
Sergeant Reardon had given the episode with the smugglers a
great deal of publicity. A Sunday paper first obtained par-
ticulars, and sent out a reporter to interview the boys. He
brought a photographer with him, who took a snap of the cave,
and also of the tree where the smuggler hid the parcel. Of
course, during his interview, the reporter learnt all about the
tropical isle and the diary. The resulting article caused a tre-
mendous sensation, and included a statement made by the police
sergeant, who went so far as to say that both boys deserved the
Victoria Cross. Its illustrations showed Ringer and Rube seated
on the look-out, and a page of the diary in Ringer?s hand-
writing.
A day or two after the article was published, the police
arrested the man who had received the parcel, and also the
thieves who burgled the shop of the kindly and estimable Wung
Li.
When Rube and Ringer took Mr Ringrow to see the cave, he
sat in it and smoked his pipe, and looked as happy as a big kid.


He even climbed the tree and swung his legs from the look-out,
and told the boys some really startling stories of adventure and
piracy. He dived into the pocket of his Norfolk jacket and
produced a pound of the best chocolates, and the three of them
finished the lot while he talked. Later, when dad and the boys
had cleared a track to it, mum and Flora visited the cave, and
Ringer pointed out the exact spot where the Chinese chest used
tc stand.
The story in the Sunday paper had made Rube and Ringer
famous. It also made the boys in the neighbourhood, and
especially those in their class at school, extremely jealous. Mary
Lou, on one memorable occasion, declared to Ringer that she
was very proud of him, to which he, like a gallant gentleman,
replied, "And I?m very proud of you, Mary Lou.?
Aunt Agatha also found herself famous. After the newspaper
article appeared, swarms of people visited the cave and then
came along to stare at her humble cottage. Then, too, since Miss
Marsden?s visit events moved fast, and a big change came into
Rube?s life and hers.
One Sunday afternoon?happily, Rube was about to go up
to the Ringrows for tea and was well dressed?Aunt Agatha
heard steps up the rough, sloping path. Looking through the
window she recognized Miss Marsden, accompanied by a man
about thirty years old, of medium height and with a pleasant
smile. Aunt Agatha gave him a quick glance, noticed that his
left eyelid had the same droop as Rube?s, and knew that the
moment she had dreaded for so long had come.
Miss Marsden?s brother had landed from America the pre-
vious day. Nothing had ever gone just as he had hoped it
would. Despite Rube?s stories of his father?s stirring and ad-
venturous life, it must be admitted that his career had been
rather commonplace. His mind had been divided between
farming and journalism and, after many ventures equally un-
successful and unspectacular, he had finally found his feet by
joining the staff of an important live-stock journal in New York.
After his long silence he had been ashamed to w r rite to his
family, and had never worried about his son, feeling sure his


mother would see that he was not neglected. It was strange
that his first letter to his mother after nearly eight years should
have been answered by one announcing his father?s death, and
advising him to come home and take charge of the family
property.
Rube beamed as he greeted Miss Marsden.
With an arm around him, she faced her brother and asked,
"Who do you think I?ve brought to see you, Rube??
For a moment the boy gazed earnestly at the stranger, then
took an impulsive step towards him. "Dad!? he cried.
The man came forward with a smile, his eyes moist and
shining. He held out his hands which Rube grasped eagerly.
"My son!? he exclaimed, and his lips trembled.
Then Aunt Agatha and Aunt Dorothy began a conversation
in which each spoke before the other had time to finish what
she had set out to say. Everyone seemed happy, and in the
swirl of talking Rube and his father found little opportunity
to say much to each other. In the midst of it Ringer and
his dad called to find out why Rube had not come up for tea.
Then came another surprise. Mr Ringrow recognized Miss
Marsden as an old friend, and insisted that all of them should
come over at once and have tea. Aunt Agatha straightway
changed into her black dress, wore the red necklace from Fiji,
and bore herself with such dignity during the evening that she
felt sure she conformed to the standard of the Duchess of
Daventry at least.
There were several things about his father that did not quite
square with Rube?s conception of him. Obviously he was not
of the adventurous type; in fact, one could style him a shy,
retiring man. But in other respects he came right up to his son?s
expectations. He was kindly, courteous, and affectionate. Per-
haps, Rube thought, he needed pepping up a bit, and felt certain
that he himself could help considerably there.
\ou see, it s like this, Ringer, he explained. "I just wanted
my pop to do all the things that I?m going to do some day.
That stands for you, too. We?re not only goin? to think, but
,we re goin to do things. Walter Raleigh dreamt of the things


that made him famous. I?ll keep pop on the station to ride
horses and look after the sheep, but some day you and I, Ringer,
will hit the trail together?and by heck, we?ll make the sparks
fly!?
Solemnly Ringer handed the diary of the tropical isle over
to Rube who, he declared, would complete it best. In due time
it may, perhaps, be published, and will make a good story for
sure.
Came the sad day when Aunt Agatha and Rube closed the
door of the old shack, and stood at the front gate to look back
upon it for the last time. It was like closing a book after
reading the final page, and pausing to savour the emotions it
had stirred. Rube was sure he would never be so happy again,
even though he knew Ringer would always be his pal, and
that they would probably continue their education together as
boarders in the same college.
Aunt Agatha said farewell to all her colleagues, who kept
city offices clean and tidy, with sorrow, yet also with a sense of
pride. Her circumstances had undergone a happy change. There
would be no anxiety about the future now. She was going to
live with the Marsden family for good.
It was a lovely sparkling day when they drove off to Orange,
over the beautiful Blue Mountains, down through the Victoria
Pass towards the Bathurst plains. Rube?s father was at the
wheel and Aunt Agatha sat next to him, while Rube snuggled
beside his aunt in the back seat, too happy and excited even for
speech. At Bathurst they stopped for lunch, and then John
Marsden bought a large bunch of red roses, and he and his son
drove back to the old churchyard where Rube?s "little mum?
had slept peacefully through many summer days and nights.
Bare-headed, they stood before a grave with a simple little
headstone that bore the name Susan. The sky was full of fleeing
clouds, but the sun peeped out and chased the shadows across
the fields. The air was heavy with perfume, and a bird on a
nearby hawthorn bush trilled as though its throat would burst.
Rube?s father reverently laid the roses on the grave, and Rube
noticed that his eyes had filled with tears.


O M
"Dad,? he murmured, his hand stealing sympathetically into
his, 'Tve never really felt she was dead. Was she very beauti-
ful? She?s always been beautiful to me.?
"Your mother was very sw r eet and good, and no one ever
took her place in my heart.? He placed his arm around the
boy?s shoulder. "Tve neglected you so far, son, but I swear
I shall devote the rest of my life to your happiness.?
And now the time has come to say:
"So long, Ringer! So long, Rube!?
THE END


(p




'
-
&
