

The Fisherman
JOHN CAMERON.


SPECTACLES versus BLINDNESS.
A. P. GREENFIELD,
OCULISTS’ OPTICIAN,
George i Street, * Brisbane,
OPPOSITE THE TREASURY.
CALL -A-HSTID GET
Tour Eyes Scientifically Tested and Measured,
No Charge for Measurements or Examinations.
The following are a few Optical Defects Treated:
Presbyopia, Hypenuctvopia, Myopia, Astigmatism, Muscular
Weakness, Photofobia, ifec.
SPECTACLES AND FOLDERS OF THE FOLLOWING DESCRIPTIONS MADE:
Con-sex and Concave Pebbles, Convex and Concave Crown
Glass, Cataract, Lenses and Deep Concaves, Convex and Concave
Plaino Cylindricals, Convex and Concave Compound Cylindrical,
Plain Prismatic Spectacles, Compound Prismatic Spectacles,
Flat and Globular, and Smoke and Blue Tinted.


WILSON I SOUTHERDEN,
DARRAGH’S BUILDINGS, QUEEN STREET,
BRISBANE.
Have a splendid assortment of General Ironmongery, all quite
new, having been opened up ex R.M.S. Bulimba,
Duke of Devonshire and Jumna.
GIVE THEM A TRIAL AND COMPARE QUALITY AND PRICES WITH OTHER HOUSES.
D. CAMPBELL,
Wishes to notify to the public and his numerous friends, that having
purchased the Business of the
Queensland ||ports [Jepot,
STREET. BRISBANE,
FROM MESSRS. TRIM RLE BROS.,
HE SOLICITS A CONTINUANCE OF THE FAVOURS SO LIBERALLY BESTOWED ON HIS PREDECESSORS.
the rußLrc may rely on'
The Choicest Brands of Tokccos and Cigars
BEiira _A_ i, “w _a sr s oust h aitd.
CRICKET, FOOTBALL, LAWN TENNIS,
And all Sporting Material by the First Makers, and
at the Lowest Possible Prices—together with
civility and attention.
T3RIiS.IL iSLISrO I3STS3PEICTIOHr I3STVIT3SIX>.




The FISHERMAN:
A Guide
TO THE INEXPERICNCED
HOW, WH EN, AN D WHE RE
TO CATCH FISH.
BY JOHN CAMERON.
JJriebunc;
(iOUIX.N AND (K.TCII, IMUNTKUS, .{IT.BS STHKKT.
MIU'CCfAWN HI,


'cTo
GEORGE COWLISHAW, Esq.,
AMi
EDWARD TAYLOR, Esq.,
Two True Fishermen,
THIS LITTLE KOOK IS INSCRIBED BY
The Author,
IN ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF THE MANY HATTY DAYS
AND HOURS WE SPENT TOGETHER WHILE
“ Out-a-Fishing.”


LIST OF FISH OBTAINED IN QUEENSLAND
WATERS.
Anchovies.
Babracouta.
Babbalong.
Barramunda.
Bonito.
Bream (many v.)
Catfish.
Catfish-eel.
Cod (many v.)
CoNGEE-EBL.
Coral-fish (many v.)
Diamond.
Diarbee.
Dolphin
Dugong.
Eel.
Flathead (three v.)
Flounder.
Gab (three v.)
Groper (many v. J
Jew.
JOIIN-DOREY.
King.
Longtom.
Mackerel.
Mullet (many v.)
Parrot (many v.)
Pebch.
Pike.
Porpoise.
Ray (many v.)
Red-snouts.
Sardines.
SCHNAPPER.
Sharks (many v.J
Skip-Jacks.
Sole.
Sprat.
Suckers.
Tahwinn.
Tailor.
Targeeen.
Toadeish (many v.)
Tbavalli.
Trumpeter.
Turtle.
Whiting (three v.)
Woeaee.
Yellow-tail.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
Preface ix.
CHAPTER I.
The Fisherman 1
CHAPTER 11.
The Tackle 15
CHAPTER 111.
The Bait to Use ... ... ... ... 25
CHAPTER IV.
The Best Forms of Bottom and the Best Fishing
Grounds 30
CHAPTER V.
The Best Time of Day, of Tides, and of the Weather ... 35
CHAPTER VI.
How to Bait a Hook and Catch Fish 39
CHAPTER VII.
The Fish we Catch, and the Fish we Eat 43
CHAPTER VIII.
The Fish we Catch but Don’t Bat, and the Aborigines
Modes of Fishing 54
CHAPTER IX.
A Schnapper Party’ About 15 Years Ago 61
CHAPTERS X. and XI.
Pearl Fishing in Torres Straits 71
CHAPTER XII.
Swallowed by a Sea Serpent .. 101


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
FRONTISPIECE Pa “
GROPER, SCHNAPPER 43
WHITING, SOLE 46
BREAM .. ~ .. ~ , _ _ _
JEW-FISH, FLATHEAD 50




PREFACE.
It is a long time ago since the idea first occurred to me to write
a little Fisherman’s Handbook; the first germ originating the
thought arising from the experience in the “ field ” of the blun-
ders made by novices in the tackle used for fishing. To attempt
to catch fish with the tackle referred to, would be somewhat
similar to expecting a man to make the fine works of a watch
with a sledge-hammer and anvil. When the mechanic has
finished the elaborate first-class railway carriage, although it
looks well in the maker’s yard, it is comparatively useless till it
is put upon the rails ; and so it is with the man who goes a-fishing.
You may “ deck ” him with the most approved fishing parapher-
nalia, give him an unlimited stock of the best bait, and tell him
to go and catch fish ; but if you don’t give him some instructions
as to how he is to go about his work—in fact, put him on the
“ track ” —he is almost as helpless and useless as the carriage in
the maker’s yard.
It has been the writer’s good fortune to assist many to acquire
sufficient knowledge in the guileless art of fishing, so that they
could catch fish in numbers equal to their wants, and to an extent
to interestingly employ them in the pastime. The most recent
of these instances is the case of a Stanley Street merchant, whom
we will call Scotia. He owns, and has owned for the last four or
five years, a cottage near Cleveland, on the shores of Kaby Bay
B


Each visit he paid to this sea-side resort, he spent many hours
and days in trying to catch fish, but never could succeed. One
day he asked the writer to give him a lesson in the art of fishing.
The request was at once complied with. Two lines properly
rigged, some cured bait, &c., were put into the boat; a spot with
a sandy bottom, in Raby Bay, was chosen for the trial. Scotia
was handed a line already baited, and instructed to cast it over
the side, and the work of fishing was entered upon, while the
theory and practice of how to mount tackle, &c., were being
imparted orally. He took note of the size of the lines, hooks,
sinker; the method of rigging ; and lost nothing of what was
told him regarding the subject generally. All the time the fishing
progressed the matter was discussed, and when the kellick was
drawn up, Scotia had nearly as many fish as his instructor. A
few months afterwards, on meeting him in Queen Street, he
mentioned that he had again been to his cottage by the sea ; had
taken his wife out fishing with him, and they had caught, in a
few hours, 130 fish ! or more than he had caught in all the pre-
vious years of his life. This information was gratifying to the
writer, from the great pleasure it afforded Scotia, and this simple
incident acted as a further stimulant to make a beginning in the
production of ‘ ‘ The Fisherman ;" as after all the bright spots in
going through life, bubble up at every turn and angle of the
journey, if you see others happy, and can contribute to their
happiness.
The Fisherman ” lays no claim to be a learned dissertation
on Ichthyology, Pisciculture, nor in any way dealing with the
scientific breeds of fish, &c.; in fact, all technicalities are avoided
as much as possible, as the great idea of the work is to give, in as
simple language as can be employed, an outline of the way to
prepare for, and to acquire a knowledge of, the fishing done in
colonial waters. The work is written for more general use in
Queensland, but will be found equally applicable to the Southern
Colonies, with slight modifications here and there ; such as larger
fish of same species requiring stronger line or bigger hook, and


perhaps in odd cases some other variety of bait not used here ;
this will not, however, in any way affect the rigging of the lines
in the way suggested, and in practice it will be found that little
or no alteration will be required in the size of hook or the
description of the tackle.
The great claim of this little book is, in the estimation of
author, centred in the recipe for Curing Prawns; that, he hopes
by its means, of disseminating broadcast among all classes who
are fond of fishing. The method will be given in the body of the
work, under the heading, “The Bait to Useit is only necessary,
therefore, to say here, that with the aid of the ingredients used,
prawns can be kept for any time ; and, so far as the palate of the
fish is concerned, they take the cured bait with as much avidity
as when perfectly fresh prawns are used ; while the skin peels off
the body readily, and the flesh is firm and white, and without
the slightest smell. The process is so perfect that the writer
could not, if asked in what way he would like to improve upon it,
give the faintest idea for improvement. Since its discovery, it
has been made known wherever the writer has travelled, both
north and south ; he knowing from experience what a boon it
would be to all fond of fishing. You can, as the writer actually
does, have jars holding eight or twelve quarts of prawns cured
at a time ; so that all you require to do is to fill your bait-tin,
and set off fishing. It matters not to you whether the prawns
are in season or not, in the river or not, on any particular day,
week, or month. You secure a stock when they are to be had,
and you always have them by yon, the same as you have your
tackle.
It must be understood that this book is written for “salt
water ” fishing ; but the same description of tackle will do for
fishing in fresh water streams ; the fisherman bearing in mind to
use the lighter or heavier lines according to the size of the fish to
be caught. The bait is, of course, quite different, and a list of the
leading baits used in fresh water fishing will be found in the
chapter, “ The Bait to Use.”


“ Pearl Fishing in Torres Straits ”
Was written for The Queenslander, and appeared in that journal
in August, 1877 ; the materials having been supplied in various
conversations held with a South Sea Islander, who was a
thoroughly honest good fellow ; and his experience in pearl
fishing will be found both peculiar and interesting.
“ Swallowed by a Sea Serpent ”
Was written as part of an advertisement, the object of it being
to call special attention to Southport in the early days ; and it is
given here because the description of the scenery as seen at the
time from the beach, at Loder’s Creek junction with the Bay, is
true to nature ; as is also the description of the excellent fishing
obtained at the spot, which is just as good now as it was then, so
that it will be well for those visiting the place and wanting sport
to bear this in mind.


THE FISHERMAN.
CHAPTER I.
What constitutes a fisherman? It may seem, at first
sight, an easy question to answer; but it is not so, except
in dealing with the general acceptance of the term. If
a boy goes fishing with a pin-hook attached to a bit of
cotton, the parents and relations call him a fisherman.
If “ Ko-catchem ” has part of a clothes-line with a hook
at the end, and attached to a olothes-prop, with which he
now and again tries, but seldom succeeds, to catch fish at
the wharves, he is a fisherman. Running in the same
incongruous lines, anyone and everyone who goes a-fishing
is, according to the popular idea, a fisherman.
In reading one of Washington Irving’s miscellaneous
works lately, the writer fell across a bright little article
on “ The Angler,” in which the following happy descrip-
tion of a party fitted out for an angling trip occurs :
“It is said that many an unlucky urchin is induced to
run away from his family, and betake himself to a sea-
faring life, from reading the history of Robinson Crusoe;
and I suspect that, in like manner, many of those worthy
gentlemen who are given to haunt sides of pastoral
streams, angle rods in hand, may trace the origin of
their passion to the seductive pages of honest Izaac


Walton. I recollect studying his ‘Complete Angler'
several years since, in company with a knot of friends
in America; and, moreover, that we were all completely
bitten with the angling mania. It was early in the
year; but as soon as the weather was auspicious, and
that the spring began to melt into the verge of summer,
we took rod in hand and sallied into the country, as
stark mad as was Don Quixote from reading books of
chivalry.
“ One of our party had equalled the Don in the fulness
of his equipments, being attired cap-a-jne for the enter-
prise. He wore a broad-skirted fustian coat, perplexed
with half-a-hundred pockets; a pair of stout shoes, and
leather gaiters; a basket slung on one side for fish, a
patent rod, a landing net, and a score of other incon-
veniences.”
Washington himself soon dropped his rod to lounge
under a tree, and sums up the result of the day’s sport
thus :—“ I recollect, also, after toiling and watching and
creeping about for the greater part of the day, with
scarcely any success, in spite of all our admirable appa-
ratus, a lubberly country urchin came down from the
hills, with a rod made from the branch of a tree, a few
yards of twine—and, as Heaven shall help me ! —I believe
a crooked pin for a hook, baited with a vile earthworm ;
and in half-an-hour caught more fish than we had nibbles
throughout the day !”
It is needless to say that Mr. Irving’s party were not
fishermen; more especially the gentleman so elaborately
got up for the occasion.
That grand old man, and thorough-going fisherman,
Izaac Walton, when trying to instruct Venator how to
fish, says :—“ Doubt not, therefore, sir, but that angling
is an art and an art worth your learning. The question


is, rather, whether you be capable of learning it; for
angling is somewhat like poetry, men are to be born so—
I mean with inclinations to it, though both may be
heightened by discourse and practice ; but he that hopes
to be a good angler must not only bring an enquiring
mind, searching, observing wit, but he must bring a large
measure of hope and patience, and a love and propensity
to the art itself.”
It is very amusing at times to hear the emphatic
opinions expressed by many men you meet at the sea-
side, and elsewhere, who may at some time or other, and
under favourable circumstances, have caught a fish, or
even had a good haul—assuming to be authorities —lay-
ing down the law as to the rules to be observed to make
a successful angler; many of them, in all probability,
never caught a fish in their lives, except over a glass of
grog. The positive way they speak on the subject has
the effect of impressing non-fishermen with the idea that
these talking bodies really know something about fishing.
A fisherman, however, is not taken in with such evidence;
and when the aforesaid talkers exhibit their tackle, the
illusion is soon dissipated. The line—the class of fisher-
men under consideration seldom boast more than one, if
they have that—is either like a small clothes-line, rigged
for catching bream or whiting, with a jew-fish or schnapper
hook; or the line is a very fine one, still mounted with
the big hook or hooks, and a sinker heavy enough to
anchor an ordinary boat. If you should be unfortunate
enough to be in the same boat with one or more of these
pseudo fishermen, you may, if sitting within a few yards
of them, have the weight of their lead impressed upon
you in a way not easily to be forgotten ; the loss of
sundry teeth, or an eye knocked out, or the skull frac-
tured, is among the chances of injuries to be expected ;


and the treat you will have, even if you escape all per-
sonal dangers, each time the line, is cast into the water,
will be so exhilarating that you will be in doubt whether
the shock given to the boat is caused by an earthquake,
tidal wave, or some other convulsion in nature. To
attain to this wonderful power of displacement and dis-
turbance of the ocean, .they stand up, spread their feet
well to the extreme edge of the boat’s flooring; they grip
their fishing line about a yard or two above the sinker,
and then begin twirling it round their head at lightning
speed for an unknown number of times ; creating in the
process a whizzing noise like that which precedes a terrific
storm or cyclone. It is at this critical time you may
look out either to receive injury yourself, have the boat
capsized, or see the thrower following his line, with arms
and legs spread out like a huge green frog. It is delight-
ful to have all this going on, more especially if the fish
are plentiful; and these convulsions occur with unvary-
ing regularity each time you have a good bite. The
mental notes you register would be sufficient to qualify
you for the office of Archbishop, in time; you’d only
want a few trips to do it.
One of the old District Court Judges, who fell asleep
many years ago, and went over the stream that divides
our tiny world from the unknown, to join the majority,
remarked to the writer while driving to town on top
of the ’bus one morning: “What a lucky fisherman
you are! you always catch fish, while I never can
catch anything.” This remark was made on the Judge
learning of a rather successful catch made that very
morning. Why could the Judge not catch fish? The
answer is very simple ; He was not a fisherman. The
reply he got at the time was something like this:—
“Judge, you never made a greater mistake than in put


ting down my success in fishing to luck. I don’t mean
to sa} T that there is not, at times, an apparent, and per-
haps, real exhibition of luck on special occasions, such
as :—Two men may be sitting side by side in a boat,
each having the same tackle, same bait, equal skill, and
all other conditions equal ; yet one catches no fish, or
only one to every ten caught by his neighbour. Such an
experience has, at any rate, the appearance of what is
called luck. That case, however has nothing to do with
the general question of one man being always successful,
and another man always unsuccessful. The luck you
talk about consists in—(l) Not sparing expense in having
proper tackle and bait. (2) Getting up at any hour in
the morning, no matter what the weather may be, to
catch the right time of tide; and (3) Going to the best
fishing grounds, no matter how far, or how much labour
may be required in the way of walking or pulling to get
there; and when there, exhibiting the necessary patience
to give the fish a chance to take your bait. You fail
because you go at a time when the tide is either running
in or out, at a mill-stream rate, and when your line will
not “hold” the bottom; at the same time the fish are
travelling instead of feeding. You go, too, to places where
you can’t expect to catch fish, more particularly with the
bait and tackle you use ; and yet you call it luck ! Do
you know that the haul you refer to was caught at day-
light this morning, cold and all as it was 1 Would you
have got up at the hour named tP go fishing 1 Not you !
so don’t mention or call such efforts by the term luck .”
The Judge really seemed for the moment as if impressed
with the belief that he may have made a mistake; but
the chances are he would again relapse into the old
groove of indifferent indolence, and stick to the luck
theory.


There is another class of fishermen who are a marvel
in their way: they might be called fish-dinner fisher-
men. They are to be found in all parts of the world;
mmd they are gentlemen, and genial, hearty fellows.’
Only let a number of these gentlemen get their legs
nnder a table well spread with a fish-dinner, with no
stint of good wines, and if their oratorical powers and
profound knowledge don’t astonish you, nothing will.
The chances are the practical part of their angling edu-
cation ceased with the pin-hook period ; and if it had
not been for their fish-eating experience, many of them
would be puzzled to tell a whiting from a whale, except
by the size.
There are many other descriptions of fishermen, or those
who claim the distinction; and it is a good thing there are
such, for they could not indulge a simpler belief; and
those who really practice the art, no matter in how crude
a form, must to a greater or less extent enjoy the pastime,
and they could not be employed in a more innocent way.
We will now deal with the most objectionable class of
fishermen—the men who really do catch and can catch
fish ; who spare no labour nor expense to secure suc-
cess ; who will go out and stay out in all weather; who
know and resort to the proper fishing grounds; and, in
fact, are fishermen, except for one thing—they have not
generous natures ; and it is impossible for a selfish man
to be a true fisherman. Four men—friends, or strangers
to each other—the principle is the same—arrange to go
on a fishing expedition together; to share and share alike
in the expenses and division of the haul. All four are
good hands with the line. Two, say A and B, have the
generous instincts and feelings of the genuine fisherman ;
the other two, C and D, have the skill to catch fish ; but
there their sympathy with and qualification for fishermen


ceases. The party start for the “ground,” and on
arrival, C gives out the bait, which has been left to him
to get, and when giving each man his share (1) he says :
“ There is not much bait; for the prawn-catcher, although
up all night, could get no more.” The fact of C having
picked out all the biggest and best prawns for his indi-
vidual use, and also, having retained a double share for
himself is, of course, a trifling matter not worth men-
tioning ; but he takes care to keep his bait-tin in his
bag, and just takes out a few at a time to keep him
going, so that no one knows what quantity he has. At
the end of the day, A and B have “ topped ” the catch,
both in number and weight of fish ; but, as agreed, the
aggregate haul is “ boxed,” and D is told off to divide
the spoil, which he does in a most satisfactory way to his
own interest, by appropriating all the big fish caught by
A and B, and giving them the refuse of the catch. Of
course A and B notice the imposition —the mean trick—
but they say nothing; they treat the perpetrator with a
look of pity, wondering how he could have dropped down
so low in the standard of meanness. It would be as im-
possible for C and I) to rise to the pure standard of true
fishermen, as it would be possible to make fish bite when
there are none about. The little souls of such men travel
in a groove altogether too narrow to lead to the broad
road along which the hearty, genial, honest fisherman
wends his way. They perhaps don’t think of nor realise
the meanness and unsportsmanlike disposition they dis-
play. Hood says:—
“ Evil is wrought by want of thought
As well as want of heart. ”
And we will take the charitable view, and say it is want
of thought that begets such acts of want of consideration
for the interests of brother sportsmen.


Having imperfectly defined some of the “ doubtful ”
fishermen, we will try to describe the genuine, hearty,
genial, thorough-going fisherman. It can be done in two
words, if we deal with a specimen of the past—lzaac
Walton! His habits, tastes, geniality, simple-minded-
ness, open-hearted generous disposition, unflagging energy
in the sport of angling; the pleasure and hearty willingness
he manifested to instruct and assist a novice anxious to
acquire a knowledge of the art of fishing ; and in all
other respects, he was a thorough-going fisherman.
The fishing in Australasia is widely different from the
fishing in Great Britain and Ireland, and the old countries
of Europe. The Colonial fishing is limited to the plain
rod and line, generally without a float, as most of our
rivers and streams are either subject to strong tides or
rapid currents—and the hand-line ; the former being used
but seldom in comparison with the latter. There is no
fly-fishing worth mentioning done in any of the colonies ;
but they are edging on in that direction in New Zealand
and Tasmania, where a few trout and other fish that take
the fly have been introduced. If old Izaac were dropped
in Australia, he would call the fishing “ roughand if
he could only revisit some of his old haunts, it would
rather startle his gentle spirit to see the changes wrought j
many of the quiet rural spots where he formerly angled,
along the banks of the brooks and rivers, as they wind
their serpentine way through hills and valleys, he would
find studded with cities, intersected with railways, tele-
graph lines, telephones, and a thousand and one of the
other great works that denote the industry and genius of
man, since Izaac fell asleep. It would grieve the old boy
to see many of the rivers and other streams that in his
day ran clear and pure, now polluted with poisonous
gases and pestilential sewerage, in which neither fish nor


other forms of life can breathe. It would rather astonish
him, too, to see a huge iron steamer being built on the
bank of a river—perhaps on the exact spot where he
used to sit and angle, and to be told that this stupendous
mass of iron would float; that the engines would be
4,000 horse-power ; and that a speed would be obtained
that would enable the owners to go right round the
world in a few weeks. To inform him he could jump
into a train and go from one end of England and run
into Scotland in a few hours; that he could speak
through the telephone, and his voice would be heard and
recognised for miles, and that he could send a message
round the entire globe in two hours, —the old fisherman
would go back to his grave, exclaiming—“ Things are
changed indeed ! ”
To come back, however, to the question of what con-
stitutes a fisherman. The man who aspires to the position
must have patience, largely stored with faith, for a com-
panion ; he must have a refined, sensitive touch; his
determination and decision of character must be un-
doubted ; he requires good judgment of time and place;
he must be unselfish, and always willing to oblige a
brother fisherman in the field ; he must have the skill to
hook a fish at the proper time or stage of bite, with the
knowledge of the correct tackle to keep, and the way to
mount it; and he must have sufficient enthusiasm and
liking for the sport of fishing as to be quite indifferent
to rain, hail, or snow, and prepared to get up at any hour
of the night or morning to catch the tides, or reach the
fishing grounds at the propitious hours, that suit the
habits and appetites of the fish, and conduce to a
successful haul. No man can hope to become a fisher-
man who goes about the work with kid gloves on.
Every true fisherman is more or less a naturalist; this


is not to be wondered at, as he is, whether fishing on the
bank of a pretty river or brook, or in a boat amid stream,
constantly seeing either birds or beasts, &c., and is made
intimate with their habits to the extent of his powers of
observation and opportunity. He should also be, and
generally is, acquainted with the habits and peculiarities
of fish.
A great deal has been said and written, on the subject
of the cruelty of fishing ; but it is well-known that fish
are cold-blooded ; have little or no sense of pain, and that
if the occupation were considered cruel, we should not
have had our Great Law Giver and Instructor ordering
St. Peter “to cast his hook into the water and catch a
fish, for money to pay tribute to Caesar,” nor would such
benevolent men as St. John, St. James and all the prin-
cipal apostles have followed the business of fishermen if
it had been specially cruel. It is argued by some it is
not so much the hooking the fish, as the cruelty in
putting worms and other live bait upon the hook. There
is some ground for this view, but the remedy is simple;
kill the worm or other bait used before putting it on the
hook. As the subject of bait will be dealt with under
a distinct heading, it is not necessary to say more here
on the matter. Fishermen are, as a body, by instinct, of
humane kindly dispositions, generally meditative, some deep
thinkers, and with a “shade” of the Philosopher running
through them. Fishing, to a fisherman, is much like gold
digging to a digger ; there is always the belief in the
mysterious unknown reward, lurking in each effort made ;
in the digger’s case it is some stupendous nugget, sur-
passing in size and value any yet discovered ; while the
fisherman’s imagination is borne up with the idea that he
may catch a whale, or something in the shape of a marine
wonder, or that he will have a haul such as no man yet


equalled in regard to numbers. The curious feature with
regard to this peculiarity is that no time, hardship, nor
adverse experience shatters this buoyant and alluring
belief in either fisherman or digger ; disappointment or
defeat to either is but a stimulus to renewed effort. The
imagination climbs over all difficulties, casts troubles to
the winds, and soars to the new starting point with the
firm belief that success must follow ; the nugget as big
as a cottage be unearthed, or the enormous fish landed
and exhibited to friends as a sample of the skill of the
fisherman.
There is no pastime or recreation that affords a man so
much uninterrupted time for meditation, or that presents
greater facilities for studying nature, than the occupation
of fishing. Another feature in connection with it is,
that it can be indulged in by young and old alike, and
with equal enjoyment. A man who has the right dis-
position, and who has never cast a line till he is in the
“sixties” can acquire the knowledge to catch fish, and so
amuse himself if he cannot become a thorough fisherman.
Many men who have never attempted the gentle art, look
. down upon it as beneath them, and only fitted for boys’
enjoyment; that is a grave and mistaken notion. Any
form of recreation that gives quiet, and draws the mind
from the worry of business and excitement constantly
whirling round the ordinary daily track ; that affords
opportunity for self-commune and self-regulation, the
chance to wipe away the cobwebs of business that have
been filling up each corner and angle of the mind, and
that have been accumulating, perhaps, for months or
years; that brings man into contact with the works of
God ; and that gives health to mind and body, must be
good to every item of humanity, no matter what his age
or position in the world may be.


“Nature, exerting an unwearied pow’r,
Forms opens, and gives scent to every flower •
Spreads the fresh verdure of the field, and leads
The dancmg naiads through the dewy meads.
She fills profuse ten thousand little throats
With music, modulating all their notes ;
And charms the woodland scenes and wilds unknown
with artless airs and concerts of her own.”
Cowper says again in his “Retirement” .
“The statesman, lawyer, merchant, man of trade.
Pants for the refuge of some rural shade,
Where, all his long anxieties forgot
Amid the charms of a sequester’d spot.”
And the writer would add if you wish to enjoy retire-
ment, go where you can get some fishing, and
Take rod and line, nor yet forget the bait,
And, if you can, take an agreeable mate ;
A basket, too, wherein some bread and cheese,
And beer, your thirst and hunger to appease. ’
Choose the river bank, with overhanging shade,
Where the running tide a deepish hole has made :
the bottom must be sandy to allure the fish;
If these you find you’re sure to fill your dish'
With saucy bream, or else the handsome jew,
Whose colors rival the rainbow’s golden hue.
You 11 settle to your pleasure with a zest,
Your pipe aglow, your brain and limbs at rest •
Each fish you catch makes time a thing of naught
Your mind s oblivious to all except the sport.
Fishing is one of those innocent sports that always
leaves man or boy, who make it a hobby, better as it
keeps them from indulging in vice that they otherwise
might or would be attracted to. It often leads to the
THE FISHERMAN.


development of talents in the boy that might have lam
dormant throughout life, but for his experience gamed
from the book of nature while out on fishing expeditions.
Many a naturalist, geologist, entomologist, and concho-
logist, who has made a name in the world for the depth
of the knowledge he gained in his respective science,
could, and sometimes does, tell how he laid the foundation
of his knowledge in rambles while out fishing. At such
times the mind and imagination are so buoyant; the
thoughts chasing each other through the chambers of the
brain are of such a pleasureable character, in anticipation
of the fish to be caught, that old Dame Nature opens her
book at a time when her wonders appear in all their
beauty and attractiveness, and impress themselves when
the mind of the beholder is most impressionable, and
while instructing in the knowledge of her mysteries and
marvels, the recipient is conscious of a boundless light-
hearted happiness. No father ought to omit in every
way he can to encourage the idea of fishing as a pastime
for his boys. Of course there are thousands who live too
far removed from any creek, river, lake, or bay, where
fish can be caught; in such cases there is no help ; but
wherever fish abound there should the art of angling be
cultivated. The man who has stuck “ grinding ” at the
professional or business mill till he could grind no longer,
often feels time hang heavy on his hands, when he all at
once finds himself an idler. The writer would say to
such, go “a-fishing.” It don’t matter whether you are
a fisherman or not; get some tackle; find out where
good fishing is to be had; take your family (if you have
such—if a bachelor, take a friend) with you, and spend
as much of your time fishing as you can. Between this
innocent sport, the perusal of your favourite authors, if
you are a reader, and the other little surroundings of


such congenial employments and associations, you will
be kept from brooding over your idleness, and at the
same time, in all probability, kept away from the hotel,
club, and other resorts—good in their legitimate use, but
too often dangerous to an idle man, who may resort to
them too frequently, and his visits be prolonged, till he
has taken more whiskey or other intoxicating liquors
than is good for him. Day by day the habit grows, and
before he knows it, lethargy sets in; his will is gone,
and he is a confirmed toper. There is the advantage,
too, to be considered by the weary man—the man who
has broken down his constitution at the “ mill ” of re-
gaining his health ; and there is no recreation that afibrds
greater facilities for doing this than fishing. It gives
exercise, fresh air, and a most pleasureable employment;
and can be indulged in at little cost, if economy has to
be considered. Take advice, and go “a-fishing, ” and
you will echo the poet who sings :
“ Could I be more than any man that lives
Great, fair, rich, wise, all in superlatives ;
Yet I more freely would these gifts resign
Than ever fortune should have made them mine ;
And hold one minute of this holy leisure
Beyond the riches of this empty pleasure.”


CHAPTER II.
THE TACKLE.
It is, of course, no use going fishing without tackle ; and
it is of vital importance to success that the right de-
scription of tackle be selected. In this chapter, it is only-
intended to deal with the question of tackle in a general
way; as there will be given under special headings, the
particular description of line and hook required for the
different fish caught. It may be laid down as a rule in
the beginning of the subject, that, in dealing with the
choice of fishing tackle, it is better to have too light than
too heavy lines ; it is better to have too small than too
large hooks; and it is better to have a too long line
rather than one too short to allow of a little play. These
may seem very common-place and self-evident proposi-
tions ; but it is notorious that the novice ignores them
too frequently, and suffers accordingly in failing to secure
success. Take a stroll along the banks of our beautiful
river, or go down to the wharves, and what do you see 1
On a fine day you will stumble on scores of boys and
men fishing, with all sorts, sizes, and conditions of lines,
hooks, and baits; and not more than one out of every
twenty will have his line properly rigged for the class of
fishing he is engaged in. At the wharves, the edible fish
caught are principally bream, but in the season a fair
sprinkle of jew-fish and flathead are included in the catch.
The tackle required for bream should be very carefully
chosen; and as they are a very smart little fish, with


unusual shrewdness, and at times very coy, it requires
tine tackle, right sized hook on gut, and proper bait, to
be sure of catching.
There are times when you can go fishing, both in the
rivers and Bay, and, although out all day, and having a
fair haul, that only one description of fish are caught •
it may be bream, or whiting, or squire, or jew-fish, or
flathead; or you may catch nothing but those plagues to
fishermen—cat-fish or toad-fish; but the rule is that your
catch will consist of two or three varieties of edible fish,
according to the season, and the spot chosen. To meet
cases of the kind, it has to be considered what is the
most suitable tackle to cope with the capacity of several
kinds of fish ; some having large, some small, some deep-
set, others shallow mouths : their .weight and size varying
in an equal degree. You cannot make any provision in
rigging a line which will be as efficacious as the special
tackle suited to catching special fish ; there will neces-
sarily be the loss of a certain percentage in the haul,
either from the lines or hooks being too small or too
big, from breakage, &c., &c. Any arrangement of the
sort would therefore have to be viewed as the best that
could be adopted to meet the difficulty. Bor the fishing
that is generally met with in the Brisbane and other
rivers along our coast, and in Moreton Bay, what is
called “ Bream tackle ” would be the best for all round
fishing, that is to say:—A number one eight-plait un-
dressed silk line, with No. 1/0 or No. 2/0 Kendal or
Limerick hooks, mounted on double gut. The line should
be fifty to sixty yards long, so as to be able to “ play ”
big fish.
Regarding the merits of the respective description of
lines, the eight-plait undressed silk line is the best; and
if taken care of, by properly drying after use, will last a


long time. Some of the dressed silk lines are good, stand
wear well, and don’t tangle; hut in the writer’s expe-
rience they are not so good as the best make of undressed.
Next to silk, the finely dressed hemp line is the best for
standing rough usage, and it doesn’t easily “kink,” if
properly stretched before used, and is very strong. Some
of the tanned hemp and watercord lines are strong, and
last well, but many of them are very stiff, and a great
nuisance to the fisherman on account of their liability to
“ kink ” —in other words, tangle.
Of the various varieties of hooks obtainable the bright
Kendal is the best; but it is difficult to beat either the
Kirby or Limerick, and if either of these make of hooks
is get-at-able, the fisherman should give a good account
of his doings, if he uses them rightly in waters where fish
are about. The sizes generally used for fishing in Aus-
tralia, range from No. 12 (small enough to catch gar-fish)
to No. 10/0, the schnapper or deep sea hook. The sizes
commonly used are, No. 3 for whiting; No, 6/0, jew-fish
(some prefer to call this species the dew-fish); and for
bream, No. 1/0 or 2/0, the latter being the most useful
size for general miscellaneous fishing. For schnapper or
regular deep sea fishing, the No. 1 best Harwich hooks
are really good, and require a lot of tough work to break
them ; and the same remark will apply to the best made
gravitation hooks; gimp, or fine limp cotton cord is the
best form of noose for schnapper hooks.
Many who lay claim to be fishermen, noose their hooks
directly on the line, or use twine to noose them with.
This is a mistake beyond all doubt, as a bit of gut would
make the difference of ten fish to one, if the fish are
at all shy. It is, however, important that good gut
be used, otherwise the loss of fish is terrible. If you can
purchase a hank of the best gut, do so, and noose your own


hooks, for many of those sold noosed are not to be relied
on. If you cannot get the best gut in the hank, and you are
reduced to purchasing the noosed hooks, select those with
double gut, and take the precaution to rebind the hooks
with fine wax-ends. Be sure, if you noose your hooks,
to soak the gut in hot water before you intend to use it,
or it will break. The simplest, and on the whole best,
mode of noosing a hook is by a series of half-hitches ;
six to eight of these being sufficient to equal the strength
of any hook or tackle ; and it is not advisable to have
the noose occupying too much of the stem of the hook,
or it interferes with the bait space.
HOW TO RIG A HAND-LINE.
The first thing to be done is to select your line, and if
you can afford it, buy a No. 1 eight-plait silk line, as it
wdl, if you handle it right, do for all fish in the river or
Bay, from the whiting to the schnapper. If silk be
beyond your means (it will cost, according to length,
from is. fid. to 12s. fid.) get a No. 1 plain or tanned
hemp line. Before you attempt to rig the line, be sure
to carefully stretch it; that is, unfold it, and extend it
between two given points, tying at either end to posts
or stakes that will hold it, while you work and stretch it
by friction with a piece of flannel or coarse cloth, covered
with vaseline. This process not only keeps the line from
“ kinking,” but it preserves it from rotting; if grease or
oi! are used, they have the reverse effect. The line being
stretched, &c., reeve a “barrel-shaped” sinker on the
line, about 18 to 20 inches above the lower hook (it would
be well for novices not to use more than one hook till
some degree of dexterity in handling the line be acquired)
or nine inches above the upper hook. The weight of the
sinker will have to be determined by the size of the line,


and the strength of the current fished in. For whiting
fishing in the Bay, unless where there is a strong current,
Jto 1 oz. is heavy enough; but, wherever the fishing
ground may be, you must have weight of sinker to hold
the bottom, or you will catch no fish. For an ordinary
schnapper line, and for fishing at Flat Rock, 4 to 6 lbs.
sinkers are required. The two hooks (most experienced
fishermen use two) should be noosed on gut, either single
or double, six to eight inches long. The best form of
frame to wind a handline on is a big cotton reel; they
can be had at a turner’s, and any size required. They
are the most handy to wind up the line, and in case of
getting a big fish on, they admit of playing him without
difficulty, or without having a lot of loose line dangling
about the boat’s bottom before the fish is hooked.
If a handline be rigged in accordance with the above
■directions, the space required by the fisherman in the
boat (most handline fishing is and has to be done from
boats) is not great; and he should, above all things, try
and acquire the skill to “throw” his line without stand-
ing up in the boat, as the oscillation caused by rising
and swaying about while in the act of casting the line, is
a complete upsetter of the equilibrium of boat, fisherman,
and fish. It may seem at first awkward to a novice to
cast his line sitting, but it is astonishing how simple it
is if only fairly grappled with. The writer, when he first
tried it, looked upon it as a feat only to be accomplished
by acrobats and athletes; but with a little practice, two
lines could be worked together, and in a space of 18 to
24 inches, and without in any way endangering a neigh-
bour’s head.
HOW TO RIG A ROD AND LINE.
The rod is seldom used in Queensland fishing, in com-
parison to the handline. The cause of this is doubtless


owing to the fact, that our streams are better suited to-
handline fishing; that boats are plentiful and easily
procurable; and that the fishing from boats has, by
experience, proved most successful. There are, never-
theless, some good rod fishing grounds along the banks-
of the Brisbane, and most of the rivers in the southern
portion of the colony; and, beyond doubt, the same re-
mark will apply to streams in the north. The rod
fishing in the colonies is quite different to the old coun-
try, and, as a matter of course, the tackle is different.
The class of rod required for Brisbane river fishing, must
be strong and reliable, as at times large jew-fish are
hooked. The most handy length of a rod is 10 to 12
feet, with properly fitted brass joints, and stiff, not
“ swinging ” eyelets. If, in travelling, you want to take
your rod with you, have it made in five joints of 15 to 20
inches each, so that you can pack it in your portmanteau.
The best “timbers” to compose the rod are—ash or-
hickory for butt and middle joints, and greenheart or
whalebone for top; or, if colonial woods are used, it
would be well to have ironbark for butt, yellow wood for-
middle joints, and black or silver wattle for tops. The
bamboo makes the lightest and handiest rod. If the
right class of timbers are selected, there is no doubt as.
good rods can be made in the colonies as in the old
country.
The rod having been selected (it should not be mado
more than twelve feet long) the line and reel are the
next consideration. If you can afford it, have Ho. 2 silk
undressed line, with bronzed or brass check revolving
plate reel, of medium size, say 3 inch frame. The mode
of mounting is similar to the handline, with the exception
that the sinker can, and had better, be further from the
hook or hooks, say 28 to 30 inches above the lowest hook..


Don’t have too limp a top to the rod, or it will occasion
no end of difficulty in a strong wind, and the loss of fish
will be considerable by the delays in tangles, &o.; and if
you have a button on your coat, be sure it will be caught
at every cast; and, for that reason, it may be well to bear
in mind that the fewer buttons to a fisherman’s jacket or
coat the better it will be for his temper and sport.
a fisherman’s “fit-out.”
The class of fishing being so different in the colonies
to that of the old country, the “fit-out” for the fisher-
man is also different. The whole paraphernalia of a
colonial fisherman can be carried in his coat pocket if he
likes, and it very often is ; whereas the English “ angler”
goes to the sport, bristling at every pore of his body with
packets and bags or baskets charged with fly scissors,
fly tweezers, clearing rings, line winders, sundry reels
and rod mounting, pliers, landing net, spinning tackle,
spring hook, gaff hook, and knife; a whole pocket-book
full of fly and other hooks, with hair snoods, twisted gut
traces, and a host of odds and ends too numerous to
mention. All that is required to go fishing in colonial
waters is :—The line you propose to fish with, mounted
with one or two hooks, according to fancy ; a spare line
in case of misadventure ; half-a-dozen spare hooks and
gut ends, stowed in a small pocket-book; a disgorger,
and a couple of spare sinkers, with a medium-sized creel
or Sandringham bag, to put your tackle, bait, lunch, &c.
in. If you are going rod-fishing, there is only the
addition of the rod.
It will b(* well for the novice to read the fore-going
paragraph carefully, so as to assist him in avoiding the
error too frequently committed by the inexperienced in
buying tackle and preparing for an outing of a day or


two fishing, when they either encumber themselves with
tackle sufficient to last for twelve months, or they buy a
line rigged, and don’t even take a spare hook, so that if
they get caught in a limb or sunken rock, or a big fish
carries off their hook, they are done. The writer has
known eases where men have gone miles to get to a good
fishing ground ; have gone fully bent on having a day’s
fishing; have, as above stated, taken only the one line
and hook ; have lost the hook by a big fish in the first
cast, and then deplored their bad luck ! Their day’s
sport was, of course, nipped in the bud for want of a
little forethought and care.
There is one of the “ superfluities ” of the English
angler’s that is sometimes useful when rod-fishing, and
the line becomes fast on a rock, or some other sunken
snare, and that is the clearing ring ; but in nine cases
out of ten it would pay better to break the hook off than
waste the time to disengage by aid of a clearing ring.
There are, however, times when the fisherman prefers to
give the time rather than break his tackle ; especially is
this the case if he happens by an oversight or other reason
to be short of gut, or the particular hook in use, and
which he thinks is the best adapted for the fish about at
the particular moment. With reference to the basket or
creel used, the writer has given the matter a good deal
of thought, and the outcome of it has been that those
now in use are not all that could be desired ; and beyond
doubt they could be made to contribute more than at
present to the convenience of the fisherman. The shape
and manufacture of one of the best English creels is all
that could be wished, but they lack the simple contri-
vance of affording the separate accommodation to the
fisherman s tackle, bait, and fish caught. After consider-
ing the matter in all its bearings, the following idea is


suggested as the most convenient form of a “combination”
creel; having a tin box fitted at either side of the creel,
with proper lid, and of sufficient size to carry the neces-
sary spare tackle on one side and the bait on the other
side, thus leaving the whole of the centre space for the
fish. This description of basket or creel would be found
to contribute considerably to the comfort of the fisher-
man, as it would keep his spare hooks, &c., dry, conse-
quently save them from rusting; and it would keep all
his gear, bait, &c., in a handy form to carry about.
If fishing with the rod, and the bottom be rocky, it is
sometimes advisable to use the float; but this is seldom
satisfactory unless in “ still ” water. The tides in our
rivers run at such a rate as to make the float tantamount
to useless, unless you are on the end of a jetty, or from
a boat, so that the line can be kept clear in the stream,
and then it is unsatisfactory, as the whirl and rush of tide
round the cork makes it difficult to determine when
there is a bite, unless the float disappears altogether
below the surface. In case the float is used it will be
necessary for the fisherman to guage the depth in the
first instance, and then adjusting the line below the float
so that the lower hook will scrape the bottom.
It is of the utmost importance that the point of the
hook is sharp, and as it often happens that the keen
point may be dulled long before the hook is worn out,
it is well to have a small file to touch the point up with.
There are only a few kinds of fish here in the Bay and
rivers that take the bait from the surface the tailor
and gar-fish, and long-tom are the best known of the
number ; but many think the mullet might also take the
hook at the surface if the right bait could be found out.
The tailor and long-tom have both been caught with
spinning tackle. It is, after all, a poor boast, for you


might work the spinner all the year and not count a
dozen lish caught. It will clearly appear from this, that
whatever the surface fishing may be in other parts, it is a
poor line here ; and, consequently, spinning tackle, patent
imitation flies, and such like gear are of no use to us.
There are, of course, some deep sea surface-feeding fish,
such as the barracouta, &c., that take the bait with
avidity, but they are not numerous, except in special
localities. It will easily be seen from these remarks
that a good deal of the elaborate fishing tackle used, and
necessary in the old world fishing, is useless here.
The fisherman can always get as good tackle in the
colonies as can be had anywhere ; in Brisbane the best-
known places to the writer are Messrs. Foster & Kelk,
or Messrs. Perry Bros., Queen Street, or Mr. Prentice’
Edward Street: there may be other places equally good,
but those enumerated are where the writer has always
obtained his supply.


CHAPTER III.
THE BAIT TO USE.
Next to the size of hook and line to be employed, the
bait is all-important; for the fish are just as great epi-
cures, and are as fond of a favourite dish, as “ any odder
man.” It may as well be stated in the very outset, that
all round, no bait equals prawns. There are few, if any,
parts of the world where prawns will not answer as bait
in salt water. The prawn to a fish is like bread to a
man. It matters not whether the appetite is keen or
not, the prawn will be taken readily; while meat, fish,
and other baits will be disregarded, unless the fish are
hungry. It would be difficult to name the edible fish
that will not take the prawn—omitting, of course, the fish
that do not take the bait at all. Next in importance to
prawns is the mullet, which for deep sea fishing has the
advantage over prawns in the being bigger, and perhaps,
to big fish, more attractive on that account. Eugerra
are also a good bait for Bay or river fishing, but none of
them can compare with the prawn.
The great difficulty the fisherman has to cope with is
the bait. Generally, if he makes up his mind for a day’s
fishing, he can make all his arrangements to fit in nicely,
bar the bait. If he has a difficulty to contend with,
ninety-nine cases out of the hundred it will be—no bait
to be got. A fresh in the river, a high wind, a thunder-
storm, too late, all sold, or some other reason why all ffis


expectations to get bait are dashed to the ground. When
he gets it, there steps in the difficulty how to keep it.
In regard to prawns, this has been the question of ques-
tions. In the summer months, three hours out of the
water is sufficient to decompose prawns to such a stage
of putrescence as to make them almost rotten; and so
offensive that a quart of them can disseminate an efflu-
vium that will poison the air for a hundred yards all
round.
For two or three years the writer was employed, at
odd intervals, in trying experiments in curing bait.
VVhen glaoialine was first introduced to Brisbane, it was
called into requisition, and, to a certain extent, was
satisfactory ; but prawns or other bait cured by it only
kept good—that is usable and attractive to the fish—for
three or four weeks ; when, in the case of prawns, they
would be shrivelled up, and too hard to use, as the hook
would not penetrate them. All sorts of brine and dif-
ferent mixtures were used, but without avail; either
the bait was too soft or too hard, or in some way useless.
These various defeats, however, only led to renewed
efforts, as to fish successfully bait was necessary, and
bait of the kind that fish would take. At last the right
ingredients were hit upon, and the question of being able
to always have a stock of bait on hand thoroughly solved.
In addition to the all-important desideratum of always
being able to have a stock of good bait at hand, there is
the great save in actual outlay. It would not be over-
stating the case to say that, out of every quart of prawns
purchased for bait, on an average fully a pint of the
quantity is lost by becoming unfit for use—in fact, rotten;
or that they are thrown away at the end of the day’s
sport, owing probably to there having been no fish about,
and little bait used ; and the idea of attempting to keep


them altogether out of the question. All this the writer
has experienced in a tenfold degree, having lost an
amount of money in decayed bait that he would be rather
ashamed to see arrayed in figures.
After all, the great consideration is to have bait when
you want it; and, as stated in the preface, if this little
work has no other feature to recommend it, the following
recipe to cure bait is worth untold gold to the fisherman,
for its efficacy is beyond question —in fact it is infallible,
if the directions are strictly adhered to. The best prawns
for the process are the medium to largest sizes caught,
but it will cure the small just as well; the only advantage
of the larger-sized being the readiness with which you
can skin them before putting on the hook for bait.
Many do not skin the prawn at all, but it is advantageous,
and facilitates catching the fish to do so. The prawns
should be quite fresh, or if they are at all gone the heads
will have to be cut off and thrown away, or they will
turn the entire body black, and so render the colour bad ;
for fish can see, and appear to like and take white bait
more readily than any other. To cure say
3 Quarts Fresh Prawns, use—
-2 lbs. White Sugar.
1 lb. Coarse Salt.
tablespoonful of Glacialine.
Mix altogether in a dish ; get a stone or earthenware jar
(tin or metal will not do at all) big enough for your pur-
pose, into which throw a handful of prawns, then a
handful of the mixture, and so on till all your prawns
are stowed away : then - empty the balance of the mixture
on top, covering the jar with a lid or bit of board to keep
the light and air out. In a few days, if you inspect, the


sugar, <fec.will be found to have formed a liquid which covers
the prawns, and so preserves them. If on inspection it
should occur that the liquid does not quite cover the top
tier of prawns, add sufficient salt and sugar in the same
proportions to make liquid to do so. In a week they
are cured so that you can take them round the world
with you. The writer cured twenty quarts on the 18th
January, 1887, and the last of them were used in
the following April, when they were just as fresh and
good as if only caught in the morning. If prawns are
not to be had, there are several kinds of bait that can be
used, and so far as the fishes’ palate is concerned, they
may be taken in the following order :
Mullet. Cockles.
Shrimps. Sandworms.
Boney Bream. Herring Dough (made
Sardines with stiff worked
Eugerra. dough, mixed with
Squid. mashed up pickled
Whelks. herrings)
Crabs. Meat, &c., &c.
Almost any kind of fish, including shark, will do for
bait on a pinch; but, depend upon it, to have the right
kind of bait, no matter what trouble it may cost to get
it, will pay in the success attending the haul.
For fresh water fishing the baits used are :
Fr ogs. Mutton.
Grubs (all kinds) Beef.
Worms.
and fish cut up, and the flesh of birds. There are only
a comparatively few of the rivers and creeks inland that


contain fish in any quantities, the Murray and Conda-
mine being among the best. Eels, some small kinds of
blackfish, &c., are of course to be caught in almost any
permanent waterhole ; and at night the former offers
really good sport, if you have a good fire on the bank
which keeps up a steady blaze, so that you can see your
float To facilitate seeing the slightest nibble, you re-
quire a good-sized pickle cork, with a white feather.
The worm is by far the best bait for the eel. As they
run pretty large at times, you require good strong tackle;
a No. 3 hemp line, and No. 4/0 hook will do.


CHAPTER IV.
THE BEST FORMS OF BOTTOM, AND THE FISHING
GROUNDS.
The selection of the right fishing grounds is one of the
best tests of the fisherman. A novice finds his way to
the bank of a river, and throws in his line in the first
clear space he sees. A fisherman makes a careful sur-
vey with the eye; notes the bends and points ; where
the still, deep water rests; where the tide is strongest;
and what the bottom is like. If it be nothing but pure
mud, and mud banks, unrelieved by clumps of rocks,
or sandy or gravelly patches, he may cast his line into
the most likely spot he sees, but he will register a mental
note—no fish here. If, however, there are spots with
sandy or gravelly bottom, he will choose the bend, oppo-
site to an acute point, where one of these conditions
prevails, and where the water is fairly deep—lo to 30
feet—and the tide not too strong ; and, be sure, if there
are fish about, he will give a good account of his doings.
The novice, who has been fishing, perhaps all day, sees a
man who has only been at the work an hour, and who
cast in not more than fifty yards above or below him,
and in no time filled his basket with fine fish ; while he,
after baking in the sun for 10 or 12 hours, can only
show a “ toady,” or two or three miserable cat-fish. He
looks at the haul of his neighbour with his mouth wide
open, and for the life of him, he can’t make out why he
should not have caught fish as well as this man, who
“ came at the eleventh hour,” more especially as he had
the same description of bait and tackle. If he had been
a fisherman, as his neighbour was, he would have known


the reason, and not fished on a mud bottom , which he
had been doing all day, and, therefore, caught no fish.
It may, and probably will, appear incredible to the in-
experienced, to say that a foot in space will make the
difference between a successful and a non-successful
catch ; nevertheless, such is the case. Two men are fish-
ing from a boat, which is moored near to a little sandy
patch, it may be only three feet square, and one line just
drops into or about the middle of this little spot, and the
owner of that line hauls up the fish as fast as he can
throw in * while his mate, whose line drops on the mud
close to, can’t even get a bite. This is no imaginary
case or theory, but is borne out in the experience of all
fishermen.
From the foregoing remarks it may be assumed, and
laid down as an infallible rule, that a sandy or gravelly
bottom is the best; while it is almost a waste of time to
fish on a muddy bottom. There are several explanations
for this peculiarity of the fish biting better, and being
more abundantly caught upon the sandy, or gravelly, or
rocky bottom. In the first place, we have few fish that
are caught with the line, that feed on or wallow in mud.
The mullet do so, but they never take the hook, unless a
very small kind that are now and again caught at South-
port, and other parts of the Bay, and that are plentiful
in the Bay and rivers near Melbourne. The breain and
flathead, at certain seasons, do a little mud banging and
poking about; but even at that particular season, you
can catch ten to one of them on a sandy, gravelly, or
rocky bottom, to what you can on the mud, as they only
spend a short time of the day in their “mudlaiking.
In the second place, nearly all fish choose sandy or
gravelly patches to have their games, of which they are
fond , to rub and clean themselves of sea lice, &c., and


to enjoy the light and warmth; while many find a greater
deposit of the marine insect life they feed on, among the
sand and gravel, than they do elsewhere; consequently,
to some species of fish, these particular forms of bottoms
are the best, even for feeding grounds. Another reason
why fish prefer the sand or gravel bottom is, that they
can see approaching enemies, such as sharks, &c., better
than they can on the muddy bottom, where the least
disturbance creates a murky veil that limits the range of
vision, and consequent danger of attack from an unseen
enemy. Some species, of course, avail themselves of the
muddy bottom, to secure their retreat from an attacking
enemy, by stirring up the mud.
Even fishermen, at times, drop into what the writer
would call a lazy mood, in regard to “ looking-up ” the
best fishing grounds, in both “ old ” and “ new ” fishing
resorts. Many years ago, when the now far-famed
Southport was mentioned as a spot suitable for a sea-side
resort, the writer paid a visit to the place, and was really
taken aback with the exceptionally good fishing, which
at the time was limited (because everybody went there)
to the small Bay in front of where the residence of
E. J. Stevens, Esq., now stands, and the point (long
since washed into the ocean) on the eastern side, and at
the junction of the South Channel and Nerang River.
“ Redspinner,” who is a true fisherman, when he visited
Southport first, and for long after all those who did any
fishing, used to limit their operations to one or other of
these places. In the Bay it was necessary to stand up
to your middle in water to fish ; and on the Point you
had to be in the water more or less. Great numbers of
fish were caught, but the writer felt convinced that, good
as the fishing was, there was better in the locality, both
in regard to numbers and weight of fish. To test the


matter, a boat was procured from that honest tradesman
and pioneer of the place, R. T. Johnston, and the river
(Nerang) Channels, and all likely spots were explored,
the result being the discovery of the best fishing grounds
in the place ; and although the resort has been open for
some nine years, the spots selected then hold the premier
position as fishing grounds at Southport. It is never
well to quietly drop into the idea, that because it is said
that this bay, or that point, or that bend, or that wharf,
was, is, and has been for “no end of time” the great
and only fishing ground to be had in the neighbourhood,
that it is so. Search, experiment, and prove for yourself,
whether the spots generally resorted to are the best.
Men in this respect are often like a flock of sheep, they
follow the leaders. ISTo thought is employed, no labour
given, to prove or test the question individually.
THE BEST-KNOWN FISHING GROUNDS.
It depends, of course, upon the class of fishing you
purpose engaging in, as to the spot you select for the
sport; If you are bent upon
Whiting and Sole Fishing,
you will require to go to the shores of the Bay ; the best
localities being near the passages leading to the Pacific,
notably Bribie, Moreton, Amity, and Southport; but the
Whiting are also caught freely, at certain seasons, all
round the edge of the Bay and inlets, where there are
sandy banks ; and also at the mouth of, and up nearly
to the Hamilton, in the Brisbane River.
Jew-fish, Bream, and Flathead,
are, in their respective seasons, to be caught readily in
the Brisbane River, from above Oxley Creek to the Bay,
wherever you find a sandy or gravelly bottom ; the best-
known places being near Victoria Bridge ; opposite the


Botanic Gardens; at the mouth of Norman’s Creek; the
point and bend where Breakfast Creek empties into the
river ; off the Sandbank below the Hamilton ; opposite
the Queensport Works; at the mouth of Doughboy Creek;
and other spots that have been tried and found satis-
factory. Almost anywhere in the Bay, within a short
distance of the shore, bream, squire, and flathead can be
caught; and the same remark will apply to jew-fish, if
the deep channels are chosen that run between the various
islands.
Schnapper, King-fish, Rock Cod, Parrot-fish, <fcc.,
are only to be caught for certain at Flat Rock, or some
of the deep-sea fishing grounds in the Pacific ocean ; but
now and again fair hauls of schnapper are caught at Mud
Island, Humpybong, off Amity Point, at Cleveland,
Macleay Island, Southport, and other parts of the Bay;
and occasionally a rock cod, parrot-fish, or king-fish are
hauled up. Tailor and travalli are also caught in a
spasmodic way in the same localities. It may here be
stated, that with regard to the tackle, bait, &c., that the
same conditions will apply to all waters along the Aus-
tralian coast. If you fish in Sydney Harbour, in the
Melbourne Yarra, near the mouth of the Saltwater River,
or the Geelong Harbour, or go to the South Australian
rivers or bays, it is all the same ; the mullet, prawns, or
other forms of bait used here will answer for the general
run of fish caught, as will also the same lines, hooks, <fcc.
You may, of course, not be able to find prawns and other
descriptions of bait got in Queensland ; but if you can
take either mullet or prawns, properly preserved, be sure
the fish will take either ; in any case, you will find a
“local” substitute. By inquiry, also, the best-known
fishing grounds are easily ascertained.


CHAPTER V.
THE BEST TIME OF DAY, OF TIDES, AND THE
WEATHER.
All who go fishing in earnest like to succeed; but it
often happens that the earnestness is thrown away,
through a false start being made. It may, of course
occur, that the fault of starting too late, was more the
outcome of uncontrollable circumstances, than wilful neg-
lect on the part of the individual of time and tide. It
is, however, too frequently, indifference to these im-
portant details, that so many return at the end of a
day’s fishing with empty bags. Eish are very exacting
in the matter of time and tide. No epicure is more so
with his cook. If you haven’t the fishes’ breakfast, din-
ner, or tea ready at the time he is willing to partake,
he’s off; and you can’t scold him as the epicure can the
cook. You see, therefore, you are reduced to the position
of making your time suit the time and appetite of the
fish; for you can’t make him do anything but what he
likes. This being so, the question arises—What is the
best time of day and tide, and the best sort of weather
to tempt his finny majesty to take your hook 1 Let us
deal with the weather first. Make one very decided note
under this head—don’t go fishing when a cold westerly
wind is blowing ; if you do, you’ll catch nothing worth
mentioning, but bony perch or cat-fish. A waning moon
is also death to good fishing, and our westerly wind is
something like the east wind in England, a damper on


all river or shallow water fishing. Westerly wind weather
is chosen for the schnapper fishing at Flat Rock, &c., on
account of the motion of the ocean being less turbulent
than at any other time—and the catches are generally
good; but the question may be asked—Would the fish
not be more plentiful, and more caught, if a south-easterly,,
or better still, a north-easterly, were blowing 1 The
writer is of opinion that such would be the result. The
suffering entailed upon bad sailors would be greatly in-
creased ; which, in their estimation, would be far from
compensating for the additional fish caught. It is no
use going fishing while heavy rain is falling ; nor when
the water is muddy, and a fresh prevails ; nor when the
water is alive with jelly fish.
THE EARLY MORNING IS THE TIME
if the tide be favourable ; and the best time of the tide-
is, beyond all doubt, half-an-hour before, and half-an-hour
after, the turn of both high and low tide; at times
the hour at the change of low tide is best, at other
times, high tide ; the question in favour of one or
the other depending upon the prevailing winds and
state of the ocean, and also the seasons of the year,
strength of tides, age of moon, <fec. Next to the
early morning, the evening or night time are best,
always providing the tides are right. Very often when
you have toiled all day, and not caught a fish, if you
were to go down to the exact ground, when darkness,
had fairly settled down, and the conditions of the tide
were right, that you would have a large haul. Moon-
light nights are bad, except the first half-hour of rising,
at which time, if the tide is flowing, you may have really
good sport.
A bright, clear morning, with easterly or north-easterly


light wind; a greyish-brown, or murky blue, or dull
green-coloured tint on the water; a tide near to the
turn, just as the sun peeps above the horizon ; a good
bed of sand or gravel for the bottom, with a depth of
four to six feet for whiting, and 10 to 30 feet for jew-
fish, &c., and you have the perfection of favourable
conditions for fishing in our rivers; and, with slight
modifications in some of the details, such as depth, &c.,
applicable to our Bay and deep-sea fishing alike. There
is no rule without an exception, and there will be odd
days and odd times when the foregoing conditions will
not secure success ; and on the same days, when more
unlikely hours and times of tide are chosen, success may
follow. That amounts to nothing ; the rule will be with
the conditions enumerated ; and you will catch fifty fish
to one, to what you will at other times.
The “making” (new to full) moon is a most important
element in the success of the fisherman, as the fish seem
far more plentiful, and the greatest catches are then
made; while during the last ten or twelve days of the
waning stage, the result is nil, or next to it. So marked
is this feature in connection with the habits of the fish,
that they can seldom or never be caught in quantities
with the line, in our rivers or Bay. It may therefore be
inferred, that they infest the shallow waters when the
moon’s action on the tides affords them a certain security
for again getting back to deep water; as each night up
to the full moon, the tide increases in volume ; but,
thereafter, when it declines in the same ratio, the fish
mistrust the means of egress, and consequently get into-
deep water, while they think it is safe. The peculiarity
of this phase of the habits of the fish is, that although
they are so plentiful in, and can be so readily caught in
the day time, during the making moon, that they will


not, as a rule, bite in the moonlight. Where are they,
and what are they about at such times 1 It is difficult
to say : but you can at times see them in great numbers,
jumping, and hear them lashing the water; but not a
bite can you get.
When the tides are not running at too rapid a rate,
you can fish right through from tide to tide in the river,
and at times make really good hauls; but it is necessary
to “ hold ” the bottom, no matter whether the tide is
slack or strong. That is a very distinct feature in our
fishing in Queensland waters, that you must have your
hooks on the bottom, or you will fail. The only fish the
writer knows of that will take the hook near the surface,
are the tailor, gar, and longtom ; and so few of them are,
or can be caught in the usual fishing haunts, that it is
not worth providing to catch them. When the tides
run strongly, it takes a great weight of lead to keep the
bottom; it is, therefore, important that those who set
out for a day’s fishing should bear this in mind, and
make provision accordingly, if strong tides are prevailing
at the time they purpose going. If at all possible, how-
ever, try to catch the “turn of the tide,” no matter what
the weather may be.
“ Blow wind ! come wrack !
At least we’ll die with harness on onr hack. ”


CHAPTER VI.
HOW TO BAIT A HOOK AND CATCH FISH.
One of the great illusions that hover in the mind of the
inexperienced fisherman, is the idea that the bait cannot
be too big; that to catch fish you must have a big bait.
The effect of this mistaken notion is, that, although they
may have the right-sized hook, and the line otherwise
properly rigged, and they may have some skill in hook-
ing a fish, nevertheless they lose nineteen out of twenty
catchable fish, through having too large a bait on, and
which enables the fish to strip the hook without being
caught. To illustrate : A and B go fishing for whiting ;
of course they catch a bream, or other sorts of fish now
and again, but the whiting forms the majority of the
catch —perhaps fifty to one. Ais a fisherman, and puts
on as small a bait as will just cover the point and curve
of the hook, taking care to have no scraggy ends hanging
down, so that the fish can’t strip his hook without afford-
ing him a chance to hook the rogue. Bis a novice, and
a believer in the large bait theory; and, although he
don’t say so to A, he thinks within himself that A is
making a great mistake in using so small a bait; he
consequently selects the biggest prawns in the tin, and
threads his hook till the hook and gut, nearly up to his
sinker, are buried, and offer to the fish a grand repast,
without the hazard of being caught. He keeps getting
good bites, but fails to catch, while A is all the time
■O ' 1
busily engaged hauling up the fish. It is only at the
end of the day B realizes something wrong, when the fish
are counted, and it is ascertained that A has caught
seventy, while B can only muster two —certainly the


}ji gg cst two caught. As they wend their way home, 1>
modestly asks A, “ how it was he caught so few 1 ” A’s
reply was equally modest : “I think you had too big
baits on.”
The writer knows a jolly medico, who is very fond of
fishing, and who is very fairly represented by B in the
above paragraph. Let the fishing be what it may, from
whiting to schnapper, he will always have the biggest
hooks, the heaviest sinkers, the thickest line, and use by
far the biggest bait of the party, no matter if there are
fifty present. His catch is generally the smallest,
numerically, of any individual of the party, but he in-
variably catches one or two of the biggest fish of the haul.
Another mistaken notion that runs in the minds of
some, in connection with putting a bait on, is that it is
not necessary to cover the point of the hook. In deep-
sea fishing, there may be some excuse for this belief,
more especially in connection with particularly voracious
species of fish, such as the barracouta, king-fish, &o. ; but
when dealing with the more sophisticated fish that infest
our rivers and bays, a disregard of the point of the hook
being hidden, means less fish caught than could be caught
if the hook is properly covered. In practice, the rule is,
if the fish are scarce and shy, that they will not take the
bait unless the point of the hook is covered. To put the
matter shortly : select a bait proportioned in size to your
hook, with which cover your hook from the point to
within a little of the noose on the stem I if there are any
loose or scraggy ends or points, cut or pinch them off-
some fish bite better at prawns if the head is left on, but
the usual way they are treated is to put the hook through
the tail, and pull the head off. It is always advisable to
skin the prawn before putting it on the hook, if you
have the time, and the prawns are in a condition to be


skinned. This is one of the great advantages of the
prawns cured by the process discovered by the writer,
that they can be skinned easier than when fresh, and
the flesh is as white as clean linen, after being stripped
of the outer coating.
HOW TO HOOK A FISH
is, of course, the fisherman’s secret; and although a
general idea may be conveyed by description, the per-
fection of the art must be acquired by practice, in the
same way that you acquire proficiency in pulling a boat,
in riding a horse, or bicycle. If fish are plentiful and
hungry, and they take the hook ravenously, little skill is
required to hook them, as, at such times, they cast aside
caution, and fight with each other for the bait, which
they “ gobble down ” as half-starved fowls do corn. It
is when the fish are in pairs, or small schools, and when
their natural food is plentiful, and their appetites are
fastidious, that the test of skill in hooking comes in.
Different fish have quite a distinct method of biting or
taking the hook. The bream gives a one, two, and off
he runs with the bait, and that is the moment to “ strike,”
in other words, hook him. Flathead suck the bait down
their throats, and you will often not feel the least move-
ment of your line, till you pull on it to see if your bait
is right, when you will find a flathead from half-a-pound
to a ten-pounder on, and for aught you know has been
on ever since you cast in. Sometimes they give a little
tug, lay still a minute or more, then give another little
pull, and then, if they are disturbed, will make a run
with the line, when you must strike. The whiting, if
small, are difiicult to strike ; they give an electric tug or
two, so rapidly, that you have to be very sharp or both
fish and bait are gone. For these you want No. 12 or


No. 13 hook, with small bit of bait, and you require to
strike at the first tug if you can. The large-sized,
whether “ whitesea ” or “ blackbacks,” bite differently,
being very voracious ; taking the bait into their mouths
at a gulp, and running the line at right angles through
the water, somewhat in the same way that a shark does.
They hook themselves if the line is held firmly, but it is
safest to give a slight tug as soon as they are fairly on
the run. The jew-fish is much like the schnapper in
biting; they seem to “grab” the hook, like a man would
the end of a rope if he was falling down a well. When
either the schnapper or jew-fish tug, all the fisherman
need do is—ditto, and your fish is on. The difference
in the mode of biting by different fish is so distinct, that,
in seven cases out of ten, a fisherman can tell what sort
of fish is at his line. This, like deciding the exact mo-
ment to strike, is only acquired by experience. It is
very important for the novice to bear in mind, that under
no circumstances, must he fish with a slack line ; if he
does, he must expect to lose many a good fish. The line,
or the part of it to which the hooks are attached, must
rest on the bottom, and a gentle strain should be kept
on it by the fisherman, so that the least interference
with the bait can be felt, and if a proper bite is made,
the fish hooked—a very difficult feat if there is a slack
line. The two leading points to be borne in mind by the
novice, in connection with striking a fish, are to keep a
steady strain upon the line, and if a fish makes a fair run
with his bait, to strike while he is in the act of running.
The art of knowing when to strike, under the tugging
mode of biting, will come in due course by practice, feel,
and careful observation. Persevere !
“ ’Tis not in mortals to command success,
But we’ll do more, Sempronius—we’ll deserve it.”






CHAPTER VII.
THE FISH WE CATCH AND THE FISH WE EAT.
As the same tackle does for all the varieties of deep-sea
fish caught at the Flat Rock, and other fishing grounds
along the Queensland coast, they will form a group ; and
a diagram of the appropriate tackle given beneath the
plate of the fish; and the same course will be adopted in
connection with river and bay fish, in the cases where
the same tackle will answer for catching more than one
kind. In the case of fish seldom caught with hook and
line, or only caught in small quantities, such as gar-fish,
sole, &0., they will only receive brief notice ; and it must
be understood by “ The Fish we Eat,” that it is only
intended to include in the list in subsequent pages the
fish caught with the line, and not those varieties taken
with the net, such as mullet, &c. As far as it is possible,
the best months will be given for catching the different
fish dealt with ; but the seasons at times are so affected
by droughts, strong winds, and storms, that one year
may not be the same as another, and a difference of many
weeks may occur in the proper season for the respective
varieties of fish coming into the rivers and Bay.
DEEP-SEA FISH CAUGHT ALONG THE COAST.
Schnapper, Groper, Parrot-fish, King-fish, Bonito, Tailor-
fish, God.
In addition to the above, there are other kinds of
deep-sea fish caught; but the schnapper is the predo-
minant fish, and the others figure much in the order they


are given above. As an edible fish, the schnapper
also claims the first place. The flesh is white and firm,
and equally delicious whether boiled, baked, or fried;
and if scaled, cleaned, salted with a mixture of salt
and glacialine, and hung up in a cool, shady place, will
keep for weeks. The parrot-fish comes next to the
schnapper for the table ; in fact, many prefer it to the
schnapper, averring it has a more delicate flavor. The
groper, king-fish, and tailor-fish, all have votaries who
swear by their excellent qualities, when properly served
with the et ccteras that a good cook knows how to gar-
nish them with. Flat Rock, Smith’s Rock, anywhere,
if rocks abound along the coast, north and south, to the
mouth of the Tweed river, the fish enumerated above are
to be caught, and the best bait to use is mullet ; but
shark, any kinds of fish, or meat, will do almost as well,
as they are very voracious, taking the bait with a snap
like the closing of a spring rat trap, so that little skill is
required to hook them. They can be caught nearly all
the year round, but the winter months are those chosen
for fishing excursions, on account of the sea being calmer,
and consequently not so exacting in making the fisher-
men “ cast up their reckoning ” too often. The westerly
winds almost determine the season resorted to for
schnapper fishing, and they usually begin in May and
■end in September; so that there are about five months
in the year that answer. Schnapper run from five to
twenty pounds, while all the others reach heavy weights.
At times, in the winter, very good baulk of schnapper
are to be had in different parts of the Bay ; off Mud
Island, Humpy bong, Bribie Island, Peel Island, Macleay
and Lamb Islands, Southport, and many other places,
but it is always an uncertain thing. You may go out
■one day at any of the places named to catch bream, and






other fish ordinarily caught in the Bay, and you’ll “light”
upon a school of schnapper, and if you have good tackle,
haul them up “ hand over fist.” You go to the same
spot every day thereafter for a whole week, and don’t
catch one. They are a very migratory and gregarious
fish, and that may account for the fact of their seldom
being caught in a miscellaneous way, like most other
kinds of fish that “ pair off.” Even at their regular
haunts, they are irregular; not because they are scarce,
but because when you are trying to catch them at the
Flat Rock, they have shifted their camp to say, Smith’s
Rock ; you shift there, and you catch as you like.
Whiting, Gar-fish, Sole, Diamond-fish.
The whiting is the most numerous, and decidedly the
best eating of all the small fish caught in the Bay.
There are three distinct kinds caught at Southport; the
bright, shining, silver-scaled, which are caught on the
outer beach ; the light brown, tinted with a yellowish
grey, generally hooked in the Broadwater and little bays;
and the blackbacks, so named from their backs being a
blackish brown, and the whole fish being of a darker
colour than the other two varieties ; it is also a much
larger and heavier fish, turning the scales at times with
weights up to 2 lbs., the average being about 1 lb.; and
generally found up the Nerang and other rivers with
purely sandy bottoms, and which empty into the Bay or
ocean. The ordinary kinds can be caught in every part
of the Bay, along the shores, and in and all about the
sandy banks that crop up in any spot in the middle of
the Bay; but they do not run larger than 5 oz. on an
average. Their flesh is as white as snow, specially firm,
and deliciously delicate to the palate; while unquestion-
ably the greatest favourite of all small fish in the
E


estimation of the mass of fish-eaters. The bait par-
excellence for catching the whiting is the prawn ; but it
must be put on neatly, and not too much of it, or the
fish will get the dinner, and not the fisherman. They
are a specially bright and plucky little fish, and die
gamely to the last gasp. The novice will have to be on,
the alert to strike, at the first decided running tug of the
fish. The whiting seldom nibble ; if they do you may
be sure it is some little invalid of the family that is not
worth catching. It is generally a pick-up and run-off
kind of bite, as much as to say, “ I mean business, catch
me if you can and sometimes it takes skill to do the
thing neatly. The main thing to secure success, is to
have the right tackle and bait. If your line is too heavy,
and your hook too large, you might just as well try to
whitewash the moon as to catch whiting.
The aborigines resort to a practice in whiting fishing
that is very peculiar, and is certainly efficacious, as the
writer has tried and proved it to be so a hundred or
more times; and that is, to strike the water with a stick
or paddle if the fish are not biting, and if there are any
within sight or hearing, they rush to the spot at once,
and give you a chance to hook them, as they then see
your bait. The feature of being attracted by a splash
and noise on the water is so great, that it happens
frequently, if one of a party occupying a seat in a boat
has a rather heavier sinker than the others, and makes
more splash and noise in casting in, that he gets more
bites and fish (if his hooks and line are the right size)
than his friends alongside him.
The best method of cooking whiting is to fry them in
olive oil. They are good if boiled ; but it is a barbarous
way of preparing such a glorious little table-fish. They
are at their best for use if cleaned and put on the table


within the hour of being caught; but if that is not
convenient, have them cleaned as soon as possible, some
coarse salt sprinkled in the inside and about the gills,
tie them with a string by the tails, hang them in a cool
shady place , not huddled together in a dish, and when
you want to use them, they will be firm and appetising.
They are to be caught ten months out of the twelve ; the
best months for making big hauls being from December
to May, except in Raby Bay, where a small kind are very
numerous in winter. Sandworms, euggera, and cockles
are the next best bait to prawns. The same bait, but
lighter tackle, with a No. 12 hook will answer for catch-
ing gar, sole, flounder, and diamond-fish. To secure the
gar-fish, you want no sinker, and attach a small piece of
cork to within a couple of inches of the hook, so as to
keep it on the surface ; you also require a light bamboo
rod with fine top. If you get among a good school it
affords really line sport, as you have to be expert to
hook the little rogues. All four of these fish require
skill to catch them, as they are noted thieves, and display
an amount of dexterity in picking the bait off a hook
that would open the eyes of any novice set to catch
them. As a highly trained artistic thief, however, the
diamond-fish claims, and is awarded, by all who have had
an encounter with him, the first place. Never, even if
you are an expert fisherman, try a “bout” with him, if
your tackle is the slighest shade too large ; if you do, be
sure you’ll get the worst of the tussle. The whole of
these little fish are remarkably good for the table, but
they are rarely caught with the hook in quantities.
They are caught now and again in the rivers, but the
best spots, however, are to be found along the patches of
sandy beach in the Bay ; and they will take any shell-
fish as bait.


Bream.
The black bream surpasses, in the estimation of the
fisherman, all other fish in the waters of Southern
Queensland, for the reason that he can be caught all the
year round. In the Bay, in the shallow waters ;on the
sandy beach bordering the shores of the Pacific ; in the
biggest rivers and smallest creeks that empty themselves
into the Bay or Ocean; in any hole or corner where a
living is to be made, no matter what difficulties he may
have to encounter to get there, you’ll find him hard at
work ; and never too “ full ” to negotiate the bait offered
him by the fisherman, always providing it is of the
right sort. He is the most industrious, “ high-spirited,”
and pluckiest fish to be had in Australian waters.
Nothing daunts him ; and, when he is caught, and lying
on the grass, or in the boat, you see, as he heaves his
sides in the effort of making the last gasp, his eye
glisten as it shoots forth the parting electric spark of
defiance, and he dies like a Gladiator.
“ Yetlow’ring on his enemy,
As if the hour that seal’d his fate,
Surviving left his quenchless hate. ”
There are several kinds of bream; the black, silvery-
brown, red, bony, and the silver-bream, also some other
varieties ; but the three first-named are the choicest and
most commonly caught with the line, and best known to
fishermen. The black and silvery-brown bream are
caught in the rivers, creeks and bays alike ; but the red
is seldom caught out of the Bay or ocean, except at the
mouths of the streams communicating with either the
one or the other. They are all agreed on one head, and
that is their partiality to rocks. Wherever you find a
clump of rocks, whether in the rivers or Bay, be sure it






is a favourite rendezvous for all bream that infest the
stream in their neighbourhood ; more especially if it is
sandy bottom, and there are shell-fish about, such as
periwinkles, whelks, &c.
Bream are in their prime from December to the end
of April, and can be caught at times in great quantities,
more especially in the early morning, or after dark if the
tides are right. The prawn is the bait if you can get it,
if not, squid, cookies, euggera, shrimps, whelks, and other
shell-fish, or herring dough. You cannot try any month in
the year that it is impossible to catch bream ; but during
the months of June and July, they are not in good order,
being attacked by marine lice, which worry them
greatly ; the irritation causing a sort of itch, that makes
them rub, and scratch, and work, and “ run ” till they
become as thin as possible. The fishermen soon detects
the presence of these lice, as they work gray patches or
stripes on the backs or sides of the fish; and are some-
times found under the gills. They are something like a
brown wood bug; and when seen through the microscope
assume the form of horrid monsters.
The weight of bream varies very much, the average
being rather under one pound. You will often hear inex-
perienced fishermen talking about having caught several
bream “over” two pounds weight. They quite believe
what they say, and they only exaggerate through
ignorance; never having seen one weighed. In all
probability their 2 lb. fish would, if placed upon the
scales, barely turn the balance at 1 lb. A 2 lb. bream is
a very large fish, who will give some sport, either with
rod or handline, to put him on the grass. When they
are in season, and plentiful, they take the hook with a
rush, not so when in pairs, or small parties. They
approach the bait at such times, with as much caution as


a General reconnoitring the enemy’s position before the
battle. They look at and smell the bait, and if suited to
their tastes, give a little tug, then drop it, swim round a
bit, then another tug more decided than the first, and
they get the flavour of the delicious prawn in their
palate,; then all caution is cast aside, the bait is picked
up and run away with • the fisherman strikes at that
interesting moment, and, if fortune favour him, adds
another victim to the cravings of the stomach.
To fish successfully for bream, more particularly when
they are scarce and shy, you must have gut, and a gut
trace is better still to attach the gut to, instead of
directly on the line ; this applies in a marked sense, if
you have a coarse line. For catching red-bream, off Mud
Island, Peel Island, and Macleay Island are first-class
spots ; large hauls being caught at times, and the sample
of fish got, run to the biggest size.
Jew, Flathead, Travalli, Johrudowry, Squire, and
Tahwinn.
This group of fish can be caught with the same sized
tackle, but there will be a great disparity in the numbers
caught of one species to that of another. Jew-fish and
flathead are caught readily in the Bay, and all the lead-
ing rivers; but the other four varieties are seldom
caught out of the Bay, or on the shores of the Pacific ;
and in the spots that form their regular haunts in
the waters of the southern portion of the colony.
The travalli, John-dowry, and tahwinn (often called
tarwhine) are only caught spasmodically- the squire on
the proper fishing grounds, and in the right season can,
however, be had in great numbers, and they are beyond
all question one of the best eating fish in Queensland
waters ; not even excepting the schnapper, while many
of them reach the size of small schnapper, and sport






almost as big a “ bump of benevolence.” The jew-fish is
most plentiful from December to June, and is one of the
gregarious species of fish nearly always found in large
schools, like the sea mullet. During certain seasons, and
in specially favourable years, when the conditions of
climate and other surroundings have been propitious to
fecundity, they infest the rivers along the coast in masses
packed together, nearly equal to the way herrings are
stowed in the tins, sold by grocers. The Brisbane river,
some twenty-five years ago, at times, and on a moonlight
night appeared to change from all water to one half
water, and one half fish. The noise made is really
startling, and the writer has seen more than one robust
individual jump back from the edge of a boat landing, as if
shot; the cause of his fright being a huge jew-fish
leaping up close to, and falling on the water in a way to
create a noise, something like a big boat being dropped
from a height of ten or twelve feet, on to the surface.
The river literally appeared alive with marine monsters,
whose anger vented itself in lashing the waters with
unabating fury all through the night.
On one of these nights the old fisherman who resides
at South Brisbane, had a singular experience. He had
been working hard all night with his scoop along the
shores of the river for prawns, but could not get a prawn
worth catching- All the time he had been working, the
lashing, splashing, tussling, struggling and thumping had
been going on among the jew-fish, in the middle, and
above and below him in the -river; but in one particular
spot, not far from where he was making a “ last try ”
he noticed that the splashing was done in a circle, which
covered a large space in the river ; the circle or ring
being clearly defined by huge jew-fish, constantly leaping
up, while others, in turn, lashed the water with their
tails. His curiosity was aroused, and he pulled his punt


to the spot. As he apppoached the edge of the circle,
there was a terrible leaping and struggling, as the
compact mass of fish opened out, and he found himself
within the ring. It was soon explained why he had
caught no prawns, for here they were “ rounded-up ” in
a solid mass, a foot deep, entangled with each other, and
incapable of individual movement, being something like
a great body of debris brought down with a flood. The
dispersal of their fish enemies, and the attempt of the
fisherman to scoop some of them into his punt, soon
infused life into the strata of prawns ; what with jump-
ing, wrenching, and other efforts, they disentangled
themselves and disappeared like magic.
The jew-fish is undoubtedly one of our handsomest
fish, resembling the salmon, both in shape and colours.
They often attain to enormous sizes; but the average of
those caught, would probably be 3 to 4 lbs. The best
size for the table is a seven to eight pound fish, which
should be cleaned as soon as dead, some salt sprinkled
inside, hung up in a cool place for two or three hours;
then stuff with proper seasoning and bake. In this way
it makes a good dish ; but it is not one of our best
edible fish, there being a great tendency to become soft.
They take the bait ravenously, so there is no great skill
required to catch them ; in fact, they catch themselves,
if you hold the line firmly.
The flathead, while one of the most tasteless fish
caught, is perhaps as great an all round favourite as any
fish that can be named, owing doubtless to the fact that
the flesh is firm all the year round. The fish after being
out of the water for a length of time, may, and will go
bad, but it remains firm until actual decomposition sets
in. He is about one of the most persistent scavengers
of the finny tribe, always on the alert for “ a good
thing,” working silently in what appears a semi


somnolent way, but nevertheless wide awake, and working
out his living. A singular feature in relation to the
ilathead, is, that the colour of his “ jacket ” or skin is
always the colour of the bottom of the stream he
inhabits ; and the writer is imbued with the idea that
he can, if shifted from a stream with a muddy bottom, to
one with a sandy bottom, change the colour of his skin
to resemble the colour of the sand. Those inhabiting
mud bottoms are unfailingly the colour of the mud, and
those living in waters with sandy bottoms, are the
colour of the sand. This is a provision of nature, no
doubt, to enable them to secure their food, by their being
invisible to the marine life they live upon, and also to
hide them from the enemies who prey upon them in turn.
The flathead are to be caught nearly all the year
round in certain localities, but not in great numbers
except in the “ schooling ” months, June to August, when
fair hauls are made. The usual habit of the fish is to go
in pairs, and it frequently happens that if you catch one,
the other will not go away, but loiters round till caught.
The squire, travalli, John-dowry, and tahwinn are
caught in the summer and winter; but the summer is best
for the three last named, while for the squire the depth
of winter seems best. It would be difficult to name a
group of fish that will surpass these four for table use,
everyone of them being faultless, with white solid flesh
and delicate flavour.
There is not much art in hooking any of the fish
included in this group, as they all take the bait at a run ;
no finesse, no preliminary coquetting and nibbling, but a
clean “grab and go.” The bait to use is prawns, or
shrimps, or mullet; if none of these are to be had, bony
bream, whiting, or other small fish will do ; they are not,
however, so good.


CHAPTER VIII.
THE FISH WE CATCH, BUT DON'T EAT; AND THE
ABORIGINES’ MODE OF FISHING.
It might appear at first-sight unnecessary to devote
space to “The fish we catch—but don’t eat,” but it is
not so in reality, as among the number there are some
dangerous customers to handle, and the inexperienced
should be warned of the danger attendant upon handling
them. The most dangerous to get a bad stab from,
would be the stinging-ray, but as they generally run
large in size, and are more widely known as a ticklish
fish to deal with, there is not the danger there is with
the catfish-eel. They look so small, and, except for their
snake-like appearance, so harmless, that no one would
apprehend the poisonous thorns carried in and hidden by
the pectoral fins ; the slightest puncture from which
causes a thrill of agony never forgotten if once
experienced, and the duration of the pain will be
determined by the extent of the probe, and the state of
the system, when the sting is inflicted. The fisherman
often finds it the simplest, safest, and most expeditious
way of getting rid of one of these plagues is to cut off
the hook and let him go, more especially if he has the
hook deep down his stomach. In dealing with the
stinging-ray, all that has to be done is to give him a
hard knock on the back of the head, and he will lie still
till the hook is disengaged. The spear he fights with,


is at the base of his tail, and he brings it to bear by
twisting the tail round the object, and suddenly jerking
it on to the point of the spear, which is barbed, and
when it enters the flesh is difficult to extract; while the
wound inflicted is impregnated with a poisonous sub-
stance that makes it hard to heal; often necessitating
the amputation of the limb pierced, and the sufferings
of the patient are simply indescribable.
The cat-fish is also a very dangerous fish to the unwary
in a sense, more dangerous than either of the foregoing, on
account of the large numbers of them caught ; in fact,
at certain seasons, and after a “ fresh,” you can fre-
quently catch nothing but cat-fish. Their poisonous-
thorns are attached to the dorsal pectoral, and ventral
fins, so that they are armed at all points; and the
slightest puncture of the skin with any one of these
thorns creates a similar thrill of pain to that felt from
the sting of the ray or cat-fish-eel.
The best way to deal with the cat-fish in taking him
off the hook, is to stick your knife into him to hold
him while you get the hook out, or give him a good
crack at the back of the head with a stick, rowlock
or stone ; only don’t try to do it with your boot, for his
thorns will go through the upper leather at either side
of the sole like a knife, and you run a risk of losing your
foot, if stung, and your system happened to be out of
order, and the sting proved to be a bad one. There is
another very dangerous fish, happily not often caught
with the line, that is even worse than either of those
mentioned, and that is the bullaroo. It is a small fish,
generally from four to six inches long, brown sides,
yellowish belly, with a small pig-shaped mouth, and a
long spike or spear at the back of the head, which can
be elevated or depressed along the' back, at the will of the


owner. To give an idea of the terrible effect and poisonous
nature of the sting of this little marine monster, the writer
will mention an incident that occurred in the early days
of Sandgate, when Myers did all the net fishing to supply
the township. A party was formed to go fishing, both
with lines and net, and also to do some shooting, at
Humpbong, Myers supplying the boat and net; and it
was intended to stay a day or two, according to the sport
“got at.” The party was made up of a Rev. of the
Baptist persuasion, as grand a man as ever “ broke the
bread of life,” and who has long ago gone to the “home
where the weary find rest •” an equally genuine man who
is now connected with the Supreme Court, two boys, and
the writer. The party camped at Humpybong, all night,
and at early mom Myers roused all hands to draw the
net in “ Haye’s ” inlet. A circle was run with the boat,
leaving the net in its track, while all of us landlubbers
stood up to our knees in the water, holding the end of
the net, and ready to haul when told to do so. When
the net began to come in gradually, there was some
speculation and expectation of a great haul, but our
hopes were dashed to the ground, the final pull revealing
two or three mullet, and sundry stinging-rays, and other
fish no use for the table. All the party had their boots
off, and a warning cry came from Myers to “ look out ”
as there were bullaroos about. Curiosity was excited
all round, and the question asked, “ which is the bul-
laroo 1 ” While the question was being asked, Myers was
in the act of throwing a huge stinging-ray out of the
net, and in doing so it lit upon its back, with its white
stomach glistening in the early sun. It was an immense
fish, perhaps 60 to 80 lbs. weight. He now picked up a
bullaroo, very cautiously, by the back of the neck, to
show us, giving us emphatic instructions to be “ sure and


never let one sting us, as he had been ‘ pricked ’ by one,
and he was nearly killed by it, never having stirred from
his bed for eight weeks ! ” Having explained the dangers
and peculiarities of the fish, he carelessly threw it away,
and in so doing, it lit with the spike at the back of its
head, right on to the stomach of the big stinging-ray,
the spike having apparently pierced into the vitals of the
ray. The whole party went on with the work of getting
the net free, and placed snugly in the boat again ready
for another haul. This work occupied probably about
fifteen to twenty minutes, and when done, the gentle-
man who is now connected with the Supreme Court, sang
out, “ I say, just come and look here and, accordingly,
we all gathered round the big stinging ray, and each in-
dividual, as he gazed upon the objects below him, seemed
struck with awe at the marvellous effect produced in so
short a time. The whole of the ray’s stomach and
“ flaps,” which were white when Myers threw the fish
on to the grass, were turned to a crimson tint, while the
stomach itself, where the bullaroo’s spear had entered,
had collapsed to such a degree, that it looked as if it
had been pounded with a pestle, or cut and bruised at
the same time. The effect of the poison was simply
terrible.
The shark, congereel, sucker-fish, and toad-fish, besides
a few other varieties, are. among the number of fish we
catch that are no good to eat, and are a trouble to the
fisherman.
There are two, cat-fish and rays, however, among the
enumerated list of the fish we don’t eat, that are fine
edible fish, and, according to some epicures, superior to
any other fish caught in these waters. It is, of course,
a matter of taste. The aborigines are specially fond of
cat-fish, preferring them to almost any fish that swim.


There is, perhaps, no more interesting sight to an
European than to see the natives engaged in fishing.
Those natives inhabiting the sea-coast country before
the white man “ put in an appearance,” did not fish as
their successors do, with modern hook and line, they
used the spear and towrow, &c., and it is questionable
whether they did not succeed in making as good hauls
in their rude way, when the fish were undisturbed by
the net, and plentiful, as they do now with the more
approved and elaborate tackle and sophisticated fish to
deal with. It is something altogether wonderful the way
in which the aborigines seem to understand the movements
of fish. An European would look upon the waters of the
bay, or ocean, and see nothing but a wide expanse of
water ; an aborigine looks, and he sees shoals of fish,
how, why, or wherefore, you cannot tell, but there it is.
He is never mistaken. It is no fancy. To him the
surface of the bay or ocean is like the page of a book to
an educated man. He read sas he runs; each w'avelet
forming a character in his alphabet. Should a shoal of
mullet come into the bay, and, without jumping up, he
looks and he knows they are there, and can form a rough
idea of the numbers of the shoal, in the same way that
Napoleon Bonaparte could estimate the numbers of a
marching army.
After a “fresh” the “towrows” come into general
requisition, more especially among the coastal tribes of
the aborigines; and in some of the rivers and creeks
they make large hauls. It is really an interesting sight
to see them strip off and quietly stalk into the water,
nets in hand, and held clear from the body on either
side, and, looking for all the world like “ black ghosts,”
moving without apparent volition or disturbance of a
muscle, and calling up in the mind some of Dante’s weird
pictures :


‘ ‘ Then with eyes downward cast, and fill’d with shame,
Eearing my words offensive to his ear ;
Till w e had reach’d the river, I from speech
Abstained. And lo ! towards us in a bark
Comes an old man, hoary white with eld,
Crying, ‘ Woe to you wicked spirits ! hope not
Ever to see the sky again. I come
To take you to the other shore across,
Into eternal darkness, there to dwell.’ ”
To lie successful in towrow fishing, the water has to
be “ thick ” with discolouration. The fisherman stands
perfectly still with his face to the point the waters flow
from, and the towrows (a hand net with a hoop at the
top) extended in either hand to right or left of his body,
so held as to catch any fish that may be swept by the
tide or flood, along the part of the stream occupied by
the fisherman. If a fish is caught in one of the towrows
he is taken out, bitten on the back of the head by the
fisherman, and then thrown on to the bank, or put into
a dillybag, hung across the shoulder. The dexterity ex-
hibited in this species of fishing is wonderful, they catch
hundreds of fish in this way.
The most marvellous instance, however, that the writer
has ever heard of, in connection with the power exercised
by the aborigines over fish, is in the case of the stinging-
ray. The power seems to be possessed by the old men,
principally. The operator will stand upon the bank of a
creek, river, or the shores of the bay, where stinging-
rays “lookout,” and he shouts in a peculiar way, but at
the top of his voice, when you will see every ray within
hearing of the sound, dart up and make a sign of his
presence. It matters not if the ray is below the mud
hiding, up he jumps at the call. You will see hundreds
jump together.
The main resource of the aborigines in the days be


fore the white man appeared, however, in obtaining their
fish supply, was the spear. With this implement they
killed large quantities of all sorts of fish, including eels ;
but the latter were often obtained by damming and
diverting a stream ; more especially was this idea acted
upon in time of flood, in the creeks, &c., where eels and
other fish abounded. Besides these, they have other
modes of fishing, and in their way they are all attended
with success : and it may be assumed the secret of the
success is largely due to the fact, that they understand
how, when, and where to “ go-a-fishing,” and spare no
labour to succeed.
If it were only possible for an old, experienced, and
clever aboriginal, to give to the world his knowledge of
the habits of fish, birds, and animals; their modes
of life in all the wonderful details that Edward, the shoe-
maker naturalist, could have done ; the chances are that
our great scientists would want to make him a member
of all sorts of societies, and learned bodies. There is no
possible doubt, that if a Buckland, Darwin, Huxley,
Tindall, or a Wallace, were chosen from among the array
of the great scientists, and dropped from a balloon or a
cloud into the wilds of Australia, and told to find his
own living, that his theoretical knowledge would be of
little use, in comparison to the hard practical experience
of the aborigine.


CHAPTER IX.
A SCHNAPPER PARTY ABOUT FIFTEEN YEARS
AGO.
“Where to, Sir r s” “Bright Bros.’ wharf!” “Right.”
The horse is swerved round on his hind legs, and friend
and self are bowling along in a hansom cab to Bright
Bros.’ wharf, at the foot of Queen-street, at 12.55, the
steamer starting at 1 o’clock sharp, on a sclmapper
excursion to Flat Rock. As we approach the wharf, we
meet sundry cabs returning, after having deposited other
members of the party, with their baggage at the steamer.
Our things are carried on board the “ Francis Cadell ”
(the name of the steamer) by one of the crew, amid a
boisterous hurrah ! from those aboard, a greeting that
each new arrival receives. At last the welcome shout is
heard, “cast off, Captain Davis, all aboard,” to which the
hearty response rings out, “ All right, sir.” The ropes
are soon cast adrift, we drop quietly off from the wharf,
and in another minute are steaming away round
Kangaroo Point. Myself and friend, who by the way,
is a member of a Sydney mercantile firm, and only on
a visit to Brisbane, are standing on the bridge of the
steamer, and are engaged in a survey of the motley
crowd assembled in the after part of the boat, and who
are all talking together, or singing “ snatches ” of some
popular ditty ; while the deck, seats, and hatchway
F


bristle with “ swags,” done up in blankets and rugs, and
of all the colours of the rainbow. To describe the
costumes, hats (especially the bats), boots, &c., <fec., is
altogether beyond the pen of the writer, it would
require a Worth, or kindred genius to accomplish such a
task. As we meditate and gaze upon the queer looking
scene, my friend breaks the silence, by remarking, “in
their guise, what a cut throat looking crowd they are
and I reply, “ truly ! If we by any means get driven
by a storm out to sea, and in our distress wanted aid
from some passing vessel, if the occupants of same got a
good look at our crowd, they would put us down for a
lot of pirates, and keep us at a respectable distance.”
“You’re right. Who is that tall, line-looking young
fellow, that gives his orders with such emphatic
authority.”
“Oh, that’s Mr. Architect. He is the captain of the
party for the trip. I must introduce you to him,
directly.”
“ What a remarkably tall man,” continues my friend,
that gentleman is who is dressed in white drill ; he
has a very intellectual face, but he looks as if he was in
a decline. Poor man ; he must he a ‘ bad feeder,’ or
something is wrong with him.”
“ Yes,” I reply, “ he has something wrong with him ;
he’s got no bottom to his stomach, at least that’s my
theory ; because, when he sits down to a meal he can
take a ship’s cargo aboard, and never wink at the opera-
tion. He may be in a decline, but let me assure you lie
never declines his ‘ tucker,’ and its a treat to see the way
he enjoys it.”
“ Who is that stout and strongly built man with his
coat cast off, and his shirt-front open ; one sleeve tucked
up, the other unbuttoned and hanging loose; and who


looks as if lie had a perspiration fountain playing in his
body somewhere, every jet trying to find an outlet at
some obscure corner or opening in his skin.”
“ That’s Mr. Stout, and the only ‘ match ’ we have on
board, who would presume to compete with our tall
friend in handling the knife and fork. You notice,
when we sit down to tea, how the two of them enjoy
the meal. They act upon the advice given by Josh
Billings, ‘ let them fight it out,’ and I really envy them
the tine digestion that enables them to take any descrip-
tion of ‘ cargo aboard,’ and assimilate it without trouble
or discomfort.”
While we have been talking the Cadell has been doing
her work, and, as my friend remarks, “ the scenery is
very pretty,” in fact, it would be difficult in any part of
Australia to find a more picturesque series of views
than those presented to the beholder in steaming from
the wharves at Brisbane to the mouth of the river, and
even right across the Bay to Moreton Island. The
reach in front of the Hamilton is, perhaps, the best spot
to get the most varied and extended view of the scenery
bordering the river’s banks, more particularly when seen
from the bridge of a steamer approaching the city, when
you see to the right the Eldemell and Toorak range ; in
front, O’Reilly’s pretty mount, with Newstead in the
foreground; to the left, the Bulimba hills and lawns,
with Teneriffe and the high land between the City and
Valley, and One-tree Hill crops up here and there in
the distance, making a picture not to be forgotten when
seen, nor easily to be surpassed in variety and beauty.
But we have left the River, crossed the Bay, and
here we are at Amity Point. The boats are let down
and all hands go on shore to assist in getting the bait
ready for the morning’s fishing. We wend our way,


with the fisherman and darkies who live at the point, to
a creek where we purpose getting the bait by the aid of
dynamite. It is a barbarous way of fishing, but when you
are in a hurry it is expeditious in its operation ; and, as
mullet won’t take the hook, it is the only way to procure
them, unless with the net, which none of our party have.
After several charges are fired, and sufficient bait ob-
tained, there is a scramble for the boats, and all hands
are “ all aboard ” by dusk, and just in time for tea.
The “ trappings ” of the tea table are not the best but
there is no lack of quantity. The “ cabin ”is really the
hold of the steamer, with long planks laid on tressels in
the centre, and affording ample accommodation for every-
one to have a comfortable seat and room to spare. My
friend, who, for convenience sake we will call Sydney,
is seated at my right, and we occupy one end of the
table. There are in all sixteen sitting round, and as
soon as everybody is busily engaged, Sydney renews his
questioning as to who some of the guests are that lie
has not yet been introduced to. “Who,” he asks, “is
that tall, thin, intellectual looking gentleman sitting next
to Captain Architect, and who looks as if he were going
to be sea sick 1 ” “I must introduce you to him after
tea. He is Mr. Typo, one of our good fishermen, and
high in the Government service.”
“ And that gentleman on his right, lower down the
table, who is he 1 ”
“ A bright, a brilliant mind, but, poor fellow, he is
being rapidly ‘ burnt out ’ with consumption. Don’t
you notice the hectic spot on either cheek 1 It is such a
pity, for he is one of the ablest men we have in the
legislature, and there are none that can equal him with
the pen ; being, by general accord, the smartest Press
writer we have in the colony.” Here our conversation


is cut short by “Joe ” upsetting a bottle of beer, in his
endeavour to reach the butter to pass round, and the
tirade of good-humoured abuse that assails him from all
■quarters drowns all other sounds. Tea over, the pipes
and cigars lighted, then all hands on deck for half-an
hour to “sniff” in the ozone and prepare for the work of
the evening.
To see the party during this half-hour, scattered about
the different parts of the ship; some standing, some
lying about, in all conceivable attitudes, some looking
over the gunwale watching the little wavelets play, some
talking, others chaffing, laughing, singing, dancing, the
whole making “ confusion most confounded ” in good
earnest, and resembling a digger’s camp at a new rush
as much as anything. At the end of the half-hour,
when the table has been cleared, the hanging lamps
lighted, and everything ready, a voice is heard above
the hubbub. “ Now boys, bring out the ‘prayer-books,’
all’s ready,” and then commences a rush for the hold to
secure the best seats for the whist or 100 parties, and
“ Joe ” —unfortunate Joe—gets a few minutes respite to
gobble down his tea.
The description of the particular schnapper party now
under consideration would be very imperfect unless a
short biographical sketch were given of “ Joe.” At the
time of the trip, he was probably 18 or 19 years of age ;
intelligent looking, active, always a smile on his phiz,
the personification of good temper, obliging to a degree :
while his powers for physical endurance were wonderful.
He filled the position of steward, and he did his duties
as if “to the manner born.”
About 11 o’clock numbers drew off to their “selec-
tion ” for the night, and shortly after the “ card tables
broke up.” By 11.30 things seemed tolerably quiet, and


those who were not asleep had the idea that they soon
would be. False hope ! Captain Architect viewed
matters from a very different standpoint; to use his own
way of puting it—“ We don’t come down here to sleep
but to enjoy ourselves.” And to give effect to this idea,
he enlisted two lieutenants ; one of whom was told to
“ stand by that ship’s bell the other having to be
ready to fulfil any order entrusted to him, such as “go
and pull Tom and Bill out of bed; bring Joe here in
custody, we’ll try him by a court-martial; rouse up
Jim, and all the boys, we must have a Jury, Judge,
and Counsellors. Ring that bell ! ” and the bell was
rung in such a way that poor little Captain Davis came
tumbling out from his cabin, having been suddenly woke
up in the midst of his first sleep, and confidently im-
pressed with the belief that the steamer must be on fire,
or the bell would not be going at such a pace ; before
his eyes are well open, or he knows where he is, each of
his arms are seized by the two lieutenants, one pulling
one way, and the other the opposite • while one says he
is to act as Judge to sit on Joe’s case, the other declaring
he must act as Crown Prosecutor. All the time this
tugging and hauling is going on, the chief is singing out
“ bring him along here boys ; ” and so the fun grows
“ fast and furious ; ” what with the ringing of the bell,
the shouting, and a bed to bed visit, every one of the
party turns out, nor could anyone get to bed again till
close on daylight A strict watch was kept upon Joe,
but nevertheless he slipped off somewhere about 4 o’clock,
and as he knew all ordinary places would be searched for
him, as soon as he was missed, he got into a quarter for
his nap where he could not be found. The bell was
rung till the clapper nearly dropped out; Joe! Joel Joe!
was shouted from all parts of the steamer, but to no


purpose; nor was the diligent search made more success-
ful. Joe had fairly beaten the radicals.
“ Peep o’ day ” ushers in the welcome sound of the
anchor’s chain being hauled up, and just as the sun
“ edges ” the horizon we are steaming through the South
Channel, with turbulent little mountains of white crested
breakers heaving and boiling “ like mad ” all round us,
then as we approach the “bar ” there is one, two, three ;
when our little steamer is first on her head and then on
her stern, and then we are in the even but uncomfortable
motion of the Pacific, and tearing away at the top of
our steaming power for Flat Rock.
Joe, in the meantime, has been busy handing round
cups of hot coffee to those who would take them. When
he offered Captain Architect his cup, he had a broad
grin upon his phiz, as much as to say, “ I beat you ! ”
which the Chief understood, and laughed outright, and
as he took the cup asked the question—“ Where, in the
name of fortune, did you stow yourself, Joe ? ”
“ Underneath the deck, right up in the bow, and be-
hind the anchor chain,” replied Joe.
“Well, that’s the only place in the ship we didn’t
search,” concluded the Chief, giving Joe half-a-crown, to
show his approval of his ingenuity in eluding his
tormentors.
Sydney walks up to me after a disagreeable attack of
“ casting up accounts,” with the remark, “ I say, what a
change has come over the company. No boisterous
songs, no jolly laughing, no chaffing ; nothing but sub-
dued long faces. Some are not turned out yet.”
“All are not like you,” I reply, “good sailors, but
when we get to the fishing ground you’ll see most of
them at their work of hauling in.”
Each man has his “ claim pegged out,” that is, has his


line fixed to some part of the gunwale where he intends
to fish from, when he gets to the ground. The bag, to
put the schnapper in when caught, the bait to be used,
already cut up, line and everything are generally so
placed as to occupy the claim and contribute to the
convenience of the fisherman when the actual sport
begins. This is the part of the trip when the
good and bad features of the man are brought out.
The selfish man will go to the bait-bag, and it matters
not to him whether the bait is scarce, and will only
admit of each having two fish per man, he takes eight
or ten, not caring one fig who goes without so long as he
has plenty.
Flat Rook ' Flat Rock ! echoes through the ship from
stem to stern, and then, as if by magic, all hands come
tumbling upon deck, and every line is “ manned ” and
ready for the fray. The Cadell is put close to the rocks,
and when the command is heard to “ stop her,” the lines
are let go, and then commences the scramble for the first
fish to claim the shilling sweep. Fish O! all alive O ! is
heard, first from the bow, and in the stern, then all over
the ship, and a squabble takes place as to which did
catch the first fish, but everyone is so busily engaged
with his line in the actual work of fishing, that no one
bothers his head for the time being, as to who did land
the “phenomenon.”
There is, perhaps, no more exciting sport in the world,
in the way of fishing, than that of schnapper fishing at the
Flat Rock when the fish are plentiful. It matters not, when
the fish are about, whether you have one or ten hooks on
your line, you can catch a fish on each hook. It is a
wonderful sight to see the deck of a steamer bestrewed
with hundreds of these grand fish.
Those who are most successful in schnapper fishing,


are those who have lots of physical strength, and who
do not suffer from sea-sickness, the skill in hooking being
reduced to a tug when the fish tugs.
Every now and then while the fishing goes on, there
is a cheery hurrah ! at the triumph of some one of the
party landing some specially big groper, king, or other
monster of the deep ; with now and then a little chad’
and a challenge to “have a drink,” when Joe! Joe!
rings through every plank of the deck, till that worthy
answers to the call and the order is supplied. The
picture some fishermen present is somewhat unique ; one
hauls, and hauls away, and while he hauls he “ lets go,”
that is, “ discharges cargo,” that is, “ casts up accounts,”
that is between and while he is catching each fish, he is
“ sea-sick ” with the motion of the steamer ; but he don’t
lie down, or knock off, but go6s bravely on, till the
anxiously looked for, and unmistakeable command is
given—“ All lines up, we are off.”
By the time Amity Point is reached, it is dinner time,
and while we have been steaming from the fishing
ground, several fine sclmapper have been cleaned and
cooked, so that when the anchor is oast in still water,
and near the spot left in the morning, the dinner is
spread ready for the party, No pack of wolves in the
Arctic regions can outvie the appetites of a sclmapper
party after the sport is over, and they get into calm
water. Nine out of every ten are unable, either from
sea-sickness or excitement, to eat anything during the
morning, so that the dinner, prepared when they return,
is really dinner and breakfast. To see the amount of
cargo taken aboard then, would lead to the belief that
some special fast had been going on for the previous six
days at least. Sydney called my attention to the fact
that Mr. Stout, and Mr. Longtom, had each disposed of


a huge schnapper, and while one was trying to “ negoti-
ate ” a turkey the other had a goose on his plate, while
each, to judge from the pleasure expressed in every line
of their faces, looked forward to “ something to follow.”'
After dinner, the boats were sent on shore, there being
ample time to reach town before dark if a start were
made in an hour or two. The first lieutenant, who had
so gallantly “ stood by that Bell ” over night, had with
him, a kanaka servant, who was a first-class swimmer,
and who, after dinner, cast off his clothes, and struck off
for the shore. In this case, the old saying of “ like master
like man ” was reversed, for it was—like servant like
master—as no sooner did the master see the woolly head
of his kanaka struggling in the water, than he divested
himself of his clothes and plunged over the side of the
steamer. At first, little was thought of the matter, as
the steamer, although in reality half-a-mile from the
the shore seemed right on it; but one of the men
employed pulling one of the boats between the steamer
and the shore, noticed, while passing within a short dis-
tance of the swimmer, certain indications of fatigue,
and at once pulled to him. It was well that he did, for
the poor fellow was in the last stage of exhaustion ; not
even having enough strength to call out. There was a
terrific tide running out, and he had battled with it till
all his strength was spent. His servant landed all right,
but it was marvellous how either of them escaped being
taken by sharks, which are specially bad in the Channel
the steamer anchored in. However, “ all’s well that
ends well,” and as the steamer arrived at the wharf
just after dusk with “ all aboard ” and no one hurt, but
on the other hand, everyone “ brimful of the pleasure
enjoyed, and each one with a bagful of fish, the verdict
was proclaimed all round : “ What a jolly trip we’ve had.”


CHAPTER X.
PEARL FISHING IN TORRES STRAITS.
A SOUTH SEA ISLANDER'S YARN.
The following “ yarn ” has been put together from par-
ticulars furnished by the South Sea Islander concerned.
My name is Sili Tarko, but on board ship the captain
and men called me Tile. In the month of May, 1875, I
signed articles, and shipped on board the Pear-le for two
years, the vessel being equipped for a pearl fishing ex-
pedition among the pearl beds in Torres Straits. The
crew consisted of the captain, three Europeans, and
three of my own countrymen. After a prolonged and
rough voyage we reached Cape York, where we stayed
one night, and anchored the next day in a central posi-
tion among the pearl islands or beds.
After making all snug on board the vessel, and getting
in a supply of firewood from an adjacent island, six of
us were told off to man the good boat Gorton, in which
we were to commence the work of fishing the precious
pearl fish from its native “ nests.” The diving apparatus,
provisions, fuel, &c., having been put on board our small
craft, we set sail from the side of the Pear-le, in search
of a “ bed ” to begin operations.
When I engaged in Sydney, the duties that appertain
to a sort of generally useful hand were what I under


took to perform, but after acting as “ tender ” to the
diver for a few days, I was informed that 1 would have
to take my turn at the diving. This I thought very
hard and unfair, as I was only getting small wages,
while the professional divers were well paid. My pro-
test was not listened to, and I had to encase myself in
the diver s dress and explore for many a weary hour
among the strange inhabitants and singular marine
herbage at the bottom of the Straits seas.
I shall never forget the first time I reached the bottom
with the cumbersome diver’s dress on. If the reader
■can vividly realise being in the course of a few minutes
transported from our world, on a bright morning, with its
sun shining clearly, and with the voices of his fellow
beings humming about him, to a world with no sound,
and among creatures, some of hideous appearance and
some very beautiful—the variety being endless, and all
floating or gliding to and fro in a most mysterious way—
he will have some idea of what my sensations were. I
felt a creeping about my hair and whole body, and the
strangeness of my marine associates, and the surround-
ings, conveyed the impression to my mind that, if not in
the “ other ” world so much spoken of, I was at any rate,
in a world quite different from our everyday working
world. What added to the strangeness of the objects
floating about was the fact, that they were all magnified
by my “ glass face,” thus making them look more weird
than they otherwise would have done.
One day when “ down below ” sending up the pearl
fish, I was startled by a great shark lashing about all round
me. I did not feel what you would call alarm ; but I
should have felt more comfortable by the absence of my
frisky friend. I stood quite still to see what he was at,
and to be prepared for an emergency. The brute was


evidently disporting in a most hilarious maimer, and I
soon had occasion to arrive at the conclusion that my
grotesque appearance had something to do with his
friskiness. He sailed round and round me, each gyra-
tion narrowing the circle and each being varied by extra-
ordinary attitudes. His sharkship kept up the perform-
ance for some minutes, when all at once he lay still
with his huge head within three feet of my body. He
looked me over from head to foot as carefully as
if he had been a detective surveying a man
“ wanted.” As he now lay poised I could see his
full length and dimensions, and allowing for his
being magnified by my “ glass face,” I estimated his
length at twelve feet, with body proportionately large.
Every now and again he would open his great mouth
and show his immense teeth, and apparently lick his
chops. How much longer he might have continued to
survey my trembling person, I don’t know, for I began
to feel rather uneasy at the sight of his great teeth and
luminous eyes staring at me, so I made a splash with
one of my legs, when, to my horror and astonishment,
he commenced dancing round and playing with me some-
what in the way that a puppy often plays round his
master. I now began to get alarmed, and at once sig-
nalled to the “ tender ” that I wanted to go aloft. Let
me assure the reader I was not sorry when I found my-
self sitting on the deck of our boat. I must, however, do
his sharkship the justice to say that he never attempted to
snap at me, but it was the very opposite of pleasant
to have so much affection and playfulness exhibited by
so strange a customer.
My next visit to the mysteries of the deep was on
the day succeeding the incident recorded above. As I
descended the ladder, the thought passed through my


mind that I had no wish to renew the acquaintance of
my frisky friend. The professional diver told me if he
■came again to make a great splashing and stir up the mud
or sand, and he would go away. This advice I determined
to follow if his sharkship attempted his larks with me ;
at the same time, I had my doubts whether such a
determined “ tumbler ” would be deterred by such simple
means.
We had our boat anchored over a very good bed of
pearl fish, and when I got to the bottom I stood and
carefully surveyed the surroundings before beginning
my work. My line of vision extended through the clear
water for about 100 yards, and within that circle I
could see every object tolerably well. To my left there
was a sort of sandy bed, over which a large school of
small fish were swimming, and directly they saw me they
made towards me, and began going round my person,
and at last came right up to where I stood. I kept very
still, and they swam through between my legs and arms,
and poised about my body in a most familiar manner.
I had my arms extended and my hands wide open.
Every now and again one of them would rest in the
palm of my hand, and I determined, if possible, to
catch one, just to see what it was like. I made the
effort by closing my right hand suddenly cn one of their
number that I felt sure I should have no difficulty in
capturing. What was my astonishment when I opened
my fingers to find that my finny friend had disappeared.
How he got away I could not tell. He was right in my
hand when I closed it; nevertheless he was gone. I
often tried the same experiment, but never succeeded in
catching one.
I had not been working long in filling my bag to send
up aloft, before I felt something twining round my arm,


and to my dismay, when I looked to see what it was, I
found a water snake firmly coiled round, just above the
wrist. lat once seized hold of the brute’s tail and tried
my best to pull it off, but all to no purpose. What was
Itodo 1 I tried, and tried again, but no use. At last 1
encompassed my left arm, where the reptile lay coiled,
with my right hand, and pressed downward, and by
this means slid the slimy visitor down over the hand,
and he glided away as if nothing was the matter. At
the time I felt very nervous, for I had never come in
contact' with one of them before, but I learnt by subse-
quent experience that they are not dangerous.
After working away for two weeks we cleared out the
bed we were then on, and our provision being short, we
weighed anchor and set sail for the vessel.
While we had been absent, another pearl fishing
schooner had anchored alongside of our vessel, and they
had got their boat out and nearly ready for starting to
work. When the captain and crew of this schooner saw
our boat coming up loaded with pearl fish they put off to
see what sort of success we had had, and their eyes
seemed to glisten when they saw our fine haul. It took
us some days to get our shells put on board the vessel,
and re-provision our boat for a fresh start. As the boat
of the other schooner had been ready long before ours,
we were at a loss to know why they did not make a
start. The fact was the ground was new to the crew,
and they did not know where to begin, and they were
waiting for us to start, so that they could follow and set
in alongside us on the same bed. Our captain, who saw
through the scheme, gave us instructions to go away in
the middle of the night, to have no light in the boat,
and we were to propel her with muffled oars. On our
way from the bed we had previously worked out, we had


discovered another, and it was to this spot that we were
to direct our com’se. It was about three miles from the
vessel, and on the other side of an island which would
completely shut us out from the view of either vessel.
The night came that we were to start. It was intensely
dark, with heavy clouds floating all round and giving
strong indications of rain. At midnight our crew got
quietly on board, and silently pushed off from the vessel’s
side. Beyond the dark clouds flying across in quick
succession, the few stars that twinkled here and there,
and heavy indistinct outline of the island under the lee
of which our vessel was moored, we could literally see
nothing. We had to grope our way as best we could.
This obscurity had one advantage, and that was the
giving us a better chance of eluding our friends who
were so anxious to keep us company. Whether we had
succeeded in accomplishing this feat, we at present could
not tell. We could hear or see nothing of them as we
stole silently on. When we had got what we estimated
about two miles away from the vessel, the mate struck a
match down the hold, and examined the compass to see
how we were going.
We had got out of the course slightly, but this was
soon rectified, and in a short time we almost ran aground
on the island we were going to work off, but the bed was
on the opposite side to where we brought up. Our task
was now easy, as all we had to do was to follow the
shore round. After getting sufficiently far round so as
to effectually hide us from view, so far as the line of
vision from those on board the schooner was concerned,
we cast anchor to await daylight, for it was impossible
to find the bed in the dark. As it wanted some two
hours before it would be daylight, I was appointed to
keep watch while the other five slept. After they had


all lain clown and were fast asleep, I felt a drowsiness
come over me, and do what I would I could not keep my
eyes open. The end was that in a short time I was just
as sound asleep as any of my mates. My sleep, however
was very disturbed, for I felt my responsibility, but the
flesh was weak. Just as the first streak of dawn was
breaking, I was awoke by a great splashing right along-
side the boat, and the first thing I saw was a great
alligator in hot pursuit after an immense dugong. The
latter was evidently severely wounded, for he left in
his wake a wide stream of blood, but nevertheless he
went through the water at a tremendous rate. Whether
he was ultimately captured or not I could not tell, for
the two disappeared round the end of the island. While
I was still gazing in the direction the two had taken. I
heard a voice exclaim, “ Good morning Jumbo ! How are
you ?” I turned about, and to my astonishment there lay
the schooner’s boat at anchor within a hundred yards of
us. How long they had been there, or how they had
managed to stick to us through the dark, it was impossible
to tell.
My mates now got up, and the question was discussed
as to whether we should go on to the bed and commence
operations, or try and give them the “slip,” The
question of going to work was decided on, as preferable
to wasting time in trying to elude them.
We soon took up our place, and after breakfast the
diver went down and the work of refilling our boat com-
menced. The crew of the other boat, as we had expected,
drew up in a line with us, and also sent down their diver.
It was now a question of skill and hard work to secure
the greatest number of the precious shells. We had
two professional divers in our boat, besides myself, and
so as to secure as much expedition as possible, we had
G


short shifts. When it came to mj turn to go down
below, the mate—who was the captain of our boat’s
crew—told me to collect as far from our boat, and in
the direction of the other, as I could, and by this means
cut the others off from the bed as much as possible. We
were anchored in about the centre. I put on the diver’s
dress and went to the bottom. As usual, before I actu-
ally began to gather the pearl-fish, I surveyed the
locality with my eyes. The water was as clear as crystal,
and I could see very distinctly all round me. As I
gazed in the direction of the other boat I saw—what
subsequently proved to be one of its divers, —but at the
time I caught sight of it, it looked the most hideous
object I had ever seen. It resembled nothing in earth
or heaven, so far as I know. When I caught sight of
it, it was stalking along the bottom at right angles from
where I was standing, and looked 20 feet high, while
the strides it made seemed to cover yards. I had never
seen a diver when down below myself before, it will
therefore not be a surprise to the reader when I say
that I could not make out the monster now before me.
I was on the point of sending a signal to be drawn up,
when the object of my terror faced towards me, and
advanced in my direction. It now flashed across my
mind who and what the monster was, and I could not
help laughing at the idea that I, who was similarly
dressed, looked to my brother diver equally monstrous.
We advanced towards each other, and he extended his
huge hand, which I took in mine, and we had a hearty
squeeze, both shaking at the novelty of our greeting.
Next day when I was down diving, I saw, sitting on a
patch of green stuff, a white object exactly like a
monkey. So complete was the resemblance that I could
not discover any difference, except the colour—the ears,


legs, arms, hands, eyes, and attitude being precisely like
those of the ordinary monkey. I tried to approach it,
so as to get a nearer view, but the first step I took it
was gone ! How or where I could not tell; but as the dis-
appearance was so quick, in fact like a flash of lightning,
I came to the conclusion that the brute had a hole close
to where it was sitting, down which it had gone. I
could not, however, discover it, although on this, as on
subsequent occasions when I saw it, I tried to do so.
At the end of ten days we had filled our boat again,
having far outstripped our opponents in the number of
shells collected, and we set off for the Pearl-le.
After working about for some months in the neigh-
bourhood where we had first set in, we weighed anchor
and shifted some miles further among some islands to
the north-east. To assist us in discovering the pearl
beds, we got three natives off one of the islands, who
are very expert in knowing where the fish are to be
found. Under their direction we took up a position in
the midst of a group of beautiful islands, and in the
afternoon I was deputed by the captain to take charge
of the boat to go on an exploring expedition, having on
board two of the natives, who were to show me the beds,
and which I was instructed to buoy. I could not un-
derstand my companions, nor they me, otherwise than
by signs. When we had got some two miles from
the vessel, they indicated that I was to stop at a place
they pointed out.
The sea was like a sheet of glass, and I noticed the
spot they had chosen for me to cast anchor seemed more
placid than the surrounding water, save and except that
its area—about two hundred yards square —appeared
alive with animal life. Turtle, water snakes, dugong,
and other marine animals were skimming about the sur


face in great abundance. What a magnificent sight it
presented to see these queer creatures disporting them-
selves in the afternoon sunlight amid the little wavelets !
What enjoyment they appeared to gather in their frisky
turnings and twinings. Who can tell what they thought
and feltl If rapid movement, leaping, gamboling, and
going hither and thither, is any index to pleasure, they
must have been enjoying its very acme.
The anchor had hardly touched the bottom before my
two companions disappeared out of the boat. They had
both dived down to explore the bed. In a very short
space of time they both came up on either side of the
boat, each having in his hands a splendid specimen of
the pearl shell. They made me understand by their
gesticulations that there were plenty more like those
they had brought up down below. They threw what
they had into the boat, and again dived. About the
same space of time elapsed as when they first went
down, when the one on the land side of the boat again
appeared with another large pearl fish. Instead of
throwing this into the boat and going down as before,
he rushed to the gunwale, cast it in anyhow, and climbed
up the side as if the “ old gentleman ” were after him.
But what had become of the other 1 I looked in the
direction that he had gone down, but could see no sign
of the man. The one who had got into the boat came
over to where I was sitting in a state of great excite-
ment, and he began gesticulating in a wild manner,
pointing his finger to the spot where his companion had
dived. To make me understand what he meant, he
opened his mouth and caught hold of the calf of his
leg. While he was still trying by this startling method
to make me comprehend what he wished to describe, the
subject of our solicitude came to the surface right close


■to the boat. He had no sooner got his head above water
than he let out a yell that reverberated through the
island, and the water round him was tinted with blood.
He reached up his hand to catch hold of the gunwale,
while simultaneously I and his companion seized him by
the hair of the head. We got his body on a level with
the boat, and in the act of lifting him in, a shark seized
hold of his only remaining leg and nearly wrenched him
from our grasp. The poor fellow, while down below,
had been attacked by a shark, who had taken off his
right leg before he got to the surface, and it was while
we were pulling him in that the same or another raven-
ous brute took off the other. It was a clean bite, or he
would certainly have snatched the man from us. We
laid him in the bottom of the boat gently, and did all
we could to allay his sufferings. Poor wretch, how he
suffered ! Heaven only knows what he went through.
He only lived about ten minutes. Judging from the
contortions of his face, the frightful writhings of his
body, and terrible groans, the time, although so short, to
him must have been a long lifetime of agony.
That night, when we reached the vessel and explained
what had occurred, the captain said he would not allow
another man to go down without being encased in the
diving-dress. The next day the poor fellow was buried
upon the island.
Some days after this sad event we were anchored
over the bed where the unfortunate native had lost his
life. I was working down below in the diving-dress,
and sending up a fine lot of splendid pearl fish—the
biggest I had ever seen. I had been at work about an
05
hour, when all at once I felt something strike the side
of my helmet. I put up my right hand to feel what it
was, when to my amazement I found a fish about two


feet long, stuck hard and fast. His tail was lashing
about, and after several vain attempts I managed to
secure it. I got a firm hold, and tried to disconnect it
from my headgear ; but pull as hard as I could, not a
move could I get out of the brute. While I was strug-
gling away might and main, another of them fastened
bn to my left side. I was now badly fixed. While one
lashed with his tail across the glass front of my helmet,
the other did ditto across my stomach. When the second
had taken hold, I let go the tail of the first, so that both
had full swing now. It is all very well to describe the
position I was in, but to feel it at the time I tell you
was no joke. Only two had fastened on to me, but how
could I tell at the time whether 1 might not have
every inch of my body similarly occupied. What
sort of fish were they, and what were they up
to 1 These were the questions that I asked my-
self as I seized both fish, and vainly endeavoured to
disconnect them from my person. Pull as I would, not
one inch could I move either. Still I worked away at
their tails, determined to conquer if possible. I might
just as well have tried to balance our boat upon my nose.
Stir they would not. In the midst of my tussle a turtle
came swimming close to me, when to my great relief
both fish let go simultaneously and darted off after the
turtle. Whether they caught the unfortunate or not I
don’t know, for they were soon out of sight.
When I went aloft and told the divers of my encounter,
they only laughed at me, explaining that the fish that
had fastened on to my body were only “ suckers.” We
subsequently caught one of them with a line, and on
turning it on its back it fastened to the deck, and there
was not a man on board the vessel strong enough, even
with both hands, to displace it. The “sucker” is at the


back of the head, and looks something like an elongated
five-shilling piece, with fretwork in the centre. This
sucker, when it takes hold, forms a vacuum, and nothing
less t.hn.n a torpedo shock would loosen the hold when
once fixed.
When we had been working about for some nine
months, and collected a good number of pearls, I was
sent on an exploring tour in the boat, my crew con-
sisting of the native who was with me when his mate
was killed by sharks, and a boy that we had taken from
another schooner which no longer required his services.
The lad was about fourteen years old, but rather stupid.
We had put on board our boat provisions to last for
three days, and we were directed to cruise among several
small islands, the farthest not being more than ten miles
from the Pear-le.
The second day after we had left the vessel we were
sailing in between two islands when the native, who
could how say a few words in broken English, asked me
to haul down the sail and cast the anchor, as he thought
we were on a good pearl bed. The wish was soon com-
plied with, for in less time than it takes to describe, the
sail and anchor were down.
The native only had a pair of old trousers and shirt
on, which he began to take off preparatory to diving.
When I saw what he was going to do I remonstrated
with him, as the captain had given orders not to go
down without the diving dress. The native however
took no notice of me, but in he plunged. I and the
boy sat watching for his re-appearance. He had been
down for what I was sure extended beyond the usual
time, and I was getting alarmed. Well I might! At
last the fore part of the body came up, with a stream
of blood and oily substance floating all around him, and


before I could get hold of what was left of the man, it
was seized and hurled through the water at a terrific
rate, leaving in the wake a wide streak of the poor
fellow’s life blood. We never saw anything more of
him. He had gone to his long home, “ where the weary
find rest.” Savage although he was, he was a “ good
fellow,” and I deplored his sad fate extremely.
The captain was angry with me when I told him what
had happened, but the boy corroborated what I said,
that the unfortunate fellow would go in spite of me.


CHAPTER XI.
PEARL FISHING IN TORRES STRAITS;
THE WRECK.
One evening, when we were returning to the schooner
with a boatload of pearl shells, I was stationed at the bow
as “ look-out,” the diver being employed at the helm, and
the rest of the crew were asleep in our small cabin.
There was a very stiff breeze blowing, and the night
closed in rather dark. We were running pretty close to
the southern shore of Babber—or, as we generally called
it, Booby Island—and when nearing the last point of
land of the island, I saw directly in front of us, and
not more than fifty yards ahead, a black object that
had the appearance of a reef jutting above the surface.
We were going right on to it. Not a moment was to be
lost, or we should have been dashed to pieces if we came
in contact at the rate we were driving through the water.
I shouted out at the top of my voice to the helmsman to
port the helm hard. Whether it was the commanding,
peremptory tone, or an alarming appeal in my voice, I
know not, but I do know that the order was executed as
soon as given. Not a bit too soon, for the next moment
the gunwale of our boat grated against the side of the
black mass as we flew past. We were saved! but it
seemed to be by a miracle. If the helmsman had hesi-
tated it was all up with us.


When we had got clear, and gone some distance from
the object, the diver sang out, “ Why, it’s a vessel half
sunk that we so nearly ran into ; look at her two masts.”
I looked as desired, and through the darkness sure
enough there were two masts, and about three feet of
the hull of a good-sized brig, evidently perched upon a
reef. At the rate we were going we soon lost sight of
the vessel, and as we thought there might be some of the
hands on the rigging, the boat was tacked, some sail
taken in, and we again ran past the wreck, taking care,
however, to give it a wider berth than before, but getting
sufficiently near to hear any response that might be made
to our hallooing. The efforts to elicit an answer to our
shouting proved futile. Whatever had become of the
crew they were not on the wreck. We therefore put the
boat about and again steered for the schooner, which was
only distant about two miles, determining to come back
the next morning to search for the missing men.
The following morning was calm, and the captain,
with myself and three others manned the whaleboat and
started at daylight for the wreck. We were not long in
reaching it. The wind having been pretty strong in the
night, the brig had parted amidships, the fore part being
still elevated upon the reef ; the aft portion, with both
masts, we found broken up, and pieces floating all about
the reef. As the sea was quite still, we pulled our boat
up to and fastened her to a ring on the bulwarks,
and the diver and myself, divested our persons of the
apparel we had on, and mounted. There was nothing on
the deck but a few odds and ends of chains, ropes, rig-
ging, &c. The diver told me to dive below and see if
there were any bodies in the forecastle. The steps
leading to this apartment had got displaced, so we pro-
cured a rope, which the diver held at one end and I the


other. We adopted this course as a means of safety,
for at times the suction is so great in a confined apart-
ment of a sunken vessel, that a man is powerless if left
to his own resources.
When I got below I could not see very distinctly for a
minute or so, but when my eyes got accustomed to the
peculiar light, the various objects towards midships were
tolerably discernible. At the end where the brig had
parted was the partition between the forecastle and hold,,
in which a great hole appeared, and -through it I could
see the craggy points of the treacherous reef as it tapered
away to nothing in the distance. The missing steps
were jambed underneath the deck across this aperture.
All the other articles in the room that would float were
sticking to the ceiling in a similar way. When I turned
my gaze towards the bow I could see nothing a few feet
from me. As I had not the diving dress on, I had to be
pulled up frequently to recover breath. I went down
for the last time for the purpose of groping my way
round the two side and end walls towards the bow, to
see if I could discover anything there. I descended, and
feeling my way as well as I could along the wall, I got
to the end partition, where I came against a bunk, and
the next instant there was a tremendous splash which
startled me, for I could see nothing, it was so dark. I
put my hands on top of the bed to steady myself, when
I felt a cold rigid face between my fingers. I seized hold
by the hair of the head with one hand, and dragged the
corpse to the opening above, and on reaching the deck it
proved to be the remains of a Chinaman. The face and
upper part of the body were perfect, but the flesh had
been all taken off the legs, by sharks in all probability,
one of whom I had disturbed, and which made the great
splash which somewhat upset my equilibrium.


We made diligent search, but found no more bodies.
The one we had discovered was interred upon the island
in due form. Some weeks afterwards we learned that all
hands on board the vessel had got away in a boat, and
were picked up by a pearl fishing schooner, but the poor
Chinaman, who was cook, was lying in bed at the time
the brig struck, and was consequently drowned in his
bunk, and quite overlooked by the crew in the confusion
of leaving.
NOVEL MODES OP FISHING.
“ There is but a step from the sublime to the ridiculous,”
and in the chronological order of my pearling experience,
there is but a day between the tragic and the sportive.
After we had been hard at work for two or three
weeks, and had returned with the boat pretty full of
pearl fish, the captain used to give those who had been
out in the boat a few days spell. On these occasions
some of us amused ourselves fishing. The day after
burying poor “ Chinee,” two of my countrymen and self
put the diving dress and apparatus on board one of the
boats, together with some dried turtle-shells we had,
lines, hooks, &c., and set off for a small bay that we
knew swarmed with fish.
In the first chapter I described the peculiarities of the
sucker. Che fish is something of the shark spiecies, and
when it can get a sufficiency it appears to live principally
on turtles. The method suckers adopt in killing the
turtle, is simply to fasten on with the sucker at the back
of their head to any part of the turtle they can get hold
of, and then placidly hang on while the unfortunate
prey rushes through the water at a frantic pace hither
and thither until it becomes quite exhausted. Then the
sucker quietly lets go and commences his meal at leisure.


I have caught a sucker now and again with an ordinary
fishing line, but this is a slow process in comparison to
that I adopted when I went at it in earnest. I used to
attach a long line to a turtle-shell, and let it float away
from the side of the boat, when in a very short time,
one, two, three, and sometimes as many as five or six
suckers would adhere to the shell, and allow themselves
to be pulled on board the boat. On the afternoon I am
speaking about we caught a great number by this means.
We had a large iron tank in the boat full of sea water,
into which we put their suckerships as we disconnected
them—no easy matter I can tell you —from the shell.
When we had caught sufficient for our purpose, we tied
strong schnapper lines to the tails of six of the suckers
and let them over the side of the boat. They darted off
in different directions as far as we would let them go.
These lines we had fastened to the seats and other con-
venient parts of the boat, each one of us having two
lines to attend to. In a very short time there would be
a strong tug at one or more of the lines, which would
be seen whizzing about, and then began the work of
hauling in the turtle. If the sucker had got hold, there
was no fear of losing the fish, unless the tackle gave
way. The sucker’s grip is much more certain than a
fishhook, The singular part in catching turtle in this
way is, that although the sucker is so tenacious in sticking
to the empty shell, and to the live turtle, while you get
him to the side of the boat, directly you turn the turtle
on his back the sucker leaves go and darts off in quest
of fresh prey.
At times when one of our suckers fastened on to a
very large turtle we had all. our work to capture him.
These suckers take very kindly to the operation of being
tethered by the tail. I have had them tethered in this


way for days, and they seem to feed about the bottom
quite unconcernedly, but let a turtle show his figure within
reach of their line and he is bound to be “had.” I
have often thought the name “ Torres ” should be
changed for “ Turtle ” Straits. I do not think there is
any place in the world where the turtle is so plentiful at
times as in the Straits off Cape York, and all among the
islands in the vicinity. These waters are regularly
teeming with them.
In about an hour we had half filled the boat with
turtle with the aid of our suckers, and as we had done
with their services for the time, the lines were unfastened
and the fish we had had at work, in addition to those
kept in the tub as a “reserve,” were let loose in their
native element, to do duty on a future occasion if re-
quired, and we fell across them.
As we had caught all the turtles we required, I put on
the diving dress and went down below to fish. It may
seem a queer idea to the ordinary fisherman to talk of
going “below ” to angle, but the method is both amusing
and expeditious if you have the appliances to put it in
practice. I selected a piece of schnapper line about
twenty feet long, noosing on a large size jewfish hook,
but having no sinker. For bait I cut up part of a small
turtle, and thus equipped descended and commenced
angling. We were anchored in about nine fathoms, and
about forty yards from a small reef of rocks. The
current was very slight, but sufficient to run my short
line to its extreme limit. It was very singular to see
how quickly the fish gathered round from all quarters
when the baited line stretched out, although not one was
in sight before. In a moment one of their number
seized the bait, and as a matter of course was hooked,
for in this way of fishing you can see all that is going


on, and know exactly when to “tug,” and feel as certain
of your fish as the Arab of his wild colt when lassoed.
I had a capital afternoon’s sport, catching as many
fish as all hands could consume for some days. One
peculiarity in connection with this under-the-water
fishing is, that for every fish I caught with the
line I caught one with my hand. The way this is
done is very simple. As soon as I hooked a fish
his companions would keep round him as I gently
hauled him towards me, and when within reach
I seized one of the number of followers with my right
hand between the two eyes, and so skilful had I become
in the feat by practice, that I seldom failed. This mode
of fishing, however, is attended with danger, even with
the diving dress on, if you are in deep water, and the
fish you hook bleed freely. The sharks either smell or
see blood a long distance, and there is no keeping them
off when they get on its trail.
I caught about five different varieties of fish, com-
prising polyneme (a sort of perch), rod-cod, bream,
“tailor,” and king. While in the north I caught a
great many fish that I had never seen before nor since.
The variety of sharks is almost endless, some of them
attaining to an incredible size, and possessing a most
voracious appetite for anything that comes in their way.
To give the reader an idea of the miscellaneous diet
these monsters indulge in, I will enumerate the various
articles I was told (but do not vouch for the
were taken from one of their stomachs. He measured
seventeen feet from the point of the nose to the tail.
When the stomach was laid bare it presented a queer
spectacle ; there were two links of a large anchor chain,
a 1 lb. circular salmon tin, a lady’s brooch, of large size,
with likeness in centre, but defaced ; several crabs, and


a singular looking crawfish, twenty-nine human bones be-
longing to different parts of the body, one hundred and
four mussels, a dugong’s tail, three old boots and a
slipper, a lump of coral, the skull of a large-sized sheep,
seventy-six nails, assorted, and all very rusty ; a sheet of
brown paper, crumpled up ; a 1 oz. vial, label destroyed ;
a lot of marine herbage, ten pieces rope, varying in
length from six inches to four feet; twenty-three corks,
some whole, some broken ; a small Wesleyan hymn-book,
wanting one side cover, and several leaves ; forty-seven
small fish, a piece of canvas, the arm of an old coat,
thirteen buttons, assorted; and a lump of salt pork,
which had formed part of the bait with which he was
caught. In addition to these articles there were several
pieces of oyster and other shells. The quantity of oil
that can be extracted from the liver of a shark of the
size of the foregoing is very great, and is largely used
north for all sorts of purposes. It is specially good for
sprains, &c.
AMONG THE PEARLS.
The pearl beds in Torres Straits are very different to
the Ceylon fishery off the coast opposite the villages of
Condatchy and Anipo. This bank measures something
like twenty miles long by eight or ten miles broad, and
several feet thick. None of the beds that I have worked
on in the Straits seas or channels have covered more
than a few hundred yards, and the layers are generally
very thin. The oysters, however, procurable in some of
the Straits beds I think are equal, if not superior, to
those obtainable in the locality named.
There is an impression on the minds of many people
that the “ fish ” encased in pearl shells is not fit for
human food in the way that the common oyster is. This


is a great mistake. If stewed, curried, or in fact pro-
perly cooked in any way, the pearl oysters are very
palatable and nutritious. Our crew used them extensively,
and generally preferred them to the salt junk.
The work of procuring the pearl oyster is attended at
times with great risk from sharks, sudden squalls, etc.,
and is on all occasions, and under the most favourable
circumstances, a hard, comfortless, and laborious occupa-
tion. No doubt the employers of labour in this capacity
make a good pecuniary haul from the speculation, but
the poor labourer “ gets more kicks than half-pence,’’
while many lose their lives. One of our divers lost
his life by the stupidity of his “tender.” He had gone
down to work below in the ordinary way. The sea was
calm, but there was a strong current running, and there
was rather an ugly reef bordering the bed we were
working on. When he had been down about half an
hour he signalled—as the tender said he surmised—to
have more line let go. Coil after coil was “paid” out,
and still the tug came for more. After a time the tender
got alarmed and called for the other diver, to whom he
explained the quantity of line he had let go, and that
the demand was still unsatisfied. Immediate steps were
taken to see how matters stood. It was too late, how-
ever, for on the second diver descending he found the
life line and tackle all entangled on peaks of the reef,
while the unfortunate diver stood upright, with his back
against a perpendicular point of the reef, against
which the tide jammed him as tightly as if he had
been tied there with strong cords. He had his right hand
extended, in which he grasped a knife—similar to what
most divers use below, and with which he had severed
the air tube, etc., doubtless when he began to suffocate,
and with the idea that by this means he would be able
H


to reach the surface. Let his thoughts or plans have
been what they may, they were frustrated, for the poor
fellow was quite dead when brought to the boat. This
sad fate is only one of many that occur from year to
year, perhaps not exactly in the same form, but in one
way and another connected with the hazardous nature
of the occupation.
The cleaning of the external part of the shells,
opening them to extract the “meat,” and searching for
the spherical pearls that are found inside, is a dirty, un-
pleasant undertaking. Some of the spherical pearls are
very beautiful. The theory of their formation is very
singular. It is thought and asserted by some zoologists
that a grain of sand or other foreign substance gaining
access to the interior of the oyster, irritates the tender
inhabitant to such an extent that in self-defence it im-
mediately begins to emit the fluid secretion it is provided
with, and thus coats the intruding atom, which increases
day by day in size, and is composed of precisely the same
material that coats the inside of the shell, and is called
in its hardened condition, “ nacre.” Some of the beds I
have worked at produced pearl oysters that contained
from one up to six spherical pearls, while other beds
have not contained one pearl in fifty oysters, or even
more. From this I infer that the character of the
ground the bed is formed on, the strength of current, or
other circumstances that I cannot explain, has some-
thing to do with the matter. Whatever may be the ex-
planation, certain it is that there is a considerable
difference in the productiveness of some beds to others in
this particular, as well as in the quantity of oysters
obtained.


A CORAL CAVE.
One day I set out from the schooner with a crew of
five hands. We had our boat provisioned for a three
weeks’ trip, our destination being a bed of pearls that
lay off an island to the north-east of a spur of the great
Torres Straits coral reef. We started early in the morn-
ing, with the idea of having plenty of time to take up a
central position on the bed, and get everything in order
for commencing work uninterruptedly the next morning.
There was not a ripple upon the water, nor a breath of
wind. We had four oars out, and we glided through
the still, placid lake—for it looked like nothing else, —
laughing, singing snatches of songs, and talking as
merrily as if on our way to a wedding. In our course
we had to run parallel with, and cross the spur referred
to, of the main coral reef. As we sailed along its edge,
it looked like a floating forest of diminutive snow-
capped trees and shrubs below the surface. When we
had reached about half the distance along the spur it
curved round in a semi-circle, and to get across we had
to follow its contour. We had not far to go before we
came to an opening where the caps of the reef receded
sufficiently low beneath the surface to admit of our
getting through. The boat’s bow was turned into the
gap, and we pulled away under the impression that for
the time we were done with the difficulty of crossing
this barrier. This idea was soon exploded. We had
not got more than 200 yards from the mouth of the
opening when we had to “ call a halt,” for in front of us
again appeared the reef. As we had plenty of time on


hand, the stoppage caused us no irritation, and we pulled
in our oars, lit our pipes, and determined to rest awhile
and look about us.
As we smoked away, we chatted on different subjects,
and among others the peculiarity of the zoophytes,
the polypes, etc., and the extraordinary and incredible
rapidity with which these dangerous coral reefs are con-
structed. The boat lay quite still, and as we surveyed
the surroundings it was evident we were in a circular
chamber of the reef. The water below us was so trans-
parent that every object could be seen distinctly. The
depth of this basin was about five fathoms, and within
this area the reef walls seemed to be almost perpendicular,
but to the south of where the boat floated it “shelved”
gradually, and there appeared to be an archway leading
under the reef. All eyes were concentrated upon this
spot, as it seemed to be alive with fish going in and out.
I proposed to shift the boat to the centre of attraction,
and I would put the diving dress on for the purpose of
seeing what it all meant. We drew over the opening
and cast the anchor, and in a very short space of time I
found myself at the mouth of what proved to be the
access to a coral cave. The entrance or hall—for that
was what it resembled —was about twelve feet wide,
extending, from beginning to opening of the cave, about
sixteen feet. As I wended my way through this hall,
the walls of which seemed quite perpendicular, I ap-
peared to drive before me an “ army of finny soldiers.”
When I reached the mouth of the cave, what a wonderful
sight was before me ! The dimensions of the apartment
would not cover more than a hundred yards square, but
the formation was irregular. It was neither circular,
oblong, nor square, but a sort of combination of all
three—the roof forming a sort of dome, made up by the


raying branches of the coral “ trees ” that bordered the
chamber’s walls, having a circular opening in the centre
of the roof, through which the sun’s rays shone, giving an
iridescent splendour to the internal appearance of the
cave.
As I stood and looked around, the idea forced itself
on my mind that I had really reached fairy land. What
a grand sight it was ! Here and there in the middle, and
on both sides of this marine palatial apartment, grew
coral trees, varying in height from one to three feet,
having perfect stems and branches, while their shape
and symmetrical proportions would have persuaded any-
one that they had been regularly cared for by a most
attentive aquatic gardener, and not reared by insigni-
cant little zoophytes in this artistic way. To right and
left of where I stood there were alternate pillars and
alcoves; in some of the latter a small coral tree ap-
peared, with a base very similar to a flower-pot. The
tints both of foliage and stems of these coral trees varied,
embracing transparent, light pink, brown, and dark-red.
It was wonderfully pretty to see the different shades of
golden light thrown upon the tips of the branches of these
different coloured coral trees. No description I can
give will convey an accurate idea of the scene. Within
the cave there were hundreds of fish of every descrip-
tion swimming in and out of the crevices and across the
further end from where I was standing. Some of these
were blood-red, others red, with silver and black stripes
crossing the body from top of back to belly, while others
were mottled with gold, bronze, and silver spots. The
attitudes they assumed were very singular, and the
effect upon the beholder most peculiar. While the main
body glided about, passing and repassing, others remained
stationary, some appearing to stand on their tails sur


veying the “upper regions,” while others stood on their
heads as if trying to bore a hole through the floor of the
cave. Among the number there were extremely hideous-
looking brutes—the devil-fish to wit; some of the
smaller fry however outvied this monster in fiendish
outline. There was one “ creature ” in particular I
noticed. It measured, I should say, from tail to nose
about five or six inches, having a bull-dog flat-head, pug
nose, red glistening eyes, with rayed barbed spike crop-
ping out from the back, and a tail similar to what his
satanic majesty is generally represented to possess. In
spite of this and other repulsive objects that floated
about me, the scene on the whole was well worth seeing,
and I did not grudge the time and labour spent.
When I had divested myself of the diving dress we
started on our way, and reached our destination before
sundown.
CONCLUSION.
The next day when hard at work sending up pearl
oysters, I saw one of the “ white ” monkeys. It was
perched on its hind legs, and appeared to be eating
something from its right hand, in the same way that one
of our common brown monkeys munch an apple, piece
of bread, or nut. When I have mentioned the fact of
seeing this white marine monkey to several people, they
have exhibited doubts in their phizes—not on my
veracity, but firmly believing that at the time I sup-
posed the object was before me I was labouring under a
mistake, or had an attack of pseudoblepsis. Nothing
of the kind. Let the reader ask any diver who has
been pearl fishing in Torres Straits for any time and he


will confirm what I say about the matter. Excepting
in colour, the creature is a perfect model of the ordinary
monkey.
At the end of fifteen days we had exhausted the pearl
bed we were working on, and we hoisted the anchor and
set sail for the schooner. Three days only elapsed after
our arrival on board, when the two years I had signed
articles for terminated, and within a week therefrom I
was on my way to Brisbane with my hard earned wages
in my pocket.
What a strange thing life is ! As memory carries
me back to the period of my boyhood, when living on
our little island among my brothers and sisters, and the
people of our tribe, I cannot but come to the conclusion
that in many respects our social and political life is pre-
ferable to, and in advance of, what I have seen practised
in so called civilised communities. At any rate our simple
life is never marred by low vices incident to all Euro-
pean countries I have visited—to wit, drunkenness,
swearing, betting, trickery in every shape and form in
business, the tussleing and struggling after the god
mammon, often to the exclusion of friendship, and the
violation of good faith between man and man. But
there, my tale is ended, and I won’t take up space
moralising or philosophising. As I said before, it is a
strange world, and the drama of real life opens up a
wider field for thought than that of fiction. Last year
I was “ daring the dangers of the deep ” up North ; this
year lam employed looking after old Dandy —a clumsy,
but quiet, trustworthy quadruped. I often look into his
kindly old face, when he comes to me in the yard and
puts his big head on my shoulder, as much as to say,
“ Give me a rub and feed, old man ” —and think what a
contrast in the mode of life I now lead, tending his


wants, and that of my pearl fishing experience. Where
shall I be next year, or you either for that matter, my
dear reader 1 This is a question none of us can answer,
and if we could I don’t know that it would do us any
good. One thing Ido hope, and that is, that I shan’t
be down among the queer objects to be seen when pearl
fishing in Torres Straits.


CHAPTER XII.
SWALLOWED BY A SEA SERPENT.
The question of the actual existence of the Great Sea
Serpent has been affirmed, contradicted, re-affirmed, and
re-contradicted times out of number. Travellers, cap-
tains of vessels trading in different parts of the world,
and many others, have, at different periods of the world’s
history, asserted that this sea monster was seen by them
in such and such latitudes, and under such and such
circumstances, the length of body and velocity at which
it travelled through the water varying; maximum of
length being about 600 feet, the speed at which it glided
through the water, 500 miles an hour. None of these
accounts, however, have passed muster without a certain
amount of incredulity existing in the minds of a majority
of those who have read the reports as to the accuracy of
the statements made by the supposed discoverers of the
Great Sea Serpent. What lam about to relate may be
accepted as fact by the most sceptical, for it transpired
only in last February, and the minutest detail is vividly
impressed upon my mind.
I had been cruising about the Bay, at the southern
end of Stradbroke Island, shooting and fishing. One
very hot morning, I took my fishing rod, tackle, and
bait, a bottle of “ Bull-dog ” beer, and some bread and


cheese, and set off along the sandy beach to a spot on
the shore of the Broadwater Bay, that is reputed—and
with good reason—to be the very best whiting fishing-
ground to be found in the colony, while, the scenery,
vegetation, and the whole of the surroundings are
beautiful in the extreme. I had left my boat in the
Nerang River, for there was no wind, and I felt too
lazy to pull the distance. After walking rather over a
mile, I came to a graceful clump of native bread-fruit
trees, growing on the very edge of high water mark,
with a pure white sandy beach, shelving at a moderate
gradient. It was high water, so I sat down under the
shade, put my rod together, baited the two hooks I had
on, helped myself to a glass of beer, filled and lighted
my pipe, and then began the business of angling in good
earnest. In about half an hour I had filled the basket
I had brought with me. And no wonder ! for the line
was no sooner in the water than I hooked one or two
splendid large whiting. I caught two as frequently as
one at a haul. As my basket was full, I thought it
was no use catching more fish, as I could not con-
veniently carry them. The sun was blazing hot, so I
made up my mind to take it easy for a short time.
In furtherance of this very sensible idea, I helped
myself to some luncheon and finished the beer. The
old pipe was replenished, lighted, and clouds of smoke
began to ascend amongst the foliage of the bread-fruit
trees I was angling under. What a glorious sensa-
tion it is that man experiences when his stomach is in
good order, well supplied, and the mind at peace with
his fellow men, and all the other surroundings of this
life. Whether it was that choice “ Bull-dog,” the bread
and cheese, the splendid sport I got, or the soothing in-
fluence of the narcotic weed, or all combined, I know


not; but Ido know, that I never felt more comfortable
or contented in my life.
I lay in a reclining position and surveyed the placid
scene that opened out before me. Directly in front of
the spot I occupied, and on the other side of the Broad-
water, Stradbroke Island stretched along in a parallel
line, its irregular peaks jutting up, and the rolling un-
dulations of its formation giving out the lightest and
deepest tints of shade, according to the angle the sun’s
rays touched its form, with here and there small bays
and indents carved out of the island’s side, and deep
ravines running down to the water’s edge; while the
varied shades of green of the trees, and the cropping
above the more even growth at different points of a gaunt
old warrior of the forest, presented to the eye a grand
central background to the picture. To the right, and
at the extreme end of the island, the huge breakers of
the Pacific Ocean came rolling and tumbling in, as if
each wave was bent upon being ashore first, their white
and foaming crests dashing the spray upwards as they
broke upon the bar, giving forth a dull roar which
sounded like the report of steady firing from heavy
artillery. To the left the Broadwater extends for miles,
dotted here and there with pretty little islands ; the
margin of the mainland, starting from where I was
sitting, being fringed with native breadfruit and other
handsome specimens of indigenous trees. After I had
thoroughly investigated this magnificent scene, I looked
into the clear blue water within a couple of feet of where
I lay, and I began to ruminate upon many things. The
fishing-rod was lying by my side just as I had thrown it
down, I picked it up, and without baiting the hooks,
cast the line into the water, and listlessly twirled it
about on the surface.


I can’t say how long I had been engaged in amusing
myself watching the small fish rushing from side to side
after the bare hooks, as I swayed the rod to and fro, but
all at once I became aware of a dark shadow being cast
upon the water just a few feet beyond thfe tip of the rod.
I raised my eyes to see what caused it, when to my
amazement there were three coils of what looked like
tarred rope, eighteen to twenty inches thick, wound up
something in the shape of an ordinary channel buoy,
distant from each other, but with no apparent connecting
link, about fifty feet. The three coils seemed to be
floating past where I was sitting, being in an irregular
line, the one slightly behind the other, but stretching
out into the Bay, and maintaining their respective posi-
tions with great precision. When the nearest of these
unexplainable heaps had floated about twenty feet beyond
the point of my rod, to my horror I saw it uncoil,
and in a moment of time a huge head rose out of the
water perpendicularly to a height of fifty feet, and
almost simultaneously the other two coils unfurled,
creating a foam and whizzing in the water similar to the
screw of a large steamer when turning amid stream.
In less time than it takes to describe the operation, the
whole length of this frightful monster was disentangled,
and in an instant the tail was elevated and raised back-
wards towards the head, so that the terrifying object
before me resembled a huge horse-shoe or new moon,
balancing on its centre. I was so horror-struck, so
prostrated with fear, that I had no power to move a
limb, but I could feel the flesh shivering on the bones,
while each muscle seemed a living worm crawling up and
down the body. In what form the monster intended to
attack me I could not conjecture, but of the fact that he
meant to do so in some way I had no doubt. There he


was, rolling and swaying to and fro on his expanded
stomach, the head and tail each being now elevated to a
height of, at least, one hundred feet, with about fifty feet
resting on the water. I tried to rise and make a bolt
for it, but not a member of the body could the mind
control. The thought occurred to me if I could only
start rolling rapidly inland I might escape. It was all
useless. There I was, helplessly pinned by fear to the
spot; the mind active and alert, but every other power
hopelessly enervated, prostrated, unstrung. Finding I
could not run, the next thought occurred to me to try
and defend myself—but how 1 I had nothing but my
fishing-rod, which I still held in my hand ; but I felt
what a frail implement of defence that would be. I
bethought me of the butcher’s knife I had hanging in
its sheath at my side. This, indeed, might be of use,
and I determined to make good use of it if I had
strength to do so. I tried stealthily to reach this—my
only hope—but the very first movement of the hand
seemed to be anticipated by my antagonist, for the head
darted down with lightning speed, and poised in a curving
form within a foot of my very nose. There it rested,
its deep sunk green eyes looking into mine with a threat-
ening glare, as much as to say, “Stir, if you dare!”
While I looked into those horrid fiend eyes, I saw the
lower jaw gradually droop until the mouth assumed the
appearance of a dark cave, endless in depth, the long
white tusks that projected from the roof of the mouth,
resembling ivory columns with rounded points. Quietly,
slowly, but surely, I felt myself being raised from the
earth. The monster had worked his lower jaw under
my legs, and was gradually drawing me down into
the dark depths of his copious stomach. But I felt
no pain, there was no crushing of bones, no puncture


of the skin, no blood-letting, but apparently a silent
sliding to a certain doom. I had kept fast hold of
my fishing-rod, and as the monster raised me from
the ground, I clutched it with both hands, and in
doing so it got right across his two jaws, so that
when he elevated his head to let me drop clean down his
stomach, the rod stopped my descent. He now reared
up his body for at least a hundred feet, to give me the
final shake down, but I stuck fast hold. There I was,
dangling about in his throat, the whole weight of my
body sustained by my arms. I could tell, however, by
the wriggling of his body that the fiend was becoming
enraged, and I saw the huge mouth closing, and the idea
crossed my mind like lightning, if I did not make an
effort to save myself now, I should be utterly lost.
Acting upon this thought, I stuck my toes in the sides
of the monster’s throat, seized his tongue with each
hand, climbed as best I could in such a slippery place,
and when I had mounted high enough, I did no hesitate
to take the desperate leap, and I landed clear on the
beach, in the exact spot he had taken me from. The
fall from such a height somewhat stunned me, but 1
scrambled up, rubbed my eyes, and looked around me (
but I could see nothing of my terrible enemy, and no
wonder —for I had only been dreaming of these terrible
horrors. There was the beautiful scene, just as it was
before I went to sleep, and if it hadn’t been for that
confounded cheese, I should never have dreamed of being
swallowed by the great Sea Serpent.


Gordon and Gotch, Printers, Brisbane.




Metropolitan |(oom|,
99 ALBERT STREET, BRISBANE.
Oysters Fresh Daily from the celebrated Moreton Bay Fisheries.
HOTELS, * CLUBS, * PRIVATE * PARTIES,
AND THE COUNTR Y,
WITHE r>3ES3PATC3E3E.


TO FISHING PARTIES AND OTHERS.
-«-4GO TOf-4”
TH€ to«RKO STMIES
AND
rae .
Produce Stores
ROMA STREET, NEXT TO THE NEWMARKET HOTEL,
OPPOSITE THE
BRISBANE.
POLICE STATION.


HORSESIVEHICLES FOR HIRE,
OF THE BEST STYLE.
— \s A. GROEBEN, Manager.


A. N. NILSEN*CO.,
smli)crs ani) Contractors
Estimates Given for Every Description of Work.
BRUNSWICK STREET
VALLEY.
