

THE
GOLDEN GATES
AUSTRALIA;
WITH
ITS TEMPTAT I ON S AND ITS PERILS.
BY AN AUSTRALIAN.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
LONDON:
FOR THE AUTHOR,
SAMPSON LOW, SON, AND MARSTON,
MILTON HOUSE, LUDGATE HILL.
“Marylebone Mercury ” Steam Printing Offices, 6, North-street, Mauchester-square.. .
...




THE
GOLDEN GATES
AUSTRALIA;
WITH
ITS TEMPTATIONS AND ITS PERILS.
BY AN AUSTRALIAN.
LONDON:
FOR THE AUTHOR,
SAMPSON LOW, SON, AND MARSTON,
MILTON HOUSE, LUDGATE HILL.


ERRATUM.
Page 4, line 6, for “ towering ” forest, read “dutani ” forest.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Chapter I.
Bound for Australia—Why do they go ?
Chapter 11.
Why do they go, continued.—The City of Sidney.—Sidney
Harbour. —Discovery of Gold —Its consequences. —Shortened
Voyage to Australia of two months only.—Telegraphic Com-
munication.— Goldfields, where first Discovered. Mineral
Wealth of Australia.—Marbles. —Varied Products.
Chapter 111.
Climates.—Unbounded Wealth—Church Education there.—
The Steamship.
Chapter IV.
Advance of Science—lts perils and its triumphs.—Feeling of
the Colonists in the Loss of the London.—Seamen.— Captain
Martin.
Chapter V.
Final Departure of the London, and news of her fate.—First
Six Days.—Dr. Woolley.—Mr. Draper.—First Terrors. —
First Losses.—Mr. Draper.
Chapter VI.
Attempt to Return to Plymouth.—Where? In the Bay of
Biscay.—Three of the seven Lifeboats gone.—Doom of Vessel
sealed. Conduct of Seamen. Captain Martin. —“Now,
boys, say your prayers.”
Chapter VII.
Last Day—Dr. Woolley.—Mr. Brooke. —Captain Martin.—■
John King.—Mr. Draper.—Boat with Survivors Departs.—
Magnanimity of- Captain Martin.


Chapter VIII.
Perils and Rescue of Survivors, —The Sinking Ship. —Boat
and Four Men drawn down. —Generous Italian.
Chapter IX.
English Benevolence.—Bereaved Australians.—Their ever-
generous sympathy.
Chapter X.
The Rev. Dr. Woolley—His work of the University—His
mental gifts—His home-ties. —The poor “Black Gin.” —
Christian Women, how elevated.—Dr. Woolley how deeply
regretted.
Chapter XI.
Captain Martin.—Mothers’ Influence.—Example in our noble
queen. —Blessed Reward.
Chapter XII.
Australia’s Future. Address to her Sons and to her
Daughters.—lron Mines—Mrs. Lang.—America’s Railways.—
Sir Edward Lytton Bulwer.—Fitzroy Mines. —Monasteries
and Nunneries. —Our only Christian badge.—Joys of a
Christian Home. —Appeal to Young Australians to keep her
free from Bigotry.—Climate, genial for Fruits and Flowers —
for Invalids. —Paraphrase, naming her many gifts.
Chapter XIII.
Education and Appreciation. —New Race of Anglo-Austra-
lians—their appearance and promise—their loyalty.—Bishops
of Australia. —Patriarchal life of an Australian. —Harleian
MSS. —Appreciation of Fatherland- —To see the Queen. —
Thoughts on “ Albert the Great and Good.”
Chapter XIV.
Concluding Reflections.-—Solomon’s Prayer for Wisdom. —
Our best Faith, not a stranger in Heaven,


PREFACE.
The discovery of gold in the New World being made
first in the colony of New South Wales, the giant head-
lands of Port Jackson received then the name of “The
Golden Gates of Australia.” Towering aloft in stupen-
dous grandeur, with a space for entrance of only three
quarters of a mile, these granite portals conveyed to
most of the many thousands who passed through them
the same feeling of their majestic proportions, as well as
of the hopeful promise of golden treasure, beyond them.
And to those who sit lightly in the ties of home, the gold
fields and the golden fleece, and the mercantile advan-
tages of Australia, will still have a voice too powerful to
be resisted ; and though now there are other gold fields,
many there will be of gold seekers and future shepherd
kings who will bend their course through “ The Golden
Gates of Australia.”
A few words are here necessary to explain the peculiar
structure of this little book. Suggested by feelings of


extreme sorrow and distress in the loss of the “ London,”
it was at first meant to tell only the story of the sufferers,
so awful in the attendant horrors of shipwreck, and so
heroic in the calm, child-like submission of, all to the
will of God. No lofty deed that time has ever told has
been suggestive of more' heart-stirring feelings, than the
pictures of faith and trust in God’s mercy and accept-
ance, conveyed in the various recitals of the survivors.
Then followed in my mind the desire that would be
entertained by many to know something of that far-off
land to which they were bound; and in the general de-
scription, given in the second and third .chapters,
memories were awakened that led to a work of more
length and detail than was at first intended, and to
touching with an affectionate interest on the promise
of a great future, that must arise, from a judicious em-
ployment of the boundless resources of Australia.
For my dear compatriots, I have recorded a few of my
own impressions of our common fatherland. And in
deep and earnest feeling for the patient victims of the
London —(seeing in their truly Christian conduct the
wealth of power over ourselves, that God has given to
each of us in the teaching of the Bible); and to the
expression of. thoughts long entertained, on the deep


responsibility which rests with parents for the eternal
welfare of their children. Speaking of Captain Martin
and others, and in the “ Address to the Sons and
Daughters of Australia,” I have endeavoured to show
how the royal laws of Christ Himself grow out of “ first
teaching”—“parental teaching”—comprised in the words
“ forbearance and unselfishness.” Mothers’ love, is the
great garden of the universe of souls. Her gentle hand
can scatter the precious seeds, and curb the pride and
self-will that spring from the native soil.
May the hope and intention of this little work not be
lost on my dear Australians ! And may it (for my
English readers) throw a new, and a true light, on “ the
promised land ” of Australia.




BOUND FOR AUSTRALIA.
CHAPTER I.
Bound for Australia, and why—The Loss of the London,
Jan., 1866.
Now, while every heart is full, and every tongue
telling the sorrowful story, the most moving impulse
is to record it to the honour of our glorious faith.
How 220 souls, full of the stirring spirit of life and
enterprise, have gone down to the deep in child-
like submission to the will of God. How the simple
teaching of a good minister, and those among them
who were strong in the Lord, had power in the words
of life, in the gospel of Christ, to give strength to
the lowly and meek—to raise up them that fall—
arfd “to give light to those that sit in darkness
and in the shadow of death,” till the Spirit of the
Lord was among them in all the riches of the
Gospel.
Truly pathetic was the scene of the last day, as
gained from the recitals of the survivors. “In
patience possess ye your souls,” seemed the thought
that maintained their calmness amid the most


terrible strife of the elements, and the inevitable
approach of death. Some were returning to
fair smiling homes, and bright faces, longing
to behold them. Some, leaving, with aching
hearts, the home of their youth, and dwelling
sadly on a loving group, now missing them
for the first time—thoughts that speak were
counting for them the weary days ere news
could go back from that bright land that had
induced them to break the charm of a joyous
home. Others, alone in the world, had still bright
visions of life before them. Once in that golden
land, what better fortunes might await them !
What whispering hope of wealth, with all its train
of benefits and honors, far above them in the old
world they were leaving. Thus sought they com-
fort and resolution, each one in that vocation which
had led him on to his destiny, and many of
them in the full assurance that every good and
pure motive sanctifies our work to God.


CHAPTER 11.
But why did they go?
But why did they go ? ” Why tempt the dangers of
the terrible ocean ? And the answer will come in
the fact that scarcely a less world-wide feeling is
the dream of aggrandisement that is daily drawing
thousands to the golden land of Australia. With
this impression, more striking yearly, to one long
resident in those sunny climes, it seems well, for
the sake of those who contemplate the same step,
to give some idea of the country, and of the pro-
mise of a life in this new world, though dwelling
here, more especially on “New South Wales,” the
mother colony.
The city of Sydney, the metropolis of New
South Wales, is so completely English that all
thought of “ distance from home ” is gone as soon
as you set foot on shore. The same language, the
same customs on all sides, the same people. It is
a line city, with streets long and wide, with hand-
some squares and public buildings, and with shops
for each trade, and warehouses for each business, as
in England; and with noble mansions and lovely
villas round the harbour. The views from the


higher points of Sydney are bold, and varied-
The irregular appearance of the city, from its
position round the extreme end of the magni-
ficent harbour of Port Jackson, with its numerous
bays studded with islets ; the infinite diversity
of hill and dale and towering forest and pro-
jecting rocks, produce a harmony of effect not
easy to conceive, and seldom to be met with.
In the words of the late Surveyor-General, Sir
Thomas Mitchell, “The discovery of gold in 1851,
in the Bathurst District, led to an emigration un-
precedented in the history of the world, and pro-
mises to bring about results of which, at present,
it is impossible to form a conjecture.” And not
less so now, in the rapid communication by steam,
of only two months by passenger-ship, and one
month by telegram.
In the all-wise providence of God, it was not
permitted to the mind of man to recognize as gold,
the same metal, until Australia had ceased to be a
place of exile. Often had it been examined by
learned geologists, and enlightened men, with the
wish “that it were really gold,” but under the
received opinion that Australia and all Polynesia
were of “a recent formation,” it was always rejected
and cast away as “mere pyrites.” It was on an
estate of W. C. Wentworth, Esq., that the first
gold-field was opened, and there, a bridge had long
been in use, where the glistening spangles declared


themselves from every mass of gold-quartz of which
the bridge was constructed. But “ Pyrites ” was the
name under which it rested. Again, at Braidwood,
on an estate of Dr. Wilson, M.D., a scholar of much
repute as an University man, the sinking of a well
being in operation, nuggets of pure gold, like small
beans in shape, came scattering at the feet of Dr.
Wilson and his friend (brother of the writer). But
to the man of science they were “ pyrites,” and the
conviction of his friend, as to the identity of the
precious metal, was negatived.
Beginning with Sydney, the gospel had been
preached in all these “Isles of the South,” when
in 1851, as if by miraculous enlightenment this
same “ Pyrites ” was seen to be gold, and was soon
found to abound in the land, west, north, and south.
And besides this treasury of precious metal, other
mineral wealth, and many rich resources of this
noble country, were soon proclaimed. Besides the
softness of “ the breezy climes, and flowery plains,
and grateful soil,” that Sir Thomas Mitchell men-
tions in his discovery of Australia Felix, at
Wallundilli and Shoalhaven were discovered mar-
bles black and white, equal to those of Italy ; while
on the River Hunter, coal mines which had for years
been worked, having seams 200 feet in thickness,
were found to possess bituminous coal (petroleum)
which is now found elsewhere in the colony; while
in granite is found silver, cobalt, bismuth, tin, zinc,


lead, and arsenic; and in mica-slate, iron ores, and
precious stones. Iron, lead, copper, and silver, were
not recent discoveries—copper having for many
years been abundantly exported from Bathurst, and
from South Australia to England.
Thus, this southern continent, “Australia,” is
now found to be a world of wealth in itself; and
though among the youngest of her colonies, is
indeed, the brightest jewel in the British crown.


CHAPTER 111.
Climates, Native Wealth of Australia—its varied
Products.
“Bound for Australia—The loss of the London.”
How life and death come clashing together in these
words ! What a knell they will long ring on the
hearts of the sorrowing mourners ! What a trem-
bling of the heart they will bring to many who still
say of themselves and their dear ones “ Bound for
Australia ” !
It is a land of promise—a good land—of wheat,
and barley, and vines, and fig trees, and pome-
granates ; a land of honey, wherein thou shalt eat
bread without scarceness ; thou shalt not lack any-
thing there—a land whose stones are iron, and out
of whose hills thou mayest dig gold, and silver, and
lead, and copper, and coal, and precious stones;
whose earth yields oil, as petroleum; where, in the
vast range of seaboard we have every climate that
is genial to man and his varied culture, from the
nutmegs* and sugar, and coffee, and cotton of
India, to the wheat, and barley, and apples, and
* The nutmegs from the Gulf of Carpentaria, are coarse, from
want of cultivation, but for these, and the Beche-la-Mer, the Malays
make a yearly voyage in their prows to the northern coast of
Australia,


cherries of England—with soil and clime congenial
to, and yielding with higher flavour, all the fruits
that England gathers in by her vast trade from all
the ends of the world, where the Indian corn
raises its flowing leaves and feathery crest in ranks
of eighteen feet in height, and where the corn-fields
of England wave in golden seas of grain—with
millet, and sorgum, and mangold-wurtzel, and
tobacco, &c., &c., and where flowers from every
clime are now seen blending in rich profusion with
the floral beauties natural to the soil. The white
man’s head and hand are alone wanted, and the
grateful soil will give him back his own grapes
and figs, oranges and melons, peaches and nec-
tarines, with apricots, plums, apples, pears,
bananas, cherimoyes, pines, &c„ &c. This is Sydney :
while the converse of England is borne out in this
Antipodean-land, the north being the
(Queensland), and the south the coldest clime
(Adelaide, Victoria, Tasmania), New Zealand,
the last to be discovered, yet not the least in the
great portions of the world ; a younger colony, yet
like a younger sister of England’s great family,
partaking of all the benefits that experience and
science has given to the world. Education in God’s
Holy Church spreading through the land with the
spread of colonization. All this, and with the
feeling of space that seems boundless 1 This, is
Australia!


Such was the feeling, and these the memories
that filled the hearts of many of those who on the
6th of January looked back with a sigh on the
stormy coast of “ dear old England.” Bound for
this land of promise, and in such a ship, they need
not fear the might of ocean, though terribly she
menaced them from the first. The London was so
beautiful a ship—so strong —so commodious—and
so famed for her speedy voyages and her valued
captain. The first sorrow of parting had been
borne ; and to the young, that hysterica passio of
poor Lear, in which they were bowed down, together
with the mortal humiliations and actual sufferings
of a first voyage would be hushed in time. To get
up their courage above this new and painful sense
of life, would be but the work of a few days,
and then all would be well. Once away from
the coast the good ship would soon run out of
the storm.
So thought the anxious parents as they watched
. »
over their young sons and daughters in this their
first great trial. And so thought the watchful
captain and his able crew, as they trimmed their
gallant bark, in the feeling of her former prowess as
able for all that might come.
“Nor winds nor waves shall tire,
Those fleshless arms whose pulses beat
With floods of living fire. ”


THE STEAMSHIP.
See how yon flaming herald treads,
The high and rolling waves,
As crashing o’er their crested heads,
She bows her surly slaves.
With foam before and fire behind,
She rends the clinging sea;
That flies before the roaring wind,
Beneath her hissing lea.
The morning spray like sea-bom flowers,
With heaped and glistening bells,
Falls round her fast, in ringing showers,
With every wave that swells.
And flaming o’er the midnight deep,
In lurid fringes thrown,
The living gems of ocean sweep,
Along her flashing zone.
With clashing wheel, and lifting keel,
And smiling torch on high;
When winds are high and billows roll,
She thunders foaming by.
When seas are silent and serene,
With even beam she glides ;
The sunshine glimmering through the green,
That skirts her gleaming sides.
Now like a nymph with classic art,
She veils her shadowy form ;
The beating of her restless heart,
Still heard amidst the storm.
Now answers like a courtly dame,
The reddening surges o’er,
With flying scarf of spangled flame,
The Pharos of the Shore.


To-night yon pilot shall not sleep,
Who trims his narrow’d sail;
To-night yon frigate scarce shall keep,
Her broad breast to the gale.
And many a foresail scooped and strained,
Shall break from yard and stay,
Before thy smoky wreath has stained,
The rising mists of day.
Hark ! hark ! I hear yon whistling shroud ;
I see yon quivering mast;
The black throat of the hunted cloud,
Is panting forth the blast.
An hour, and whirled like winnowing chaff,
The giant surge shall fling,
His tresses o’er yon pennant staff,
White as the sea-bird’s wing.
Yet rest, ye wand’rers of the deep,
Nor winds nor waves shall tire,
Those fleshless arms whose pulses leap,
With floods of living fire.
Sleep on ! and when the morning light,
Streams o’er the shining bay,
Oh ! think of those for whom the light,
Shall never wake in day !


CHAPTER IV.
Advance of Science, its perils and its triumphs by God’s
WILL FOR THE FULFILMENT OF MAN’S GREAT DESTINY.
On Saturday, the 6th of January, 1866, in an iron-
ship, fully laden, and with 1,200 tons of iron on
board, two hundred and thirty-nine souls put to sea
in the face of an unusual gale to cross the Bay of
Biscay, and bound for the antipodes, a voyage of
16,000 miles. How very like a fable it reads.
Even fifty years ago it would have seemed the
assertion of a madman. But we live in the age of
active science; in it man’s arm is not shortened to
wielding the pen alone ; it is the arm of science
that he wields, gaining from each element some
wondrous power he has borrowed from the light-
ning, the electric-telegraph, and with it formed a
circumambient intelligence round the world.
Fairly onward now in that march of intellect
that has for its goal the sacred promise of “ Only a
little lower than the angels.” Perhaps he needs be
sometimes reminded of “Who it is that holds the
reins,” —to whom belong “ the power and the
glory,”—and so from time to time he receives a
shock that vibrates through the world. He, the
unseen, is ever near, giving strength to the spirit


that urges him on, as much now, as when with
Noah He dictated the building of the Ark—or
with Moses, the beauty of the Tabernacle. It is
to God, in His fostering mercy, and fatherly care,
that man owes each step to the pedestal on which
he now stands; and when a failure comes, it may
often be traced to some delicate point, where con-
science has not been listened to; some too much
iron in the iron bark, which but for the gale, would
have been immaterial. His hand is seen in all,
though we forget to give Him the glory; and as
from each defeat man wakes to new lessons, and
while we deplore the anguish and suffering of the
many, another great truth is secured in practical
science, and for the furtherance of his safety, and
the fulfilment of the great destiny which the
Almighty has allotted to him “To subdue the
earth, and to possess it,” and so with giant strides
he stalks over the world, to spread the knowledge
of the goodness and glory of God as the waters
cover the sea.
Seldom indeed, thanks be to God, have we to de-
plore so appalling a calamity as that of the loss of
the London ; and well may it be so, for really as it is
a personal calamity to thousands, here and in the
colonies, all the world will shudder with dismay and
sympathy. Dismay, on finding that it is not only with
the winds and waves that we have to reckon—that
the question is not only the expense of travel, but
13
The Loss of the London.


the possibility of surviving it—that a ship fitted for
the roughest seas, and navigated by the most
skilful hands, should be engulphed where an open
boat could live; because of the laws of gravity,
broken by man’s forgetfulness of the awful respon-
sibility that rests upon him, in the question of life
and death to those for whose safety he undertakes
to provide—Of sympathy—but of what avail is com-
passion or condolence where the dearest ties of life
are broken. In Australia there is not a city, nor
scarcely a circle, into which it will not carry the
pangs of bereavement. How many are the children
that are made orphans by this loss of hundreds!
How many who will weep for wives and husbands,
for brothers and sisters, for whom they will be
watching and waiting with love and tenderness
sharpened by expectation,—One universal cry will
rise among them, for with colonists there is a closer
and yet more general interest than can exist in
wide-spreading England. Natural ties, and inter-
marriages with the old families, spread far and
wide from Sydney the feeling of personal interest;
and the names of many of the passengers are
known widely, with that feeling of welcome which,
even to the stranger, reigns in the land.
Of what avail was the noble daring of the hardy
seamen—untiring in a sense of duty, and with the
feeling of wives and children looking to them for
daily bread. In their conduct throughout was the


same dignity and glory of the race, that shines out
so nobly in that of Capt. Martin. Unable by a
perfect skill, that was rendered useless, to save his
passengers, he chose to remain with them in death,
rather than take advantage of the opportunity of
escape with the survivors. There is a lofty heroism
in the self-sacrifice of the brave and good man, that
claims for his praise the grand and the pathetic, as
“ doing all as in God’s sight.”
For all, it is impossible not to feel with touching
force their brave and gentle submission to the will
of God, nor to enter into their sorrows and their
prayers, while we offer our heartfelt gratitude to
heaven for the Divine truths of the gospel, as here
so pathetically seen in its power to give strength
and alleviation to our sufferings in every time of
need. Well may we prize our freedom and many
blessings in that glorious faith in God’s mercy
through Christ, which makes the Bible the open
portal to the Paradise of God, and to gain and
secure the free use of which the blood of Englishmen
has flowed like rain.


CHAPTER V.
Final departure of the London, and news of her fate.
It was on Wednesday, the 17th, that the curt and
cruel message came flying through the land on the
wings of the telegraph—“ How, on Thursday, the
nth, the London had gone down in the Bay of
Biscay, with 220 lives on board.”
The most unusual gale, often a hurricane, had
never ceased to blow from the time of her departure,
till the old mariners said “ They had not seen the
like for 20 years.”
Hearts, still aching with farewells, had never
ceased to weep and pray for their dear ones on the
stormy deep, shuddering with dread as each day
and night it seemed at intervals to increase in
violence,.howling through the clustered chimnies,
and round the corners of the houses in raging gusts
that drew from many an earnest heart a prayer for
the poor sailor in his life of peril.
On Friday, the 29th December, 1865, the London
had left the East India Docks a masterpiece of
mechanical science. “I consider her perfect in
every way,” said the emigration agent, as he stepped
on shore and she steamed down the river. At


Gravesend several passengers joined her and a
lunch was provided on board as a farewell meeting
to many.
On Saturday the 30th, she left Gravesend for
Plymouth, but the weather was so boisterous that
she had to cast anchor at the Nore, and remain the
whole of Sunday.
On Monday, the Ist of January, at break of day,
she weighed anchor, and steamed down the channel
against a head wind, which increasing to half a gale
when off the Isle of Wight, the captain put back,
and lay to for the night in St. Helen’s Roads.
Early on Tuesday the 2nd, the wind being still
ahead, but light, she passed through the Needles
into the Channel.
On Wednesday the barometer was so threatening,
and the wind so violent that the pilot decided on
taking her into Spithead for shelter.
At daybreak on Thursday the 4th she left the
Motherbank and steamed out through the Needles,
arriving off Plymouth on the early morning of
Friday the sth. To bring her within the break-
water a pilot with his assistant put off in one of
their well-manned boats; but so rough was the sea
that the boat was upset and the pilot drowned, the
assistant and men being saved with much difficulty
by one of the lifeboats of the London.
Completing here the number of her passengers,
in all 54 first-class and 99 ordinary passengers, and


of officers and crew 86, making a total of 239 souls,
she left Plymouth soon after midnight, on the
morning of Saturday the 6th, steaming out with
her head to the wind. At 5 o’clock they sighted
the Lizard lights and set sails, but at 6 o’clock the
wind changed and the sea began to rise. The
barometer was still threatening, but not in a man-
ner to intimidate an experienced seaman.
On Sunday, January 7th, after a fearful night,
the gale was rising rapidly, in strong squalls and
rain, and the ship rolling terribly; but it was the
Sabbath day, and Dr. Woolley and Mr. Draper
together performed the beautiful services of our
church. The day closed in threatening aspect, and
night came on and passed, the ship rolling and the
wind blowing with increased violence.
On the morning of Monday the engines were
stopped, and sail raised by the captain’s orders,
but at noon, there was a lull in the weather, giving
them a few hours of rest, and time to breathe with
thankfulness and hope that they might soon pass
through the circling storm.
But again the winds, as if unchained, rose up
with greater fury. At twelve on this night the first
disaster began ; the spanker was torn from its
place, and with great difficulty secured, by the
captain and John King and some of the crew, from
being carried away. It was a night of raving storm
and rolling sea; sleep came to few; but through


the fitful gale was heard the frequent voice of sup-
plication and prayer to Him who directs the storm,
and at whose bidding it can “be still ” All night
Captain Martin worked with his men, nor did he
again sleep till in the sleep of death.
And now, on this night of Monday, has the
feeling of apprehension gone forth among the pas-
sengers ; a sense of peril that seemed hourly more
and more present. Watching for every change, the
engines were again stopped and the sails raised, the
wind blowing a full gale, while the captain surroun-
ded by his men, was obeyed promptly, willingly,
implicitly, for he was beloved, as well as respected
for his able semanship.
As the morning of Tuesday the 9th came, after
a night of sleepless dread to the passengers (for
“ fearfulness and dread have come upon them ; ”
“ their hearts have failed them, and in God alone is
their hope and strength; ” with Him in solemn-
prayer has the night been spent below). At seven
o’clock began a succession of disasters, from which
the noble ship was never to recover. The storm
raves and rages around her as she pitches and rolls
in the roaring waves, when a heavy sea broke into
the lifeboat, filling the boat and carrying her away
with all her gear. This in itself was a fearful loss,
but many more followed. The hardy seamen quail
at the might of the seas that come rushing and
crashing over the ship, with a roar that called up


all their strength and courage to confront them,
while the noble ship plunged through them, sobbing
and surging like a living creature.
At nine o’clock the jib and flying jibboom were
torn away, and with them the fore-topmast, the
foretop-gallant mast, fore-royal mast, and main-
royal mast with all their spars and sails and other
gear, and this with a clattering crash on deck, or
swinging with the motion of the ship, to the immi-
nent peril of those around.
So terrible had the hurricane been, it seemed
impossible for it to increase in fury, and yet it did ;
and in the midst of this almost impossibility to
repair the damage, Captain Martin, cool and self-
possessed as ever, set all hands to work to remedy
each evil, with an energy that nothing but the most
desperate resolution could have given him.
The masts which had fallen on board hung sus-
pended in the rigging and could not be cleared.
Thus terribly dismantled she steamed slowly ahead,
the gale seeming to increase, the sea washing
all forward on deck. An awful night it was; but
He who is a refuge from the storm was with them,
present no doubt in the hearts of all, and Mr.
Draper had already begun his w T ork of exhortation,
and many more were there to whom the blessed
teaching of the strength and hope and eternal life
found in the bible was familiar, and their gentle,
kindly voices were heard among them, and no


doubt gaining strength themselves as with God’s
holy book in their hands, they recalled each passage
that raised up the lowly and fainting heart, and
conveyed through the sacred word a new light to
the weak—the light of grace and pardon and love—
in the words of Christ Himself.
Thus wore away the long and terrible night of
Tuesday, while “louder yet and yet more dread,
swelled the loud trump of death.” No cries were
heard from these Christian sufferers, but supporting
one another, they bare in patience the will of God.
“Be Thou the trembling sinner’s stay,” seemed the
strength that came to all.


CHAPTER VI.
Attempt to return to Plymouth.
ONCE more, in the feeling of “ Homeward bound/”
is the voice of joy and thankfulness heard throughout
the ship. The captain sees that it is best to retrace
his course; and early on Wednesday morning the
order is given to turn the ship’s head and run for
Plymouth. Sails are again set, and hope returns
to all as she raises her shattered head to meet the
waves for home: but how crestfallen she looks as,
if partaking the feelings of her master (hoping
through fear), she surges heavily through the un-
abated storm.
As yet her engines are perfect and the lower
decks dry, and thus far in working order; she
might have breasted the gale through the 200 miles
between them and Land’s End ; for at noon an
observation was taken, and this found to be their
position in the Bay of Biscay. All vigorous in
action, the damage of the preceding day and night
is repaired as far as may be; the broken mast
secured from its swinging position aloft, and clear-
ance made of broken spars and jib-booms : the ship
seems more trim, and with fresh courage they


prepare for another terrific night; for the waves
were running mountains high, and the fury of the
storm unceasing. By six o’clock it was again a
perfect hurricane, the rolling and pitching fearful,
and quantities of water were shipped. Now, in the
furious squalls that seemed unparalleled, they lost
the fore and mainsails; violently severed, they
were blown quite away ; and now a towering wave
breaks in and carries away the lifeboat and cutter
from the starboard side : with one sweep they were
gone, swept away into the darkness of the furious
hurricane. Three of their seven boats were now
gone, and two of these the lifeboats. The sails are
in ribbons; but the captain, not quite desponding,
trusts to the engines, when as the vessel drove on
through the wild night, soon after ten o’clock, a
giant wave came down, as if hurled from above,
upon the hatch of the engine-room, and smashing
through everything, and carrying all away, it flooded
the engine room. Now came the harrowing con-
flict, for the doom of the vessel was sealed!
The chief engineer, Mr, Jones (ill in his bed), was
soon below; the water was rushing in fast round
Mr. Greenhill, who stood by his engines. Of all
calamities this was the most fatal. To remedy the
evil all possible means were resorted to; no hope
now could blind them to a knowledge of their peril:
with such a hurricane blowing, and a lashing sea to
sweep all before it, no substitute for the powerful


hatch could be made to hold : tarpaulins, spars,
ladders, sails, blankets, mattresses, nailed down by
the carpenter, all were torn away, and the yawning
hatchway opened again and again to the seas that
poured down.
At eleven o’clock that night the engines were stop-
ped by the rising of the water above the furnaces,
and from Mr. Greenhill the Captain heard the pain-
ful intelligence that no more could be done by
steam power to save the sinking vessel. With
what conflicting feelings the truth must have
reached his ears; though, with a mind clearly
open to the peril that must attend the loss of the
engine-room hatch, it was not unexpected. Call-
ing to his men, he turned again to the sails; but
no sooner up than away they were torn into
ribbons. A fatal spell seemed on them at every turn.
Paralysed now in all human power to save the
ship, and the more precious lives confided to his
care, how impossible it is to imagine his feelings or
the feelings of his hardy crew in this trying mo-
ment —their fate opening to their clear intelligence,
as each hour had brought more dire defeat of their
skill in seamanship. In this last blow the life-pulse
of the gallant ship was gone ; and with all the
generous enthusiasm of a sailor’s love for his ship,
even if safe himself this would have been dreadful :
but now to keep her afloat was life to them all,
and brave and noble was the struggle.


It is seldom that a sailor’s heart is not quick to
realize the presence of the Almighty. Trained by
early teaching to do battle with the elements, his
mind is soon awake to a sense of dependence on
God. The most overpowering impression of religion
is that which we receive amidst His mighty works,
as when “the tempest roars among the hills, and
the thunder echoes, and the lightning writes God’s
glory on the corners of the sky; then worship we
in God’s own cathedral, and with God’s own ritual.”
The awe and adoration He then writes on our
hearts is the sense of His power and might and of
our own littleness, and is not to be forgotten. Now
indeed the presence of the Lord was there; He
who rides upon the storm was there to speak peace
and give strength and hope to their troubled souls.
Beset with tribulation and woe. It was to them (like
Job in his trials) “the hour of Satan but they did
not swear and curse, as has been known before,
when unhappy men have spent their over-wrought
feelings in blasphemy. Not so now—the words of
the bible were in the hearts of many, and the
promises of God’s mercy were heard aloud from
good Mr. Draper, “Their sins, and their iniquities
will I remember no more; for I will be merciful,
saith the Lord, and pardon all who come unto me
by faith in Christ.” “Be not afraid; He has not
required of us more than He knows we can per-
form.” “ Now it is faith alone that He asks : faith


in His merits and power to wash away our sins,
and in His promises to pardon and receive us.”
“ Fear not, only believe.” In such words as these
was the power of God’s grace able to still the tem-
pest of fear that was in their trembling hearts. That
in God alone was now their hope, they knew, from
their own experience, as well as from the simple
words of the captain, “ Now Boys, you may say your
prayers.” A seaman’s phrase, to imply, “ There is
no hope, your efforts now are useless, God alone
can save us! ”
26
Bound for A ustralia.


CHAPTER VII.
Thursday, their last Day—Heroic Conduct of the
Captain on the departing Boat.
It was on the morning of Thursday, the nth—
after a night of darkness and distress unspeakable
—a night to be remembered in many a tearful
record—when in Tor Bay alone, more than 30 ships
had stranded, when many a heart besides, breathed
the spirit of prayer that went up from the London.
With thoughts of widowed homes and orphaned
children, had the men worked on : all night the
pumps were going, well supplied with heart and
hand, and no lack was there of courage and cheering
words to keep alive the spirit of alacrity to do what
could be done in the hope of keeping the vessel
afloat. Dr. Woolley and Mr, Brooke with the rest
of the passengers working vigorously af the pumps.
Others were baling with buckets, &c., while with
difficulty they kept their footing, the storm driving
them hither and thither, as the waves washed over
the deck, knocking them against casks and frag-
ments of wood, each moment in imminent danger of
being washed overboard.
And now to-morrow has come—the last to-
morrow.


In the saloon, were groups of passengers in prayer
—on the floor, or as best they could secure them-
selves in the violent motion of the ship. Parents
and children, friends with friends, but in this
season of sorrow all were friends, one heart,
one hope, one destiny The Brotherhood of
“ The Sons of God, and joint heirs with Christ,”
elevated all into the same dignity, converting them,
each and all, into examples of moral courage and
even divine heroism—Mr. Draper was among them,
never ceasing in his prayerful teaching, helping
them to see in God’s own light, The Word, that He
has given for the strengthening of our souls, strength
to meet death without fear and amazement. The
fate of the vessel was hastened*by the stoving-in of
four of the windows of the poop cabins, struck by
tremendous seas, thus, piece by piece this noble
vessel had to succumb—shutters, and props, and
spars are now tried in vain—the water comes pour-
ing in, and soon the upper and lower saloons are
flooded, and the ship lurching in the trough of the
sea, takes in tons of water over the gunwale. To
close the aperture over the engine-room is again
tried in vain. Fourteen feet of water is found to be
in the room, and yet they resort to other means.
The captain’s voice is heard “ Men put down your
buckets and try to close the hatch, we may yet keep
her up.”
The dull, dim light of the solemn morn was grow-


ing stronger, when the vessel was evidently settling
down. The poor young officer, Mr. Angell, had
never left his post at the donkey-engine used in
pumping,—no relaxation of effort was there among
them—the pale delicate Dr. Woolley, unused to
labour—the stalwart, burly Brooke (bareheaded and
barefooted, and attired only in a Crimean shirt and
duck trousers) are still working on with the sunburnt,
toilworn, and almost amphibious sailor, at the
pumps, while the baling was going on through the
saloon. “It is of no use, I think, but you may go
on/’ was the captain’s reply to Mr. Wilson’s question
of the utility of baling, and turning to the carpenter
he had the boats made ready and provisioned for
sea. An iron pinnace to hold fifty persons, on being
lowered was swamped, and sunk head foremost, the
six men being hurled violently into the water, they
were saved; John King, having been 12 seconds
under water, was washed up against the ship—this
was about 10 o’clock—and ere long, the captain
came into the saloon, and looking round upon the
sorrowing groups, said “ Ladies, there is no hope for
us, I am afraid, nothing short of a miracle can save
us.”
These words were, from the captain, only the
solemn confirmation of their own fears, and in mute
suffering they were received. “ For more than
twelve hours had the saloon been as a sanctuary,”
prayer unceasing had risen to God in all the fullness


of penitent supplication. And now Mr. Draper is
heard with full voice, “Well, my friends, our captain
tells us there is no hope, but the Great Captain
above tells us there is hope, and that we may all get
safe to heaven,” —and now he prayed aloud, “ O God,
may those who are not converted be converted now,
hundreds of them !” Many a time through the day
had this prayer been heard on his lips, and often he
cried aloud “ Prepare to meet your God !” repeating
in full voice the same words from time to time
throughout the day and night, and this conviction
has brought around the good pastor many a sup-
pliant, crying “ Pray with me, Mr. Draper,” “ Pray
for us, Mr. Draper,” and able he was, in his long life
of missionary teaching, “ To tell of heaven, and point
the way.”
The presence of mind and the conduct of Captain
Martin, is again shewn, and the point where, in the
perfect absence of self, he reaches the heroic is,
where he tells Mr. Greenhill to take the command
of the port cutter, which he had had prepared, “ Get
into the boat, and take command of the few it will
hold, there is not much chance for the boat, there
is none for the ship, your duty is done (as
engineer), mine is to remain here.” On the men
shouting to him to join them before pushing off, he
replied, “No, I will go down with the passengers.”
And throwing them a compass “Your course is
E.N.E. to Brest, I wish you God speed, and safe to


land.” With mind so clear, and full of life and love
for others, how truly each word bespeaks a Christian
hero!
“ What a dignity belongs to man ! He was made
in the image of God ; and though his soul is like a
temple in ruins, its very ruins are grand.”
Now, when simply and truly taught in the faith
of Christ, we can look beyond the ashes of the dead.
How firmly and truly can the mind be made to rest
on that Rock of Faith!
It is not that we are often called upon to do any
great work that shews our trust in God’s promises,
in simply doing our duty in that state of life into
which it hath pleased God to call us. Herein, alone,
is man dignified in his Christian course ; but, as with
Captain Martin, to be able to close his eyes to the
life that was yet before him, and to step back and
sink with the sinking vessel; this was the super-
natural motive which lifts up the humblest duties
into a higher atmosphere, and refines away their
earthliness and glorifies them, “ Whatsoever ye do
do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men :
knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward
of the inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ! ”
Listening to conscience he said inwardly “I will seek
God’s honor first, and do God’s will above all things,
and leave God to take care of my soul, and mine.
To minds thus stayed upon God death but opens
the door to another life. The way to which must


have been learned through the words of our blessed
Saviour, wherein He has left us, as on a chart, the
way laid down to His home in Heaven, and that we
might not fear to go, God sent His beloved Son to
take our nature upon him, to die as man dies, having
shewn us by his example how to live without sin in
the world, to look up to God as our common father
as children look up to tender loving parents, and to
die in the sure hope of a joyful resurrection.
It is impossible to conceive an idea of their
sorrows and their sufferings, but we can all know
the secret of the strength to bear in humble sub-
mission the will of God, as we see it mentally in
those perishing Christians as they stood uncovered
on the deck of the London.


CHAPTER VIII.
Perils and Rescue of the Nineteen who Escaped.
Generosity of the Italian Captain.
The Boat, in which were nineteen men, sixteen of
the crew, and three of the passengers, had barely
time to clear the eddying whirl of waters round
the sinking ship. Five minutes had scarcely
elapsed, and eighty yards of distance gained, when
looking back, they saw her rear her once noble
head, as if in desperation, and sink beneath the
waves.
What feelings of dismay must have rushed to
each heart in this awful sight. So near were they
as to see what passed on board.
Another boat had been provisioned and launched,
and in it the boatswain, the purser’s mate, the
butcher, and the baker, were preparing to leave
the ship, but when in the boat they were drawn
down by the eddying waters.
As the stern of the vessel descends, the keel, as
far as the foremast being out of water, the crowd
of helpless human beings on her deck were seen to
rush forwards as if driven by the overpowering
rush of air from below escaping through the deck


as well as the hatches. The young officer, Mr.
Angell, was still standing with his hands on the
engine—his post of duty.
For a moment, two men with life-belts were seen
to struggle on the crest of a wave, and then to go
down with the ship into the black gulph she
created, and around, and over which, the snowy
foam, like snow-fields on the water, long remained
in circling eddies.
No cry was heard, for then more loudly seemed
to come the thunder on the wings of the dark storm.
Scarcely could those in the escaping boat hear
each other at this moment, when shouting at the
utmost of their voices.
With a stunned feeling of wonderment at their
own escape, and of horror for their friends, long
afterwards they rowed on in mute amazement,
viewing their own hope of escape still as uncertain
as it was desperate. The next moment might see
their light boat overturned in the turmoil of the
angry surges. It was a fearful struggle for life, as
they rowed on through the evening and the night
with parched lips and nerves strained to the utmost,
while any movement from right to left of the boat
might have caused the destruction of all. Now in
the black gulph, and now on the green crest of the
waves that seemed running mountains high. All
through the frightful night they rowed with desper-
ate courage, and that elastic hope which seldom


fails to befriend man in his deepest conflict. Day-
light of Friday found them alone on the same
tremendous seas in the Bay of Biscay, but about
eleven o’clock a vessel hove in sight, and the atten-
tion of the crew being called to the boat, they were
taken on board. Before this, more than once during
the night they had nearly foundered by seas breaking
over them, and nearly filling the boat; cans and buck-
ets were constantly requisite to keep the water from
rising. When succour was close at hand they were
struck by a squall in which they gave themselves up
for lost, the water nearly filling the boat. For their
sustenance they had in the boat, a quart of water
(the rest having been thrown out), three bottles of
brandy, and two of champagne, some carrots and
turnips, and a bag of biscuits ; soon after midnight
they saw by the faint light of the moon a vessel
close to them, but in the roar of the wind and
waves, they could not make themselves heard
sufficiently for those in the ship to find them, and
having no light they could not be seen ; for an
hour she seemed tacking about in search of them.
Two other vessels they saw but could not approach
them because of the cross sea; at last, one of the
two ships, for which they had rowed for five hours,
hailed them ; she was an Italian bark, the “ Adria-
nople,” Captain Cavassa, whose kindness and
humanity was extreme. Benumbed and perishing
as they were after twenty hours exposure to the


pitiless wind and waves; the young midshipman,
W. M. Edwards, was caught up and drawn on
board in a helpless state. The generous Italian,
speaking but little English, had them rubbed in
blankets, and clothed in warm attire, and after
having a turkey prepared for them, with soup and
tea, he gave to each a warm bed, with a hearty
good will that cannot be too highly appreciated.


CHAPTER IX.
Benevolent Aid to the Survivors.—Truly English.
The Barque Adrianople , Captain Cavassa, with the
nineteen rescued sufferers, reached Falmouth on
Tuesday the 16th, and thence the Telegraph caught
up the unhappy news, spreading desolation and
woe throughout the land, almost as a national
calamity was it felt, and at once taken up, with
all the benevolent purpose of generosity so truly
English. On the following Tuesday a numerous
‘‘deputation of gentlemen and merchants, headed
by Mr. Hickson, Chairman of the Poplar Board of
Guardians, and Superintendent of the East and
West India Dock Company, waited on the Lord
Mayor at the Mansion House, in behalf of the
widows and orphans and relations of the unfortunate
crew who perished in the London .”
On Friday evening several influential gentlemen
met at the Terrace Hotel, Gravesend, to take into
consideration the necessity of raising a subscription
towards relieving the unfortunate survivors of the
steamship London , when it was determined that a


subscription should be raised for the relief of their
present distress, and also that a suitable testimonial,
as a token of respect, should be presented to
Captain Cavassa, of the Italian barque Adrianople,
for the humanity and kindness he bestowed on the
nineteen survivors, whom he had rescued from a
watery grave.
“On Saturday the deputation waited on the
Mayor of Gravesend, stating the object of their
meeting. His worship readily acquiesced in their
request, and kindly consented to act as Honorary
Treasurer for the fund. Upwards of £l6 was
subscribed in the room ; and a committee formed
for carrying out the views of the meeting. For the
widow and children of Dr. Woolley a meeting
was soon convened with the same benevolent pur-
pose by his brother Oxonians, and many of the
gentlemen of Sydney who are now in England.”
It is difficult to quit a subject so full of grief, or
to say the last words of regret. Our English readers
generally, cannot take the full idea of the sorrow.
To them the list of passengers are but as names,
and one impresses no more than another; but to
how many Australians do they convey all the
impression of reality.
“Those groups of beings who stood on the deck of
the London as the only boat quitted her, and who
saw the descending lines of the vessel sinking be-
neath them. ‘We,’ says an Australian of Sydney,


“ can recall their countenances, we can distinguish
their voices, we can tell the import of their tears,
and we seem to be present at the terrible sacrifice.
Those death-cries came from the lips of our kins-
man. What human sympathy can do, will be done
to alleviate so much woe. Colonists, always com-
passionate to the unfortunate, will be doubly so
when bereavement has fallen on the families of
public benefactors.”


CHAPTER X.
The Rev. Dr. Woolley.
Weeks have come and gone, and still the whole
world of England seems ringing as it were a death-
knell to the loved and lost of the London. A
calamity so widely spread will be the theme of
many an abler pen than mine, and yet would I fain
pay a passing tribute to the memory of the only
friend of my home that was among the sufferers.
In the mental pictures—that come and go—of those
long hours of agony and suspense, the delicate,
sensitive features of the distinguished member of
the University, the Rev. Dr. Woolley, are ever
present. He is named first in the performance of
the services of the Sabbath day together with the
Rev. Mr. Draper. There it is easy for those who
knew him, to conceive what would be the context
of his simple yet elegant address. There, no doubt,
some chaste and affectionate words fell from the
lips of the able and judicious teacher, that could be
gathered in by all for the hour of tribulation.
Again he is named as applying his small amount
of physical strength to the pumps, together with
Mr. Brooke.


None that knew “the good man, John Woolley,”
but will think of him as in the performance of his
duty; and those, the young survivors, ever in the
thick of the tumult of surrounding terrors on deck,
might well overlook the ceaseless earnest labours of
the many below. To any near him, to all, wherever
he might have been, would flow comfort and consola-
tion in the words of eternal life—though his voice,
in such a sounding storm, would reach but to the
few around him. His life had been devoted to the
duties of an University Professor rather than to those
of the pastor of a flock : but when called upon
occasionally, in his sacred office in the pulpit, the
point and force and sweetness of his discourse, had
always been a theme of admiration, so clear and
definite was his mind, and so choice and refined his
language.
The difficulties of his position in organizing and
fitting in the elements of so great a National In-
stitution as an University in a new land, called forth
the aptness and method of a mind equal to the task
in energy and concentration. Well did he acquit
himself in all, and truly was he beloved by his
young students, for to his mind belonged that
singular charm of sweetness and freshness in the
manner of imparting instruction ; strong in the very
gentleness of his deportment, and so cultivated in
the love of the beautiful in Art and in Nature, he
was truly the right person in the right place, im-


parting widely 5 to others the refinements of his own
cultivated taste. In his hours of leisure, how boyish
in his mirth, as a boy out of school, I have seen him,
even to climbing trees, and running races in com-
petition with the youthful members of a pic-nic party
and dashing into the rippling waters not to be beaten
in the race of First to the boat; this was the true
spirit of his fun, when first I met him in 1852 or
i 853-
But to hear him on the more touching theme of
home and his Mary, was like a stream of poetic-
prose ; the beauty of all that surrounded the spot
where first he saw her, as if enchanted by her love-
liness, the word itself, Mary—so full of sweetness—
not any language could give a name more musical
more fraught with love and brightness ; what to
him was all his learning compared with the joys of
home, the mental refinements that lived in his home.
And yet that mental strength he so much prized
had grown in his presence—gaining, as the dial from
the sun, till, so in harmony with his own mind were
the thoughts she uttered, they fall on his ear like
chords of sweet music. This, was from the full-
ness of his heart, in 1864. In remembering the
freshness and grace of his pleasantry, as when wel-
comed first in my family home with his charming
wife ; it is doubly a regret that there are few among
my friends to whom I can liken him. The simplicity
of the great scholar was a compliment to the listener,


when he spoke of his wife, in every step of his
praise, all women seemed a little higher, and
though save to queens, it is not for women to
aspire to great things, unless, indeed, they be
reached by small and patient steps, a higher
rank seemed due to her, who in her early mornings
with her children in the gardens, could devote her
time so well that each child would return home
having learned from its mother, a lesson in Greek,
or Latin, or in the French and German languages!
Knowing this, but not from himself, I too thought,
with what reason he rejoiced in the companionship
of a mind so cultivated, to him she seemed his equal,
and even more. And now, to my own mind, came
the truth of all that woman owes to her blessed
Saviour. In a land where the poor Black Gin is
equally a daughter of Eve, equally a descendant of
the exiles of Eden ! How does the curse of woman
(first in transgression) rest upon her! —See in the
painful contrast. Where for her, is the dignity of
woman, where the joys of home, she is just where
she was left at the fall, dependent on man, a slave
without protection, a mother without a mother’s love,
and how to her white sisters came the higher state
of being ?
It is to Christ alone,"and His blessed Gospel that
they stand indebted for all the unspeakable difference
between them. In Christian lands the loss of liberty
to woman is forgotten in her inheritance of love,


God’s love too, so that she rises to an equality with
man, not by nature, but by grace. “ Bone of his
bone,” God made her his equal, and but for the too
warm and impulsive nature of our mother Eve, we
should have known only the good and the beautiful,
such as the Bible tells, and Milton sings “ When God
walked with man in the Garden of creation.” Now,
through Christ our Lord, she too is free in the
strength of His words “Whoso doeth the will of my
Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother,
my sister, and my mother.”
But, to return to the good man, John Woolley,
and the peculiarity of his sensitive elegant mind, as
I saw him last, in 1861, when to express his feeling
of desolation and loneliness in the absence of part
of his family in England, “ When I turn my back
on Sydney to return to my desolate home, it seems
as if everything had a covering of black crape. My
garden, and drawing room, and all so dear for her
sake, seem so changed by their absence.” Hoping
to cheer the once bright spirit by pointing to the
noble pile, the University, all seemed to him fright-
ful and distorted. Even the beauties of the angel,
“ Faith,” as from the pediment she points her
graceful finger to the skies, had lost for him its
hopeful teaching for the while. And now, poor
man, I can but imagine what to him must have
been the last few days of his life, in the thought of
that home and its inmates; save in the feeling of


“ Leave thy widow and thy fatherless children to
me;” and that he well knew the hearts of the
people among whom he had left them. Full well
he knew that it was the will of God, and though
inexplicable now, soon on the other side of death
he would know why this fearful trial was in his
destiny.
In the rich treasury of his mind how must the
messages from God have passed through his heart,
as in hopeful pleadings with the God of mercy he
would call upon him to “ deliver them out of the
trouble.” My message to others has been that God
(ever merciful) to pardon and receive us, is ready to
take us to His home, and though the desolation
of orphanage come uj>on my children, they will
know that they still have a Father in heaven in
whom they will trust. “Turn Thy face from my
sin, and put out all my misdeeds,” and the answer-
ing thought was there, “I am thy light and thy
salvation,” saith the Lord ; and to the King of
kings and Lord of lords he bowed his suppliant
head.
How dear, then, to him were the messages of
God, “Be not afraid, I will be your succour,”
“While angels rejoice over you who have heard my
voice, and with sorrow for your sins have called upon
me by faith in my promises.” Why then, since we
know that death is not annihilation, should this
heathenish dread of death be still perpetuated in


the teaching of Christians ? Why are we still taught
in childhood to regard this bony frame which is our
structure, with feelings more than revolting, as the
image of death, a monster who is to bear us far
away, as if we knew not whither ? It would be
equally easy, and far more wise, to impress the
young mind with the idea of death as the open
gate of Paradise. The same instinct would pre-
serve the life of childhood that keeps the dog and
horse from the precipice and the fire; and the child
thus in the habit of looking to the end with joy,
rather than with fear, man would be more
likely to live in the habit of that good life which is
called the “preparation for death.” Yes, far more
merciful it would be to lessen this dread of death,
and man can teach the one as easily as the other.
One moment of sleep, and through heaven’s starry
doors, past all we so much dread. And, blessed be
God, for passages so clear and so decisive as those,
which place beyond doubt the fact of our conscious
and happy existence in the presence of the Lord
between death and the resurrection, and not alone,
but with joyful recognition of dear ones gone
before. I need not think of how I shall be fit to
stand in his presence. He who clothed himself
with our flesh to live among us to teach us how to
live, as well as how to die, will make me fit for the
communion of saints and angels in His heavenly
home. This voice that God gave me is the voice


in which I am to praise him there. This heart
shall live again with which He told me to love
Him. He will make me to do and think the
thoughts of angels. “At heaven’s gate will be
thousands of angels,” who rejoice over every repen-
tant sinner. “Be not afraid—only believe.”
Thus, or much in this hopeful spirit, would he
comfort and support himself and others. He sees
around him, with a kindly sympathy, his brother
man in every stage—young men and maidens, old
men and children—from the helpless infant of four
months old to tottering age in the old parents, with
whom the battle of life being over, the promise of
a smiling home with prosperous children on the
other side of the world awaited them. Young
married couples were there, bound for a new life, a
“ life in the bush,” for a few years, and then a happy
return to parents and kindred. He sees around
him delicate girls with clasped hands, who all un-
accustomed to terrors of any kind, could only sink
on their knees and pray, or, with souls nerved to
suffering by Divine grace, shuddering at their own
helplessness. Some of these had come home with
young married sisters or brothers, who had chosen
old England for their marriage tour, and now were
returning home. What treasures have they stored
in memory and in notes in all their travels, and of
England’s lovely gardens, and cottages, and palace
homes ; of elegant fountains, and Phidian graces,


and Paladian structures, each one and all have gained
some new idea of beauty wherewith to embellish their
English homes, though at the Antipodes. And the
young men, how much have they gained in practical
purposes, as young statesmen, or for the higher
cultivation of their broad acres. How, in fancy,
they have brought together the old and new world
in the adornment and better ordering of their
homes.
Ala£, how it makes the heart ache to think of it!
All gone down in the high hearts that wept and
bled for one another in the sinking London. For
the colonies, the loss of Dr. Woolley is greatly to be
deplored. In his visit to England, his comprehen-
sive mind had gathered in a store of new and help-
ful thought to be applied for the advancement of
the young ecclesiastics and statesmen under his
charge in the university. How greatly he will be
missed in his bright cheery manner, his moderation,
his gentle, persuasive authority.
To have breathed again the getherializing atmos-
phere of his dearly-loved Oxford must have given
a new impetus to his life; thought, and purpose had
grown young again, surrounded by old scholastic
associates, and among the endearing mementos of
childhood.
“ Sleep sweetly tender heart, in peace,
Sleep holy Spirit, blessed Soul!.
While the stars bum, the moons increase,
And the great ocean round thee roll.” Tennyson.


CHAPTER XL
Captain Martin.
In one of the letters in the Times , of those who had
friends in the London, it was said of Captain Martin
that on the Sunday previous he had attended the Sacra-
ment of the Lord’s Supper. What a blessing and comfort
is this now to his friends ! “ This do in remembrance of
me.” He had been there in remembrance of Christ—of
His promises of forgiveness of sins, of the resurrection of
the body, and the life everlasting after death—there to
renew his pledge as Christ’s soldier and servant, and to
gain a renewal of strength to fight against the tempta-
tions of the “ world, the flesh, and the devil.” It is by
early training that the mind is awakened to a sense of
our need of God’s help, and that, this true Faith in Jesus
Christ will bring to each of us, the fulfilment of His
promises for us, even “the grace whereby we receive
salvation,” for “ God so loved the world, that He gave
His only begotten Son, that whoso believeth in Him
should not perish, but have everlasting life “ the pre-
cious blood of Christ, as a lamb without spot," was shed
to save us from the punishment of our sins ; His human
nature suffering the most cruel death, the death of a
malefactor, that we might be spared what he has suffered


for us. And shall He ask us in vain, that we remember
him ? It is all that He asks, that we love and trust
Him as a child does his parent, believing in His power
to keep us from sin. Strength comes, by faith in His
power to help us, whatever be the occasion; “Ye
shall not be tempted beyond what ye are able to
bear;” “ With every temptation there is always a way
to escape.” We can see his power with us, and for
us, in every event of our life, and in death. To all
believers he says, “If by faith ye are alive unto God,
sin shall have no dominion over you “ but ye have the
gift of God, which is eternal life through Jesus Christ
our Lord “Be ye perfect, even as lam perfect,” are
the words of Christ, and in the Gospel we have His life
and example before us. In prayerful watchfulness over
ourselves we must ask for His especial grace to help us
by putting into our minds good desires.
What might Christian mothers do if this were always
their teaching in each little world of home; the practice
of attending with their children the Holy Sacrament —
What a cry has gone up from the sinking London, a cry
of praise and thanksgiving to God from all those who
had been taught to look to the light that God has given
us —the light of his glorious home above —with a con-
science awake to the simple truths of the Bible, to the
path there laid down, as in a map, to find the way; con-
sulting it as we should a chart in the desert, or on the
trackless ocean. It is seldom that great minds leave
behind them a more striking truth than that which rests
in the words of Napoleon 1,, that “ the grand deside-


ratum of a great nation is good mothers.” And for Eng-
land, how beautiful the example lives in the life of our
noble Queen. Truly in her has God blessed the nation.
“ Indeed, the very top of admiration,” she shines forth,
the glory of a glorious kingdom, on whose realm of many
climes the sun shines on, through day and night, through-
out the year.
And if to mothers’ love belongs, as truly it does, the
training of the hearts of their children, so to parents it
belongs to train them for eternity. Not to nursery-maids
and nursery-governesses alone should they be entrusted.
As Rachael prayed, so, no doubt, you besought God for
them; and to you is given more than Rachael’s blessing,
for you are spared to cherish them ; and yours it is to
imprint on their hearts not only the Lord’s Prayer and
the Creeds, and the Church Catechism, but the applica-
tion of them to themselves, and the promises of Christ
in the Bible, as addressed to each individual soul. That
“ Our Father ” means that God is really our common
father, loving each of us as a father loveth and pitieth
his own child; and that “ prayer ” means the looking
up to God and asking, as hopefully as we should of a
loving father, with the full assurance that he hears us,
and will grant all that he sees good for us; that as he
created us, so it is he that gives us our daily strength and
reason, as well as the daily provision of food and rai-
ment, guarding us from evil and danger by His fatherly
care —not because we deserve it, but only out of His
mercy and goodness—and therefore we should love
Him, and worship Him, and give Him thanks, and
51
Mothers' Influence.


do our best to serve Him truly all the days of our
life.
Teach them the words of Christ, that their bodies are
the temple of the Holy Ghost, that any pollution of the
body is a sin against the Holy Ghost. Teach them not
only to read the Bible, but thus to have it in their hearts
as the way and the life, the power of God unto salva-
tion ; in the example of Christ, how to live in the world
a life of purity and truth, and, though tempted as He
was, yet without sin.
Take them yourself to the Holy Communion as soon
as they are confirmed —■“ ere earth has defiled what was
born for the skies ” —especially your sons, and so until
they feel their power over themselves in the strength to be
gained there alone. Daughters follow easily in their
mothers’ steps of duty, but it is to your sons you must
look for the good standing of your family name. Abra-
ham was chosen of God, “ because he would command
his children after him:” he would implant in the hearts
of his children the piety and high principle of duty be-
stowed on himself by God’s gift.
As little children to their parents so must we be to
Christ, trustful, obedient, grateful, loving; when Christ
says “ Fear Him,” it is not with a slavish dread—-
he means, fear to offend Him, with a holy principle of
reverence, as for a parent.
Let the love of home reign in their hearts, as a
feeling pure and sacred, next to the love of God.
How does the smile or kindly voice of a father or
mother spread joy and gladness through a home of


loving children ! so let that joyful, trustful atmosphere,
breathe around them in that open intercourse of home,
that is not far from the love of the Paradise of God ;
something of the fragrance of Eden will rest within it.
“I will dwell in them,” saith the Lord, “and I will
receive you, and will be a father unto you ; ye shall
be my sons and my daughters, saith the Lord God
Almighty.”—Cor. ii. vi.
“ Sweet is the smile of home; the mutual look,
When hearts are of each other sure ;
Sweet all the joys that crowd the household nook,
The haunt of all affections pure ;
Yet in the world e’en these abide, and we
Above the world, our calling boast.”
— Keble.
Death transforms the soul —it does not effect any
change—as man dies, so God knows him to be—
we must try to live as we would wish to die —(in the
Bible we never read of preparing for death) —death but
opens the door to another life-—“ Blessed are the dead
that die in the Lord ” —if, then, the dead are blessed,
they do not cease to be —no, another life opens before us
—the elevation of mind—the expansion of intellect- —
the enlargement of all powers—the removal ; of all
the shackles that confine them —the spread of the soul’s
unfettered wing, to soar, rejoicing, in unceasing life.


There, alone, will cease that thirst that is in every
bosom for something better than life can give.
Parents who have thus felt for their children, regarding
them as “ inheritors of the kingdom of heaven,”
will feel assured of being restored to them in the
realms of life, a restoration which will be bright and
radiant with joyful recognition—not alone , in the second
paradise, as it was not good to be alone in the first
—night rolled away with sorrowful memories—no more
tears —and there, what joy to hear the Saviour’s call
and say, “ Behold me, Lord, and the children whom
Thou hast given me.”
Impossible as it is, for us in the quiet of home, to
picture or to conceive the sufferings and the dismay of
those dear souls who went down in the “ London, ”
there is a speaking, touching language in their gentle
submission, that tells of how this Christian land has
the spirit of God’s own laws and promises spread
abroad among its members in every sphere. The
mourner’s tears will flow—but parents would not say
“ Come back to me my children ! ” —no, it was the way
to God, that he chose for them, and they are safe.
Perhaps those dear parents and children who died
together would have said; “ Better so, than to be
scattered abroad upon the world’s wide stage.” In
all, there is an idea conveyed of concentrated suffering
and resignation in those pictures of whole families
clinging together in mute despair; below, and on
deck children of all ages —babes asking of mothers
the meaning of qdieir tears! What an impossible lesson


to convey to a precious child, to whom the idea of
safety was its mother’s arms !
“A simple child
That lightly draws its breath,
And feels its life in every limb.
What could it know of death ? ”
Wordsworth.


CHAPTER XII.
Australia’s Future —Address to her Sons and to her
Daughters.
It is difficult to quit a subject so full of thought and
feeling without a few words of project and hopeful
aspiration to my young Australian brothers —stalwart
and brave —and with a spirit of action and enterprise
to raise you above every difficulty.
Why, when the earth on which you tread is teeming
with mineral wealth, was that noble ship, the “ London,”
laden in part with 1,200 tons of iron? Has not the
iron of the Fitzroy mines been proclaimed “ pure as
a Damascus blade ? ” The dew will not stain it:
100 per cent it has been proved to be, in pure ore,
in some of its veins. With acres, nay miles, of this
within 100 miles of Sydney, and with gold and silver
under your feet, what need you more?
Why should England supply the one, and (for this
item) absorb the other, when Nature’s royal gifts are
around, above, and below you ? There is not in the
world a climate where man can live more in the air,
with so little wear and tear of life. As was said by
Mrs. Lang years ago, “Ye hae naething to do, but pitch
your tent and be thankfu’.” Once spread your network
of railways, as they did in America (simply and cheaply


first), and then how unfettered will be your projects.
It was to that network of railways throughout her
magnificent country that America owed her rapid rise.
Like you, with English blood flowing through the veins of
her aspiring sons, she was not to be daunted by
difficulties. Well had it been for New South Wales
if, in the enlightened statesman and elegant scholar,
Sir Edward Lytton Bulwer, she had had a governor,
instead of a minister of state, at the period of her first
backward step. She would not then have suffered that
political fall under which she now struggles. But
onward, still —and rise like heroes ! Shake off that
crotchety spirit that has troubled your councils and tied
your hands, and let the Fitzroy mines yield the iron for
any extent of railways to facilitate your internal trade,
and to develop your vast resources —concentrating in
Port Jackson (the mother colony) the various postal
routes of our Southern world. Is it labour that you need ?
Then what means that talk of Monasteries and Nunneries
in that free young land ? Is a Monastery the right place
in which to waste the thews and sinews of your brave
and able young men, when labour is so much required,
and a happy home of his own, with wife and children to
make it bright, is within the reach of every young man ?
Say you will have none of it!
, And to you, my fair young sisters of Australia, —Are
you to be shut up from the bright air, and all the joys
of life that God hath hallowed ? is the charm of young
life that stirs within a happy home to be denied to you ?
To love God is to keep his commandments ; and in these


words of Christ is the only badge He has left us of our
Christianity —“By this shall all men know that ye are my
disciples, if ye love one another.” Nowhere does He
say seclude yourselves, or separate yourselves, apart from
the world and its duties; our love to one another is to
be exercised in the world. Our rules of life and self-
discipline are in his own example, and from the time his
active mission began we find Him in the haunts of men
—in the temple, in the city, in the crowded mart, where-
ever there was a multitude. He was found feeding the
hungry, healing the sick, giving sight to the blind (which
wealth and kindness may try to do still) and to all, freely
opening the way to pardon and love in His heavenly
home. “Follow after me,” He says, “and be ye
perfect.” And to be like Him, the pinnacle of virtuous
life, should be the humble aspiration of every Christian
soul. His name is ours, as Christians, and the object of
our life and of our faith, should be to show ourselves as
one family in the sight of God —the object of the
Almighty being, clearly, to manifest Himself in Jesus
Christ and His Church; and so He will be revealed in
His own good time. How can unity exist in a young
empire unless we keep ourselves free to serve Him as He
has taught us ? In this question much is at stake—lt is
as the life of freedom in a young empire. Let ours be a
people who by education will think, and read, and judge
for themselves, as disciplined by God’s Spirit, not ad-
mitting the obsolete customs and opinions of Rome and
the dark ages, that resist the march of improvement and
progress : but claiming for every man the right from


nature and from God, of freedom of opinion, by which
to judge of all things. This is the tendency of Protes-
tantism—the open door of truth, a clear way for improve-
ment and consequent civilization. “ Stand fast, there-
fore, in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made you free.”
Nowhere has He said, withdraw yourselves as isolated
bodies of men and women, such as we see in Convents
and Nunneries ; nowhere, to abandon every holy name
of family love and duty which He has sanctioned and
sanctified. No ! this was the work of Satan himself,
thus to enthrall the mind of man to the power of man.
And what is the aim of their teaching ? not freedom, as
the sons of God and joint heirs with Chiist. Free to do
all good, restricted only from evil, is the freedom of a
Protestant, with Christ alone for his intercessor with his
Maker. His pastor is his friend and brother man: no
inquisitorial visits, no penance, no confessions, no for-
giveness of sins from priests ; this last was a supernatural
power given by our Saviour to His disciples, together
with raising the dead, healing the sick, giving sight to the
blind, but nowhere do we find the apostles forgiving sins;
all other miracles they performed, but not to forgive sins
—this was for God alone —they, were still men.
Every man is a priest in his own house, and in his
example of truth and justice, faith, love, and charity, can
shew forth the teaching of the Law and the Prophets,
the teaching of his blessed Lord and Saviour.
God has not required of us any lofty supernatural
virtues which we cannot reach, and which Rome in her
monasticism pretends to. With the spirit of the gospel


in our hearts, we shall lean on God’s help absolutely, and
only, and this He has promised to all who ask it through
Jesus Christ. It is He alone who can forgive us our
sins. Our own ministers declare and pronounce to us,
that we, being penitent, “ are sure in Christ’s promises of
the absolution and remission of sins.” And this is all
that men can do. No Priest nor Pope can do more.
They have no higher teaching than that which is yours
and mine in the Bible; none but that spiritual light which
comes by the gift of God to all good ministers, and
to all who study with good and high purpose the Bible ;
but that, they would keep from you, save their own
interpretation of it. Look to yourselves, my dear
Australians. See in the Times now in 1866, what Spain
has done; a nation calling herself “ Most Catholic
Spain.” Certainly the most bigoted, and most in
bondage to the power of Romanism, “ Spain, a haughty
nation, unscrupulous as ever of international morality,
makes a bonfire of well filled bonded warehouses, to the
extent of upwards of a million sterling, where the loss
falls on neutral nations. This instance of Castilian
chivalry, in these our days of more practical Christianity,
when, to resort to such a barbarous extremity with a view
to indulge vindictive passions,” shows her to be a people
as cruel now, and as forgetful of God’s retributive justice,
as 300 years ago, when, “at the hands of Pizarro, she
impoisoned with the virus of small-pox, gay ribbons, and
strings of bright beads, to bring down the beauty and
strength of the simple Peruvians.” This they did in the
greed of wealth to gain the silver mines of Peru. Per-


haps in their ignorance of Christ’s teaching in the Bible,
they thought that Priests could absolve them from even
this dreadful sin. They could not have known from the
Bible the love and mercy that died to save each mortal
soul; to give us abetter world than even this, so beautiful
and glorious as it is. See what He has given us here ;
even a foretaste of heaven, in the love, and joy, and peace
of a happy home, when in it is His holy teaching. What
boundless joys spring from those solemn words spoken
by the Lord Himself —“Obey your parents, love your
wife, reverence your husband, love your children.” He
creates us to be infants, sons, daughters, husbands, wives,
father, mother. As children, let the Child of Nazareth
be your model—as married, let the Lord who loved the
church (that is, all Christian communities) be your type
—as parents, let the heavenly father, the God of truth
and mercy, be your guide.
And all this is yours, my young Australian friends, so
long as you keep yourselves free, in our holy Protestant
church, the liberty in which Christ hath made you free ;
be not entangled with the yoke of bondage, and your
children will rise up and call you blessed, for they will be
free. Let no influence have power to forge for you those
shackles to free herself from which England had to
wade through seas of blood (the Reformation). Look
to yourselves young men, with hearts glowing with every
noble instinct of piety and loyalty, and prizing the
blessings of a Christian home, and see that they take not
from you that blessing of God, the truths of the open
Bible, and the pure belief that it contains (with the


Prayer Book) all things necessary to salvation. See that
they impose not on you the worship of the Virgin Mary.
Christ has nowhere commanded it; indeed he seems
expressly to forbid it, when he says, “ Whomsoever shall
do the will of my Father, which is in heaven, the same is
my brother , and sister, and mother .”—St. Matthew, x., n.
It is purely Idolatry, and the key-stone of their strength;
man is by it enslaved through his affections. It is the
most cunning of their devicesand simply “a tradition of
Men,” “ making the commandment of God of none
effect.” God says, “This is my beloved Son, hear Him."
Matthew, xvii. We are to worship God purely
through Him , and by no other Mediator ; the way , he
has shown us in words, and in example. Keble says—
“If in our daily course our mind
Be set to hallow all we find,
New treasures still of countless price,
God will provide for sacrifice.
We need not bid for cloister’d cell,
Our neighbour and our work farewell,
Nor strive to wind ourselves too high
For sinful man beneath the sky ;
The trivial round, the common task
Would furnish all we ought to ask,
Room to deny ourselves—a road
To bring us daily nearer God.”
The desire of God is, that we should all come to Him,
and the way is quite clear; each day bears us on to that
great gathering which will be “ Creation’s Jubilee,” and


we, in our day, must see that we leave the way clear for
those who come after us, in that fair young land of
promise. Fain would I (if with the glass of Prince
Houssain, in Arabian story, I could) open to the eyes of
my English friends, that wonderful ethereal blue distance,
that seems to blend so softly with the violet shades of
earth ; where the myrtle is a tree, and the double-oleander
is seen ten feet in height, and where the vine twines its
branches in wonderful profusion. No care in England,
or at Versailles, in all the magnificence of horticultural
beauty, can give to the orange and lemon, or pome-
granate, and other fruits, the odour, and vigour, and
beauty, they have there, with but little care or culture;
nor can even Naples, or Nice, or Provence, the flowery
land of poetry, and the troubadours, vie with the orange
groves and vineyards of Australia.
There is not in the world a more salubrious clime than
that of Sydney and its vicinity, though from the great
range of the thermometer, the heat of a climate almost
tropical might be imagined. The atmosphere so clear,
and light, and dry, is in itself a panacse for many ailments.
Invalids from England and from India rally quickly there.
Many from both of these opposite regions, though carried
on shore as helpless invalids, are soon on foot and on
horseback, enjoying life as their neighbours. People ot
delicate constitutions live long there, who in a less tem-
perate atmosphere would soon fall victims to bronchitis,
&c., &c. And for this bright homeland was bounding
many a heart of those that went down in the lamented
“ London .”


PARAPHRASE,
NAMING HEK MANY GIFTS.
Know ye the land of the Cedar and Vine,
Where the flowers ever blossom, the beams ever shine,
Where the light wings of Zephyr, oppressed with perfume,
Wax faint, in the groves of the orange in bloom ;
Where the sun adds new odour and zest to the fruit,
And the wild bird is brilliant, or sings as a flute ;*
Where the tints of the earth and the hues of the sky,
In colour though varied, in beauty may vie ;
Where the purple of ocean is deepest in hue,
And the sparkling air breathes life’s spirit anew ;
Where the gold lies as pure in its earth-crusted bed
As the golden Mimosa that waves o’er thy head ;
Where the Naptha flows pure, as of old, from the hill,
But no Oracle tempts the frail spirit to ill:
Where the lights of the Rainbow from moonbeams lie low
In the ocean, in Mother-o’-pearl shells, f that grow
In clustering beds, as a pearl-sheeny shield
For panoplied knights of the Sea-queen to wield ;
Where pearls grow in mussels, and gems in the field ;X
Where the vibrating air seems to sparkle at noon,
And where Fire-flies§ dance, like a shower from the moon;
Where the Virgins are fair as the roses they twine,
And the spirit of Man trusts a promise divine.
’Tis the clime of Australia, the land of the Sun,
Where England a young giant course has begun.
O, hail it! dear Albion, as Child of thy breast,
For Victoria’s our Queen, and your God is our rest.
* The flute-toned notes of many of the birds is most striking,
especially of the thrush and piping crow (commonly called magpie).
The note of the organ-bird is of deeper melody.


f See in the Times , 1865, the Speech of Sir J. McDonald, the
Governor of Western Australia, of the discovery there, of banks of
mother-o’ -pearl shell of great size. The exquisite tints of the Lunar
Rainbow, not unfrequent there, are those of the mother-of-pearl
shell.
J In the gold-fields are found diamonds, rubys, garnets, amethysts,
&c., &c. See Times of 1865, a learned article on Australian gems.
§ On the Warragumba and Nepean rivers the fire-flys are most
brilliant, as also in many parts of Australia.


CHAPTER XIII.
Education and Appreciation.
If I were asked to describe an English gentleman, I
should say—honest of thought, loyal, manly, generous,
and gentle; refined in taste and feeling, and courteous in
demeanour. And of these, who by hundreds —nay,
thousands —have, in the noble spirit of enterprise, left
their native land and found in Australia so fair and
ample a field for their labours and their capital, a race
has now sprung up, claiming all the characteristics of
their Saxon forefathers, and needing only equal advan-
tages of travel (as yet enjoyed by the few) to make them
in all things like to their English prototype. By nature
there is strikingly a free-born grace in the children of
Australia : the boys, agile and alert as an Indian hunter,
and a fresh round beauty in them all as children, such as
artists love to perpetuate, owing no doubt to the free
growth that has known no check to nature in measles,
whooping cough, &c., &c. These infantile ailments, with
scarlatina, are the introduction of late years. Many still
live who, fifty years ago, saw the desolating effects of
the first influenza among the poor aborigines, brought as
it was by South American traders. That the climate is
by nature favourable to Europeans is seen in the beauty
and grace of their children, even with ordinary care and


training. In the higher class it is still more striking,
causing them often to be likened to the groups of
Phideas and Praxitiles ; as in feminine beauty, to the
“Lily-crowned Nymphs,” of Flaxman; or to “The
Graces,” of Canova. Generally fair and blue-eyed, with
a strong dash of the sunbeam in their lovely hair, it is
purely English beauty that shines out in many a happy
family; and with habits and tastes for mental cultivation,
and surrounded by all the refinements of life, it is easy to
forget when among them that yon are at the antipodes.
Though in the far wilds of Australia, an Englishman is
the same being: he plants his home there with a heart
full of the home of his fathers —and so, naturally, all
things grow around him in the same taste and feeling of
home. His sons, more free in their country life, become
manly and bold at an earlier age ; but in the natural
pride of a parent, as far as schools can provide, they are
not suffered to be less educated than their English cou-
sins, and often with the view of finishing their Education
in England. No books can convey exactly the thoughts
and feelings acquired by a few years well spent in
Fatherland, and both countries must gain in different
points by the comparison. There is now no part of the
world where education is more generally diffused than
in Australia, and this, thanks to our good Bishops.
The feeling of loyalty is deep and general, the at-
tachment to the mother country intense, and even those
born in the colonies speak of it as home, and are as
truly attached to the British crown as to their country.
No praise is too high for the successful organization of


so great a work as that which devolves upon a bishop in
a new country. Far and wide, over hundreds of miles,
he plants his churches and spreads his schools, wherever
the means are attainable. It is for time, as well as for
eternity, that he has to provide, in his care for his widely
spreading flock ; and often against contending elements,
such as in the old world it would be difficult to conceive.
Far more onerous are his responsibilities than those of
his brethren the bishops in England; for, so far from
higher appeal, he must necessarily be self-reliant in many
an anxious step. To obey the command of his Lord and
Master is truly his work —to gather into the fold the
great family of God—to “ let the whole earth be filled
with His glory;” and often is it, as with good Bishop
Selwyn, to leave behind him the even course of refined
culture for a life of peril among savages. Few, indeed,
have had trials equal to those of the Bishop of New
Zealand; but all must feel sensibly the weight of their
high calling. So it is with an English gentleman who
transplants himself and family to Australia in his ex-
tended responsibilities—his mode of life becomes more
like that of a patriarch of old. Far from the settled
abodes of his kind, he stands alone—magistrate, minister,
doctor—for, really a justice of the peace, he has besides
to exercise the duties of the last named professions.
Should a limb be fractured, his nerve and skill are taxed
to set it. Should a child be sick and die, it is he that
performs the office of baptism and the last sad office,
burial —and it may be for his own child. So, on each
Sabbath day, he is the minister for his people in the


services of the church. His self-reliance, called upon in
every emergency, his force of character is more strongly
developed, and in his wider views he is a wiser and a
better man, while under the bounteous skies of Australia
his flocks and herds have given him accumulated wealth;
and yet, on returning to Fatherland, he has sometimes
had to claim his equal rank with his fellow men, as if
that sweet transparent atmosphere could receive or give
a taint. That Australia was once a place for exiles, will
be as much a matter of history ere another century, as it
is now that Virginia was the last of America to receive
them ; or that Ireland once bore the same relation to
England, as is now seen only in the Harleian MSS. in
the British Museum.
Too much can scarcely be said on the benefits of
travel. Well would it be for every Australian to visit
England. In a nearer view of all that he has been
taught to venerate and prize in the ancient institutions of
his fatherland, his mind and judgment will become more
sound and more enlightened; apart from every pleasure
and gratification that it must afford, the feeling of equality
with his fellow-men which it gives, is a boon that parents
should endeavour to bestow on their children. It is a
higher step to independence of thought and feeling to
have seen the glories of an old nation. Much indebted
is the world at large to the Illustrated News for the wider
expanse of thought and imagination that it has conveyed,
even to the world’s end; but to a young mind well
trained, there are in every scene a thousand points to be
remembered that no illustration can give.


Much indeed is there to see and value in the boundless
charities of England— the grand and noble in architecture,
both of the past and present—the wide spread of science
in all its branches—the wonders of machinery, and the
noble achievements of art. The parks, the gardens, the
villas, the castles, and above all for grandeur of effect
(the most noble to be seen), the park at Windsor, where
nature, the queen of artists, has lent her aid for hundreds
of years, perfecting the lordly beauty of the park, and
lines of trees that form the avenue, a continuous beauty
of three miles in length, from the colossal statue of King
George 111. to the Royal Palace, towering so grandly at
the opposite extreme; which, when seen in all the rich
panoply of autumnal tints, drew forth the exclamation,
“ This is the most royal sight in the world,” from an
accomplished authoress, who had visited most of the
Royal Palaces in Europe. Then to see our noble Queen
in the House of Lords, surrounded, as she should be, by
the wisdom and talent of the nation ; and if in a circle to
receive the honour of presentation, to behold Her
Gracious Majesty in all the attendant state of royalty;
the inheritor of a crown from a hundred kings ; the head
of the Protestant Church, under the long peace of whose
protective power, the march of science has made such
rapid strides throughout the world.
To the proud patriotism awakened in every chivalrous
mind by these time-honoured institutions of our glorious
kingdom, the young Australian brings the charm of
novelty. His only sense of the grand has been in the
pomp and maj esty of nature, in the storm, the forest, the


ocean, and the glories of the firmament. What wonder,
then, that in the presence of his Queen his heart is filled
with a new sense of loyalty, more mature than that which
already dwells in the breast of every educated Australian—
(a feeling as if each had an individual property to prize
in the Queen and her Royal Children). And so it is;
their sorrows and their joys are entered into with heart-
felt sympathy. The death of His Royal Highness, the
lamented Prince Consort, sent a thrill of grief to every
hearth and home throughout the land. Well was he
known and appreciated for his kingly virtues, and vast
acquirements ; equally to them, though at the Antipodes,
had reached the benefits of his great mission, in the dis-
charge of which he has added a higher lustre to the
British crown. In his taste for the true and the beautiful,
he has given a more enlightened direction to the intel-
lectual, and the artistic; and to the sons of toil, a higher
tone of self respect, by his appreciation of the honour due
to industry. Thus, in his too short career, his life and
example is seen to have shed a new light over the pursuits
of a nation—a light that reached even to the Antipodes,
and it is in the reasonable pride of consanguinity with
Englishmen, that the sons of Australia send back their
loud acclamations to each note of praise, in echoes that
say—“ Albert the Great and the Good.” The “good” is
his by the voice of the nation, and “ great ” he was, to a
distinguished degree by merit, and as being the gifted
Consort of Victoria, our honoured Queen. What grand
conception can equal that of the Industrial Exhibition,
wherein he brought all nations of the world together as


brethren in friendly competition of their arts and labours,
and opened, as it were, the doors of England as an arena
for their display ? Truly, the generous Christian mind
that could achieve so lofty a consummation, has reaped
for itself the title of “great,” as well as “good.” While
nations proclaim his greatness by repeating his grand
conception, and while history records his fame, let
grateful Britain be the first to declare him—“ Albert the
Great and Good.”


CHAPTER XIV.
Concluding Reflections.
Seeing the many lessons of life that will grow out of the
fearful catastrophe of the 11 London" how unequal do I
feel (even as a child among the sea-side shells) to bring
to light the golden grains of thought that surround her, in
her ocean bed. May God’s blessing rest on those who
do—for the comfort and strength of the mourner—for the
saving of the weak —and for the glory of Him whose only
badge left to us by Himself, is—“To love one another,”
—Whose care feedeth the sparrows, and decketh the field
with lilies—Who, while in His tender love, He assures us
of a home with Him in heaven, where there shall be no
more partings, no more tears ; and of beauty and glory
“ such as it hath not entered into the heart of man to
conceive,” —yet tenderly awakens our minds to the ex-
quisite lovliness of the world we live in—the passing
beauties of which (as now seen more fully by microscopic
aid) not “Solomon in all his glory,” could attain unto.
While the heavens are telling His glory, and the earth
continually shewing forth His power and might, and man
gaining in each succeeding age more intelligence for that
dominion over it, which was named in God’s gift to Adam,
may he (to maintain it justly) often call to remembrance
the prayer for wisdom of the wise man Solomon: “O God


A "r f
di /SU O
"r t 3 oS
Concluding Reflections.
of my Father and God of Mercy, who hast ordained man
through Thy wisdom that he should have dominion over
the creatures that Thou hast made, and ordered the
world according to equity and righteousness, and executed
judgment with an upright heart, give me wisdom that
sitteth by Thy throne.” May his faith be trust in God’s
guidance; and so shall he not find himself a stranger in
heaven when his time shall come. Remembering while
here, that he is only a servant, may charity and truth
abound, and science so surely develope its usefulness, that
the old world and the new be brought together with
less of sorrow than now so often comes through “the
unquiet sea,”
FINIS.




