





fyj S


EE CORD OE VOYAGE
Of J4E
STIRLIN G,
CftA-H L-ES ROGERS A CO.
64, KING STREET,
1863.


INTRODUCTION.
On previous long voyages, having found the advantages
of a weekly paper to afford a little agreeable excitement,
to stimulate latent talent among passengers, and diversify
the monotony of the ocean, I announced an intention to
edite a Record of our Voyage in the ‘ Great Britain/ and
in which all personalities would be avoided, and good
fellowship promoted. The intention was carried out, and
is now submitted, in a printed form, according to desire.
Wksterton, Stirling, N. 8.,
February 1863.


Shortly will be Published, in One Vol. Bvo, 10s. 6d., by Mr Bentley,
Publisher in Ordinary to Her Majesty,
INCIDENTS
OF THE LAST
MAORI WAR IN NEW ZEALAND,
WITH ILLUSTRATIONS OF NATIVE CHARACTER, AND THE
PROSPECTS OP INTENDING COLONISTS.
COLONEL SIR J. E. ALEXANDER, K.0.L.5.,
Author of “ Teavbls in Persia and in Africa,”
“ Explorations in America,” &c.


®{jt
A RECORD OF THE VOYAGE OF THE S.S., ‘GREAT BRITAIN,’
FROM VICTORIA TO ENGLAND—IB62.
No. I.
27 th September 1862.
As that noble ocean-bird the ‘ albatross,’ with great extent
of wing, and an apparently untiring power of flight, sails
majestically over the great deep, so has the powerful and
celebrated steam-ship, ‘ Great Britain,’ hitherto successfully
performed her voyages in both hemispheres. For this reason
we give the name of the ‘ Albatross ’ to our paper, and
to which we now respectfully invite contributions, ‘grave
and gay, but not severe.’
On the morning of the 18th September 1862, the ‘ Great
Britain,’ of 5000 tons’ burden, and 500 horse power, com-
manded by Capt. Gray of the Royal Naval Reserve, loosed
from her moorings in Hobson’s Bay, Melbourne, and in
smooth water steamed down towards the Port Philip
Heads, carrying a valuable cargo of gold, wool, &c., from
the golden colony of Victoria.
The passengers in the saloon were Sir Charles and Lady
Cooper, Col. Sir James E. Alexander, Judge Wrixon, Col.
Broughton, R.E., Capt. Watson, R.A., Lieut. Magenis, R.H. A.,
Major White, 40th Mr Maguire, late U. S. Con-


sul, Mrs Maguire and two children, Mr and Mrs D. S. Camp-
bell, Mr H. Creswick, Capt. and Mrs Greig and two children,
Mr and Mrs Rose and four children, Mr and Mrs Wilkins,
Mr and Mrs Anderson and two children, Mr and Mrs
Jones, Mrs and Miss Dawson, Mrs and Miss Paris, Miss
White, Miss Pond, Misses Kilgour (two), Mr Gill, Capt.
Lucas, Mr Miller, Master Jones, Mr W. Ramsbottom, Mr
J. Joseph, Mr Hopkins, Mr Ivory, Mr Pohl, Mr Whyte,
Mr Hartwright, Mr Howell, Mr Macartney, Mr Ellis, Mr
Fielden, Mr C. Cooper, Mr Orbelle, Mr and Mrs Moses
and family. There were in the secend saloon, forty-six
adults, eleven children, and three infants. In the third
saloon, seventy-six adults, eighteen children, and seven
infants. In the fourth saloon, 104 adults, thirty-four chil-
dren, and six infants. Officers of the ship—Capt. J. Gray,
R.N.R., Ist officer, Mr R. Peterson, 2d, Mr G. Peterson,
3d, Mr Hughes, 4th, Mr Watt; purser, Mr Beckett,
assistant, Mr Rea; surgeon, Dr Newbold ; chief-engineer,
Mr Meadon; ship’s company, total, 142; total souls on
board, 518.
For an iron ship the c Great Britain ’ is one of the
strongest afloat. She is now nineteen years old, and
strength and solidity are apparent in all parts of her hull
and fittings. She also possesses some of the modern im-
provements, such as reefing from the deck, double top-
sails, &c.
Steaming and sailing, the course was through Bass’s
Straits towards the east, to round ‘ the Horn,’ and thence,
if favoured by Providence, towards the shores of ‘ Merry
England.’
There was the usual amount of sea sickness and its
attending discomforts among some of the passengers,
whilst others ‘ roughed it ’ bravely, and attended regularly
at meals; gradually all emerged from their berths and


hiding-places, till the tables were respectably filled. There
is every appearance also of a harmonious gathering, and of
good fellowship to the end of the voyage.
After a few days out, it blew furiously, as is usual in
these so called ‘ Pacific ’ latitudes, but as we made great
progress —1000 miles in four days—and there was no
damage done to the sails or spars, the gale was an advan-
tage to us.
No ships or living objects were seen on the great deep
but the albatrosses, molly-mawks, and Cape pigeons, wing-
ing their untiring flight, and circling unceasingly in the
wake of the vessel.
We passed and saw the Auckland Islands, on the fifth
day. This group was first discovered by Captain Bristoe
of the British whaling-ship, ‘Ocean,’ belonging to Mr
Enderby, in 1810, and they are described in the voyages
of Sir James Boss, and of D’Urville and Wilkes, &c.
Seventy New Zealanders came over to occupy them from
the Chatham Islands, and engaged in whale-fishing; but
it is believed there are no inhabitants now left on the
Aucklands, and though occupied some time by the
Enderbys, they have been abandoned as a whaling station,
though still considered British islands. The Aucklands
are volcanic, and consist of basalt and greenstone —some
basaltic columns are 300 feet high ; and there is a fine
harbour called Lawrie, beside which stands Mount Eden,
which attains a height of 1300 feet. Por the botanist
there is great novelty among the bright green-feathered
ferns and gay-flowered herbs; the birds used to be so
tame, that they alighted on one’s cap, and sang melodi-
ously. One writer says, ‘ The land birds are excellent eat-
ing, particularly .the hawks ;’ —this is not the case in other
parts of the world.
The largest of the Auckland group is thirty miles long,


and eighteen broad. As to climate, it is said not to be very
severe; in July the mercury was about 88° in the valleys,
and the trees retained their verdure, and in the summer
the glass rose to 78°. Very high winds from the west
prevailed. On the sixth day we passed Campbell Island.
It was named after Mr Robert Campbell of Sydney, when
it was discovered by Captain Hazelbrough, in the ship
‘ Perseverance/ in 1810. The island is mountainous, and
thirty miles in circumference, and has good harbours, par-
ticularly Perseverance Harbour, four miles in length, and
where there are the remains of a settlement, and some
graves of seamen. J. E. A.
AN ESCAPE.
Sailing up the Gulf of St Lawrence in a "transport,
I was walking the deck at eleven o’clock at night,
with the chief officer, previous to ‘turning in,’ when
I felt an unusual chill in the air, and it was the
month of May. I said to the mate, ‘We must be near
ice;’ he answered, ‘ I think we’re long past it.’ The soldiers
of the watch on deck feeling as I did, began to stamp their
feet to keep themselves warm ; and as they were disturbing
those below, I sent them down, and to remain, if required,
at the bottom of the ladder. The deck w r as no sooner clear
of them, and we could see well for’ard, than the mate sud-
denly ran to the forecastle, and called aft, ‘ Hard a-port! ’
I looked to the steersman and saw he was nodding over
the wheel; I roused him and called, ‘ Hard a-port! ’ and
looking to the bows, I saw a line of fire, as it were, on the
deep; it was the sea j breaking on an immense iceberg,
towards which we had been directly steering. The captain,
hearing a commotion on deck, now came out in his shirt,
a card party of officers below was suddenly broken up, and


we were close under the lee of the great berg. The sails
were aback, and the captain anxiously watched them ; at
last the top-gallant sails filled, and we slowly passed the
iceberg, which disappeared like a great mass of ground
glass, and presenting altogether an appearance of solemn
grandeur, which was heightened by our providential
escape. J. E. A.
MILD PACIFIC POETRY.
The Horn, the Horn, the stormy Horil,
To which with wind and wave we’re borne,
To weather it let no one scorn ;
Eull oft spars lost and canvas torn,
Do give the seaman cause to mourn
His vessel tempest-tost and worn,
Amid the icebergs of the Horn.
‘ Let’s liquor ! ’ then, nor sit forlorn,
And drink success to ‘ round the Horn.’
A HOOSIER.
Two American gentlemen went into a place of refreshment
to drink a cool bottle of champagne. A hoosier, or western
countryman, came in after them, and sitting down, helped
himself out of their bottle. ‘ That’s cool! ’ said one gentle-
man to the other. ‘ Yes/ said the hoosier, ‘ there’s ice in it!’


tonspnhm.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ALBATROSS.
Sir, —Permit me to congratulate you upon your laudable
endeavours to alleviate the monotony of a sea voyage by
the introduction of your magazine, which I trust will re-
ceive the co-operation and good wishes of all.
In adding my quota to its columns, I am happy to say
that our voyage has commenced under most favourable
circumstances, the progress of the ship being far in advance
of her swiftest homeward voyage ; the continuance of the
same, I am sure, would be very gratifying to each and
all of us.
I must trespass on your kindness, but think it my duty
to impress upon the minds of all passengers, that in order
to guard against Fire, too much care cannot be taken, and
I am quite sure your cordial support may be relied upon.
I enclose an abstract of the log, shewing the progress
and position of the ship, which may be edifying to some of
your readers.
In conclusion, accept my best wishes, and believe me,
yours truly,
JOHN GRAY, RN.R, Commander.
Great Britain, s.s., 21th Sept. 1862.
THE laughing jackass.
The Jackass laughs in the gum-tree — why?
Because he sees in the eastern sky


The sunbeams struggling into life,
To waken man to care and strife,
And he knows full well, ere they rise again,
A thousand crimes will be done by men.
And he laughs again at the set of sun,
To think of the risks the fools have run,
For he says to himself, They have dearly bought
The things that are given to me for nought;
And loudly he laughs—so he may, my word,
For the Jackass, indeed, is a sapient bird.
R. R. H.
Under the head of Commercial Intelligence, we have to
report the state of the markets at present: —
All liquors remain steady, with the exception of Hol-
lands, which has declined 33 per cent, within the past two
days, with increased consumption, and no prospect of
further change at present.
Breadstuffs have materially improved since the arrival
of the new crop.
Metals. —No change.
Matches. —None on hand at present, but some expected
to arrive daily.
Soap. —Only Brown Windsor in the market, which is
evidently too expensive for some, though in very general
use.
Soft Goods, Haberdashery , Sc. —The market has been
very quiet, except in few articles.
Greys (Grays) have been very active during the past


ten days, and have been much sought after on account of
their beauty and usefulness.
Blues are very dull, and fortunately but few in stock.
There has been quite a movement in the hat trade, and
the market has been nearly cleared of Bell Toppers ; only
one holder at present, and the lot is so bad, it cannot in-
fluence the price. Last sales at one shilling. M‘G.
CONUNDRUM.
When were walking-sticks first introduced?
ADVERTISEMENT.
Strayed, Stolen, or Run Away. —One box containing
medical comforts. A bottle of the medicine will be given
to any one finding the property and restoring it to the
‘publisher of the Albatross.’
abstract
OF THE LOG OF THE
GREAT BRITAIN
S.S.
Days t, „
Out. T> ist -
Month. Day,
Long.
Remarks.
Sept. 18
Thursday.
Friday.
Pilot left the
ship at 11
148.51 E.
151.42
Saturday.
Sunday.
Monday.
Tuesday.
2
3
4
156.17
161.41
167.14
173.28
179.41
W ednesday.
Thursday.
Friday, 1.
Friday, 2.
174.49 W
168.14
| 2 days in 1.


NOTICE TO CONTRIBUTORS.
Contributors are requested to put their communications
to the ‘Albatross ’ into the Editor's box, in Bar Alley, s.s.
‘ Great Britain.’
Ed. A.
Sir J. E, Alexander, Editor.
D. S. Campbell, Publisher.
MEMORANDUM OF ‘
TEMPERATURE.
Water.
Remarks.
September 19
» 20
« 21
„ 22
„ 23
« 24
„ 25
j- 1 Day.
26
„ -JU
„ 26


®|t
No. 11.
4 th October 1862.
Since last week, the progress of the good ship has been
very satisfactory. Up to Wednesday she bowled along at
the rate of sometimes twelve and thirteen knots an hour,
having, to that time, averaged 242 miles a-day. A singular
and unusual haze now appeared accompanying the strong
breeze. This occasioned some anxiety in these icy latitudes,
and prevented observations of,the sun, and a view of the
horizon, where danger might lurk. At night a considerable
number of the passengers remained up —of course only from
a laudable curiosity —to see an iceberg ‘silently, slowly,
grandly’ navigating the deep ; but the watchers were dis-
appointed. As yet we have seen no ice.
There is an enterprising whaling captain on board, who
might tell of his experiences in these southern seas, and
of the strange sights he has witnessed whilst in pursuit of
the right and spermaceti whales, also of the fur-bearing
seals of various kinds. Other fishermen, in these wild la-
titudes, have recounted how that whilst the boats were
down after a whale, the monster, after the first iron was
fixed in its flesh, suddenly turned on the ship, and rushing
upon it like a steam ram, stove it in ; whilst some of the


boats’ crews would be picked up afterwards, with the fingers
of their messmates in their pockets, the rest of their bodies
being devoured to allay the pangs of hunger. Again, we
would be told that an iceberg had been seen with a ship
resting on it, 100 or more feet above the water, a wreck,
which had been lost on the ice, and from the heeling over
of the berg had been carried up into its strange position ;
—for the same reason the body of a whale was said to have
been seen occupying an equally elevated position on an
iceberg. These stories ‘ are interesting, if true,’ but we
have no doubt some true and marvellous tales may be
elicited among us, if people will only allow themselves to
be ‘ drawn out.’
Whilst we are on the subject of ice and whales, it is
lamentable to think of the reckless destruction of these valu-
able inhabitants of the deep in these waters ; they are now
scarce, also seals, sea-lions, sea-elephants, &c., and no won-
der ; at all seasons, and under all circumstances, were they
I ursue.l remorselessly, and selfishly destroyed. The whales
were followed from the open seas into the quiet bays to
which they had resorted to calve, and there even attacked
and slaughtered, old and young together. The same with
the seal tribe ; but it is now believed that if the great ice
barrier in the south could be penetrated with vessels with
lifting screws, a great preserve of whales, &c., would yet
be found towards the Antarctic Pole.
To diversify the usual chess, backgammon, and whist
playing, the captain had a space cleared at one end of the
saloon, and there, to the music of Mr Pohl and others, the
dancers ‘ tripped it ’ in what some call ‘ square dances,’ or
quadrilles, in the lively polka, and the cheerful Sir Roger
de Coverley.
There has been also some excellent singing by Mr Pohl
and Mrs Wilkins, and the prospect of a concert is even


held out, vocal and instrumental, the captain and the
weather favouring. We are also happy to announce that
one of the saloon passengers promises to exhibit dissolving
views of a superior class.
On Sunday singing was introduced—a great addition to
the service at all times. This might be assisted by a har-
monium which is on board.
The wind having chopped a-head, the screw has been again
brought into play, and carried us toward Patagonia, the
land of giants, along the 58d parallel of latitude, at the
rate of eight knots, and the temperature milder than it has
been, but not the row in the menagerie of small children,
who exhibit their health and spirits as a caution to
bachelors. J. E. A.
ANOTHER ESCAPE.
In the infant days of Port Phillip—say 1841—I had then
been in the colony upwards of a year, and was residing in
Bunninyong, not far from the now celebrated Ballarat, which,
I need scarcely add, was at that time bush of the wildest
description. A neighbour of mine, Mr H. Anderson, who
came in the early days of the settlement from Western
Australia, was settled as a sheep farmer at Winter’s Plat,
rode over to my place to tell me that he had lost a colt
which he had just taken in hand to break in, with a tether
rope attached, and he feared he would get tied up in the
bush, and so perish.
I had fixed to go the following morning, at day-break,
with a Mr Cartwright, a nephew of the celebrated dentist
of that name, who was forming a station at the foot of
Warrenheip Hill, to the Messrs Learmonth’s station, to
procure some sheep for killing, which we obtained, and


started with a horse and dray to my place with them, a
distance of about three miles, by a bush track. Having
my kangaroo dogs with me, I returned by the side of the
range, a little to the left of the track, hoping to fall in
with a ‘ dingo.’
I had not gone far when I saw Mr Anderson’s colt in
company with a second which had just completed its
education. I approached them carefully and caught the
one with the rope attached, which was a three-inch coir,
and which I coiled upon my arm, managing the horse with
my eye more than by any other power which I had over
him, as the rope was only round his neck.
I had not gone far when the second horse, which kept
close to the colt I was so intent on managing, suddenly
galloped off to, as I afterwards found out, a small herd of
cattle, —imagining, I doubt not, that it was the mob of
horses they were accustomed to run with. The colt, an
immensely powerful animal, over sixteen hands, followed
suit, and now picture my position. In the excitement of
managing the unbroken animal, I had imperceptibly
allowed the end of the rope to coil round my left leg, and
in an instant I was being dragged over a rough and thick-
ly timbered country, about twelve feet from the horse’s
heels, as fast as he, now much alarmed as well as I, could
go, and after the first effort to shake myself clear of the
rope, with the certain knowledge that I could not extricate
myself, and more, that even if any one saw me, which was
not likely, and attempted to follow the mad career of the
horse, my chance of escape would be less. At each bound
of the horse I was thrown about like a cork, the right leg
being free to strike anything that was in the way. For-
tunately I was light and young, so that the blows which I
received all over my body did not deprive me of my senses.
There was, however, more in my favour than that; there


was a watchful Providence (who watches over all, and who
suffers not a sparrow to fall to the ground without His
willing it) guiding the wild steps of the animal. I ex-
pected each moment would be my last. I did not feel
great fear, but my mind was filled with anxiety for those
from whom I, a joyous boy of sixteen, had so recently
parted in England, and who would hear of my sad end. I
was impotent to help myself, and I trusted in the Almighty
to save if He so willed it.
I never committed an account of this to paper before,
but even at the risk of being tedious, I cannot close with-
out bearing my evidence to the wonderful power of the
mind in cases of extreme danger. I can truly say that, in
a few moments, all which I had done from my infancy to
that moment passed in quick review before me, and so do
I believe will it be with all of us when we are called to
judgment at the last great day.
To return, the horses finding their mistake when they
got amongst the cattle, and seeing the horse in Cartwright’s
Dray in the distance, they continued their gallop towards
it. Cartwright saw my danger, although he at first thought
it was only my dogs which were hunting the horses ; they,
poor brutes, were keeping, with their accustomed faithful-
ness, as near as they could to their master, He (Cart-
wright) stopped his horse, and the others checked for a
moment when they arrived near the dray, upon which he
instantly caught the slack of the rope and released me from
my perilous position. I had been dragged,' we afterwards
found out, nearly a mile and a-half, at a pace which
scarcely enabled me to breathe ; and, excepting that my
clothes were torn to shreds, and my shoulder-blades liter-
ally skinned, I was not much hurt. Even to this day I
feel nervous when I see any one leading a horse with a
long rope. H. C.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ALBATROSS.
Sir, —Being desirous of adding my mite to your wide-
spread and valuable paper, with the hope of affording a
share of amusement to our fellow passengers, I intend to
contribute a few anecdotes of our Queensland aborigines,
snakes, &c., &c., in fact, anything which, I trust, may
prove of interest to the general assembly (not of the Kirk
of Scotland) in our good and trusty ship.
Hoping that my gentle readers will treat my productions
leniently, I subscribe myself yours faithfully,
Lector.
YARN THE FIRST.
Being accustomed to break the monotony of bush-life by
often visiting the blacks’ camps, I was once most agreeably
surprised to see a young black friend of mine, ‘ Davy,’
doing his best to amuse his dusky friends with a little
touch of theatricals. His first play or tragedy represented
a new chum hut-keeper baking a damper by the side of a
blazing fire, which rendered the scene in the darkness of
night most picturesque, the glare lighting up the trees and
granite boulders, surrounded with our lovely green grass,
almost, you might say, like a scene of enchantment; then
two blacks approach and look at Davy (who represents the
hut-keeper) quietly, Davy makes a remark, in answer to
their inquiries as to what he is about ‘ boodgery tello ‘
(good to eat) ; they then give a soft whistle, when the bush
seems literally to swarm with natives, who by degrees
crowd round the hut-keeper, who has by this time ex-
plained all the process necessary for rendering the damper


to be best adapted for eating, when, just as he is in the act
of rising to lay it on the embers of a burnt-down adjoining
fire, they knock him on the head at a given signal with
their hullah trullahs, pick up the damper, and bolt off with
frantic and fiendish yells. Davy, after ‘gammoning" for a
minute to be dead, now gets up, and laughing, says, ‘ I
believe that boodgery bale gammon belonging to me/ or
in other words, ‘ Aint I clever V
BETRAYED LOYE.
From the German of Chamisso.
As we kissed each other at night, love,
With no one standing by,
But only the stars in heaven,
We trusted them up so high ;
One of the stars down falling
To the sea betrayed our love ;
The sea unto the oars ; then
The oars to the boatman above.
The boatman now to his love
Of our love told the joys,
And soon through streets and markets
It was sung by all girls and boys.
ACROSTIC.
T he praise of Alexander has been rung,
H is feast, by Dryden gloriously sung,
E ach boy at school has it at end of tongue,


A nother Alexander now before us comes,
L ong may his paper reign in all our hearts and homes.
B est friends, ‘ between the post, and you and me,’
A n eighth impression is all I hope ’twill see.
The ninth may come, and if it do, why then,
E eluctant though we be to wield the pen
0 f authorship ; still well act as men
S urely will always do in such a case,
S o they but see a smile on beauty’s face. H.
ANECDOTE.
Mr Alderman Moon, when Lord Mayor, was asked to
offer himself as candidate for the city of London. A short
time afterwards, at a dinner party, he was asked by a
friend why he had not come forward. He answered, ‘ I
should have done so, only there was a (A)itch soipewhere.’
The Lord Chancellor, who was present, answered— ‘ All
the more reason for coming to the scratch !’
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ALBATROSS.
Great Britain, s.s., 3 d October 1862.
My Dear Sir, —In submitting my weekly report to
your notice, I am happy to say that our voyage still con-
tinues prosperous, and maintains the advantage over pre-
vious voyages, as mentioned in my last letter ; and under
these circumstances I entertain every hope of accomplish-
ing the voyage home in a shorter space than hitherto oc-
cupied.


In perusing your paper of last week, I find it stated
that the topsails are reefed from the deck, allow me to
correct that little error, as the ship is fitted with double
top-sail yards, by which reefing is nearly dispensed with. —
I remain, yours truly,
John Gray, Lieut., RN.R.
IMPATIENCE.
On some voyages the captain has to exercise consider-
able command of temper when the passengers evince im-
patience about the progress of the voyage. In travelling
to Aberdeen by rail on one occasion, we were amused by
the coolness of the guard, who, after a stoppage of some
duration, was addressed impatiently by an English travel-
ler. ‘ What is the meaning of this, guard ? What are we
stopping for? 7 ‘You’re in a hurry. Sir,’ coolly answered
the guard, ‘ am no in a hurry.’ A.
FREE TRANSLATION,
A soldier of Lucullus’ army once,
Root-sore and tired, was sleeping like a dunce,
With all his ‘ swag ’ about him. As he lay,
Some sneaking rascal stole his belt away—
A belt well filled by plunder and by pay ;
He dreamt of something wrong, and turned about,
And, waking, found himself not worth a groat.
Savage as hungry wolf, and fit for strife,
He sought out danger, careless of his life.
While in this mood, he stormed, as I am told,
A fortress strong, and rich in bags of gold.


For tliis he got an honourable cross,
And a new belt well-filled repaired his loss.
Just after this the General wished to seize
Some Oastle, call it Castle what you please ;
And seeing our hero lolling in the shade,
Much at his ease, he an oration made,
Exhorting him his former self to prove,
In words which might a laggard’s spirit move.
< Hero, go forth ! go where fair virtue calls I
See yonder castle, scale its towering walls;
Go and your former daring emulate—
Think not of danger, the reward is great.’
At this our hero shrewd, though country bred,
Laughed in his sleeve, and answering, thus he said,
‘ By your request, much honoured I have felt>
But ask some fellow who has lost his belt.’ C. C.
A STEAY SHOT.
Aie— f John Barleycorn ’
Theee armies went into the East,
Three armies stout and tall;
And they had sworn a solemn oath,
Sebastopol should fall
They stormed the Alma’s gory heights,
The Russians fought in vain,
A rumour then to England went
That Sebastopol was ta’en.
Then marched they straight upon the town,
All conscious of their might;


A great flank march it was they made.
And the town appears in sight.
Up rose then the great Redan,
With batteries stout and strong ;
And flanks all armed with heavy guns.
That no one should it wrong.
A council then held all the chiefs,
And all agreed Twas vain
To try and take those bristling heights.
By a brilliant coup-de-main.
But all in vain, the weeks flew by.
Each tried each scheme he knew.
One day the Mamelon appeared,
And daily stronger grew.
Then sat they down, these hoary chiefs.
To ponder o’er their schemes ;
Of tape all red they had ten miles,
Foolscap ten thousand reams.
Until at length the siege train came,
Loud rose its ponderous roar ;
Of guns there was just ten times ten,
And fifty mortars more.
They battered down the Malakhoff,
They shelled the great Redan ;
The shot and shell that,were poured forth,
Enumerate who can.
They fired all day and all night,
They fired all night and day ;
’Twas th c, fen d'enfer which took the town
Prince Gortschakoff did say.


iripnal Ifetttttu.
‘ I said of laughter, It is mad ; and of mirth, What doeth it ? ’
Eccles. ii. 2.
Of laughter I said it is madness,
Is life not a valley of tears ?
And of mirth it must yield into sadness,
To care and the turmoil of years.
Yet I longed after happiness greatly,
I searched in humility’s cot,
Midst temples and palaces stately
I sought, and behold it was not.
I bethought me of wealth and ambition,
Of the power of glory and gain,
But I humbled my soul in contrition,
For I saw that such visions were vain.
So I said in my heart, what is laughter ?
Or what is the value of mirth ?
True joy is reserved for hereafter,
’Tis known not, it dwells not on earth.
E.RH.
WOMAN AT P BAY EE.
She rose from her delicious sleep,
And put away her soft brown hair;
And in a voice as low and deep
As love’s first whisper, breathed a prayer;


Her two white hands together pressed
Her blue eyes sheltered in their lids ;
The folded linen on her breast,
Just swelling with the charms it hid ;
And from her long and flowing dress
Escaped a bare and snowy foot,
Whose step upon the earth did press
Like a snow-flake white and mute ;
And then from slumbers soft and warm.
Like a young spirit fresh from heaven.
She bowed that slight but matchless form,
And humbly prayed to be forgiven.
0 God ! if souls unsoiled as these
Need daily mercy at Thy throne ;
If she upon her bended knees.
Our holiest and our purest one,
She with a face so pure and bright,
We deem her some stray child of light,
Must kneel and pray for grace from Thee ;
What far, far greater need have we !
How hardly, if she win not heaven
Will our wild errors be forgiven !
An iceberg was seen on Thursday night, of some size,
and ten miles distant. On Friday morning, a mass of low
ice, near the ship, with a very icy feeling in the air; and
on Friday evening, at 10.30. p.m,, another berg, sup-
posed to be about 600 feet long, appeared five or six
miles to windward. This created considerable sensation
amongst the green horns. A.


ana G E A M.
So I cannot tell.
Per favour Albatross.
Geeat Beitain, s.s., 3 d October 1862.
To Captain Geay.
Deae Sie, —Would you request that the steersman, in-
stead of dancing particular portions of the hornpipe dur-
ing the night, be asked either to continue the dance with-
out intermission, as the passengers underneath would then
get used to the noise, or to dance the hornpipe and be
done with it. My friend, ‘ the Major/ complains that he
has nearly used up his remaining hairbrush in ineffectually
trying, by battering on the roof of his cabin, to awaken
the man's dull comprehension to the atrocity he commits.
Suffer me to ask also, that notice be taken of the habit
of passengers smoking on the starboard side of the ship ;
(I am told the saloon passengers act up to the notice). The
smoking is in itself offensive, and leads to expectoration,
which, unfortunately, is swept up by our dresses.
I am told that untwisted rope would prevent the water,
which hangs between the skylight and middle mast, from
flowing back and keeping the deck wet. —Yours obediently,
S. X.
TO THE EDITOE OF THE ALBATEOSS.
Sie, —I have much pleasure in recording the general


good health prevailing throughout the different passenger
departments ; and in order to ensure a continuance of the
same, I recommend a strict compliance with the sanitary-
regulations of the ship—cleanliness and good ventilation
being indispensable. At the same time, every care should
be taken to prevent colds, &c., by the adoption of suitable
and warm clothing, especially while in the Southern lati-
tudes ; and, trusting the old proverb of £ prevention better
than cure,’ may be remembered, I have the honour to be.
Sir, your very obedient servant.
Eobt. Newbold, M.D.
s.s. Geeat Britain, M October 1862.
ANECDOTE OF LOED SEATON.
Field Maeshall Loed Seaton is one of the most distin-
guished officers in the British army. A follower of Wel-
lington during the Peninsular War, when at the head of
the 52d Light Infantry, he rendered the most valuable ser-
vice ; again, at the ‘ crisis of Waterloo,’ when heavy columns
of the French were advancing to crush the thinned British
ranks, he brought forward a part of his regiment, so as to
take the enemy in front and flank, and before the guards
were ‘up and at them,’ Colonel Colborne smote and quite
paralysed the enemy. Afterwards, as Sir John Colborne,
Lieutenant-governor of Upper Canada, he would be seen on
Sundays walking a mile to church with Lady Colborne, and
followed by his fine family of sons and daughters. He is
truly a religious man and it may be said of him that ‘ he fears
Cod,’ and nothing else. One of his council said to him
one day, ‘ I wonder, Sir John, you walk to church when,
you have a carriage.’ ‘My coachman,’ answered Sir John,
1 has a soul to be saved as well as I have.’ J. E. A.


The commercial intelligence of the week is rather
meagre, but the trade done with the interior has been fair.
In ironmongery, no nails have changed hands. This
market is pretty well cleaned out, though some rusty ones
are held by several parties. In hops, the season has just
commenced, and the two lots which have arrived were
eagerly taken up, and the market is now suffering in con-
sequence of the non-arrival of another invoice now quite
due. Salt —no further imports of this article will be re-
quired, as a hed of very superior white has been discovered
in our immediate vicinity.
‘Oils and Bone.’ —Several calls have been made for
castor, and a small parcel of lubricating oil has been dis-
posed of. In bone we have to advise further shipments of
ivory, as one very superior lot now in stock is very much
liked.
Spirits.—Everybody’s has riz.
Building materials have been going up. Deals, in active
demand at from one shilling to half-a-crown each. Bricks,
the few in stock are hardly equal to the call. Logs, the
market has been cleared of an old lot, very knotty, but a
fresh arrival the same day has kept up the supply, and we
now quote them very regular.
Tiles. —Under this head there is slow movement, one
lot, still in the market, quite unsaleable.
M. G.
CONUNDRUMS.
Answer to last, When were walking sticks first in-
troduced ?
A. When Eve presented Adam with a Cain,
What animals brought the least baggage into the ark ?


A. The Fox and the Cock ; for the one brought only a
brush, and the other a comb.
What animal existed before the creation of the world ?
A. The great Chai-oss, (chaos.)
Why are two Ts like hops ?
A. Because they make beer be^er.
What is often brought to the table of the ‘ Great Britain,’
invariably cut but never eaten ?
A. A pack of cards.
In what colour should you keep a secret ?
A. In violet, (inviolate.)
What is the difference between young maids and old
maids ?
A. Young maids are happy and careless, old maids are
cappy and hairless.
Why is the letter G like a civil war ?
A. Because it makes (/-hosts of hosts.
advertisements.
Wanted, tenders of hands and hearts for the erection of a
building, to contain all the articles which it is expected
will be contributed to our new weekly (no, not weakly, good
friends, by any means). So many logs have been thrown
overboard, that recourse must now be had to bricks, of
which, luckily, there is a good supply, and to render their
union cemented and enduring is all now needed.
LOST, STOLEN, OR STRAYED,
Two children (sex not known), supposed to be boy and
girl, last heard of in the passenger list of the screw s.s.
‘ Great Britain.’ Whoever will communicate any informa-


tion, which will lead to the recovery of the same, will be
liberally and handsomely rewarded by their afflicted and
disconsolate parents. Apply on Board.
’/ S.S.
ABSTRACT OP THE LOG OP THE
GREAT BRITAIN
Remarks.
Miles
160.58
153.38
146.22
139.26
132.37
126.42
117.25
Cape Horn S., 84
E. Dist. 2485
J. W. B.
NOTICE TO CONTRIBUTORS.
Owing to press of matter, several contributions are ne-
cessarily held over till our next issue.
D. S. C., Publisher.


®j n Ullnttms.
No. 111.
l\ih October 1862.
It was remarked on the evening of Wednesday the Bth of
October, that though we had been about three weeks on
our voyage, the vastness of the world of waters we were
traversing was apparent from our not having seen a single
vessel out of the thousands at all times navigating the deep,
nor even an old whale. The sea was cold enough for
these oily monsters, also the air for the warmly-clad sea-
birds. For some days it seemed on the point of freezing
on deck, but it thought better of it and didn’t—only made
the active pedestrians tread the boards more briskly, while
‘ the brave winds ’ blew us towards Tierra del Fuego or
the ‘ Land of Fire/ so named because the navigator Ma-
gellan saw numerous fires along the beach, as he navigated
the strait named after him. On Thursday we not only
saw a barque steering to the east like ourselves, but a
whale spouted near us, and a black fish, about nine feet
long, repeatedly sprung from the waves in its lusty vigour.
The island of Fuego is thinly inhabited by a race of
half-starved savages of a dirty copper colour, wearing a
ceal skin round their loins, and living in conical huts of


boughs of trees, and subsisting on shell-fish and sea-birds’
eggs, also what seals or sea-otters they can procure, and
an occasional whale or porpoise washed on these inclement
shores. We shall probably pass close to the wild rocks of
Diego Ramirez, forty-four miles south of Cape Horn, and
on which the surf usually beats furiously on the west.
The region we are now passing reminds us of the most
melancholy fate of one we met long ago in Cafferland at
the conclusion of the first war there, Capt. Allen Gardiner,
R.N., a religious enthusiast, who spent his time and for-
tune in distant lands to improve and convert the heathen.
After his visit to Africa,
‘ Whose sunny fountains
Roll down their golden sands,’
he thought to carry the gospel of peace among the ne-
glected races of Patagonia and Fuego, He established a
mission, station at the Falkland Islands, and on several
occasions visited the mainland—at last with fatal conse-
quences, for with six companions he perished miserably
from famine on the east coast of Fuego, at Spaniard’s
Harbour, where, as it appears from his journal found on
the beach, they tried to subsist on mice, decayed fish, and
sea-weed, when their own provisions failed—having, with
strange improvidence, left their powder on board the vessel
which brought them out.
Yet Captain Gardiner seemed to be a man of tact and
precaution on other occasions. Thus he narrated to the
writer how he had passed through Cafferland at the begin-
ning of the war of 1835. He was then going to Natal
with a waggon, when one day being outspanned, a number
of excited Caffers came about him and said, £ News has
come that a chief’s blood has been shed, and revenge must
be had ; for this a white man must die ! ’ Captain Gardiner
tried to pacify them, though apparently in vain; but re-


marking that an old chief was trying to shave himself with
one of the penknives he had given them, he' thought he
would divert their attention by lathering and shaving the
chief properly with a razor. This engaged them for some
time, but again becoming excited, he said, ‘ I will give you
tobacco if you will shew me a war-dance.’ They agreed
to this, and whilst they were stamping and shouting, the
captain caused the oxen to be quietly collected and in-
spanned or yoked, and before the dancers had time to re-
cover from their fatigue, he cracked his whip and moved
off to a safe distance.
The 'Two Years’ Cruize’ of Captain Snow in the schooner
‘ Allen Gardiner ’ narrates what followed the attempts of
the Christian sailor Gardiner to improve the moral and
social condition of the wild tribes of these southern
lands.
As the breeze is said to come up after a dance, so there
is occasionally in the saloon music to encourage the more
youthful portion of the passengers ‘to tread a measure,’ in
which the Captain also assists; his spirits get up as the
breeze freshens, and though a Scotchman, he would not
be likely to join in the song in which occurs the line —
‘ Oli, blaw ye western winds, blaw saft,’.
A twelve-knot breeze and stunsails aloft and alow is his
delight, as is that of most of those whose thoughts are of
‘ England, home, and beauty. ’
The back-bone of South America., the Andes, extending
from Panama to nearly the Horn, act as a wall to stop the
western gales which come in violent puffs round the south
corner, as it were, of the great continent, which here rises
in huge, misshapen, and barren precipices, with violent
tides and currents at their base; yet in various parts, forests


and verdant shades and even flowers relieve the scene, and
proclaim that even here
‘All is not barren.’
J. E. A.
HARD LINES.
In some Scotch steamers the customs are sometimes pecu-
liar, and calculated to surprise the English and other
‘foreigners/ Thus, some years ago, whilst attending a
meeting of the British Scientific Association, on that oc-
casion held at Glasgow, I accompanied a party of geologists
to the island of Arran, in order to ascend and examine
Goatfell, and we embarked in a Clyde steamer. Dinner in
due time was announced, and the hungry philosophers sat
down to eat, but the covers remained on the dishes, when
the steward said, ‘ Gentlemen, 111 tak’ your denners! ’
‘ What does he mean ? ’ said one of the learned body next
me. ‘He means/ I answered, ‘to be paid before he gives
us anything to eat.’ ‘What do you take us for?’ said one
of the professors to the steward, ‘a set of thieves and
blackguards V ‘I dinna care what ye are,’ answered the
steward, ‘but I’ll tak’ your denners !’—and we were forced
to submit, though very indignantly, and paid all round
before we were allowed to see the fish, flesh, and fowl
under the covers.
Again, on leaving the Thames in a Leith steamer, I re-
marked two young Scotchmen come down to the steward,
in great anger, and one said to the steward, ‘We took our
berths when we came on board, and some people have got
into them, and we’ve come down to mak’ a row about it.’
‘ You can’t make a row here,’ cried the steward. ‘ We’ve
some stout fellows here to prevent any rows.’ And so ’


poor fellows got no justice, and this was another case of
Hard Lines. A.
Now the gallant ship careering
Proudly o’er the stormy deep ;
Past the wild rocks of Ramirez,
Puego’s land so hoar and steep.
Urging on her homeward voyage,
Her canvas swelling to the gale ;
From her bows the bright spray dashing,
In her wake a snow-white trail.
Flocks of sea-birds close attending,
Circling with untiring wing ;
Spouts the whale, the black fish gambols,
Through the cordage chill blasts sing.
O G O
Turn we now our prow to northward,
Past the Falklands’ dreary strand,
Through the equatorial regions,
Hopeful gain our native land.
EVENING.
From the German.
Leave me, my child, to go my way,
The sun is sinking in the west;
Tis growing cold as well as late,
Only beneath there may I rest.


Why wilt thou sing thy songs of love ?
They reach me with a mocking tone ;
Love is to me a forgotten word,
For I am friendless and alone.
And yet I can recall the time.
Its sound was pleasant in my ears ;
But now I onward go alone
Through my allotted term of years.
From here my path must downward go ;
My weak and tottering steps lack power,
For gone is youthful fire and glow,
That feel I more from hour to hour.
ANECDOTE.
A Modeen Teavellee. —A smart young gentleman
arriving at a railway station shortly after the train had
started, inquired of a porter, ‘Where’s the train?’ ‘lt’s
gone, sir.’ ‘Gone, is it,’ said the traveller; ‘then have the
goodness to fetch me another.’
take caee of fiee.
A MATCH having suddenly come to light, look out, lest
there be a general conflagration !
Cjamspnfcme.
TO THE EDITOE OF THE ALBATEOSS.
Sie, —The small instrument I have referred to in your


leader of last week as suitable for leading the singing at
church on Sunday, is quite at the disposal of any lady or
gentleman who can .play it.—l am, yours, &c. C. C.
A Harmonium.— Editor.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ALBATROSS.
Sir, — Could you, through the medium of your paper,
get a concert up for the amusement of the passengers ? I
know several in the second and third cabins that I think
would only be too glad to lend their assistance.
While I am giving you that trouble, I might mention
that something might be done for the improvement of the
singing on Sundays ; I should be very glad to give my
small help.—Trusting you will excuse yours respectfully,
H. 8., Fore-Saloon.
H. B, will please communicate with Mr Creswick.
Editor.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ALBATROSS.
‘Great Britain,’ s.s., 11th October 1862.
Dear Sir, —Since my last letter nothing of importance
has occurred ; the good old ship still continues in advance
of her celebrated homeward voyage, and, in reference to
the same, I still entertain the same opinion as expressed
in my last letter.
As we are now fast approaching a more genial clime, I
think it my duty to impress upon the minds of all pas-
sengers the necessity of strictly carrying out the sanitary
regulations of the ship, the same being essentially con-


ducive to the health of all on board, and I feel assured
that your kind co-operation may be relied upon.
I enclose abstract of log with the usual entries, &c., and
beg to remain, yours, &c.
John Gray, Lieut, RN.R
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ALBATROSS.
SWEETHEARTS AND WIVES.
Sir, —This good old seafaring toast, which, as tradition
tells us, has come down from the seventeenth century (in
the time of the Dutch wars), and under the British flag,
has since been universally observed from the Arctic to
the Antarctic Circles, yet, strange to say, is entirely ne-
glected in the renowned ‘ Great Britain/ s.s., which to me
appears quite unaccountable. Where, I ask, are those
great sticklers for ancient institutions, those happy-faced
Benedicts who turn the honeymoon into honey years, and
talk and sing of happy nuptial days ? What are they about ?
Why their silence ? Is it that Hymen thinks it Cupid’s
office ? If so, I will now ask where is that race of gallant
chevaliers, that regiment of idolaters who worship the
goddesses in the ‘Agapemone?’ Where is ASsculapius
and young Narcissus, those pilgrims of love, who at the
sacred shrine, in well-bred whispers, swear eternal vows—■
where are they \ what is it like ? Like chaff before the
wind—like the smoke from the chimney-top —
‘ Like the baseless fabric of a vision,
Winch leaves not a wreck behind.’
Come, come, boys, be up and stirring —try and teach the


elders —give the toast, when all will be forgotten, and
‘ bygones shall be bygones.’—Yours truly.
hIDELITAS.
Note. —lt is whispered in the ‘higher circles/ that the
archer Cupid has not been idle on board, but has shot a
new holt into a target where it is likely to remain fixed.
‘ How fast the arrow sticks ?’ said a fair toxopholite to a
susceptible captain. ‘lt does indeed ! ’ he replied with a
sigh. A.
The weather has been somewhat squally in the saloon
during the past week; so much so, indeed, that a small
spar came off down there; this, however, was soon amended.
These squalls have occurred mostly in the intervals between
meal hours.
The wind has been generally fair, but occasionally a
foul breeze has been experienced in the saloon.
THE HEIGHT OF POLITENESS.
A Bond Street swell having been asked to a country -
friend’s house,'.after passing a most pleasant night, rose
early in the morning to refresh himself with a stroll through
the farm-yard, which he had no sooner entered than he
was attacked, by a number of turkey-cocks which, no
doubt, considered that he was invading their private do-
main. These he treated with extreme indifference, but as
he advanced, he spied a hen sitting, in the process of in-
cubation, and which was on the point of rising, either from
excessive fear or profound respect, when, with as great an


inclination of his head as his stiff choker would permit, he
in the blandest manner possible ejaculated, ‘ Pway ! don’t
rise, madam I ’ Punch.
ANA6EAMS.
Answer to, So I cannot tell, Constellation.
He talks and finds all
Open arch.
Princess Charlotte Augusta of Wales.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ALBATEOSS.
A WHALING INCIDENT.
Sir, —The barque ‘ Fortitude/ Capt. C. Baiey, left
Hobart Town in the year 1846, on a whaling voyage, and
proceeded to the south-west coast of New Zealand; they
shortly fell in with sperm whales. The captain, chief and
second mates, lowered, and succeeded in killing a large
whale some distance to windward. It was now blowing
hard, and night coming on, the captain left the whale with
the chief and second mate, he going on board to keep the
ship to windward, whilst the boats towed the whale to
leeward. About ten P.M., the captain was a short distance
from the ship, which was hove to for the purpose of hoist-
ing his boat up, when, in coming alongside, the boat was
unfortunately upset. The crew consisted of six, two of
whom were natives of the Solomon Islands ; they endea-
voured to reach the ship by swimming, but perished in
the attempt, the ship drifting faster than they could swim;
the remainder of the crew lashed themselves on to the


boat but were washed off and all drowned except the cap-
tain, who, in addition to lashing, had put his finger into
the plug-hole. It was blowing a gale, and the other boats
were now obliged to desist from towing, and lie under the
lee of the whale. At daylight, finding the ship a long
distance to leeward and the gale increasing, also fearing
some accident had happened, the mates proceeded on board,
when they heard the sad intelligence that the captain had
been upset, upon which they immediately started to wind-
ward in the direction they thought most likely, and after
some time, their attention was attracted by large quantities
of birds which were hovering over the boat on which was
the captain. They pulled up to him and took him off, and
in doing so, were compelled to cut his finger out of the
plug-hole, it having swollen so, that they could not extri-
cate it in any other way. He was quite insensible, and in
a very exhausted state.
This incident may appear strange, but it is nevertheless
true, and can be vouched for by others on board the ‘ Great
Britain/ lam happy to add that Capt. Baley still sails
out of Hobart Town, and is a gentleman universally re-
spected. E. L.
s.s. ‘ Geeat Britain/ 9th October' 1862.
TO THE DISAPPOINTED.
A GOOD SUBSTITUTION FOR DISSOLVING VIEWS.
Look at your bottled spirits at night for the substance, in
the morning for the shadow. Young inebriates vanishing
from vr az e.


SPORTING STORY.
Before starting to what the home people choose to term
the wilds of Australia, it was considered advisable that I
should serve a sort of apprenticeship to a sheep farmer for
a year or two; so I was packed off to one of that jolly genus,
who thought nothing of demolishing at times, as occasion
might require, thirteen tumblers of that favourite Scotch
beverage, whisky-toddy, after dinner, at a sitting. He
commenced to manage me pretty well for the first few
weeks, by getting me to walk round the hills with his head
shepherd to look after sheep affected with the sturdy, stag-
gers or vertigo, braxy, &c., &c., but finding that the steep
hill-sides had too much tendency to sprain my ankles, and
noticing the burns to be swarming with trout, I by degrees
dropped the sheep farming for the rod, gun, and leister
‘ or fish-spear/ of which Mr Jimbuck took very little notice,
as he seemed quite contented with pocketing his salary for
me. Well, one evening during close time—that is, when
salmon come up all the rivers and small burns or streams
to spawn, and people are not allowed by law to catch in
any way these fish under a heavy penalty —I overheard some
shepherds talking of going out ‘to burn the water/ That
is managed by a man carrying on a long pole a sort of open
net-work basin, made of hooped iron, filled with chips of
tarred wood, rags, &c., which, when lighted, throws a
strong glare on the water, so much so that you can see
every pebble at the bottom of the stream bed. lat once
resolved to make one of the party; and as it was my first
attempt, I sallied out with the greatest glee, with about
fifteen others, with lots of whisky, sticks for firing, bags to
carry whatever we might capture, proud at having my
leister to shoulder, and wondering what I should do if a


water-bailiff got hold of me. All being ready, we had s
glass a-piece to drink success to our undertaking, and after
a short walk we arrived at a favourite pool. We lighted
our croozie and anxiously looked all through the water, but
no fish ; we then went to a rocky and very strong pool, and
the man with the light could hardly walk, when all at once
some one sang out, ‘ He’s aff down the stream;’ then there
was such a bobbing that the man with the light was like to
break his neck trying to keep up with the leisterers, but
he couldn’t; still it was clear moonlight, they made several
chance thrusts at the fish, meanwhile I was hurrying after
them, not looking particularly where I was going, when
all at once I found I had no footing; my leister flew out
of my hand, and my hat somewhere else ; and no wonder,
as I myself was at the bottom of a deep cut drain ; however
I soon recovered myself and ‘ belongings/ bolted after the
mob who were shouting and yelling, and soon came up to
them. I spied the wake of the fish as it was swimming
rapidly down, calculated my distance, and in a moment
dashed into the water at all hazards and transfixed him,
for which feat I was most warmly applauded, as I had
taken, as the saying goes, the shine out of them ; in fact,
the new chum had the laugh against the old adepts. When
we returned home, we found the fish to be full of roe, and
it weighed over 11 lbs. We bagged in all, that night,
after some most exciting sport, about a dozen fish, made
up of salmon and sea-trout. Spoetsman.
A r ote. —We hope our sportsman, now wiser grown, will
hereafter discourage spearing ‘foul fish’ out of season, and
will do his utmost to preserve our valuable salmon in ‘the
north countrie.’ Editoe.


In Commercial News we have nothing startling to report.
The cargo of matches so anxiously looked for in our first
issue, has arrived, and the white vestas were taken eagerly,
being of superior quality, and in good condition.
In Spirits there is a brisk movement, and brandy, gin,
and whisky are regularly going down.
Drapery, <&c. —No change in the white sheetings, but
‘ Greys ’(‘ Grays ’) are still active and in favour. We saw
a very large lot damaged by sea water on Thursday; for-
tunately the inside of the package was found dry, and the
colour remains good.
Linens. —A large lot of stained in stock; would advise
more frequent shipments of good quality, adapted for table
purposes.
Hats. —A new style of bell top, half the usual height,
has been introduced from South Australia.' The old lot
still on hand.
Shirts. —In Crimeans we have to note little change.
Some of last week’s stock still in the market.
Not from our special reporter — Gandies rather scarce,
and holders inclined to be slightly independent; may be
d however. M‘G.
move
CONUNDRUMS.
Why is a bachelor between two lovely and fascinating
young ladies like a waiter at an inn ?
A. Because he is distracted by being obliged to pay
attention to two belles at once.
Why is a late eminent London discount broker, during
the panic in the money market, like Pharaoh’s daughter ?


A. Because she drew a great prophet (profit) from the
rushes on the hank.
Why is a lamb an animal of very bad character ?
A. Because it is always on the turf, and in the company
of black legs.
Why are the captain of a ship and a school-girl identical?
A. Because both are skippers.
Why is a Victorian a wife-beater ?
A. Because he’s always ready to liquor (lick her.)
Which is the Queen of the Roses ?
A. The rose of a watering pot, because it reigns (rains)
over all.
What is the difference between a woman and a looking-
glass ?
A. One reflects without speaking, and the other speaks
without reflecting. (V ery t ungallant conundrum.— Editor.)
Why is a short black man like a snow-ball ?
The answer to this will be given next week.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
The world-renowned knife-grinder has the honour to an-
nounce his arrival, and to inform his friends and the public
generally, that he will perform every afternoon at three
o’clock, until further notice, in the steward’s pantry.
The first performance will be under the patronage of the
chief steward and suite, who have kindly consented to
honour the entertainment with their presence.
The undersigned, seeing the mischief which has been caused
by the many quack medicines now in use, and ever desirous
to benefit his fellow creatures, has devoted many years of


his life to the discovery of a remedy alike simple and effi-
cacious, and, as the result of his unceasing labours, has
pleasure in introducing to the discriminating public of
Great Britain,
The Amphitrite Balsam,
without doubt the most remarkable discovery of modern
times, the ingredients of which have all, at considerable
risk, inconvenience and expense, been procured from the
bottom of the ocean, principally from the sand-banks there.
It is an invaluable remedy for catarrh, chilblains, sea-sick-
ness, gout, rheumatism, dyspepsia, sun-strokes, freckles,
headache, neuralgia, in fact, £ all the ills which flesh is heir
to,’ and at the same time perfectly harmless if taken in
larger doses than needful. Last, not least, it is the only
true
Elixir of Love,
and all ladies and gentlemen can, with one trial, attract
whom they please by following the written directions, and
can also prove the sincerity of any professed attachment.
Sold in bottles from l|d. to £5 by N. 0. Gammon, 5
Lovers’ Walk,
None genuine without maker's name.—Agents wanted.
N. 0. G.
Wanted, a good experienced butcher to commence busi-
ness near the fore-saloon. To a person of good business
habits a sure fortune may be relied on; the whole of the
inhabitants being pledged to support an opposition in the
above trade.
Any further information may be obtained by applying


between the hours of ten and twelve o’clock, a.m., before
the ,12th inst, at the Eed Cow House, Poultry Yard.
‘ Great Britain,’ s.s., October 7, 1862.
NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.
‘ Spectator.’ —We have received your communication, but
must decline publishing it, as it is not suited to our columns.
ABSTRACT OF THE LOG
OF THE
GREAT BRITAIN
Remarks.
Miles,
Oct. 4


No. IV.
18£/i October 1862.
We cannot always sail on summer seas in the voyage of life,
or be fanned with gentle breezes, and thus we experienced
rough weather and a wild ocean when we passed the
longitude of the Falkland Isles. There were headaches
and sea-sickness, as at the commencement of our voyage.
On Wednesday, the ship buried her head in the waves,
pitched fearfully, and rolled to such a degree, that port-
manteaus, carpet-bags, and hat-boxes became most lively,
and beyond all control in their playfulness in the cabins,
whilst soup, gravy, and mustard followed their example in
the saloon. The barometer fell to 29‘20.
In ‘ the bear garden ’ we are happy to report that no
limbs were broken, nor ‘precious eyes’ put out—the
young bears tumbled about as usual, and required no
stirring up with the long pole. As accomplishments of
bears, they also danced, and their sweet voices proved that
their lungs—as their appetites at feeding time—were in
good order. The barometer continues high with them,
until there is a fall and a cry, when a careful nurse is
heard to soothe the child with ‘ Never mind, moy dear!


—and did it hurt itself on the naughty deckey!—did
it then!—the ikky tiddleums/
Touching the Falklands, this remarkable group of
islands, situated in the same parallel of south latitude
that part of England and Ireland is in north, though their
resources are very partially developed, yet they are no
doubt destined to become important possessions of Great
Britain. They consist of the large islands of East and
West Falkland, besides an infinity of small islands, are
300 miles from the continent of South America, and are
on the highway from Australia and New Zealand, &c., and
for ships passing round the Horn generally. For refitting
after encountering, and sometimes suffering from the
tempests of the Horn in winter, the Falklands are most
conveniently situated, their harbours are excellent, and
though only shrubs are to be found on them, yet spars are
to be procured from Tierra del Fuego, &c. Why there are
no trees on the Falklands arises from the want of depth of
soil; but a foot of earth suffices to raise vegetables and
grain—as rye, barley, and corn, as the Norwegians do
under similar circumstances in Scandinavia. At Port
Stanley, in East Falkland, is the seat of Government; the
pensioners sent out some years ago are located there, and
there are altogether about 500 inhabitants on the island,
some of whom are employed as herds for the horses, cattle,
and sheep, which find food for themselves, without being
housed, in winter as well as summer.
As to climate, it is remarkably healthy ; the winters are
like those of England, and the summers cooler. Peat is
abundant, the shores swarm with fish, as mullet, &c.; and
wild geese, ducks, and teal afford good sport. It has been
suggested that the Falklands are admirably adapted for a
penal settlement; among other reasons, the difficulty of
escape from them, and the useful way in which convicts


might be employed in the first instance, afterwards allowed
to marry and settle in a country improved by their
labour.
In leaving now the region of the Horn, we must bear
in mind that having doubled this famous promontory, we
are allowed to think ourselves, in American phraseology,
‘ some pumpkins / as one of the order of travellers thinks
he has got a high degree if he has traversed some part of
the interior of Africa and ‘ shot his lion/ so your sea-
voyager, after being ‘round the Horn/ believes that he
can indulge in some ‘ tall talk/ Thus some time ago, in
a Shannon river steamer, the engineer came up from
below, and was ‘ discoursing ’ some of the passengers about
the excellence of the boat, and pointing out, too, what a
smart man the captain was, who was ‘ swelling it ’ in gold
band and anchor buttons. This aroused the ire of an
‘ old salt * who stood by, and who had, like our humble
selves, been ‘ round the Horn.’ ‘ Has your captain ever been
round the Horn ?’ he cried. ‘ No/ was the reply. ‘lf he
had, you might talk about him then, not else. Round the
Horn the wind is so strong that common sails are blown
away like so many handkerchiefs ; we use hide sails there,
and if your captain went there, the old bullock! we would
skin him, and make sails of his hide. One night we
sprung our main-top gallant-yard, the carpenter went up
to fish it, and the wind blew the teeth out of his saw ;
this will give you a notion of the Horn.’ ‘ Yes/ said the
engineer, ‘ and I suppose it required two men to hold his
hat on when he came on deck.’ By this time the old
salt, seeing he was chaffed in his turn, moved off, mutter-
ing to himself some more about ‘ the old bullock, who had
never rounded the Horn.’ As to ourselves, let us sing
joyfully—


‘ A wet sheet and a flowing sea,
A wind that follows fast,
And fills the white and rustling sail,
And bends the gallant mast.
And bends the gallant mast, my boys
While like the eagle free,
Away the good ship flies, and leaves
The old Horn on the lea.
J. E. A.
OUR S A L. —A N AMERICAN STORY.
I was doing a stroke of business last fall in Virginy,
down near the edge of the big swamp; and a plaguy,
snaky kind of place it is, I tell ye. One night, sitting
over the fire, I says to the man I was stopping with—
‘ Kurnul/ says I (I was talking to Kurnul Jehosophat
Brown), ‘ Kurnul/ says I, ‘ I calculate there’s an almighty
tale (quantity) of snakes in these diggings.’ ‘ Wall/ said
he, ‘ I guess you’re not far wrong; ’tis only two days
gone since our Black Sal slipped round the corner to get a
log, when a dog-goned rattlesnake nipped her by the heel.’
‘Nation!’ says I, ‘ and is the poor girl dead?’ ‘Dead/
screamed the astonished Kurnul! ‘ Dead ! a sarpent’s
bite kill Sal—kill h ;it killed the sarpent/ That’s
a fact, stranger, that this child tells ye.
recollections of a trial foe murder.
At the summer Assizes for Shropshire, in' the year 1884,
five persons stood in the prisoners’ dock, charged with the
murder of one Thomas Bright. The prisoners were an


aged man and woman, and three young men, about 21 or
22 years of age. The two elder prisoners were man and
wife, one of the young men their son, and the two others
their nephews. This trial was remarkable as an instance
to shew how easily, and with what small temptation, per-
sons familiar with vice are led into the commission of the
greatest crimes ; and it is remarkable for the fact that the
murder in question was committed for. the sole purpose of
saving from punishment the man on whose information
the prisoners were charged with it, and who now appeared
as a witness against them. This man was William Carter,
the son of the female prisoner by a former husband. The
main facts of this case were that Carter, who had been
domesticated with the old man and woman, who, as well
as himself, were persons of low reputation, had been com-
mitted to Shrewsbury gaol on a charge of theft, and was
to take his trial at the next Shropshire Quarter Sessions.
The deceased Thomas Bright was the principal witness,
and without his evidence Carter could not be convicted.
Thereupon a family council was held by the five prisoners,
whereat it was determined to be necessary to get rid of
Bright, and a plan was arranged for the purpose. Bright
was invited to supper at the old man’s cottage. He came
accordingly, and all the prisoners were present at the meal.
The conversation was of the ordinary kind, and every thing
went on as if no one had an idea of the dreadful act which
was about to be committed. After the meal was finished,
it was proposed, according to the pre-arranged scheme,
that the young men should go into a field near at hand,
belonging to a neighbouring farm, and get some turnips,
and Bright was invited to accompany them, and he accord-
ingly did so.
When they reached the field, one of the young villains,
to keep up appearances, began to pull some turnips, and


Bright stooped down to do his part. Whilst he was in the
act of stooping, he received a violent blow on the head
from a bludgeon, which stunned him. He was a strong,
active man, but he had no opportunity of contending with
his assailants, for before he could raise himself from the
ground, showers of blows fell upon him, and he soon lay
a lifeless corpse before his murderers. The next question
was how to dispose of his body, but this also had been
pre-arranged, and the corpse was hastily put into a sack,
which had been brought for the pretended purpose of car-
rying home the stolen turnips, and borne between the
murderers to an old gravel pit, rather more than a mile
distant, and there buried.
The Shropshire Quarter Sessions, at which Carter was
to be tried, soon followed, and the witness Bright not ap-
pearing, Carter was of course acquitted. He was met out-
side the court-house by his mother and step-father, and
his three other relatives, and congratulated on his lucky
escape, and then escorted to a public-house; where, as they
sat around the table enjoying themselves, they made known
to him the means by which his acquittal had been brought
about, each of them boasting of the share he had in it.
Carter returned to his former home, and everything
went on smoothly for a short time. No suspicion of mur-
der had arisen in the neighbourhood, and Bright's disap-
pearance was accounted for by the supposition that he had
absconded, for he was not of good repute.
Carter, however, was not a man to abstain very long from
the commission of crime, and he very shortly engaged in
the robbery of a fowl-house, and was again committed to
Shrewsbury gaol to take his trial for this offence. Whilst
waiting for his trial, it occurred to him that he might get
a pardon by giving information of the murder I have already
described. He thought it would be pleasant to be dis-


charged without further punishment, and he seems not to
have thought it disgraceful to inform against his mother
and other relations, who, however criminal, had at least
been kind to him. He was as basely selfish as he was
wicked, and he thought the ignominious death of others
was not to be put into the balance with imprisonment and
hard labour to be borne by himself.
So, after the usual preliminaries required by the law, the
five prisoners were placed in the dock, and the counsel for
the prosecution having opened the case in a clear, calm, and
dispassionate statement, William Carter was placed in the
witness-box, and there detailed the facts above set forth,
in a manner as cool and indifferent as he could have done
if the case had been one of small importance, and the ac-
cused had been persons with whom he had no connection.
Carter was severely cross-examined by the counsel for the
prisoners, who was no less a person than the celebrated
Charles Phillips, but he answered all the cutting questions
of that able cross-examiner with the same sang froid with
which he had given his evidence in chief. In short, little
or no impression could be made upon him, and his evidence
being confirmed by the finding of the body of Bright and
by evidence of the unguarded expressions of the prisoners,
and by other particulars which I cannot enumerate, the
case for the prosecution was concluded ; and notwithstand-
ing a most eloquent and animated address by their talented
counsel, and after a careful and impartial summing up of
the evidence by the presiding judge, the prisoners were all
found guilty, and the dreadful sentence of the law, as it
then stood in regard to murder, was passed upon them,
viz., that on the day next but one to that on which they
were tried, they should be severally hanged by the neck
till they were dead, and that their bodies should be dis-
sected.


All the prisoners except the old woman stood during the
whole of the trial with apparent calmness, but an observer
could see that she was undergoing great mental emotion,
especially during the time her son was giving his evidence.
She was restless, and the muscles of her haggard face and
neck were agitated convulsively.
I afterwards heard that the sentence of death on the two
elder prisoners was commuted for transportation for life.
C. C.
ANOTHEE WHALING INCIDENT.
We had been out some twelve months on a cruise in the
Indian and South Pacific Ocean with but little success, and
getting short of wood and water, the captain wished to
obtain a supply, but at some place where the crew could
not ‘ run.’
In whale-ships the crew are paid a lay or share of the
catch, consequently when a vessel is unsuccessful, the pay
is small, and the crew generally run the first opportunity.
We arrived off the Island of Malanta, also called the Arsa-
cedes or Island of Assassins, and manned two boats, taking
four muskets, for the purpose of exploring a fine bay to see
if there was shelter for the ship and also wood and water;
we pulled some six or seven miles into a beautiful bay
much resembling Sydney Harbour, and the captain made
up his mind to take the ship in. We had observed several
natives as we pulled in, also some canoes.
At about two o’clock p.m., we were on our return to the
ship, but at a narrow part of the bay some sixty or seventy
canoes full of natives, armed with bows and arrows, had
waylaid us, and were prepared to dispute our passage to
the vessel. We rowed up to them, the captain endeavour-


ing by signs to pacify them, but to no purpose ; our only
answer was a shower of arrows. We immediately fired our
four muskets, when every ‘man Jack’ of them plunged into
the water, and we dashed through them on our way to the
vessel; however, they were very soon in their canoes, and gave
us chase. Finding it no use attempting to pull away from
them, as they could paddle half as fast again as we could, we
loaded our muskets and lay to for them; this time we only
gave them two muskets, when they again jumped into the
water. After repeating this a few times, they all went on
shore. We went close and endeavoured to make friends
with them by giving them presents, but to no purpose ;
they would swim off to us for our presents and throw
cocoa nuts into the Water, and when we went to pick them
up, let fly an arrow at us. At dusk we left them and went
on board, and stood off, but about ten p.m. were alarmed
by the cry of ‘breakers under the bows,’ and just had time
to tack and get clear of the reef. Had we struck on it,
our friends would have had some fine pickings, for they
were cannibals. We cruised off here some time, the natives
coming off to trade as if nothing had happened. Some
time before this a London ship had taken a whale close in,
when they came off, murdering three boats’ crews, with the
exception of a boy. He used to write on the green cocoa
nuts to the vessels to endeavour to get him off, and they
often stood close in at night, hoisting lights for him, but
the natives were too vigilant, and would not allow him to
escape.
E. L.


DAVY'S SECOND AND LAST TRAGEDY *
To understand Davy’s second tragedy properly, I must ex-
plain to you that for some years past our Government
thought it requisite to establish a body of native police to
ferret out and keep quiet all the more offensive and hostile
tribes of blacks ; but these native troopers, ‘to whom it is
their greatest delight to hunt down their sable brethren,’
sometimes exceed the white officer’s orders, and shoot
down indiscriminately, at times, the old and young as they
fall across them. Davy being disgusted at such a proce-
dure, had cleverly brought out the force of his tragedy by
representing a poor old black, with a wallet on his back,
and a yam-stick in his hands, eagerly digging up the
ground in search of his daily food, evidently without the
slightest suspicion of danger, when first you see in the dis-
tance, by the glow of the fire, one black stealing towards
him with a stick in his hand to represent a gun; soon
another and another follows, all armed similarly, till
all at onee they rush at the old man with a yell, pretend
to fire their carbines, on which the old fellow tries to
get up to run off, but, being wounded, he can only toddle
a few steps and drop down dead, much to the satisfaction
of his cold-blooded murderers, who now disperse, dead man
and all, and have a jolly laugh and smoke after it, with
sundry demands of ‘ you give it baccy, my boy.’ I am glad
to say it is quite the exception to the rule, these cold-
blooded murders; and when they do happen, the strictest
inquiries are made to prevent repetition, for squatters and
Government are alike horrified at such deeds. It is only
* Acted by a native Australian.


necessary to see these plays performed in their native wild-
ness to thoroughly appreciate them, as the splendid and
wild scenic effect of a bush-fire amongst the drooping trees,
&c., far surpasses any theatrical scene I ever beheld. The
concocting these plays also shews considerable originality
and common sense in Davy’s composition, and that the
blacks in some parts of Australia are not quite so nearly
allied to the brute creation as many are falsely led to sup-
pose, as I shall be able to prove, I think, in another yarn
or two concerning the ready wit of others of these natives.
Lector.
DRAMATIC ENTERTAINMENTS.
We understand we are soon to have some theatrical repre-
sentations ; we would earnestly exhort the aspirants for
histrionic fame to remember that the ‘ end of playing,’ ac-
cording to Hamlet, ‘is to hold as ’twere the mirror up to
nature—to show virtue her own features, scorn her own
image, and the very age and body of the time its form and
pressurealso to follow this same prince’s advice, ‘ to suit
the action to the word, and the word to the actionabove
all, to buy some
Amphitrite Balsam.
Sold in bottles from to £5, by N. 0. Gammon, 5
Lovers’ Walk.
ANECDOTE.
Amongst the anecdotes contributed to the Albatross, per-


haps one relating to the earliest days of Victoria may not
prove uninteresting.
In the year 1837, all the ladies and gentlemen of Mel-
bourne (known then only as ‘ the settlement ’), consisting of
about twelve or fifteen persons, were frequently in the habit
of going to each other’s tents or huts for the purpose of
spending a merry evening. On one occasion of the kind,
one lady not feeling well enough to accompany her family
and husband, had seated herself comfortably in an easy
chair, with a book and candle beside her, intending to have
a quiet evening’s reading. She had been sitting so about
half-an-hour, when she was disturbed by a strange gurgling
sound coming from part of the marquee used as a store-
room ; and on looking in that direction, she saw protruding
from under the canvas division what appeared to her to be a
very large ball covered with black wool. Having been but a
short time in the colony, and not knowing by what wild
animals or venomous reptiles the place was infested, she
felt rather alarmed ; but being naturally courageous, and
possessing a considerable amount of curiosity—a feeling
more especially attributed to ladies, but very unjustly —she
determined upon solving the mystery; and getting up most
cautiously, and creeping round the marquee, she succeeded
in reaching the opening in the canvas, and on lifting up
one corner, she saw a human monster in the shape of her
black cook, lying flat on his back, with his mouth wide
open under the tap of a porter cask, and the porter quietly
running down his throat, causing the gurgling sound that
had so alarmed her.


Inmpuhiia
TO THE EDITOR OP THE ALBATROSS.
Great Britain, s.s., 17 th October 1862.
Dear Sir, —Since my last, I am pleased to inform you all
goes well, the ship still maintaining the supremacy in point
of passage, although, through the adverse winds of the past
few days, we have only attained an average daily speed for
the week of 221 miles. I still have every hope of accom-
plishing a quick passage. I am happy to say that the
health of all on board is most satisfactory in every respect.
I must again trespass on your kindness to call the at-
tention of passengers to the regulations of the ship respect-
ing smoking upon deck, &c., and promenade allotted to the
various classes, as specified on notices placed in various
parts of the ship. I trust they may be unanimously and
cheerfully carried out, for the comfort of all.
I enclose abstract of log, and beg to remain yours, &c.
John Gray, Lieut. E.N.R., Commander.
GLOVES.
Wear seemly gloves, not black nor yet too light,
But least of all the pair which once were white;
Shave like the gout, if so your fancy bids,
But be a parent, don’t neglect your kids. M.
My first is made by my whole, which is the comparative


of my first, and if a man were not my whole, he would be
my whole for it.
Bet-ter.
An expression of sorrow.
An animal that burrows.
An eminent speaker,
A town in Upper Canada.
A heavy weight.
The first letters of these words form the name of a great
poet, and the last letters, of a greater.
Answer to be given next week.
Our special commercial reporter not having returned from
market up to the time of our going to press, we are unable
to publish our weekly report; but the following intelligence
has been received from an outsider in reference to articles
of American manufacture.
The importation of American drills has entirely ceased,
in consequence of the immense demand for the Southern
States, the supply of which has hitherto fallen far short of
their requirements.
In Notions we have to report the arrival of a very valu-
able cargo which has been selected with great care and
judgment being admirably adapted to the present state of
this market; some of the smaller articles find great favour
with the ladies, but not with the soldiers.
The present holder (Gray) asks rather an exorbitant
price for this shipment, as he fears when he quits it he
will have considerable difficulty in replacing it.


ANSWEES TO LAST WEEK’S ANAGEAMS.
He talks and finds all.—The Falkland Islands.
Open Arch.—Cape Horn.
Princess Charlotte Augusta of Wales.—Her august race
is lost. 0 ! fatal news.
CONUNDETJMS.
Why was the sculptor of the Greek Slave a dishonest man?
A. Because he chiselled her out of her clothes.
Why does a sculptor die the worst of deaths ?
A. Because he makes faces and bu(r)sts.
Why is a postage-stamp like a naughty boy ?
A. Because it gets licked and put in the corner.
When is a ship in love ?
A. When she is attached to a (buoy) boy.
Why is ‘ St Paul’s Cathedral ’ like a bird’s nest ?
A. Because it was built by a Wren.
Why is Hobart Town like a battle-field ?
A. Because it is guarded by Nelson, and looked over by
Wellington.
Why is a boy, in the act of getting thrashed, like the
eye?
A. Because it is a pupil under the lash.
Why is the letter F like a cow’s tail ?
A. Because it is the end of beef.
Why is a grandmother a soldier ?
A. Because she is a granny dear (grenadier.)
What book would a man wish his wife to be like
A. An almanac, so that he might have a new one every
year.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
That world-renowned knife-grinder, whose arrival was
announced in our last issue, after one very satisfactory per-
formance, has mysteriously disappeared. A large reward
has been offered for his apprehension by Joseph Rodgers
and Sons of Sheffield, to whom, it seems, he is under great
obligations.
A haie-deessee has been discovered on board. Ladies or
gentlemen desiring to have their hair fashionably arranged,
a la mode de Paris , will please apply to the wine-steward.
Any gentleman wishing to undertake the office of censor
to the Albatross, is requested to apply to the publisher,
who will remunerate him in proportion to his ability and
fitness for the post.
NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Lynx’s communication relative to the doings in Lover’s
Walk is inadmissible.


S.S.
ABSTRACT
OF THE
LOG OF THE
GREAT BRITAIN
Remarks.
Miles.
Oct. 11


No. V.
25 th October 1862.
Light clothing and cooling drinks are now the order of the
day, for we are in the tropics, thermometer 80°, and our
good ship has gone on steadily under steam for some days;
the wind blowing through the decks from the north. With
the south-east trade we will make better progress ; in the
meantime, the wisest plan is ‘ to take things by the smooth
handle/ for this time next year it will signify little to most
of us whether we saw the Exchange clock at Liverpool a
week sooner or later.
There were three events this week —a play in the saloon,
dancing on the upper deck amidships, and a close view of
the picturesque island of Trinidada—
‘Placed far amid the melancholy main.’
The play was very successful, and gave great satisfaction ;
and much credit is due to the performers for making an
agreeable break in the voyage. The stage was in the saloon
at the mizen-mast. On each side of the drop scene —a
garden and terrace —were British flags. The performers
could not, in American phraseology, * face the music,’ as
the piano was behind, but they faced a row of wax lights.
The audience were seated as comfortably as the space for
their accommodation would admit of; the open skylights


Capt. Amersfort,
Capt. Watson, R.A.
Peter SpyTc, .
Mr Hartwrigiit.
Swizel,
Mr Magenis, R.H.A.
Delve, ....
Mr Wilkins.
Ernestine Rosenthaal,
Miss White.
Gertrude,
Mrs Wilkins,
admitted of a close array of heads in the gallery. The
name of the piece selected for the evening’s entertainment
‘ The Loan of a Lover.’
And the dramatis personae were—
Prompter, Mr Crbswick.
Leader of the Orchestra, Mr Pohl.
The first scene discovers Delve, the gardener of a baron,
and Mynheer Swizel, the steward, on the stage, both well
got up in their parts and their costume —Swizel bearing
‘ a fair belly with good capon lined,’ his face also betoken-
ing that he did not mix much water with his schiedam.
A discussion about clearing out orange-trees takes place.
Delve retires, and enter Peter, a simple young fellow, a
farmer, not overburdened with brains, but who has been
left ‘ a tidy sum ’by his father, and which he had been re-
commended to share with ‘ a tidy lass.’ Peter was excel-
lently personified, his Dutch hat and * smalls ’ included, his
good-tempered, helpless expression, awkwardness of his
legs and arms; and desiring to rent a farm from Capt.
Amersfort, on a visit to the Baron, he wishes the
steward to put in a good word for him; he hints at an ac-
ceptible bribe to Swizel, ‘a keg of the finest flavour.’
Enter Gertrude, a young person allowed the run of the
castle as the daughter of the baron’s old bailiff. This part
was performed with wonderful spirit, and the Swiss cos-
tume adopted was in excellent taste. Trying to deliver a
message to Swizel, Gertrude annoys him with her atten-


tions to Peter. Exit the steward, and an amusing dialogue
takes place between Gertrude and Peter, who says he has
been advised to many, and asks Gertrude’s advice who to
choose. Several are named and objected to, then Peter
thinks he’ll choose one on market day, when this duet is
sung—
Peter. —To-morrow will be market day,
The streets all thronged with lasses gay,
And from a crowd so gay no doubt,
Fond hearts enough one may pick out ;
In verity, verity, verity, ay,
In verity, verity, verity, ay.
And from a crowd so great, no doubt,
Fond hearts enough one may pick out.
Gertrude. —Be not too bold, for hearts fresh caught,
Are ne’er, I’m told, to market brought,
The best, they say, are given away,
Not left to sell on market day,
In verity, verity, verity, ay,
In verity, verity, verity, ay.
The best, they say, are given away,
Not left to sell on market day.’
Some of the gentle folks approaching, and Peter retiring,
asks Gertrude to look out for him a good-tempered, pretty
little wife, promises her a present on the marriage, and
that she will dance at the wedding, all which is provoking
enough to Gertrude, who has designs on Peter’s heart her-
self, though, like a muff, ‘he does not see it,’
Enter Ernestine and Capt. Amersfort, and a lover’s
quarrel ensues from a trifling cause, between the daughter
of the Baron and his visitor, whether to walk or ride, or do
neither ; then ‘ Mamsell ’ discovers Gertrude in distress,
and questions her. She complains of having no lover, and
Ernestine having many, offers to lend her one, no other
than Capt. Amersfort. He is astonished, but at last humours
what he considers an absurd joke. The difficult part of


stage lover was well sustained by ‘ the bold captain ’ in
gold lace and sword on his martial thigh, and his lady-
love, who put him to a severe test of obedience, was enacted
and dressed in a most lady-like manner. Ernestine retires,
and a dialogue ensues between the Captain and Gertrude,
whose prepossessing appearance touches the gay Captain,
when they are intruded upon by Swizel and Peter, the
latter wishing to rent ‘ his honour’s farm of Appledown.’
Peter’s love and jealousy were at length roused by having
seen the Captain with his arm round Gertrude’s waist.
The Captain and Peter retire. The steward, Swizel, hear-
ing that the Captain had promised, as a dower to Gertrude,
2000 crowns, thinks he must fall in love, and with diffi-
culty falls on his knees to ask Gertrude’s hand, and is dis-
covered by Peter, and Gertrude receiving other offers of
marriage, she coquettishly says to Peter, ‘lf you can find
me a nice, handsome, good-tempered husband, I’ll make
you a present the day I am married, and you shall dance
at my wedding.’ Peter is ‘ dumfoundered,’ and he and
Delve, the gardener, are about to come to blows about Ger-
trude, who engages in a plot to excite the jealousy of Er-
nestine as well as of Peter, and comes in dressed as a bride,
which confounds still further Peter, who threatens to throw
himself into the canal if Gertrude marries another ; at last
everything comes right—the Captain and Ernestine are
reconciled. The c lent lover ’ is given back, and Peter is
made happy with the hand of Gertrude.
SONG.
|ls mine, |is mine, let the stars work their will,
If our patrons approve, nothing now can go ill ;
But the lover we lent must with them work his way,
Or our dealings will end with ‘ the devil to pay.’


Gertrude (leading Peter forward.)
Kind friends, I hope my choice you will like.
He’s here, poor trembling Peter Spyk,
Who says he’ll prove a husband true.
Do you believe him ? ( Peter )— ‘ Say you do.’
Oh ! happy hour, oh ! joyous night,
Our friends now share in our delight.
|ls mine, |is mine, let the stars work their will,
Sure our friends have approved, nothing now can go ill.
The lover we lent has with them made his way,
And their smiles of content all our toils over pay.
The curtain falls amidst the unanimous applause of a
well-contented and good-looking audience.
On deck, some well-executed dancing took place in these
calm nights, to the music of Messrs Schmidt and Kohl, who
play with good taste on the clarionet and cornetto, relieved
by the lively violin of Mr Walter Holliday.
At five A.M., on the 23d, the word was passed through
the ship that the great pinnacle of rock rising from the
depths of ocean, Trinidada, in latitude 20.0 and longitude
29.25, was right ahead ; some got up to see it as the sun
rose, others waited for their bohea, and to see it comfort-
ably as we passed it at breakfast time.
Trinidada (with its accompanying satellites, the Martin
Vass Rocks, nine leagues distant) is a very remarkable
land-mark. The island is six miles in circumference, rises
from the sea like the rugged and jagged summit of a cor-
dillera ; the north side is barren, but on the south the ra-
vines are filled with evergreen shrubs, purslain, &c. Wild
hogs and goats are also abundant. Sea-fowl sail round
the cliffs, and the rocky bottom abounds with fish. The
surf beats incessantly on the iron-bound shore, and has
been seen in a gale to dash to the height of 200 feet. The
anchorage is a mile from the island, and chain cables can


only be used on account of the rocky bottom. The monu-
ment and sugar-loaf are singular prominences on the
island —the first, also called the nine-pin, is 850 feet high,
and hangs over as if about to fall, the sugar-loaf at the
south-east end is 160 feet high; both have trees at the
top, and there is a great arch, 50 feet high and 420 feet
long, through which the sea rushes. The Portuguese had
a settlement on a sandy beach on the east side, where there
is fresh water; the remains of their roads and terraces are
yet to be seen, but desolation and solitude seem now to
claim Trinidada for their own.
Note. —Possibly vines might flourish here.
There has been a talk on board of American privateers
and particularly when a large ship, name unknown, bore
down upon us on Monday last, and our Captain kindly
offered to take charge of the gold which might be ‘ burning
a hole’ in any one’s pocket. We were on excellent terms
(not long ago) with our American cousins ; we cannot for-
get several recent causes for esteeming them, to wit, the
purchase by the United States’ Government from a whaling
captain of the abandoned Polar surveying ship ‘ Eesolute,’
for 40,000 dollars, and her being presented complete to
her Majesty. Again, the American commodore, Tatnell,
who esteemed ‘ blood thicker than water/ when he helped
with his boats our wounded sailors at the desperate fight
before the Taku forts in China. Then the brilliant recep-
tion at New York, &c., of the Prince of Wales ; and lastly,
the magnificent gift of i? 150,000 by Mr Peabody of Danvers,
to the poor of London.
Newspaper writers have stirred up angry feelings since
this cruel war began in the States, but we trust that,
among people like the Americans and British, who have a
common origin, a common language, a common literature


and congenial commercial pursuits, and whose characters
are to surmount every difficulty by resolution and contriv-
ance—we say, we trust we will find on our arrival in ‘ the
old country/ our difficulties surmounted, and a happy state
of feeling prevailing. In the meantime, we can afford to
laugh at amusing ditties like these—
There’s not a man beneath the moon,
Nor lives in any land he,
That hasn’t heard the pleasant tune
Of Yankee Doodle Dandy.
In coolin’ drinks and clipper ships,
The Yankee has the way shewn,
On land and sea, he says, he whips
Old Bull and all creation.
J. E. A.
THE AMEEICAN WIDOW.
In travelling in the United States, I was much better
pleased to meet the acute and intelligent men of the East-
ern States, who, it is well known, sometimes do ask many
questions of ‘ the stranger,’ than the silent men, in some
parts of the west, who sit round a stove pipe, and neither
tell their own mind, nor intrude their interrogatories. If
the traveller is wise, he will answer readily and civilly what
is sought to be known, and thus get an opportunity of
asking questions in return, and in this way acquire much
information of the country and people, and ‘ get along ’
pleasantly in addition.
An amusing instance may be given of American ques-
tioning. A lady in mourning was seated in a railway car,
and was eyed for some time by a tall, slab-sided down-
easter opposite. At length he said, ‘ln affliction?’ She
replied, ‘Yes.’ He continued, ‘Father, mother?’ She
answered, ‘No.’ ‘ Brother, sister?’ ‘I have none/ she


answered. ‘ Husband, meb be V *lt pleased God to take
my husband,’she answered, ‘Merchant, soldier, sailor?’
he again ‘ put in.’ ‘He was a seafaring man.’ ‘ Saved his
chest?’ said the inquirer. ‘ Yes,’ said the widow. ‘Pious
man and saved his chest,’ remarked the other. Then after
a short consideration, and looking pleasantly at the widow,
he inquired, ‘ Have you a notion of changing your con-
dition?’ This was too much, and turning from the inter-
rogator she looked out at the window, uttering the word
‘ impertinent ’ with due emphasis. He coolly replied,
‘ Seems ryled,’ and then turning to a male passenger, he
cried, ‘ Mi! what a pretty umbarel; inclined to trade,
meb be V A.
THE FOUR AGES.
CHILDHOOD, YOUTH, MANHOOD, AND OLD AGE.
Imitation of Horace.
The tiny boy who has just learnt to talk,
And with firm step can unsupported walk,
Delights in play. Transient his hopes and fears,
His anger quick, as quickly disappears,
Tears follow smiles, and smiles soon banish tears.
Th’ unbearded youth, who goes no more to school,
And has escaped from his strict guardian’s rule.
In dogs and horses, and the grassy field,
Takes his delight, these all his pleasures yield;
Like wax, he’s moulded into any vice,
Admonish him, he’s angry in a trice ;
Greedy of money, prodigal, profuse,
He wastes his means on things of little use,


Upstart, uncertain, he will wish to-day.
For what, to-morrow, he will throw away.
Become a man, his views of life are changed,
He quits the pleasures amongst which he ranged.
For riches seeks, for honours, friendships, fame.
Flatters the people, and acquires a name ;
He’s careful, cautious, rises with the sun.
Is slow to do what he would wish undone.
Sad the condition of the aged man,
He scrapes together all the wealth he can.
And fears to use it, hoarding for his heir.
What he perhaps will squander in a year.
Timid in action, dilatory, slow,
He fears to look beyond the world below.
Anxious for life, and never at his ease,
He’s querulous, and difficult to please :
He lauds the bygone time when he was young.
Talks of his conquests and how well he sung ;
Repeats the tales he’s often told before,
Lectures his juniors, and becomes a bore. C. C.
TIME.
Each coming year brings with it a new joy ;
Each year receding, leaves behind alloy.
C. C.


ON A MARINE BAROMETER.
Dedicated to Capt. Gray, s.s. Great Britain.
When down I fall, ‘ fall too,’
Examine well the skies,
And never fail to shorten sail
Till up again I rise.
A THIRD WHALING INCIDENT.
After cruising in the Japan Sea, we arrived off Behring’s
Island on the coast of Kamptschatka, having now been
five months out with a clean ship. At last, having lowered
after right whales, the second mate fastened to a very large
one, but in doing so, had the nose of his boat knocked off,
and was obliged to cut from the whale. All hands went
aft in the boat, and he was enabled to paddle to the ship,
about a mile distant.
I now called to the mate to be very careful and not get
his boat stove, as the whale was inclined ‘to work awk-
ward but had scarcely done so, when she came up under
my boat, knocking her all to pieces, consequently the mate
had to pick us up ; both crews, consisting of twelve, were
now in the one boat, with no other near us, should we meet
with any accident; however, we did not like the idea of
losing the whale on this account.
The crew also appeared willing to go up to the whale
again. We got a good chance, and killed her in a very
short time, without any further accident; but, after all,
the whale sank, and we lost her. Thus, after having two
boats smashed, and risking our lives, with two crews ia


one boat, and with no one near us, we had to return on
board very much dispirited.
I now steered away north, determined to try the Arctic
Ocean, having heard that some American ships had done
well the previous year. We soon fell in with Polar whales
and filled the ship in six weeks. We then forgot our ill
success of the first part of the voyage, and returned home
in ten months.
The Esquimaux often came on board. Their canoes are
made of walrus skins, the gunwales, &c., being of whale-
bone, and such drift wood as they pick up. They also
capture the whale; to describe their mode of doing so may
be interesting.
' Their harpoons are made of walrus’ teeth, and their line
of the hide of the same animal, each canoe carrying about
thirty fathoms, to which are attached some dozen seal-skins
blown out. Ten or twelve canoes fasten to the whale,
so that he has about one hundred blown skins to tow after
him. This generally ‘ heaves him to,’ when he becomes an
easy prey. They then tow him on shore to a village, and
he is cut up in an incredibly short space of time. After-
wards large stones are piled on him, and this becomes their
winter food. It is strange bow soon these people have ac-
quired a taste for grog and tobacco ; they will sell anything
for the purpose of obtaining them. E. L.
ANECDOTE OF LOED NOEBTJEY.
A leading member of the Irish bar was one day making
a speech in court, and a jackass chanced to bray. Upon
which Lord Norbury, who was the judge presiding, said,
‘ One at a time, if you please, sir.’
Shortly afterwards, during Lord Norbury’s summing up.


a drove of pigs happened to pass the court, and sent forth
a fine chorus of squeals and grunts, upon which Lord Nor-
bury said, ‘ This noise is so great I can only hear myself
speak’ The counsel replied, ‘lt is only the echo of the
court, my lord ! ’
A SECOND LEGAL ANECDOTE.
A CASE of collision was one day being tried in "Westminster
Hall, and Mr Hawkins, Q.C., who was counsel on one side,
in examining a witness, made use of the word ‘ brougham,’
several times (making the word into two syllables.) Lord
Chief-Justice Campbell at length said, ‘ Mr Hawkins, if you
were to call that word “ brougham,” you would save your-
self one syllable, and the witness would understand you
much better.’ Lord Campbell shortly afterwards had oc-
casion to ask the witness a question relative to an omnibus;
upon this, Mr Hawkins remarked, ‘ If your lordship were
to call that word “bus,” you would save yourself two sylla-
bles, and the witness would understand you much better.’
ANECDOTE EVINCING THE APTNESS OF THE ABORIGINES*
WHEN PUT TO THEIR WITS’ END TO OVERCOME
DIFFICULTIES.
Many of the horses, which are not required for present
use on stations, are generally turned out of the paddocks
into the wide bush to ramble where they may till, when
wanted, some black fellow, of whom there are often a few
loitering about to pick up the offal of sheep or bullocks, as
they are killed for rations, is sent to find them, and run
* In Australia.


them in. On this particular occasion, ‘ Wararaba,’ native
black, knowing that the mob he was sent for was quieter
than the others, went on foot, accompanied by two fine
kangaroo dogs. He very shortly got on their tracks, which
he knew from a mark made on the ground by one of the
horses having a peculiarly shaped shoe, followed them up
for about two miles, when he espied them grazing quietly,
and further on, at a considerable distance, a few old men kan-
garoos. Like all blacks, who are so keen after game, he now
seemed to have his mind wholly engrossed in the one main
object, viz., how he could best contrive to circumvent ‘ the
ancients.’ He first goes gently up to the horses, some of
which, knowing him very well, come up to him. He now
catches the quietest, leads it by his handkerchief to a bush,
from which he cuts two pot-hook sticks ; he then ties his
handkerchief round the horse’s muzzle, ‘ decks’ a pot-hook
on each side to serve for a bridle, jumps up on his bare
back, and seating himself firmly, gets as close as he can to
his game without disturbing them ; off go the kangaroos,
dogs, and Wararaba in full chase after them, till, after a
most exciting run, he came in at the death of a regular
boomer of six feet in height, the tail of which he brought
back as a trophy along with his mob of horses, quite proud
of his ride and the dashing feat he had performed.
Lector.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ALBATROSS.
Sir, —In the last issue of your paper I saw by an adver-
tisement that a literary censor was wanted for your week-


ly bantling, though, strange to say, there was notone word
about the qualifications. May I presume then, that his
official duties will be as follows, —Ist, To act as supervisor
over every kind of correspondence, both foreign and
domestic. 2nd, To furnish a summary of the saloon de-
bates. 3rd, To review all the periodicals, drawings, books
of art, &c. 4th, To write the leading article and revise
what you write yourself; and lastly, to possess such a master
mind that will infuse great intellectual vigour into ‘ the
rickety child.’ If my hypothesis is correct, I can say with-
out egotism, there is no man on board so competent as
myself to undertake the important post; still, lam not
going to accept the office in a hurry. I want no vulgar
pay, for I have as great a contempt for gold as Timon of
Athens himself; my demand is a very modest one—only
guarantee me a handsome testimonial on leaving the ship,*
lam your censor to-morrow. In the meantime, I shall hand
over my portfolio of credentials to your proprietors, who,
at a mere glance, will quickly see that I have taken the
highest university honours. This Ido as an act of
courtesy, though it is quite superfluous ; for any one with
half an eye can discover at once, through my conversation
and manners, that I am a social wrangler from Cambridge.
To this fact every gentleman in the cabin, except one, is
ready to bear testimony ; as to the exception, it goes for
nothing, and I care very little about it. To give a taste of
the quality of this gentleman, I was mentioning to him
about the censorship, and how glad they would be to
catch me, and what do you think was his 'polite reply ?
‘You,’ he said to me, ‘take the censorship! Do you think the
editor, a thorough business-like man, would submit “ to
play the second fiddle” to a poor imbecile scribe like you ? ’
I then spoke of my honours, ‘ All bosh,’ he said, and off
* Would a dinner with a dozen courses do ?— Editor.


he went laughing. Now, Sir, to settle this question, I will,
on Monday morning, bring a dozen gentlemen to your
office, heroes from the camp and the bush, the ex-consul
and ‘ the financier,’ I will bring the learned judges, and
they will, one and all, swear fealty to my academical cele-
brity ; they will tell you that I am a man of high scholastic
attainments, of great historic and scientific research, and
above all, that I possess such rare literary accomplishments
that would give to the paper an elevation and a dignity
of surpassing excellence, that would indeed be a most
auspicious day for the bantling, a day of regeneration, a
day when ‘this downy bird,’ this juvenile Albatross, will,
in the twinklingof an eye, be suddenly transformed, bursting
forth in all her glory, clothed in the majesty of the ‘Times,’
into the guiding star of the ‘ Great Britain,’ the leadingjour-
nal of the seas, the illuminator of the ocean.—Your very
obedient servant,
Bulwer, Juu.
P.S. —Eecollect that, in the event of the proprietors and
myself coming to terms, you will be required to confine your-
self to your proper vocation that nature intended you for,
that is, to be my ‘sub,’ bearing in mind the saying of the
great painter of antiquity to a disciple of St Crispin—
A r e sutor ultra crepidam.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ALBATROSS.
‘Great Britain,’ s.s., 2 ith October 1862.
My Dear Sir, —I regret to say our hitherto prosperous
voyage has, for the past few days, been marred by adverse
winds, and our daily average for the past week consider-


ably reduced, nevertheless the old ship maintains her posi-
tion in advance of past voyages.
The health of all on board continues perfectly satisfac-
tory, and I may say that much depends upon the passen-
gers in complying with the sanitary regulations of the ship,
in order to guard against sickness, &c.
I must, through your kindness, convey my thanks to
the passengers in general for so far carrying out the pre-
scribed rules respecting the promenade upon the upper
deck. I enclose abstract of log with usual entries, &c.,
and beg to remain yours, &c.,
John Gray, Lieut., RN.R,
Commander, ‘ Great Britain,’ s.s.
THE LORELEIBERG.
Many are the travellers who yearly visit the Germans’
beautiful river the Rhine, to wander amongst the vineyards
which cover its banks, and lose themselves and all idea of
modern improvements in contemplation of the ruins of
castles and monasteries of days gone by. The grandest
sight of all is, however, one of nature’s, not man’s handi-
work ; whoever has been whirled through the torrent which
rushes between the rocks of the Loreleiberg and the op-
posite shore, will not easily forget it, but will wonder that
any one should wilfully, as tradition asserts, throw them-
selves into such a whirlpool even for the love of so beauti-
ful a being as Lorelei is represented to have been.
Wallace, in his opera of Lurline, gives us quite a dif-
ferent version of the story, and not a correct one. The fact
is, however, that Lorelei was the happy possessor of the in-
gredients which have now been combined in
The Amphitrite Balsam,


Sold in bottles from to £o, by N. 0, Gammon, 5
Lovers’ Walk.
None genuine without the signature —Agents wanted.
WELCOME, LITTLE STKAN GEE.
This on a pincushion, in pins, usually announces an inte-
resting event. Such a one has occurred on board—Mrs
Thomas having presented her lord with what tailors would
call ‘a chip of the old block,’ We beg to suggest a name,
‘Britannia Thomas;’and we sincerely hope that mother
and child are doing well. A.
A USEFUL MACHINE.
An American said he had invented a flogging machine for
schools, of one-man ]sower, so that a naughty boy fixed in
it could be properly flogged and turned out of it ‘ such a
good boy,’ This is recommended to the notice of Captain
Gray for next voyage, unless he has one already on hand.
accident.
One of our oldest and most highly respected fellow citizens,
attempting to introduce a new style of helmet, in attesting
its merits ran full tilt against the spanker boom. Strange
to say, the boom was not much damaged, but our worthy
citizen received several severe contusions —one of which
was nearly as large as a threepenny piece. We are happy
to state, that with the aid of a little sympathetic ointment,


and some Hollands and sugar judiciously mixed by a
friendly foreigner, he has rapidly recovered, and is, (as you
can all see) able to resume his duties to
Alexander, Campbell, & Co.
RECIPE FOR KEEPING DOWN SUPERFLUOUS FLESH ON
BOARD SHIP.
Keep your eyes open, and your mouth shut.
A FACT.
There were, when we started, 624 berths in the ship.
Another one came to light on Thursday morning, off
Trinidada.
ANSWER TO LAST WEEK’S ENIGMA.
An expression of sorrow— S sob, B
An animal that burrows— C coney, Y
An eminent speaker— 0 orator, R
A town in Upper Canada — T Toronto, 0
A heavy weight— T ton, N
The first letters of these words form the name of a great
poet, and the last letters of a greater.
We are sorry to report that the trades expected this week
have disappointed us, and we have been doing a small


business. There is, however, a brisk movement in some
articles.
Beer, for instance, is much up in the last few days.
Brandy, as usual, going down.
Hollands, having been bought up by a speculator, is now
entirely out of the market.
Hats. —There has been an extraordinary change in this
article. One very large lot, introduced by Peter & Co.,
has been purchased for the American market. A new
article in Tasmanian leghorns for summer wear is much
admired, being portable; and, from its stiffness, is well
adapted for windy weather. The old lot of bell-toppers has
been very quiet.
Linens are in demand, and markets changing every day.
One large and beautiful lot of stripes is in the market,
which we think will be disposed of in a few days.
Greys (Grays) have fallen off a little, owing to the trade
in the south-east having subsided. There have been seve-
ral inquiries for Whites. One lot seems to be much
called for, but the holder is very nervous about disposing
of the invoice. M‘G.
CONUNDEUMS.
What’s most like a hen stealing ?
A. A cock-robin.
Why is a sheep-shearer like the Great Britain ?
A. Because he’s a clipper.
Where is our favourite maiden (Meadon) to be found ?
A. In the engine-room.
Why do we all like this maiden (Meadon) ?
A. Because we are are all fond of esteem—(e’steam.)


Why was Lord Byron like a soap-manufacturer
smothered in tallow ?
A. Because he died in Greece.
ADVBETISEMENTS.
Wanted as soon as posible, the Trade Winds. Apply to
Captain Gray, who hereby offers a reward of a quick pas-
sage to the producer.
Missing from the Saloon of the ‘ Great Britain/ a Scotch
gentleman, aged 35, about 5 feet 5 inches high, sandy
hair and whiskers, and slightly bald; when last seen he
was dressed in white, with a lorgnette in his hand, look-
ing for the wind.
The gentleman who pulled down the programme for the
concert, will please return it, and he can be accommodated
with a copy of Bell’s Life, if such be more to his taste.


OF THE LOG OP THE ‘
BRITAIN,’ S.S.
ABSTRACT
GREAT
Dist. Lat.
Temp.
Wat.
Miles.
Oct. 18
SO 57 J
31 61
32 69
33 72
34 74
35 77
36 76
Several
communications
unavoidably held over till
next issue.
Editor.


No. VI.
Ist November 1862.
‘ I ALWAYS go to town on melting days,’ said the retired
tallow-chandler, in answer to his friend, who inquired how
he managed to spend his time since he gave up the shop;
if this worthy had sailed for some time north and south of
the line, he might have had ‘ melting days ’ enough to
satisfy his greasy taste. Since last week, we have been
what cooks term ‘ rendered,’ and some look delicate, rather;
whilst others, with undying appetites, preserve their
usual proportions. c I can’t eat my vittels,’ says the Lon-
don footman ruefully, when the heat is too much for
Mm, but he usually makes up with beer what fails him in
solids. ‘ You can’t hold a live coal in your hand by think-
ing on the frosty Caucasus,’ says one of the ancients ;
neither can we ‘ cool ourselves down ’ by recollections of
the iced juleps, slings, and the inimitable sherry-cobblers of
the land of the west. ‘No how you can fix it, no sirree ! ’
Dissolving views have been postponed; the considerate
possessor of these, fearful of dissolving both himself and
the audience during the exhibition, until the nights are
cooler, and with a temperature considerably under 80°.


Loud cries of ‘ Joe! Joe! ’ are heard occasionally on
deck, the well-known signal among the diggers that some
‘ chum ’ has turned out in a new or ‘ stunning ’ rig. Thus a
lively gentleman connected with this publication, in ap-
pearing on Sunday in his usual crestless helmet, and in a
short and white garment which he explained was ‘ a John
Chinaman/ was saluted with a round of the above cry.
Game-cocks, when prepared for fighting, have their crests
or combs cut off, and are also docked of their tails; so we
recommend those inclined to play with our friend to be
careful how they go about it, or he may ‘ a tail unfold ’ in
the shape of a rope’s end, and so ‘ tuck it in/ in a diffe-
rent way from which he is recommended to do himself,
‘ wholesale and retail/ ‘ Does he wag his tail ? ’ as the
wild-beast keeper said when he put his head into the
lion’s mouth in the show. We could not say this here,
for our lion ‘ ain’t got none to wag/ unless ‘ the Chinaman ’
is changed into a respectable night-shirt, which is usually
well provided.
Storms and tempests are not rife in these regions; the
sea is undulating, it is true, with waves, and we are not,
as is often the case in unfortunate sailing-vessels, lying
panting for days and weeks on the line, sails idly flapping
on the masts, the passengers rowing round the ship on a
smooth sea, and watching the gaf-topsail fins of sharks
above the surface, or trying to hook these murdering ocean-
monsters; we have no fear of calms with the valuable
steam-power at command, and freely used by the captain
when there is the least failure in the breeze.
We crossed the equator on Wednesday the 29th October,
after forty days from Melbourne, the quickest run Captain
Gray has made from Melbourne to the line in the ‘ Great
Britain ’ in ten years, or any other vessel.


Lightly skimming o’er the billows,
See the flying fish appear ;
Whilst upon the tranquil ocean,
Tranquilly our course we steer.
Soft and warmly blow the breezes,
In the region of the line ;
Eougher gales would better please us,
Homeward as our thoughts incline.
The speckled sea-birds late attending,
No longer circle in our tracks ;
The cold and stormy seas best suiting
Their closely feathered, down-clad backs.
The Southern cross no more shines o’er us,
Radient with its beams afar ;
New Heavenly glories now surround us,
Hail we now the Polar Star.
In latitude 8.56 south we passed, without seeing it, the
Brazilian island of Fernando Noronha, remarkable for the
high rocky peak on the north side, called the Pyramid,
and, like Trinidada, with ‘ a hole in the wall ’ in the south-
west point. Noronha is seven miles long, and two broad ;
cattle, sheep, wood, &c., may be got here, and the governor
used to derive a profit from the sale of supplies. The
island is used, like Norfolk Island, for transportation, and it is
described as a terrestrial paradise; a varied surface covered
with luxuriant vegetation, and enlivened with beautiful
flowers. The inhabitants are excessively lazy, lolling in
their hammocks, smoking and gaming, or playing the
guitar. The earth produces, with little exertion, what
supplies almost all their wants ; the sea furnishes the rest.
In 1832, when Captain Fitzroy, the Naval Surveyor, landed
at the island, the governor had 200 black soldiers to guard
800 convicts. Catamarans were only allowed on the island,
and no boats, for fear of escape.
On Saturday night, the 25th October (the anniversary


of a certain marriage), the piano was wheeled to the front,
a corps of vocal and instrumental performers took up their
position beside it, and a concert came off at eight o'clock,
under Mr Pohl as leader, with considerable success, and of
which the following is the
PEOGEAMMI
PART I.
Pianoforte Duet — ‘ * Marche Triumphale, ”
Mbs Maguire and Mr Pohl,
Song —“Tak y’er Anld Cloak aboot ye,”
Col. Sir J. E. Alexander,
Vocal Duet —“ What are the wild waves saying ? ”
Miss White and Mr Creswiok.
Instrumental —“ Wenn die Sehwalben,”
Messrs Schmidt and Kohl.
Song — “ Annie, dear, good bye,” . . Mr J. Beckett.
Pianoforte Solo —“Lnrley,” , . , Miss Moses,
Solo — ‘‘ So Early in the Morning, ”
Sib J. E. Alexander and the Compant.
PART 11.
Chorus —“ Old massa in the cold ground,”
Mr Pohl and the Company, accompanied by Mrs Paris,
Vocal Trio from Norma,
Mrs Wilkins, Mrs Maguire, and Mr Pohl.
Comic Song — “ Limerick Races,” . . Mr T. Smith.
Vocal Solo and Duet from Schiller’s Lay of the Bell,
Mrs Wilkins and Mb Pohl,
Pianoforte Solo —“ Schulhoff,” . . Mrs Maguire.
Chorus —“ German Sauerkraut,” Mr Pohl and the Company.
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.
On sea and on shore, among soldiers and sailors, and par-
ticularly to make a break in a voyage among the passen-
gers, music of all things ought to be encouraged and pro-


moted, and we are glad to find that, on these beautiful
moonlight nights, on the deck, groups are formed for sing-
ing amid-ships. We hope this good custom will be kept
up, and so we now sing
‘ The C, the C, the open C,
That cometh from the chest so free ;
’Tis cheering to hear that high clear sound,
How it filleth the house above, around ;
It rings through the stalls, to the pit it flies,
And e’en to the back of the gallery hies ;
Mere quivers and quavers to me sound mild,
But the high chest C just suits this child.’
In latitude 0.55 north, we passed within six miles, and
clearly saw the dangerous rocky islets called St Paul’s, or
Penedo de St Pedro. Many wrecks may have occurred on
these terrible crags rising out of soundings 100 feet above
the water, only a quarter of a mile long, and in the direct
track of ships from southern lands. The northern islets to
us appeared dark, whilst the southern peaks were white
from guano.
On the shore the aspect is described as most dreary, no
verdure, but innumerable sea-fowl, as boobies, &c., disput-
ing the ground with the mariners who may land there for
eggs. We may mention here that we ate with relish, on
the West Coast of Africa, quantities of the eggs of pen-
guins, &c., by boiling them hard, and using only the yoke
—the fishy white was rejected. The sea about St Paul’s
abounds with garoupas, also voracious sharks, and it is
necessary to beat the water with the oars to drive off sharks
before the baited hooks are let down for the garoupas,
otherwise the sea-robbers make a rush at the fish on the
hook, and carry off half of it before it can be got into the
boat J. E. A


TO E. G. C.
Whene’er we stroll along the deck at night,
Beneath the arch of constellations bright,
Our thoughts oft wander to old England’s shore,
Where live the dear ones we would meet once more.
Then say, What dreams of happiness arise,
What schemes of life we plan, reject, revise ?
Tell me the one to which you most incline,
Meanwhile, dear partner, let me tell you mine.
First let me feel my present means secure,
Or even less, provided it be sure,
So that I need not fear Dame Fortune’s power.
Nor float uncertain on each doubtful hour.
Then in some pretty spot remote from town,
Some rural spot, I’d like to settle down.
On a fair lawn, where flowers of every kind
Are with choice shrubs, and loftier frees combined.
Where Thames or Severn water a rich mead,
On which my cattle can in quiet feed.
I’ll have my humble cot with gable ends,
With rooms sufficient to receive my friends.
With well-filled library, and goods in store.
Sufficient for our use, we want no more ;
With garden trim, well sheltered by high walls.
To keep out pilfering knaves and winter’s squalls.
A well-kept path must lead us to the green.
Where, amidst trees, the village church is seen.
Here, not unmindful of the approaching day,
When earthly things from me must pass away,


Amidst such joys as modest wealth can give.
With you, dear Emily, I’d choose to live.
These blessings if my gracious God impart,
What can I render but a grateful heart.
SECOND ANECDOTE EVINCING THE APTNESS OF THE
ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA, WHEN PUT TO THEIR WITS’ END,
TO OVERCOME DIFFICULTIES.
A young black was one day sent to look for a doctor
whose name was Mellon; so, after getting his name all
right at the first set off, he no doubt thought he could re-
tain it in his memory ; however, the first person he met
he accosted thus, —“You been (see) Mil, Mil, Dr M-i-1,
M-i-1. Ech, my boy ! Me been loose him, gooray. What
for cobra cabaun stupid ? (head very stupid); ’ then
scratching his head, and looking very serious for a little,
at last (like Peter*), an idea seemed to flash across his brain,
as he suddenly ejaculated, ‘Dr Brother belonging
to Pumpkin, I believe! ’ The party accosted could
hardly give an answer for some time, the relationship being
so ridiculous ; however, he laughingly replied, ‘ Dr Mellon,
you mean ?’ The black gave a jump and a shout of de-
light, exclaiming at the same time, ‘ Ats se fellow, my boy !
bale gammon belonging to you pidney ’ (know); and hav-
ing obtained the desired information, he went on his way
rejoicingly. Lector.
* Spyk ; alluding to Peter Spyk in the play acted on board.


EPITAPH ON A WATCHMAKER.
Here lies, in a horizontal position,
The outside case of
George Eomleigh, watchmaker,
Whose abilities in that line were an honour
To his profession.
Integrity was the mainspring,
And prudence the regulator
Of all the actions of his life ;
Humane, generous, and liberal,
His hand never stopped
Till he had relieved distress.
So well regulated were all his motions
That he never went wrong,
Except when he was set agoing
By people
Who did not know
His key;
Even then he was easily set right again.
He had the art of disposing his time
So well,
That his hours glided away
In one continual round
Of pleasure and delight,
Till an unlucky minute
Put a period to
His existence.
He departed this life, Nov. 14, JBO2,
Aged 57.
Wound up in hope of being taken in
Hand by his Maker,
And of being thoroughly cleaned, repaired,


And set a going
In the world to come.
Charles to the altar led his lovely Jane,
And to her father's house returned again,
Where, to convey them on their wedding tour,
All ready stands a neat post-chaise and four.
When lo ! the warring elements contend,
Clouds rise on clouds, and floods of rain descend;
This moves not him, but in he hands his bride,
And seats himself enraptured by her side ;
And thus (to cheer the fair one) he begun,
‘ I hope we soon shall have a little sun.'
But she, to whom the weather gave no pain,
Who shrunk not from the wind, nor felt the rain,
But filled with future hopes of them bethought her
Replied, ‘ My dear, I’d rather have a daughter.’
GLADLY AND MORE GLADLY.
From the German of Ghamisso.
Cold and stormy the north wind blew,
The road was rough, and raw the night,
My hair was wet with evening dew,
And I was exhausted quite.
Let sparkle the sweet and bright red wine,
The hoary toper gladly would
Sun himself in its rosy shine,
And warm him with a draught so good.
More gladly, in his hour of care,
He suns himself in thy sparkling glance,


And sips from thy rosy lips so rare,
The flames which make his heart’s blood dance.
Reach but thy mouth and cup to me,
With youthful love of early life ;
The storm may rage and tear at will,
Yain against me would be their strife.
ON MY WANDEEINGS,
From the German of Chamisso.
As I wandered out in sorrowful hour,
My love she wept so sadly ;
My feet are lame, my shoulders sore,
My heart it aches ! oh, badly.
Why sing ye, ye birds, in the morning light,
Ye know not what ’tis to part;
Sorrow and shoes don’t press you tight,
Ye birds can be light of heart.
The rain may pour, the sun may shine ;
Now in the east, now in the west;
I think of her, my loved one ! mine !
Who, of all men, loves me the best.
What seekest thou, the country round,
Thou weary one with beard so grey ?
I seek not- —I’ve already found;
I seek not what is mine to-day.


Still am I happy, still am young,
The world is cold and void of charms ;
At home I have of joy my fill,
When I am in my loved one’s arms.
Sounds now from the far distance,
A joyous song for me ;
The father goes to his children,
The loved one, my love, to thee.
He kisses thy ruby lips,
He kisses thee on the brow;
His feet have borne him home,
They’re lame no longer now.
A FOURTH WHALING INCIDENT.
Barque ‘Flying Childers'
I was cruising off the south-west cape of Tasmania, in com-
pany with several other vessels; at daylight we were among
sperm whales. All the ships lowered their boats, and were
in continual cha.se the whole day. About two p.m., the
chief mate, being close to the vessel, went on board; I and
the second mate being some miles to windward. The mate
had only been on board a short time, when a whale came
close to the vessel; he immediately lowered and struck.
The whale took to running before the wind and sea. In
hauling up to kill him, the whale made a sudden stop, the
boat ran on top of him and was upset; one man had his
shoulder dislocated, and another lost his hold of the boat
and was drowned. The whale was still towing the boat
with him, and it was with difficulty that, after some time,
the men were enabled to cut the line and to get clear.


The mate and remaining men lashed the oars across the
boat to float it. The ship, being to windward, ran down
and picked them up. They got the wounded man on board,
bailed the water out of the boat, took two other men from the
ship, again fastened to the whale, and killed it without any
boat near them. On my return on board, I found a whale
alongside, and this was the first I knew of the unfortunate
accident that had occurred. E. L.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ALBATROSS.
Great Britain, s.s., 31s£ October 1862.
My Dear Sir, —I am extremely happy to say that the pro-
gress of the good old ship has been (under the circumstances of
light and adverse winds) very satisfactory, and, I am proud to
say, still keeps her position in advance of past voyages, being
still one day in advance of her fastest passage home, sur-
passing any steamer or sailing-ship from Australia, in point
of time and speed, from that quarter to the present latitude,
as mentioned in the abstract of the log which I enclose.
The health of the ship is all that can be desired, and
trusting that it may so continue, believe me to remain,
yours, &c.
John Gray, Lieut, RN.R,
Commander, Great Britain.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ALBATROSS.
SOth October 1862.
Sir, —I write these few lines on a subject of the most
vital importance, one which engages the attention of even


royalty itself; for does not the beautiful Eugenie, empress
of the French, condescend to set the fashion, and, in some
cases, invent the same for the ladies, not only of her own
land, but of the whole civilised world ? Then, if so, may it
not be permitted one of the most devout worshippers of
this goddess (she is one, is she not ?) to pay some little at-
tention, and also direct yours to the fashions prevailing in
the ‘ Great Britain ’ amongst the male sex. As long as the
cold weather lasted all was well, but with the warm, ‘ a
change has come over the aspect of their clothingand, in
the name of public decency, I call upon you to use the
power of your editorial pen towards obtaining a more be-
fitting costume than many seem disposed to adopt. Sir,
we are not inhabitants of the wilds of Australia, Tasmania,
or New Zealand, and therefore we have a right to expect
some regard for our feelings. Light summer clothing is
all right and proper, and no one can say anything against
it, but, like the 'poses plastiques, the gentlemen seem every
day less and less inclined for clothes. One day, vests are
discarded —this we wink at; the next, flesh-coloured stock-
ings (to put it mildly) are accepted —we resolutely shut our
eyes to that. The day after that, in coming up from my
bath, which, Mr Editor, I take very early in the morning,
to escape the inquisitiveness of any prowling monsters (as
the French call them), I was alarmed by a voice from a
figure in a state of apparently semi-nudity, being all in
white ; but as I discreetly turned away my eyes, I cannot
give you any more accurate description of this undress
which the wearer had the assurance to tell me was all
proper and correct. I wonder if he thought me silly enough
to believe him ; if so, you may undeceive him. I only
pity and forgive his blindness and stupidity in thinking he
could impose upon me. Where can the monster have been
brought up ? The climax, however, to all these atrocities


occurred, above all days, on Sunday last. During divine ser-
vice I had my eyes, as usual, devoutly fixed upon my prayer-
book, but happening to raise them for a moment, they encoun-
tered the figure of a person (I should like to know if he
claims the title of gentleman) clad in—oh! Mr Editor,
what do you think ? I can scarcely write the words —a
pair of trousers and a shirt, the latter worn outside in
real Maori fashion. Words are powerless to describe my
feelings and those of my sister passengers, who, equally
with myself, deprecate such an outrage upon public decency.
I would simply ask for information, as Miss Dastle says,
what is the meaning of this, and where is this undress to
end ? Aid us with your pen, or we shall all be compelled
to seek refuge in our cabins until a change in weather
brings about a corresponding change in clothes.
Yours, as you treat me, indignantly or exultingly,
WILHELMINA.
CROSSING THE LINE.
' Crossing the line,’ —to how many of us has not this, in
the days of our hot youth, been a subject of desire first,
and afterwards of regret, when the line had been crossed ?
Can any one man amongst the many now on board the
‘Great Britain’ lay his hand upon his heart and say,
‘ Such was never my case?’ Now we have all, man and
woman, young and old, crossed it, and very quietly. Nep-
tune with his vagaries has not come on board to claim his
dues, as formerly was the case ; and truly ’tis well he did
not, for ‘ ’tis a custom more honoured in the breach than
the observance,’ and we are glad to think the days of
such mummeries are passing away. Only for one thing is


it to be regretted, from him we might have obtained the
secret of the
Amphitrite Balsam.
Sold in bottles from l|d. to £o, by N. 0. Gammon, 5
Lovers’ Walk.
None genuine without signature of maker. —Agents
wanted.
‘how do you feel?’
Proceeding up the noble Hudson River, glorious in the
month of October, with the varied tints of the American
fall or autumn, the purple hues of the stately maple con-
trasting with the bright yellow of the graceful poplar, and
both relieved by the sober livery of the evergreen pine
tribe, was a young couple on their wedding tour. They
were fond of each other, naturally, and it was tantalising
to * a lone man ’ to observe the toying of this pair of
lovers; but we ate and slept through it all, philosophically,
without much disturbance. In the morning, the young
man rose by times; —the praise of early rising is due to the
Americans ; they never take ‘ a round of the clock ’ of sleep,
as some lazy Britons do when ‘ they have the chance;’ this
would not suit the ‘ go-a-head nation/ Well, as I said, the
young man rose early, and going on deck, took an obser-
vation and came down again; a tap-tap-tap is heard at his
cabin-door, and in a pleasant voice he cries, ‘ Mary ! ’ she
answers, ‘Well! ’ ‘Do you feel like bacon and eggs?’
inquires he; ‘Guess I do,’ says she; and so they adjourned
to breakfast, and we followed after, feeling also very ‘like
bacon and eggs.’ A.


‘THE EXCEPTION PEOYES THE EULE.’
It is a remarkable fact, that yesterday, when the captain
requested universal silence, in order to hear the Yankee
skipper, not a single child was heard to scream. The
pretty dears ! *
IVote. —We spoke a handsome American ship, the ‘ Talis-
man’ from Calao, on the 31st October.
AN IRISHMAN’S EFFUSION TO THE MOON.
Success to the moon ! she’s a bright noble cratur,
Which lights us up every night in the dark :
But the sun, he shines only by day, which by natur
Wants no light at all, as you all may remark.
TOO GOOD, EVEN POE A YANKEE.
An American paper has the following:—‘Down East, they
tried a chap for swindling. The audacious fellow had dried
snow and sold it for salt.’
EEPOET OP THE COMMITTEE FOEMED TO SIT ON BULWEE,
JUN.’S, CEEDENTIALS, AS TO HIS OBTAINING THE
CENSOESHIP OF THE ‘ ALBATEOSS.’
We, the committee, having sat on Mr Bulwer, jun.’s.
* In justice to the ladies, it should be remarked that they were also
quiet, and none talked for the space of two minutes.


credentials, as tendered to us by him, are constrained to
say, that though in a few points highly satisfactory, we are
sorry to say we found a considerable degree of discomfort
from their great irregularity, from a softness on their ex-
terior difficult to digest, and from the hard matter of get-
ting at the kernel, the whole being evidently tinted with a
slightly verdant hue, so much so in fact, that we are greatly
astonished at the said Bulwer, jun., having the effrontery to
lay them before us, especially as we have been led to
understand that the said Bulwer, jun., himself confessed to
his having had to go through a severe process of cramming
before he could be duly qualified to receive those precious
articles, and that he often found them in a pretty pickle,
‘previous to his obtaining them,’ through his dull and
peculiar habits.
The committee on the whole, therefore, do not deem it
prudent to accept the said Bulwer, jun.’s, services as cen-
sor of the weekly ‘ Albatross,’ his credentials being of too
middling a stamp, even though he should be enabled to
give a Eowland for an Olive, or anything else.
The committee, at the same time, would recommend
the said Bulwer, jun., to bottle up his credentials at once,
to preserve them for some future and more appropriate
occasion when they might be likely to go down with a
greater relish.
Juxta Cheesy, Acting Secy.
With reference to the above report of the Committee, we
are precluded this week, from want of space, and the heat
of the weather, from giving insertion to another article
from the pen of Bulwer, jun., but which will appear next
issue, ‘ if all is well.’ Editors


AN EASTERN TOMB.
During my travels in the East, one of the most interesting
objects I saw was the very ancient tomb of Esther and
Mordecai: of Esther the queen of ‘ the great king Aha-
suerus, who reigned from India even to Ethiopia, over an
hundred and seven and twenty provinces / of Mordecai the
Jew, ‘ a child of the captivity/ who had brought up the fair
Esther, his uncle’s daughter, and adopted her as his own ;
she was fair to look upon, and thus acquired promotion
from Ahasuerus ‘as he sat on the throne of his kingdom,
which was at Shusan, in the palace.’ Hamadan is now the
name of the ancient Ectabana or Shusan, and it is in the
centre of Persia, a land which every eastern traveller de-
sires to visit; I saw it under peculiar advantages, as an
attache of a British embassy, at court and in the field with
the Persian army against the Eussians,
Inquiring my way to the tomb I was in search of, I
found the Jew who had it in charge, and he accompanied
me to it. He wore the usual Persian high and conical cap
of black Astracan lambskin, and a long blue garment with
a shawl round his waist.
We went up a gentle ascent, clear of houses, and arrived
at a bell-shaped stone building, on a square basement; on
the top of the dome a stork had built its nest. My guide
approached a low stone door, and stooping down, he reve-
Jtently kissed it. Eolling it back, we found ourselves in
a circular chamber. High up and all round were Hebrew
inscriptions. It would have taken some hours to copy
them ; they were the outpourings of full hearts of a chosen
and now scattered people.
My chief attention was, however, directed to the centre
of the floor, where, side by side, were two curious arks of


wood, about five feet high, and that of the queen highly
carved; Mordecai’s was plainer. The material of which
these arks were formed was dark with age and partly de-
cayed, but shewing marks (to me unmistakeable) of the
greatest antiquity. Par below in the ground was, doubt-
less, the honoured dust of her who saved her people from
a cruel massacre, instigated by the wicked Hainan, and of
him ‘ whom the king delighted to honour, and clad in the
royal blue and white, with a crowd of gold on his head/
The guide allowed me to appropriate a small detached
fragment of wood which lay near the door, and which I
carefully preserve. I then retired, earnestly trusting that
we may live to see the day when the interesting people
(one of whose sacred places I had been privileged to visit)
will be restored to their ‘ land of promise,’ there to rebuild
Salem’s towers, and again behold Judah’s hills crowned
with the vine and the myrtle, and ‘ the cedars that wave
on Lebanon.’
‘ Tribes of the wandering foot and weary breast,.
How shall ye flee away and be at rest ?
The wild dove hath his nest, the fox his cave.
Mankind their country, Israel but his grave.’
A.
MAEKET EEPOET.
Soles are plentiful and mostly thirsty, as proved by the
diminution of liquors.
Shrimps are numerous and noisy.
Flounders. —One very flat white one was seen on
deck on Wednesday last.
Crabs . —None on hand; some might be caught by
launching a boat manned by landsmen.
Lobsters are supposed to be on board, but have not yet
appeared in true colours.


Skate. —Not to be bad in the tropics, many will perhaps
try it towards Christmas.
Spirits, strange as it may appear, are gradually rising
the nearer we approach our journey’s end.
Beef has entirely disappeared.
Mutton is in the ascendant, and reigns paramount at
dinner.
Pork has lately been taken out of the market, the only
article in this line being a pie richly ornamented with
white lace.
Fowls have disappeared with the warm weather, and
given place to
Ducks , mostly white ones. M‘G.
CONUNDETJMS.
Why is the ocean like Sheridan’s comedy of the School for
Scandal ?
A. Because it has a Surface calm yet treacherous.
Suppose that a cow, which had been roughly milked by
Richard, could speak, what patriarch’s name, in asking
him to treat her more gently, would she use ?
A. Melchisedec (milk easy, Dick.)
Why is the letter E like the day of judgment?
A. Because it is the end of time and the beginning of
eternity.
ANAGEAMS.
]. Rare at biting.
2. Try cap again.
3. Contain a cleat.


TO COEEESPONDENTS.
A COEEESPONDENT asks if the letter signed Bulwer, jun,,
is not to be found in Bulwer, sen/s, work, £ the Caxtons/
and altered from the original. If this is so, possibly
Bulwer’s nephew may have improved on his illustrious
uncle, who, ‘ when he comes for to know it/ will not, like
the captain in the song of Billeye Taylor, make him ‘ first
lieutenant of the gallant Thunder Bum/ but Beef-eater
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary at the Tower of London.
Editoe.
ABSTEACT OF THE
LOG OF THE ‘ GEEAT BEITATH, S.S.
Mh.es.
Oct. 25
9.58
6.54
3.26
No. 0.26 N.
„ 27
» 29
„ 30


No. VII.
B th November 1862.
Sailing within the tropics, watching the sea ‘deeply,
darkly, beautifully blue/ and crested occasionally with
‘ white horses' of foam, (not angry billows, storm-tossed),
and stretched at ease under the awning, the breeze now
tempered to a degree of moderate heat, and no longer like
the blast of a furnace or the close steam of a conservatory,
is all very enjoyable, and it should be enjoyed; for like all
things sublunary, these ‘ airs of Paradise ’ are fleeting, and
November weather in England is anything but merry
weather.
Our progress, on the whole, has been satisfactory
during the last week ; an inveterate grumbler might com-
plain that he had nothing to grumble at; occasional sails
were seen in the horizon, but none to speak to since our
short conference with the American ‘Talisman/ only a
small Norwegian schooner, on Thursday morning, passed
within gunshot.
Lately divine service, consisting of prayers, psalmody,
and a short sermon, has been held on the upper deck, which
enabled the passengers fof’ard and the stout fellows com-
posing the crew to attend; a rainy or cold Sunday neces-
sitated the service to be performed in the saloon. Ttfo
zealous men of the second cabin held separate services


twice a-day, besides the morning service. The sacred duties
on Sunday are as carefully attended to in the ‘ Great Bri-
tain ’ as are the usual ship’s duties on every day of the week.
On Wednesday night, at eight o’clock, Mr Cooper was
so good as to exhibit his dissolving views ; the valuable
apparatus was of a superior order, and cost 100 guineas.
The programme was as follows :
INTRODUCTORY SCENE,
Entrance to the City of Petra.
ANCIENT CITIES.
City of Petra.
Damascus.
Raineses.
Baalbec.
Ruins of Tyre.
Mounds of Babylon.
EGYPT.
Denderah (Temple)
Pharaoh’s Bed.
Great Hall of Columns.
Crocodile on Sand-bank.
HOLTLAND.
Bethany.
Pool of Siloam.
Gethsemane.
Fords of Jordan.
Cedars of Lebanon.
Cana of Galilee.
City of Tiberias.
Mount of Ascension.
City of Jerusalem.
Mount Moriah.
NATURAL PHENOMENA.
Grotto in Capri.
Aurora Borealis.
Dropping Well.
The Geysers, Iceland.
Natural Bridge, Virginia.
Fingal’s Cave.
Falls of Niagara.
THE SHIP.
Sailing round the World.
Ship in full sail.
„ at anchor by Moonlight.
„ in a Storm.
„ struck by Lightning.
„ on Fire.
Crew escape on Raft.
ENGLAND.
Virginia Water.
Windsor Castle.
Tintern Abbey.
House of Lords.
Buckingham Palace.
St Paul’s.
Tower of London.
WATER-MILL.
Summer Scene—Day.
with Swan.
„ Moonlight.
Winter Scene—Day.
Moonlight.
with Falling Snow.
VESUVIUS.
Eruption by Night.
STATUARY.
Cupid encircled by a Dolphin.
Minerva protecting a Warrior.
SIX COMIC SCENES.
CHROMATROPB
GOOD NIGHT.


The exhibition gave great satisfaction, and it was to be
regretted that, owing to the limited space to which it was
unavoidably confined, the whole ship’s company could not
see it.
A handsome supper given by the captain, with appro-
priate speeches by Sir Charles Cooper and Colonel Brough-
ton, closed the entertainments of the evening.
On Thursday morning, we passed through quantities of
sea-weed. There is a belt of sea-weed beginning in 25°
North latitude, and reminding one of the use made of a
small portion of it by the immortal Columbus (and pos-
sibly near where we are now). His crew losing heart and
afraid to proceed on their voyage,—the first adventurous
voyage to America, —he encouraged them with the pros-
pect of land by pointing to the sea-weed; this (‘ what great
events from trifling causes rise ’) resulted in the discovery
of America.
Weighing has been in fashion lately with some ; a few
have fallen away, but most have gained in weight during
our voyage. Let these last comfort themselves by what
Shakespeare says—
‘ Let me have men about me that are fat,
Sleek-beaded men, and such as sleep o’ nights.
Yond’ Cassius has a lean and hungry look,
He thinks too much, such men are dangerous.’
J. E. A
TO THE EDITOE OF THE ALBATEOSS.
Deae Sie, —Having been requested to write a few lines
on the salmon, I have thought that I could not do better
at the present time than to give you my opinion as to what
means should be adopted by our legislature to restore the
salmon rivers of Great Britain to their former healthy con-
dition.—l am yours, &c. W. Ramseottom.


RESTORATION OP THE SALMON FISHERIES OP GREAT
BRITAIN.
The gradual decline and diminishing value of the salmon
fisheries of Great Britain have long been the subject of
serious consideration among commercial men. Various
plans have from time to time been suggested, with a view
to the restoration of declining rivers to their previous pros-
perous condition. Hitherto, however, nothing decisive has
been done, although the want of some comprehensive re-
medial measure is everywhere felt and acknowledged.
Hence it is that I venture to urge the adoption of a re-
medy, simple in detail and easy in application, by which
all salmon-frequented rivers may speedily be made peren-
nially productive. The remedy in question consists in an
enactment to the effect that the mesh of every salmon net,
&c., shall be of such a size as to permit the escape of all
salmon of 7 lbs. weight and under. A brief examination
of the consequences of such a regulation, in contrast with
those resulting from the use of the present statute net, will
amply shew the expediency of its immediate enforcement.
No doubt some of your readers are aware that a two-
and-a-half inch mesh is the least by which salmon may
legally be captured, and that the employment of a smaller
subjects the offender to a penalty. The intention in thus
prohibiting the use of diminutive meshes was highly com-
mendable ; but unfortunately the statute did not answer
the end for which it was originally designed. At the date
of its enactment, but little was known of the natural his-
tory of the salmon. At that time, and indeed up to a
very recent period, it was generally thought that the sprod
and mort ( sea-trout ) were the young of the salmon. Act-
ing under this impression, the legislature adopted a two-


and-a-half inch mesh, in the belief that such a size would
be large enough to allow young salmon to pass through
the nets and ascend the rivers for the purpose of spawn-
ing. Later researches have shewn that the mort and
sprod are an entirely distinct species, and that the grilse, or
young salmon, are of such average dimensions, that by far
the greater number has no chance of escape from the
statute net; an occasional fish only, thanks to its lean con-
dition, happening to struggle through. In confirmation,
let the reader inspect any Billingsgate in the United King-
dom, and observe the vast preponderance of grilse, and the
comparative scarcity of full-grown salmon offered for sale.
Thus it happens that the object of the enactment has been
completely defeated by an imperfect knowledge of its sub-
ject. The injurious effect of the use of so small a mesh is at
once apparent. No provision is made for the future. The
cause of the diminution of the species is evident at a
glance. So long as grilse are prematurely destroyed, in-
stead of being permitted to spawn, so long will the yield
of salmon fisheries fall infinitely short of that which would
otherwise be attained by a more judicious and enlightened
course of conduct. The results accruing from the general
adoption of a larger mesh are so easily perceived that little
explanation is needed.
Instead of being prematurely sacrificed, the majority
would ascend the rivers and deposit their ova. The spawn
thus deposited would necessarily produce a greater num-
ber of fry than heretofore hatched, and the grilse them-
selves would return as salmon in the following year, almost
double their previous weight. Every year, therefore,
would bring one season’s produce to the market, leaving
the produce of the former season for the purpose of spawn-
ing. The yield of a fishery would at once be double both
in number and in weight.


Forty thousand grilse are annually caught in the Tay.
Were these to remain unmolested, as they virtually would be
if suchamesh were adopted, they would deposit one hundred
million ova, and would themselves return from the sea in
the ensuing season double in weight, affording an abun-
dant yield of full-grown salmon.
Such important probable results are worthy of the
greatest attention, as well from the magnitude of the in-
terests at stake, as from the simplicity of the means to be
employed.
The only sacrifice involved is that of depriving the
markets of grilse during the season in which the pro-
posed regulation is carried into effect. On no ground can
it be proved that the adoption of this regulation would be
detrimental to the interests of either the upper or the
lower proprietors of rivers. The increased supply of sal-
mon would alike benefit all. All classes would share in
the advantages which an abundance of such wholesome
food would afford.
In conclusion, I believe that by the adoption of the
above proposal it would be a national boon, a final cure
for all failing salmon fisheries ; and I appeal to the intel-
ligent readers of the ‘ Albatross ’ whether such important
results are not worthy of acquisition at the cost of so sim-
ple an enactment. W. E.
FIFTH WHALING INCIDENT.
It was ‘the right whale ’ season off Jervis Bay, and we
were taking oil rather fast; we lowered after three whales
and chased them some hours; the mate finding the whales
going very fast, went on board to stow oil down; I continued


chasing the whales under sail, and after a long time came
up to them and fastened to one, but, in doing so, the boat-
steerer (who was my brother) was knocked overboard ; we
threw him the mast and sail, and I endeavoured to reach
him with the steer-oar as the boat passed him, but could
not do so; I now ran forward, bent on two drags, and let
my line run out, as by doing so I still had a chance of
getting the whale. In the excitement of the moment I
had not observed that we had only one oar left in theboat,
and looking round, saw my brother was a considerable dis-
tance from the boat, keeping himself up with the oars.
We made the best of our way to him, got him into the boat,
picked up our oars, and caught the whale. They had not
seen us from the ship, nor had the second mate, so that we
were very fortunate in coming off so well. ,
E. L.
THE ADVANTAGES OF BEING [IN DEBT.
Some years ago a boat, in which were two men, was drawn
by the force of the current into the rapids of the Niagara
Eiver near Chippewa. It seemed as though no human
effort could save the boat and its unfortunate inmates from
being hurled over the dreadful precipice. A large crowd
had collected on the shore, and stood pale, hopeless, almost
paralysed, watching the awful scene. Suddenly appeared
a man amongst the throng, who was a tradesman in the
village; almost at the same moment the boat, which had
been labouring heavily, capsized, and the two men were
seen breasting the dreadful current. *Oh dear! oh dear! ’
shouted the tradesman, on whose countenance was depicted
the most utter agony and despair. ‘ Save the man with


the red hair, for God’s sake save the man with the red
hair !' As if by magic, the crowd seemed to be electrified
and encouraged to make a desperate attempt; fortunately,
a boat was at hand, and it was soon manned by four stal-
wart men. After several moments of great peril, during
which time the lookers on were speechless and almost
breathless with fear, the man with the red hair was
rescued, but his poor companion was beyond the reach of
aid, and soon dashed over the boiling cataract into the
whirlpool below. As the boat reached the shore, and the
man with the red hair was taken out almost lifeless, a shout
of thankfulness to the brave boatmen rose involuntarily
from the crowd. The tradesman was particularly demon-
strative, and as he gazed on the fainting form, exclaimed
from the bottom of his heart, ‘ Thank God he is saved.
He owes me sixteen dollars ! ’
J. F. M.
EXTRACT FROM THE DIARY OF ME PEPTS.
6th November. —To the bear garden, as some do call
the children’s play-ground, and there much screaming and
noisy mirth, also a throwing of one another on the ground,
violently, with soiling of clothes and disturbance of the neigh-
bours, at which much vexed, but could not interfere, being
fearful of the mothers of the ‘ innocents.’ At one time I
thought some mild chastisement would improve matters,
and with the end of a rope, but considered again that this
might be only a relief for a brief space of time, as the
children were healthy, and might soon forget their punish-
ment, and might also fall on me in a body, to the spoiling
of my own clothes, and so loss of temper to my wife, poor


wretch! So resolved to provide myself with the sweet
meats called black sugar, hard bake, toffee, and such like,
in sufficient quantities, and give them privately to the
children, and they much pleased, but would become sick
by over-eating, previously soiling the dresses of those they
approached with their fingers, then taken home for some
days, and so to bed. A.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ALBATROSS.
Dear Sir, —As I have undertaken the collection of
subscriptions from the saloon passengers for the two
unfortunate blind men we have on board, I wish you
would insert the list, and also the following particulars
respecting them, which I have gained from themselves, and
others now on board, who knew them in Victoria, that
the subscribers may feel that the men are worthy recipients
of their charity. John Thomas, native of Cardiff, South
Wales, was born in March 1838. At the age of fourteen
he went to sea, and left in August 1854, to go to the gold
fields of Victoria. His success has been precarious. In
October 1860, when working at a quartz reef at Sandy
Creek, and in the act of charging a blast, it exploded from,
it was afterwards supposed, a piece of quartz getting mixed
with the loam, causing the total loss of one eye, and only
enabling him to discover light from darkness with the
other.
From the time of the accident to his coming on board
the ‘ Great Britain/ he has been dependent on friends, and
a subscription was raised, with the assistance of the Eev.
Mr Wilson, baptist minister of Sandy Creek, to enable him
to pay his passage, Mr Wilson specially exerting himself


'by giving a lecture on the life, genius, and time of John
Bunyan. His chief object in going to England is to obtain
medical advice, as the hope has been held out to him that
he may, under skilful treatment, recover the sight of one
eye, and then, as he is otherwise strong, be able to earn
his living;—failing the recovery of his sight, he looks for-
ward to getting into an asylum in the old country, where
he may learn a trade. His relatives are poor ; the only one
he expects to meet is his widowed mother, who is now
living in Cardiff. He does not know any one in Cardiff to
whom the kind donation of the passengers could be
remitted, so I would suggest that our worthy Captain be
asked to see that the amount be placed in safe hands for
his benefit.
John M'Coskill is a native of Buncranua, near London-
derry, county of Donegal, and aged twenty-eight. He
arrived in Victoria as a farm labourer in 1858, and worked
for Mr Hamilton, of Riddell and Hamilton, for five months,
afterwards worked as a quarryman at Gisborne, until the
time of the accident in 1860, by which he became totally
blind, and lost his left arm. He was also charging a
blast when the accident occurred. Since the time of his
accident Mr Hamilton has kept him ; and his brother, who
is now in Mr Hamilton’s employment as a labourer, has paid
his passage to enable him to join his father and family,
who have written for him, and hope to be able to provide
for him. As his relatives are poor, a donation will be
of great assistance to him. The Rev. David Mitchell,
presbyterian minister of Buncranna, would take charge of
the generous subscription of the passengers of the ‘ Great
Britain/


Subscribed in the fore saloon,
... intermediate,
L 4 7 9
9 5 6
steerage,
2 7 0
saloon,
30 14 0
L. 46 13 6
I have only to add that, as the subscription list is not
yet closed, I shall be happy to receive any additional
amounts which may be tendered. —I remain, yours truly,
Heney Ceeswick.
November Ist 1862.
LINES TO SOoWe THE lEEITATION OF WILHELMINA.
Wilhelmina appears to be very much hurt
At seeing a man go about in a shirt;
She endeavours to prove that the costume is bestial,
Whilst, in point of fact, it is strictly ‘ celestial.’
She’ll be happy to know the poor shirt she’d decry
Is the recognised dress of all Confucii;
The colour is commonly blue or nankeen,
But white, in hot weather, is frequently seen.
J. 0. (i.e. John Chinaman.)
THIED ANECDOTE EELATING TO THE
ABOEIGINES OF AUSTRALIA.
In Queensland, there is a tree which I believe is peculiar
to our colony, named ‘the bottle tree/from being very
much Of the same shape; many grow like soda-water
bottles, being much less in diameter near the ground than'


from ten to twelve feet higher up, there being not a single
branch till you come to the top of the neck, whence seve-
ral branches radiate, covered with rather pretty foliage,
and, as a slight simile, may be compared to the escaped
fluid when the cork is hastily drawn. They generally grow
in dry portions of the country, and the natives I found
made.a very ingenious use of them. In the scrub when I was
hunting, I found a stick or spigot sticking out of one of
these trees; I wondered what it had been driven in for,
when screwing it out, I nearly suffered for my rashness by
getting a slightly discoloured stream of water in my face.
I found eventually that the natives make a hole at the top
of the neck, where two branches meet, and dig out the pith,
of which this tree principally consists, the bark and wood
being only about four inches thick in a tree of eleven feet
diameter, so that the first heavy rain soon makes it into a
good water-butt, as by drawing the spigot they soon fill
their coolamans or water-pitchers, made from the large
knots or excrescences of gum-trees hollowed out; and by
carefully replacing the stick, I believe they seldom fail to
obtain sufficient for their temporary requirements. The
pith of a young tree is much like sago. I never heard of
a larger tree than the above mentioned, of eleven feet.
Lector
RETURNING HOME.
Among our fellow-passengers, there are, doubtless, many
who are returning to their native land with pockets better
lined than when they left her shores, (it may be as much
as a quarter of a century since,) with the intention of pass-
ing there in peace and quietness the remainder of their
lives. We congratulate them heartily upon the accomplish-


ment of what has probably been the wish of years, but
would remind them, at the same time, of the many changes
they must expect. Once familiar faces will either be miss-
ing altogether, or will be so altered as to be almost if not
quite unrecogniseable; the village green will have been
built upon, and the village become a town; quiet country
places will have been thrown open to the rush of towns-
people by the railways which now intersect the country in
every direction, and the towns themselves considerably in-
creased in size. Only in one thing is the country un-
changed ! The climate of Great Britain is the same as
ever, and cannot but be very trying to persons who have
for years been located in places which enjoy so fine a cli-
mate as Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand. None
should therefore land without a good supply of the
Amphitrite Balsam.
To be had in bottles, from to £5, of N. 0.
Gammon, 5 Lovers’ Walk,
Great Britain, s.s., 7th November 1862.
TO THE EDITOR OP THE ALBATROSS.
My Dear Sir, —I regret very much that the progress
of the ship has not been so satisfactory for the past few
days as hitherto; however it is yet too early to despair of
accomplishing the passage in as short a period as her cele-
brated voyage in 1859.
Through your kindness, permit me cordially to thank
Mr C. Cooper for his instructive and interesting entertain-
ment of Wednesday evening, which I am sure was most,
gratifying to those who witnessed the same.
I am glad to be able to report that the health of all on


board continues in the same satisfactory state as previously
reported.
I enclose abstract of log, and beg to remain, yours truly.
John Geay, Lieut., B.N.K.
THE KING IN THE NOE T EL
From the German of Chamisso.
In the North was a mighty king,
Proud too and rich was he;
His equal there ne’er yet was.
And never one will be.
And when came his time to die.
As he sate by the desert sea,
His heirs came creeping by,
The wolf, owl, and bear, those three.
First, he said to the shaggy bear, —
‘ I leave thee forest and wood,
No hunter to plague thee will dare
In thy airy haunts so good.’
Further to the owl said he :
‘ I leave thee towns and towers.
Countless as sands of ocean,
To serve as thy daughters’ dowers.’
To the wolf then next he spake:
£ I leave thee a quiet field,
Covered o’er and o’er with corpses,
Where I my sceptre did wield.’


As he made an end of speaking,
He laid him down to rest;
A storm, which then was breaking,
Hurl’d hailstones on his breast.
ANSWERS TO LAST WEEK’S ANAGRAMS.
1. Rare at biting—Great Britain.
2. Try cap again—Captain Gray.
3. Contain a cleat—Atlantic Ocean.
DRINKS MUCH IN USE ON BOARD THE ‘GREAT BRITAIN.’
Four-fifths of a great lawgiver, two fifties, and a vowel
—(Moselle.)
An industrious insect and a consonant —(Beer.)
EXTRAORDINARY PHENOMENON.
Seen, during the present head wind, by an experienced
navigator, a westerly sea on the weather side of the vessel.
Grand Musical, Literary, Dramatical, Operatical, and
Oratorical Entertainment, to be held in the Saloon of the
‘ Great Britain,’ on the 31st November 18G2. Under the
distinguished patronage of Cook, Knife-grinder, Laun-
dress, & Co.


PART I.
Grand Overture on the Floor, ... By Herr von Feilden.
As performed by him in the Saloon off Cape Horn, and received on that
occasion with great applause.
Solo —‘ Auld Robin Gray,’ .... By Lieut., R.N.R.
Duet —* The Campbells are coming,’ By a Male and Female Cammell.
German Chorus— ‘ The Rose that all are praising.’
Comic Song (In Character), . . By Yillikins and his Dinah.
Aria —‘The Fair Land of Pohl-and,’ .By an Eminent Pianist.
Scotch Air —‘John Anderson my jo, John.’
Comic Duet — ‘ Pretty, pretty Polly Hopkins,’ . By Hop and Pop.
Gld English Ballad —‘ The Hoak and the Hivy go ’and in ’and,’
Lord Youknowwho.
Duet —‘ Nancy Dawson,’ . . . By a Mother and Daughter.
Sea Ditty— * We did not catch that Whale, brave boys,’
an Enterprising Whaling Captain.
An encore here is expected, when the same singer will kindly favour
the audience with ‘Jemmy catch’em Kangaroo.’
An interval of three-quarters of a minute, during which a pea-nut will
be presented to each of the audience.
PART 11.
The Literary Entertainment will commence with—
Selections from the History of Alexander the Great,
a Distinguished Officer of the British Army.
Readings from Mrs Ellis’s Family Secrets, By a Connection of the Family.
Dialogue from Domhey <k Son,
Argumentative Discourse between Capt. Cuttle and Solomon Gills.
Scene from the Serious Family,
Capt. Murphy Maguire and Aminadab Slick.
Treatise on Sheep, By A, Ramsbottom.
Scene from Wilkie Collins' Favourite Work ,
Conversation between Walter Hartwright and the Woman in White.
Owing to the lateness of the hour, the intermission will be reduced to
half-a-minute, during which distilled water will be distributed, free of ex-
pense, by the generosity of the chief engineer.
PART 111.
Selections from the Grand Oratorio— 1 Moses in Egypt.’


One Act of the Opera —‘ The Miller and his Men.’
Principal Character by Bul web, Jug.
The whole entertainment will conclude with a grand corrobberee intro-
duced by cat-calls in the passage, by a gentleman amateur, who has ob-
tained considerable eclat in that line, assisted by all the juvenile natives,
and joined in by the whole strength of the corps.
Donkeys and drays can be ordered at midnight. Donkeys’ heads turned
to the right, and kick up to the left. Exeunt omnes.
CONUNDRUMS.
Why is a Cockney a most unpleasant companion?
A. Because he always exasperates.
Which are the most industrious letters ?
A. The Bs (bees.)
Which are the most extensive letters ?
A. The Cs (seas.)
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Dropped in the Saloon of the ‘Great Britain,’ several
very valuable H’s. The finder will be rewarded upon
returning them to their proper place.
Preparing for the press, a complete History of the
Life and Adventures of Bulwer, jun,, the Hero of the
Censorship on board the ‘Great Britain,’ to be published
immediately on landing, by Oliver and Gill, Liverpool; to
be had also of Longman and Co., London; Alexander and
Campbell, Edinburgh ; and Paddy Maguire, Dublin. The
following is a prospectus of the work: —First and foremost
is the hero’s celebrated letter to the editor, and the


editor’s masterly reply, his terse and epigrammatic style,
and slashing attack on Bulwer for his scoffing at the
‘Albatross’ as a ricketty bantling, and mere downy bird;
same time is so ambitious to secure the great oracle’s ser-
vices, that he tells him he is willing to condone an apology,
and receive him and his deputation most graciously.
Shaking of the Editor’s pen on his attempt to compliment
Bulwer on his stupendous intellect, his anxiety to get a
peep at the prodigy of human learning, the living encyclo-
pedia, the walking university; his yearning to know
Bulwer’s pedigree, his ceremonial instructions touching the
forthcoming interview, his eloquent peroration; at this
juncture the sound of distant voices was heard, and in a
few minutes there burst forth tumultuous shouts of joy
from the ‘ Albatross ’ office at the prospect of the coming
man, waving of handkerchiefs from the windows on hear-
ing of the glad tidings, cheering of the printer’s devil,
drinking of healths from foaming jugs of October below,
and sparkling Moselle above. Trial of the Editor’s
question of privilege, speeches of counsel on both sides, nice
points of laws argued, judgment reserved. The Editor
summons his privy council, is advised to maintain the
dignity of his high office with great pomp, and to inaugu-
rate the eventful day with vice-regal splendour. The
Editor t rose with a stately grace, and remarked that the
great trial concerning his maritime rights only closed at a
late hour last night, but the learned judge, with his usual
courtesy to suitors, kindly promised to come down this
morning, and deliver judgment in the council chamber.
Scarcely had this announcement been made, when a loud
knocking of the door followed; Tipstaff rushes to open,
the Chief-justice appears with all his paraphernalia, is
ushered in, all the members rising, and taking his seat
amid profound silence. Delivery of the judgment. His


honour commenced by observing that he and his learned
brother had, with untiring labour, carefully examined every
statute concerning the privilege of the press, from the time
of Elizabeth, but there was only one that had any reference
to maritime privileges, which was the 9th Vic., sec. 4,
chap. 2, and it was there laid down what is the law of the
case—so clear and perspicuous as to be beyond all doubt
The words of the act are as follows:—‘lt shall be enacted
that any person of good name and fame, who may be here-
after practising the profession of a journalist on the high
seas, and under the British flag, shall be, ex officio, the
representative of the fourth estate of the realm, and shall,
for the time being, be invested with the same rights and
privileges as a viceroy on land.’ He (the learned judge) was
further fortified by a decision quite to the point, by my
Lord Campbell, ‘ whom, I may presume, was a member of
your family, Mr Campbell.’ The learned Editor, beaming
with smiles, recognises the compliment with a polite bow;
he then, in a state of excitement better imagined than de-
scribed, looks towards the Judge, and says, ‘ Do I understand
you, Sir Charles, that under the act of Victoria, it is your
opinion and decision that I have the power of creating
knights V Sir Charles— ‘ Most unquestionably, and orders
of the garter and thistle also, like the Viceroy of Ireland.’
The worthy Editor can stand no longer, sits down |in an
ecstacy of delight, calling for a smelling bottle. The
Viceroy, on recovering, issues an order in council command-
ing all the deputation, both civil and military, to appear in
full court dress, at the inauguration of the censorship.
Assembling of the deputation at the ex-consular office ;
reading of a letter from a distinguished veteran knight of
the sword and pen,—substance as follows: —That he has
made up his mind a long time ago never to attend any
public meeting again, unless it was ‘ early in the morning,


before the break of dayregret and amazement of the
assembly at such nice scruples ; a note also was read from
a gallant colonel, begging to be excused, having received
a wound in his leg in a hot chase after some guerilla
boys. Appearance of Bulwer, jun., with his portfolio;
he appoints Lieut. Swizel his aid-de-camp, and Captain
Amersfort to drill the deputation. The ex-consul
receives the white staff, and is elected president. Mr
Bulwer then retires to adjust his robes, he has scarcely
turned his back when that wicked wag Amersfort begins
to fire off his puns on nature’s scanty work, and Swizel,
ever up to fun, lets off his artillery of wit and raises a
siege of laughter, Bulwer returns, the captain files off his
corps, and gives the word of command, ‘Right about,
march.’ Arrival of the procession in the vestibule of the
‘ Albatross,’ the doors of the great hall thrown open ; the
Viceroy of the Seas in his chair, in his gorgeous costume, and
encircled on his head was that magnificent wreath which
he wore at the Olympic games in the Richmond Park. In-
troduction of Bulwer, his profound obeisance, and hand-
some apology ; —he approaches the Viceroy, who is struck
with the peculiar idiosyncrasy of his face, shakes hands,
and retires. The ex-consul whispers to his excellency
that it would be wise to confer some mark of distinction
on his illustrious guest. The hero is commanded to ap-
pear before the vice-regal chair; is conducted by Captain
Amersfort and his aid-de-camp ; is requested to kneel; he
hears the magic words, ‘Rise, Sir Jacob ; ’ becomes panic-
struck, and, in his attempt to get up, tumbles along the
floor, is lifted up by the ex-consul, who gives a hint he
should like to be knighted himself. Doctor sent for, feels
his pulse, pronounces it to be a paralytic attack brought
on from over-stuffing himself with porridge, but is now
all right for a time. Great discussion takes place on the


nature of the testimonial; the Viceroy cuts the question
short, and calls on Sir Jacob to say what kind of thing
he would like. Sir Jacob at once replies that the only
tribute he could like was a gold snuff-box containing the
freedom of the ‘ Great Britain ; ’ his Excellency inquired
what he meant by the word freedom; Sir Jacob promptly
answered, f Why, a free passage to and from England and
Melbourne for life.’ The Viceroy, amid a general titter of
laughter, remarked, there would not be the slightest diffi-
culty about the gold snuff-box; but as to the freedom of
the ‘ Great Britain,’ Captain Gray must be consulted. A
special messenger despatched for the gallant captain; his
quick appearance amid much cheering. The Viceroy in-
troduces Sir Jacob, remarking that the captain must have
been quite aware that he had been a long time in search
of some ‘ great seer,’ to act as censor of the ‘ Albatross/
and now he was too happy to say they had found a second
Socrates; but the compensation he requires seems quite
preposterous. ‘ What is it ? ’ asks the captain. ‘ Why, the
freedom of your ship—that is, afree passage—for life out and
home.’ Captain Gray— ‘ lam quite ready, on the part of
the owners, to accede to his request with pleasure, well
knowing that the owners will consider Mr Bulwer’s won-
derful genius, polished manners and conversation, would
far more than compensate for the trumpery passage-money.’
Captain gets a hint he is to be knighted, and retires amid
loud huzzas. Opening of the portfolio—Lieut, Swizel
superintends ; pressure of the crowd of courtiers; Captain
Amersfort, sword in hand, forms a ring ; the portfolio un-
locked ; the strange motto on top, and stranger relics
below. Though details are reserved for the work, here are
a few samples. The first article was a large drawing of
King’s College, Cambridge; the next was a photograph of
Sir Jacob in his academic cap and gown ; the next was his


Uncle Sam’s diploma, who had been dead seven years,—
‘ There,’ says Sir Jacob, drawing himself up in a dignified
attitude, ‘ there are testimonials for you, sufficient for the
censorship of the Times! Low murmurs of ‘ cheat, scamp,
humbug,’ and cries of ‘ draw again,’ when out comes a
greasy old wig, a large batch of pawn-shop duplicates, a
two years’ washing bill, two dickeys, a tooth-pick and a
small-tooth comb; loud cries of £ shut up,’ and louder cries
of ‘ rogue, villain,’ &c. Here his Excellency started on his
legs to calm the rising storm, and admitted that it had all
the appearance of a monstrous fraud, but implored them to
be patient for a few minutes, and give him another chance.
His literary examinations, classical questions put to him by
distinguished literati, and questions on natural history by
some learned graziers, also questions on simple rules of
grammar; but the answers were so ludicrous and grossly
stupid, that the uproar and clamour shook the very floor.
Here are one or two specimens:—he was asked how many
declensions there were ; he replied, only one, which was the
sun’s,he believed, itwasabout 95 yesterday—(loudlaughter.)
The last question put was, How many parts of speech
there were; he replied, Three, nose, mouth, and wind-pipe.
Hoars of laughter and yells from all sides. At this crisis, Sir
Jacob, long on the watch, saw the coming storm of
indignation and took flight to his cabin, the deputa-
tion after him exclaiming, ‘ Stop him, duck him, sack
him; ’ he bolts his door, and cries ‘ Murder! ’ Great
tumult on ferreting him out; unsuccessful attempt to
tar and feather him; is taken into custody and brought to
trial; brilliant speech of Mr Serjeant Buggins on his behalf;
counsel for the crown, having replied in an able speech,
proved that the evidence against the prisoner was above
all suspicion. His Honour the Chief-Justice then pro-
ceeded to sum up the evidence, and after minutely explain-


ing the law of the case to the jury, told them that the
evidence sworn in court that day by gentlemen of the
highest honour, brought home the prisoner’s guilt as clear
as two and two make four; still it was a matter for their
deliberation alone, and reminded them that if any doubt
should arise in their own minds, to give the prisoner the
benefit of that doubt. The foreman, without leaving the
box, at once gave an unanimous verdict of guilty. The
learned judge, in the most solemn manner, proceeded to
pass judgment; he said, looking at the prisoner, ‘ Jacob
Bulwer, you have had a most patient and impartial hearing,
and been tried before a jury of twelve honest and
enlightened men, who have pronounced you to be
guilty of the most monstrous fraud in the annals
of civilisation, and although the power of the court
under the 17th Charles Second (commonly called the
statute of frauds) to transport you beyond the seas for the
term of your natural life, the court thinks the ends of
justice will be better satisfied by giving you a local punish-
ment. The sentence of the court is, that you are to have
your head shaved, and to walk up and down the saloon for
one hour, clothed in a white sheet/ Exciting scenes on
witnessing the expiation of his crime, his grotesque ap-
pearance in the saloon, consternation of the ladies and their
tears, uproar of the boys, and cries of ‘ Punch and ghost,’
his purgatorial sufferings, his ignominious fate and final
exit to the imps below.
Gentlemen anxious to procure copies of this interesting
and invaluable work, will please to give in as early as pos-
sible their names and address to the purser.


THE LOG OF THE ‘
BRITAIN,’
ABSTRACT
GREAT
Miles.
Nov. 1
» 6


ijje I|l It at ms.
No. VIII.
15 th November 1862.
The flight of the Albatross, commenced in the * underworld 5
and extended to European seas, must now be brought to
a close, and our bird of snowy plumage, and immortalised
in Coleridge’s Ancient Mariner, must now close its long
pinions and sink to rest. If our Albatross of the £ Great
Britain ’ is intended to be remembered, and kept as a sou-
venir of a pleasant voyage from the shores of Australia, it
might be printed in double columns at a moderate cost at
Liverpool, and copies sent to those who subscribed, say a
crown each, and who would give their names, and their
money , to our publisher.*
lu the meantime, those of the passengers who kindly
supported the paper with their contributions, and the
others who good-naturedly received our weekly numbers,
are duly thanked, and every good wish is offered for their
future prosperity.
It may have been remarked in other ocean newspapers
a want of completeness; thus, no list of saloon passengers ;
no descriptions, even short ones, of the land seen or passed
* A neat woodcut of the ‘ Great Britain,’ or the figure of ar albatross,
might head the publication..


near, during the voyage, these defects the Albatross has
tried to remedy, and Captain Gray has supplied weekly an
extract from the log.
This last week has been one of strong breezes, gales,
rain, and baffling winds, and the weather, altogether, was
so variable at the beginning of the week, and the wind so
adverse, and the sea so rough on Wednesday, that our ex-
cellent captain in despair took off his boots and threw
them overboard as an offering to Neptune, in the vain hope
that such a sacrifice would appease him; but the sea-god,
on looking at the boots, found them so old and worn out,
that he flew into a violent passion, and sent his chief mes-
senger Boreas with a thundering denunciation of his wrath
o o
against our good ship, which was rolled and pitched in a
manner altogether disagreeable. On Thursday morning
Neptune seemed to be somewhat appeased, but he had not
behaved altogether in such a generous manner as might
have been expected from such an old-fashioned gentleman,
and he still continues in a very sulky mood.
The ancients believed in the existence of a beautiful
land, ‘ Isles of the West,’ called Atalantes, far in the ocean
and west of Lybia ; the continent of Africa, the Azores or
* Isles of Hawks/ may be the Atalantes of ‘ the world as
known to the ancients/
The Azores are nine in number, and we were steering in
the direction of Flores, the northernmost island, on the
14th November,
Joshua Vanderberg, of Bruges, in Flanders, discovered
the Azores in the middle of the fifteenth century, on a
voyage to Lisbon ; and the Portuguese, then full of enter-
prise, immediately sent and took possession of them, and
considered them, as they really are, a most valuable ac-
quisition.
The capital of the Azores is Angra in Terceira, where in


1833, rendezvoused the British expedition, to assist in es-
tablishing Donna Maria on the throne of Portugal, usurped
by her uncle Don Miguel. The climate of the Azores is
delightful, the air pure, clear, and serene ; the soil is volcanic
and very productive, European and tropical plants equally
flourish upon it. The oranges of St Michael have a world-
wide reputation. There is ‘ a thorn to the rose/ however,
here as elsewhere; there have been occasional earthquakes
in the Azores—a violent one in 1841, also high winds are
frequently experienced, as we know, in the regions of these
western islands.
The people are good and honest, and contented to live
by their industry, rather than by warlike enterprise, pre-
ferring the olive to the laurel.
Pico, a volcanic mountain, 7000 feet high, is a remark-
able object in an island of that name.
For variety of scenery, abundance of the necessaries of
life, unrivalled climate, and cheapness of living among a
well-disposed people, the Portuguese, who have long been
on the best terms with the British, and whose interest it is
to retain our friendship, the Azores are strongly recom-
mended to the notice of those who require a milder tem-
perature in winter, than that of the British Isles, to en-
able them to continue ‘ the battle of life/
But in the pursuit of health or of independence, let this
be our rule—
Never give up ! it is wiser and better
Always to bope than once to despair ;
Fling off the load of doubt’s heavy fetter,
And break the dark spell of tyrannical care.
Never give up ! or the burden may sink you,
Providence kindly has mingled the cup,
And in all trials and troubles bethink you,
The watch-word of life must be, never give up !
J. E. A,


FOURTH ANECDOTE RELATING TO THE
ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA.
As the voyage is now so nearly at an end, I think that I
may as well write a few lines about our sable lords’ ladies,
alias black gins, even at the risk of being thought un-
gallant at not having commenced with them; but you must
bear in mind that, as is general in Australia, every thing
being opposite to that which is customary in our ‘ tight
little isle,’ so the sable ladies are slaves to their lords,
as vice versa with our fair spouses, at least to a great
extent, as Mrs Caudle’s lectures will pretty fairly testify.
Though when shifting their camps they have to carry
all their cooking utensils, their own and their masters
opossum rugs, dillies full of sundries, as various as abeg-
garman’s wallet, and sometimes consisting of a couple of
little hands of a favourite babe, and the smoke-dried skin
of a near relative made up into parcels like Barret’s
Twist, well ochred feathers to ornament their heads, bits of
broken glass, delf, with bees-wax to fix said ornaments
thereon, with which when decorated they look most
charming, they often have a kick for a degree of freedom,
which, poor creatures, they seldom attain, as their lords
keep them in capital order by a blow from a heavy hullah-
hullah, which often breaks a couple of ribs at a time ; yet
I have known of a virago, on getting breath again, get up
and villify her lord till he got so enraged, that he sent a
spear through her, she still continuing her abuse, till she
had to drop from loss of blood; like the woman who, when
drowning, and could no longer have the last word, was
seen as vanishing with one hand merely above water, with
a pair of fingers moving scissors-fashion, as much as to


say, ‘ Clip it yet.’* When they have a set-to among them-
selves, it is a most laughable sight; perhaps one has stolen
from the other a nice morceau of fish out of her gunya, or
bark house; the thief is at once set upon by the others;
a fearful jabbering commences; this brings more friends of
each party ; the whole party now seeing that there is
likely to be a regular row, bolt for their yam-sticks, with
which they are excellent hands at quarter-staff, breaking
each other’s heads, and also warding off the blows most
cleverly, as is soon seen amidst the general melee ; diffe-
rent sides by this time having been formed, —when you
suddenly hear a scream from one of the gins who first
went to loggerheads, the other having nearly bitten off
one of her fingers, which makes her vanish the first op-
portunity, being sufficiently aware that, ‘ under the cir-
cumstances,’ discretion is the better part of valour. The
propagators of this storm having thus settled the question,
the fiendish yells of the others, with their most discordant
jabbering, and cracking of sticks, cease, as they retire, quite
done up, to growl over their grievances at their leisure in
their several gunyas. Lector.
HAUL-A WAY-DITTIES.
Landsmen and others curious to know the words of
sailors’ songs or choruses, such as they use in hauling ropes,
we propose to satisfy this laudable curiosity, and give a
few specimens, so ‘ list ye landsmen all to me ’ to the
words, first, of —
• A husband had put his wife under water in a dispute about whether a,
knife or a pair of scissors had been used for some purpose.


HAUL AWAY, JOE.
Away, haul away, my pretty little Eosey,
Away, haul away,
Haul away, Joe,*
Away, haul away, come rock and roll me over,
Away, haul away,
Haul away, Joe.
Away, haul away, come roll me in the clover,
Away, haul away,
Haul away, Joe.
Away, haul away, we never will surrender,
Away, haul away,
Haul away, Joe.
Away, haul away, we will either burst or bend her.
Away, haul away,
Haul away, Joe.
HAUL THE BOWLING.
Haul the bowling, come down upon the bowling,
Haul tHe bowling, the bowling haul.
Haul the bowling, the Blackball bowling,
Haul the bowling, the bowling haul.
* The solo singer gives the first line, and the others take up the two
next, and haul away at the last word, 1 Joe.’


Haul the bowling, Paddy Kelly’s bowling.
Haul the bowling, the bowling haul.
Haul the bowling, Kitty she’s my darling.
Haul the bowling, the bowling haul.
Haul the bowling, the fore and maintop bowling,
Haul the bowling, the bowling haul.
Haul the bowling, the packet ship is going,
Haul the bowling, the bowling haul.
BULLY IN THE ALLEY.
v -0. • •
Easy, my man, easy,
Away, a bully in the alley;
Easy, my man, easy.
Health, my boys, Pm bully in the alley.
Oh ! the dirty alley,
Away, a bully in the alley;
Oh T a white-washed Yankee in the alley,
Health, my boys, I’m bully in the alley.
I lost my jacket in the alley,
Away, a bully in the alley;
I lost my jacket in the alley,
Health, my boys, I’m bully in the alley.
I am a bully in Booble Alley,
Away, a bully in the alley;
I am bully in Booble Alley,
Health, my boys, I’m bully in the alley.


I am going away to leave you,
Away, a bully in the alley;
I am going away to leave you,
Health, my boys, I’m bully in the alley,
I never will deceive you,
Away, a bully in the alley;
I never will deceive you,
Health, my boys, I’m bully in the alley.
WHISKY JOHNNY.
Whisky is the life of man,
Whisky Johnny;
Whisky is the life of man,
Whisky for my Johnny.
Whisky in that old brown jar,
Whisky Johnny;
Whisky in that old brown jar,
Whisky for my J ohnny.
Whisky can do what no man can,
Whisky Johnny;
Whisky can do what no man can,
Whisky for my Johnny.
Whisky brought me to disgrace,
Whisky Johnny;
Whisky brought me to disgrace,
Whisky for my Johnny.
Whisky up and whisky down,
Whisky Johnny;


Whisky up and whisky down.
Whisky for my Johnny.
Whisky in the morning sun.
Whisky Johnny;
Whisky in the morning sun.
Whisky for my Johnny.
JEMMY RILEY.
Oh, 3a, Jemmy Eiley had two daughters.
Oh, Jemmy Eiley, oh ;
Oh, old Jemmy Eiley had two daughters,
Oh, old Jemmy Eiley, oh.
Oh, one knit the stockings and the other the garters.
Oh, Jemmy Eiley, oh.
Oh, one knit the stockings and the other the garters.
Oh, Jemmy Eiley, oh.
Oh, old Jemmy Eiley was a miser,
Oh, old Jemmy Eiley, oh ;
Oh, old Jemmy Eiley was a miser,
Oh, old Jemmy Eiley, oh.
Oh, old Jemmy’s daughter married a keizer.
Oh, old Jemmy Riley, oh ;
Oh, old Jemmy’s daughter married a keizer.
Oh, old Jemmy Eiley, oh.
Oh, old Jemmy Eiley he liked brandy,
Oh, old Jemmy Eiley, oh ;
Oh, old Jemmy Eiley he liked brandy,
Oh, old Jemmy Eiley, oh.
Oh, old Jemmy died in Pandy,
Oh, old Jemmy Eiley, oh ;


Handy Pandy, drinking brandy,
Poor Jemmy Riley, oh.
These are some of the elegant ditties which enable the
sailors to haul ‘ with a will/ and haul together.
A SKETCH OF CRIMINAL LIFE.
There are few of the various calamities incidental to man
that meet less consideration from the minds of the multi-
tude than that of the convict, and perhaps none, in the
opinion of the humane and virtuous, demands more earnest
attention and solicitude. The fate of that class of beings
is a subject little known, and less inquired into, by far the
largest portion of society. Their share of commiseration
is chiefly confined to those whom the ties of consanguinity
operate upon, and which may be faintly imagined in con-
templating the deep and silent sorrow overshadowing be-
reaved parents for the crimes of an erring child, and
bowed down with shame and sadness, more intense than
his natural dissolution would have caused them. If such
are the sorrows of his friends, what must be the anguish
and bitterness of soul of him whose transgressions have
entailed such evils upon those whom he loved so dearly,
and the appaling consequences falling upon himself. How
justly may he, when sunk in despair, and clasped in the
iron arms of anguish, his thoughts reverting back to for-
mer scenes of happiness and domestic bliss, adopt the
plaintive lines applied to the dead—
‘For him no more the blazing hearth shall burn ;
Nor busy housewife ply her evening care ;
Nor little children lisp their sire’s return,
And climb his knee the envied kiss to share.’


These thoughts are suggested by remembering the case
of a man whom the writer met with some twelve or thirteen
years ago, on board a prison-ship. He was a member of
a good family in London * After conversing with him
for a short time, he made a statement to the following
effect:—
‘ I was born of parents who are well-connected. After
leaving school I was sent to college, but being what is
termed ‘ a fast young man/ I left in disgrace. My mother
was doatingly fond of me, and humoured me in every way.
This eventually caused my ruin. I was idle, fond of com-
pany, and low pursuits. One fine summer’s day, I was
walking in one of the parks near London, when I met
several young men I knew, who persuaded me to join them
in a party to one of the public places of amusement. I
went, but picture to yourself my feelings, when next morn-
ing I was standing at the bar of justice,'f my good name
branded with that of a felon. Behold me trembling and
expecting every moment to be committed for trial. This
indeed was the case; I had a fair trial, was found guilty
of cutting and wounding, and sentenced to ten years’
transportation. Follow me to my lonely cell, where I was
confined seventeen months; no friend to soothe or com-
fort me, for I dare not write to my mother under an as-
sumed name, and from a prison. I had no hope of a mi-
tigation of sentence, knowing that I was guilty. At length
the day came for me to embark on board ship, and for the
first time since my conviction, I heard men speak in such
a manner as made me think of home, but then I dare not
write to let the dear ones know that I was on board a
convict ship. They know not what has become of me, but
I hope to live to see them again.’
* The son of a captain in the navy.
+ It is understood this was a case of stabbing at Cremorne Gardens.


He arrived safely at his destination, and I knowing his
statement to be correct, he was recommended to a gentle-
man, who took him at once into his service. When the
gold was discovered in Australia, he took advantage of the
opportunity offered of getting on board ship, and at length
arrived in England. He had only been in London a few
days, when he was recognised as a returned convict—was
re-convicted, and sent to Western Australia, where he ar-
rived greatly depressed, caused by knowing that his parents
had both died within a few days of each other, shortly
after he left England. He never recovered this shock, and
about six months ago he also was carried to that ‘ bourne
from whence no traveller returns.’
He was a great writer, and was fond of poetry. The
following lines were written by him on his first voyage;—
LINES ON PASSING REFLECTIONS.
Oh, bright broke the morn, o’er the face of old ocean,
Scattering its beams where the darkness had been;
Swift sped our ship, as with varied emotion.
Our hearts o’erflowed, yet rejoiced in the scene.
The scene of bright morn and the blue heaving waters,
Whose spray kissed our cheeks and flew back in wild glee;
Sails set to the full, and the winds gushing murmurs,
The monarch of day gilding air, sky, and sea.
And as our good ship sped her way through the waters,
Graceful and gay to her far distant port,
Methought of the many and fearful disasters,
Which so often the hopes of the sailor cut short.
Of the wild sweeping storm by the winds lashed to fury,
Where the might of Jehovah sublimely is seen;


Of the treacherous reef and the lightning all gory,
Adding terrors tenfold to the else awful scene.
Methought of the home and the days of my childhood,
Of the hearts that I loved and had left far behind;
And wished in my anguish that they too had followed,
So selfish are they who no comfort can find.
I thought of the hopes I had freely indulged in,
Before crime and misfortune had shrouded my fate;
Of the warm expectations and high ardent soaring
With which my fond heart was once so elate.
Now crushed and extinguished and scattered in darkness,
Those hopes, expectations, and soarings so high;
And blighted this heart, and a prey to that sadness
Which unnoticed in words is expressed in the sigh.
The sigh that will burst from this agonised bosom,
Though its heavings in vain I strive to repress,
Tells a tale to the stranger that life’s early blossom
Has been tainted and stript by the worm of distress.
And those who once knew me, the happy and joyous,
Sporting in glee o’er hillock and plain,
Revelling in sweets which ere long became poisonous,
They knew me, but never will know me again.
They will know me no more, for the ties that once bound us
Are severed by crime and its punishment keen ;
And a wide-spreading ocean rolls its gulph now between us,
Oh ! are they not now as though they never had been ?
Ah no ! for fond memory still sees them as ever,
And the home and the scenes I have left far behind 5


Nor can all the wild billows of sorrow dissever
The warmthrobbingsof nature and her ties from the mind.
Hope on then, poor exile, though thy fate is a sad one,
And though sorrows remorseless thy bosom surcharge ;
Look above, look to God, firm through all do thou hope on,
There’s a home for the weary, where thy joys shall enlarge;
Shall enlarge as thy grief has enlarged here below,
And shall swell as eternity’s cycles increase ;
Hope on then, tho’ no more of earth’s joys thou may’st know,
What is life with its woes if thy last end is peace ?
A distinguished lawyer in the robing room at West-
minster Hall, was detailing once to his friends how much
he had enjoyed himself at his (h) •' ouse,’ and that he had
been making (h) ‘ ay.’ Upon which some wag remarked,
‘ You had better have made some H’s while you were about
it.’
LINES.
’Twas when wind and woodland grappled,
And the morn rose drear and dappled,
Barred with clouds like streaming pennants.
That my young wife dying lay.
And dim warnings passed before her.
In the twilight shadows o’er her,
Warnings to that- spirit’s tenant,
’Ere should fall that house of clay.
How I prayed that death would leave her,
And that God would stay the fever;


Night and morn how I besought Him
To remove the hectic bloom.
Spring time gave the fatal blooming,
Summer found the bud consuming;
And God took her in the autumn,
And the red leaves strewed her tomb.
PECULIAR METHOD OF DISPOSING OP OLD 'BLACK FELLOWS’
WHEN UNABLE TO WORK FOE THEIR LIVING,
As is practised by the natives at Cleveland Point, More-
ton Bay, and there alone, as far as 1 am aware and
trust.
When the Cleveland blacks feel it a nuisance to find food
for their gray-headed old men, they invite one ofthem to go
over to one of the small islands in the bay, to have a feed of
oysters, as being a style of living well suited for their
flat worn-down old teeth; he readily accepts the kind offer,
and when they have landed on the island, and gathered a
good supply of shell-fish, they light fires to roast the same,
and to make them open themselves. They now sit round
and commence their feast, the old man enjoying himself
amazingly ; when a stray black steals behind him, and sud-
denly gets the gray head fixed between his knees, the ope-
rator’s hands having been previously fixed on old gray-
head’s cheek, and with a skilful and sudden jirk, literally
thraws (twists) his neck; they then bury him in a hole
two feet deep, and return to their friends, who are easily
made satisfied with some plausible yarn as to his non-
return. The old men seem to be so much in their second
childhood, that I suppose they forget having lent a hand
to dislocate the necks of others, in the days when they


were young themselves, as they have not the slightest idea
of their being so performed on when they leave their re-
latives. Lector,
I have only been told all this by blacks, otherwise I have
no voucher.
A PROMISE KEPT.
In the year 1750, a gentleman of the name of Gomm
farmed his own estate, in the parish of Chinnor, in Oxford-
shire. He was a keen sportsman, and had, shortly before
the occurrences after mentioned, caused two men of the
parish to be imprisoned for poaching. Shortly after the
men were discharged from gaol, a threatening letter was
thrust under the door of Gomm's house, which was in the
following terms : —‘ Unless you put ten guineas into the
old shoe which you will find under the hedge near the
white gate, you won’t be long alive —there are two of us.’
The writer was not discovered, but suspicion fell on the
two poachers.
In a few days afterwards, Gomm, when out shooting on
his land, got into a field surrounded by a copse. While
watching the dogs beating the field, he was suddenly ac-
costed with these words, ‘Now we have got you ! ’ and he
at the same moment saw at a little distance from him two
men, one armed with a gun, and the other with an axe.
They were the poachers. He promptly levelled his fowling-
piece at the man who had the gun, and said, ‘ Drop your
gun this instant, or you are a dead man; you know I never
miss.’ The gun was dropped. ‘ Now go back ten paces.’
The order was obeyed. The same order was given to the
man with the axe, and also obeyed by him.
Then Gomm addressed them in a calm manner, and in


terms which perhaps they hardly expected. He said, —
‘You are the men who put the threatening letter under my
door—you know that you can be severely punished, but I
do not want to punish you. Now, if you will promise not
to molest me again, I will not trouble you for your past
conduct; and if you keep your promise, no one shall know
in my lifetime what has passed to-day; but I shall at
once take such steps as, if any mischief is done to me, will
cause you to be taken up as the perpetrators of it,’
They promised not to attempt anything against him for
the future, and departed.
They kept their promise, and Gomm strictly kept his,
for he told that morning’s adventure to no one, not even
to his own family; but after his death a sealed packet was
found in his escritoire, inscribed:— ‘ To be opened after
my death—Thomas Gomm.’ And in this packet was en-
closed a detailed statement of the facts I have above nar-
rated. C. C.
ANOTHER ADVANTAGE OF BEING IN DEBT.
There was a steam-boat race on the Father of Waters, the
Mississippi; the captain of one of the boats, with a
foot on the safety-valve, calls to the clerk, ‘ Have the pas-
sengers all paid?’ ‘Guess not,’ was the reply. ‘Well!
all those who havn’t paid, put them in the safest place, the
ladies’ cabin; if the firewood is used up, pile on the hams, and
now let her split! ’ A.
THE SWIMMING BELT.
Experience in swimming belts induces a few words op


these articles of a traveller’s outfit. It is a wise precaution
to take one, though it may never be required; but we ear-
nestly warn voyageurs against trusting to inflated indian-
rubber belts, as they often become useless with keeping,
the cloth perishing with what is used, in the first instance,
to make them waterproof. Cork is the article to trust to,
and a handy cork belt, portable enough to fold together in
small squares and lie in one’s travelling bag, can be bought
in London, Liverpool, &c., for 10s, and will last a lifetime.
We give an instance of the use of a life-belt. Captain
Bond, an officer of the 14th regiment, when a subaltern,
was about proceeding on service to the Cape of Good
Hope in the ‘ Birkenhead,’ iron steam-ship, and his brother
said to him, —‘ Better take this swimming belt.’ Captain
Bond said he did not think it was necessary. ‘ Well, I’ll
give it to your soldier-servant to keep for you/ said his
brother.
The ‘Birkenhead,’ after coaling at Simon’s Bay, was
proceeding to Algoa Bay to discharge her freight of sev-
eral hundred young soldiers and munitions of war. It was
ten o’clock at night, the captain and chief officer were in
bed, and the deck was in charge of the second officer;
Point Danger—ominous name—had to be passed, a fatal
ipade in the course, the ‘Birkenhead’ struck on a
rock some distance from the shore, hung there for some
time, and then began to break up. There was no confusion
among the troops, the commanding officer said, ‘ The boats
must save the women and children, stand by men to help
them into them ! ’ and they did so, not a man attempting
to get in himself; then those who could swim cast them-
selves into the sea to try and reach the land, the rest
stood on the deck and went down with the sinking ship,
a noble example of courage and discipline.
Previous to this awful crisis, Captain Bond’s servant


went below and brought up his master’s swimming belt;
though unable to swim himself, he gave it to his master, and
helped him to put it on. His servant was drowned with
the others who perished. Captain Bond took to the water,
and at first was passed by the strong swimmers; in
time he came up with them, and saw some miserably per-
ishing, exhausted and pulled down by voracious sharks ;
but Providence befriended him, and he reached the shore,
in safety, wearing his swimming belt. A.
WISE SAWS AND MODERN INSTANCES.
Peoyeebs are voted old and rusty,
If I quote a few, don’t all get crusty;
The first I would to your attention bring
Is, ‘ Charity to all the world’s the thing ;’
Tho’ some say, ‘ Charity begins at home/
And that from it ’tis better not to roam.
And, next, ‘ Have mercy for the faults of others
Bearing in mind that all mankind are brothers.
And be no niggard either with such treasure,
* To you’ll be meted with the self-same measure.’
‘ Shew faith and trust in all; ’ but yet look out,
‘Wolves in sheep’s clothing still do go about.’
‘ Cleanliness of body and mind
To godliness comes next,’ you’ll find,
‘ Idleness is the root of evil
Root it out, and shame the Devil.
‘ Avarice is a deadly sin,’
Let it not your heart within ;
But do not squander in hot haste,
The proverb says, ‘ Want comes from waste.’


' Evil communication dread,’
Of many faults it is the head.
‘ All that glitters, made of gold/
Believe it not, or you’ll be sold.
‘ Each bird thinks its own young the fairest,’
So, of course, mine’s among the dearest,
* Happy’s the bride whom the sun shines on,’
But happier far who ne’er is one.
* As a fair lady never by faint heart was won,’
So a dark lady, also, must yield to a dun.
* Empty waggons make the greatest noise
On shipboard read, children, girls, and boys.
That ‘ A workman quarrels with his tools/
Is only true when applied to fools.
< Holla, as soon as you enter the wood/
If you consider the counsel good ;
But I may tell you, wise folk say
To wait till you’re out is the better way,
" A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush/
For such sayings as this, I don’t care a rush;
As one, by my own dog and gun brought down
Is worth more to me than two bought in town.
Now, my friends, I’ve almost done,
‘ Always take care of number one ; ’
But on this point, advice you do not need,
Else should £ I prove myself a friend indeed; ’
Reject from these the false and keep the true.
There’ll be no difference then ’twixt me and you
£ A joy for ever is a thing of beauty/
* England expects every man will do his duty ;’
To do it, however, and to do it right,
He must try the Balsam of Amphitrite,
At 5 Lover’s Walk, from N. 0. Gammon.
To be had in bottles from l|d. to L. 5,
Which he’ll get while I the subject am on.
None genuine without signature.


(Jjarmpn&mf.
TO THE EDITOR OP THE ALBATEOSS.
Sir, —Permit me, by means of your widely circulated paper,
to caution the public against giving credence to an adver-
tisement which appears in its columns. I allude to the
Amphitrite Pills and Balsam.
Being rather subject to violent headaches, and finding
myself worse than usual one morning, in consequence of
having taken too much salmon over night, I resolved to
try Professor Gammon’s infallible restorative. I therefore
forwarded the requisite number of postage stamps, with a
request that the medicine might be sent to my address.
Binding that no notice was taken of my communication (I
suppose the professor appropriated the stamps), I determined
to apply personally. Upon inquiring for the iEsculapius, at
5 Lovers’ Walk, I found the Professor engaged in a game of
chess or cribbage, I forget which, with a fair neighbour.
I thought this rather a light occupation for a follower of
the healing art, but considered it as one of the eccentrici-
ties of a great genius. Not to trouble the public with
unnecessary details, I will only add that, having reason to
doubt the efficacy of the remedies prescribed, I caused them
to be analysed, when it was proved beyond question that the
pills were made of marine soap and sugar, the balsam was
a mixture of soft soap and palm oil, and the medicine con-
sisted of salt water, coloured; had the latter been.soda
water, coloured with brandy, I might have forgiven him.
Philanthropical motives induce me to make this disclosure,
to which I trust you will give the utmost publicity.
I have dissatisfaction of being, Sir, your suffering
subscriber, Wilhelm Heez.


NOTICE PEOM PEOFESSOE GAMMON.
The Amphitrite Balsam
has all been disposed of, so you’re sold again, and no
gammon.
On Friday the 14th November, after dinner, Sir Charles
Cooper rose and proposed the health of Her Gracious
Majesty, which was received with due honours, after which
Sir James E. Alexander read the following address :
Geeat Beitain, s.s., November 1862.
Dear Captain Gray,—A prosperous voyage from Mel-
bourne homewards, being about to be concluded, the saloon
passengers of the ‘ Great Britain ’ take this opportunity, the
anniversary of your birth-day, to express the high sense
they entertain of your ability as a commander; of your
great and unwearied attention to the duties of the ship;
and your constant endeavours to promote the comfort and
happiness of all on board. The passengers consider that
they are very fortunate in having sailed with you; they
wish you and your officers every success and happiness,
and that a future career of prosperity is yet in store for you.
Your acceptance is requested of a purse of sovereigns.—
We are, Dear Captain Gray, very sincerely and faith-
fully yours,
(Signed by) Sie J. E. Alexandee,
Sie Chaeles Coopee,
and all the Saloon Passengers.
The health of Captain Gray was then drank with musi-
cal honours, and he made the following reply :


Ladies and gentlemen,—ln accepting the flattering ad-
dress, and the substantial testimonial accompanying it, I
cannot express myself in terms suitable to the occasion,
but believe me it is gratifying to find that my endeavours
to fulfil my duty for the general welfare of all have met
with your approbation. And for the handsome manner in
which it has been acknowledged, permit me to tender my
very sincere thanks, assuring you I shall ever remember
with pleasure your kind sentiments and good wishes for
my future welfare.
In behalf of my officers, I beg you will accept their
warmest thanks, for your kind appreciation of their ser-
vices ; and I am quite sure it will be their pleasing duty to
reciprocate your good wishes towards them.—Believe me
to remain, yours truly,
John Gkay, Lieut, RN.R, Commander.
Judge Wrixon then proposed ‘ the officers of the ship,’
with a few appropriate remarks, and the toast was respon-
ded to by Dr Newbold and the purser Mr Beckett; a few
songs followed, also the toast of the ladies, by Captain
Watson, R.A., and acknowledged by Lieut. Magenis, RH.A.
The gentlemen of the press (the Albatross) were pro-
posed and responded to, and the proceedings of the after-
noon were carried on in a satisfactory manner, and under
the influence of moderate potations of ‘ the sparkling.’
The scholars of the famous grammar-school at Sherborne,
in Dorsetshire, the name of the head-master of which was
Lyon, were one morning assailed with the cry of ‘ Jackals!
Jackals !’ When, being desirous of ascertaining why they
were thus assailed, they were coolly informed that they
were the L(y)ion’s providers.


CONTJHDEUMS.
What word in the English language ought to see best ?
A. Indivisibility, because it has the greatest number of
(eyes) i’s.
When is charity like a top ?
A. When it begins to hum (home).
Why is a promissory note like a flower.
A. Because both are matured by falling due (dew).
Why are women like candles ?
A. Because they flare up.
Why are men like candles ?
A. Because they are wick-ed.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Eotjhd. —The H’s advertised for in last week’s paper, in
the possession of parties who misapply them on every pos-
sible occasion, and who are hereby warned against retain-
ing them.
At the Ocean-Bakery rolls are supplied every day; the
first were delivered at dinner on Saturday last, after a sus-
pension of two or three weeks. A constant supply may
be anticipated.


BUE G 0 U CLUB.
Liverpool Branch, 10 North Street.
To heavy Porridge-feeders. —A fourpenny quart dish can
be had any hour of the day fresh from the tub. No charge
for apron or long spoon. Gentlemen on opening the door,
will please be careful of the ivory handle.
We are requested to state that the total sum subscribed
towards the blind men amounts to L. 47.
ABSTEACT OF THE LOG OF THE * GEEAT BEIT AIN,’
Long. Dist.
Miles.
Nov. 8
64
65
Mem.—
miles.
Cape
Clear bears N. 64 E.; distance.
!, 1182


Supplement.
On the 18th November, after dinner, Sir Charles Cooper, in
a complimentary speech, requested the saloon passengers
to join him in a vote of thanks for the manner in which
the Albatross had been conducted, and for the pains
taken to make it acceptable to the passengers; the paper
had been eminently successful. The proposition of the
Chief-Justice was received with much applause.
Sir James E. Alexander, and Mr D. S. Campbell, as
editor and publisher, expressed their satisfaction at the re-
sult of their endeavours to interest and amuse their fellow-
passengers. Much praise is also due to Mr H. Creswick
for the efficient manner in which, on Saturdays, he dis-
charged his duty as reader.
On the 19th November, the Irish coast was sighted, and
after a prosperous voyage of 62 days, the ‘ Great Britain ’
cached Liverpool.
AN ADVENTURE.
In the summer of 1888, when a youngster, and engaged in
steamboat pursuits on the coast of Scotland, an accident
happened to our favourite steamer, which threatened to be
attended with the most disastrous consequences. We had
sailed in the morning with over 300 passengers on board,
and had got fairly out to sea; the day was beautiful, and
nothing to disturb the smoothness of the surface but the
heavy easterly ground-swell which frequently rolls along
in the German Ocean.


To enable your readers the better to understand the
nature of the mishap, I may explain that all steamers are
provided with what is termed blow-off pipes,—these pipes
communicate between the bottom of the boiler, and the
bottom or bilge of the ship, and form the medium of con-
veying the salt or other sediment to the sea, from the
boiler, by the strong pressure of steam and water in the
latter. On the occasion of the engineer turning the blow-
off cock—which was one constructed on peculiarly safe
principles, and how such an accident could have taken
place, I suppose must ever remain a mystery—the stopper
got unfortunately displaced, and was carried with the
boiling water under the boiler.
The captain, engineer, and several of the stokers, in a
fruitless attempt to stop the escape of the water from the
boiler, and recover the stopper, got severely scalded; the
water and steam in time having become exhausted, the
vessel was rapidly filling by the pressure from the sea.
To add to the distress and helplessness of our pitiable
position, in the midst of the bustle and confusion, a few
sailor passengers left us to our fate, by deserting with our
only boat to secure their own safety, and pulled away to a
vessel becalmed in the offing, some ten miles distant, their
nearest help.
Your readers may imagine, though I cannot attempt to
describe, the scene so suddenly changed, from that of com-
fortable, happy security to have death suddenly staring us
in the face, and no earthly help within our reach. There
was little time to think, so having great confidence in my
swimming and diving resources, I instantly stripped, and
jumped overboard; the few minutes required to swim
abreast of the dangerous spot, gave time for reflection ;so
once abreast, and after two or three attempts, at first un-
successful, another dive enabled me to discover the spot of


the serious leakage. Once ascertained, I felt secure ; so re-
turning to the surface, and getting a good supply of
cotton .waste, I dived again and securely blocked up the
mouth of the pipe. By great exertions, pumping and bail-
ing the water out, we were soon able to recover the lost
stopper, and in some two hours were again steaming on our
voyage, P. G.
TO THE EDI TOE OF THE ALBATEOSS.
Geeat Beitain, s.s., 1 9th November 1862.
My Deae Sie, —As the termination of our voyage is now
fast drawing to a close, permit me, through your magazine,
to return my warmest thanks to the passengers in general,
for their co-operation in aiding my endeavours to carry out
the various regulations of the ship. Our voyage, under
the blessing of Providence, has, so far, proceeded most
successfully.
To yourself (Sir James Alexander), and my worthy
friend D. S. Campbell, Esq., I tender my warmest thanks
for your extreme kindness and successful endeavours to re-
lieve the monotony of the voyage by the publication of the
Albatross ; and believe me, it will ever remain a pleasant
reminiscence of the past.
I enclose abstract of the log, and with my best wishes
for the future welfare of all, I say farewell, and beg to re-
main, yours very truly,
Johx Geay, Lieut RN.R


A FAREWELL.
Farewell ! kind friends, we meet no more,
The Albatross flies not on shore.
Farewell! may happiness attend
Your footsteps whereso’er ye wend.
Meanwhile o’er seas I take my flight,
But not to be forgotten quite ;
Let me in glorious type appear,
On printer’s page in letter clear;
Then will I soar, and boldly claim
A niche within the House of Fame.
BRITAIN,’
ABSTRACT
THE LOG OF THE ‘GREAT
Miles,
Nov. 15
Stag’s Rock
distant 4


3 «ippwpp^]ppWß^<^piipipE^pijlipf^Tlffi^^
g' I \ / 1 : ISB** I I J
I|- I I G^a U f c |r 1 C SE A ' | I ym
H' | T seUerlnZt | SPITZ^W^^* 1 " 1 Dj?f | H
| |
I B I L-a. fi 1 \OaleHa.nkesland Smith C . ■ ***>P*r. l'||
_ !
|. ~ ‘ * s V\ ~H4 * ~j t); t ~~ “j (tea*-- II
gib' . t i! ,rt, ili djL. r a x toVmm*'# • © hLiverpt>ol ( %f tJ£ <£ » ' fiiwvVMVm ° f| nl . irv rt*A»TH. J 3 .tfrnkanjkoi Jfpannu-r - I’lS
(«®ai*gu? 7 **»*■*«* , . ./? (fi W 1/ /> I Y\tf ITT-V '’■ ■
I. FtS X ‘w t » ?7 *“+ •*■ \\ HHI --a /p i 1 ! A J h i^Z^ ( r ■
/iitr ,1 ’j 7 ' t A v r^S^v
> W RJlopeifc; -* c ® / . vJj I I ■ il\ H I) V \/> m
lr \ tiC«ftggV4 I ’ »f' ,)< ' l l rf \ .j, A’ )Hycherlc f ' J *^ wr/ - K /^' ‘ J |’"tf \ Piaeuwhoit. |j W 7 J.A ! 1 L t 3 ‘S
r^\ tJ, s^^ i:S ' ,iS '' d r^S'>i\ Per 1 Arclio Circle y^ ,,MA 3 ,y y/ fl A ' *?\ T I {„lth c ll "1" °j y- * ■
oiN/^.> f A ft f -^-i 1 C _ *s\ topperJiAdianji/i /?^S !, o /,rr^T W\ A 0 U JSy \ R %’!& if C T A ( ~\ ‘*%a |v\ \| f r> f re* - (> r==
R N IHJ p-i / r s? \V l i‘| M a oj Kf -m
y fc> '* f/ r "T pf." ■ •'* VA *C. Farewell Orkneys,l* Uttersbmg 0 tMI / r —v, 1 T /o <|w .t ' ' '■ ~ |6O
s&£T l/U * n )D 'iPH ' BUY* W\ % «. A r , w ™fZhX^ el lM V iTobol4U /, ot #/~ /-f/ [y KA OF 1^
. y rtA*ora'lf lirrst oi ” „ ,idl^^v\\^lk/i am r tr/l .; \ * r #., JXAIW//A v Wertern, ■• fSL* ?« TM j a1Rlo« rcW& t lobol^U i C /e' i\ ) OUliffooM J%f/ SEA OF /•? U, F j
■ oei %Z£~ 1 V '. . I 5 rOs-i. /> L/'// , •* . V C-ial J \ /<? VC \ r J^f f/l /\ xW/ .., \Tomsl: / \ / Etrewk X j j 4 .j*sw /4. cL\ aim s chatka -3
m 1 *~~~- > '*^s> T J Wv<&-~h (%• *, 7 \\/ Mt '*'4 a
B NORTH x^^ x T^W^4AI^A^ m ' north '''f V\ vr : T ‘ ( > v< -' -s 1
fc"~=J 1 (obwihiaJt\js.. ■ six/hivnetX t'Ul v / i fiTvW •' /> / /• / Br& ,^'iTza : T xV* A /fcv Pl x^- > ?^,7/T, 1 - : *flolzri 1 S ri (m y "^"
ra 1 I —■^»^g«4Jfc%aJ3Mfety > g
» I ■«*»-»{ * i* " -" X -, AT <J « r «■ a
£±- | | <j re, \u -|y y- Yo TiiJ> ,/i ■■■■■■•■ - fewM a 'u j * 7 m w%'4v ? \ .- & I •-=
B- 1 a'^ / ' , B // XSprcse.r List, f.^n ! C>. tiCf ■' ■ S
fe-i i yfrott/- •\s.jae*aet- J ‘ "“I %'-?‘trS** E ” 1 ZJt'J^zW £^~^- r ,^,' C' j ••-. I Ja P"r>| Jsj i -s
S- Sica deflate, I \?( '7^p\S3#®"?wV PV>, tr »,. f Western Islfs Jj>:. d r Oi/dnl*‘ r f\^et' t ; AF '■*WJS r /•„ >• >d3brat r, aA* '-i'"--. :•; ,4 . r ”r C 1 ’ — C ' ! ZZ
if 7P_7_: ' 7 1 " V h -. ''' 5 m
|. i— — ; r .. A J c r* : '/#r Sf ” I
zz:_ ■ S*t.vjnt’i<"i[ s ■ Trojik- of Canter I & ‘"/. A j If Gunlata ( .- .l' 1 A.,/! t s \<ftmnAaWA »">'» rn ,„(’ ,,. I Sul/thurX. _ ~~
B inuei^wiYAfc^»*\^ oa hoo “■ “" ~\» ~~'p >aaar ,'l.cife<r&v \ i ‘in 'j-F r f /F ®* * ’ r'™” 1 w
B‘ * 9<X Z#3hrhyb*e rr • / P c X \ I A«beaU / f fWa * ,fiat I H7^ ' L <■.:*»'*****,
fej. Cotton £• . fW< ,0 ' < a irhcri-r,’p. (hohrar HIM J cro,r^'} ,et .-Lt«t >• i L s SJ ' \ ’ A "'«"®J/1 T A «ftV r r *f. T „ 7 &Ww/fc — 6wnn,jS r Vsju^...- 4, s(/S *t L ■ ladroru-If.. 1 '□=
P=X /- i Feb? 14 1770 1 A- 0 * * ,a m ’*£ T \%nlalrf>e* C.Terdl. I t I Kau«*a \N|rfaiA\ \ e T MordaEsA* * 7 ft/b*«WJV /ofßKJsr ?al\ k A 7 f\ Philippine Tinian-' O C K /Jf J|T •~=
T<S ;.Z I I yfef S.tit.r tnti“ ■», \lnrUnico ' i_ I "adent \\l Saf Ifc f'T", „.- t /.j J 1 / JcAml ' Ma&unl / «. ‘ fiwl \ laizOLl p.(/,//J//£y .(hnmt ’ ”
W 1 Tcwud^‘ J^%mFr' A “ ‘ ,V / ; 'W4, 7 '"<>'’ ' T ’ " 7}Wl f \... XW/rff/w/ Wol :\l .frn>C//«,,„ ,*//W itXtA |) i]~> X Isles “P' 1 •'» 1
‘SiPedro,. I #%^J^2^ toCO<P< Ucc«aiv,4?\ f i .W , ■ M
—-■- •:; - Bnrbadoes/. ft fy Jf jt \r 1 rlfx l *? O * . r j£/J<crriltn j - T'"" ; '. f l ' .■ • .V 1 I ‘SMwsonrT. rrr^
S Mujaraytv naro4,ao * O C t. si JX Q c E . x ~ IIS E ? st M*\ / „ u . T IV • yj' -ißoffoleu ', Jfufrmrer
=:• i I XT<4 1, 1 5 A J, r fba r jK %H ri{ jjce.rlon , tU» A c.-nf ••••• tWinaM- •• Bottf) tnv r =
a ‘- B«fK« S \UV r " h ,;< .'< : S Peleivi* K..K'- : *S
—-=J Rfirw • Christmas I. * \ .;, /f. A r orth C.Pn/rnas f (xV r^/ 1 (rii meaßy c f/ t , /n / Ml ( \ JSSAfaijmfaa'o . d& ]• j F et i S'■//, ~/ r . --r-
o * . Fqr.-iTOi■{ | /y.\:\•' ‘ J/oro/iae \ £ \tfftZon XI ‘ S SThomas f\ o f —,
£ r-'**” ,;
i^du^sJv^ 7l , 4 fs&r^r)UT>r • '4a“- Hfc' -r—-i
Si- M,M/,*,, r Kuh rJ ihi.-i? , '''*' u : «•*'"•/«••/ T‘“S.-S" r%' >^to..M*’- ii,, «/'' i » -v » F r// *«< - )f! ***** v „ r ; \ .r„„.,,,. '^M^ m ,,m/.
i«: .V?lW.'***??: .y.'.'Ptir™ - irrmih F r . 1... ? X?.U i .^..°.(.jA”^. 1 .* l . r.°.'.‘I 1 . .:./<:•? L . ‘* /f p{{•:&/• Fi\.. .! / ISI • 6 .V1. , V *r<au/aotiooi' j*ir=g
~±“' -r/e/*r,,/,eri/. dxTbobouai * Pilmirnr t. ft. ,>,f / CC-^FP^ 0 J ftneep&n'Al , p fJtr*in>**7f,S" fv / Tropic of Caprieorn. Sfinrpx SX i li Otuicnse nr . ■
mu I . 'G t * ' "‘ 'ntu-hJ S W,//v-« /- AX»C ? \jy Dirk ffarfn,,.i /.d A tj S T K A 1. J A W'W'SfX w Jfunter I. .m
ifT' .JJJj'rf “* r »_£ ’LA x i i ; nr -:i
;-• _ (_, s’ill’J jfOlL- e> L» 1 Columbus r X«a i nonesy. 30
•iRws«G . . y F ; tofparai feL- ??/ IdFc iZ‘SL e . i 9. A 1 ® 1 'T f P A f C I F I C
dt/nn ./’crnandc.v c I’ 1 - A ’l\Ay JdeSPfdry i \ \£v j r lotrrij' lv-er,f fi S- \ i) .//■'••s' ,ir C forth ■
. ,iwr. -4 r / / I r '• rto t , • /, I <^f«odno W WXJ | X . =
hdmontyy \ y i . 1/ fcßftSfV. 08 A'H„ ■™ I Id \T L Ai A r T V\ C , V?_ “•"•< SiFaulr \ ,Gc4?‘ > **Ah/h%v. k-E"” X £art •-S
t ( I I <!* Conceptiony- 9); U Plato / I *j,jK . | ,X O o * V % j - .. “ J*uUaSr9 ■ ±=
\ | •'\v\ /ZliAli A XI > I > \c-xv' vmenJp.s / r . , j ' I I ' i Co <Tl .<i‘ vl ■> \“ Cfiamont C . '•'///1v.,. a* -= !
,#fer Hr m.«,. / "^1- *• i ; I ■ ■*»—• „.. a!
i ; , I ! 1/ ; l j.._: ' I „.„i.:vi 4 >
jSnAn. /rLjtinbsi Yfp'(Gulf «t S.George T r*„mde 7 ~ T ' | ’ [~ ’ \ P j
Cdr/W,,,.,- ) S r fib, J Pr.Sdyrards/f , _L, j OVrX F A A J
Ef fit fiy jrr a 'At Dt LA / A I i*wif*J*|7. XamUilu land«r . PfiA'd/,, s
mr. o c E ui A Arts* y-u* / I . „ | X . ’ =
ssR : / .|.l»* p .., ./ O C \ A .V I \ =
= ■ pY^ 1 * 9 j ,<,lk -. 3=
“ cp * /an ’- r \A( \ji;v» t- '? > ' r 'ydCv> (S,Georgia X. ' Macqiuuiej /. UZS
g i | / -ig
j ZZ ■ j J Candlemas Cf | I i .‘ | ' I I j
—~ j | “ ' J Sandwich j 1
I L_ I [_ gAk ,.t\iunl .w *-Ya\‘s I J Land _ I j ~ \ I I i i ~
i , '] 77 r fZrles anddnuM tlUdr ' 60
M I Elephant If. * t li/ehlfle I e c Venice «
ZZ ' I K.OmrgJs„ Oarencol. />>">" aor | I | -S
i * I ■ ■ I XsVTUigstoHS J. 9 * Grerrwichl. Cororumon l . i zesj
” ! j j i ! ~=sa
g- / T A R r T Bif£oe ; -/f I ;ari d <7 A- .S’ O U T H E R V O C L A N j .g
jZ- , j Lotig-.iVest frjan. Greenwich Jdilaidel. t t rt Antarcticj Circle I j | j '"' [_ j j Long. last from Grcenwidr J [|S|j|
(^h iiiiii ! iiiiiiii n “n ; iiiiiiiiii>' c ul]llTniMiG , Yninjiiii.i>“-Jiii)iiiiTrn? I 1 ■^iiiMiiiiiiil ; “Oiiiii.iiiii^»^ii.iiiiiiiiii? v< 4iii.iiii»iJJl r -.finimiiiiz ,> ii:ii'ii]rriii^'-uiiMiiiii : iiiiii>- < ydiiii.iiiii>- t -4ii:ii-i:]iuiii- >^
GEORGE PHIL IP A SON, J. ON I) ON & I.IVKKPOOI,


