

THE WILLIAMSONS.
Maggie Moore.




THE
WILLIAMSONS:
BEING A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE CAREER OF
MR. & MRS. J. C. WILLIAMSON.
TOGETHER WITH
FACTS AND FIGURE S
RELATING TO THE FIRM OF
WILLIAMSON, GARNER & MUSGROVE.
COMPILED BY
GARNET WALCH,
Melbourne:
WM. MARSHALL & CO., PRINTERS, “THE LORGNETTE” OFFICE.
1885.


SEEPAGE.
SHE compilation of this tiny booklet has been a
pleasure to me, and I honestly believe that its
perusal will prove a pleasure to my very good friends,
the public. I have known Mr. and Mrs. Williamson
ever since their first arrival in Australia, and have cogent
reasons for thinking that I am one of a vast majority
who consider the success the Williamsons have achieved,
both fairly deserved and gratefully acknowledged.*
GAKNET WALCH.
St. Kiloa,
7th October, 1885.
* A portion of the within particulars appeared in the Melbourne
Argus , of the sth Inst.


THE
Williamsons.
S||$WAMES CASSIUS WILLIAMSON is a
|) native °f Pennsylvania, U.S., but passed liis
early youth in the more Western States.
Like thousands of other lads, he preferred the
glare of the footlights to Lyceum lectures or
missionary meetings. Every cent of his “ spending
money ” was hoarded up until the coveted “ quarter ” was
amassed, which was the “ open sesame ” of that Enchanted
Cave where all the heroes and heroines of the drama met on
equal ground. It was shortly after the death ol his lather


a well-known physician in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and
when Williamson was about twelve years of age, that he
determined to try his fortune on the boards. He managed
to ingratiate himself with some of the actors then playing
in the city, and was at last actually given a part, and a
“ speaking part,” too, in the celebrated, though, alas,
ephemeral Indian drama, rejoicing in the title of “ The
Jibbernanisy,” an improvement on Fenimore Cooper,
whereof the “dime novel” is the modern prototype.
Little Tom Bruce was the name of the character allotted to
Williamson, and the dialogue consisted of “one consecu-
tive ” line; but that line, we may be sure, was as conscien-
tiously studied, as diligently rehearsed, as variously “ posed,”
prior to performance, as if it extended to a hundred pages.
Partly owing to the want of time to communicate with New
York for a superior wardrobe, and partly on account of this
“ first performance on any stage ” being made without the
consent of the home authorities, Little Tern Bruce’s costume


was limited to a great-coat with the collar well turned up,
and a large muffler, the latter ingeniously disposed, both to
preclude recognition and conceal the blushes of the debutant;
so that, in point of fact, the “ eyes had it,” and had it all
to themselves. As for the mouth and its ally the voice,
they were completely extinguished by the omnipotent
muffler, and when the cue was given and the audience waited
with bated breath for Little Tom Bruce’s immortal line, a"
gurgling murmur from behind the worsted barrier was all
that could be heard. This was how he “ got on ” that
night; how he “got off” he does not so clearly remember.
The signal failure of his first attempt would blight many a
lad’s ambition, but Baratarian disappointment of the initial
dish only served to whet young Williamson’s appetite for
the banque of fame. Undaunted alike by the jokes of
his juniors and the snubs of his seniors, he hung round the
theatre, good-humoredly oblivious of all rebuffs, and making
himself pleasant by means of the impromptu sketches at
which he was clever.


Soon after this he had to return to school, where he
remained until he was between fifteen and sixteen, when
the old craving reasserting itself, he managed to obtain
a fresh engagement, playing a small role in “ Barney
the Baron,” one of the pieces forming part of the repertoire
of Billy O’Neil, then a great favorite with the Americans.
This was Williamson’s introduction to the brogue. All who
have seen him in “ Kerry ” and “ Arrah-na-Pogue ” will
agree that he profited well by his first lesson. He
next joined a travelling company, where his duties were
various, not to say multifarious, ranging from sub-auxiliary-
assistant-stage-manager (otherwise call-boy) and copyist,
with much hurried and laborious night-work, to the per-
formance of minor parts, including those rapid changes in
dramatic life known as “doubles.” He even once offici-
ated as scenic artist. “ I had so little to do,” he says,
“ that they asked me to paint a couple of scenes for ‘ Uncle
Tom’s Cabin.’ ” I unhesitatingly complied—l would have


attempted the rebuilding of the Tower of Babel, so long as
I received a few words of encouragement. Complacently
does he recall bis transcendent efforts as an amateur
Gordon. He speaks of the two scenes with a self-appre-
ciation mellowed, not weakened, by age. They were “ Eliza’s
Escape Across the Ice” and the “Apotheosis of Eva.” “The
way in which I plastered on the whitewash for the ice and
the blue for the river,” says Williamson, “ lingers in my
memory like a holy charm. Then there were the candle-boxes
on rollers tor tbe blocks of floating ice, with the isinglass
for the glistening effect, and to crown all, a quantity of
red fire. I had seen red fire used before, when the
Avenger of Blood was slaughtering the Panther of the
Plains and his warriors to staccato music, and I felt sure
it would “ lift ” the audience. It had that effect. They
did not call for the artist—it was not fashionable in those
days—but the applause was immense, at any-rate until the
fire went out, when the audience followed suit. We were


not in Maine. As for the ‘Apotheosis of Eva,’ with
blue fire, as appropriately celestial, mv clouds in that scene
would have made the fortune of any respectable bedding
manufacturer.” At this period his salary was six dollars
(£1 45.) per week, for which he worked at least
twenty hours out of the twenty-four.
Williamson now made up his mind to stick to a
theatrical career. He had an interview with his guardian,
who wished him either to proceed to Harvard for the
University course, or enter at once into business —pointing
out how strongly his family were opposed to his connection
with the stage. But finding the young fellow inflexible,
the elder wisely gave way. Said he, “ I know but little
about theatrical affairs, I visit the theatre occasionally
for my amusement, and that is all. But I should judge it
to be a calling where mediocrity meets with but poor reward,
while on the other hand, a good position on the stage
means, I fancy, as great a success, financially and socially, as


in any other profession. One tiling, liowe\er, my iad, I
would impress upon you most firmly, and that is, make it a
point to rise at least one rung up the ladder every year.
Do not sit down on the ground in the hope that someone
will come along and hoist you to the top on his shoulders.
Your own exertions, rung by rung, will alone land you
where you can take your rest, and help the othei climbcis
if you will ; and remember, whatever you attempt do it to
the best of your ability.” “ This advice,” says Williamson,
“ I have always endeavoured to follow.” Giving him a small
sum of money to buy necessary wardrobe, his guardian bade
him good-bye, telling him that he would be, at any time,
welcomed back again ; but if he gave up the stage and
returned home, his farewell to the boards must be a final
one. And so ward and guardian parted. Their next
meeting is referred to further on.
And now commenced the battle of life in real earnest.
Crossing over to Canada, Williamson played there for a


year, and so much was lie liked that he was accorded a
substantial benefit. Fortified with the results of this he
attacked the very citadel of the drama in America—New
York. He felt that he had gained the first rung of the
ladder in knowledge of the stage and personal popularity ;
now for the second ! After considerable waiting and many
disappointments, he at last succeeded in obtaining a minor
position at W allack’s Theatre, then perhaps the best school of
acting in the United States. There he remained for five years,
diligently pursuing his vocation, with various rises of salary
from twelve to thirty dollars per week, and achieving many
successes in almost every branch of comedy and “ dialect ”
characters. After a total stay of seven years in New York,
he had gained the position of “leading dialect comedian,”
and was engaged in that capacity to succeed the celebrated
John Raymond at the California Theatre, San Francisco.
\
In this city he met Miss Maggie Moore, a great pet of the
public. She had been on the San Francisco stage from her


childhood. Shortly after Williamson's arrival, Miss Moore
was engaged to play soubrette parts at the California Theatre
in the position until then occupied by Miss Emelie Melville.
The two public favorites, thus brought together, remained in
the same theatre playing different parts for some time, and
finally decided to fight the battle of life side by side. They
were married in February, 1873. Their popularity at
this period was very great. Miss Moore had appeared in
a large number of singing, dancing and comedy parts of all
kinds, and Mr. Williamson had had a most thorough
schooling in the best theatres and with the most talented
companies, playing every class of character, ranging fiom
Touchstone to Dogberry in Shakesperian roles—leading
parts in the old five-act comedies and in sensational dramas
—and all kinds of “ dialect business,” embracing Irish,
French, Herman, Yorkshire, Negro, and even Chinese
characters. He felt that both he and his wife were well
prepared to launch out into a wider sphere of action, and to


take their place amongst dramatic stars. With this view
he projected a tour round the world, but determined to
remain one more season in the California Theatre before
taking so decisive a step. It was at this time that the
celebrated actor-author, Mr. Dion Boucicault, paid his first
visit to California, and the Williamsons were his leading
support, Mr. Williamson playing Danny Mann and Michael
Feeney , and Mrs. Williamson Eily O'Connor and Arrah in
“ Arrah.na-Pogue,” etc.
It was while getting together a repertoire of plays for
their tour round the globe that Williamson chanced upon
that then very rough diamond, thac Koh-i-noor of domestic
diamas, ,£ Struck Oil. ’ He was waited on one day in San
I lancisco by a certain Sam Smith, a ruggeci Californian miner,
who submitted a piece for purchase. It contained several
crude poetic ideas of the Bret Harte School, but did not
suit Williamson’s purpose, and he declined it. Had the
author any other plays ?” The author had one other


which he had been on the point of putting in the file. The
manuscript of The Deed, or Five Years A/way, was then
submitted. In the central character of John Stofel,
Williamson recognised a part that, much elaborated, would
suit himself ; but there was absolutely nothing for Mrs.
Williamson ; the part of the hero’s daughter was quite a
subsidiary one, and not of a “ dialect ” nature ; not “ Dutch
in the slightest degree. At Williamson’s suggestion, the
author attempted to alter the part, and by making Mrs.
Stojel John's second wile, account for her step-daughter
speaking German-Englislh. Ismith tried the fiist act, but did
not succeed very well. Williamson then purchased the piece
in its unfinished state, and set to work with a friend, Mr.
Clay Greene, making the needful changes. Two acts were
thus altered, when the Williamsons proceeded for a brief
engagement, to Salt Lake City, where the drama was
rehearsed, Williamson himself reconstructing the third act and
introducing Stofel's gradual restoration to reason. At Salt


Lake City “ Struck Oil ” was produced “ for the first time
on any stage.” It was a pronounced success even at that
early period of its existence. Strange to say the locality
where the scene of “ Struck Oil ” is laid, is within a few
miles of Williamson’s birth-place.
After a hearty farewell benefit in San Francisco, the
Williamsons sailed for Australia, arriving in Melbourne
towards the end of 1874. It will interest many to learn
that Miss Jennie Lee, our friend of “ Jo ” fame, took Mrs.
Williamson’s place in the California Theatre. What to
open in, in Melbourne, proved a vexata qucestio, many
persons of considerable experience urging the new arrivals
not to commence with “ Struck Oil,” as German character
parts were not understood here, and would fall flat in
consequence. But it was decided that “ Struck Oil ”
should be the main feature of the initial programme, and it
was produced at the Theatre Royal on Ist of August, 1874.
The result is part of our theatrical history. After being


played for seven weeks, tlie piece was taken ofl for the time
being, the receipts having regularly risen even beyond the
large takings of the first week. A few words here to
correct an erroneous report that was circulated after “ Struck
Oil ” had proved so surprisingly attractive. It was said
that the Williamsons offered to play for a fixed salary, and
that luck alone enabled them to assume the position of
“ stars.” This, Mr. Williamson distinctly denies. They
came out to Mr. Coppin, the latter acting for Messrs.
Harwood and Cos., to a definite starring” engagement on
“ sharing terms,” and no alteration was either suggested or
made, save and except that, instead of playing hut three
months in Melbourne and then proceeding to Sydney, the
season in the former city was extended to five months.
During this period, “ Struck Oil” was performed for about
sixty nights, and the Williamsons received something over
£6OOO as their share. It was here that Mr. Williamson
made the acquaintance of Mr. Arthur Garner, then a


member of the Royal Company, and Mr. Garner took part
in the now immediately following “ Struck Oil ” perform-
ances in Ballarat, Sandhurst and Geelong. At the close of
this country tour, the Williamsons played at the Melbourne
Opera House for the benefit of the Eye and Ear Hospital,
the gross receipts amounting to £284, the Williamsons
giving the whole of their share to the institution.
The Sydney season was as successful as the Melbourne
one ; the little Queen’s Theatre, then at a very low ebb,
being lifted into a first-class position, and the share of the
stars amounting to £5138. En route to Adelaide they
played a brief engagement at the Melbourne Opera House.
It was while going down to the theatre to perform in the
“ Fool of the Family ” with the Williamsons that the
favorite actor, John Dunn, fell dead in the street. At
Adelaide the season was as brilliant as elsewhere.
Declining several flattering offers and leaving the other
colonies for a future visit, the Williamsons bade good-bye


to their now numerous Australian admirers and proceeded
to India, the net result of their fifteen months sojourn in
the Land of Gold being about £15,000.
They reached Bombay in time to see the landing of the
Prince of Wales (November, 1875) and the consequent
festivities—then across by rail to Calcutta, where they
appealed under the management of Mr. G. B. W. Lewis.
Their engagement lasted for five weeks, during which
“ Struck Oil ” had the unprecedented run—for Calcutta—
of eighteen nights. Agreeing by cablegram to appear in
London, they left for England, spending a brief holiday in
Egypt, where they climbed the big Pyramid, on the top of
which they had lunch, and drank the health of their Austra-
lian and Californian friends. They opened at the Adelphi
Theatre, London, on Easter Monday, ’76, in “ Struck Oil,”
with a cast including Mrs. Mellon and the late Sam Emery.
The agreement made with Mr. Chatterton, lessee of the
Adelphi, was for one month, with the option on his part of


a renewal for two months further ; but before the three
months were over he wished the new meteors to become
fixed stars, and an engagement was entered into for an entire
year. Clear proof this, if any were needed, of the success
of the London engagement. “Struck Oil” ran for 100
nights, and was replaced by “ Arrah-na-Pogue,” with
Williamson as Shaun, and Mrs. Williamson as Arrah.
This also ran for 100 nights, the opinions of the London
critics being favorable in the extreme. The next production
was to be “ The Shaughraun,” which manager Chatterton
deemed could be played in England without consulting the
author, as the piece had been first performed in America ;
but although the author had no legal rights, Williamson,
notwithstanding the offer of an indemnity from Chatterton,
recognised Boucicault’s moral claim, and refused to appear in
the piece without his consent. At a loss to himself of large
prospective profits, and despite threats of action, Williamson
broke off the engagement, and, taking another holiday,


the Williamsons visited the chief cities of France, Germany,
Italy, Belgium, and Holland—enjoying for the greater part
of the trip the charming companionship of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Jefferson. To John Stofel and Leezie the echter
Deutscher of Germany and the Dutch folk of Amster-
dam were especially interesting. Returning to England
the Williamsons played in Liverpool, Manchester, Birming-
ham and Glasgow. In Liverpool they again met Mr.
Garner, who was playing at another theatre, and enjoyed
many a chat with him upon Australian experiences. Across
to Dublin, where “ Arrah-na-Pogue ” and “ Kerry ” were
given in addition to “ Struck Oil,” and then over to Kew
York, under engagement to play in the principal cities of
the States for a season of 40 weeks. But before entering
on this tour they slipped over to San Francisco, thus com-
pleting the Trip Round the World that they had mapped
out three years before. As the London “ Theatre of
September 11, 1877, puts it:—“ Thirty-three thousand


miles of steady and deliberate travel, visiting five conti-
nents, six hundred and five nights of acting, and all in
three years ! This sounds like a story-book statement, a
romance of Jules Verne—yet, as an American paper points
out, it is an accurate and brief epitome of the energetic
career since 1874 of Mr. and Mrs. J. C. Williamson.”
Their re-appearance in San Francisco, of course in
“ Struck Oil”—but how altered and elaborated since its
first production in that city—was the signal for a complete
ovation. Says one of the papers of the period : “ Nothing
like the reception of the Williamsons has been seen in the
California Theatre, since the welcoming home of Edwin
Adams The house was densely packed in every part,
and long even before the curtain rose, the eager desire of the
vast multitude to do honor to Maggie Moore and her
husband was plainly apparent. When they did appear a
pex-fect hurricane of congratulatory cheering set in, which
could not be stilled sufficiently to allow the play to proceed


for nearly five minutes, and it broke out again and again
all through the evening.”
The New York season following immediately after the
above was very successful, the papers speaking in the
highest terms of the natural acting of the Williamsons, and
of “ Struck Oil” as an exceptionally attractive drama, full
of true pathos, interspersed with “reasonable drollery.”
All through America to fulfil various engagements ; a
summer in California ; a further season in New York ; and
a final tour through the States, extending to 30 weeks,
made up a total of two years in their native land, with
“ Struck Oil ” as their sole programme, until the papers
began to refer to it as a perennial play, fit to rank side by
side with “ Rip Van Winkle,” Williamson himself being
spoken of by the New York press, as reminding them
strongly of Jefferson, more particularly in the pathetic
scenes. Higher praise could hardly be given. It was
while playing “ Struck Oil” in St Louis that Williamson


again saw his guardian. Eighteen years had passed since
they met, the old man’s advice had been faithfully followed,
and the ladder-top achieved.
All this time the desire to re-visit Australia had been
growing stronger, and culminated in a start for another
tour round the world in June, 1879, Williamson bringing
with him the sole Australian right to “ Pinafore.” At his
landing here legal complications arose owing to his being
forestalled. Without entering into particulars, it is
sufficient to say that Williamson obtained verdicts in all
the causes tried, thus proving, principally at his own
expense, the validity of the English Copyright Law in
Australia, a matter of no small value to authors and owners
of plays, strengthening also the hands of honorable managers
in the colonies. He further found that during his absence
stolen copies of “ Struck Oil ” had been circulated, and
that the piece had been “ hacked and hawked ” about to a
disheartening extent. He was strongly advised not to open


in it, but persisted in so doing, and John and Lizzie Stofel
were welcomed back in a most enthusiastic manner, the
Williamson share of the first week’s takings being con-
siderably over £SOO. A third meeting now took place
with Mr. Garner, whose popular London Comedy Company
were playing in Melbourne when the Williamsons returned.
“ Pinafore ” was next produced, with a full measure of
success, running six weeks in both Melbourne and Sydney.
It was the Williamsons’ intention to remain here for a year
only, but their reception was so kind, and business so good,
that they stayed on. Others of Gilbert and Sullivan’s
operas, notably the “ Pirates of Penzance ” and “ Patience”
were purchased, and special companies formed to produce
them, with remunerative results. And so three years stole
by. During this period, Mr. George Musgrove, a nephew
of the late W. S. Lyster, had brought out his Comic Opera
Company, whose phenomenal success in “ Tambour Major”
is fresh in our memories. The three companies controlled


by Williamson, Garner and Musgrove respectively, were
now supplying the attractions at the leading theatres of
Austialasia, and it was deemed advantageous that an
amalgamation should take place. Accordingly, the now
existing powerful firm of Williamson, Garner and Musgrove
was formed. The Theatres Royal in Melbourne and Sydney,
and the Princess Theatre in ihe former city, were leased,
and operations were carried on upon an extended scale.
At the announcement of the amalgamation, there were not
wanting those who denounced it as a monopoly, and spoke
in somewhat bitter terms of the “ triumvirate ” as seeking
to gain their own selfish ends by injuring “ the profession,”
keeping capable actors out of engagements, and so on. But
Time, which refutes most calumnies, has shown that the
reverse of what was predicted has been the case. Actors
and public have alike benefited by the coalition management,
the former in more regular employment, with good salaries,
and no anxiety on their part as to the “ walking ” of that


theatrical bugbear the “ ghostthe latter, in the manner
in which the various pieces produced are “cast” and
mounted. As to the cry of monopoly, that is silenced by the
fact that other managements are “alive, and doing well,”
while further theatres are in course of construction. The
rule laid down by Williamson, Garner and Musgrove, as
enunciated by themselves, is to “ go straight on, doing our
own business in our own way, not imitating or interfering
with anyone else, but striving our utmost to please our
great masters, the public, and as a logical sequence, ‘ make
things pay.’ ” In the matter of variety, the popular taste is
certainly consulted, a constant succession of novelties being
kept up, while, to speak locally, those who saw last year’s
Pantomime, or the Bcucicault revivals, at the Melbourne
Royal, will give the firm credit for both taste and liberality.
As an instance, it may be mentioned that for the Boueicault
season of six weeks and five nights, no less than 25 entirely
new scenes were painted, many of them being extensive


During the three years that have elapsed since
the formation of the firm, the relations of the partners have
been of a most amicable nature, but all three agree that the
task of catering for Australian playgoers is not an easy one.
Notwithstanding the limited population of the colonies, the
public expect things to be as well done here as in London,
Paris or New York. Mr. Williamson has recently returned
from a ten months’ trip throughout England and America,
during which he succeeded in inducing Mr. Dion Boucicault
to make his long postponed visit to Australia, and
secured a number of other attractions. Of these, we
have already seen “ lolanthe ” and “ The Private Secretary,”
and “ The Mikado ” is in preparation, the firm having
arranged with Mr. D’Oyley Carte for the whole of Gilbert
and Sullivan’s operas, past, present, and for three years to
come. Contracts have also been entered into with such
leading dramatists as Sims, Pettitt, Comyns-Carr, Jones
and Barrett, Henry Herman, Paul Merritt, etc. Each
production of plays so secured, is watched in London by


Mr. Michael Gunn, acting on behalf of Williamson, Garner
and Musgrove, who sends out full particulars in order that
the pieces may be placed before the Australian public with
the utmost attention to the requisite details.
“ Miss Maggie Moore ” has appeared in several comic
operas and pantomimes in Melbourne and Sydney, but “ the
Williamsons ” have only played one engagement, viz., in
August, 1883, when the sixth “ Struck Oil ” season opened
at the Theatre Royal, Melbourne, with the usual results, the
receipts for the first seven nights being £1737, the largest
amount taken in this theatre by any stars during a like
period.
As an example of the receipts, expenses and profits of a
sharing engagement, with the star a large participant in the
results, may be given the particulars of the recent Boucicault
season of 41 nights at the Melbourne Theatre Royal. The
gross receipts for the first two weeks, with “The Shaughraun
as the programme, were £1331 11s. and £1206 9s.
respectively. In the third week, “ The Jilt ” produced


£999 10s. The fourth week, with one night of “ The
Jilt” and five of “The Colleen Bawn” is credited with
£1226 Is.; the fifth, “Colleen Bawn,” £960 6s. 6d.;
the sixth, three nights “ Kerry ” and “ Arrah-na-Pogue,”
and three nights “ Shaughraun,” £1217 4s. ; while in the
final five nights, “ Kerry ” and “ Arrah-na-Pogue ” realised
£1073 14s. 6d., making a gross total for the 41 nights of
£8074 16s. Of this sum the management paid Mr.
Boucicault £3522 7s. 5d., leaving £4552 Bs. 7d. Although
Mr. Boucicault found people to fill most of the principal
parts, the preliminary and current expenses connected with
Ins engagement were very heavy, and averaged slightly over
£SOO per week, so that the net managerial profit for the
season was £ll3O 13s. sd. The recent “Private
Secretary” season of 40 nights at the Gaiety Theatre,
Sydney, resulted in the management and Mr. Thornton
netting a little over £I3OO each. Passing from melo-
diama and farcical comedy to pantomime, we find


the gross takings during the fourteen weeks’ run of
“ Cinderella ” at the Melbourne Royal—Christmas, 1884,
to Easter, 1885, to be £18,704, of which large sum the
expenses, preliminary and current, swallowed up no less
than nearly £IO,OOO, leaving a net profit of £3710. Not
to weary the reader with details, interesting though they
undoubtedly are, the experiences of Messrs. Williamson,
Garner and Musgrove in other directions may be epitomised
as follows:—Amongst successful productions with the
management’s own carefully selected stock companies “ The
Silver King ” takes front rank, both as regards popularity
and pecuniary results. It enjoyed a run of eight weeks in
Melbourne, and a like tenure of public favor in Sydney.
In Comedy, “ Impulse ” heads the list, running for 69
nights at the Princess Theatre, Melbourne. Asa proof
that a good play, well acted and liberally mounted, is its own
best advertisement, may be cited the fact that, although
“ Impulse ” was produced on a Boxing Night, its largest


receipts were those of the sixth and seventh weeks, and
when withdrawn it was drawing more money than during
the opening nights. Of comic operas “ Mascotte,” has
been the most successful, though very expensive to mount,
the dresses alone involving an initial outlay of over £I2OO.
Gilbert and Sullivan’s latest efforts, “ Patience,” and
“ lolanthe,” were also very successful. Amongst stars
of whom the firm retain pleasing recollections may be
mentioned Miss Genevieve Ward, who played a brilliant
engagement of 26 weeks with them in Melbourne
and Sydney, and Miss Jennie Lee, whose term extended
to 33 weeks. To show a little of the reverse side of
the picture, and the judgment needed in the selection of
dishes to suit the public palate, the comic opera, “ Billee
Taylor,” although a pronounced success in London and
America, could only be kept on the boards here for three
weeks, the management losing upwards of one thousand
pounds in that period. Of Italian Opera, Williamson,


Garner and Musgrove remember a single “dose,” which
was expensive and unsatisfactory, leaving them nearly
£2OOO out of pocket in five weeks ; and this with Signor
Cagli finding the entire company. In high tragedy,
Sheridan has been this management’s only star— universally
praised by both press and public—his Lear, it will be
remembered, rising into the regions of genius—but the
engagement was not profitable from a financial point of view.
Some idea of the magnitude of Williamson, Garner and
Musgrove’s operations during the past three years may be
gained from the following figures, extracted from the firm’s
last balance-sheet. The amount paid in theatre rents, is
£31,239 15s. Id. ; in shares of “ stars,” combinations,
£50,060 19s lOd. ; for royalties to authors and play-owners,
£4821 Bs. 2d.; law costs, etc., £1,507 ; passage money,
£4,294 15s. 7d. ; bills for sundries, £24,772 2s. 9d. ;
printing and advertising (Australian work only), £16,447
9s. 2d.; salaries and wages to actors, singers, scenic artists,


and working staff generally, £135,245 17s. lid.; ora total
of upwards of a quarter of a million sterling, exclusive of
the expenses of Mr. Williamson’s recent trip home to secure
pieces, &c. These figures and the facts that the firm employ
several hundred people, while the great bulk of the money is
circulated in the colonics, speak for themselves. Tbe under-
taking, as a whole, is probably as great as any similar
enterprise in the world, and, as such fair'y claims honor-
able recognition.
Wm. Marshall & Co., Printers, “Lorgnette” Office, Melbourne.




THE WILLIAMSONS.
J.C.Williamson.


" /f*
/' <tjt\x~jQ~f>Y'cLJ2. C>^
( // Q /x /±
S&lcur^2^^J> A^WeO
Q~h~t- A -£ <? cn~^zZZZ-^^>
—-— 0~6-C c<+y
