

VP-
BALLOT IS THE THING.
AC —♦—
„ vEENSLAND EDITION OF “WEARING OF THE GREEN.”
Oh comrades dear ! and did yon hear the news that’s going round :
The Shearer is by law forbid to camp on camping ground.
Unto the chain-gang’s clank again Australian woods shall ring,
For they have found a law was made when George the First was King.
It makes the Squatters sing, Oh, it makes the Squatters sing !
This vile old law that once was made when George the First was
King.
We used to have the notion that in Queensland men were free,
That before the law, the Squatter was the same as you or me ;
But the sturdy Bushman now, they say, down to his knees we’ll bring.
With this old law that once was made when George the First was King.
It makes the Squatter sing, Oh, it makes the Squatter sing!
This vile old law that once was made when George the First
was King.
And if you are a Railway man, I’d have you for to know
You’ve got to ask your gaffer where your sympathies should go.
Your heart, your purse, your conscience to their keeping you must
bring.
Why, it’s even getting hotter than when George the First was
King.
When George the First was King, When George the First was
King.
Why it’s even getting hotter than when George the First was
King.
But keep your heads and tempers, boys. Your time will come again.
Remember that your breath has made, and can unmake these men.
When they’ve to face the ballot-box, it’s mighty small they’ll sing,
These men who’d drag us backward to the time when George was
King.
It’s mighty small they’ll sing, my boys ; it’s mighty small
they’ll sing,
These men who’d drag us backward to the time when George
was King.
Then keep your heads, I say, my boys ; your comrades in the town
Will help you yet to win a vote, and put your tyrants down.
Throw your old guns aside, my boys ; the ballot is a thing
1 hey did not have to reckon with when George the First was King.
The ballot is the thing, my boys, the ballot is the thing
- Will show these men how long it is since George the First was
King.
Rockhampton, March 26.
W. Ktdston.
Printed at the Northern Argus Office, Rockhampton.


l5OB 00296642 7
