

* . - . ' •
THE
»
CHRISTIAN SABBATH.
%
THE DUTY AND MANNER OE KEEPING
IT HOLY.
BY
WILLIAM MoINTYRE, A.M.


Tfie following pages are reprinted from The Testimony,
with a few slight alterations. What is attempted is,
in the first place, to prove the universality and per-
petuity of the obligation to keep the Sabbath day holy,
and the substitution of the first day of the week for the
seventh as the day to be thus kept under the Christian
dispensation ; and, then, to indicate what constitutes
the keeping holy of the Sabbath.
When God instituted the Sabbath our first parents
constituted the whole human family ; they were the
human family as it then existed. They may, therefore,
he said to have represented its future generations.
What God said to them, viewed in this light, He said
to all mankind. As regarded, however, the relation of
human family to the moral government of God,
Adam was constituted the federal head and representa-
tive of “ his posterity descending from him by ordinary
generation.” It is the former kind of representation
that comes into consideration, in dealing with the ques-
tion of the universality and perpetuity of the obligation
to observe the Sabbath.
In our remarks on works of necessity and mercy, we
made no express reference to the use on the Lord’s
day of omnibuses, hackney carriages, or the railway,
which is sometimes pleaded for and justified on the
ground of necessity. The use on the Sabbath of one
or other of the modes of conveyance mentioned may
be necessary for him who uses it to enable him, for
example, to aMend a place of worship ) but, that we
may determine whether such use of it is or is not a
violation of the Sabbath law, we must view it in its
relations to all on whom it imposes work, or who in
any way arc parties to it. Let us suppose that the
conveyance used is an omnibus That it may be used


on the Sabbath, it is obvious that the proprietor must
run it on that day, that is, he must to that extent
pursue his secular calling on a day, which, by a special
enactment, God has set apart from the portion of our
time which He has allotted for secular occupations, or,
in other words, he must disregard the character which
God has impressed upon the Sabbath as the consecrated
portion of our time, and disobey the law in which He
requires that, employing it in accordance with that
character, we “ keep it holy.” Need we ask whether
it can be right for him to do so ? Can it be right for
him to set at nought God’s distribution of our time,
and his express and authoritative requirement with
respect to our employment of it? Nor can it be
alleged that the ruuning of his vehicle on the Sab-
bath is on his part a work of necessity. Though
it might be necessary for him to add Sabbath work
to the work of the six; working days that he might
realise a profit, this would not constitute the kind of
necessity under the pressure of which works may bo
done on the Sabbath that, under other circumstances,
are to be excluded from it. And quite as little is the
work in question a work of mercy. It is from a
compassionate desire to afford succour or relief that
it is performed We must, therefore, hold that thtr
omnibus proprietor, in running his vehicle on the
Lord’s day, is guilty of desecrating what God has hal-
lowed. He breaks the divine law, “ remember the
Sabbath day to keep it holy.” And if he thus sins in
running his vehicle on the Sabbath, does not he who
uses it on that day partimpate in the sin? Does ho
not accept and endorse the arrangement that the omni-
bus shall be run on the Sabbath ? He clearly does.
But there are still other parties to this arrange-
ment. At least the driver and conductor are parties to
it. These in carrying out the arrangement are required
to work and do work on the Lord’s day. And there is
this aggravation of the evil in their case, that, while
the proprietor, though he runs his omnibus on the
Sabbath, may himself, if so disposed, attendv on the
public ordinances of religion, they are deprived of this


I run comes UUU uuuDiuauuuu, in uctiiing yy 11/11 1/111/ 'l'li-'J
tion of the universality and perpetuity of the obligation
to observe the Sabbath.
In our remarks on works of necessity and mercy, we
made no express reference to the use on the Lord’s
day of omnibuses, hackney carriages, or the railway,
which is sometimes pleaded for and justified on the
ground of necessity. The use on the Sabbath of one
or other of the modes of conveyance mentioned may
be necessary for him who uses it to enable him, for
example, to attend a place of worship ; but, that we
may determine whether such use of it is or is not a
violation of the Sabbath law, we must view it in its
relations to all on whom it imposes work, or who in
any way arc parties to it. Let us suppose that the
conveyance used is an omnibus That it may be used


on the Sabbath, it is obvious that the proprietor must
run it on that day, that is, he must to that extent
pursue his secular calling on a day, which, by a special
enactment, God has set apart from the portion of our
time which He has allotted for secular occupations, or,
in other words, he must disregard the character which
God has impressed upon the Sabbath as the consecrated
portion of our time, and disobey the law in which He
requires that, employing it in accordance with that
character, we “ keep it holy.” Need we ask whether
it can be right for him to do so? Gan it be right for
him to set at nought God’s distribution of our time,
and his express and authoritative requirement with
respect to our employment of it? Nor can it bo
alleged that the running of his vehicle on the Sab-
bath is on his part a work of necessity. Though
it might be necessary for him to add Sabbath work
to the work of the six working days that he might
realise a profit, this would not constitute the kind of
necessity under the pressure of which works may be
done on the Sabbath that, under other circumstances,
are to be excluded from it. And quite as little is the
work in question a work of mercy. It is not from a
compassionate desire to afford succour or relief that
it is performed We must, therefore, hold that the*
omnibus proprietor, in running his vehicle on the
Lord’s day, is guilty of desecrating what God has hal-
lowed. He breaks the divine law, “ remember the
Sabbath day to keep it holy.” And if he thus sins in
running his vehicle on the Sabbath, does not he who
uses it on that day partic : pate in the sin? Does ho
not accept and endorse the arrangement that the omni-
bus shall be run on the Sabbath ? He clearly does.
But there are still other parties to this arrange-
ment. At least the driver and conductor are parties to
it. These in carrying out the arrangement are required
to work and do work on the Lord’s day. And there is
this aggravation of the evil in their case, that, while
the proprietor, though he runs his omnibus on the
Sabbath, may himself, if so disposed, attend-on the
public ordinances of religion, they are deprived of this


privilege. The Sabbath is no Sabbath to them. Now
is there not sin, unmitigated Sabbath desecration, in
all this ? Does not the proprietor desecrate the Sab-
bath in requiring his servants to reduce it, and in
reducing it himself by theirjigency, to the character of
a working day ? And do not they desecrate it in com-
plying with his requirement ? But the desecration of
the Sabbath in the case does not stop here. The
proprietor of the vehicle employs the driver and con-
ductor to act for him in doing the Sabbath-desecrating
work under consideration j and constituted thus the
agents of ; the proprietor, he who uses the vehicle
employs them to do so much of that work for him
as he deems requisite for his purpose; and employing
others to do work for him by doing which they dese-
crate the Sabbath, he desecrates it himself. It affords
no relief from this condemnation, that the omnibus used
i i specially hired to convey those who use it to church,
for the arrangement precludes the driver and conductor
from attending on the public ordinances of religion,
and thus from observing the Sabbath as the Sabbath.
It implies and requires Sabbath desecration on their
part; and those who make a contract with them which
they cannot fulfil without desecrating the Sabbath,
are clearly parties to all the Sabbath desecration which
the fulfilment of it involves. And in this respect
those who use their own carriages are in precisely the
same position, if their use of them prevents their
coachmen from attending on the public services of
the sanctuary.


THE CHRISTIAN SABBATH.
The sanctification of the Lord’s day is a subject of vital
importance; and the prevalence of erroneous views
with respect to it, and the advocacy of such views even
within the Church and from its high places, impart to
the consideration of it the character of an urgent pre-
sent duty. From the great and growing prevalence of
deplorable laxity of belief with respect to the Sabbath,
even those, who are not infected with this laxity, are
exposed to a danger that renders necessary for them, at
the point at which they are exposed to it, the protec-
tion of clear and operative scriptural views.
In bestowing on the Sabbath the consideration which
is thus urgently called for, we must, as is evident from
the nature of the case, direct our attention, first, to the
a-uty, and, then, to the manner, of observing it.
The Duty of Sanctifying the Sabbath.
The only ground on which the duty of sanctifying
the Sabbath can be validly maintained is, that God has
given us a law which requires the sanctification of it.
As there is no transgression where there is no law, so
where there is no law there is no duty. Has God, then,
given us such a law ? Our answer to this question is,
that immediately after the creation He gave a law to
the whole human race, enjoining the keeping holy of
one day in seven; that the day which He originally
set apart to be thus kept holy was the seventh or last
day of the week ; that on Christ’s rising from the dead
the day on which He rose, the first day of the week,
was substituted for the seventh, and constituted the
day of sacred rest, —the Sabbath day, under the pre-
sent dispensation.
In support of the first two of these position^,—that,
immediately after the creation, God gave a law enjoin-
ing the sanctification of one day in seven, and that


the day which He originally set apart to he thus kept
holy was the seventh or last day of the week, —we refer
to Genesis ii. 1, 2,3. “ Thus the heavens and the earth
were finished, and all the host of them. And on the
seventh day God ended His work which He had made ;
and He rested on the seventh day from all His work
which He had made. And God blessed the seventh
day, and sanctified it: because that in it He had rested
from all His work which God created and made.”
From this passage we learn that “ on the seventh day,”
immediately on His “ ending” the work of creation,
God “ rested from His work which He had made,” —
rested from it not only as no longer prosecuting it, but
also and especially as delighting in it and regarding it
with complacency, on account of the display which it
afforded of His glorious perfections, and the purposes
which it was fitted to serve; or, as it is elsewhere ex-
pressed, “ rested and was refreshed,” (Ex. xxxi. 17) ;
and that, at the same time, He set it apart as a day of
rest for man. He “ blessed” it, constituting it a day
the proper observance of which should be attended with
great and signal blessings, and “ sanctified” it, setting,
it apart as a day to be devoted not to secular employ-
ment, but exclusively to religious exercises. In other
words, He invested it with the character of a Sabbath
or day of rest , and, of course, by doing so, He re-
quired,—made it a law, —that it should be observed as
bearing this character.
And let it be carefully remarked that He gave this
law to man,: —to the human family as a whole, and not
to a portion of it merely. When it was given our first
parents formed the entire human family ; and, besides,
God dealt with them, at that period, as representing
their posterity. He clearly dealt with them as sustain-
ing this representative character, when “He blessed
them, and said unto them, be fruitful, and multiply,
and replenish the earth and subdue it,” for the efficacy
of the benediction extended to their posterity; and, in
like manner, the grant of food announced to them in
the following terms, —“ Behold, I have given you every
herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of the earth,
and every tree in which is the fruit of a tree yielding
seed, to you it shall be for meat,” —had the same refer-


cnce to their posterity as it had to themselves. (Gen.
i. 28, 29.) To take a still more momentous instance,
different but analagous,* the language which God ad-
dressed to Adam with respect to the forbidden fruit,
though, from the terms employed, it might _ seem to
apply to himself alone, applied to “ all mankind, des-
cending from him by ordinary generation : “of the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not
eat of it, for, in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou
shalt surely die.” (Gen. ii. 17). Now, to our first
parents, as thus constituting at the time the entire
human family, and as representing it in all its future
developments and generations, God gave the babbath
and the law enjoining the observance of it. Thus, in
giving this law to them, He gave it to all mankind.
Some have, indeed, maintained that the Sabbath was
first instituted on the occasion referred to in Hx. xvi.
22-30, and that it was, therefore, given to the children
of Israel only. To reconcile with this view the passage
in the 2nd of Genesis, they allege that in that passage
Moses mentions the institution of the Sabbath prolcp-
tically or by anticipation, to indicate that though God
did not “ bless the seventh day and sanctify it "when
He “ rested” on it immediately after the completion of
the work of creation, it was because He had then rested
on it that He afterwards blessed and sanctified it. This
construction of the passage is worse than gratuitous.
It can only be regarded as an attempt, however uncon-
sciously made, to get rid of a plain and inconvenient
Scripture testimony.
In the brief and very plain narrative subjected to
this unwarrantable treatment, Moses relates three facts,
,„that (( on the seventh day God ended His work which
He had made”; that "He rested on the seventh from
nil His work”; and that He " blessed the seventh day
and sanctified it,” In each of these statements a
((seventh day” is mentioned j the seventh day,” in-
tended in the first two of them; is evidently the day
which immediately followed the six days occupied by
the work of creation) and the question is, in what
sense we are to understand “ the seventh day. in the
last of them. Are we to understand it as being the
same da j numerically with “ the seventh day intended
* See prefatory note.


in the two preceding statements —that is, as being one
day only, and that the day which immediately followed
the completion of the work of creation ? This view of
it is forbidden by the fact that “ God blessed the
seventh day” in the sense in which it is spoken of in
this clause, and “ sanctified it,” constituting it a day
to be “ kept holy.” This was evidently a permanent
ordinance, applying not merely to the particular day
which immediately followed the completion of the work
of creation, and to that day alone, but to the seventh
day as such, and, therefore, in the first instance, to the
first seventh day, and then, but equally, to each suc-
ceeding seventh day. This is the only interpretation
of which the language admits. In the first two clauses
a particular day is spoken of as “ the seventh day,”
and then, without any intimation that a different day
is meant, it is stated, in the third clause, that “ God
blessed the seventh day and sanctified it.” Thus no
room is left for reasonable doubt as to the day He
blessed and sanctified ; He blessed and sanctified the
seventh day just mentioned by the historian, the only
seventh day mentioned by Him at all. From the de-
sign and effect, however, of His blessing and sanctify-
ing it, it is evident that it was not as one individual
day that He blessed and sanctified it, but as the seventh
day, and that, therefore, in blessing and sanctifying it,
He blessed and sanctified the seventh day as such from
that time forward. We cannot exclude the seventh
day mentioned in the preceding clauses, and understand
by the “ seventh day” of the third clause a series of
seventh days which began some twenty-five centuries
later. Nothing could be more outrageous than such an
interpretation.
Those who contend that the Sabbath was not insti-
tuted till after the departure of the children of Israel
from Egypt, and that in the passage under considera-
tion the institution of it is mentioned proleptically or
by anticipation, argue that the fact that, except in this
passage, no mention of it occurs in the history of the
antidiluvian world, or, after the flood, till the children
of Israel had entered upon their forty years’ wandering
in th« wilderness, would be incredible upon the suppo-
sition that it had been instituted immediately after the


creation. In answer to this argument we maintain
that the silence on which it is founded is abundantly
accounted for by the great brevity of the portion of the
sacred history referred to. A narrative, which occupies
only some sixty-four pages of a school Bible, embraces
a period of not less than twenty-five centuries, and pre-
sents a universal history of the first twenty of those
centuries. Though the history of Abraham’s descend-
ants for the next five centuries, after the alleged insti-
tution of the Sabbath in the wilderness, occupies five
times the space allotted to the history of Abraham and
his descendants for the five preceding centuries and to
the first twenty centuries of the history of the world,
yet it contains no mention of the Sabbath. This is a
far stronger case of silence than that on which the
argument to which we now reply is founded; but, not-
withstanding, it is admitted on all hands that the Sab-
bath was observed during the five centuries in the
history of which this silence obtains.
In maintaining the Mosaic origin of the Sabbath,
reliance is placed on the phraseology of the passage in
the sixteenth chapter of Exodus. It is contended that
the expressions —“ to-morrow is the rest of the holy
Sabbath —to-day is a Sabbath unto the Lord, —the Lord
hath given you the Sabbath”—could be properly em-
ployed only in instituting the Sabbath. We conceive,,
however, they can be understood only as referring to an
already existing institution. On the sixth day the
people gathered a double quantity of manna; and all the
rulers of the congregation came and told Moses, Moses
then acquainted them with the appointment of God
that on the sixth day manna should be laid up for the
Sabbath. —“ This is that which the Lord hath said, to-
morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord;
bake that which ye will bake to-day, and seethe that
ye will seethe ; and that which remaineth over lay up
for you to be kept until the morning.” In using this
language, the Lord did not institute the rest to which
it refers, but only reminded the people of the occur-
rence of that rest, as rendering necessary the gathering
of a double quantity on the sixth day. The expression
“ to-day is a Sabbath unto the Lord,” is to be viewed
in the same light. The remaining expression, “ the


Lord hath given you the Sabbath ’ does not at all
imply that He had not given it till then, oi* that He
had given it to them only; it is equally consistent with
the view for which we contend, that He had given it
from the beginning to the whole human family. He
had given it "none the less to them though He had given
it to preceding generations. The utmost that the lan-'
guage of this passage can be understood to imply is,
thaL their reckoning of time having become uncertain
or erroneous, in the state of bondage from which they
had just been delivered, and their oppressors having to
a great extent or wholly deprived them of the Sabbath
rest, Hod now restored that rest to them, with a cer-
tain extension, as we shall see, of its relations and
significance, and delivered them from all uncertainty
and error as to the day to be observed as the day of
rest. But into the meaning of the statement, “ the
Lord hath given you the Sabbath, we shall, by and
by, inquire more carefully.
The reckoning of time by weeks is evidently con-
nected with the institution of the Sabbath ; and, hence,
the fact that this mode of reckoning time obtained
from the beginning proves that the institution of the
Sabbath also was coeval with the origin of our race. <
But, oven apart from the testimony of the inspired
historian, which we have adduced and vindicated, the
fact that sabbath observance is a moral duty affords
ample ground for the conclusion, and, indeed, when duly
appreciated, necessitates the conclusion, that a law enjoin-
ing this duty was given immediately after the complex
tion of the work of creation, and given to the whole
human family. By a movcbl duty we mean a duty which
is not merely positive, or constituted a duty by the law
which enjoins it, but a duty in its own nature, and
therefore 'independently of any express enactment with
respect to it; and it is evident that all men must
always been under obligation to perform all duties of
this class. It would be wholly irreconcileable with the
exercise and existence of moral government that the
subjects of it, or, rather, those who ought to be dealt
with as such, should not be required to do what, as
being a duty in its own nature, they were undei obliga-
tion to do.


That Sabbath observance is a moral duty appears from
the purposes which it is intended to serve. In “ His
works which He had made” on the “ six days, both as
the execution of His plan so far, and as a great step
towards the further and full execution of it, God
afforded a signal display of His glorious perfections;
and, “ on the seventh He rested and was refreshed,
regarding His perfections as thus displayed, and this
display of them, with ineffable complacency. Into this
His own rest He invited and commanded our first
parents, and in them the whole human family, to enter,
He constituted participation in it their proper blessed-
ness. In the meantime, however, even before the fall,
the occupations connected with the body and its wants,
to which they were obliged, though beneficial because
dutiful, conducted to such participation indirectly only
and, as it were,” circuitously, being directly subservient
to intermediate and temporary ends. It was, there*
fore, highly desirable, if not, indeed, necessary for
them, that seasons of sufficient length, and recurring
regularly and with sufficient frequency, should be set
apart for them, during which they should be authorised
and required to abstain from all such occupations,
and to devote themselves to other occupations and exer-
cises designed and fitted to conduct directly to it. And
such seasons were set apart for them by the institution
of the Sabbath,
The Sabbath having been instituted to answer such
a purpose, the observance of it was clearly a moral duty.
Was it not a moral duty, a duty in its own nature, to
enter into God’s rest on God's own invitation and call to
do so ? And a great advantage for entering into it, an
advantage, too, needed by them, having been offered, or
even made known and accessible to them, was it not
their duty, their duty from the nature of the case, and
independently altogether of any express legislation on
the subject, to avail themselves of it eagerly, and to
its utmost extent? Was it not their duty, not from
the requirement of any mere positive law, but from
the nature of the case, to admire the perfections of
God so far as He had been pleased to manifest them,
and to regard with satisfaction a manifestation of them
that He Himself regarded with satisfaction —to asso-


ciate themselves with Him in regarding it with satis-
faction as, in wonderful love and condescension, Ho
called upon them to do so ? And if they only under-
stood, whether from their own unaided appreciation of
their position and its requirements, or from their having
received a supernatural revelation, as they certainly
did understand, that, if they employed a certain portion
of their time in a certain way, or, to use the language
supplied by the actual facts, if they kept the Sabbath
day holy, this would greatly conduce to their attaining
to such association with Hod, or to their entering into
His rest, was it not their duty, and their duty, let it
again be observed, not from the requirement of any
mere positive law, but from the nature of the case, to
fulfil this condition ? These questions admit of only
one answer, the answer, namely, that they lay under
the obligation of a moral duty to comply with Hod's
call to enter into His rest, and, with the view of enter-
ing into it, to keep the Sabbath day holy.
They may have been unable to determine for them-
selves that one-seventh was the right proportion of
their time to keep holy, or even that it concerned
them to keep any portion of it holy \ but, upon either,
of those suppositions, the moment they attained to the
knowledge, in whatever way they attained to it, that,
if they kept one-seventh of their time holy, it would
conduce, and conduce greatly, to their entering into
the rest of Hod, the keeping holy of that portion of it
presented itself to them invested with the character of a
moral duty.
The only circumstance connected with the observance
of the Sabbath, that could have been regarded by them
as not entering into the essence of the duty, and as
not embraced therefore under its character as a moral
duty, was the circumstance of the particular day of the
seven to be observed as the Sabbath. At the same
time, inasmuch as the seventh day was set apart as the
Sabbath, not arbitrarily, but as sustaining a certain
relation, we are not prepared to admit that even this
circumstance could have been justly regarded, and, there-
fore, we are not prepared to admit that it was regarded,
in that light. We do not, however, commit ourselves,
though we are inclined, to the opposite view. Wa


are aware that the fact, which will afterwards claim
our attention, that the Sahhath was subsequently
changed from the seventh to the first day of the week,
may seem to imply that the obligation, arising from the
character of Sabbath observance as a moral duty, did
not extend to the circumstance of the particular day of
the seven to be kept holy. But though it be held that
it did extend to that circumstance, yet, inasmuch as it
attached to the seventh day, if it attached to it at
all, on the ground that that day sustained a certain
relation, it would, of course, be transferred to any
other day that might come to sustain a higher rela-
tion, or, rather, that might come into the place of the
seventh day as sustaining the same relation under a
higher aspect, as the first day of the week actually did.
Thus it appears that, viewing the observance of
the Sabbath as a means of entering into (rod’s rest,
the observance of it, as to all that was comprehended
in it, if we do not except, —and we question if we ought
to except, —the circumstance of its having been ob-
served on one day of the seven rather than anothei,
bore to our first parents the character of a moral duty.
But the Sabbath is also to be viewed in the light of
its relation to the rendering of public worship to God.
Man is under obligation to render such worship to Him,
He owes Him homage under every form under which
he is capable of yielding homage to Him; and, being
capable of yielding to Him the homage of public wor-
ship,—of worship offered by all publicly and in con-
cert, —he owes Him homage under this form. Being
thus under obligation to render public worship to. God,
he must be under obligation to render it to Him with a
certain degree of frequency. We cannot conceive ot
the obligation under which he lies as being so vague
and indefinite that it may be equally well discharge
by his presenting public worship to God once in a life-
time, or once a year, or once a month, or once a week.
And being under obligation to render public worship
to God with a certain degree of frequency, he must be
under obligation to render it to Him periodically. We
cannot conceive of the frequency with which he is
under obligation to render it as being any other than
that of the recurrence of periodical acts of public wor-


ship. We cannot conceive of it as the frequency of
acts of public worship performed at irregular intervals.
It does not appear that a frequency, incapable of being
exactly specified and described, could be subjected to
the control of a definite obligation. Besides, when it
is remembered that the public worship which man
owes to God is worship rendered by all publicly and in
concert, it must be evident that, in order that it may
be practicable to render it, it must be rendered at re-
gular intervals or at seasons recurring periodically. It
is thus evidently a moral duty to render public worship
to God, and to render it to Him periodically.
If man could not have discovered for himself with
what frequency he ought to render it, a special revela-
tion to supply him with this information was necessary
for him, and, if necessary, we may safely conclude, was
vouchsafed to him. Such a revelation would inform
him that public worship should be rendered to God
on one day in every seven, the day on which it should
be thus rendered to Him being that day of the seven,
—the last, in the first instance, —to which the his-
torical relation sustained by it imparted a special suit-
ableness for being observed as the day of sacred rest 3 and
possessing this knowledge, from whatever source he
derived it, he would be under obligation, on moral and
not on mer q positive grounds, to render to God the
public worship which it shewed to be due to Him, and
thus to observe the Sabbath.
The considerations which have now been presented,
are sufficient to prove that to man before the fall the
observance of the Sabbath was invested with the char-
acter of a moral duty. He was then, therefore, under
obligation to observe the Sabbath, or, in other words,
at that early period, as Moses relates, a law enjoining
the observance of it was given to our first parents, as
a law not only for themselves, but also for the whole
human family,
The Sabbath, given to man, as we have seen, at the
outset of his course, was given to him for all the sub-
sequent periods of his history. The obligation to
observe it under which he was brought was not a
temporary one. It rested, as we have evinced, on moral
and not on mere positive grounds, and was, therefore,


from its very nature, perpetual. From its resting on
such grounds, the perpetuity of it is involved in the
continued administration of the divine government,
except on the supposition of such a state ot things that
G-od’s rectoral dealings with our race should be con-
fined wholly and for ever to the infliction of punish-
ment. The fall, indeed, would have established such a
state of things, if a revelation of mercy had not been
vouchsafed. But such a revelation was vouchsafed,
and announced to man a new way by which, though
now a sinner, he might still enter into the rest of God,
and approach God with acceptable worship. Man was
thus replaced in a position to observe the babbath, and,
replaced in such a position, he was under obligation,
as before the fall, and under obligation, as then, on
moral and not tm mere positive grounds, to observe it.
The claims of the Sabbath having thus survived the
fall, nothing occurred in the subsequent history of the
race to abolish or impair them. Accordingly, it con-
tinued from age to age to be the duty of all, into what-
ever depths of ignorance and degradation they might
have fallen, to “ remember the Sabbath day to keep it
holy.” We need no historical record of the actual
sanctification of it to assure us that it ought to have
been sanctified. From the fact that the observance of
it is a moral duty, and that, as we conceive necessarily
followed from its being such, and as the sacred history
expressly informs us, it was prescribed to our first
parents immediately after their creation, and pie-
scribed to them as constituting at the time and as
representing the whole human family, we know that it
ought to have been always sanctified by all, whether in
certain cases and at certain periods it was actually
sanctified or not. The obligation to sanctify it was
perpetual and universal.
The discharge of this obligation, however, soon ceased
to be universal. The depravity of nature introduced
by the fall afforded a practical manifestation of itself in
an early and rapidly extending apostasy. In the time
of Noah this apostasy had become almost_ universal, tor
with the exception of that patriarch himself all were
then involved in it. “ All flesh had corrupted his way
upon the earth.” (Gen. vi. 12.) And it cannot be


doubted that, in the midst of this fearful prevalence of
corruption, the claims of the Sabbath were ignored.
The knowledge of it, however, could not have been
lost, and we learn from the history of Noah, and might
infer from his character, for God “ found him
“ righteous” and he “ walked with God,” that in his
family both the knowledge and the observance of it
were preserved.
After the flood men again “ corrupted their ways.’
Treating the Sabbath as if it had not been invested
with the character of a day of sacred rest, multitudes
seem to have lost all knowledge of its bearing such a
character, retaining, probably, no trace in their views
or usages of its having ever come in contact with their
history, except the belief of the sacredness of certain
days, and the observance of them in accordance with
this belief. There were always some, however, who
remembered the Sabbath day “to keep it holy ) and,
when God adopted special means to preserve the true
religion in the line of Abraham, the bearing and appli-
cation of those means, of course, extended to the sanc-
tification of the Sabbath, which forms an essential
element of the true religion. But, notwithstanding
the advantages which, in consequence of this interpo-
sition, the descendants of Abraham enjoyed, their
sojourn in Egypt, especially from the severity of the
bondage in which they were held during the latter
portion of it, must have exerted a baneful influence on
their habits in relation to the day of sacred rest, and
even obscured their knowledge of its claims and of the
divine requirement with respect to it. Hence a repub-
lication of the Sabbath law became necessary for them
and was vouchsafed to them. At the same time the
duty enjoined was specially adapted by means of certain
adjuncts, and by a reference to their own history im-
parted to it, and by a consequent extension of its signifi-
cance, to the character and design of the economy
under which they were placed. The Sabbath law, in
being thus republished among them, and adjusted to
their circumstances, while other nations were left in
the ignorance and disregard of its requirements into
which they had sinfully fallen, was “ given to them.”
Ex. xvi. 29. It had indeed been given to them before


for it had been given immediately after the completion
of the work of creation to the whole human family;
but, as regarded its beneficial hearing upon their wel-
fare, they had lost it to some extent, while others, in
this respect, might be said to have lost it wholly, and
God, in restoring it to them, and especially in restoring
it to them with the adjustment to which we have re-
ferred to the gracious design of His dealings with them
as a people, u gave it to them ” anew, or gave anew
to them the Sabbath of which it enjoined the observance.
He “ gave to them ” the whole of the economy under
which He placed them, and He, therefore, “ gave the
Sabbath to them ” as it formed one of the institutions
of that economy. In a similar sense, u Moses gave
them circumcision,” though “ it was not of Moses, but”
had been given to Abraham, and was therefore “ of the
fathers.” John vii., 22.
And, while the giving of the Sabbath to the children
of Israel in the wilderness, (Ex. xvi., 29), is thus per-
fectly consistent with the primeval institution of it, and
with the universality of the obligation to observe it,
the appointment of it at the same time to be a sign
between God and that people (Ex. xxxi., 17; Ex. xx.
12) is equally so. It followed, indeed, from the nature
of the ordinance of the Sabbath, that it was “ a sign ”•
between God and those to whom He gave it, as we have
seen He gave to them. It was, as a necessary conse-
quence of its having been given as it teas given to them,
a sign that He set them apart to be a peculiar people to
Himself, and made such arrangements for their benefit
as were eminently fitted to secure that they should bear
the character which should distinguish them as His
people, or, in other words, that “ He was the Lord that
sanctified them;” and, further, as thus given to them
it was a sign that He opened for them a path by which
they might approach Him with acceptable worship and
enter into His rest; and, on the other hand, if duly
observed by them, it was a sign of the corresponding
procedure on their part. We cannot conceive of the
Sabbath as given anew as it was to the children of
Israel, except in subserviency to the purpose of an
economy of grace; and given thus it must have possessed
such significance.


The fact, that in the preface of the Ten Command-
ments (Ex. xx., 2; Dent. v. 6) the sanctification of the
Sabbath is enforced by the consideration, that the
J .ord had “ brought ” the children of Israel “ out of
the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage/’ may,
perhaps, at first sight, seem to imply that the Sabbath
was first instituted when it was given to the children of
Israel in the wilderness, and that it was instituted for
them alone. All the commandments of the Decalogue,
however, are enforced by the same consideration ; and,
as we cannot infer from the nature of this enforcement
that, for example, idolatry, theft, and lying were first
forbidden when the commandments which forbid them
were given to the children of Israel in the wilderness,
and that the prohibition of them had reference to the
children of Israel only, we cannot draw from it the cor-
responding inference with respect to the observance of
the Sabbath. It is as being in Himself and in relation
to us what He has revealed Himself to be, that God
claims obedience from us. He afforded a glorious reve-
lation of Himself in the work of creation, and He claims
obedience from us as being what He thus revealed Him-
self to be. He afforded a further and, in some respects,
a more glorious revelation of Himself when He “ brought
out His people with ,a mighty hand, and redeemed them
out of the house of bondmen, from the hand of Pharoah,
king of Egypt.” Deut. vii., 8. In this revelation He
presents Himself to us as the God of salvation, inter-
posing on behalf of His people.—interposing on their
behalf as a whole, and, with a stretched-out hand and
with a mighty arm, working for them as a whole a great
deliverance; and He claims obedience from us as being
what He thus revealed Himself to be, And He claims
it not merely as an acknowledgement of what He revealed
Himself to be by the interposition in question, but also
as an expression of our gratitude for that interposition
itself and for what He effected. He effected a glorious
redemption for His people,—not for some of His people
merely, as so many individuals, but for His people as a
whole, for His Church; and, as the Church of God is
cue, all its members, however widely dispersed in respect
of time and place, forming “ one body,” the deliverance
wrought for it, on the occasion of the exodus from


Egypt, was a deliverance wrought for it not merely as
it existed then, but also as it exists now, —it was a
deliverance wrought for the Church of all ages, for the
one only Church’. Accordingly the language of the
enforcement prefixed to the Ten Commandments is ad-
dressed to the Church irrespectively of time, and thus
addressed to the Church now as really and appropriately
as it was addressed to it when the law was given from
Sinai. The Church owed gratitute to God for the
deliverance from Egypt when that deliverance was
wrought, and it has ever since owed' Him gratitude for
it. It owes Him gratitude for it now, and will owe
Him gratitude for it always.
It is also to be observed that, as the Church itself Is
one, its interests are one: Its interests, as secured in
one age, are not restricted to that age, but constitute
a permanent and indestructible contribution to the
cumulative result of God’s dealings with it. Thus
What is effected for it in one age, lays it under an obli-
gation to gratitude in all succeeding ages, and even affects
beneficially the interests of those who were members of
it in preceding ages. Besides, the advantages which
the Church enjoys, say at the present time, are not to
be traced exclusively to God’s recent interpositions on
its behalf, but to all His dealings with it hitherto.
More recent interpositions but followed up what earlier
interpositions had effected. On this ground also the
Church owes gratitude and the due expression of its grati-
tude to God now for the deliverance which He wrought for
it in the exodus from Egypt, and the appeal, therefore,
is still addressed to it, and addressed to it most legiti-
mately, u I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.”
Such being, the case, one cannot but wonder at the
crudeness of view, and the flippancy withal, displayed
by the language employed by some professed members,
and even by office-bearers of the Church, —that the
Lord never brought them out of Egypt. He brought
His Church out of Egypt, and, if they are members of
His- Church, that deliverance affected them, and they
cannot disclaim the obligation which it imposed.
While the Sabbath derived an extension of its original
significance from the connection into which it was


brought with tho history of the children of Israel, it
did not become in consequence of that connection, and,
as an institution of which the observance is a moral and
not a mere positive duty, it could not become, a distinc-
tive element of the Mosaic dispensation, and neither
was nor could be involved in the liability of all that was
distinctive of that dispensation “to vanish away.”
Accordingly, when the Mosaic dispensation was abolished,
the Sabbath passed on to the Christian dispensation,
and, under this latter dispensation, it will retain its
claims through the successive periods and to the very
close of the present state of things.
That the observance of it would be obligatory and
would thus obtain under the Christian dispensation is
distinctly intimated in the following prophecy. “ Thus
saith the Lord, Keep ye judgment, and do justice : for
my salvation is near to come, and my righteousness to
be revealed. Blessed is the man that doeth this, and
the son of man that layeth hold on it; that keepeth
the Sabbath from polluting it, and keepeth his hand
from doing any evil. Neither let the son of the stranger,
that hath joined himself to the Lord, speak, saying.
The Lord hath utterly separated me from His people :
neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree.
For thus saith the Lord unto the eunuchs that keep
My Sabbaths’ and choose the things that please Me,
and take hold of My covenant; even unto them will I
give in Mine house and within My walls a place and a
name better than of sons and of daughtersl will give
them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off.
Also the sons of the stranger, that join themselves to
the Lord, to serve Him, and to love the name of the
Lord, to be His servants, every one that keepeth the
Sabbath from polluting it, and taketh hold of My cove-
nant ; even them I will bring to My holy mountain,
and make them joyful in My house of prayer; their
burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted
upon Mine altar; for Mine house shall be called an
house of prayer for all people. The Lord God which
gathereth the outcasts of Israel saith, Yet will I gather
others to Him, besides those that are gathered unto
Him.” Isaiah Ivi. 1-8. This passage refers to times
when there should be no ceremonial requirements and


restrictions, and when the distinction between Jews
and Gentiles should no longer be regarded. Under the
Mosaic dispensation the eunuch might feel himself
excluded, to a great extent, from participation in the
blessings promised to his countrymen; for he had no
personal interest in the promise of a numerous and
prosperous posterity, (Gen. xv. 5, xxii. 17,) and pro-
bably also access to the temple service was denied to
him. But, when the times should arrive, to which the
prophet pointed forward the anticipations of the Church,
eunuchs, if spiritually qualified, should have full un-
restricted access to spiritual privileges, and. should
receive more than compensation for the peculiar disad-
vantage of their social position. “Even to them” the
Lord “would give in His house and within His walls,
a place,” admitting them, to all the privileges of His
people, “and a name better than, of sons and daughters,
He would give them an everlasting name that should
not be cut off.” And in those predicted times there
should be no ground for the complaint of “ the son of
the stranger,” the Gentile, that “the Lord had utterly
separated him from His people.” The middle wall of
partition between Jews and Gentiles having been broken
down, “the sons of the stranger that joined themselves
to the Lord to be His servants, and that took hold of
His covenant, even them the Lord would bring into
His holy mountain, and He would make them joyful in
His house of prayer.” They should no longer be
“ strangers and foreigners, But fellow-citizens with
saints, and of the household of God;” and the Lord’s
house, thrown open to the Gentiles as well as to
the Jews, “should be called a house of prayer for all
people.”
It is evidently to gospel times that this description
applies; and the prophecy distinctly again and again
intimates that, during these times, the Sabbath will be
kept, and that, while rich and abundant blessings shall
be imparted irrespectively of ceremonial observances,
and of the distinction between Jews and Gentiles, they
will not be imparted irrespectively of Sabbath-keeping.
“The man that doeth this,” —such is the announcement
of the prophecy,—“and the son of man that layeth hold
on it, that keepeth the Sabbath from polluting it, and


keepeth hishandfrom doing any evil,” shall “be blessed,"
and he alone shall be blessed; and this announcement,
thus made in general terms, it reiterates, first with
respect to “eunuchs,” and then with respect to “ the
sons of the stranger,” giving the same prominence in
each case, to the “keeping of the Sabbath .from
polluting it,” as an indispensable condition of the
predicted and promised blessedness. Thus the Sabbath
is to be observed all along under the gospel dispen-
sation to its very close; the observance of it will all
along form an essential element of the godliness, by
which those shall be distinguished whom God will en-
rich with His blessing.
We have already seen that the Sabbath was brought
into special connection with the Mosaic dispensation,
and we have now to remark that it has been brought
also into special connection with the present dispen-
sation. And, as it derived from the event by which it
was brought into connection with the former an exten-
sion of its significance, it has derived a further and
«til greater extension of it from the event in which
its relation to the latter originated. But here the
resemblance between the two cases terminates, and an
important dissimilarity presents itself. The deliver-
ance, which the Lord wrought for His people in bring-
ing them out of Egypt, created no necessity and fur-
nished no ground for transferring the Sebbath from the
seventh to a different day of the week. On the con-
trary, if, as some have held, and as is highly probable,
if not certain, it was consummated on the morning of
the seventh day, it furnished an additional ground for
still retaining that day as the Sabbath. But the pro-
curing of salvation for sinners was a work of a higher
order, and afforded a fuller and more glorious display
of the Divine perfections than any previous works
afforded, —the fullest and most glorious display of them
that has at all been furnished, or will ever be furnished
in connection with the history of our race. And, at
the same time, it sustained the special relation to the
interests of man, that it opened for him a path by
which he might enter again into the rest of God, from
which he had excluded himself by sin, and enter into it
now, —may we not say ? —as, from the more glorious


manifestation of God afforded by the work of redemp-
tion, a higher rest. It is true, indeed, that from the
time the announcement was made, though not in the
form, yet with the force and design of a promise to our
first parents and their posterity, that the seed of the
woman should bruise the head of the serpent, a way
was open for man by which he might enter into the
rest of God, but it was wholly because of the retrospec-
tive efficacy of the work under consideration that it was
open for him. Thus, as on the completion of the work
of creation, access to the rest of God was vouchsafed
to man, so renewed access to.it was vouchsafed to him,
after the fall, on the faith, in the first instance, of the
Redeemer's engagement to finish the work which the
Father had given him to do, and, ultimately, in consi-
deration of his having actually finished it. Accordingly,
as the completion of the former work was commemorated
by the observance of a day of rest, it was proper that the
completion of the latter should be similarly commemo-
rated. But, then, inasmuch as the former work, glorious
as it was, has comparatively no glory because of the
glory of the latter that excelleth, it was proper that
the sabbatic commemoration of the more glorious work
should have special and primary reference to that work,
and should not consist in a mere extension of the
meaning and purpose of the Sabbatic commemoration
already allotted to the less glorious work. And it was
arranged that it should have such reference to it. The
resurrection of Christ, which proclaimed the completion
of His work of procuring salvation for sinners, took
place on the first day of the week, and the Sabbath,
carrying with it, however, the whole of its former
significance, was transferred to that day.
We have seen that prophecy teaches the perpetuity
of the- Sabbath, and we apprehend that it also teaches
this transference of it to the day on which Christ
rose from the dead. We understand the following
passage as doing so. u Open to me the gates of
righteousness; I will go in to them, and I will praise
the Lord : this gate of the Lord, into which the righteoua
shall enter. I will praise Thee : for Thou hast heard
me, and art become my salvation. The stone which the
builders refused is become the head stone of the corner.


This is the Lord’s doing; it is marvellous in our eyes.
This is the day which the Lord hath made; we will
rejoice and be glad in it.” (Psalm cxviii. 19-24.)
Viewing this language in the light of the ultimate
reference and higher meaning of the psalm, it presents
the believer to us as desirous to engage in the public
services of tha Sanctuary. “Open to me,” he says,
the “ gates of righteousness; I will go in to them, and I
will praise the Lord,” Under the influence of his
high estimation of the privilege* of access to the services
of the sanctuary, he adds “this gate of the Lord, into
which the righteous shall enter;” if we are not to
regard these words as the answer made to his application.
Then, addressing the Lord he declares how he would
employ himself in the sanctuary. “ 1 will praise Thee,
for Thou has heard me, and art become my salvation.”
How the Lord had become his salvation he then states :
“ the stone which the builders refused is become the
head stone of the corner,” that is, as the Apostle Peter
teaches us to understand this figurative language,
(Acts iv. 10, 11,) the Lord Jesus Christ, whom
the rulers of the Jews rejected and crucified, having
by His death atoned for the sins of His people,
was exalted by God to be a Prince and a Saviour.
Having desired to be admitted within the courts of God’s
house that he might praise the Lord for His wonderful
works, the believer next sets forth the suitableness of
the exercise in which he sought to engage to the charac-
ter of the day: “ This is the day which the Lord bath
made ; we will rejoice and be glad in it.” He had said
before that he would praise the Lord, because as risen
and ascended He had become his salvation, and now he
adds that the Lord had “ made” the day on which he
was resolved to be thus employed, that is, had con-
stituted that day a day to be thus employed, and there-
fore he would so employ it, he would “ rejoice and be
glad in it.”
Thus after the resurrection of Christ—so this passage
teaches—a day should be constituted, which should be
kept with gladness and with rejoicing, and on which
particularly the risen and exalted Saviour should be
praised. Now the Christian Sabbath is exactly such a
day. The observance of it is founded upon and com-


memorative of His resurrection; and in the proper
employment of it He is contemplated as the risen and
exalted Saviour, It thus occupies the very place
assigned to the day intended in this passage; and no
other day has been proposed or is fitted to occupy it.
The Christian Sabbath agreeably to the view which
we have given of the ground on which the first day of
the week was substituted for the seventh as the day of
sacred rest, began early to be called the “ Lord’s Hay.”
It is evident that, when the Book of Revelation was
written, towards the close of the first century, the first
day of the week was known among Christians as the
“Lord’s Hay,” the day which the Lord Jesus Christ
had consecrated and set apart to be employed in spiri-
tual exercises, the day which He had thus “ made.”
The first day of the week having been raised to this
distinction, the observance of the seventh day of the
week as a Sabbath must have been abolished ) for two
Sabbaths were not observed.
The passage to which we have just referred, brings
under our notice one of a series of facts, which can be
legitimately regarded in no other light than as intended
to intimate to us, that it was the mind of Christ that
the Sabbath should be changed to the first day of the
week. “ On the Lord’s Hay,” the first day of the week,
John “ was in the spirit,”—visited with the miraculous
influences of the Holy Ghost, and Christ appeared to
him, and favoured him with various important com-
munications. Christ systematically thus honoured and
distinguished the first day of the week. When He rose
from the dead on that day He conferred upon it its
radical distinction. And, having thus “ made ” it a
day pf rejoicing to His Church, He has ever preserved
to it that character. After the day on which He rose,
it does not seem that He again appeared to His disciples
till the first day of the week came round. It was on
that day of the week that, the disciples being within
and Thomas with them, Jesus came, the doors being
shut, and stood in the midst and said “ Peace be unto
you.’ (John xx. 26.) And it was on the first day
of the week He visited His disciples with the pente-
costal effusion of the Holy Spirit, and granted to them,


in the conversion of three thousand souls, their first sig-
nal victory over the kingdom of daftness. (Acts ii.)
And has not Christ, from age to age, throughout the
subsequent history of His Church, continued to honour
the first day of the week by blessing His people and
making them a blessing on that day more than on any
other ? Has He ever blessed with spiritual prosperity
those by whom the Sabbath is desecrated; and has He
not always blessed with such posperity those by whom
it is devoutly observed ?
The Apostles, acting under Christ’s instructions and
the guidance of Divine inspiration, kept the first day of
the week, and taught their converts to keep it, as the
Christian Sabbath. Thus at Troas the disciples were
accustomed to come together on the first day of the
week to partake of the Lord’s Supper, and engage in
other religious exercises; and Paul, ott one occasion,
abodh' there for seven days, waiting it would appear for
the first day of the week, and when that day arrived he
"preached unto them ready to depart on the morrow.”
(Acts xx. 7.) The first day of the week was similarly
observed by the Corinthian Church. This is evident
from Paul’s instructions to it respecting the collection
for the saints. “ Now concerning the collection for
the saints, as I have given order to the Churches of
Galatia, even so do ye. Upon the first day of the week
let every one of you lay by him in store, as God hath
prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I
come.” (1 Cor. xvi. 1,2.) We learn incidentally from
this passage, that the first day of the week was also
observed by the Churches of Galatia; and doubtless
other. Churches were in like manner taught to observe
it. There would-be no wavering or inconsistency in
the instructions of the apostles upon the subject;, for
they only promulgated the law of Christ in the case.
Thus we have- abundant evidence for holding that the
Sabbath has been changed from the last to the first day
of the as one day in, seven, has been
permanently set apart to be observed as a Sabbath, the
first day of the seven is the day thus set apart under
the Christian dispensation.


The Manner of Sanctifying the Sabbath.
The proper observance of the Sabbath consists in giv-
ing full practical effect to the consecration of it. God,
by consecrating it, set it apart as a day which should
not be employed in the common duties of life, but
should be devoted to religious exercises ; and the proper
observance of it consists in disposing of it in accord-
ance with the prohibition.and the positive requirement,
which the consecration of it thus implies. What, then,
are the import and extent of this prohibition on the
one hand, and of this requirement on the other ?
To this question the fourth commandment supplies
an answer, and so far as regards the import and extent
of the prohibition, a full and detailed answer.
u Remember the Sabbath-day, to keep it holy ; six
days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work ; but the
seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God ; in
it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor
thy daughter, nor thy manservant, nor thy maid-ser-
vant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within
thy gates: for in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the
seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath
day, and hallowed it.” —(Ex. xx. 8-11.) Of the pro-
hibitory portion of this enactment, the object clearly
is, to exclude from our employment of the Sabbath
what forms the distinctive employment of the other
days of the week, as the unconsecrated portion of our
time. That employment of those days is first authorised
and prescribed —“ six days shalt thou labour and do all
thy work,” and then, with respect to the Sabbath, on
the ground that it is “ the Sabbath of the Lord our
God,” —a consecrated day, in which He “ challenges a
special propriety,” —it is added, u in it thou shalt not
do any work;” that is, evidently, any such work as
bad just been enjoined as the distinctive work of the
unconsecrated days of the week. The point from which
we are to start in keeping the Sabbath, is the point
which we have gained when we “ labour and do all
our work ” on the other six days, “ being diligent in
business, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord ;” and start-
dog from this point, we are to leave behind us all such


“ labour” and "work,” with all thoughts and emotions
connected with them. The Sabbath, by being conso
crated, has been separated from the portion of our
time which has been given to us for these, and, ac-
cordingly, we must carefully exclude them from our
occupation of it, if we would not be guilty of dese-
crating what the Lord has hallowed.
And obviously it will not satisfy the prohibition
that we lay aside the principal duties of our week-day
avocations —those which are most deliberate and labori-
ous. All duties of this class are forbidden, and, as it
is wholly as being of this class, that is, as being secular
duties, that they are forbidden, they are all forbidden
equally. None of them is excepted. The language of
the law is : “ six days shalt thou labour and do all thy
work,” —that is, thou shalt employ six days in thy
secular duties; “ thou shalt labour,” if the duties of
thy place and relations be laborious, and, whatever
their nature may be, thou shalt perform them—thou
shalt “do all thy work:” and then we are carried, as
it were, on holy ground, —but the seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God,” a consecrated day, “in
it thou shalt not do any work.” This prohibition, it
is obvious, does not respect laborious duties- alone, but
all secular duties whatever, —all the duties immediately
before commanded as the distinctive employment of
the rest of our time : for it is not said thou shalt not
labour, but “ thou shalt not do any work,” —thou shalt
not occupy thyself, either more or less, in any thing of
a secular nature. What we have to avoid is the violat-
ing of the character of the Sabbath as a consecrated
day ; and this its character will be violated if we admit
anything secular into our occupation of it. The ex-
tent to which it will be violated will of course be greater
or less according to the extent to which we admit what
is secular; but it will be really violated, (and it is with
the fact and not the degrees of violation we are at pre-
sent concerned,) if we admit at all what is secular. The
whole of the Sabbath is consecrated, no part of it is left
common and therefore open to secular occupation ; and,
accordingly, if we give any part of it to such occupa-
tion, however small that part may be, we are guilty of
desecrating it; we invade and violate the sacredness


of its character. The part of it which we employ in
what is secular, he it long or short, is consecrated time,
and therefore by such an employment of it we are
guilty of applying what is consecrated to a common
use, that is, of doing with respect to it the very thing
which its consecration forbids, and, consequently, of
setting aside its consecration and treating it as a
nullity.
It will, perhaps, be said, and whether or not it will
be said, this we know is the impression on the minds of
many, an impression, too, on which they often act, —
if the portion of the Sabbath which we employ in the
manner condemned is but very short, and if our employ-
ment of it in that manner is a mere cursory and inci-
dental thing, which did not at all originate in any set
purpose or deliberate arrangement, it must be a matter
of little importance though it be slightly different from
that employment of it which is “ according to the com-
mandment.” Now, this is exactly to say, in other and
less explicit terms, —“ it must bo a matter of little im-
portance though our conduct in this case be slightly
sinful— a statement, surely, on which no professing
Christian would venture, though, alas! it is often im-
plied in the practice of professing Christians. Let us
ever bear in mind, that, in seeking to determine
whether or not we may safely follow a proposed course,
our inquiry must be whether it is sinful , and not
whether it is very sinful. The avoiding of sin, and not
the avoiding of much sin, is the point to which our
vigilance must be directed. “ Let not any iniquity
have dominion over me,” is the prayerful desire of
every Christian heart. Sin is a leprosy, and if it is
first permitted to the extent of a small “ spot,” it will
soon extend and diffuse its loathsomeness over the
whole soul. No rule, therefore, can be more wholesome
than this, and it is peculiarly necessary in the case of
the Sabbath, —watch against the first entrances and the
small beginnings of sin. Suppose Achan had adopted
the reasoning to which we have just adverted as applied
to the Sabbath, —and it is not at all improbable that
such thoughts did arise in his mind, —suppose he had
said within himself, “it is true that all the gold and
silver of Jericho, and all the vessels of brass and iron


found in it have been consecrated, and that every other
description of property which it contains has been pro-
nounced accursed; but, still, these few shekels of
silver and this wedge of gold are so very small a por-
tion of the former, and this Babylonish garment, goodly
as it is, so very small a portion of the latter, that,
though I take them, the whole amount of the conse-
crated property on the one hand, and of the accursed
property cn the other, can scarcely be said to be dimi-
nished, and therefore my taking them, even if it
becomes known, will be overlooked as a matter of no
importance, and certainly cannot be severely censured;
would this reasoning have been correct, and might the
expectation founded on it have been warrantably enter-
tained ? To both inquiries the event returns most em-
phatically a negative answer. But is not the reasoning
precisely the same which leads us to conclude that, as
the portion of the Sabbath on which we allow secular
matters to intrude is so very small, it cannot be regarded
as of any serious importance though the manner in which
we employ that portion of it is not exactly what it ought
to be ? Think of a rich Jew proceeding to take one of
the male firstlings of his flock, and justifying the act
on the ground, that the male firstlings were so nume-
rous that one out of their number was as nothing.
Could the justification be sustained? His conduct
would admit of no justification, and yet it is precisely
the same in principle with the conduct of him who
employs any part of the Sabbath in doing his own
work; and so also is the offence of Achan. In fact,
the three offences are identical,— taking for a common
and private use a portion of consecrated gold, a portion
of consecrated time, or one of the consecrated firstlings.
In each case there is the same ingredient of setting
aside the divine appointment, and acting in direct con-
travention of it. What God has consecrated is treated
as common and unconsecrated.
To give a more definite character to our views of the
prohibition which the fourth commandment conveys,
let it be observed that, if our actions are distributed into
four classes ;—(1.) those which are immediately neces-
sary to the supply of our natural wants, as, for exam-
ple, eating and drinking; (2) those which are more


remotely necessary to the supply of our natural wants,
as cooking and taking exercise; (3), those which have
a secular object, as ploughing and sowing on the part
of a farmer, working at his trade on the part of a
mechanic, buying and selling and corresponding and
conversing on business on the part of a merchant; and
(4), religious actions; it is to the second and third of
these classes that the prohibition of the fourth com-
mandment applies. Such actions as are immediately
necessary to the supply of our natural wants are not
forbidden, though, doubtless, as they ought always to
be regulated by the laws of moderation, it is peculiarly
our duty to regulate them on the Sabbath by those
laws. The second class of actions, those which are
remotely necessary to the supply of our natural wants,
are unquestionably forbidden, so far as they may be
dispensed with; they are common and not sacred or
religious actions, and ought not, therefore, to occupy
consecrated time any further than is absolutely neces-
sary. The law was thus understood by the Jews, and
the uniform practice of the pious declares that it is thus
understood by them. As regards cooking, which we
formerly mentioned as belonging to this class of actions,
and to which we now refer only for the purpose of
illustration, it cannot, we think, be doubted, that, in-
stead of faring more sumptuously ou the Sabbath than
on other days, and thus rendering necessary a greater
amount of the labour of cooking, we ought rather, as
much as we can, to choose such food as may be dressed
with least labour and at the least expense of time.
Actions which have a secular object, which form the
third class in the distribution which we have proposed,
are wholly forbidden —“ Six days shaltthou labour and
do all thy work ; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of
the Lord thy God, in it thou shalt not do any work."
Ko part of the Sabbath is to be occupied in “ thoughts,
words, or works, about our worldly employments.”
These are the very actions which are most opposed to
its character as a consecrated day. Many we believe
pei form actions of this class without ever adverting to
their character as actions of a secular nature, without
indeed adverting to their character at all, and, there-
fore, without feeling that by performing them they


desecrate the Sabbath. Now we ought to correct this
inadvertency. It docs not become us to be heedless
and off our guard, to act without reflection and care,
where the divine law is concerned. Let us mark the
character of every action, let us refer each to its proper
class, and then admit particular actions into our occupa-
tion of the Sabbath or exclude them from it, as the
class to which they belong is to be admitted or ex-
cluded. For example, you receive a letter, which you
know from the writing is from one of your commercial
correspondents, and the question is, whether this letter
may be read on the Sabbath. To obtain an answer to
this question, let it be first ascertained to what class of
actions the reading of such a letter belongs. Is it not
obviously one of those actions which have a secular
object? Docs it not belong to your secular occupation
or calling? It unquestionably does; and, therefore,-
as the whole of this class of actions is forbidden by the
law of the Sabbath, so of course is each individual
action of the class, and the action in question among
the rest. As we feel the class ought to be dealt with,
let us deal with the individuals which it comprehends - r
and unless we are prepared to pursue our secular avoca-
tions on the Sabbath in their full extent, let us lay them
wholly aside, and obey the commandment, “ in it thou
shalt not do any work.” Some wo arc aware will
object, that, however correct this may be in principle,
it would be extremely inconvenient and often attended
with much loss if adopted in practice. To this objec-
tion it would be sufficient to reply, in the language of
Scripture, “he that walketh uprightly walketh surely;”
the path of duty is always the path of safety ; we most
effectually consult all our true interests by walking in
that path, for godliness,—and the due observance of
the Sabi ath is an important part of practical godliness,
—“is profitable unto all things, having the promise of
the life that now is, and of that which is to come.”
But the view of facts upon which the objection proceeds
must surely be mistaken. The course which we have
urged has been adopted and is now pursued by many,
without experiencing the disadvantages with which,
according to the objection, it must be attended. It
cannot, wo conceive, bo for a moment supposed, that


the providence of God is so conducted that it renders it
impossible to obey His law, or that His government of
the natural world opposes and counteracts his govern-
ment of the moral world. While, therefore, difficulties
will be met w:th in the path of duty, they will be such
difficulties as will indeed try our faith and devotedness,
but, if we possess faith and devotedness, will not stop
or eventually even retard our progress. But though
we should suffer temporal disadvantages in consequence
of our obedience to the law of God, ought we to shrink
from bearing them ? Are not the blessings of the next
life incomparably more valuable than those of the pre-
sent, and ought we, therefore, to consider it a very
grievous thing if we are required to some small extent,
or indeed to any extent, to forfeit the latter for the sake
of the former? “If any man will come after me,”
says the Saviour, “ let him deny himself, and take up
his cross, and follow me.” If, therefore, we find that
we cannot follow the Saviour in the due observance of
the Sabbath, without denying ourselves, without incur-
ring loss, let us submit to the loss and follow Him, that
at last we may “be with Him where He is;” “for
what shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole
world and lose his own soul?” In the end it will be
evident to all, that in keeping of God’s commandments,
in keeping of them carefully and exactly, there is great
reward.
When works of which the performance on the Sab-
bath is forbidden become at any time, as in certain
circumstances some of them do, works of necessity or
mercy, the prohibition ceases to apply to them. They
may then be performed on the Sabbath.
Works of necessity and works of mercy are alike in
this, that, while they are not such works as form tho
appropriate and distinctive employment of the conse-
crated portion of our time, circumstances render the
performance of them on the Sabbath necessary. They
are thus, both of them, strictly speaking, works of
necessity, the difference between them being, that the
works which are usully called works of necessity axe
necessary in their bearing on those who perform them,
while the works which are usually called works of
mercy are necessary in their bearing, not on those who


perform them, but on others or on the lower animals.
The following illustrations will sufficiently indicate the
nature of the necessity which justifies the performance
on the Sabbath of works which, in the absence of such
a necessity, ought not to be admitted into our employ-
ment of it. When David “ bad need, and was an hun-
gered, he, and they that were with him, he went into
the house of God, and did eat the show bread, which is
not lawful to eat but for the priests, and gave also to
them which were with him.” While he was in urgent
need of food, he could not procure common bread ; and,
under the pressure of the necessity to which his circum-
stances thus subjected him, he used consecrated bread
for a purpose for which the use of it, except under such
a pressure, was forbidden by the fact that it was con-
secrated, A similar necessity would, of course, justify
an analogous use of consecrated time. In a synagogue
into which our Loid went on a sabbath day, “ there
was a man which had his hand withered. And they
asked him, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath
days ? that they might accuse him. And he said unto
them, What man shall there be among you, that shall
have one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the Sabbath
day, will he not lay hold on it, and lift it out ? How
much, then, is a man better than a sheep ? Where-
fore it is lawful to do well on the Sabbath days. Then
saith he to the man, Stretch forth thine hand. And
he stretched it forth; and it was restored whole, like
as the other.” (Matt. xii. 10-13.) “ And he was
teaching in the synagogue on the Sabbath. And, be-
hold, there was a woman which had a spirit of infir-
mity eighteen years, and was bowed together, and
could in no wise lift up herself. And when Jesus saw
her, he called her to him, and said unto her, Woman,
thou art loosed from thine infirmity. And he laid his
hands on her ; and immediately she was made straight,
and glorified God. And the ruler of the synagogue
answered with indignation, because that Jesus had
healed on the Sabbath day, and said unto the people,
There are six days, in which men ought to work :in
them therefore come and be healed, and not on the
Sabbath day. The Lord then answered him, and said,
Thou hypocrite, doth not each one of you on the Sab-


t>ath loose his ox or his ass from the stall, and lead him
away to watering ? And ought not this woman, being
a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bound, 10,
these eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the
Sabbath day ?” (Luke xiii. 10-16.)
We remarked before that works of mercy are works
of necessity when viewed in their relation to those for
whom they are performed by others, because they can-
not perform them for themselves; and they are called
works of mercy because they manifest the kindness of
those who perform them. We have now to remark that
works of necessity and works of mercy alike sustain a
relation to the kindness of God similar to that which
the latter sustain to the kindness of man. It is in the
exercise of kindness, —of compassionate consideration
for the life and health not only of man but even of the
lower animals, that G>d authorises such works to be
done on the Sabbath notwithstandiug it is a consecrated
day. God “ will have mercy and not sacrifice,” (Matt,
ix. 13; xii. 7) and, therefore, relaxes, so far as mercy
requires the relaxation of it, the prohibition involved in
the consecration of the Sabbath. And what is thus
the origin determines the extent of the relaxation.
Dictated by mercy it extends no further than mercy
requires. In performing works of mercy for others, we
are to act in the spirit in which the permission to per-
form them is granted to us; we are to do all that
enlightened sympathy and kindness, associated with
reverence for the sacrcdness of the Sabbath, wiL de-
mand, and no more, and, then, it is only such works as
we are thus to perform for others as works of mercy,
that we are authorised to perform for ourselves as works
of necessity. ,
In this connection it should be fully recognised that
it is only when works, excluded from the distinctive
employment of the consecrated portion of our time, be-
come works of necessity in their relation either to our-
selves or to others, that the performance of them on the
Sabbath is permitted; and, accordingly, it is only
under the felt pressure of necessity, this pressure con-
straining us to deviate for the time from our chosen
and habitual com se, that we can lawfully perform such
works on the Sabbath.


The brief but comprehensive requirement of the Sab-
battysf'“ remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy.”
God, in the sense already explained, has made it holy,
and we are to keep it holy, —to preserve to it the cha-
racter which He has impressed upon it. What, then,
is that character ? It is a character composed of those
two elements, that the Sabbath is a consecrated day, and
that it is a day of rest. Inasmuch as it is a consecrated
day, no portion of it is to be occupied with secular
work, the Whole of it is to be devoted to religious exer-
cises ; and, inasmuch as it is a day of rest, we arc to
observe it by resting in the facts and realities to which
it directs our thoughts. The Sabbath originally com-
memorated the work of creation and the display of the
divine character afforded by it; and, under tho Chris
divine character afforded by it; and, undop tho Chris
ti nil nrlfl nrl nlmnnirnd. nw tib* Pi I. i4l I’l.'lV wt
tin it fn-rfhm. nn,l npnmnllir
oemplateJ worlf nf rnrlmTrptinnj nml tbn citill higher
di?r If T nffm.rln.l • and,
under the Christian dispensation, and as observed on
the first day of the week, it commemorates further and
specially the completed work of redemption, and tho
still higher display of the divine character afforded by
that work. Now wo observe it is as a day of rest by con-
templating with admiration and satisfaction, of soul all
that it thus recalls, particularly the facts and fruits of
redemption, and the glorious character of God as un-
folded by it, —by contemplating and regarding thus
God’s gift of His Son, the incarnation, Christ’s
obedience unto death, His resurrection, His ascen-
sion, His mediatorial reign and resources, the blessings
He bestows upon His people, their privileges and
prospects, the Spirit’s office and work, and the
love, wisdom, holiness, justice, power, and mercy of
God, as they shine forth in the gospel,—by resting in
what God has done, in what He does, and in what Ho
will yet do for His people, and thus going forward and
ascending to rest in Himself.
That wo may thus enter into the Sabbath rest, wo
must, as it wore, pass onward to it by means of tho
appointed exercises of religion. Those exercises, accor-
dingly, occupy an important place and form an essen-
tial element in the due observance of the babbath. If


we neglect them, or if we treat them as if it were not
at all necessary, though very proper and seemly, to
observe therii with earnestness and regularity, in that
case we do not desire to enter into the rest to which it
is the design of the Sabbath to conduct us ; and it we
engage in them, however regularly, without seeking to
enter into that rest, our engagement in them is but a
lifeless formality.
"We saw that one ground, on which the institution of
the Sabbath was necessary was, that without such an
ordinance it could not he secured that the homage of
public worship should he rendered to God ; accordingly,
regular and devout attendance on the public ordinances
of religion is one of the most distinctive and essential
portions of the observance of the sabbath. The neglect
of them, so far as it extends, is a practical refusal to
concur in the design of its institution.
It is to be observed that the fourth commandment is
specially addressed to heads of families and to magis-
trates. It holds heads of families responsible at least
for abstinence on the sabbath Irom all secular work on
the part of their children, their servants, their cattle,
and even the strangers that sojourn with them ; and it
is evident that it holds magistrates responsible for the
observance of the sabbath to the same extent by those
under their authority, for the expression “ within thy
gates ” refers properly to a city. How grievous the sin
of those on whom the duty of protecting the Sabbath
from being desecrated with secular work has been thus
specially devolved, when, instead of faithfully discharg-
ing this honourable and important duty, they direct
and command that secular work le performed upon it!
No motive to perform any duty can be stronger than
those which arise in the case of the sabbath from the
consideration that by the due observance of it wo, on
the one hand, render public homage to God, and on the
other, enter into His rdst. Accordingly, those who do
not observe it, whether they positively prefane it or m t,
are proved by their non-observance of it to be utter
strangers to spiritual sympathies.
No excuse has been left for invading the Sabbath
with secular work. God has made sufficient provision
for such work, by allotting for the performance of it six


days out of every seven—“ six days shalt thou labour
and do all thy work.” We are not required to with-
draw ourselves wholly from secular employment; in
the circumstances of most, such a withdrawal would
involve a grievous and extensive abandonment of duty.
In the fourth commandment, accordingly, which regu-
lates the employment, not of the sabbath merely, but of
our whole time, it is expressly enjoined that we per-
form the proper secular work of our station—“ six
days shaft thou labour and do all thy work,” We are
not, however, to carry secular work beyond the limits
of the six days within which God has thus confined, it
—we are not to carry it over the borders and into the
territory of the sabbath. God having appointed for it
a definite portion of our time, we are carefully to re-
strict it to that portion. On what rational ground can
we desire to extend it further ? Does not God know
what portion of our time it is best for us, all our inte-
rests considered, to employ in secular work ? And, in
Hre legislating on the subject, did He not consult our
welfare while He prescribed our duty ? Is not His law
throughout, and therefore His law respecting the Sab-
bath, not only holy and just, but also good ? Will any
change introduced by us, or any possible change, im-
prove an arrangement made by Him ? Besides, are we
not wholly dependent on His blessing for the success of
our secular labours ? and can we expect His blessing if
we set aside His law ? We may rest assui’ed it is best
for us, not only as regards the life to come, but also as
regards this life, to labour only when God authorises us
to labour, resting when He commands us to rest. In
enlarging our acquisitions by sabbath desecration, we
really mingle with them a corrupting element, and the
consequence will be that they will not keep, and, in the
meantime, they will exert, however insidiously, a most
baneful influence upan our character, eating, in this
respect, as a canker.
If it were proper to regard with dissatisfaction, on
any ground, an arrangement made by God, it might be
expected that we should be disposed to complain that
the numerous wants of the present state render it neces-
sary for us to devote so much of our time to secular
avocations, and that the portion of it left to us for ex-


elusive and undistracted application to spiritual exer-
cises is so very brief. "When on the contrary, our
complaint is, that too much of our time is claimed for
spiritual exercises, does not the fact indicate a melan-
choly derangement of our sympathies and misdirection
of our desires ?
The duty enjoined in the fourth commandment is
enforced by the further consideration that the Sabbath
is the Lord’s—“ the seventh day is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God.” The whole of our time is the Lord’s,
and we have, therefore, no right, however much we
may overlook the fact, to employ any portion of it
otherwise than as He directs. But while, as it were,
He has given to us six days of the week for our work,
He has reserved the remaining day for His own special
service. It is thus His day, and, if we would not rob
God, it should be used for Him as He Himself directs
And, if it would be wrong, in any ease, to appropriate
to ourselves what belongs to another, shall we appro-
priate to ourselves, in the face too of an express pro-
hibition, what belongs to the “ Lord our G d?” Shall
we violate a right guarded by the gl >ri us perfections
and the awful majesty of Jehovah, and supported and
enforced by all the displays and bestowals of His 1 -ve ?
It is a strong enforcement of the duty under con-
sideration that God has recommended it to us by His
own example. He “ rested on the seventh day.”
Shall not wc then be followers of God as dear children,
and rest < n the Sabbath day according t > His example ?
And it is t > be observed, that the example, thus set by
God at the beginning, was set anew by God manifested
in the flesh. Christ kept the Sabbath day h< ly; His
enemies, who evidently watched with special attention
His conduct on the Sabbath, could charge Him with
nothing that even they could attempt to represent as a
desecration of it, but that He all wed His disciples to
relieve their hunger by plucking the ears ■ f corn, and
that He Himself “ did good ” on that day ." He ha*
thus left us an example that we should follow Mis
steps.


