

the iioimoiis •
CONVICT LIFE
TWO LECTURES
JOII N FRO S T.
(X’UINTED X'UOJX THE SIIOKT-UANX) WBITEK’S NOTES.)
*
?ioi!tion:
Holyoakb & Co., 1-47, b beet Stueet.
Heiwoob, Mancuesteb ; Love, Geasoow; Mann. Lee us '


TWO LECTURES,
DELIVERED IN THE ODDFELLOWS’ HALL, TADIHAM,
August 31st, 1856,
MR. JOHN FROST,
MR. FLAGS, OF FADIBAM, IX THE CHAIR.
AFTERNOON LECTURE.
Ms, Frost, who was loudly cheered on presenting himself before the
audience, spoke as follows:—Mr. Chairman and friends, I should have been
a very bad judge of human nature had I entered upon a task such as that in
which I am now engaged with the expectation of finding it a bed of roses.
Every one who attempts to deprive bad men of power must expect to meet
with the hostility of those men whom he assails, and we all know perfectly
well that the worse use they make of power the more do they desire to re-
tain it. It is flow forty years ago since I commenced my political career.
In 1816 and 1817 I first became acquainted with the political state of our
country, and from that time to the present I have consistently advocated the
principles'of the Charter, believing from my soul that they are the only
sound principles upon which good government can be based, and that unless
they can be brought into practical operation we shall never have the House
of Commons filled with good men. As our chairman has already stated, we
want men in whose honesty and integrity we can place confidence : we do
not want men who endeavour to obtain that power with which the law in-
vests them for the purpoee of making it subservient to their own peculiar
aim*. Those of us who are acquainted with the history of the House of
Commons-know that from the time of Edward the First, when that house
was first established, until the present day, it has been, not an institution
for the good of the people, not an assembly of delegates endeavouring to ob-
tain for the people that which belongs to them, to procure for them the pos-
session of their rights, but an engine in the hands of great men to take from
the people that which they should call their own, and to apply what they
have thus acquired for their own benefit, and to the injury of the commu-
nity. We have a great battle to fight—l do not mean a physical battle, for
we must proceed cautiously, yet firmly and boldly. We have to contend
with great powers, and we must take our measures accordingly. I have
this morning received a letter from Wales, in which I am informed that the
prcs<, almost without exception, are attacking me hip and thigh. Their ob-
ject, I am told, is to put mo down ; but they have not put me down yet,
and I doubt whether they eveF will put mo down. (Cheers.) We know
that we arc in the right, that we are only asking for that which belongs to
us, and all we have to do, as men of principle, is to proceed with caution,
and success, in my opinion, must in a very short period crown our efforts.
The subject on which I mean to address you on the present occasion is one
that was commented upon in the “ Manchester Guardian" on Thursday
la«t. I come before yotf as a public character, ant} I believe that if my cha-
racter were to be strictly examined it would stand the test of inquiry. I
wish you, I wish my countrymen generally, to believe that I am actuated by
a desire for their good; that I seek for that which belongs to them, and not
for anything that I can gain. I have got nothing by agitation, I can assure
you ; nay, I may say that I have lost a great deal; but that will not deter
me from pursuing the same course I adopted years ago, and which I have


adhered to throughout in the belief that that course is the right one. As I
have said before, an article upon my proceedings appeared in the “Manchc: •
tet Guardian” of Thursday last, and 1 do nut think I could better engage
your attention then by reading a portion of that article, and making a fe.v
observations thereon, with a view of showing the nature of the charges lit t
have been preferred against me, and that they are not founded on the princi-
ples of justice. But before doing this, I would point attention to the fact
that not a single charge is made against my character, and that nothing has
been said which will have a tendency to lower me in the estimation of anv
thinking man. I have been accused of ingratitude to the government, 1
have been told that I am a shar.eless man, and other charges of that de-
scription have been brought against me ; but nothing has been advanced to
show that I have ever made use of any power I may have possessed with n
view to my own gain, improperly : the accusations that have been leveled
at me are of that description that cannot be well disproved or defended, be-
cause. they are merely based upon individual opinions. The editor of the
“ Manchester Guardian” says ;
“ Among the blessings which the conclusion of the Russian war has
conferred upon tire country, must be reckoned the restoration to English and
Irish society of a number of individuals who had, at various times, been de-
ported from their native shores for political offences. The term by which
we describe the delinquency of these exiles is, indeed, inadequate for tho
purpose ; for, if the crown had confined its favour to abbreviating tho doom
of simply political offenders, it must have looked in vain for an object ap-
pealing to its clemency.”
Now, the English and Irish exiles might have returned many years ago ifwvo
had gone on our knees and solicited such a favour of the English govern-
ment. Mr. Smith O'Brien, and the rest of the compatriots, refused indig-
nantly even to acknowledge that they were wrong. They said they had
not done wrong'in endeavouring to show the country the oppression under
which it laboured, and notwithstanding all the intimidation, threats, and
even promises that were made by the English government, not one of the
Irish exiles uttered a single sentiment that could be construed into an apo-
logy. The government attempted the same thing with me, but they found
me quite as firm as the Irish gentlemen, and if I had continued m Van Die-
men's Land all my days—though I am bound to England by near and very
dear ties, having a large family here—and had never been permitted to see
my family any more, not a single sentence should ever have escaped my lips
that any Chartist in the kingdom would deem dishonourable. (Cheers.) I
did not begin the contest with a view of begging and praying for anything
they could afford me f I began it from a conviction that I was doing my
duty, and I will adhere to the course I have hitherto pursued so long as
health and strength are Vouchsafed to me. Beg for my return ! Why, I
would not beg my life at \he hands of those men ; and surely it can hardly
be expected that 1 would beg for anything that would have the effect of
restoring me to England by a sacrifice of principle on my part. Now, this
does not seem to have pleased the editor of the “Manchester Guardian,” who
seems to think that if we had been a set of crawling, creeping reptiles, who
would have disgraced ourselves and our cause by making apologies to such
a set of men as those who constitute the government of tho present day,
we should have exhibited a proper spirit, But we did notact upon any such
principle •we-bore oppression, we suffered every punishment that was in-
flicted upon us, and we were determined not to do anything that would have
the effect of disgracing our cause. The article in the “ Manchester Guar-
dian” goes on to say


“Whatever may have been the rigour of the administration in times
past, there can scarcely be now alive a British subject who has bden con-
signed to punishment for hostility to the government of the day, except
where that hostility has been expressed in actions which involved open
danger to the property and lives of his fellow-subjects. Peace, however, is
the parent of forgiveness, and there is no one who questions the grace or the
policy of the decision which has allowed all ranks and orders of these mis-
guided persons to return unmolested and pitied, to the country which they
quitted with so little honour to themselves.”
There is noone, I think, whounderstandsthcEnglish government of the present
who will suppose that they were actuated by any. motives of clemency in
giving us our pardon. It was no such thing; it was a matter of policy on
the part of the government, and nothing mote. In 1853, a number of Irish
representatives petitioned Lord Palmerston for the return of Smith O'Brien.
He told them ho would take the matter into consideration. He did so, and
just as the session was about to close, he gave those gentlemen a denial
iiromising to take the matter into consideration against the next meeting of
’arliameiit. In 1854, a large meeting of the inhabitants was held in New-
port, and a petition was sent up to government praying for my restoration
to my native country. That petition was treated with contumely, and
thrown nside as unworthy of notice. .In the same year the Irish gentlemen
came forward again, and as Lord Palmerston then wanted the votes of the
Irish members, it became a question whether the Irish exiles could bo
pardoned and the Chartists left in Van Diemen’s Land. I was there eight
years longer than Smith O'Brien ; my companion Jones received his pardon
six years, and Williams eighteen months before me. I suppose they wete
so Cond of me out there that they did not wish to lose me; but whatever the
motive, they kept me longer than any one else, and at one time, Lord
I’abncrston actually told some friends of mine in the House of Commons,
that I was the only obstacle to the return of Smith O’Brien. However, from
sortie motives which I cannot think were other than political motives, they
did pardon me, and I am now here in my country for the'purpose of showing
the good people of England what sort of rulers they have so far as the penal
colonies are concerned. So far from my having made use of any apologetic
or conciliatory language towards Lord Palmerston or the] English govern-
ment, I will read you a few extracts from a pamphlet which I published in
America, and when you have heard them, it will be a matter of surprise on
your part that Lord Palmerston should ever have suffered me to return to
England, There could have been no other reason for permitting my ret urn
than that the government wanted the votes of the Irish members, many of
whom were detcimined that if he did allow the Irish gentlemen to come
hack, and would not extend the same act of justice toward the English
Chartists, they would secede and leave, him in the lurch, which he would
most certainly have been in, had they abandoned him. You will agree with
me when I read these extracts that no language proceeded from me that
might nut have proceeded from any honest minded and consistent man.
“Every reader of history must be well aware that the aristocracy of the
British Isles, were, and are, a curse to the world. The power of the law-
giver, in their hands, has been used for purposes destructive of everything
which virtuous men would prize.”
Ido not think you will call that bending to the aristocracy. The pamphlet,
from which this is taken, was, as I have already intimated, originally pub-
lished in America, copies of it were sent to Lord Palmerston, and.the other
ministers, they all read it before pardoning me, and I do not think that the
language it contains is such as wouldTiave been likely to induce such a man


as Lord Palmerston to permit my return, if he had i ot been actuated I y
motives of a political nature,
“ Wherever freedom attempted to raise its head, whether at home < r
abroad, there the power of the Parliament was exerted to destroy it. Insati-
able and mean in the pursuit of wealth, the aristocracy were like a taking
lion, seeking whom it might devour. Not satisfied with public property,
such as crown lands, church lands, charity lands, school lands, tithes, &c., &c.,
they contracted a debt a little short of a thousand millions of pounds, no
small part of which they have received, and while thousands, and hundreds
of thousands, are in a state of the greatest destitution, these haughty and
base descendants of the Normans are wallowing in wealth, received from the
taxes paid by those who want the common necessaries of life. Suppose for a
moment we cast our eyes to France at the commencement of the revolution
of 1789.”
Now, these are matters which I think ought to engage the attention of every
well wisher to his country. The only thing we have to do at such times as
the present, is to show the consequences that resulted from the exercise of
the power wielded by the aristocracy. There are thousands of persons who
in all probability would not act upon the principles they entertain, with
reference to the Charter, if they were not shown the use their rulers make
of tire power given to them—how they tax the people and how they appro-
priate the money they have raised by those taxes, the payment of which
occasions great distress among the people upon whom they are levied. There
are, also, thousands-wh.o would be ready to engage in an agitation, having
for its object the reduction of taxes, and who at the same time might think
very little about the principles of Chartism :
" Did any country in the world suffer more than France, at this period,
from the operation of laws made by haughty and corlupt men, whose will
was subject to no restraint ? Were not the leaders of the French Revolution
wise and good men; whose object was to raise their country to happiness, by
removing those customs and laws by which France was oppressed and
impoverished? Who prevented a consummation to desirable ?”
It is well known that there never was a set of wiser men than were assem-
bled at that period in France. Who were they then, what prevented the
French legislature from passing laws that would have been for the benefit of
the people of France ?
“ The English aristocracy! ! They knew well, that if a proper form of
fovernment were established in France, the example would be followed in
Ingland, They went to war with France for the purpose of restoring the
tyrants and tyranny. They subsidized the despots of the continent. They
spefit the money of the people of England to perpetuate their slavery. They
crushed the spirit of liberty in their own country by tyrannical edicts,
upheld and enforced by a standing army, and in doing so they contracted a
debt, the lamentable, the direful effects of which extend their ramifications
to every family in the'kingdom. For what purpose is the present war
undertaken by the English Government? Lord Palmerston told the inhabi-
tants of Melbourne that the war was against tyranny ! Against tyanny
undertaken, too, by Lord Palmerston, That man who can look at the con-
duct of the late Emperor of Russia without horror, can possess but little
humanity. In the pursuit of his ambition, or the gratification of his passions,
he was indeed a merciless man ; and one whose name should be held in
detestation; but, on my conscience, I believe that he was not a worse man
than Lord Palmerston, (“hear, hear,*’) and I believe, too, that my readers
will be of the same opinion before they finish this letter: the difference


between these two men was in their power not in the disposition to exercise
it! lam of the opinion, that opinion formed by muchteading and thinking,
that there is no cruelty, which the most ferocious of men could perpetrate,
that would not be practised by the aristocracy to uphold and perpetuate
their power, among the most prominent of whom is Lord Palmerston.”.
Now, I do not think that this sort of language waslikely to induce Lord Palm-
erston to suffer me to come back to England, unless there were some powerful
reasons in favour of my being pardoned. I have read this to show that
during the whole of the time I was in Van Diemen’s Land, and during the
period I was in America, not one word escaped me, tending to show that
my disposition and principles were changed, or that I ever condescended
to beg or make use of what I should consider improper language, with a view
of procuring my pardon, lam called ungrateful ; the writer in the
“ Manchester Guardian” accuses me of ingratitude, because I have not gone
home and remained with my family, leaving political matters to other persons.
It strikes me, however, that I am only performing my duty in going through
the country for the purpose of showing in what manner our countrymen in
Van Diemen’s Land are treated, and the state of society in that remote
region. Never, in my opinion, in any age or country, has society existed in so
depraved a state as I have witnessed in the penal colonies, produced to, by
laws not equalled in severity in any part of the civilised world. They tell
me that lam ungrateful to the English Government. I will endeavour, so
far as my abilities will permit, to show you the consequences of their rule.
I have with me a paper published in America, and in it is a report of a
meeting of the British residents in Broadway, held for the purpose of congra-
tulating me on my arrival in that country, and.to petition the Queen for my
restoration to England. In that is given g short history of the conduct of
the English Government to mo after the jury had found me guilty, and when
I was entirely dependent on the mercy of the government for my life. I will
■ eloto the circumstances. We were in the condemned cell, awaiting the
time fixed for the executions, when one of the three appeared very anxious
that we shoeld commit suicide—that we should defeat the object of the
government by taking our own lives. He thought it would be a most dis-
graceful death', if we were to allow ourselves to be hung, and afterwards to
have our heads cut off and our bodies quartered, though thelatter part of the
sentence probably would not have been carried into effect. The subject yras
discussed night after night, and at that time, I should tell you, we had very
little hope of receiving a remission of the death sentence. We were not
aware of the agitation that was taking place oufrof doors; everything was
kept secret from us, and it was when we were thoroughly persuaded that we
had no hopes of being suffered to live, that one of my companions introduced
the suggestion that wo should commit suicide.. I was opposed
suggestion from the.commencement. I thought it would be acting a
cowardly part indeed, for men placed in our situation to take away our own
lives, for by so doing I conceived, that we should be merely playing the
game of the governmen; that that would have been doing the very thing they
wanted us to do. After a great deal of discussion on the subject, two of us
came to the conclusion that we would await the event in preference to doing
that which in my opinion would have suited the purposes of the govern-
ment, New, mark the steps they took- to induce us to do that
which would of course hare prevented my being here to address
you to-day. The condemned cell was in one of the towers of the gaol,
secured by a strong gate. There was a very small room in which we lived
during the day, and when night came we were shut up in tht tower.
we were locked up together little did we think that the turnkey was lying
within six feet of our beds, and listening to every syllable of our conversation.


Some time alter the period I refer to a young man from Newport was
gent to Monmouth gaol for three years, for haying been concerned in the
affairs of 1839, I afterwards met him in America, and found, from what he
told me, that while we had been discussing the question of suicide, the
turnkey had been listening to all that we had said. From the conversations
related to me by that young man, 1 was convinced that this must have been
the case, because there were no other means of acquiring a knowledge of
our discussions, than listening at the door. No doubt, so soon as the
turnkey became acquainted with what had passed between us, he reported
what he had heard to the Governor of the Gaol, and the Governor, in his
turn reported to the Police Magistrate, who wsa in constant communication
with Lord Normanby, the then Secretary of State for the Home Depart-
ment. We were to have been hanged on the Saturday, and on the Thursday
previous, we received a letter from the Sheriff of Monmouthshire, of which
I will read yon a copy:—
To the High Sheriff of the County of Monmouth.
Sir, —I am to signify to you the Queen’s command that the execution oj
the sentence of death passed on John Frost, Zephaniah Williams, and
William Jones, now in the gaol of Monmouth, be respited fill Thursday,
the 6th of February; but the prisoners are to be distinctly informed that
the sentence of the law will then be assuredly carried into effect.
Now, that was received on the Thursday evening, two days before we were
to be executed. On the Friday evening, our turnkey came into the cell and
said “ I have just returned from the post office, and have met Ford, the
gaoler, and he is very law—indeed he seems as low as the grave. • He has
received a letter from the Secretary of State, and that has made him quite
low.” Ford came into the condemned cell on the same day, and read us a
letter he had received containing almost the same language as that I have
just read, and containing a direction from the Secretary of State that he
should read it to us, in order, I suppose, “to make assurance doubly sure.”
Well, just as we were going to bed, Ford capre into the room, and said
“ Frost, I have come here for the purpose ef having a little conversation
with you.” “ Well,” I said, “ what is it f I shall be glad to hear anything
you may have to say.” "What,” he then asked, “ would you like to have
dope with your bodies after you are sead.” Bather a pleasant subject to
introduce to men in our situation ! (Laughter.) It was a very gloomy
evening, and the place in which we were, the condemned cell, was anything
but ple&sant quarters, I can assure you, without saying anything of the
prospect before us. I looked at him! ”1 understood, was my reply,
“ that the sentence was that our bodies were to be placed at
the disposal of our most gracious Majesty. Have you received any
orders from her transferring the power which the law gives her to me or to
my companions ? Because, if you have received no authority to that effect,
your question amounts to nothing.” He could not say that he had received
such authority, because if he had said so we should have asked for it at
once. He therefore evaded the point as well as he could, but I endeavoured
to keep him to it. However, he continued to talk about cutting eff our
heads and quartering us, and everything that he thought might have a ten-
dency to excite fear on our par*: At last I said to him, “Mr. Ford, what
docs all this amouut to f You know that you have no authority for putting
the question you have put to me, and you know perfectly well that were I
to direct you or any one else how to dispose of my body, the authorities
would prevent my wishes being carried into effect. Besides that, you know
perfectly well that we have friends, who would not suffer our dead bodies to
remain above ground for want of some one to inter them.” Now, what was
the object of ell this on the part of the gaoler i What object had Lord Pal*


merston, and probably my friend Lord John Russell, in sending a communi-
cation of the description X have read, when at the same time it was deter-
mined that we should not be hanged ? They knew what our conversations
were, they knew that the subject of suicide had been discussed in the con-
demned cell, and they thought that by holding out no hope they would in-
duce us to do that which they tljemsclves were afraid to do. X think this
must be perfectly clear to every one who takes the matter into considera-
tion. Ought I, then, to be grateful to a government who were capable of
committing so base an act as that ? Am Ito go upon my knees and thank
them (for saving my life when they did all in their power to induce me and
others to take away oar own lives ? I think that no wise or honest man
would say I onght to be grateful for conduct, which, had it succeeded in
frightening us into the commission Of suicide, would have had the effect of
disgracing ourselves and of injuring our cause more than anything else that
could have happened. Now I come to another matter. When they had got
us into the convicts'hulk they nearly starved us. I really believe that in
the ten or twelve days I was in the hulk, I was reduced 20 lbs. or 30 lbs. in
weight, , They gave us no food but bread and water, or at least, none that I
could partake of save bread and water. After a little time, when we had
complained 6f the treatment, we had received, they gave us better food, and
by that time my stomach had become so weak it would scarcely retain any-
thing. When the period for my removal arrived, I was weaker than I had
ever oeen in my life.' They put us on board a barge. The weather was very
cold, as cold as it generally is in the month of February, and we we-e clad
only in our. prison dress—a little jacket and a little thin waistcoat.
In order, I suppose, to show some commiseration, they threw a piece
of old tarpaulin over ray shoulders, to prerent me from perishing of cold.
When we got on board the transportjhip, I was put into the hospital. Du-
ring the evening I was lying down, rather low—indeed more dispirited than
I had been during any period of my incarceration. I had forgotten myself
for a few minutes in a very uneasy kind of sleep, when 1 was awakened by
.hearing some one say, “ This, sir, is John Frost.” I-looked up, and then
found the hospital full or military officers. An old gentleman came up to
me and said, “I have not come here, Mr. Frost, for the purpose of reproach,
ingyou j I have come here to give you a little advice. I am the governor
of Portsmouth, and Lthink you willjio well to take my advice.” “ WelT,
sir,” I replied, “ lam ready to listen to' you.” “If,” he continued, “there
should be the slightest commotion in this ship during the time she is on her
voyage hence to Van Diemen’s Land, the officrt in command of the troops
has stlicl ofHers to act with the greatest promptitude.” " Would it not
hare been better,” said I, “that our lives should have been taken according to
law, than that thcyshould be taken on our passage to Van Diemen’s Land? And
do you mean that that promptitude will be evinced if I or any of us have
nothing to do with any commotion ?” “I have nothing further to say to
you, sir,” was the reply. When we had got within a few days sail of the
Cape of Good Hope, a letter was brought to me by a prisoner. In that letter
I was asked whether I and my companions would engage in an attempt to
take the ship from the authorities, and the writer assured us that if we would
engage in such an attempt, and were successful, he would ensure that we
should be obeyed. Now, that letter put me into an embarrassing position.
If' the surgeon superintendent had been aware that I had received a letter of
that sort, and had not disclosed it to him, he would have called it treason, or
misprison of treason. But I did not like to betray the man who had written
thus, supposing him to be honest in his intentions ; I therefore showed the
letter to one of my frftnds and he seemed inclined, I thought, to make the
attempf suggested. I then said, let us examine the matter fairly; we have


made one mistake, do not let us make another. Suppose we make the at-
tempt and fail; our death will not be a very honourable one, for if we should not
be killed at once, but taken prisoners, we are sure to be hung. There is no
one to save us here; no agitation to keep the matter alive and frighten the
government out of their intentions. In the next place, suppose we should
succeed, what are we to do with the 212 prisoners on board r In two hours
they would be masters of the ship, and if we attempted to prevent their doing
that which they would be sure to do first thing, procure drink, they would
throw us over-board. For my part I shall have nothing to do with it.” 1 then
put the letter into the fire and said nothing more about it. Now comes
the question, was that letter the act of the prisoner or was it the
act of the government, or of the governmetn authorities on board the ship,
for the purpose of entrapping me and my companions into something which
would give them the opportunity of taking away our lives ? That prisoner
would not have obtained writing paper without the knowledge of some'one
in authority on that vessel, and as for finding the opportunity of writing a
letter unobserved in a convict ship, that was quite out of the question..
When we got to Van Diemen’s Land, the Doctor, as he was about leaving
the ship, said to me, “ Frost, I am happy to bear testimony to your good
conduct since you have been under my authority, and let me tell you,” and
as he said this, he looked straight at me and put his finger to his nose,'" you
have said nothing, you have done nothing since you have been in thisship,
with which I have not been made acquainted/’ If that were so, he must
have been acquainted with that letter, and must have known that it was a
trap to take away our lives. Here then is another act of the government,
for which I think I have no reason to be grateful. Just look at these two
things. The government have possession of three persons who are convicted
of a certain offence, and endeavour to induce them to take away their own
lives. Failing in this, an attempt is made on board the convict ship to
induce us to get up a mutiny, whereas they would have been well prepared
to repel every movement of ours, if we had been foolish enough to fall into
their trap, and the result would have been that we should have been hung.
Now, I think it would be impossible for any one bearing the name of a
man to act a more disgraceful part than the government have acted ; and
yet the editor of the " Manchester Guardian ” tells me that I ought to go on
my knees to the Government, and thank them for suffering me to come back
to my own country. When we arrived at Van Diemen’s Land, we were sent
down to Port Arthur, a penal settlement, for the purpose of being placed in
certain situations. I was put into the office ol the commandant,-Captain
Booth, to fill the situation of police clerk. My companion Williams was
sent to the coal mines, and Jones was sent to the boy’s establishment at
Point Puer. I certainly do think that the wise men made a great mistake
in putting me into the commandant's office, I had not been there many
days before I was completely horror struck by the cruelties committed by
the Government authorities, and the sad consequences that resulted from a
convict code not equalled in severity in any part of the civilized world. A
short time after I had got into the office, I asked the commandant if he would
permit me to write a letter to Mrs. Frost. “Certainly,” he said, "by all
means, but you must be aware that no letter can be sent from Pott Aithur,
or any other place on Tasman’s peninsula, without it has been fiist submit-
ted to me. “ I will do nothing contrary to your regulation?,” an-
swered I, “I am here, and will make the best of my situation. 1 will
give you no trouble and shall feel very glad if you will think* so.” I then
wrote thejelter. That letter was put into the hands of Captain Bosth ;he
read it, and told me that he saw nothing objectionable in it. The letter was sent
home, and, though no act of mine, was published in England. There was


something in it that was displeasing to Lord John Russell, and orders came
hack to remove me from the commandant’s office. The commandant came
to me one day after he come from Hobart Town, and said, “ I have
orders to remove you from the office.” “For what?” Tasked, “have I
conducted myself in a manner that is displeasing to you?” “No,” said
Captain Booth, “ you have given satisfaction. ' “ And where are you going
to put me,” enquired I. " Why, I must put you in the gangs.” “In the
gangs, for what? Do you mean to put me in the gangs without trying me ?”
The gangs, you should know, are awkward places to be put into ; for when
there, you have to associate with men who are not the most pleasing char-
acters, and whose manners, habits, disposition and language arc such as to
form the worst pajt of transportation. They Have a space of about eighteen
inches to lie down in, twenty or thirty lying in a hut. Taking me out of
the office and putting me into the gangs without having committed any
offence, shows that the motives of justice in reference to myself, were any-
thing but the right ones, 1 was turned out of the office and put into the
gangs, and that was an act which I think every rational man will say was
most unjust and cruel. I had submitted the letter to the commandant, he
read it, and approved of it, and if there had been anything in it that was
wrong, I think it was his duty to have pointed it out to me, so that I might
have altered it, or have writteu*another letter. But pothing of that sort was
done. ' I was kept in the gangs for two or three years, and subject to the very
hardest kinds of labour that any man could endure. But nil this did me no
hatti), it only raised my spirit, and I think that I was actually a stronger
man after wot king in the quarries and carrying logs, than I had been before.
The exercise only added to my health, increased my strength, and increased
my desire to try whether I could not be of some service to my fellow
countrymen, if ever I should be permitted to revisit England. I now wish
you tfl listen with a little attention to the state of society in Van Diemen's
lAnd and the consequences resulting from a convict code, which Sir
William Molesworth has stated "is not equalled in severity in any part of
the civilized world,” Nothing can be more detestable than fur a lawgiver
possessing power over men, to make actions, innocent in themselves,
offences, and to punish the persons “ offending,’” with merciless severity.
One of the greatest crimes that a man can commit in Van Diemen’s Land, is
to walk through a settlement with his hands in his pockets. There is a
crime! A man puts his hands into his pockets, such an act is against the
regulations, he is brought up, tried, convicted and flogged. I knew a young
man, a very decent well-behaved young man, who was standing at the door
of his hut one day, when an old drunken vagabond of an overseer came by.
In those places they always choose the worst men they can find to fill the
government situations. Humanity is a quality that would exclude any one
from power in Van Diemen’s Land; for in the penal colonies humanity is the
greatest offence that an officer could be guilty of. The overseer spoke to the
young man in a most authoritative and impudent manner. The young man
looked at him and said nothing. “ Take your hand out of your pocket,”
said the overseer, and went off to the superintendent. That young man was
put into the cells : three days afterwards he was tried by the commandant,
and sentenced to receive thirty-six lashes. I saw him flogged; and what
effect had that punishment upon him ? It made him one the worst men in
the station. He became an entirely different man, and from that time was
continually receiving punishment, occasioned solely by the degrading man-
ner in which he had been treated. Would any man who reasoned upon
the subject, suppose that those persons who were possessed of authority were
subject to no restrictions in its exercise ? When men possess power, are
they justified in making use of it as they please ? I should think not. And


this is one of the evils of which I complain. We say that the power of the
lawgiver ought to be limited, and that he ought to be responsible for its
exercise. This would be- the case if the people had the power of
choosing the men who make the laws. Lawgivers should be responsible
for the exercise of their power; and why should it not be so ? They ought
to be responsible in their persons and in their property if they abuse the
power entrusted to them. What are the effects likely to follow, and which
have followed, such conduct as I have already drawn your attention to ?
Let me read to you an instance given in the pamphlet from which I have
already quoted, and thus show you how the laws enforced in the penal
settlements are contrary to the principles of justice and of human nature,
and what effects are produced by their severity.
“ While I was police clerk at Port Arthur—"
I was police clerk for twelve months, and during that period the books
passed through my hands—
“ Two sawyers were brought to the office and charged by the superin-
tendent with breaking a saw. They pleaded guilty to the charge of break-
ing, but denied that it was done wilfully. The commandant, always dis-
posed to reverse the maxim, which it is said should prevail in all courts of
justice, that innocence«hould be persumed till guilt be proved, pronounced
them guilty, and sentenced them to receive six and thirty lashes each. Now
let m$ describe a Port Arthur flogging.”
I am speaking in reference to human beings, your own countrymen, and it is
not impossible that some of those with whom I have been acquainted may
be relatives or friends bf persons who arc now present. I know that a large
number of persons, especially boys, were transported from Manchester while
I was in Van Diemen’s Land, and some of them were treated in a manner
the mere description of which woffld fie sufficient to shock human nature.
To proceed, however, with my description:—
“The flogger at this time was one of the most powerful men on the set-
tlement, and one who, like his master, felt a gratification in inflicting and
witnessing human misery. There were many prisoners who would bear
any punishment rather than complain; lam certain that they would have
died at the triangle rather than utter a groan. It was a contest between
the parties : the flogger using every means in his power to break the spirit
of those who suffered, and the sufferers determined to sustain the punish-
ment unflinchingly; the authorities looking on. It may be supposed what
the sufferings must have been when the operator was influenced by such
feelings. The knout was made of the hardest whipcord, of an unusual size.
The cord was put into salt water till it was saturated; it was then put into
the sun to dry ; by this process it became like wire, the eighty one knots
cutting the flesh as if a saw had been used."
And this punishment was also inflicted on men for the offence of putting
their hands in their pockets !
“It may be judged what sort of a state the back must have been in
after a flogging by such a man, and with such an instrument. When taken
from the triangles the chest would be quite black.”
The back, I should remark, would be in such a state that no one could ever
see anything like it who had not lived in the penal Twenty-five
lashes at Port Arthur, inflicted, as I have'said before, for tr fling offences,
produced more suffering than three hundred would have produced as they
are inflicted in the army.


" Yet the commandant would often witness this punishment with as
much indifference as if he weic looking at some philosophical experiment.
The next day the superintendent came into the hut to me, and said, ' Frost,
you remember the sawyers yesterday ?’ ‘Yes’, sir.’ ‘ I will now show you
the sort of men we have formasters. ' When I came to Port Arthur as super-
intendent, I gave every man that I could task-work ; among these were the
sawyers. I gave them a fait day’s work, and if they finished {he quantity
within time, they might employ their spare time for their own advantage,
I gave each a small piece of land to cultivate for himself. Many of them
would worklate and early, and would often finish their work by middle day
Friday ; they would then work in their gardens, or go fishing ; and as fish
abound in the bays, they would catch enough for the whole settlement; and
as we had, at that time,<scarcely anything but salt meat and very little vege-
tables, we found.the fish very acceptable. The men, with the view of
plehsing me, would often do more than their allotted task, and the work
would be much better done than it is at present, and very rarely was a saw
broken. The men were in much better health, better behaved, better tem-
pered, and many of therm were very industrious men. There was scarcely
any flogging, very little punishment of any sort, and the feeling between the
officers and prisoners was of a kindly nature.' ”
During the time I was in the office at Fort Arthur, it used to be my
duty to read the regulations to the prisoners. Oim day, I was engaged
in reading the regulations to about thirty or forty persons standing before
me in the dock, when I noticed a very tall powerful looking man, who
was built like a Hercules. Just as the prisoners were leaving the dock,
he said something to the commandant, complaining of the treatment he
had been under. He had been transported, 1 learnt, for some offence
against military discipline. The commandant paid no attention to the
man’s.complaint, and a few days afterwards the same man was brought
up charged with having assaulted his ewerseer. The overseers are always
the worst men to deal with, and he was charged with assaulting ene of
them. The man.told the commandant that -it was impossible for any
one living, who had any spirit, to bear insults such as he had received
from the overseer before he struck him; but this did not avail,. he was
sentenced to receive one hundred lashes, —one hundred Fort Arthur
lashes, and fifty of them in the breech. When he heard the latter part
of the sentence, he said, “ I hope not, sir. If lamto be flogged, let
me be flogged like a man, and not like a boy. I have been a soldier,
sir, and you have been a soldier; treat me like a man.” “By heavens,”
said the commandant, “ yon shall be flogged according to your sentence.”
He was so flogged, and in a very short time he was brought up again.
Never did I see a man who felt more acutely the sgony of his situation.
He was, as I have said, a powerful man. When he was tried a second
time, it was for not having treated the commandant respectfully, and all
that he had said was what I have just narrated. For this he was sen-
tenced to fourteen days, solitary confinement on bread and water, his
offence having been no mote than a remonstrance on the cruelty of his
former sentence. And what effect did all this punishment have upon
him? After he had served the fourteen days on bread and water —a
very small quantity of bread—he was taken out of his cell and put
before the door, heavilv ironed, with a large chain about' his waist,
fastened to another chain running along the causeway. In that position
ho worked for some time. One day I heard a cry of '* murder ! he has
killed a man.* I ran to the door, and there saw the man who had
been so cruelly treated, standing with two or three others, and a man
lying on the ground before him*nearlf dead. It seemed that he had


determined to abscond, and had made a confident of another person who
was working with him. This person had, he believed, betrayed him to
the authorities, and in a moment of irritation, he struck the other a
blow on the head. The wounded man was* taken to the hospital, and
in two or three days died. The offender was brought up and examined.
I took down an account of the examination before the magistrates. The
prisoner was as firm a man, probably, as ever I saw in my life. lie
said but little during the examination, and was committed to Hobart
Town for trial, where he was found guilty, sentenced to be hanged,
and he was hanged. Now,, here were two lives lost, both of which
might have been spared by anything like humane treatment. But the
overseers in Port Arthur are the very worst men that can be found, and
unless a man is a stock or stone, .it is almost impossible for him to re-
main in the gangs without offending some one'of the overseers, and
getting mercilessly punished. • I now come to a subject to which I will
crave your serious attention, for it is very important that we should consider
the effects produced by the administration of bad laws by bad men. It is
said by philosophers, and I believe the saying is a true one, that.injustice
and cruelty destroy the reflecting faculties, and leave no thought or wish
but for the immediate gratification of the sensual. In such cases no moral
feelings can restrain men from the commission of the very worst acts that
can be committed, amd these results I have witnessed in Port Arthur, to an
extent probably not equalled in the world. I would avoid these subjects if
I canid, but I am anxi ius that the people of England should know what is
the real state of society in that part pf the world, with a view that a change
should be brought about for the better. Within this year 1,200 men have
been sent from England to the penal colonies of Australia, and I will ven-
ture to say, that one half, if not more, have already been destroyed, if the
commission of the worst crimes that man can perpetrate be destruction.
The state of society in Yan Diemen’s Land when I left there, was not
equalled even in the worst days of the Canaanites. I say again that I
would avoid these subjects if I could, but I do believe that the duty I owe
to my countrymen requires that the matter upon which I am about to speak
should be fairly bronght before them, and in such a way that it cannot be
misunderstood.
“ Sir William Molesworth stated to the House of Commons, no one
contradicting him, ‘ that the convict code was not equalled in severity in any
part of the civilized world ; and that the depravity in the penal colony was
unequalled,’ ”
Having requested females to withdraw, Mr, Frost proceeded:—Some years
ago a report upon the then condition of Norfolk Island was made by the
officers there, in resident Chaplain made us of this language :
“Blasphemy, rage, mutual hatred, and the unrestrained indulgence
of unnatural lust,.are the things with which a short residence in the
prison-wards of Norfolk Island must necessarily familiarize tho convict.
What solemn feelings must arise in the breast of every thonghtfiil man
in reading the 19th.chapter of Genesis; and how must these be intensely
increased by the continual discoveries which are made, proving the. truth
of the historical part of the Bible.’’
There is no fact in history sustained by stronger evidence than the des-
truction of the Cities of the Plain, and the causes which produced that
destruction. When I was coming from Hobart Town to the United
States, _ we"wen£firs£to Collao. AboutJ’fifteen years ago, a great part of
that district was destroyed by an earthquake, and the spot on which it
formerly stood is now a beautiful and extensive bay. It is a common thing


in fine weather, when the ships are sailing by, for those en board to see the
tops of thehouses which formerly were a part ofCollao, and discoveries have
been made within the last twenty years proving to demonstration the truth
of the 19lh chapter of Genesis. While engaged in Van Diemen's Land in
looking over my memoranda and manuscripts relating to the conduct of
the authorities and the moral state of the prisoners, while considering how I
could most effectually make known to my countrymen the condition of the
prisoners, I was lent an English newspaper called the “ Guardian.” This
paper contained, to me, the most interesting and important information I ever
had met with, I insert what I copied from the paper.
“Discovery of the Site of the Cities of the Plain by M. De Saulcy,
Member of the French Institute.
“M. De Saulcy's arguments seem to us demonstrative, and if so, the
discovery is one of the most striking within the whole range of biblical
antiquity. The disinterment af Nineveh is, as a matter of feeling, a small
matter compared with the discovery of Sodom and Gomorrah. We do not
remember to have read anything of a more thrilling interest than this portion
of M. De Saulcy’s volumes. There is something so strangely awful in the
idea of these living monuments of divine vengeance yet remaining, after
thirty-six centuries, with the actual marks of the instrument of their over-
throw still visible on their blasted ruins."
“I was at FortArthurand on other stationsonTasman’sPeningula for three
years and a half, and during this time I was a most anxious observer 01 the
conduct of the authorities, and of the effect of their legulations on the mor-
als of the prisoners. I was in the daily habit of conversing with prisoners,
men of almost all grades of society, transported for different offences.
Among these were men of family, some of rare talents and great acquire-
ments. I wag made acquainted with the early history of many of them,
and I saw with deep regret how thoroughly depraved many of these
highly gifted men,- under the influence of circumstances, nad become.”
some of the most talented men I had ever known in my life I met with in
Fort Arthur, and they were some of the most depraved I had ever seen.
People talk of education. The best educated men I ever met in the penal
colonies, were the most degraded and debased. If you educate a man, if
you add to his knowledge without, at the same time, improving his natural
disposition, you do injury rather than good, and nothing can more strikingly
exemplify this fact than the state of the colonies in Van Diemen's Land.
“There are crimes of a certain nature which so thorougly debase the
human character that it is beyond repentance. In many cases, after a long
career of vice, the heart is softened, and the repentance is sincere and lasting.
But the crime of Gomorrah is of that nature, and so appalling in its co -
sequences, it brings the heart to such a state, that it is dead to every ren •
vating influence. It hardens the,heart to such a degree, that the only relief
it finds is in inflicting torments on others. Not ten men could be found in
the Cities of the Plain uncontaminated by this crime. It is evident that
the inhabitants could not be purified, therefore they were destroyed ; and
the account is handed to the world in sacred writ; and there lie the remains
of what was once the most beautiful spot on the globe, as a warning ; yes,
as a warning to governments and to nations. lam now about to describe
scenes, the description of which will, in all probability, excite different and
powerful feelings.”
You must recollect that.in what I have just read, I was writing to the
people of America, and some time or another I shall have much to say os
the state of that country, in this particular.


11 1 would avoid this, were it possible with the performance of the duty
which I owe to God and my country. There is no other mode of remedying
the monstrous evils, and of bringing the perpetrators to justice, but by a
description of the offences themselves, and of the lamentable consequences
which flow from them. Few things would give me greater pain than, un-
necessarily, to put upon paper a sentence calculated to exite the anger of an
American mother. Is there an American mother who would condemn me,
were her sons subject to a system, the* effect of which ’ I am about to describe ?
I believe not. There are English mothers, and these not a few, whose sons
are at this moment in situations infinitely worse than death. I will go far-
ther, and say, that to my knowledge there were, and probably are, sons of
American mothers in similar situations, and subject to the like consequences.
‘ Where-could I go except to America to make these things known ?’ There
is no fact in history sustained by stronger evidence than that of the destruc-
tion of the Cities of the Plain, and of the cause which produced it. Has
the English nation nothing to fear 1 Does not the same all-powerful Being
exist ? Has he not the same hatred of the crime as he had in the days of
Abraham ? Can I ask the people of England questions of greater impor-
tance ? Before any one condemn me, let him ask himself this question : Is
the writer doing anything displeasing to the Almighty ? Werq he, at this
moment, to be placed before the tribunal of God, and this charge made,
would be be condemned ? I will rest my case on the answer to this question.
1 had not been in the office of Port Arthur many days, when a man was
brought there, charged with this offence, committed under horrible circum-
stances,”
Mr. Frost here detailed the circumstances
" This first excited my suspicions. There*was at that time a young man
with whom I was in constant intercouse, who well knew Port Arthur.
From him I received information as to the great extent of this crime. He
pointed out to me who were in the practice of committing it; and he con-
vinced me, too, of the total indifference with which it was regarded by the
authorities. ‘There is a young man in the carrying gang, ’ said he, ‘just
arrived from Hobart Town; the men are after him from all quarters. You
will have him in the office soon ; the traps (constables) are looking out.’
On the 9th September, 1840, about five weeks after I was placed in the
office, this young man and another were brought to the office, and charged
with this offence. Let me claim your attention to this statement, lor by it
you will perceive the truth of what I now assert, that the authorities of
Van Diemen’s Land fore indifferent to the commission of this great offence.’
I will prove to your satisfaction that the feeling of the English Government
was of a similar kind, and I will prove to you, in some future letters, that in
the estimation of the English and colonial authorities, smoking was deemed a
greater offence than that of Gomorrah, and punished with greater* severity.
It will be recollected that I was present at this trial, and that my description
was taken from the record book at Port Arthur. When a prisoner was
brought to the office, and placed in the dock, the witness stood forward to
give his testimony; he informed the commandantof the nature of the offence;
the commandant after he had heard the statement, directed the police clerk
what name to give to it. The witness, < n this occassion, was a very well-
informed man, one who had seen much of life. ‘Well, what have you to
say against these men ?’ said the commandant. ‘Myself and my fellow
constable were in the bush, watching the carrying gang. We had heard
that abominable practices had been carried on by some of them. We saw
these men in the act of committing an unnatural crime.’ tWhat name shall
I give it ?’ said the clerk. ’Gross misconduct, said the commandant. It


wag entered on the book as gross misconduct. The constable was sworn:
*My companion and myself were in the bush, watching the carrying-gang.
We saw the two prisoners in the act’— ‘ Stop !’ said the commandant J ‘ you
witnessed a disgusting scene ?’ ‘ We, said the constable, ‘ witnessed a dis-
gusting scene.’ The prisoners were sentenced to twelve months’ hard
labour in chains. From 1840 to 1845, about half a dozen were tried
for this offence before the Supreme Court, found guilty, and sentenced to be
hanged; not one was, I understand, executed. In 1846, two men were tried
for this offence, committed under the most horrible circumstances ; they
were found guilty, and executed. The power of a magistrate does not ex-
tend to try men for felony; but he did try them; he did assume the power,
and he gave these men a less punishment than if they had been charged with
‘ having tobacco in possession. ’ Instead of committing these two men to
Hobart Town, to be tried by the Supreme Court, he gave the offence another
name, in order to bring it under his jurisdiction, and, by doing so, • he
smothered the thing.’ Again, look at his conduct to the witness ! He stopped
him, put words into his mouth, in order to preyent the teal crime from
appearing! Why was this course pursued? The commandant knew that the
authorities at home, and in the ‘ colony, wanted to conceal the state of society
among the prisoners; ’ and he was aware that if he had committed these
men to be tried by the Supreme Court, 'he would not have pleased his
masters ! ’ Let us now lay before America, and Great Britain and Ireland,
the state of society among the convicts, ‘ never forgetting ’ that the cause
was, and is, a code* not equalled in severity in any part of the civilized
world. ’ During the administration of Sit Eardley Wilmot, it was commonly
reported in Hobart Town, that a great number of prisoners who had just
arrived from the peninsula where in a wretchedly diseased state. A Dr.
Lilley, the leading Presbyterian minister of HobaU Town, went to the
Govenor, to inquire as to the truth of the matter. You shall hear the result
in the doctor’s own words. In a few days after Hie interview with the Gov-
ernor, a meeting of the Prebytery was held. On addressing the meeting,
the doctor uttered this language :— ‘ Sir Eardley Wilmot permitted me to
see the report of the medical men from the mines. This account was of the
most revolting nature. There were eighty cases of disease, consequent on
this horrible crime.’ In the year 1854, just before I left Van Diemen’s
Land, I was talking to Dr. Lilley ; the subject was the state of the prisoners.
I asked him if he recollected what appeared in the newspapers ns to the
interview between him and the Govenor ? • Perfectly well, said the doctor:
‘it was quite correct. Why do not you,,who have seen so much, publish
an account of the state of the prisoners ? ’ My answer was, ‘ The proper
time has not arrived.’ There were in Van Diemen’s Land, men from all, or
neatly all, countries, subject to the same brutal treatment, and too often
followed by the same effects. It requires a person to pass through the dif-
ferent gradations of punishment, such as was administered in the penal
colonies, to be sensible to what a state men may fall under the influence of
circumstances. This state of things shows, too, clearly, what meh possessed
of power are capable of when subject to no restraint —when far removed
from public observation and censure. This state of society, in a greater or
lesser degree, has existed in the penal colonies for more than half a century,
and as the depravity increased, the pengl code increased in severity. May it
notbesald that the Almighty is slow to anger? The state of society described
by Sir William Moles worth existed previously to 1840. The number of prisoners
subject to the code of Norfolk Island and Port Arthur was small, compared
to the number of prisoners within the colony. In 1840 a new system was
introduced by Lord John Russell, called the Probation System, which in-
creased the punishments and the depravity in a tenfold degree. Every pris-


oner to Van Diemen’s Land was sent to a probation party for one, two, three,
and sometimes four years, before he was assigned to a master, and in these
places subject to a code similar to that of Nbrfolk Island aad Port Arthur.
What were the effects of this new system ? This system, the work of a re-
formed Ministry and a reformed Parliament? Each probation station became
a Gomorrah, full of crime, misery, and disease ! Yes, and this state was
well known to the Ministry and the Parliament, yet thousands were yearly
sent to these places, principally young men and boys, to a fate worse than
death. Just about this time I saw an extract from. an English paper; I in-
sert a copy. ‘ The Duke of Richmond gave ndtice that if there were no
remedy for the fearful evils existing in the colony of Van Diemen’s Land, as
to the state of the convicts, he would move for a committee of inquiry, for
in no country calling itself Christian was there a worse state of depravity.’
There was not a member of Parliament who was not well aware of this
fearful state, and yet not one man could be found to properly expose it, and
to trace the evil to its cause, that cause being irresponsible power in the
hands of vicious men. In addition to the fearful state which I have partly
described, there was another evil well known to the authorities. It was
almost impossible for a good-lodking youth to be sent to any of these places
without falling a victim to the hellish system, for if other means failed he
would be forced. A youth was sent to the coal mines, in which were so
many diseased men. He resisted all attempts on his person. One day, in
the mines, six men lay hold of him, threw him down, and four held him
while two violated his person. Attempts were made to hush up the
matter; he would hear nothing of the sort. The six men were apprehended,
committed to Hobart Town, tried by the Supreme Court and found guilty.
Two of them were executed; I saw them hanged. The other four were sent
to Norfolk Island, there to carry on the same practices. Were Ito stop
here, I think I have made out a case which must excite the indignation of
every honest man, to whatever nation ho may belong; but this fornjs a very
small part of the charges which might be brought and satisfactorily proved
against the aristocracy. Under the government of Colonel Arthur an estab-
lishment was formed on Tasman’s Peninsula, called Point Puer, to which
boys of a certain age were sent from Great Britain and Ireland to be taught
trades, to be reformed, to be made useful members of society. Here,
were scenes which threw Norfolk Island and Port Arthur into the shade !
Scarcely a boy ever left that place among the many, many thousands who
were sent there who did not fall a wretched victim to the system. Here,
too, the authorities placed me in a situation to see the system naked, for the
records of the trials at Point Puer passed through my hands. I was one day
talking to a very intelligent man, who had been at Point Puer for a consid-
erable time ; he 'had acted as an overseer, and saw much of the iniquity of
the place; the subject was the moral state of the boys. ‘ Something hap-
?ened one evening at the Point,’said he, * which distressed me'more than
can describe; I shall never forget it. There was an exceedingly nice lad at
the Point; he had been well brought up. The big boys made many attempts
to reduce him to the same state as the rest; they had, however, failed. One
night, just before the boys were locked up, several big boys got hold of him,
and took him to some distance from the station ; we heard his cries, anjl they
went to our hearts. ‘ Help? help, murder, murder, mercy, mercy, oh God,
oh God !! ’ * What did you do ? ’ said I. ‘ What did you do ?' 1 Nothing,
wo could do nothing; if we had attempted anything, the big boys would
have killed us. They succeeded. He is now grown to be a fine young man;
I meet him often in Hobart Town, but never do I see him without thinking
of that night. . The authorities in the colonies.knew these things as well as
we did. Many a time have we urged on Captain Booth the necessity of a


different arrangement, particularly as to the mode in which the boys sleep.
What we said amounted to nothing. The big boys and the little ones slept
in the same room, and I need not tell you what followed. But,’ said he,
4 it would be unfair to throw all the blame on Captain Booth. A plan was
sent to .the Home Government, by which much might have been avoided ;
the answer was, 4 the Home Government disapproved of the alteration.’ ”
For three years and a half I was on Tasman’s Peninsula; for twelve months
I was in the office, and during this period I was a mosLattentive observer
of all that took place, dt the effects of prison discipline upon the morals of
those who were subject to it. It appeared as though the authorities were
determined that I should see the thing in its most hideous aspect, for after I
had been in the police office twelve months, and had acquired all the know-
ledge necessary to lay the state of things before my countrymen, they sent
me from place to place throughout the whole Island, and almost everywhere
I went, I found the same practices prevailing, the same cruelties and the
same moral degradation. I do not think that any other place in the world,
ever produced so much misery as has arisen from the prison discipline of
Van Diemen’s Land. What is to be done to cure this evil ? Will the people
of England submit to such things ? We talk of taxation, and. very pro-
perly so, we talk of the conduct of the authorities on various matters, we hold
their conduct in contempt, and we scorn the actions of men who really
deserve our scorn; but what are all these things compared with the terrible
state of society which I have just described ? What can be the cause of this
I cannot conceive, unless it arises from the same thing that has brought you
here this evening—the fact that the men in the House oj Commons have no
feeling for the people.. Ido believe that if the authorities were convinced
that every man sent as a prisoner from England would be reduced to tho
state I have just described, it would not occasion on their gart one moment’s
regret. For many years I have been a very attentive reader of the Bible;
during the time I was in Van Diemen’s Land, I was a very assiduous student
of that work, and the result of my investigations have been a thorough
belief of its contents. We hear and read of things that taken
place thousands of years ago, we have works handed down to us from
the times of the Greeks and the Romans, the works of Homer, Demos-
thenes, Cicero, and no man who is acquainted with the nature of
testimony can doubt the statements relative to the origin of those works;
yet there is nothing in the testimony confirmatdry of many of those old
writers that can carry with it half the weight of that which has been
discovered in corroboration of the state of society among the Canaanites
as described in the Old Testament. The subject upon which I have
been addressing you is with me an-all engrossing one; I can scarcely
talk about anything else but the horrible state of society in Van Die-
men’s Land, and the terrible consequences resulting from the severity of
the punishments inflicted on the prisoners. Are we, I ask, to submit to
this r Is it a matter of indifference to us that our countrymen should
be sent out, sometimes for the most trivial offences, to places where
they are treated worse than brutes, and where such moral degradation
as I have described, arises from such treatment? The course that I
mean to pursue is this:—On coming to London, I called upon Mr.
Duncombe, and put into bis hand the pamphlet from which I have been
reading to you. I described to him many things that are not men-
tioned in the pamphlet, and he was perfectly horror struck. I mean,
when Parliament meets, to be up in London. I mean to prepare peti-
tions, I will take care that those petitions contain such evidence as will
satisfy every reflecting man as to their truth. I will put these into the
hands of Mr, Duncombe, and I hhve no doubt that he will do his duty


ns on other occasions. We shall then see ■what the wise men will do.
Some time ago, after I had put the pamphlet into the hands of Mr.
Duncombe, he handed one to a gentleman who has taken an active
part on the transportation question. He sent down to me for twenty-
five or fifty copies, staling that he wanted to place them in the hands
of a committee of the House of Lords, and a committee of the House of
Commons, in order that they might see the state of society in Van Die-
men’s Land, and if possible, do something to alter the present system.
But the committee of the Lords, notwithstanding the pamphlet placed in
their hands, have recommended that .transportation shall be again re-
sorted to at some place distant from the Australian colonies, and no
doubt with the same discipline and the same effects resulting from their
policy. If a man, .a father, a husband, can hear* and believe the truth
of these statements without having his best feelings excited, he scarcely
deserves the name of a man. I hope they will make a proper impres-
sion upon yon, and that in your different circles and localities you will
talk the matter over; and should you be in need of a stimulant to in-
duce an endeavour to obtain a real reform in the House of Commons, I
believe yon will find it in what I have stated to you. No man can. consider
these matters attentively, without being anxious for a change in the present
system. If there be any truth in revelation, and I dare say that most of
those around me believe there is, the system, unless changed, is certain to
produce the same results that were brought about thousands of years ago in
the most beautiful cities in the world. What are we asking for now as
(Aartists ? A change in the mode of electing members of the House of
Commons; and is not the present mode sufficient to induce any man to take a
part in bringing about a reformation ? In the year 1847,1 was Mayor of New-
port. An election took place, two wealthy men were candidates, and I will
venture to say, that mole than £ 20,00 J was spent in bribing the different
electors. The present state of the elective franchise in England, is one I
think that cries aloud for a change. Just think for one moment of the sum of
£20,000 being spent in an election for a small borough, containing probably
26,000 inhabitants, and all this to induce men to come forward and vote for
candidates'whom they believed in their consciences were unfit for the position
they sought. But there was one man at that election whose name ought to be
held by his countrymen in veneration. He was a working man. The contest
was very close, and he was applied to by the blues—they were the tones—for
his vote. The person who applied to him, took £2OO out of his pocket and
laid it upon the table. “ There,” said hs, “I will give you that £2OO if you will
vote for us.” “No,” said the man. But his wife was standing by him at the
time, I have generally found that there is most fiependence to be placed in
the woman, butin this case, the wife said “ take the money, just think of the
consequences that would result to your family from that £2OO. You know
how poor you are, and what good that will do you.” The husband looked at
the money, and said “ I know that it would do me a great deal of good at
present, but it would ultimately be a curse to me. It is the wages of sin, and
as such, I will not take a farthing of it.” (Applause.) Now, that man is
one in a thousand. I saw him in America, where he died about six months
ago. You will scarcely be able to find another man in his situation in life,
perfectly sensible of the advantages that would result from the possession of
such a sum of mbney, but who would nevertheless put it aside, despite the
persuasion of his wife, and refuse to take it, A few words more, and I have
done. When you go home to your families, you will probably talk these
matters over,but will it end in talk ? Will you not endeavour to reform the
system thaMs productive of such a state of society as I have described ? I
trust you will, I hope you will, as men,'as Christians, as fathers, do all in your


power to change a system which is a curseXo the world, and I pray God; that
he will impress on your hearts the necessity of exertion on the part of each
and all of you to realise so desirable a result. (Cheers.)
EVENING LECTURE.
The Cha.:bmxn having announced that Mr. Frost’s lectures would be
published,
Mr, Frost said—l do not think a more effectual method of .helping for-
ward the object we have in view could be adopted than to place the-truth
before the people of this country, and I am therefore very glad to hear that it
is intended to lay before the community some of the scenes that have been
described to-day. Sumetimes a powerful impression may be made by talk-
ing, but when you have a book before you, when you read it and go over it
again and again, the impression is much mote likely to be permanent and
lasting. It may not be uninteresting to you to hear something of my com-
panions in misfortune —Williams and Jones. They are both in Van Diemen’s
Land. Williams is engaged in seeking for coal mines, and Jones keeps an
hotel in Hobart Town. Williams has every prospect of making a good for-
tune, but Ido not think Jones has been quite so lucky. Some time ago Wil-
liams found coal in Hobart Town. As soon as he had begun to seek for coal,
the wise men out there came to the pit where he was at work, and did all in
their power to induce him to give up the attempt. They said there was no
coal there ; but Williams is not the sort of man to be easily dissuaded from
such an attempt as he was then making, apd he at length succeeded in ob-
taining coal. If he had remained there I - think he might have done better
than engaging in a larger undertaking. However, he sold his moiety of the
discovery for £BOO, and with that capital is now engaged in seeking for coitl
ata place near Launceston. If he finds it he will soon make his fortune.
remember one day, while I was in the office at Port Arthur, a signal-man
came to meandsaid, “ Ihavebadnews, Frost; very bad news.” “ What is
the matter ?” asked I. “ Williams has bolted.” “What," I exclaimed,
“ Zephaniah Williams ? ” “ Yes,” was the answer. This intelligence gave me
a great deal trouble, of for I well knew the consequences of bolting in VanDie-
men’s Land. Noonewho hasnotbeen therecanhavescen such miser able things
as the convicts would risk their lives in for the purpose of escaping. In the course
of a few hours news came from the commandant that it was Zephaniah Wil-
liams who had bolted; I had had some doubt at first whether it could be
him. He and three others, it was stated, had a canoe made, then left the
mines, and got to the opposite shore on Forrest’s Peninsula. >( It was their
intention to nave gone on board some ships that were lying a't a distance—
American whalers. It is no very uncommon thing for convicts at Van Die-
men’s Land to escape to the whalers, and some of them have home sufferings
which you might suppose human nature incapable of enduring in their at-
tempts to get away. Two young men were once brought to Port Arthur.
They had been for several days on board a whaler, concealed in an oil cask.
The authorities searched the ship all over, aud at last they made use of bay-
onets, one of which, being thrust through the cask, struck one of the poor fel-
lows on the head, This made him sing out, and his place of concealment
being thus discovered, he and his companion were seized. They were taken
to Hobart Town, before the Governor, and I will now relate a fact to con-
vince you that all ths convicts in Van Diemen's Land are not so bad as they


are generally supposed to bpindeed, I believe that by very far the greater
part of those men, if properly treated, might eventually become vejy useful
members ofsociety. But the mode in which they are treated drives them
to desperation, and their very worst passions then become excited. Sir John
Franklin, the Governor, said to those two men, “You have been on board a
certain ship, and you have been found in that ship ; now, if you will come
forward and give evidence against the captain of that ship, so that he may be
convicted, he shall be fined in a penalty of £SOO, and you shall receive a
moiety of that penalty, in addition to which one of you shall have a ticket of
leave, and the other a conditional pardon.” This was one of the greatest
temptations that could have been held out to men so circumstanced, parti-
cularly the offer of the ticket of leave and the conditional pardon ; and yet
those two men refused the offer : they would not come forward and betray
the man who had treated them kindly. This shows that there are some men
out there who are not entirely lost to virtue, and I do believe that the opin-
ions entertained of the convicts generally are not just. Some of the worst
men are to be found out there; but they are not all bad men ; for I am tho-
roughly persuaded that if all the innocent men who are sent out to Van Die-
men's Land were placed together, they would forma goodly number. One
time, an old superintendent of a probation station said to me, “I was talking
to-day with one of the swell mob, and he told me that he committed an act
at onetime in England which weighed heavily ou his mind at that moment.
1 In fact,’ said he, 1 there is not a day passes over me that I do not feel the
consequences of the great sin I have committed. I was a pickpocket, Ido not
mean to disguise the fact', and was well known to the police. One day I
was in a crowd, and picked a gentleman’s pocket of a pocket-book ; but he
missed the book almost immediately, and gave thealarm. Some of the police,
who' were at a distance, saw mo and were making towards me. I knew per-
fectly well that they were aware I belonged to the swell mob, so I slipped
the pocket-book into the pocket of a person standing before me. When the
policemen came up and were going to lay hold of me, I pointed to the other
man, who was searched, and the book found in his pocket. I went before the
magistrates and gave evidence that I saw the man take the pocket-book out
of the gentleman's pocket. The man was tried, convicted on my evidence,
he is now in Van Diemen's Land, and has been here for the last two years.
Sometime after that I was lagged for committing an offence of a similar kind,
and here I am; but not a day passes over my head that does not bring me great
grief tothink that I should have been the means of sending to this place an
innocent man who was guilty of no offence at all.’ ” I can assure you that
these is no small number of innocent persons sent out there. I knew a young
woman in Hobart Town, at whose house I lived for some years; she was
then married. A more virtuous woman I believe never left England. She
had lived in London years before, and was about to be married to a young
man who was foreman in a cooper’s shop. Apartments had becu taken, and
the young woman and her relations had gone to the apartments preparatory
to the marriage, which was to have taken place in two or three days. Her
intended husband purchased some knives of one of the men in' his employ ;
but he djd not know that they had been stolen from a gentleman's house,
whither some of the coopers had been sent to do some work. The foreman
gave the parcel to the landlady of the house where he and his intended wife
were to live. It was aTnown paper parcel, and that was put into one of the
rooms. The young woman never opened it, nor did she know what the con-
tents were. One of the persons who had stolen the knives give information
to the police as to the party who had bought the knives. A policeman went
to the house where the young woman was, and said, “ I have come to search
this house.” “ Well, said she, "my house is open toyou.” " Whstis


this ?” said the constable. He laid hold of thffparcel, opened it, and found
it to contain the very knives of which he was in search. The young woman
was tried, convicted, and sentenced to seven yetfrs’ transportation, she know-
ing no more of the circumstances than I did, who was in England at the time.
These facts will be sufficient to convince you that there are many in Van
Diemen’s Land who ought not to be there. What are we to think when we
find that persons who are charged with offences of which they have never
been guilty are sent out there and treated in the manner I have already de-
scribed ? I know a man there who was what is termed a “ cracksman.”
During the time I was there I was very anxious toconverse with these men,
and to obtain as much information as I could relative to their former mode of
life, and how they had become the degraded characters that many of them
were. The young man I have just alluded to was formerly one of the first
“cracksmen” in London. The word “cracksman” means housebreaker.
He told me of circumstances that convinced me of the innocence of a person
who had been transported to Van Diemen’s Land fora robbery thathad been
committed in the city. “I,” said the cracksman, “was suspected, and a
policeman in plain clothes was sent to apprehend me. I was in the habit of
frequenting a certain house, and the waiter came to me one night
and told me that a person wanted to speak to me. I went
to the door and found a well-dressed man. He asked me if my name were
and I told him it was. Hejthen put his hand into his pock-
et and said 1 1 have a warrant for your apprehension.’ ‘Oh!’ said I, ‘well,
I’ll come.' As we were going along in a lonely street, I took out a life preser-
ver which I always carried with me, and struck the policeman as hard a
blow as I could strike. He fell, apparently dead. He was ill for a long
time, and his life was despaired of. Another person of similar descrip-
tion to myself was apprehended and tried for the offence. The policeman
swore to him, and he was transported. A few months afterwards as I
was going along Regent’s Park, X met the policemen with a handkerchief
round his head. A superintendent was with him. Our eyes met; I
was satisfied he recognised me, and I made off." But to return to
my companion Williams; after he had absconded, he was apprehended,
or rather he gave himself up at a place called Richmond. He was
brought back to Port Arthur and tried. Two persons who absconded
with him proved that he did not go voluntarily, but that they forced
him to accompany them, and yet, notwithstanding this, the commandant
sentenced him to two years’ hard labour in chains, a punishment which
he expiated before the door of the office, breaking stones from a stone
heap under the eye of a very watchful overseer. But the worst of it
was that he was put into what are called the “cells.” These cells Ae
about seven feet long by four feet in width. They are quite dark, and
the occupant is not allowed even a knife to eat his food with. They
throw in to him in the dark, as they would to a dog, a little food, and
there is nothing but an old rug for> him to lie upon. If he is wet he is
obliged to remain in his wet clothes till the following morning, and I
believe the treatment that Williams received on those occasions weak-
ened his constitution very materially. Before that time he was a hearty
man, but when I left Port Arthur he was not so hearty as I am now.
A shocking circumstance occurred in connection with two men, Hill and
M'Kay, who bolted with him. Hill was a fine young man. He had
been a constable in Hobart Town, and became attached to a young wo-
man. He petitioned to be allowed to marry her; but the petition was
refused. He became desperate, committed some offence, and was sent to
Fort Arthur. When Hill and his companion had got upon the main is-
land, M'Kay, who had received a great injury from a sawyer working


some distance from where he then was, fell in with his enemy, and
murdered him. Hill was not present at the time. They afterwards
-broke into a gentleman's house, and a large reward was offered for their
apprehension. After the murder, the two went to the hut of some saw*
yers, with whom they had some rum. When they went away they pro-
mised to return next day, but in the interim the sawyers had seen the
placards offering £IOO for their apprehension, and a free parden to any
one giving the information, if he were a prisoner. They therefore seized
the fugitives on their return to the hut, and those men were eventually
hanged,—Mr. Frost went on to remark that in his belief nine out of ten of
the offences committed by convicts were created by the severity of the
laws, and the cruelty of those who administered them. There was no
place in which justice was less understood or less practiced than in the
penal colonies. The authorities had no notion of justice; they did not
consider the difference between innocence and guilt, but were as ready
to punish an innocent man as a guilty one. There was a magistrate
whom he knew, who was a most corrupt fellow. The only way to gain
a point with him was by a bribe, for he was always ready to receive
presents of any description. It was no uncommon thing for any one hav-
ing an assigned servant, who had done anything that displeased his mas-
ter, to be sent to the police magistrate with a present and a letter. In
the letter the servant’s offence was set foith, and the magistrate, with-
out trying the man, would order him to be flogged and sent home. On
one occasion, however, a police magistrate made a trifling mistake. A
servant was sent with a letter and a present, but as he suspected some-
thing wrong, he persuaded another man to be the messenger. The
result was that (he wrong man was flogged, and the injured person, who
happened to be a freeman, took proceedings against the magistrate that
were only compromised by the payment of a very large sum of money.
On another occasion, a shepherd, who was an assigned servant, was
driving some sheep, when he was met by a man of some distinction,
moreover a military man, and in his (Mr. Frost's) opinion, they were
the worst men to whom power could be given. They brought into the
civil service the same spirit which actuated the military service, and any
departure from what they considered the respect due to the officers,
was in their opinion a high crime. The convict shepherd was subse-
quently taken up on a charge of having passed a magistrate without
touching his hat. He was tried by the very magistrate to whom he had
failed in respect, and that functionary at once assumed the somewhat
singular position of accuser, witness, and judge combined ! The result was
that the shepherd received thirty-six lashes, and when liberated after his flog-
ging, he discovered that he had lost a portion of the sheep he had
previously been tending. On reporting what had dccured to his master,
the latter, instead of pitying the man for the treatment be had received,
caused him to receive another 36 lashes for having lost the sheep! On
another occassion, a ticket-of leave convict dunned a magistrate for money
owing to him. The method of payment resorted to was unique. The ma-
gistrate had the man closely watched, and after a time the poor fellow was
brought up oh a charge of breaking some one of the government regulations,
convicted, and sent to Port Arthur for two years. Whatever property that
man possessed would all have been taken to by the crown or by that magis-
trate, and he dare say kept by him, for when persons of that description
got hold of property they generally stuck to it and do not like to let it go.
The mode of administering justice in Van Diemen’s Land, independent of
the cruelty he had spoken of, was the strangest he had ever known. All his
(Mr. Frost's) hearers had read of Sir John Franklin. He knew Sir John
well, and could affirm that a more brutal man probably never existed, nor


one less fitted for the situation in which he was placed. A constable, who
lived some distance from Hobart Town, had a wife who, besides being a
woman of some education, was possessed of great personal attractions,'
A police magistrate residing in the same district, attempted; though
unsuccessfully, to seduce this woman, but she repelled him with in-
dignation and scorn. The husband, when informed of this outrage, wrote a
letter to Sir John Franklin, who was at that time the Governor of Van Die.
men’s Land, but a? the letter was, and very naturally so, somewhat strongly
worded, Sir John was thrown into a violent passion—not atlearning the con.
duct of the magistrate, but because of the language made use of by the
constable in describing his wrongs. Sir John Franklin was enraged to find
that the constable had spoken in disrespectful terms of his superior officer,
and in the end, although he dismissed the magistrate, he dismissed the con-
stable also. Only yesterday the statue of a great man, or of aso called great
man, was fixed in a conspicuous part of Manchester —the statue of thelato
Duke of Wellington. Probably, said Mr. Frost, there never lived in this
world a more unjust man than .he Duke of Wellington. He acted upon a
principle which it will be sufficii nt for me to lay before you in order to con-
vince you that he deserved the character I have given him. Never, in the
whole course of his life, from ll e very moment he possessed power as a
military man, did he nor would hi list m to the complaint of an inferior officer
against a superior. I have nodoulttrat those who are acquainted with the
conduct of the Duke of Wellington will admit this statement to be true.
Never did any man in the wbrld discover a wantof justice, morality, and right
feeling more thanhcwhocouldconduct himseltin this way, andyctlhat man is
held up to the veneration of mankind, and thousands were yesterday assembled
to witness the inauguration of a statue to perpetuate his memory. Is there
any prospect of a sound political change in this country while men are thus
ever ready to worship whatever is possessed of power ? I can see no difference
between the putting up of that statue In Manchester, and the conduct of the
Babylonians in worshipping the golden image. While men arc ready to get
in this manner, while they continue to submit to those who are possessed of
power, regardless of the way in w hich that power is exercised, it is useless for
us to talk of the Charter. In the case I have mentioned, Sir John Franklin
found fault with the constable because he had spoken in disrespectful terms
of his superior officer. A gentleman who happened to hold a high official
appointment in the colony, and who was with Sir John at the time said, "but
consider the matter amoment before you decide. What would have been your
situation if anyone had attempted to take liberties with your wife? would
you net have felt and acted as this man has done under similarcircumstanccsf ’’
“Oh ! ” answered Sir John ; “ but that is no justification. He should have
spoken in respectful terms of his superior officer ; that is what I blame him
for not having done.” * But,’ rejoined the other, “how is a man to be respect-
ful towards a man who has attempted to commit the greatest outrage that
con be perpetrated against a married man ? ” But Sir John did not see the
matter in that light and he said “ Well, I will discharge them both." When
that constable afterwards applied to be restored to his appointment and set
forth how badly he had been used, Sir John Franklin said to him “ I think I
have acted with the greatest justice; I have discharged you for speaking of
your superior officer in disrespectful terms, and dismissed the magistrate far
illtreating your wife." That was the governor of Van. Dieman's Land ! his
conduct from the beginning to the end was of r similar kind. Mr. Frost then
went on to argue for the necessity of a change in the government, and having
gone at some length into the doctrines of Chartism, he resumed his scat
amid loud applause.
[Frestonl’rinted by Kdw. Ambler.J
