





THE
LEVERIAN MUSEUM,
UNDER THE PATRONAGE OF
THEIR ROYAL HIGHNESSES THE
DUKES OF €(JAIBERLA JV D AND BRUNSWICK,
THIS MUSEUM
CONTAINS MANY THOUSANDS OP
\ ? *->• v : ; >% r - ' ■ vi
NATURAL CURIOSITIES,
OF
QUADRUPEDS, BIRDS, FISHES,
REPTILES, INSECTS,
\ , ' 4 . :
JHincrala, SfjeUs, jpomite,
AND COINS.
(
■■"i-lg «Si ——
THIS CATALOGUE
Gives a brief and faithful Description of Objects worthy particular Attention
in the Museum.
PRINTED BY GEDGE AND BARKER, BURY.


ADDRESS.
THE PROPRIETOR ,
* 7
SIMPSON SEAMAN, IPSWICH, SUFFOLK,
Begs leave to state that he has fitted it in the most
elegant manner possible, and he trusts that the lovers
Natural History will here find a fund of rational amuse-
ment, in observing Nature in its different habits faith-
fully copied. Those Ladies and Gentlemen who have
been entertained by contemplating the surprising Curiosi-
ties of Nature, will have an opportunity, with the assist-
ance of this little Treatise, to communicate to their
Friends a portion of the delight they experienced; for
next to the gratification of beholding what is strange or
beautiful, is the pleasure of recounting the wonders we
have seen.
The Proprietor has spent mare than twenty years hi
unwearied application, sparing no expence to render this
Exhibition deserving Public Attention, and trusts that a
liberal and enlightened public, considering the vast ex-
pence of collecting, and conveying from placets place,
will not think the Terms of Admission otherwise than
moderate,
admittance.
Ladies # Gentlemen \s.—Servants $ Children ikl. each.
65" Free Tickets, not Transferable, 2s. each.


THE
LEVERIAN MUSEUM.
No. 1. SWORD FISH, f X The fish in
the Museum was caught in the rive* Orwell, and the only
one ever before exhibited in England; is eleven feet in length,
it weighed upwards of three hundred weight. The Sword
Fish is found in most parts that are frequented by whales, to
which it is a most terrible enemy. At the sight of this
animal, say navigators, the whale seems agitated in an ex-
traordinary manner, leaping from the water, as if with af-
fright. The Sword Fish destroys the whale by piercing it
with its sword ; the sea is soon dyed with blood, proceeding
from the wounds of the whale, while that enormous animal
vainly endeavours to overcome its invader, by striking it on
the surface of the water with its tail, making a report, at
each blow, louder than that of a cannon.
No. 2. The CASSOWARY, or EMEW, is almost as
big as the Ostrich. The feathers of this bird are all double,
two coming out of the game quill, and lying the one upon
the other, and of a blackish colour; these feathers have that
form and situation, that to those that behold the bird afar
off, its skin appears to be covered not with feathers, but
only with hairs. It is a gentle nalured bird and easily tamed.
Inhabits the Molucca Islands.
No. 3. GREAT-EARED OWL. This
bird is said to inhabit mountainous and rocky situations. It
preys on hares, rabbits, and other small animals. This
species is often described as the Horned Owl from Hudson’s
Bay, but is more common in Norway, and has been known
to have been shot in England.
No. 4. LITTLE OWL. ( Strix Passerine,) This
elegant species of Owl is the smallest in England, and seldom
to be met with; it makes its nest in the holes of walls of
ruined edifices and rocks; lays five or six eggs spotted with
yellowish white. It is found at Hudson’s Bay, and has been
received from the West Indies.
No. 5. SILVER-HEADED VULTURE. It is said
this bird has an excellent sagacity of smelling above all other
birds, so that it can perceive the savour of dead carcasses-
a 2 V


from far. The ancients have delivered, that the Vulture is
content only with dead carcasses, abstaining from the rapine
and slaughter of living animals. But some moderns affirm,
that it pursues living birds, and preys upon living fawns,
hares, kids, lambs, &c. It is an inhabitant of Africa.
No. 6. BOA SERPENT. There are several species of
this enormous reptile, distinguished by the number of their
abdominal and caudal scuta. They are all terrible for their
magnitude and bite, but destitute of venom. The Ring
Boa, to which the following observations shall be confined,
has two hundred and forty scuta on the belly, and sixty on
the tail. Its length is twenty-eight feet, and its thickness in
proportion. The Oriental Indians, Malays, Ceylonese, &c.
adore this monstrous production of nature, and use the skin
for clothes; they do not even reject the flesh, which by some
writers is said to be not unwholesome. The Ring Boa
frequents caves and thick forests, where it conceals itself,
sometimes rolled round the body of a tree, till its prey
comes within its reach. When it seizes animals, especially
of the larger kind, it perfectly twists itself round them, so
as effectually to involve their body, and impede their motions;
while by the vast force of its circular muscles, it breaks and
bruises all their bones; after having destroyed life, it licks-
the skin all over to facilitate deglutition ; this process reduces
its victim to a shapeless shining mass, when beginning at the
lower extremity it gradually sucks in the body. The Boa
has been observed for a long time with the horns of a stag
sticking out of its mouth, these being too large and com-
plicated for it to swallow, as well as too hard for it to digest.
When exasperated it makes a loud hissing noise.
No. 7. Male and Female PENCIL PHEASANTS.
( Phasianus- Nycthemerus.) This elegant species of Pheasant
is a native of China, it is often kept by gentlemen in this-
country its habits are the same as the common; Pheasant,
its only difference is the variation in colour of its plumage.
No. 8. A group of COMMON SNIPES and JACK
SNIPES.
COMMON SNIPE. (Scolopax Gallinage.) This is a
plentiful species in most parts of England, and is found in
high as well as low situations. mi
JACK SNIPE. (Scolopax This species of
Snipe is not so numerous as the common ; is a more solitary
bird, and never known to be gregarious; nor is it known to
remainin' this country during the breeding season.


No. 9. GOAT-SUCKER. fCaprimulgus.) This bird
visits us in May, and departs again in September, xtraakes
no nest, but lays its eggs on the bare ground, amongst fern
or heath, sometimes in nut stubs near the ground, and lays
two beautiful eggs, whitish, elegantly marbled with light
brown and ash colour.
No. 10. Male and Female RED GROUS.
Lagopus.) This bird is only to be met with in the extensive
uncultivated wastes covered with heath, particularly the most
mountainous situations; is driven from the south by culti-
vation. The mountains of Wales are now the most southern
parts these birds are found in ; are not uncommon in York-
shire, but no where so plentiful as in the highlands of Scot-
land, where the moors are unbounded.
No. 11. WATER RATS. (Mus AmpUhius.) The
Water Rat never frequents houses, but is always found on
the banks of rivers, ditches, and ponds. It feeds on small
fish, frogs, insects, and sometimes roots. It swims and
dives admirably well, and continues long under water.
No. 11. ARMADILLO. The Armadillo is an inhabi-
tant of South America, and is perfectly harmless and inof-
fensive, presenting only its covering by way of repelling ex-
ternal injuries, and never seeking to molest other animals.
No. 12. NUMIDIAN CRANE. This species obtains
the different appellations of the buffoon bird, and the demoi-
selle or lady; for no sooner does it perceive itself noticed
than it begins to dance or curvet, and to exhibit a variety
of gesticulations, but whether these antic tricks proceed
from vanity or fear, is yet undecided.
No. 13. MARTEN. (Mustela Maries.) This is the
most beautiful of all the British beasts of prey; when taken
young, it is easily tamed, is extremely playful, and in con-
stant good humour. It preys on game of all kinds, and
principally inhabits woods.
No. 14. GREY OWLS, with the NEST and YOUNG.
f Strix Stridula.) This Owl inhabits woods, and breeds in
hollow trees, lays two eggs, of a dirty white. It feeds on
young hares, young rabbits, rats, and mice.
No. 15. LUMPFISH. ( Cyclopterus Lumpus.) Great
numbers of these fish are found in the Greenland seas. It is
sometimes caught on our coasts, but seldom eaten, being
insipid.
No. 16. WOODCOCK. These
birds appear with us in October, they generally come to us
a 3


with Northerly or Easterly winds ; they are more plentiful fm
Wales and Ireland than in England.
No. 17. TURTLE DOVE, ( Columba Turta .) The
Turtle visits this country in the Spring, and remigrates in’
September. It chiefly inhabits thick woods. These birds
seem to be more plentiful in Kent than any other County.
Iso. IS. PARROT. Linnaeus makes forty-seven species-
in the beautiful family of Parrots, and probably he has not
described more than half of them. Of all Foreign birds the
Parrot is best known in this country, and is most admired,
noi without reason ; as it unites the greatest beauty with the'
greatest docility. Its voice more exactly resembles the human
than that of any other bird:
No. 19. CARDINAL GROSSBEAE. This species is
a native of several parts of North America, and from the
superiority of its song has obtained the appellation of the
Nightingale of that continent.
No. 20; PURPLE GRAKLE. ( Gracula Quiscala.)
The farmers of Virginia and' Pennsylvania took infinite pains
to destroy and drive them from those provinces for feeding
on their lice, the consequence was, that their crops were
destroyed by a caterpillar which these birds would have eaten.
No. 21. HONEY BIRD. ( Cuculus Indicator.) Is
found in Africa.
No. 22. Y ACOU. A native of South America.
No. 23. ( Recurverostra Avosetta.) This
bird breeds in tbe Fens of Lincolnshire, Romney Marsh, in
Kent, and on some parts of the Suffolk coast; it feeds’on
worms and marine insects, which it scoops out of the mud or
sand.
No. 24. REDWING and NEST. {Turdus Iliacus.V
This bird is a migrative species, coming to us in great flocks
about the latter end of September.. It is said to breed in
Norway and Sweden.
No. 25. FIELDFARE {Turdus Pilaris.) This is a
migrative species, visits us in October, and remains till the-
beginning of April. Its food is the fruit of the hawthorn,
worms, and insects.
No. 26. ERMINE. {Mustek Erm'mce.) This animal
when brown is called the Stoat. It changes its colour in
winter, and becomes white, except the end of the tail, which
remains black.
No. 27. STARES or STARLINGS, and NEST.
K Sturnus Vulgaris.) This bird is plentiful in all parts of


England; breeds in hollow trees, towers, ruins, cliffs, and
often in high rocks over the sea.
No. 28. CUCKOW destroying a NEST of WAGTAILS.
(Cuculus Canorus.) This bird comes to us early in the
spring, and almost invariably leaves us by the first of July.
The food of the Cuckoo is chiefly insects.
No. 29. YOUNG CUCKOW beingffed by WAGTAILS.
It is well known the Cuckow makes no nest, but deposits
its- eggs in the nest of some small bird. This bird was shot
when receiving food from a Wagtail.
No. 30. HUMMING BIRDS with their NESTS. (Tro~
chilus.J Among the beautiful varieties of the feathered 1 race,
there are but few that equal the brilliancy of colouring dis-
played by these little animals. This genus contains twenty-
one different species; they are inhabitants of the warmer
climates of America.
No. 31. COLE TITMICE and NEST.
The Colemouse is not so plentiful a species as the marsh,
keeps more in woods, and seems to live entirely on insects.
No. 32. BEE EATERS. (Meropi api Ster.J The
common Bee Eater is the only one out of twenty-three
known species that has ever made its appearance in England.
It does not appear to have been noticed in England till within
these few years. In the third volume of the Linnean Trans-
actions, an account is given of one having been shot at
Mattishall, in the county of Norfolk. They arc common in
the South of France and Italy.
No. 33. LONG-EARED BAT. ( Vesperiilio Auristus.J*
The principal distinction between this and the common Bat
is the ears: in this they are above an- inch long, within
each of these is a less ear.
No. 34-. COMMON BAT. (Vesperiilio Murinus.J
This species of Bat is very common in England; it makes its
appearance early in the Summer, and begins its flight in the
dusk of the evening in quest of insects. The Bat brings only
two young at a time, which it suckles from two teats placed
on the breast.
No. 35. GREAT BAT. A species first discovered by
M. de Buffon, since that in Flintshire, and other parts of
England. It ranges high in the air for food, and retires early
in the Summer.
No. 36. COMMON MOUSE. {Mus MusculusJ This
little timid animal inhabits houses, barns, and corn stacks.
No. 37. LONG-TAILED FIELD MOUSE. (Mm
Sylvaticus,


No. 38. SHORT-TAILED FIELD MOUSE.
Agrestis.J These Mice live in banks and hedges, and often
barrow under ground.
No. 39. Male and Female BEARDED TITMICE.
flatus Biarmicus.) This bird is very little known, though
it breeds with us, and continues the whole year. It is found
amongst the reeds between Dunwich and Lowestoft, in
Suffolk.
No. 40. WATER RAIL, This bird
continues with us the whole year, and by many is erroneously
believed to be the land rail metamorphosed, which they
say takes place in the Autumn, not knowing perhaps that bird
t y t t a t season. It is found in most parts
of Europe frequenting rivulets. Some times it is very fat
and as well,flavoured as the Land Rail. 1
No. 41. LONG-EARED OWL, This
bird frequents large woods, and is partial to fir, box, or
holly plantations, where it conceals itself by day amongst the
evergreen foliage.
No. 42. SHORT-EAREDOWL. (SUixßrachyotos.)
1 his bird comes to us in October, about the time the Wood-
C i° C^r,^ l t^* eS a PP earan€e » an d departs the same time with
that bird in March, hence it derives the name of Woodcock
Owl.
No. 43. W HITE OWL. (Strix Flammea.) This
bird resorts chiefly in barns for the sake of mice, its principal
food. It breeds in old decayed trees, and lays four white
eggs.
No. 44. GREEN SANDPIPER. (Ochropus Tringa.)
1 his is a scarce solitary bird, it frequents shallow streams,
co nes to us in September, and departs Northward in April
to breed. r
No. 45. STARLING, for description vide No. 27.
No. 46. ARABI AN THRUSH. A solitary bird of that
country.
No. 47. YELLOW T BUNTINGS with NEST and
YOUNG. (Emberiza Citrinella.) This is one of the most
common indigenous birds of this country. In winter it as-
sembles in flocks with other granivorous birds.
No. 48. YELLOW-BREASTED TOUCAN., f Ram-
phatos Tucanus.J This bird, so formidable in appearance,
js quite hai mless and gentle ; it feeds principally upon pepper,
wnch it devours very greedily, gorging itself in such a
manner that it voids it crude and uncocted; this however is


no objection to tbe natives using it again; they even it
to that which is fresh gathered from the tree, _ and ? d "
suaded that the heat and strength is qualified by the ,
and that all its noxious qualities are thus exhausted.
na^f 9 : SO SCAKLET a .BREASTED ORIOLE. This
W Nm S0 n . ati BLUE "fnd GREEN PAROQUET. vide
No^ 8 51 RED-LEGGED PARTRIDGES, roale and
female, with their YOUNG. (Tetrao These
hlriU are very common in some parts of Suffolk, .out
estates of the Marquis of Hertford and Lord l Rendksham,
they are more numerous than the common Partridge.
No. 52. HARE. ( Lepus Timidtts.J An animal comimo
in all parts of Europe. In Winter it turns white i
Northern countries.
No‘ si. KUkand Female RED WINGS, vide No. 24.
Sm 55. YELLOW-HEADED ORIOLE. An mha-
bitant of North America.
Wfv ns BOTANY BAY FINCH.
No. 57. BADGER. (Ursus The Badger is
a solitary animal, digging for itself a long wm»»g
the earth ; as it is naturally averse to the light, it seldom
quits this retreat till the night. It lives on young
young birds, and eggs from their nests. It m remarkable ..or
L cleanliness. The Fox, taking advantage of this quality,
often takes possession of the Badger’s hole, by depositing its
excrements at the entrance thereof, which is so offensive to
the Badger that he seeks a new retreat. . r .
No. 58. GOLDEN PLOVER.
This bird is found in most parts of the known world, With
us it chiefly inhabits heaths, moors, and downs; m severe
weather the sea coast* j ? \
No. 59. GARGANEY. {Anas Querqaedula.) Whether
this bird ever breeds with us is not ascertained; it is fouM “i
our decoy ponds in the month of April, and. is called t
&U N™ e 60. re GREAT BALTIMORE ORIOLE. An in-
habitant of the woods in North America.
No. 61. CUCKOW, vide No. 28.
No. 62. JAVA HARE. This animal is said to be veiy
numerous in- that Island, and in no. other part o t e wor


N 0.63. MARTBtJ and PARTRIDGE. [MusleU
Mar Us. J This is the most beautiful of ail the British beasts
of prey; when taken young is easily tamed, is extremely
playful, and in constant good humour. It preys on game of
all kinds, and principally inhabits woods
.■ N0 ;64. CRMSON TANAGER. This beautiful bird
IS an inhabitant of South America.
No. 65. PIGMY CURLEW.
ibis is a very rare b.rd, only two seem to appear on record ;
mie was killed m Holland, and the other near Sandwich, in
Kent. The bird in the Museum was shot near Yarmouth.
No. 66.1
(FEMALE or RINGTAIL.
anous are the opinions concerning these birds ; some authors
have ever considered them as male and female ; others as two
distinct species. By dissection the Henharrier has always
prove to e a male bird. These birds are common in
England, and build their nests on the ground under a furze
bush ; Jay two eggs.
No. 67. CINEREOUS SHRIKE. ( Lama. ExcuUtor.)
This is a scarce species in England, said to breed in some of
pur mountainous situations, coming in March and departing
m September. When it has killed its prey, it fixes it to a
tliarn, for the purpose of pulling it to pieces.
'Thpry I REELS, ( Morinellus,)
Jne HottFell appears to make this country a resting place in
its migratory flights to and from its breeding place.
aSin°in SS °V° Ur dOWnS ’ heaths ’ andraoors in April, and
again in oeptember.
No. 69. REDSHANKS. {Scolopax Calidris.) This
mill' 5 CC T mon 011 °“ r sko'es >n winter, and breeds incur
maishes adjacent to the sea coast. It lays four eggs like the
Lapwing’s, but smaller. 88
No. 7°. NUTHATCHES. {Sitta Europe.) This
and not W,t , h . us the "’ hole 3' ear . but is a local bird,
and not to be- tound m several parts of the kingdom.
There are , G .°!f DE . N ORIGIN. (Oriolus Gallmla.)
EnoUnd T,“- r®" ‘ n ? tance . s of this bird being found in
d d '.- 11 li T ld ln va ”ous parts of the European Con-
in Africa I** 1 ** le ® ummer uionths-; it is supposed to Winter
ofmL 72 ' , A r I I ICA WOODPECKER. An inhabitant
ot most parts of that country.
• N °* 73 ‘ MOOR BUZZARDS {Falco M


with their Young, in their curious downy covering before the
appearance of the first feathers. This bird frequents moors
and barren situations; it preys on rabbits, frogs, and lizards.
Its nest is made on the ground amongst short wood, furze,
or fern ; and lays four eggs perfectly white.
No. 74. CREEPERS. ( Certh These birds bear a
strong resemblance to the Humming Bird. They are dis-
persed over every part of the world, while the Humming
Birds are confined to America. *
No. 75. AFRICAN ROLLER. An
example of the vivid plumage of this family.
No. 76. TABUAN LORY. Inhabits the Friendly Islands. ,
No. 77. NONPARIEL PARROT. Inhabits New Holland.
No. 78. TYGER SNAKE. A native of the East Indies.
No. 79. SACRED KING-FISHER. Inhabits Botany Bay,
No. 80. GREEN HUMMING BIRDS. Inhabits
Surinam;
No. 81. BLACK and WHITE BUTCHER BIRD. A
native of Surinam.
No. 82. AFRICAN PIG. Remarkable for its being
striped like the Zebra.
No. 83. PERSIAN ORIOLE. Persicus .)
An inhabitant of the Persian Deserts;
No. 84. COMMON GALLINULE. [Fulica Chloropus.)
This bird is common in rivers of this Kingdom. In the act
of diving, its wings are used as fins.
No. 85. SPOTTED WOODPECKERS.
The Spotted Woodpecker is less frequent in England than
the Green ; its habits and manners are nearly the same.
No. 86. RINGTAIL and YOUNG, vide No. 66.
No. 87. GREY WAGTAILS. {Motacilla Bod rid a.)
It visits us in September and departs in April; it is a solitary
Bird, frequenting watery places, especially small shallow
streams, for the sake of insects, on which it feeds.
No.BB. GROSSBEAK. {Loxia Coccothraustes.) This
bird usually visits England in the autumn, and continues till
April; but there have been instances of its breeding here.
No. 89. BLACK-HEADED GULL. ( Lams Midi-
bundus.) These birds lose the black on the head in the
winter, and do not assume it again till the breeding season.
No. 90. HERRING GULL. ( Fiscus Bar us.) The
Herring Gull is found plentiful on all our shores, and in the
Northern parts of Europe.
No. 91. COMMON GULL. {Larus Canus.) These


birds are often seen with rooks in severe weather, and follow
the plough for the sake of worms.
N 0.92. WINTER GULL. {Larus Hyber nus. ) These
birds are common on all our shares.
No. 93. BLACK-BILLED AUK. [Aka Pica.) This
is only found on our coasts in winter.
No. 94. LITTLE PENGUIN. ( Minor.)
Inhabits New Zealand.
No. 95. PARTRIDGES and YOUNG. (
P^rdrix ,) This bird is found in all parts of England where
corn is cultivated, but never at any great distance from
arable land ; upon the barren mountains of the North it is
never seen.
No. 96. YOUNG PUMA LION, whelped at Glasgow,
July 25th, 1819, being the first Puma Lion ever whelped in
Britain.
No. 97. GREY DOTTRELL. This bird inhabits
heaths,, moors, and downs.
No. 98. RABBITS. {Cuniculus.) They were formerly
natives of Spain ; were first introduced there from Africa.
Rabbits are most prolific of all animals ; they will breed seven
times a year, and bring eight young each time ; on a sup-
position that this happens regularly during four years, their
numbers will amount to 1,274,841.
No. 99. THICK-KNEED BUSTARDS. (Charadrius
(Edicnemus.) This is a migrative species, making its ap-
pearance with us the latter end of April; it frequents hilly
open situations, mostly heaths or warrens.
No. 100. KING-FISHER. ( Ispeda.) The
King-fisher frequents small rivers, where it breeds. It makes
its nest in the hole of a bank with small fish bones, which it
ejects sometime before the female begins to lay, this matter
is mixed with the earth. The female lays seven white trans-
parent eggs.
No. 101. LITTLE AUK. \Alca .) This bird is
seldom to be met with in England, but is common in Green-
land, where it breeds, and lays two eggs, differing from others
of the genus, which lay but one ; these are larger than those
of a Pigeon, of a bluish white. The winter residence of this
bird is unknown ; it is probable it lives at sea, in some more
temperate climate remote from land.
No. 102. GREEN WOODPECKERS. {Picus Viridis.)
This species is not uncommon about most of the wooded parts
of England, its food is entirely insects. Woodpeckers are
seen climbing up a tree, but never down.


No. 103. This singular bird was shot in Suffolk; but to
what species it belongs is not yet ascertained.
No. 104. PAINTED FINCH. A native of Carolina:
No. 105. BLUEMANAKIN. Inhabits South America.
No. 106. BANANA BIRD. Is dispersed through the
regions of Carolina and Brazil;
No. 107. CRIMSON CREEPER. Inhabits the Sand-
wicli
No. 108. * RED-HEADED WOODPECKER. A native
No. 109.* YOUNG SHARK. {Squalus.) This fish is
the dread of the sailors in hot climates, where they constantly
attend the ships in expectation of what may drop overboard.
Swimmers often perish by them ; sometimes they lose an arm
or leg, and sometimes are bit quite asunder, serving but for
two morsels for this ravenous animal. The young animal in
the Museum was caught in the River Orwell.
No. 110. PORCUPINE FISH. (Diodon Hystrix.)
In point of habit or external appearance, the remarkable
genus Diodon may be said to connect, in some degree, the
tribe of fishes with that of the spiny quadrupeds, such as the
Porcupines and Hedge-hogs; it is also allied in a similar
manner to the Echine, or Sea Urchins. It is a native of the
Indian and American Seas, and is sometimes eaten by the
inhabitants of the West Indies.
No. 111. HORNED TRUNK FISH. (
Cornutus.) This extraordinary fiish is often found in the
Indian and American Seas.
No. 112. PIPE FISH. (SyngnatJms Acus.) This fish
visits our shores in summer. It is sometimes called the Sea
Adder,
No. 113, SHOVELLER. ( Clypeata.) This
bird is sometimes met with in England, but by no means
common. It is said some remain in France during the breed-
ing season.
No. 114. GOLDEN EYE. (Anas Clangula.) ' This
bird visits us in winter, and feeds chiefly in rivers contiguous
to the sea; sometimes killed in fresh waters more remote, is
a quick diver, and not easily shot, except on the wing*
No. 115. BREAM, (Cyprinus Brama .) The Bream
is an inhabitant of the deep parts of still rivers. It is a fish
little esteemed, being very insipid.
No. 116. GATTORUGINE. This curious fish was first
discovered to be a British fish by the Rev. Mr. Williams,
b


who found it on the Anglesea coast.
No. 117. ERMINE, and ROBINS with YOUNG, vide
No. 26.
No. 118. HUMMING BIRDS with NEST, vide No. 30
No. 118. BLAUK WOODPECKER.
It is doubtful whether this bird vras ever found in England ;
is common in many parts of the European continent, but no
where so plentiful as in Germany. It has all the habits of
/ the Green Woodpecker.
No. 120. PRATENCOLE. ( .) An inha-
bitant of Austria.
No. 121. Non-descript.
No. 122. BULFINCHES. ( The
Bulfinch is not migratory, but frequents our woods all the
year. %
No. 123. WEASEL. {Mu This is the
least of the Weasel kind, and like the rest is very destructive
to young birds, poultry, and rabbits, besides a great devourer
of eggs.
No. 124: SANDERLING. ( Charadrins Calidris.)
The Sanderling is found on many of our shores ; but whether
this bird breeds with us is not yet thoroughly known
No. 125: GRASSHOPPER LARK. (
vial™*) It is not a plentiful species, but probably appears
less so by its habit of concealing itself amongst*furze,.
No. 126. PIED FLYCATCHER. ( -
capilla.) It is said to be indigenous to England. It is how-
ever very local, and by no means plentiful; but is spoken of
as an inhabitant of Yorkshire, Lancashire, and Derbyshire
No. 127. SPOTTED SANDPIPER. Macii
laria.) This species of Sandpiper is seldom met with in
England ; it is said to inhabit North America.
No. 128. HOODED CROW. The
Hooded Crow visits the Southern parts of this kingdom in
October, and retires Northward to breed in the beginning
of April.
No. 129. MAGPIE. ( CorvuPica.) A well known
bird in all parts of England ; it continues with us the whole
year.
No. 130. JACKDAW, ( Corvus Monedula.) These
birds are common in all parts of England; also found in
Denmark, France, and Germany.
No. 131. CRESTED PHEASANT. (
Cristatus.) Native of South America.


No. 132. RED PHALAROPE. {Tringa Hyperborea.)
Taken at Sanda, in Orkney. The summer plumage of the
common Phalarope. # . ~,
No. 133. BITTERN. {Ard The Bittern
is by no means a plentiful species. In the season it
is only found in the less frequented reedy marshes and swampy
moors well clothed with rushes. ;
No. 134. COOT. (Fulica Atra.J The Coot is a very
common bird in this country, and continues the whole year.
No. 135. CURLEW. ( The
Curlew is common on most parts of our coast in winter, and
some few remain in the south in summer, but do not breed.
No. 136. RED-THROATED DIVER. (Colymbus
Septentrionalis.) This bird is said to breed in the northern
parts of Scotland, but rarely visits the southern parts of
England, except in very severe seasons.
> No* 137. SPECKLED DIVER.
It is the most common species found in this country.
No. 138. EIDER DUCK. fAnas Mollissima.) It is
found plentiful on the Farn Islands on the coast of Nor-
thumberland. t ■
No. 139. HARLEQUIN DUCK.
This bird is an inhabitant of the more northern parts of the
world. It is found in Russia, Iceland, and Greenland.
No. 140. PINTAIL DUCK. ( Anas Acuta,) This
bird is frequently taken in our decoys in winter, and sold by
the name of Sea Pheasant.
No* 141. FOX. (Vulpes.) The Fox is produced in
most countries, nor does one of them differ much in size from
another, but much in colour. In Muscovy some of them
are black, some white, and others red.
No. 142. MERLIN. (Falco CEsalon.) This is the
smallest of the Falcon genus; is exceedingly rapid on wing.
This bird visits the south of England in October. It breeds
in Scotland* '
No. 143. TIT LARKS. ( Alauda Pratensis.J This
bird is common in most parts of the kingdom ; it is partial to
barren situations.
No. 144. EASTERN CUCKOW. (Cuculus Ori-
entalise) An inhabitant of China.
No. 145. GOLDEN PLOVER.
This bird is found in most parts of the known world ; with us
it chiefly inhabits heaths, moors, and downs.
No. 146. YELLOW BUNTINGS & 47.
A 2


No. 147. INDIAN SERPENT. This species is nine
feet in lengthy and inhabits China. F n e
Tb?Rattle«m A . T^ LES . N^ KE * Durissimus.)
The Rattlesnake is bred in America, and in no parts of the
old world; some are six feet in length, but their usual size is
l'° eer ‘? ln dea * h which ensues from this
. es tnahes a solitude wherever it is heard. The
very mstant the wound is inflicted, though small in itself it
‘ he S l‘ n ? of a bee; th >s which
more ’ far . ft , om abatm S> grows every moment
more excruciating and dangerous; the limb swells thp
venom reaches the head, which is soon of a monstrous size
the eyes are red and fiery, the heart beats quick with fre-
quen in eiruptions, the pain becomes insupportable, & some
exp.re under ain five or six hours; but others, who artof
1 o nZf 6 "on I v" T-T’ S o rV ‘ Ve the agon y for a hours
longer, only to sink under a general mortification which
ensues, and corrupts the whole body.
No. 149. LONG-TAILED TITMICE and NEST
Of InldaSr " J ThiS bird iS ** »*S
No. 150. SAND MARTINS and NEST. (Hirundn
iS’Zl aKftjag*" •'•'W-- a™.
game of all kinds, and to poultry; it generally :f
woodland burrows for
FcFJ™ Oisourm*
VZoVlke “ Eng ' and ! U breeds in ,be 4
(Cristatus Colymbus )
sVVto'IZVVV t 0 E r? land; Wwds in the meres of
No 1 54 mife / ndm tbe fens of Lincolnsliire.
This birdt and NEST - Miliaria.),
XT b i r! m all P arts of England. ;
xt°’ nLARKS and NEST, vide 143,
some°times'aD^ ER - GA i NSER ‘ ( Mer S«s-) These birds-
sometimes appear in the south of England in winter hut
Siffi in f tbe nor ; h * they a“e "‘aid
ocotiand, in some of the rocks#
is (KujuenHv . POCH^ RD - Cdms Permit.) This species,
us!" deCOys m wultei V but is not known to


No. 158. HOBBY destroying a NEST of BUNTINGS.
(Falco Subbufea.) This is a migrative species, visiting us
in the spring, and leaves us in October.
No. 159. BUNTINGS and NEST, vide 154.
No. 160. WINCHATS and NEST. _ (Motacilla
Ruhetra .) This is a migrative species, appearing with us in
April, inhabiting the same places as the Stonechat.
No. 161. STONECHATS and NEST. (Motacilla
Rubicola.) This bird remains with us the whole year, and
frequents commons and furzy places.
No. 162. LONG EARED OWL, vide No. 41.
No. 163. YOUNG CUCKOW, vide No. 29.
No. 164. RING DOVE. ( This
bird is indigenous to this island. In winter they assemble in
large flocks, and constantly resort to woods to roost.
No. 165. YOUNG HEDGE HOGS or URCHINS.
( Erinaceus*) The Hedge Hog is a nocturnal animal, keep-
ing retired in the day. It feeds on roots, worms, fruit, in-
sects, dead carcasses and eggs ; of the last of which it is a
great destroyer. It lies under the reproach of sucking cows,
but the smallness of its mouth renders that impossible.
No. 166. MADAGASCAR or VAMPYRE BAT.
(Vespertilio Vantpyrus .) These Bats are common in the
islands of the East Indies. They are carnivorous and fero-
cious. This is the Bat to which Linnaeus applies the title of
Vampyre, on the supposition of its being the species of which
so many extraordinary accounts have been given relative to
its power of sucking the blood of men and cattle: such is the
account of authors who have described it. The Bat in the
Museum was kept alive at Yarmouth, and contrary to what
has been asserted, found very harmless ; it refused animal
food and fed on fruits and vegetables ; it slept with its head
downwards, wrapping its wings round its body in form of a
mantle. This Bat, with its wings extended, measures 35
inches.
No. 167- MORILLONS. {Anas Glaucion:) Although
a bird of the Duck kind has been given under this denomina-
tion by a variety of authors of repute, it is doubtful whether
it is not a variety of the Golden-eye:-
No. 168- WOOD BUZZ ARDS, vide No. 99.
No. 169. ARCTIC GULLS. {Larus Parasiticus:)
This is a fierce and rapacious species, attacking whatever
approaches its nest, and the arts they make use of to decoy
an intruder from its- neighbourhond, exceed those of any
b 3


other bird. They never fish for themselves like other Gulls,
but watch the Kittiwake, &c. and as soon as they observe
they have taken their prey, attack them, and by striking
them on the back, oblige them to disgorge the fish they have
just taken, and with wonderful adroitness and rapidity catch
it a few yards in its descent towards the water,
v No. 170. LESSER TERN. (Sterna Minuta.) This
bird has all thehabits ofthecommon Tern, butnot sonumerous.
No. 171. REDSHANKS and YOUNG, vide No. 69.
No. 172. GOLDEN PHEASANTS male and female.
{Phasianus Pictus.y This elegant species of Pheasant is a
native of China* it is often kept by gentlemen in this country ;
its habits are the same as the common Pheasant; its only
difference is the variation in the colour of its plumage,
No. 173. WHITE WAGTAILS. ( .)
In winter these birds change their abode, but do not quit the
Kingdom.
No. 174. RINGED PLOVERS. ( Hiati*
cilia.') This bird is plentiful on all the coasts of England.
No. 175. This group of birds consists of the SURINAM
KING FISHER, LONG-TAILED TITMOUSE, REED
BUNTING, WRY-NECK, BALTIMORE BUTCHER
BIRD, PERSIAN FLY-CATCHER, SNOW BUNTING,
and three SISKINS:
No. 176. CINEREOUS SHRIKE, vide No. 67.
No. 177. RED-BACKED SHRIKES and YOUNG.
(Lanius Collurio.) This bird visits us in May, and departs-
in September, chiefly haunts inclosed moist situations.
No 1/8. INDIAN LARK. A of many of the
Indian Islands. ,
No. 179. CAVIES* Natives of Guinea, hence they are
called Guinea Pigs.
No. ISO 1 . BRAMBLING. (Friugilla Montifringllla. )
These birds are frequently seen in large flocks on the coasts
of Kent and Sussex.
No. 181. FIELD LARKS and NESTS. ( .)
No bird has been more confounded'than this species of Lark,
it visits this country in the beginning of May.
No. 182. NIGHTINGALES and NEST. {Motacilla
Luscinid .) Though this bird appears with us in April, it is-
said to be found only as far north as Yorkshire.
No. 183. WINCH ATS and NEST, vide No. 160.
No. 184. ARABIAN THRUSH. A native of that
coun t ry. . ;


No. 185. FOUMART or FERRET,and common RATS;
The Foumart is originally a native of Africa.
No. 186. CHAFFINCHES and NEST. (
Ccelebs.) This bird is common in all parts of England.
No. 187. YELLOW WAGTAILS and NEST. (Motet-
cilia Flava.) This bird visits us in April, and migrates again
in September. .
No. 188. TOADS. ( Rama Bujh.) The Toad is an
inoffensive animal, and by no means poisonous as has been
asserted. It lies torpid during winter, choosing for its retreat
either the hollow root of a tree or cleft of a rock, where it is
found in a state of seeming insensibility. It has been found
in the heart of a tree alive and healthy, without the smallest
entrance or egress, supposed, to have been there more than
seventy years.
No. 189. LIZARDS. ( LaceA frills. ) Lizards are a
class of animals differently ranked by different authors. Ray
classes them with quadrupeds ; Linnaeus with serpents; and
Brisson makes a. distinct class of themselves. Lizards are
perfectly harmless ; their food is insects.
No. 190. WHIP SNAKE. The bite of this animal is
poisonous ; it is a native of the East Indies.
No. 191. COMMON SNAKE. { .)
This species of reptile is perfectly inoffensive ; it preys on
frogs, insects, worms, and mice. * 1 *
No. 192, CROCODILES. Crocodiles are to be met
with in the principal rivers of Asia, Africa, and America,
It has often been known to seize a-man froma canoe, when any
part of his body has been so far out of the canoe as to be
within his reach; it has also been known to enter the huts of
the natives, and carry away young children.
No. 193. SPARROWHAWK. ( Nisus.) This
is a very common species in most of the enclosed parts of the
Kingdom.
No. 194. RING OUZEL. (Turdus Torquatus.)- The
Ring Ouzel is a scarce bird in England, migrating from one
part to another. It is generally believed they do not win-
ter with us, but are known to breed in Scotland and
the north of England.
No. 195. JACK SNIPES and EGGS, vide No. 8.
No. 196. This group consists of the Marsh Titmouse,
Bearded Titmouse, Blue Titmouse, Cole Titmouse, Long*-
tailed Titmouse, Thrush, Creeper, Cross-bill, Green Finch,


Lesser. Redpole, Bullfinch, Tit Lark, Greater Retools
Nightingale, Chaffinch, Nuthatch, Grey Wren, Canary
Jlj 11 Üb«
No. 197. REED SPARROWS ami NEST. (
Schcemclus.) This is a common bird, frequenting the sides
of rivers.
No . 198. LESSER REDPOLE. {Fringilla Cinaria.)
J .is blrd common m the southern parts of England during
winter ; at this season it is gregarious.-
PHEASANT. A variety of the com-
mon Pheasant.
No. 200. AFRICAN PHEASANT. This beautiful
bird is an inhabitant of the interior of Africa#
No. 201. HONEY BUZZARD. (Falco Apiwrus.)
I nis appears to be a very rare species.
No. 202. RINGTAIL, vide No.
No 203- WRYNECKS and NEST..
This bird appears with us in April. It i s not uncommon in
the southern and eastern parts of the Kingdom, but is more
scarce westward, and rarely found in Cornwall.
No. 204*. REDSTARTS and NEST. ( Motacilla
Phcemcurus.) This bird visits us in April, and leaves us in
oeptember.
No, 205. PEREGRINE FALCON and WOODCOCK
( PeregrinusFalco.) This bird'is seldom to be met with ; it
bold and powerful, and was much esteemed by Falconers
It breeds in rocks on the north coast of England and Wales!
clim°t An inhabitant of the warmer
No. 207. BEE-EATER. From Africa.
No. 208. G ERENDER SERPENT. To this animal the
inhabitants of the coasts of Mosambique pay divine honours,
and while their deity lies coiled up, the people fall upon their
faces before it with the most serious adoration.
The GREAT BOA. ( Boa Constrictor.)
1 his is a species of the largest kind in the world. The bite
of the Serpent is not poisonous, for when it encounters any
arge quadruped, it is hy the strong folds of the body, and
the fierce verberations of the tail, that the enemy is destroyed ?
by this twining round, and drawing the knot with convulsive
eneigy, this enormous reptile breaks every bone in the quad-
rupe s body, and then at one morsel devours its prey. It is
a native of Africa* India, and South America.
No. 210. BLIND-WORM or SLOW-WORM. (Anguis


Fragilis.) The motion of this serpent is slow, from which
and from the smallness of its eyes, are derived its names >
like others of the genus it lies torpid during winter.
No. 211. SUPERB FINCH. A native of Botany Bay.
No. 212. RED LARK. { This species
of Lark is very rare in England. It is said to inhabit North
America.
No. 213. LESSER PARROT. From the West Indies.
No. 214. CANARY BIRDS and NEST. These birds
were first brought from the Canary Islands.
No. 215. Non-descript.
No. 216. OCEANIC FLYING-FISH. (Exoccetm
Evolans .) The fishes of this genus, which are few in num-
ber, are remarkable for the extreme length and size of their
pectoral fins, by which they are enabled to spring from the
water, and support a kind of temporary flight, or continued
motion through the air, to the distance of 2 or 3000 feet;
when the fins become dry, they are obliged to commit them-
selves to their own element. The fish here described is an
inhabitant of the American and Indian seas, and is occasion-
ally observed in the Mediterranean. The celebrated Bonnet
considered this species of fish as forming a kind of connect-
ing link between fishes and birds, similar to that which BatSr
may be supposed to form between birds and quadrupeds.
No. 217. YOUNG ALLIGATOR, vide No. 1.
No. 218. TUFTED DUCK. (Anas The
Tufted Duck is not common with us in winter. Is found in
all the northern parts of Europe as far as Norway.
No. 219. TEAL. ( Anas Crecca.J The Teal is the
smallest of the Duck tribe; it comes to us in winter, and fre-
quents our fresh waters.
No. 220. GANNET or SOLAN GOOSE.
Bassanm.) The Gannet is found plentiful on the coast of
Scotland; it lays but one egg, on the most inaccessible
parts of the highest rocks. *
No. 221. CINEREOUS GOTWIT. ( >
This is a scarce bird, visiting our coasts only in summer.
N 0.222. RED GOTWIT. ( Scolopax Lapponica.) This
is a rare species in England, and to be found only in sum-
mer ; it is said to be plentiful in some parts of America.
No. 223. RUFFS and (Trimga
These birds are found in the Isle of Ely and Lincolnshire,
where they are taken in nests and fattened for the table. They
are remarkable for always differing in plumage, being impos-


sible to find two alike. The females are called Reeves,
which the fowlers avoid taking, that their numbers may not
be diminished.
No. 224. KESTREL. (Falco Tinmmculus.) This beau-
tiful species of Hawk is very common ; continues with us
the whole year, feeds principally on mice.
No. 225. WHIMBREL. (Scolopax Phceopus.) This
is a migrative species, visiting our coasts in May, where it is
called the May-bird.
No. 226. WEASEL, vide No. 1251
No. 227. WATER RAT, vide No. IT.
No. 228. SPARROW HAWK and PARTRIDGE, vide
No. 193 k
No. 229. TOURACO* This elegant bird is a native of
, Africa; it subsists on fruits and vegetables, and has a shrill
piercing voice.
No. 230.- PARROOUET. From South America;
No. 231. HARE and LEVERETS, vide No. 52.
No. 232. DUN-DIVER. f Mergus Castor.J This bird
is considered by some to be the female Gooseander,but on
dissection there have been found male birds. This bird is
common in Germany, and breeds in the lakes of the more
northern ports of the world.
No. 233. BLACK GUILLEMOT.
These birds are frequent in the north on the Earn Islands;
and in Scotland, in the Hebrides.
No. 234. AMADAVAT. This bird is a native of China*
and is often brought to this country alive.
No. 235. AMERICAN BEE-EATERS.
No* 236. AFRICAN CREEPERS.
No. 237. BLUE TITMICE & NEST. (Parus Cceruleus.)
This bird is found in-every part of Europe.
No. 238. SPARROW HAWK& LEVERET, vide 193.
No. 239. DOTTERELS, vide No. 68.
No. 240. CAYENNE GOAT-SUCKER. This is the
largest of that genus, and is called the Grand Goat-sucker.
No. 241. MOOR BUZZARD, vide No. 73.
No. 242. MARTIN and RABBITS, vide No. 13.
No. 243. GOAT SUCKER, vide No, 9.
# No* 244. WOODCOCK. (Scolapax Rusticola.) These
birds appear with us in October ; they generally come to us
with northerly or easterly winds ; they are more plentiful in
Wales and Ireland than in England.
No. 245. THROSTICLES & NEST. ( Tw 'dus Micicus.)


The Throstle remains in England the whole year, but is sup-
posed to quit the more northern parts in winter.
No. 246. CHAFFINCHES and NEST, vide No. 186.
No. 247. WINCH ATS and NEST, vide No. 160.
No. 248. WHITE CROW. This singular bird was taken
near Coventry, Warwickshire.
No. 249. HEDGEHOG, vide No. 165.
No. 250. OTTER and YOUNG. The
Otter swims and dives with great celerity, and is destructive
to fish, being its principal food. In rivers it is always ob-
served to swim against the stream to meet its prey. It forms
a habitation under ground, on the banks of some river or
Jake, and always makes the entrance of its hole underwater;
works upwards 4o the surface of the earth, and makes a
minute orifice for the admission of air.
No. 251. BULFINCH, vide 122.
No. 252. WOOD GROUS. ( These
bird; are become very rare in this kingdom, a few only are to
be met with in the north of Scotland. It is common in the
pine forests of Norway and Lapland..
No. 253. FOX and MALLARX).
No. 254. LEOPARD. An animal of the feline kind,
possessing all the voracious and destructive powers of that
tribe of animals. It inhabits Senegal, Guinea, China, and
Arabia. The Leopard devours almost every beast of the
forest; and when these fail, they descend to the domestic
herds among the cultivated parts of Lower Guinea.
No. 255. WINCHATS and NEST, vide 160.
No. 256. SPOTTED WOODPECKER, vide 85.
> No. 257. SNOW BUNTING. (Emberiza Nivalis .) These
birds appear on our eastern coasts in large flocks during the
winter. Some few are said to remain on the highest moun-
tains in Scotland.
No. 258. FIELD LARKS and NEST, vide 181.
< No. 259. SKY LARKS. (Alauda Arvensis.J This
bird is common in the greater parts of this Kingdom.
No. 260. GREATER PETTYCHAPS. (
Horten sis.) This bird arrives here about the latter end of
April; it. chiefly inhabits thick hedges.
No. 261. WOOD WRENS and NEST. {Sylvia
Sylvicola.) This is a migrative species, appearing with us
in April ; it is so similar to the Yellow Wren that it is but
little noticed.
No, 262. NIGHTINGALES and NEST, vide 182.


No. 263. CAYENNE BUTCHER-BIRD. (Ltmius
Cayanus.) In manners resembles our Butcher-Bird
No. 264. GLOSSY THRUSH. This bird is a native of
Africa, where it is esteemed for its song as well as beantv
No. 265. BOHEMIAN CHATTERER. (Amvelis
Garrulus.) This is a rare bird, a few visiting this country
in severe winters. 3
No. 266. W HID AH BIRD. This singular formed bird
is an inhabitant of that part of the African coast.
Nm 267. STORMY PETEREL. ( Procellaria Pelagicn.)
The Stormy Peterel is rarely seen on our shores. The body
is of so oily a nature, that if a wick is drawn through from
the mouth to the vent, and lighted, it wiN burn as a lamp ; and
is said to be actually used for that purpose in the Ferroe
Islands.
No. 268. GREY SANDPIPER. (Squatarola Trima.)
llns is a very scarce British bird, not found here in the
summer months, and of course retires northward to breed-
freqrients the sea shores only. Said to be found in Siberia
and Carolina m large flocks.
No. 269. BLACK GROUSE. (Tetrno Tetrix) The
Black Grouse is at'present chiefly confined to the more
northern parts of this kingdom ; population and culture hav-
of g ScotTand t iem fr ° m 5 * S P lentiful on the highlands
No. 270. WINTER GULL. {Larus Hyhernus ) These
are common on all our shores. 7
No. 271.- KNOTS. ( Tringa Canutus.) This species is
chiefly confined to the fens in Lincolnshire, Isle of Ely, and
a tew other places.
™ N °; ■ 00D LARK - (Mavda Ariorea,) The
Wood Lark is by no means a plentiful species, but is met with
in most parts of the kingdom sparingly.
,p No ‘ 2 2t 3 ' ““ SPOTTEE > WOODPECKERS.
{Picks Minor.) This is by much the scarcest species; it
possesses all the habits of the Green Woodpecker-
No. 274. NUTHATCHES and NEST, vide 70.
No. 275. GREY WAGTAILS and NEST, vide 87.
n ?°* ; i7 ?* REDERE ASTS and YOUNG. (
iiubecula .) This bird is common in all parts of England,
an an inhabitant of the greater part of the European
continent. r
No. 277. Non -DESCRIPT FINCHES from Asia.
No. 278. PIED FLYCATCHER, vide 126.


No. 279. STARLING, vide 27.
No. 280. BRAMBLING, vide 180.
No, 281. GREY WAGTAILS and NEST, vide 87.
No. 282. GALLINULE CRAKE This
is a migrative species, appearing with us in April, and
departing in October. It makes a singular noise, resembling
that of a comb when the finger is drawn along the teeth, and
which is used as a decoy.
No. 283. WHITE-THROATS and NEST (
Sylvia.) This is a very common species, visiting all parts of
the Kingdom in April, and departs again in September.
No. 284. LESSER REDPOLES and NEST, vide 198.
N 0.285. REDBREAST and YOUNG, vide276.
No. 286. SANDPIPER (Tringa Hypoleucos.) This
bird visits tills country in the spring, and frequents our lakes
.and rivers. "
No. 287. HEDGE WARBLERSand NEST (
Modularis.) This bird is found in all parts of England, and
continues the whole year.
No. 288. CAYENNE GOATSUCKER, vide 263.
No. 289. GOLDEN CRESTED WRENS ( Motacilla
Jiegulus.) This elegant species of warbler is the smallest
British bird; it principally inhabits fir plantations, and con-
tinues here the whole year.
No. 290. SAND PIPERS, vide 143.
No. 291. TIT LARKS and NEST, vide 286.
No. 292. WATER OUZEL Cinclus.) This
•species is a retired solitary bird rarely seen but on the banks
of rapid rocky rivers or streams of water, particularly in the
mountainous parts of Scotland and Wales: It is certainly a
most curious and singular circumstance, that a bird not ap-
parently in the least formed for diving, should pursue its
prey under water, living chiefly on small fish and aquatic
insects. It cannot however swim on the surface.
No. 293. LONG-TAILED TITMICE, vide 149.
No. 294. REDBREASTS and NEST, vide 276.
No. 295. BLACK CAPS (Motacilla Airicapilla.)
This bird migrates, visiting us in the spring, and returning
in September.
No, 296. CARASAW. This beautiful bird is a species
»of Turkey, domesticated in the West Indies.
No. 297. CARP (Cyprinus Carpi This is one of the
naturalised fish of our country, inhabiting pools and still
-rivers.
c


No. 298. CREEPERS (Certhie Familiar is,) This
bird is perpetually climbing up trees after insects. It con-
tinues with us the whole year.
No. 299. CROSS-BILL (Loxia This
bird has been known to breed in the pleasure grounds of
Nathaniel Lee Acton, Esq. Livermere, Suffolk; it is a con-
stant inhabitant of the northern parts of Europe.
No: 300. CARRION CROW ( Corvus Corone.) The
Crow is a bold bird, always at war with the lesser species of
Hawks ; it feeds on flesh, insects, and grain.
No. 301. ROCK DOVE This bird
breeds in caverns on our coasts, ruined edifices, and some-
times in holes of decayed trees.
No. 302 i CENEREOUS EAGLE, (Vultur Albicilla.)
This bird inhabits Scotland and the Orkneys, also Russia,
Sweden, and Denmark: It preys on land animals, fish, and
aquatic birds. It is the voung of the White-tailed Eagle.
No. 303. SPOTTED FLYCATCHERS and YOUNG
( Muscicapa Grisola .) This is a migrative species, visiting
us in the spring. It makes its nest in the hole of a wall.
No. SOL GOLDEN THRUSH. This beautiful bird is
a native of'South America,
No. 305. GOLDFINCHES ( CardueUs Fringilla.)
This bird is common in all parts of England; it continues
with us the whole year.
No■ 306, LITTLE GREBE •( Critatus. )
This bird is common in small rivers, where it breeds. In
large rivers it is often devoured by pike and trout while diving.
No. 307. GREEN SANDPIPER ( Trmga.)
This is a scarce solitary bird ; it frequents shallow streams.
No. 308. GREEN GROSBEAK ( Loxia Chloris.)
This bird is common in most parts of England.
No. 309. WHITE-WINGED GROSBEAK, An inha-
bitant of Italy.
310. HOOPOE ( Upupa Epops .) This bird is seldom
met with in England, occasionally visiting us in the autumn ;
its food is insects and worms. It is found plentifully in the
deserts of Russia and Tartary ; also in France and Germany,
No. 311. JAYS and YOUNG {Corvus Glandarius.) A
bird common in all parts of the kingdom where there is
woody ground.
No. 312. SPOTTED KINGFISHER. This bird
quents the rivers of North America.
No. 313. LAPWINGS {Tr Venellus.) This bird


is common in most parts of the kingdom. It breeds upon
heaths and fens and lays four eggs, which are placed: in a
quadrangular manner, touching each other at the smaller
ends, by which they occupy the least possible space.
No. 31L MARSH TITMICE {Parus Palustris.)
This bird is not so common as the blue species ; it is also
found in Italy and Sweden - .
No. 315. MOLE {Talpa.) The Mole breeds in spring,
and brings four at a time; it makes its nest of moss, and that
always under the largest hillock. ♦
No. 316. PERSIAN ORIOLE {Persicus O An
inhabitant of the Persian deserts. **
No. 317. OYSTER-CATCHER O'stra-
legus.) This bird is common in all our shores, but never
quits the sea coast. In winter they, assemble in small flocks.
No. 316. LESSER PETTICHAPS
lais. ) This is the first species of Warbler that pays its annual
visit ta us in the spring* It is a busy restless bird, always
active amongst the trees and* bushes in search of insects.
No. 319. PTARMIGAN {Tetrcm Lagopus-.) It is a
very local species* with us, confined to the loftiest mountains
of the; north. Some few are yet found to 1 the south of the
Tweed, but it is more plentiful on some of the Highlands of
Scotland, from which it rarely or never descends, even in
the severest season, when nothing but snow is to be seen. '
No. 320. PUFFIN ( Aha Arctica .) These birds appear
on many parts of our rocky coast about the middle of April,
and begin to breed about the middle of May.
No. 321* PURRES (Tringa Cinclus,} The Purre is
found on alt our coasts during winter, but seems most partial
to the flat sandy shore.
No* 322. QUAIL (»Tetrwo Cot'urnixJ)' This species of
partridge is found in all parts of the old world, but not in
America. It is a bold bird, and is frequently used in China
for fighting as we do our Game Cocks. With us they appear
in the beginning of May, and leave us in October.
No. 323, 32f, and 325. Contains a beautiful variety of
Pyrite and Crystals from the different mines in Derbyshire.
No. 326. Contains 63 beautiful specimens of Scotch
Pebbles.
No. 327, 328, and 329. Contain a great variety of
Crystals, Chalcedomy, Opals, Quartz, Fluor Spar, Carbo-
nate of Copper, Iron Pyrites, Corals, Peacock Coal, Petre-
factions, Flame Stone, Talk, Mica, Satin Stone, Emery
c 2


Stone from the Red Sea, Mineral Pitch, &c.
No. 330. Contains a variety of Moss and Sand Agates,
Scotch and Egyptian Pebbles.
No. 331 and 332. Contain a variety of insects of the
orders of Coleoptera, Lepidoptera, Neuroptera,. Hymenop*
tera, Diptera, and Aptera.
No. 333, 334, and 335. Contain upwards of a hundred
specimens of East and West India and British Shells.
No. 336 and 337. Contain a variety of eggs of some of
flip rarp Rrifich hirrlci
No. 338. BROWN LINNETS (Fringilla Linota.J A
variety of the Greater Redpole.
No. 339. CINEREOUS SHRIKE, vide 67.
No. 340. LITTLE AUK, vide 101.,
No. 341. STINT vide 321.
No! 342! _ SANDERLING } CJmradrius Calidris.) The
Sanderling is found on many of our shores, where it flocks
together with the Purrs; but is not so plentiful a species.
No. 343. RED SAND-PIPER fTringu Islandica.)-~~
This bird rarely visits our shores ; is said to be found on the
coasts of New York, Labrador, and Nootka Sound, Iceland,
and about the Caspian Sea.. Not in the summer plumage.
No. 344. KING of the VULT URES
Vultures are the most ravenous of the feathered tribe, gene-
rally devouring only such animals as are dying, or found
dead, and putrid.. Their sense of smelling is; so.exquisite,
that they are able to scent a dead carcase at an amazing
distance. In some of the battles of the east; where vast
slaughter takes place of horses and men, voracious animals
crowd to the field from all quarters, of which Jackalls and
Vultures are the chief.—The King of the Vultures is the
most beautiful of that tribe of animals; it is an inhabitant of
South America, and is protected on account of its services
in destroying dead and noxious animals. &
No. 345. GOLDFINCHES, vide 305.
No. 346, . j A pair of Non-descripts.
No. 347. MALE and FEMALE PHEASANTS, with
YOUNG ( PhasianusColchicus.) The Pheasant is found
partially in most parts of England, but not so plentiful in
the north, and rarely in Scotland. This bird does not appear
to pair, but the female hides her nest from the male. It is
generally believed the Pheasant.and domestic fowl will breed
together; if so, possibly the colour of the spurious breed
would depend much on that of the common fowl. It is more


probable the Pied Pheasant first originated from the Common
Pheasant and White Indian Pheasant.
No. 348. WHITE or GREENLAND BEAR and BOA
CONSTRICTOR SERPENT. The White Bear differs
greatly, both in figure and dimensions, from the Brown Bear
of the Alps and the Black Bear of North America; it is car-
nivorous, treacherous, and cruel; it principally lives on fish,
seals, and dead whales; White Bears seldom remove far from
the shore; sometimes, however, they are seen on ice floats
several leagues at sea, and are often transported in this
manner to Iceland, where they no sooner arrive than all the
natives are in arms to destroy them.
No. 349. GREATER REDPOLES ( -
nabina.) These birds chiefly resort on furzy commons in
the breeding season, where they conceal their nests* com-
posed of moss and bents, interwoven witbwooh-
No. 350. RING OUZEL ( Turdus Torquatus.) The
Ring Ouzel is a scarce bird* in England,- migrating from one
part to another. It is generally believed they do not winter
with us, but are known to breed in Scotland, and in the
north of England. 1
No, 351- ROACH (<Cyprians Rut Hus.) This fish is
common in most of our deep still rivers.
Nos 352; ROLLER ( Corac There are
very few instances- of this bird being found in England. It
ie-found in Germany, Sicily, and Malta*
No. 353. SCOTER, vide 2.
No. 354. SEAL ( iPochwVitalina.y The Seal is an
excellent swimmer and ready diver, feeds on most sorts of
fish which it can master; it sleeps on rocks surrounded by
the sea, and if disturbed by any thing* takes care to tumble
over the rocks into the sea-
No. 355. CHIMNEY SWALLOW ( Hirundo Rustica.)
The Swallow seems to be known in all parts of the world.—
It has been said this bird’ lies torpid in cliffs, hollow trees,
and such places, during winter. It is well known that in
some animals, whose radical heat is sensibly affected by cold,
the power of action is lost when the fluid becomes languid,
and animal life is as it were suspended. The Bat, the Dor-
mouse, and Hedgehog, become torpid in winter, when the
mean state of the air is below 45 degrees. Thus it is with
the Swallow and Martin, who have been accidentally de-
tained in this northern climate. It is supposed to winter in
Senegal, and probably many other warm climates.
c


No; 356- TENCH. The Tench has by some been called'
the physician of the fish, and that the slime is so healing that
the wounded apply it as styptic. It loves still waters, and is
rarely found in rivers.
No. 357. GOLDEN THRUSH. This beautiful bird i*
a native of South America.
No. 358. MISTLE THRUSHES (Turdus
This is the largest species of Thrush, but by no means so
plentiful as the common and seems-to be less so in winter.
No. 359. VIPER { Coluber Berms.) Vipers are found in
many parts of this Island, but the dry, stony, and particularly
chalky countries abound with them. The four canine teeth
are placed two on each side the upper jaw, these instruments
of poison are long, crooked, and moveable, and can be raised
and depressed at pleasure; they are hollow from the point to
their base, near which is a gland that secretes, prepares, and
lodges the poison, and the same action that gives the wound,,
forces from this gland through the tooth the fatal juice into
it. The symptoms of the venom if the wound is neglected
are very terrible, it first causes an acute pain in the place
affected;, attended with a swelling* first red, afterwards livid*
which by degrees spread to the neighbouring parts, great
faintness and sickness at the stomach, bilious convulsive
vomiting, and cold sweats* and in consequence of these,
death itself. But the violence of the symptoms depends
much on the size or rage of the animal* or depth, or situation
of the wound. The most certain remedy for its bite is olive
oil applied to the wound, and a quantity taken inwardly.,
No. 360. Silver and .Copper Roman Coins.
Nos. 361 and 362. Ancient British Silver Goins- ft-
No. 363. Ancjent Copper Coins.
Nos-364< and 365, Provincial Coins.
No. 366- BLUE-CRESTED JAY {Comm .>
A native of South America-
No. 367. PAROQUET, from the East Indies. r|
No-366. IURTLE DOVE {Columba Turtur.) This
-bird visits this country in* the spring, and remigrates in
September.
No. 369- SKY LARKS and YOUNG, vide 256.
No. 370- GREEN FINCHES from Botany Bay.
No. 371. OSPREY ( FalcoHalieetus.) This species life
rarely met with in England, it resides chiefly near water,
especially large rivers. Its principal food is fish, which it
catches with great dexterity by pouncing on them with vast
rapidity, and carries them off in its talons.


No. 372. PAROQUET, from the West Indies-.
No. 373. SPOTTED KINGFISHER, from North
America
* No. 374. LESSER TERN, vide 170.
No. 375. SANDWICH TERNS. This bird was first
noticed by Mr. Boys, of Sandwich, where it is not uncommon,
and communicated to Dr.- Latham, who-first published an
account of it.
No. 376. SANDPIPER, vide 286;-
No. 377- WHITE TAILED EAGLE & HAKE, vide 302.
No. 378. SPOON BILL ( The
Spoon Bill is rarely met with in England; '
No. 379. J TERN [Sterna Hirundo.) This
bird visits us in summer ; is found in great abundance on our
eastern shores.
N 0.380. WHEAT-EARS (. MotacillaCEnanthe .)' This
bird is a migrative species, appearing with us in March. It
principally frequents rabbk-warrens; and makes its nest in a
deserted rabbit-burrow.
NoiSSl. WIDGEON [Anas Penelope.) The Widgeon
is found in most parts of Europe ; breeds in the more northern
parts; visits England in the autumn.
No. 382.. WRENS and NEST [Motacilla Troglodytes.)
This species of warbler is common in all parts of England.
No. 383. REED WRENS Arundinacea.).
This is a migrative speciesis said to be found in the fens-of
Lincolnshire, and on the banks of the river Colne, in Buck-
inghamshire.
No. 384. GREAT SNIPE [Scolopax Major.) This
species is rarely met with in England ; it was-first described
by Mr. Pennant.
No. 385. SWIFT ( HirundoApies.) The Swift makes its
appearance with us in May. It is said to inhabit the greater
parts of the old Continent.
No. 386. LANNER (Falco Lanarius.) This is a very
bold bird, and was formerly used in Falconry. It is now
clearly ascertained to be the Peregrine Falcon in young
plumage.
No. 387: SQUIRRELS [Sciurus Vulgaris.) This
animal is remarkably neat, lively, active, and provident;
never leaves its food to chance, but secures in some hollow
tree a vast magazine of nuts for winter provision. In the
summer it feeds on the buds and young shoots, and is parti-
cularly fond of those of the fir and pine, and also of the young


cones. It makes its nest of moss between the fork of two
branches, and brings four or five young at a time.
No. 388. KITE {Fa/co Milvus.) The Kite generally
breeds in wooded mountainous countries; its motion in the
air distinguishes it from 1 all other birds, being so smooth and
even as to be scarcely perceptible; from thence is derived
the old’name of Glead. Lord Bacon observes that when
Kites fly high it portends fair and dry weather. The tail of
this kind is sufficient to distinguish it from all other British
birds of prey, being forked. Pliny thinks that the invention
of the rudder arose from the observation made of the various
motions of that part when the Kite was steering through the
air; certain it is that the most useful arts were originally
copied from animals, however we may now have improved-
upon them.
No. 389. PATAGONIAN RATS:
No. 390. GUILLEMOT (Colymbus Troile .) These
birds are found in amazing numbers on the high cliffs on se-
veral of our coasts. They are very simple birds, for not-
withstanding they are shot at and see their- companions killed
by them, they will not quit the rock.
No. 391. RAZOR BILL {Ac&Torda.) These birds*
frequent the highest rocks that impend over the sea, where
they form a grotesque appearance, sitting close together in
rows one above the other. -
No. 392.. ALLIGATOR is a creature that Hveth on land
and water. Its body is rough, being.covered with a rind so
thick, firm, and strong, that it m almost impenetrable by any.
dart or spear. By the reason of the shortness of the legs, its
pace is very slow, therefore it is not very difficult for a man-
to escape from it by flight, especially if he does not go straight
forward, but turns and winds out of the direct path, for the
Allegator is so hard and stiff, that it cannot easily turn and.
wind after him. It inhabits the West Indies..
No. 393. SEA WOLF is taken at the mouth of the Elbe;
it Is of a very voracious nature, and furnished with very de—
structive teeth. It is- said thati.it> will sometimes fasten on an-
anchor with its teeth, and leave the print of them behind it.
It has a double 1 row of sharp and round-teeth, ten or twelve
in a rovr, both in the upper and lower, jaw.
No. 394. GOD WIT (Scolopax These,
birds-are in small flocks on our coast in September, and con-
tinue with us the whole winter; they walk on the open sands*
like the Curlew, and feed on insects.


No. 395. SUN FISH, vide 422.
No. 397. BLACK BACKED GULL (Lavus Marinus.J
These birds frequent our coasts in small numbers, andbreed
in the highest cliffs. It feeds not only on fish, but like the
Raven, very greedily devours carrion.
No. 398. CINEREOUS EAGLE, vide 302.
No. 399. BLACK GUILLEMOT, vide 233.
No. 400. RED*BREASTED MERGANSER.
gus.) This bird rarely migrates farther south than the Firth
of Forth;
No. 401. FERRUGINOUS DUCK
Pennant says we do not find it mentioned by any writer ex-
cept Linnaeus, who took his description from Rudbeck’s
paintings, and adds, that it is found, though rarely, in the
Swedish rivers. This bird was taken in a decoy at Iken, Suffolk.
No. 402. CORNISH CHOUGH (Corvus
This species is but thinly scattered over this kingdom* a few
only are found on the coasts of Kent, Cornwall, Carnarvon-
shire, and Anglesea. It builds its nest in high cliffs, and lays
four or five eggs, white spotted with dirty yellow.
N 0.403. NORTHERN DIVER Glacialis.)
These birds inhabit the northern parts of this island ; liv§
chiefly at sea, and feed on fish. There is no doubt but the
Great Loon ( Mergus Stellatus) is the young of this bird. \
No. 404. FULMER ( Procellaria This species
inhabits the Isle of St. Kilda. No bird is of equal use to the
islanders as this ; the Fulmar supplies them with oil for their
lamps, down for their beds, a delicacy for their tables, a balm
for their wounds, and a medicine for their distempers. *
No. 405. BLACK-TOED GULL ( Ceppli us. ) A few of
these birds are to be met with in the north of Scotland. It is-
the opinion of many Naturalists to be the* young of the
Arctic Gull.
No. 406. SMEW (Mergus Albellus.) This bird appears
to be more rare than formerly, a few only are seen in severe
winters. ’*
No. 407. STONE CURLEW, vide 99.
N 0.408. SEA SWALLOW,vide 170.
No. 409. BLACK TERNS {Sterna Fissipes.) These
birds frequent fresh waters, and breed on their banks among;
reeds
No. 41*0. TURNSTONES ( Tringa Morinettus. ) These
birds take their name from their method of searching for food
by turning up small stones with their bills to get at the insects'


that lurks under them. They are found on the east coast of
this kingdom in small companies of four or five.
No. 411. HAWFINCH, vide 88.
No. 412. SWIPES, or MOUNTAIN LINNETS
naria Montana .) These birds visit the eastern coast of this
kingdom in December, and depart again in March. It is a
femiliar bird and more easily tamed than the common Linnet.
No. 413. SPOTTED GALLINULE [Rollus Parzana.)
This species is not very frequent in Great Britain. It inha*-
bits the sides of small streams, concealing itself among the
reeds and sedge.
No. 414. PUFFINS {Alca Arcfka*) These birds frequent
the coasts of several parts of Great Britain and Ireland, but
no place in greater numbers than Priestholme Isle, off the
coast of Anglesea, where their flocks may be compared to
swarms of bees for multitude. These are birds of passage;
resort thither in April, and dispossessing the rabbits of their
holes, occupy them till August, when they all disappear.
They lay but one egg, white, and of the size of that of a hen*
N0*415, PINTAIL, vide 140.
Nbi 41*6. SHOVELER, vide 113.
No. 417. SHTELDUCKs f
No. 418. SOLAND GOOSE (vide 220.)
No. 419. GAD>WALL f Anas Strepera), This species
of Duck is but rarely met with in this country.
No. 420. SCAUP DUCK These birds
are common in most of our salt water rivers- during winter.
They take their name from feeding, on. scaup or broken shell
fish. .
No 421. SCOTER' f Anas' Nigra/. This bird is al-
lowed in the Romish Church t*o» be eaten in Lent. It is an
excellent diver, said to live almost constantly at sea. It is-
found in most of the northern parts of the world.
No. 422. SUN FISH f Ostracian LcevisJ. This fish
grows to a very large size* When boiled has Been observed-
to turn into a glutinous substance.
No. 423. NUTCRACKER (Corvus
This very rare bird* was shot in the parish* of Holton, Suffolk,
in June, 1824. Pennant mentions but one being killed in
this kingdom.
No. 424. LITTLE BUSTARD- This beautiful bird is
found in many, parts of Europe, But nowhere comraonj. two
or three instances only are on record of its being killed in this
kingdom. The bird in the Museum was shot at Rendle-
sham, Suffolk, in 1824.


No. 425. ALPINE HAPE. On the very top -of the
highest Scottish mountains with the Ptarmigans is found this
beautiful species of hare. It is very easily tamed, and soon
becomes much more familiar than the common hare.
No. 426, RAVEN (Corpus Corax). The Raven is a
very docile bird, may be taught to speak. Their scent is
remarkably good, and their life prolonged to a great space.
No. 427. LITTLE AUK, vide 101,
No. 428. G A RG A NY, vide 59.
No. 429. POLECAT, vide 154.
No. 430. WOODLARK This is a
very local species frequenting wooded countries. It sings in
the night, and like the common Lark sings as it flies.
No. 431. VELVET DUCK ( Fusca) This is by
no means a common species; a few visiting this country in
cpvpffi wmfpr«
No. 432. RUFF and REEVE, vide 223-
No. 433. SWIFT \Hirundo This appears m
©ur country about fourteen days later than the Sand Martin,
but differs greatly in the time of its departure, retiring inva-
riably about the middle of August, being the first of the
genus that leaves us. It is more on the wing than any other
Swallow; its flight is more rapid, and that attended with a
shrill scream. It breeds under the eaves of houses, in
steeples, and other lofty buildings.
No. 434. SHIELDUCK {Anas Tadorna). These birds
frequent the sea coasts, and breed in rabbit-holes. When a
person attempts to take their young, the old birds shew great
address in diverting his attention from the brood ; they will
fly along the ground as if wounded, till the former are got
into a place of security, and then return and collect them to-
gether. In winter they collect in great flocks. Their flesh
is very rank and bad.
No. 435. REDSTARTS {Motacilla Phcenicurus). This
bird remains with us only in the spring and summer, and is
observed to come over with the Nightingale. It makes its
nest in hollow trees and holes in walls and other buildings.
This bird is so remarkably shy, that it will forsake its nest if
the eggs are only touched. It has a very fine soft note, but
being a sullen bird, is with difficulty kept alive in confinement.
No. 436. SEA LARK, vide 174.
No. 437. SEAL, vide 354.
No. 438. OSPREY, vide 371.
No. 439. MISSLE THRUSH (Turdus Major). This


is distinguished from all the kmd by its superior size. It mav
be observed that this is the largest bird, British or Forefrn
(withm our knowledge) that sings or has any harmonyS
IT chauedn?
ng, (mattering, &c.the Pigeon kind excepted, whose slow
pamtwe conhnued monotony has .something sweetly soothing
in it. ihe Missle Thrush begins its song early in the snrin<?
sitting on the summit of a lofty tree. It feeds on insect?’
holly and mistletoe berries. *
No. 4-40. Contains a great variety of the most rare and
beautiful species of BRITISH BUTTERFLIES & MOTHS
creatures whose elegance and variety of beauty demand our
prXctlon* i gnora " c . e lon S imagined them the spontaneous
production of putnfying matter and undesigning chance
a - ble fOFm an anitnal as t 0 ereate a World
proved thpm° V fn rieS of naturalist B rectified that mistake, and
proved them to proceed from parents like themselves after a
fernafe 00 > h h WOnde * rful ° rder ° f S eneration - The preg-
nant female with unerring sagacity deposits her eggs in some
secure concealment, where the mint brood may Ifd as soon
andXrive lm * edl f e and P r °P er sustenance ; here they feed
nd.fthnve, and cast off several skins till arrived at full growth
when every species, in a manner peculiar to itself, is changed
into an Aurelia; whence in due time a Moth or Butterfly
issues forth, arrayed with all the glories of its parent This
00 partake of the joy of love, lays eggs, l„d
f ated manner. another ** an uniform and ™* d ulte-
GREY SANDPIPER, vide 268.
.442. FIELDFARE ( Turdis Pilaris). This bird
passes the summer in the northern parts of Europe, also in
11 h^ iS in tbe la /S est ««•* feeds' on
ms ot all kinds, and is very fond of those of the juniper.
Idfares visit our island in great flocks about Michaelmas
Marir e We‘ he ‘“T f* ohe bt »r thf
from Norwlv S f Sp6C 5 * hat * he that migrate here cLe
in ilmt l ’ f ° r . Ced by tbe ex cessive rigour of the season
breed ifr IhW^'T’i/® we V 6nd tbat tbe y winter as well as
xt “ „ ss ’i and tbe moderate climates.
breads hfholl ST f ARE ( Sturnus The Stare
and offing K W J ree i’ GaVeS ° f houses > towers, ruins, cliffs,
of Whd?f TK Sh n oC , ks . ° Ver the sea ’ such as those of the Isle
eatahS l ’ TV heir flesh 18 80 rera arkably bitter as to be scarcely
speak ' J are Very d ° cHe birds > and ma y be taught


No. 444. L APWINGS, vide 313.
No. 445. CANADENSIS. These birds are found in
various parts of North America ; at Hudson’s Bay they are
one of the chief articles of food. The flesh of the young
‘birds is accounted good, and their feathers are an article of
commerce, much in favour of those places where they breed
plentifully. :vc
No. 446. SMYRNA KINGFISHER. They are found
by the river sides -at Smyrna, as our ■Kingfishers are in this
country.
N 0.447. BENGAL KINGFISHER. Mr. Pomet says
when they are going to breed they throw out of their mouths
a-white froth, with which they build a nest the bigness and
shape of a round dish, where they lay their eggs and hatch
their young ones ; these nests are as a white colour, tending
to yellow, and of a hard dry consistency; the taste being in-
sipid and almost like that of vermicelli. These nests, are
brought from the East Indies into France and other parts of
Europe, where for their fine flavour they are esteemed a very
great delicacy; they are said to afford very good nourish-
ment, being boiled in water with a fowl and ginger. dn
No. 448. GOATSUCKER,-vide 9.
No- 449. (Valeo Palumbarius.) This
species and'the Sparrow Hawk are distinguished by the name
of short-winged Hawks, because their wings when closed fall
short of the end of the tail. The Goshawk was in esteem
among Falconers, and flown at cranes, geese, pheasants,
and partridges.; is found in the north of Scotland. 4f
No. 450. SEDGE BIRD (Mot a cilia Salic aria,) This
bird visits us in the summer; it frequents fens-and marshes,
and sits on low bushes; reeds, or sedges, and has a most
harsh jarring note.
No. 451. GOLDEN PHEASANTS, vide 172.
No. 452. VAMPIRE, vide 166.
No. 453. ARCTIC GULLS, vide 169.
No. 454. FLYCATCHER {Muscicapa G The
Flycatcher is a bird of passage, appears in the spring, breeds
with us, and retires in August. It builds its nest on the
sides of trees, towards the middle. It will take its stand on
the top of some stake or post, from whence it springs forth
on its prey, returning still to the same stand for many times
together; they feed also on cherries, of which they seem
very fond.
No. 455. CAMELION. The Camelion has continued
D


as it were blown up for two hours together, and then lie
grows less and less, insensibly, for the dilation is always more
quick and visible than the contraction ; in this last state he
appears extremely lean, and the spine of the back sharp, and
all his ribs may be told ; the skin is very cold to the touch;
and notwithstanding he seems so lean, there is no feeling the
beating of the heart; the surface of the skin is unequal, and
has a grain not unlike shagreen, but very soft, because each
eminence is as smooth as if it were polished. Some of these
are as large as a middling pin’s head on the arms, legs, belly,
and tail; but on the shoulders and head they are of an oval
figure, and a little larger,- those under the throat are ranged
in the form of a chaplet, from the lower lig to the breast;
some on the head and back are amassed together in clusters,
with spaces between them, in which are almost imperceptible
spots of a pale red and yellow colour, as well as the ground
of the skin itself, which plainly appears between these clus-
ters. This ground changes colour when the animal is dead,
becoming of a greyish brown, and the small spots are whitish.
456. BLACK TERNS {Sterna Fissipes.) This species,
like the rest of the Terns, frequents ‘the sea shores in sum-
mer, but its habits and manners are somewhat different. It
does not associate with them ; it has a shriller cry, its evo-
lutions are more rapid, and Its turns while on the wing are
shorter; it seems to prefer the rivers, fens, marshes, and
lakes inland, to the sea. It builds its nest among reeds and
rushes in marshy places, with flags and coarse grass, lays
four eggs, of a dirty greenish colour, spotted and encircled
with black about the thicker end. It feeds on beetles, mag-
gots, and other insects, as well as on small Ashes. Ornitho-
logists and voyagers say it is met with at Hudson’s Bay,
Newfoundland, and Iceland, and that it is common in Si-
beria, and the salt lakes in the desarts of Tartary,
No. 457. CROSS BILLS, vide 299.
No. 458. MERGANSER, vide 156.
No. 459. RAVEN ( Corvus Corax.) The Raven is well
known in all parts of the world, and in times of ignorance
and superstition was considered as ominous, foretelling fu-
ture events by its horrid croakings, and announcing impend-
ing calamities. In those times the Raven was considered as
a bird of vast importance, and the various changes and mo-
dulations of its voice were studied with the most careful at-
tention, and were made use of by artful and designing men
to mislead the ignorant and credulous. It is a very long-


lived bird, and is supposed sometimes to live a century or
more. It is fond of carrion, which it scents at a great dis-
tance. It is said that it will destroy rabbits, young ducks,
and chickens- It has been known to seize on young lambs
which have been dropped in a weak state, and pick out their
eyes while yet alive. It will suck the eggs of other birds.
It feeds also on earth-worms, reptiles, and even shell fish,
when urged by hunger. It may be rendered very tame and
familiar, and has been sometimes taught to pronounce a va-
riety of words. It is a crafty bird, and will frequently pick
up things of value, such as rings, money, &c. and carry
them to its hiding place. It makes its nest early in the spring,
and builds in trees and holes of rocks, laying five or six eggs
of a pale bluish colour, spotted with brown, The female
sits about twenty day&j and is constantly attended by the
male, who not only provides her with abundance of food,
but relieves her in turn* and takes her place in the nest.—
The natives of Greenland eat the flesh, and make a covering
for themselves with the skins of these birds, which they wear
next their bodies.
. No. 460 v MOOR BUZZARD, vide 73.
No. 461 v CRESTED GREBE, vide 153.
t No. 462. CHATTERER (Ampelis Garrulus.) This rare
bird visits our island only at uncertain intervals. Their summer
residence is supposed’ to be the northern parts of Europe,
within the Arctic Circle, whence they spread themselves into
other countries, where they remain during winter, and return
in the spring to their usual haunts. The general food of this
bird is berries of various kinds, in some countries it is said
to be extremely fond of grapes. Only this species of Chat-
terer is found in Europe, all the rest are natives of America.
No. 463. TREE SPARROW
This species is sometimes met within Yorkshire, Lancashire,
and also in Lincolnshire, but has not been seen further north
than those counties; it differs from the House Sparrow in
making its nest in the holes of trees and not in buildings. It
feeds on fruits, seeds, and insects, it is a lively active little
bird, and when it alights has a variety of motions whirling
about and jerking its tail upwards and downwards like the
Wagtail. It is found in Italy, France, Germany, and Russia,
and is much more plentiful in many parts of the Continent
than in England.
No. 464. HARTFORD WARBLER*. This bird seems
to*be rare in this country and owes its name with, us to the
d 2


accident of a pair of them having been seen near Dartford, in*
Kent, a few years ago; since that many have been taken
near Dartford, and are supposed sometimes to winter with us.
Buffon says they are natives of Province, where they frequent
gardens and feed on flies and small insects.
No. 465. BOA SERPENT, vide 209..
No. 466. WILD PIGEON (Columba JEnas.) Wild
Pigeons are said to migrate in large flocks into England at
the approach of winter from-the northern regions, and return
in the spring, many of them, however, remain in this country,
only changingtbeir quarters for the purpose of procuring
food. They build their nests in the hollows of decayed trees,
and commonly have two broods in the year. In a state of
domestication their increase is prodigious, and though they
never lay more than two eggs at a time, yet, allowing them
to breed nine time in the years, the produce of a single pair
at the expiration of four years may amount'to the enormous-
number of 14,762.
No. 467. REDSHANKS, vide 69.
No. 468. WATER OUZEL, vide 292.
No. 469. WATER RAT, vide 111
No. 470.' SEDGE WARBLM { Salicaria,
This bird is found where reeds and sedges grow, it likewise
frequents the sides of rivers and ponds where there is covert;
it sings incessantly night and day during the breeding time,
imitating by turns the notes of the Sparrow, the Swallow,
the Skylark, and most other small birds, from which it is
called the English Mock Bird.
No. 471. E AGLE OWL (Strix Bubo.) This is the largest
of the Owl genus, being almost equal in size to an Eagle, and
has a powerful as well as dignified look. These birds are
sometimes met with in the northern Scottish isles, where
they prey upon Rabbits and Grouse, which are numerous
there, but they are very rarely seen in England.
No. 472. SOLITARY THRUSH (Turdus Solitarim.)
Latham says this bird is frequent in France, Italy, the
Isles of the Mediterranean and the Archipelago, and other
parts where it is not only esteemed for its song, but held in
veneration by most people so as to think it almost sacrilege
to take the nest or kill the bird. They are said to frequent
mountainous and rocky places, and to be always seen alone
except'in the breeding season. Their food consists chiefly of?
insects and berries. Their young are easily brought up, and
besides their sweet natural wild song, they may be taught
whistle tunes and articulate words.


No. 473. MOUNTAIN FINCH, vide 180.
No. 474. ROCK LARK (Alauda Campestris .) This
bird is mostly met with among the rocks on the promontories
and isles near the sea shore; it builds its nest commonly in
the crevices, near the tops of those where the earth has
crumbled down and made a lodgment; it is wholly composed
of the small blades and stems of dried grass; the eggs, five
in number, are closely freckled with ash and sprinkled with
small spots.
No. 475. CAPE COLA. This bird is found plentifully
in the wooded parts of the Cape of Good Hope,
No. 476. FIELD LARK This bird
frequents woods and plantations, and sits on the highest
branches of trees, whence it rises, singing to a considerable
height, and descends slowly with its wings set up and its tail
spread out like a fan. Its note is full, clear, and melodious,
and peculiar to its kind.
No. 477. GRASSHOPPER WARBLER { Sylvia'
Locustella.) This bird is seldom seen, and is best known
by the lengthened grinding or sibilous noise which it is heard
to make about the dusk of a still summer’s evening. It
an artful bird, and sculks and skreens itself from the sight of
man among old furze bushes, or in the.thickest brakes and
hedges, which it will not readily quit, nor be easily forced
away. The nest is composed of coarse dried grass, about
three inches in thickness, but the space allotted for nidification
is very shallow. It lays five eggs, ground colour white,
beautifully freckled all over with spots of a carnation hue.
No. 478. LION and LIONESS. The Lion is the noblest
and most tremendous of all animals ; his form and appearance
are strkingly bold and majestic, his large head and shaggy
pendant mane, his strength of limb and formidable counten-
ance exhibit a picture of terrific grandeur; his voice when
irritated is a horrible roar. He usually preys on Horse and
other large animals, and does not often attack mankind, bo
prodigious is his strength; that a single stroke of his paw is
sufficient to break the back of a horsei The seizing upon his
prey is generally accompanied with a ! loud-and tremendous
roar. When in quest of food his roaring is even said to re-
semble distant thunder. He does not willingly attack any
animal openly, unless provoked or extremely hungry, in the
latter case he is said to see no danger, and to be repelled by
no resistance. The method in which he his prey is
almost always to spring or throw himself upon it with one
d 3


vast bound from the place of his concealment. The Romans-
frequently exhibited these animals in their public shows;
Hanno, a Carthaginian, is said to have been the first person
who tamed a Lion, and he was condemned to die for what his-
fellow citizens deemed so great a crime. They asserted that*
the republic had to fear the worst of consequences from a
man who had been able to subdue so much ferocity. The
Lion has often been known to despise contemptible enemies*
and even to spare the lives of such creatures as have been*
thrown to him for the purpose of being devoured. In con-
finement they each devour about four pounds weight of raw-
flesh every day.
No. 479. BADGER, vide 57.
No. 480. JAVA HARE, vide 62.’
No. 481. BLACK GROUSE, vide 269.
No. 482. NUTCRACKER' (CorvusCaryocatactes.)-
There are very few instances known of this bird having been-
seen in England ; it is more common in Germany, and founds
also in Sweden and Denmark, and frequents the most moun-
tainous parts of those countries. It makes its nest in holes-
of trees, and feeds on nuts, acorns, and the kernels of the
pine apple. It is said to pierce the bark of trees with its bill*
like the Woodpecker. The bird in the Museum was-shot in
the parish of Holton, Suffolk, in June, 1824. Pennant*
mentions but one being killed in this kingdom.
No. 483. CROCODILE, vide 192. Of this terrible
animal there are two kinds; the Crocodile,' properly so called* 7
and the Cayman or Alligator, vide 392. The distinctions-
usually made between these animals are these: the body of
the Crocodile is more slender than that of the Alligator, its-
snout runs off tapering from the head, like that of a Grey-
hound ; while that of the other is indented like the nose ofa-
Lapdog. The Crocodile has also a much wider swallow, and is
of an ash colour. It seldom, except when pressed by hunger,
or with a view of depositing its eggs, leaves the water. Its
usual method is to flhat along upon the surface, and seize
whatever animals come within its reach; but when this me-
thod fails, it then goes closer to the bank* Disappointed of
its fishy prey, it there waits, covered up - among the sedges,
in patient expectation of some land animal that* may come to*
drink. It then seizes the victim at a spring, and having
secured the creature with both teeth and claws, it drags it
into the water, and instantly sinks with it to the bottom.
Sometimes it happens that the creature the crocodile ha&.


ilius surprised, escapes from its grasp wounded, and makes*
off from the river-side. In such a case, the tyrant pursues-
with all its force, and often seizes it a second time; for,,
though seemingly heavy, the crocodile runs with great celerity.-
In this manner it is sometimes seen above half a mile from
the in pursuit of an animal wounded beyond the power
of escaping, and then dragging it back to the river-side,
where it feasts in security. There is no animal, but man
man alone, that can combat it with success.. We ate assured
by Labat, that a negroj with no other weapons than a knife
in his hand, and his left arm wrapped round with a cow’s*
hide, ventures boldly to attack the animal in his own element.
As soon as he approaches the crocodile, he presents his left"
arm, which the animal swallows most greedily; but sticking
in his throat, the.negro has time to give it several stabs under
the throat; and the water getting in at the mouth, which is-
held involuntary open, the creature is soon bloated up as big.
as a tun, and expires* ~
No. 484. BIRD of PARADISE., This bird has been
more celebrated for the false and imaginary qualities which
are attributed to it, than for its real, and truly remarkable
properties. It has been reported of it that it is naturally
without legs, and is perpetually upon the wing, even while it
sleeps, and that it-subsists entirely upon vapours and dew,
with a variety of other assertions* equally false and equally
ridiculous. There are about eight different species of these
birds; but that which is best known is the greater Paradise
Bird, which appears to the eye of the size nearly of a Pigeon*
though in reality the body is not much larger than that of a
thrush. The tail, which measures about six inches, is as
long as the body; the wings are large compared with the
bird’s other dimensions. The head, the throat, and the neck*
are of a pale gold colour. The base of the bill is surrounded
by black feathers, as is also the side of the head and throat,
as soft as velvet, and changeable like those of the neck of
a Mallard. The hinder part of the head is of a shining green,
mixed with gold! The body and wings are chiefly covered
with beautiful brown, purple, and gold feathers. The up-
permost part of the tail feathers are of a pale yellow, & those
under them white and longer than the former, for which
reason the hinder part of the tail appears to be all white. But
what chiefly excites curiosity, are two long naked feathers,
which spring from the upper part of the rump above the tail,
and which, are usually about two feet long, These are bearded


only at the beginning and the end ; the whole shaft for about
one foot nine inches being of a deep black, while the feathered
extremity is of a changeable colour, like the Mallard’s neck.
The natives, who make a trade of killing and selling these
birds to the Europeans, generally conceal themselves in the
trees where they resort, and having covered themselves up
from sight in a bower made of the branches, they shoot at the
birds with reedy arrows; and, as they assert, if they happen
to kill the king, they then have a good chance for killing the
greatest part of the flock. The chief mark by which they
know the king is by the ends of the feathers in his tail, which
have eyes like those of a Peacock. When they have taken a
number of these birds their usual method is to gut them and
cut off their legs; they then run a hot iron into the body,
which dries up the internal moisture; and filling the cavity
with salts and spices, they sell them to the Europeans for a
perfect trifle.
No. 485. The HEAD of an OTAHEITAN CHIEF-
TAIN, curiously embalmed in a manner entirely unknown
to Europeans, where the benignity of the countenance, pe-
culiar to the tribe, is finely expressed; the silky black hair,
olive complexion, and tattooing of the whole face, presents
one of the most interesting objects ever beheld..
No. 486. The HEAD of a NEW ZEALAND CHIEF-
TAIN. The ferocity of his Countenance, the short bristly
hair on the front, contrasted with the long stiff curls on the
back part of the head, the amocoed- face, high cheek bonesy
and thick lips, of this Warrior, have an effect which no lan-
guage can describe.
No. 487. SPECIMENS of the CLOTH of the OTA-
HEITAN S, formed from the fibrous bark of the mulberry
tree, beaten into its present state by a kind of mallet, and
cemented by a kind of glue made of the Hibiscus Escubsntus.
No. 488. A FLY WHISP, formed of a peculiarly hard
wood, and beautifully ornamented with carving done by
muscle shells; it is used for brushing off the mosquitoes.
No. 489. A singularly elegant HEAD DRESS, formed
from the skin of a bird peculiar to the Society Islands.
No. 490. The BELT of a WARRIOR, made of fibres
of the cocoa nut, ornamented with the teeth and jawbones
of small animals.
No. 491. A beautiful OTAHEITAN HEAD DRESS,
formed by the fibres of the cocoa nut, and feathers of the
European fowls, introduced into that country by Captain-
Cook on his last visit.


No-492. A PAIR of SHOES from New Zealand.
No. 493. A beautiful APRON, composed of the pafilla,
perforata, and fibres of the cocoa nut, worn by women of
distinction in New Zealand.
No. 494. The TATTOOING INSTRUMENT of
Otaheitc. ~
No. 495. A NECKLACE, formed of animal bones and
small shells from New Zealand.
No. 496. A THIGH ORNAMENT of a Chieftain of
Otaheite.
No. 497. A THIGH; ORNAMENT of a Person of less
distinction.
No. 498. A THIGH ORNAMENT of a common person
No. 499. A HEAD DRESS, most beautifully wrought
with human hair From Otaheite.
No. 500. A HEAD DRESS from NEW ZEALAND,
jnade with the Hair of a Negro.
No. 501. An ORNAMENTAL COMB, beautifully
wrought with the fibres of the Cocoa Nut;
No. 502. An INDIAN WAR RATTLE..
No. 503. EAR DROPS; taken from Tippo Saib'*s party.
No. 504. Various kinds of FISH. HOOKS, used by the
Otaheitans.
No. 505. A FEATHERED HELMET, worn in battle
by the New. Zealanders,


LINES
Addressed to the Head of the Otaheitan Chieftain..
;y‘r t i.
Wert thou a Chieftain of a distant Shore?
Did Valours blood flow through thy shrunken veins.?
Did Minions call thee great, in days of yore,
And huzza thy career through gore stain’d plains ?
2.
What mean the curious indented, lines,
The segments and the circles- on. thy face ?
Were they the meed for-which Ambition pines?
Or emblems of thy Country, Rank, or Race ?
5.
Thy hair is all dishevel’d—ebonlocks
Hang o er thy olive-brow, and others seem"
Thy shoulders to have mantled, ere the knocks
Of Tomahawk, and Battle ■ Axe thy dream,.
4.
Thy fev’rish dream of Glory clos’d; in death*
Ihy scalp displays twoghastly wounds, the bone
'Shining, white, compact, lies firm beneath,
-As when thou struggling heav’st the dying groan*.
5...
But now- all motionless'before me lies
This Otaheitan Head, —and when I seek
Knowledge whereon I long might moralize,
Not one response can the. dried casement make*-
6.
The skull' long tenantless, o’er sea and land:
Has pass d unconscious through, their varying scenes,■.
Alike the verdant plain, the fading strand,
And all the wide expanse which intervenes.
7;
Or I would- ask, ’midst all thy travels, past,
Has aught more lovely to thine eyes
Than those deep shades wherein thy hut was cast,.
.And infant frame to hardy manhood rear’d?/'


AB.
Have the proud 'Arts and Sciences we boast,
The heights of Learning which we proudly soar.
The long solicitude of thought they cost,
Increas’d of happiness our meagre store?
; v •• '9.
Or with *hy banana and bread fruit tree,
Thy fish and cocoa nuts, wert thou as blest,
With simpler food, in ruder life, as we,
Who are of countless luxuries possest.
10.
And thou hast pass’d the portals of the grave;
O ! say—do there distinctions still survive;
Are vengeful Tyrants here, there call’d the brave,
Or scorn’d as bloody Monsters Ao .they live ?
Are Sages there, oontem{flative ■'Still seen,
O’er States beyond that state they long have pass’d;
Or are their brows for ever now serene.
In spheres which through eternity will last ?
m.
I
And is, O! say, th’ Almighty there -enshrin'd
In Glory, far our thoughts above;
Beneficent alike to all mankind,
Whose lives were spent in meriting his love ?
15.
In vain I question thee, thou monument
Of what w r as valiant —frail mortality !
But now a brainless skull, whose walls are rent
By Time, and mouldering into kindred clay!
FINIS.








[’ 1 a tfimljJ
HcLylume 'Takclcv 312
I . w '*T ~m.
MiL.jtui’li Muir
V J
The Hon. Justice J.A.Ferguson, y(S
Judge’s Chambers,
Industrial Commission,
SIDHSY, Australia. 17th July, 47.
* » ■ 4 v v , ' ' •
THE LE7ERIAN iJUSEUM. (c.X625). £3. -
t
Postage Sc Ins. is. Bd.
£3. Is. 2d.
EXPORT LICENCE NO. 8L.18a.10098/47.
Per Reg. Letter Post,
