

THE
ANGLO-ISRAELITE
WITH AN
J. FRED. CASTLE.
JOHN WOODS AND CO., 13 BRIDGE STREET.
MELBOURNE: M. L. HUTCHINSON.
ADELAIDE : E. S. WIGG AND CO.
BRISBANE : GORDON AND GOTCH.






./r ■


. ANGLO-ISRAELITE:
WITH AN
♦ ...
♦, . i
* ,
. *i
■ m •
: V ’• * .; r,
*** ' -
V '. -4
•« v *
J. FRED. CASTLE.
I
# . '
•• * * «
The children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed, shall
he established, before thee. — Psalm cii.
I
I
\ * i
ff •
SYDNEY:
JOHN WOODS AND CO., PUBLISHERS,
13 Bridge Street.
1 880.




W il> 5“5
5-6
PREFACE.
more than fifty years the writer of the following pages
has felt deep interest in the fortunes of the Lost Tribes, and
h as ea g er ty read an Y work which, with more or less
J probability, endeavoured to account for them ; buf in the year
1847 the excellent treatise of John Wilson on “Our Israelitish
& Origin ” fell into his hands, since which time he has publicly
and privately advocated the views here set forth. At that time,
however, and for years after, the subject was treated with ridicule,
and only provoked merriment or contempt, so that it was almost
impossible to obtain a hearing. It is certainly matter for congratu-
lation that this period of indifference has passed away, and that so
many earnestly study the Holy Scriptures with reference to this
subject, and discover to their wonder and delight “ that the promise
made unto the Fathers, God hath fulfilled the same unto us their
Children.”
The writer lays no claim to originality—the material, and
often the very words, have been picked up from various Authors
during many years reading : most of these notes were made more
than twenty years ago, so that if he has succeeded in stringing
together a few pearls, he claims nothing beyond the setting and
arrangement. He has purposely brought forward the words of
others, who in writing never dreamed of their opinions being
adduced to illustrate our Israelitish Origin. The reader will
doubtless feel that this unconscious witness is of all testimony
most valuable; for if, as Sir John Herschel says —“Verifications
of any subject spring up as it were spontaneously from quarters
whence they might be least expected—evidence of this kind is
irresistible, and compels assent with weight which no other
testimony possesses.”
The Map will, it is hoped, be found very useful to the
reader.
Cavan, N.S.W., J. FRED. CASTLE.
October, 1880




THE ANGLO-ISRAELITE.
OYER the whole world, says Auberlen, sits enthroned the
eternal God who is love. Because of His love He has
from eternity determined to reveal and impart Himself ever
more and more completely to His intelligent creatures, that
they, being filled with His own life and glory may attain to the
perfecting of their existence in Him, that God may be all in
all. Nor did God relinquish this loving plan upon the entrance
of sin into the world; on the contrary. He revealed his love
all the more gloriously, as that Grace which saves the lost
and brings about the perfecting of the world by the process of
redemption; and because of His free and inconceivable mercy,
He held fast His thoughts of peace respecting humanity against
all heathenish apostacy, and determined to accomplish, first
the redemption and finally the perfection, the glorification of
the world by continuous revelations of Himself.
But now what position is this divine Revelation to occupy
with regard to the false paths into which the nations have
wandered ? No fresh deluge is to exterminate the ungodly
race, neither was the whole of Humanity to be miraculously
brought back to the living God, for that would have been a
violent and enforced deliverance, while God, on the contrary,
carefully respects the liberty and free-will of 'man. Thus,
He could neither annihilate nor convert the human race as
a whole; it only remained, therefore, that at certain points
of greatest susceptibility to Divine manifestations. He should
begin to work for the deliverance of all. God had to adopt
individual expedients in order to accomplish general salvation ;
therefore. He set apart, as formerly Noah, now the Semitic
Abraham, to be the especial recipient of his Revelation.
Abraham, during the early nomadic period, when national
life was in process of formation, was chosen the ancestor of
one particular family who were eventually to become a
particular nation. While God suffered the heathen to walk
in their own ways (Acts xiv., 16) he chose Israel for his own
inheritance, and by the historical destiny of that one people,
prepared the way for the final purpose of all revelation —the


redemption of the human race. The Almighty condescends
also to tell us something of the reason for his selection—Gen.
xviii. 19, “ For I know him that he will command his children
and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of
the Lord to do justice and judgment.” Now bearing in mind
the three distinct families of Abraham, I think it would be
found, if full enquiry be made, that a large proportion of the
Asiatic nations owe their knowledge of God to the sons of
Abraham by Keturah, or to the son of Hagar, Ishmael; while
it is quite certain that Africa's swarthy sons are indebted to
the Arabs—lshmaelites for what civilization and religion they
possess ; and I hope we shall find in the course of these remarks
that our Caucasian race is similarly indebted to the posterity
of Isaac.
Abraham's seed was to be as the stars of heaven, as the
dust of the earth, to possess the gate of his enemies; and,
moreover, in him all the families of the earth were to be
blessed (Gen. xxii., 16, 17, 18); and all these blessings we
find specially repeated to Isaac, who was seventy-five years old
when his father died. In Gen. xxvi., 3-4, “ I will perform the oath
which I sware unto Abraham thy Father, &c. Here we find
repeated the promise of Dominion, multiplicity of seed and power
to bless others. To Jacob the promises are again repeated and
we may say, enlarged—for to him in his wonderful vision at
Bethel was vouchsafed a glimpse of the Redeemer's kingdom
—a vision of angels to which the Saviour alludes (John i. 61),
and the promises to Jacob are sealed by this remarkable con-
firmation— (< I will not leave thee until I have done that
which I have spoken to thee of,'' Gen. xxviii. 16, which was
that “ thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth; and thou
shalt spread abroad to the west and to the east, and to the
north and to the south ; and in thee and in thy seed shall all
the families of the earth be blessed.''
Now, in the mention of Jacob's family, the student of
Scripture will not fail to notice the foreshadowing of the pre-
eminence of Joseph; and also the future disruption of the
family, as adumbrated in the dreams of Joseph, which indeed
seem to have offended his Father, as well as provoked the
envy of his brethren. Joseph's character of candour and
simplicity is sufficiently evident by the recital of his dreams;
since a designing disposition would have been marked by reti-
cence and concealment of matters calculated to excite envy and
hatred.
Holy writ records, not without deep meaning in the brief
and apparently trivial statement that “ the lad was with the
sons of Bilhah and Zilpah'' (Gen. xxxvii. 2). Now, we may
easily imagine the sons of Jacob's handmaids had imbibed
something of heathenism from their mother's breast, and the


report of their doings which reached Jacob's ears was probably
evil enough, and no doubt (as in the case of the wicked
sons of Eli) drew upon them the reproof of their father, which
evoked deeper hatred against Joseph. Let us glance aside for
a moment to sympathize with Rebekah in her deep sorrow at
Esau having married a Hittite woman : “ I am weary of my
life because of the daughters of Heth—if Jacob take a
wife of the daughters of Heth—what good shall my life do
me ?" We may imagine this bitterness of heart, by supposing
a member of a noble and religious family entering into a
matrimonial connection with Maori or Polynesian?
Happily we know but little of half-castes, and I believe
there is scarcely a family in the United States who can trace
any admixture of Indian blood; such no doubt in another
fifty years will be the experience of Australia and New Zealand
with respect to their Aboriginies.* Yet the Anglo-Saxon
family is often looked upon as a very mixed race; this view
has arisen from the fact that England has been for ages a
refuge from the storm of persecution, but if the subject could
be sifted I believe it would be found that most of the
reformers —men of progress —both in politics and religion,
who have at various times found a haven of safety in Britain,
were of Gothic blood like ourselves. D'Aubigne says the
Reformation to all human appearance had every prospect of
success in France and Spain, until the priesthood stirring up
the ignorant aboriginal Celtic masses quenched Bible progress
by fire and sword, axe and cord. . . But to return, the
brothers of Joseph determine to murder him, and then say
they, “we shall see what will become of his dreams." In the
providence of God their design is over-ruled, and passing over
the well-known earlier history of Joseph, we find in part the
realization of his dreams on the arrival of his brethren in
Egypt. Joseph a prince, second only to Pharoah, in the
mightiest empire then existing, his brothers suppliants, and,
in their own eyes, criminals, nay almost murderers.
As the recital of these events circulated among their children,
how would Manasseh and Ephraim and the sons of Benjamin
regard their relatives, and how especially would the sons of
Bilhah and Zilpah regard the sons and grandsons of Joseph?
They were men of like passions with ourselves, and in speaking
of them we must put ourselves in their place, see with their
eyes, feel with their hearts, and never forget that famous verse
of Terence, “ Homo sum : nihil humani a me alienum puto !”
of which if I wanted a broad translation, I would adopt the
humourous saying of Artemus Ward, that “ after all there is a
* Tacitus speaking of the Anglo-Saxons says, “ Nullis aliis aliarum
nationum connublis infectos” —unstained by any intermarriage with other
nations.


great deal of human nature in mankind/’ Is it possible then
that Ephraim and Manasseh could have regarded the suppliants
with friendly eyes ? Must not a feeling of resentment on
account of their father’s wrongs, and a sentiment of disdain
arising from the difference of their rank have found a perma-
nent place in their breasts ? And would not the mighty bles-
sings of their grandfather Jacob delivered on his dying bed
have further nourished this feeling of superiority ? For, con-
sider the blessings on Ephraim, that he should increase as fishes
do increase, and that his seed should fill the Gentiles or
nations (Gen. xlviii., 16-19). We know too, how deeply the
pride of ancestry is felt; a family who can now boast of
Norman blood, or trace a genealogy before the conquest,
cannot forget it. Will then the ten thousands of Ephraim,
and the thousands of Manasseh forego their proud position,
their rights and privileges ? No —although involved in the
common lot of Egyptian bondage, they yet retain their pre-
eminence, for we gather from an apparently incidental remark
of holy writ (Psalm cxiv.) that when Israel came out of
Egypt Judah was his sanctuary and Israel his dominion —or
ruling power.
The sea saw that and fled ; Jordan was driven back ! Does
inanimate nature alone regard these events ? and shall we
remain indifferent to the beginnings of the mighty race whose
annals are the history of modern and Christian Europe ? to
the origin of the wonderful, political and social world in
which we live ?
Having now reached the period of the Exodus, about 1500
years 8.C., I must turn aside to remark that Sharon Turner
says the Danes boasted of an antiquity for their nation of 1500
years 8.C., on which S. Turner observes that they must have
meant 150 years 8.C., but probably the Danish Chronologists
knew the truth of their statement. Let us compare a remark
of Canon Kingsley in his admirable lectures on the Roman and
the Teuton, speaking of the British Constitution :—“ The
British Constitution has sometimes lately been represented as a
clumsy and artificial arrangement of 1688 —1688 after Christ ?
. . . 1688 8.0. would be nearer the mark. It is as old in
its essentials as the time when not only all the Teutons formed
one tribe, but when Teutons and Scandinavians* were still
united —and when that was who dare say ? We at least
brought the British Constitution with us out of the bogs and
moors of Jutland along with our smock-frocks, leather gaiters,
brown bills and stone axes : and it has done us good service,
and will do till we have carried it right round the world.”
* Scandinavia has been aptly termed “officina gentium,” manufactory of
nations.


Montesquien also says,* “If we would read the admirable
work of Tacitus on the manners of the Germans, we should
see that it is from them that the English have derived the
idea of their political government. This admirable system
was found in the forests.” We need only add, probably a
thousand years before our ancestors reached the German
forests.
To return, I need not enumerate to the student of Scripture
the blessings on Joseph and-his sons, though these should be
carefully borne in mind. We notice next that, on the estab-
lished order of march, Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh
immediately followed the Ark and cherubim, the symbols of
the Divine presence. There is a beautiful allusion to this in
the Ixxx. Psalm, “ Give ear, 0 Shepherd of Israel: thou
that leadest Joseph like a flock (Vulgate and Prayer Book
translation wrongly, like a sheep ) ; thou that dwellest between
the cherubim shine forth, before Ephraim, Benjamin, and
Manasseh; stir up thy strength and come and save us.” This
Psalm reads like an expostulation on the part of the ten tribes
during a period of deep and long-continued distress —an ap-
peal to the Father of mercies to think on his covenanted
promise—the Vine that He brought out of Egypt, the fruitful
Bough, Joseph (Gen. xlix., 22.), or Branch that He made so
strong for Himself—to carry out His purposes of Redemption
to the whole world—and a prophetically confident assurance
that being restored to the favour of God by the Son of Man,
the Saviour 1 , we should no longer go hack, but live and call
upon His name, and henceforward rejoice in the light of His
countenance.
What would have been the happiness and prosperity of
Israel but for their perversity we may judge from Psalm Ixxxi.,
13, to the end, “ 0, that my people had hearkened unto me,”
&c- ; also from Isaiah xlviii., 18, “ 0, that thou hadst hearkened
unto My commandments —then had thy peace been as a river;
thy righteousness as the waves of the sea; thy seed also had
been as the sand,” &c. The symbols of the divine presence
were under Ephraim's protection not only on the march
through the desert, but remained so during 300 years after
their settlement in the land—the great commander (Joshua),
an Ephraimite, ,set up the Ark of God at Shiloh, in Mount
Ephraim, where he dwelt.
Here, for a time after the death of Joshua, Ephraim seems
to have rested, contented with his evident superiority—for,
by Joshua’s act, official dignity, and residence, this spot be-
♦ Si Ton veut lire I’admirable ouvrage de Tacite, sur les moeurs des
Germains, on verra que e'est d'eux, queries Anglais ont tir6 l’ide6 de leur
Gouvernement politique. Ce beau syst6me a ete trouvd dans les bois. Esprit
deslois Bk. xi., Cap. 6.


came not only their political capital, but also consecrated as
the ecclesiastical capital, where God had set His name, and
was to be enquired of. Here, too, reposed the bones of
Joseph, which they had brought up from Egypt; subsequently
the bodies of Joshua and Eleazar, the son of Aaron, found here
a resting place, and no doubt the remains of many of their
great men, so that the vicinity of Shiloh became a sort of
Westminster Abbey—the receptacle of their mighty dead.
Most of the history recorded in the Book of Judges pertains to
Ephraim and Manasseh : the crushing defeat of Sisera was
effected by the Northern tribes under the direction of Deborah
—prophetess of Mount Ephraim. The next great victory
recorded, in which Judah had no share, was that of Gideon, of
the tribe of Manasseh, over Oreb and Zeeb, and again over
Zeba and Zalmunna, in which victory Gideon was assisted
by the Ephraimites, whose pride was much hurt at not having
been earlier summoned.
Their desire to maintain superiority—perhaps, at this time,
to effect separation, was evident from their expressed intention
to make Gideon King though he resolutely refused, declaring
the Lord shall rule over you. (Judges viii., 23.) Jepthah the
next mentioned great warrior was also of Manasseh, a Gilead-
ite, and Gilead was a a son of Manasseh. Coming now to the
times of the great prophet Samuel we notice he was an
Ephraimite—his father dwelt at Mount Ephraim; this brief
mention of names may serve to indicate the superiority of
Ephraim and Manasseh; and let me repeat, that now in the
time of Samuel the ark of God—where God was to be enquired
of—had abode in Shiloh 300 years —their centre of political
power —the seat of learning and ecclesiastical capital.
But the Ark of God, by the folly and wickedness of the
sons of Eli, falls into the hands of the Philistines, and on its
restoration, remains twenty years at Kirjath-jearirn; and we
read that all Israel lamented for the Ark of God. Samuel
reproaches them for their idolatry—no doubt the people of
Ephraim among whom he dwelt, and on their promise of
reformation, a defeat of the Philistines is recorded, and im-
mediately afterwards a king is demanded. Samuel sets forth
the folly of the request, but complies according to Divine
arrangement; when the first king by God's appointment is
taken from “ little Benjamin," the men of Ephraim ought to
have been content, as Benjamin was own brother to Joseph,
but appears to have been too intimately connected with Judah
to please the proud Ephraimites. In the 60th, and again in
the 108th Psalm, we read, “ Ephraim also is the strength of my
head." The context in both of these Psalms merits deep
study, —now, since the Holy Spirit twice records this wonder-
ful expression, we cannot be surprised that human pride, so


strongly developed in Ephraim, should insist on superiority
and Dominion. The Psalmist again 78th records —“ Moreover
God refused the tabernacle of Joseph (Ephraim and Manasseh)
and chose not the tribe of Ephraim, but chose the tribe of
Judah who thus became and remained,” my Lawgiver '' and
the Ark of God came to Jerusalem. The evident and natural
exultation of the sweet singer of Israel (Psalm 78 and 67 to 72)
may assist us to imagine the bitter disappointment of Ephraim
after 300 years of supremacy,—that this bitterness was deep-
seated and lasting, as well as the triumphant feeling of Judah
we learn from Isaiah xi., 13. who writing more than two
hundred years after, says “ Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and
Judah shall not vex Ephraim.” The dissatisfaction thus
engendered, continued even during the glories of Solomon's
reign, otherwise Jereboam an Ephraimite need not to have fled
into Egypt to reappear in God's own time to effect the lasting
separation of Judah and Israel. We read too of this separation
long before it, took place, the Almighty threatens Solomon for
his idolatry (1 Kings xi., 11.), “ I will surely rend the kingdom
from thee and give it to thy servant;'' again (1 Kings, xii.
15.) “ Rehoboam hearkened not unto the people, for the cause
was from the Lord;'' again (v. 24, and 2 Chronicles, xi., 4.),
when Rehoboam was preparing to fight —“ Ye shall not fight
against your Brethren, the children of Israel; return, for this
thing is from me.'' This is spoken by the Almighty with
whom is no variableness or shadow of turning, to effect His
mighty purposes, to accomplish His holy covenant —and, yet
some of the present day declare that this breach was healed, and
the twelve tribes again became one people after the captivity
of Babylon ! If so, may we not fairly enquire for what pur-
pose was the separation ? was it merely for the purpose of
discord ? for this was the immediate and lasting effect—that
wars might rage between Brethren for more than 250 years a
time often of internecine struggle, and nothing to come of it at
last!
The national apostacy of Israel under Jereboam (B.C. 975)
mightily strengthened for a time the kingdom of Judah, for we
read (2 Chronicles xi., 13.) “ The priests and Levites that were
in all Israel resorted unto Rehoboam out of all their coasts.''—
The Levites left their suburbs and their possessions and came
to Judah and Jerusalem —v. 16, and after them, out of all the
tribes of Israel, such as set their hearts to seek the Lord God
of Israel came to Jerusalem to sacrifice to the Lord. Again
we read (xv. 9,) in the time of righteous Asa of Judah about
25 years after,—“there fell to him numbers of people out of
Israel, when they saw that the Lord his God was with him''—
and to prevent this tide of Emigration of his best subjects, we
find Baasha, King of Israel, trying to build a frontier town to


stop the fugitives, but in vain. Although we read that soon
after this the Lord began to cut Israel short (2 Kings, x., 32),
yet subsequently Joash King of Israel takes prisoner, Amazish,
King of Judah, whose folly had provoked the contest and that
after a severe defeat Jerusalem is taken and plundered. This
is memorable on account of the challenge of Amaziah and the
contemptuous reception of it by Joash (2 Chronicles xxv., 18.)
Once more, only about 25 years before the captivity of Israel,
Judah again suffers defeat at their hands, and two hundred
thousand sons and daughters are carried captive, but sub-
sequently restored to their homes by their enemies, without
ransom, clothed, shod and fed and the feeble mounted upon
beasts (2 Chronicles xxviii.) Indeed almost the only time we
read of peace or unity of action between Judah and Israel was
when Jehoshaphat joined Ahab against Ramoth-Gilead, and this
unity of purpose seems to have resulted from the family
alliances of the two kings. We come now to the time of
Hezekiah in whose reign about 720 B.C. Shalmaneser, King of
Assyria, carried away the ten tribes into captivity. Of the
remnant which was accessible to Hezekiah's messengers we
read (2 Chronicles xxx.,) that he sent to invite them to return
to Jerusalem and to the worship of the Lord God of their
Fathers, but the majority treated the invitation with scorn and
mocked his envoys. We learn from 2 Kings xvii. that the
deportation of the inhabitants of the Kingdom of Samaria,
that is, of the ten tribes by Shalmanezer, about 720 8.C., was
so thorough, that wild beasts multiplied and that heathen
inhabitants from other conquered countries were drafted into
the land. But if, during the continuance of Judah's prosperity,
the efforts of righteous Hezekiah to heal the breach were
scorned and mocked—at what future period of Judah's history
do we read of any such effort being repeated—or what possible
incentive could the deported tribes have had to rejoin the
people of Judah ?
It is not denied that at various times, individual Israelites
attached'themselves to Judah. Josephus notices that in the
time of Ptolemy Philadelphus, about 270 years 8.C., and 450
years after the Assyrian Captivity, six learned men out of each
tribe were selected to translate the Hebrew Scriptures into
Greek—the Septuagint copy —but the bulk, we may say the
whole of the people went into captivity, in accordance with
the prophecy “ Israel shall go forth of his land." From the
time of Hezekiah, the Kingdom of Judah declined until the
period of the Babylonish Captivity about 600 B.C. which ter-
minated the independence of the Hebrew polity.
Under the proclamation of Cyrus about 538 B.C. took place
the return to their land, henceforth called Judaea, but at this
time they were under tribute and so continued ever after.


We learn from Josephus that Alexander the Great, as a mark
of his favour, remitted the tribute every seventh or sabbatical
year; under the Seleucidoe, the successors of Alexander, they
suffered severer taxation and tribute, nor was their lot at all
lightened under the Roman yoke. The incident of the
Saviour's birth at Bethlehem, was, under Providence, due to
the imperial order of a new enrolment for the purpose of tax-
ation, from which even the blessed Saviour was not exempt.
How odious was this tribute may be gathered from the
detestation universally felt for the (publicanus) Imperial tax-
gatherer. Near 40 years after the crucifixion, Jerusalem was
leveled with the ground, and its people destroyed or dispersed;
and the Emperor Adrian a hundred years after forbade any
Jew to enter into Jerusalem under pain of death. At what
period then of the mournful decadence of Judah would the
myriads of Ephraim have been likely to rejoin them ? even
supposing the ten tribes to have remained in Upper Armenia,
where they were placed by Shalmaneser, what inducement
could they have had to join this poor tributary remnant ?
This point needs to be dwelt on, as some people say that the
twelve tribes coalesced on the remnant's return from Babylon,
but no authority can be quoted for this statement. We have
shown the separation was from God—should not our opponents
bring forward divine command for that re-union which they
say took place after the Babylonish captivity ? But let us
exhibit a few of the numerous and insurmountable difficulties
which beset this hypothesis.
In the first place it is directly opposed to the testimony of
the Jews themselves in all ages. Josephus expressly says,
Bk xi. c. 5, “ There are but two tribes in Asia and Europe
subject to the Romans, while the ten tribes are beyond
Euphrates till now, and are an immense multitude, and not to
be estimated by numbers." The expression beyond Euphrates
may mislead, as it has often been supposed to mean eastward
in Asia; but Esdras says, "they entered the river by the narrow
passages,” (see map) evidently near the sources in Upper Armenia
where as the stream runs from east to west their course would
plainly be northward towards Caucasus, and thence round the
Black Sea into Europe. Esdras says to a distant region called
Ar-sereth, and we find the river Sereth a branch of the lower
Danube in Moldavia. The evidence of modern Jews agrees
with this; we read in the Jewish Chronicle, October 11th, 1878,
“ The location of the ten tribes and their dispersion are matters
that history has to sift and account for. All that we know
with certainty is the very meagre narrative of the Scriptures,
and the few romantic tales which are scattered in the works of
dreamy historians and wonder-seeking travellers. That the
earth did not open and swallow up so large a number as the


deported tribes must have been, is well understood in the
absence of all record to that effect; that they did not readily
coalesce with the nations among whom they were transplanted
is, judging from the characteristics of the race, equally a
matter of certainty. It must be borne in mind that history
has to do here with a brave , highly organized and cultivated
people, —great even in their vices. . . . The deported
TRIBES HAVE YET TO BE ACCOUNTED FOR.”
For the fulfilment of prophecy, it was necessary that Judah
should remain in the land until the birth of the Saviour in
Bethlehem—for of Judah came the Chief Prince (Messiah)
(I Chron. v. 2), and the same verse records but the birthright
(is) Joseph’s —this birthright includes multitudinous posterity
—dominion of the sea and to the utmost bound of the ever-
lasting hills (Gen. xlix. 26). We may therefore see why
there could be no return for them, but rather continual contact
with aboriginal races who by them were pushed to the ends of the
earth (Deut. xxxiii. 17), We might pause to notice the righteous
retribution inflicted by the Gothic tribes on the Romans, thus
avenging the bitter wrongs of their brethren of Judah, but we
rather turn to admire the providence of God in thus making
ready a people prepared by His former teaching to receive the
Saviour, and through Him to publish the glad tidings of
salvation to the whole world. Here is a fitting mission for
the ten tribes; and it has been observed by writers of ecclesi-
astical history that Christianity never appears to have taken
firm and ineradicable root until its reception by the Gothic
tribes. Where are now the seven churches of Asia ? What
perceptible Christianizing influence do they exert on the sur-
rounding nations ? Let us remember that St. Paul was, by
a message from heaven, specially directed to Europe, u Being
forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia”—a
vision appeared to Paul in the night. There stood a man of
Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, “ Come over into Mace-
donia and help us” (Acts xvi., 9). This happened at Troas, a
spot which the poetry of Homer has rendered ever classical;
this shore has been visited on many memorable occasions by
the great men of the world. Here Xerxes passed; here
Julius rested after the battle of Pharsalia; but above all, we
associate the spot with the European conqueror of Asia, and
the Asiatic conqueror of Europe—Alexander and St. Paul.
Here, by the tomb of Achilles, Alexander girded on his armour;
from this goal he started to overthrow the august dynasties
of the East; and here the great Apostle of the Gentiles is
armed by heavenly visitants with the weapons of a warfare not
carnal—hence he is sent forth to subdue all the powers of the
West, and to bring the civilization of the world to the
obedience of Christ. The view of distant Macedonia im-


printed on his memory —the thought of Europe’s miserable
heathenism being deep in his heart —he was prepared like
Peter at Joppa to receive the full meaning of the voice speak-
ing to him in a dream. In the vision of the night a man of
Macedonia came to plead the spiritual wants of his country —
it was the sick enquiring for the physician; the ignorant
seeking for wisdom; the voice which ever since has been calling
on the Church to extend the Gospel to the remotest bounds of
heathendom. “ Come over and help us ! ” We must here
make a short digression in order to notice the proud position
attained by many Jews within the last century, whether hold-
ing, as many did, civil and military appointments under the
great Napoleon, or now as financiers, journalists, and states-
men, is to many a subject of wonder. George Eliot, in her novel
of Daniel Deronda, says,“ That after ages of persecution and
exclusion this people have come out of them rivaling the nations
of all Europe in healthiness and beauty of physique, in practical
ability, in scientific and artistic aptitude, and in some forms
of ethical value, is a remarkable phenomenon. A significant
indication of their natural rank is seen in the fact that at this
moment the leader of the Liberal party in Germany is a Jew;
the leader of the Republican party in France is a Jew; and
the head of the Conservative Ministry in England is a Jew.”
Let us glance also at the picture of Rothschild, as sketched
by Edward Jenkins, Esq., M.P., in his “ Apotheosis of
Jingoism”: —“ Perhaps the reader has never thought of the
amazing position held by financiers as the one of whom I now
write. In every case Hebrews : of necessity, able, astute,
accomplished, informed as none but kings and princes and
the greatest ministers, are informed of the profoundest secrets
of cabinets, of princely closets, of royal boudoirs, —with what
silence they exert their tremendous powers, and, on the whole,
with what honour and principle and generosity ! What is
the future of this princely race, which sent to the climax of
power in ancient kingdoms its facile Josephs and Mordecais,
and Nehemiahs, and Daniels, and which holds in its hands the
financial fortunes of the proudest nations ! It is not dying
out, it is growing. It is not suppressed, it emerges. Fifty
years hence it will be the strongest power in the East, how-
ever Sclav or Magyar may strive to stamp it out. At every
centre of population a firm, pressing, mutually-supporting
force, it gains more and more of financial and political power,
and recent instances show that the other races will have to look
to their laurels if they would not yield to this one the palm of
intellectual superiority.” The Rev. George Nugee, in a
lecture delivered in May, 1880, at St. George’s Hall, London,
observes —“ The Jews have shown themselves so alive to the
advantages of education that they number half the University


students, half the barristers, and more than half the merchants
of Vienna.” To this we may add that it is well known that the
newspaper press, both in England and on the Continent, is
principally in the hands of the Jews.
Do we thus quote to exhibit our own inferiority ? Nay;
do not these statements afford presumptive evidence of kin-
ship ? for of what other non-Christian people can similar
things be averred ? Though we may have to look to our
laurels, we can occupy no inferior position—for the birthright
is Joseph’s; and 120 years after the Assyrian captivity the
Holy Spirit by Jeremiah xxxi. 9, declares, “ I am a father to
Israel, and Ephraim is my first-born.” But, say our op-
ponents, you are assuming the truth of our descent, and not
proving,—we will produce abundant proofs from writings,
sacred and profane, first observing that if we are not de-
scendants of Jacob, the supplanter, with whom God entered
into covenant, we are mere Gentiles descended from aboriginal
races.
Now it has often been declared that the laws of England
and its whole system of jurisprudence were framed by savages
living in the woods, their long hair hanging down, and their
bodies painted blue: doubtless a distance of near 2,000 years
may lend enchantment to the view; but personal contact with
aborigines now-a-days seldom increases our respect for their
talents and attainments, or our admiration for their habits or
mode of life. It is quite as probable that the Red Indian
built New York and Washington, or that the aborigines of
Australia built Sydney and Melbourne, as that the aboriginal
races of Britain wrote the English laws. Let us now turn
to Holy Scripture, which the Saviour assures us “ cannot ho
broken ” (John x., 35), and notice a few of the very numerous
texts referring to Israel, and particularly to Ephraim, for they
were to increase as fishes do increase, and to become the fulness
of nations, or more literally, to fill the Gentiles (Genesis xlviii.
16-19) —no doubt by displacement of the aborigines—again, thy
seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate cities to
be inhabited (Isaiah liv., 3). But if the Jews of the present
day, computed at between six and seven millions {vide Lon-
don Illustrated News, 1879), comprise all the twelve tribes,
or all that are left of them, how has God's promise, nay. His
oath, been kept, that these people should be as the stars of
1 leaven, as the sand of the sea-shore, as the dust of the earth,
possessing the gate of their enemies ?
This people have I formed for Myself ; they shall show
forth My praise (Isaiah xlviii., 21). Could'then the teaching
nation, the missionaries, be found in obscurity, hidden in a
corner ? No; called by the name of the Lord, they were to
spread to the ends of the earth. Joseph was found by his


brethren in Egypt among the Gentiles —a grand blessing—
though they knew him not; and yet shall the children of
•Joseph be recognized in God’s own good time among the
Gentiles as “ The seed which the Lord hath blessed ” (Isaiah
Ixi., 9), for it is in blessing others that we are to be blessed.
The Lord hath chosen Jacob to himself—lsrael his own
possession—Jacob his peculiar treasure (Psalm cxxxv). Again
He sheweth His word unto Jacob, His statutes and ordinances
unto Israel. He hath not dealt so with any nation (Psalm
cxlvii.) In Isaiah we have the expression often repeated—
Thou art My servant, O Israel—to do God’s missionary work —
in whom I will be glorified (Isaiah xlix). We might multiply
such texts indefinitely, and then ask our opponents —Do the
Jews, or twelve tribes, as you vainly suppose them, fulfil the
conditions indicated by the prophets ? Are they the people to
lighten the Gentiles —to carry the knowledge of salvation to
the ends of the earth ? Nay, they do not even proselytize now
—and how jealously did they formerly guard their privileges !
If Paul preached to the Gentiles, what was the infuriate cry
of the Jews ? Away with such a fellow from the earth, for
it is not fit that he should live (Acts xxii,, 22) ; and St.
Paul continually reminds his Gentile converts that the perse-
cutions and imprisonment which he suffered were on their
account. But are the Jews even now fulfilling the offices
assigned in Holy Writ to Israel as servants, messengers, and
missionaries ?—their chief advantage, that to them were en-
trusted-the oracles of God (Romans iii., 2), was taken from
them nearly 2000 years ago, according to the word of the
Saviour, “ The kingdom of God shall be taken from you
and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.”
Since that time the ministration of the Bread of Life has
been principally in the hands of Ephraim, the first-born. Is
not this also shadowed forth in the parable of our Lord ?
(Matthew xxi., 28). A certain man had two sons, and he
came to the first and said, Son, go work to-day in my vine-
yard. He answered and said, I will not, but afterwards he
repented and went. And he came to the second and said
likewise. And he answered and said, I go, sir; and went not.
Whether of them twain did the will of his father ? They say
unto him. The first.
The more texts we accumulate the stronger will be the
proof that the Jews do not and never did comprise the twelve
tribes, and if we regard ourselves as mere Gentiles we are
struck by this astounding anomaly, that we are, and have
been for many ages, in possession of privileges and advantages
not enjoyed by God’s own people, to whom pertaineth the
adoption , and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of
the law, and the service of God, and the promises, &c. (Romans


ix., 4); but can the argument be sound which leads inevitably
to such a conclusion ? In our reverence for God's word are
we to be blind to our own advantages ? to our position in the
world, for which, under the Almighty Hand, we have evidently
been in training for many centuries ? Is this an intelligent
recognition of mercies countless as the sands ? Can we resist the
conclusion that we are principally the people to whom the mighty
promises of Scripture are made ? Are they not fulfilled in us?*
Could this be so against the will of God? The Jews them-
selves acknowledge that we occupy the position of Israel, and
are doing Israel's appointed work. Are we then doing so to
the exclusion of God's own people ? Have we, contrary to the
word, intention, and purpose of the Almighty taken their place ?
But say some, we are spiritual Israel ! This expression is
well invented to account for the evident advantages of our
position as compared with that of the Jews; for students of
Holy Scripture knowing that some must be doing God's work
in the world, and that the Jews notoriously are not evan-
gelizing the world, and wrongly supposing the Jews to include
Israel —these have been driven to declare themselves spiritual
Israel —a half truth, but a dishonour to Almighty God, which
they cannot intend; yet we may hope the day will soon arrive
when they shall acknowledge themselves to be the literal Israel
as well as spiritually so, for in the pursuit of this important
subject we shall see that God can be rich in His grace towards
the Gentiles hy our ministration, and yet most literally true to
the promises made to our father Abraham and to his seed for
ever. The substance of the conversation of the two disciples
on their way to Emmaus (Luke xxiv., 21,) was, “We trusted
that it had been He which should have redeemed Israel ." Were
they thinking of a Gentile nation calling themselves spiritual
Israel ? Again, at the moment of our Lord's ascension, the
last burning question asked by the sorrowing disciples is,
“ Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to
Israel?” (Acts i., 6.)
A friendly critic has objected that when the disciples on
these occasions spoke of redeeming Israel and restoring again
the kingdom to Israel, their views and wishes, and probably
their knowledge too, of Israel, were limited to the indwellers
* Look at the nations of the earth. Why is the Gospel to-day preached to
us Englishmen ? Few nations enjoy it as fully as we do. In Sweden and
Denmark, Prussia and Holland, the candle burns but dimly—a poor, flickering
lamp, which cheers their darkness, while in our own dear land the Bun of the
Gospel shines brightly, and men rejoice in the light of day. Why this ? Why
no grace for the Japanese ? Why no gospel preached to the inhabitants of
Central Africa ? I cannot tell you —but assuredly Divine Sovereignty, passing
by many races of men, has been pleased to pitch upon the Anglo-Saxon
family, that they may be as the Jews were aforetime, the custodians of
divine truth, and the favorites of mighty grace.—Spurgeon’s Sermon, “ Elec-
tion no Discouragement.”


of the land—that is, to the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin:
but not to mention other scriptures which oppose this view, it
may be sufficient to quote St. John’s remark on the prophecy
of Caiaphas (x., 49—53) that Jesus should die not for that
nation only, but that “ He should gather together in one the
children of God that were scattered abroad.” That these
children of God were the ten tribes is plainly evident from
Ezekiel xxxvi., which refers throughout to Israel who had then
been scattered 120 years or more —Verse 19, “ I scattered
them among the Heathen, and they were dispersed through
the countries.”
If the kingdom were never to be restored to Israel but to
be given to a totally distinct Gentile nation, would the loving
Saviour have allowed His friends to cherish a false hope ? On
another subject of great, though unexpressed anxiety. He
anticipates their fears by assuring them, “ If it were not so, I
would have told youand surely this last, most heartfelt
yearning inquiry, if without foundation, —if intended to apply
to a strange people —would have been set at rest.
Moreover, what should we say of the good faith of an
earthly monarch, who had given very large promises and sealed
them by oath, to enrich a certain people, who in their own
persons listened to and expected fulfilment of these promises—
to make them first and foremost, head not tail, above not
beneath, lenders not borrowers (Deut. xxix., &c.), and then to
lose sight of, or to wipe this nation out of existence, and fulfil
every promise to a stranger nation, neither kith nor kin ?
Would St. Paul then have said (Romans xi., 29), “The gifts
and calling of God are without change of
purpose ?” Or as Conybeare and Howson translate it, “No
change of purpose can annul God’s gifts and call.” And surely
the dealings of the Almighty must commend themselves to our
sense of right and truth. We will now return to the ten tribes
whose history we traced to the Assyrian Captivity, 720 8.C.,
having cast off the worship of God and abandoned themselves
to idolatry—though in the darkest times a remnant existed who
had not bowed the knee to Baal—the Almighty now brings
them into the wilderness (Ezekiel xx., 34-37) and there pleads
with them. He brings them under the rod, into the bond of
the covenant, but yet His mercies follow them, and the
prophecies foreshadow His loving plan in spite of their
apostacy. Isaiah xxviii. is specially addressed to the crown
of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim, and written 720 8.C., at
the commencement of their captivity; but amidst the woe
pronounced, do we not find the merciful means of restoration
not obscurely hinted ?
In verse 15, Because ye have said. We have made a
covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement, &c,.


Therefore, thus saith the Lord God, Behold I lay in Zion for a
foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a
sure foundation, &c. Yerse 18, Your covenant with death
shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall not
stand. Hosea prophecying 60 years before the Assyrian
Captivity speaks of Israel in the wilderness, and there, not
after the manner of man, God promises comfort and a door of
hope from whence it might least be expected—the Yalley of
Achor for a door of hope. We learn from Joshua vii. the
Yalley of Achor was of distress, humiliation, and trouble.
Now it is worthy of remark that St. Peter in his epistle
addressed to the strangers scattered , reminds them specially of
the promise in Isaiah xxviii., Behold I lay in Zion, &c., and
also of the promises in the prophecy of Hosea, Who in times
past were not a people but are now the people of God, which
had not obtained mercy but now have obtained mercy. 1 Peter
ii., 10; Hosea i., 6-9; and ii., 23, in which chapter we have
the remarkable prophecy (verse 16), In that day thou shalt
call me Ishi, husband, —and no more Baali—lord. Should we
not fairly acknowledge that these prophecies and St. Peter's
Epistle primarily respect the same persons? Again, is it
without purpose that immediately after the sufferings of Christ
set forth in Isaiah liii. there follows that magnificent song of
triumph beginning, Sing, 0 barren one, thou that didst not
bear; break forth into singing thou that didst not travail with
child: for more are the children of the desolate one than the
children of the married wife, saith the Lord. Enlarge the
place of thy tent, &c.: for thou shalt break forth on the right
hand and on the left; and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles,
and make the desolate cities to be inhabited, &c.
Now, we are not left in doubt as to who the barren woman
is—we read Isaiah 1. 6, Where is the bill of your mother's
divorcement, whom I have put away ? Behold for your trans-
gressions is your mother put away.
To show further who is meant, turn to Jeremiah iii. 8,
When for all the causes whereby backsliding Israel committed
adultery, I had put her away and given her a bill of Divorce,
yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not &c. . . . The
backsliding Israel hath justified herself more than the treacher-
ous Judah. Indeed the prophecies declared the birth and
mission of the Saviour as having not merely an important (one
might almost say) an exclusively paramount bearing on the
calling and conversion of Israel (Isaiah xlix. 5.) Messiah is
formed from the womb for what purpose ? To bring Jacob
again unto Him. Bishop Lowth's beautiful rendering is, “To
bring back again Jacob unto Him, and that Israel may be
gathered; therefore am I glorious in the eyes of Jehovah, and
my God is my strength." . . . That wonderful chapter


xxxi. Jeremiah from first to last is on the same subject—
declares Ephraim the first born : 9v., Rachael weeping for her
children then in captivity, 15v., —the mode of their restoration
—A woman shall compass a man , 21v. {Compare Isaiah vii.
13, A virgin shall conceive, &c.) The predicted unity of
Israel and Judah 27-28 v. (Compare Ezekiel xxxvii. 15 to
end.) Lastly, if the ordinances of sun and moon, day and
night, can depart, then the seed of Israel also shall cease from
being a nation before me for ever 35-36 v. . . . The lost
tribes have also been sought —we need hardly say in vain
among various races of savages; writers disregarding the light
of God’s Holy Word, have put forth strange theories. Mrs.
Simons and the celebrated William Penn declared the North
American Indians to be the ten tribes. Mr. Grant said the
Nestorians. Rev. J. Samuel was in favour of the Jews of
Daghestan, about the Caspian Sea. Warburton in his
“ Crescent and the Cross ” sets forth the claims of the
Fashallas and Abyssinians. Mr. Forster in his “Primeval
Language ” ingeniously makes out the Affghans to be the lost
tribes.
Do any of these people blossom and fill the world with
fruit to God? Are they by the favour of God advanced
“ above all people on the face of the earth,” Deut. vii. 6.
Most of them are in a degraded state —some altogether
passing away —indeed, if we have regard to the prophecies we
must look only for polished and civilized races to fulfil the con-
ditions predicted. We may add that the celebrated Dr.
Abaddie, a Huguenot divine, who came over with William 111.
1688, declared unless the ten tribes had flown into the air, we
must look for them in north-western Europe, and the testi-
mony of Rev. Joseph Woolf was similar, after journeying
eastward to Bokhara and southward to Timbuctoo in search of
the lost tribes.
We must now, in following the fortunes of our ancestors,
turn principally to profane history, and Herodotus speaks of
the revolt of Media under Deiocesfrora Assyrian rule 710 8.C.,
just as Israel was there settled—thus Media became inde-
pendent of Assyria. Is it not very probable that the Israelites
Extract of Illustrated News, December 1856, p. 566.
Dr. Macpherson has lately presented to the British Museum Ins valuable
collection of ancient ornaments and relics obtained from the catacombs at
Kertch where he was Inspector-General of Hospitals (Turkish contingent.^
They comprise vases of bronze, terracotta and glass, ivory carvings,
ornaments of gold and other metals, including examples of a high-class of
ancient Grecian art, with certain objects also of a later age, but of even
greater interest to the English antiquary. These consist of personal orna-
ments of bronze, identical in form, with those found in Anglo-Saxon cemeteries in
our own country, explored by Hon. R. Neville and other archaeologists.
Similar discoveries in this vicinity are mentioned in Clarke’s Travels and
noticed by Wilson, Israelitish Origin.


in Media and Armenia took part in this revolt against the
Assyrian oppressor ? Even if not, the Assyrian Empire fell
in 606 8.C., an event which no doubt left the Israelites free
to follow their own devices. A glimpse to this effect is
afforded us in the last chapter of the history of Tobit, who
directs his son to leave Nineveh (believing its coming destruc-
tion) and proceed to Media. The last verse records that the
son before his death rejoiced in the destruction of Nineveh.
Now, it is worthv of remark that those authentic historians
Strabo and Herodotus date the first irruption of the Goths into
Europe from Armenia and Circassia round the Black Sea *
about 600 years 8.C., under Odin or Woden, the mover, as
Canon Kingsley translates the word. 500 years after we find
them in possession of North Germany, Scandinavia, and
Denmark —on the banks of the Rhine, nay, even in Gaul, in
contact with the great Julius Caesar, whose Roman soldiers lay
weeping in their tents and making their wills at the prospect of
encountering the invincible Goths or Germans ; 500 years after
Julius Caesar’s time we find them under Alaric thundering at
the gates of Rome. Perry, in his history of the Franks, says,
“ If the Greeks and Romans are rightly called the people of
the past, the Germans, in the wider sense of the appellation,
have an undoubted claim to be considered the people of the
present and future; for to whatever part we turn our eyes of
the course this favoured race has run, whether under the
name of Teuton, German, Frank, Saxon, Dane, Norman,
Englishman, or North American, we find it full of interest and
glory. Majestic in stature, high in spirit, with fearless hearts,
on which no shackle had been laid, they came forth from their
primeval forests to wi’estle with the masters of the world,
Tacitus, Germania, iv. “Ipse eorum opinionibus accedo,
qui Germanioe populos, nullis abis aliarum nationum connubiis
infectos, propriam et sinceram et tanturn sui similera gentem
extitisse, arbitrantur.” For myself I agree with the judgment
of those who regard the peoples of Germany unstained by
any intermarriages with other nations, as a race pure, isolated,
and which resemble only themselves.
Let us see if in the features and doings of our ancestors
we may not discern marks of the long-lost son. We believe we
find in the Anglo-Saxon race the distinguishing marks of the
first-born, Ephraim, but we cannot deny an Israelitish origin
to the Teutonic families of Europe. We find them then
issuing from the very place of Israel’s hiding about a hundred
years after the Assyrian captivity—coming forth conquering
* Wilson supposes the tribe of Dan to be the Vanguard, and to name the
rivers which they pass. . „ ,
The Don or Daun, the Dnieper, the Dniester, and the Danau or Danube,
the rest or consolation of Dan. See Map.




ERRA T A .
In page 23, in line 27, the word unusually should read
“ usually ”; and in the same page, in line 30, after the
word distinguishes should he added the words “them from.”


and to conquer. As soon as we meet with them in historic
times, says Canon Kingsley in his admirable work, “ The
Roman and the Teuton/' they are always moving, migrating,
invading —and these migrations were wholesale, consisting of
men, women and children, horses, cattle and dogs, bag and
baggage. Were they not doing the same in j9re-historic times ?
“ Did not the spirit of Woden, the mover, move them, and
forced them to go ahead then as now ?" Kingsley again,
page 60, “ These Teutons —strange people —so strange that
they have conquered —one may almost say they are all nations
which are alive upon the globe, and we may therefore expect
them to have done strange things in their infancy."
Tacitus says, the Celtic nations, which had formerly been
such a terror to Rome, had in his time ceased to be a terror,
being driven into corners by the Goths. Before proceeding
further we must say a few words of the Saxons —and first of
the name —Bosworth, in his Anglo-Saxon Grammar, concurs
with Sharon Turner that Sakai-suna, or sons of Sak, is the
most probable origin of our word Saxon. The word is written
by Pliny Sacassani, a merely Latinized form. I was informed
many years ago by a learned Hebrew scholar that in the
Talmud (Section Idolatry), it is recorded that Josephus was
severely blamed by his countrymen, the Jews, because he. was
willing to accept for them the designation Sakai. This name
they had obtained from the Macedonians from the time of
Alexander the Great, 320 8.C., and the Jews who emigrated
to the new city which he founded (Alexandria) were unusually
termed Ha/caL crvva, Sakai-suna. The Talmudists say that this
means sons of Isaac —Beni-sak, and that this term distin-
guishes the Arabians (Ishmaelites) who style themselves Beni-
Abraham. The Romans wrote the Greek Ha/cai, Sacas,
pronouncing the c hard. In Genesis xlviii.. 16, the dying
patriarch, in blessing Ephraim and Manasseh, says, “ Let my
name be named on them, and the name of my fathers Abra-
ham and Isaac” The Saxons and Angles took possession of
Britain, and a celebrated German writer (Roth) observes, “ It
was not its insular position, but the exclusion of all Celtic and
Romance elements which kept England, comparatively speak-
ing, free and happy." “ Happy for us English," says Kingsley,
“ that we were forced to seek our adventures here in this lonely
isle, where order, justice, freedom, morality, the barbarian
elements might reign."
In our school histories of fifty years ago we used to read,
“ The Saxons are represented as a very cruel people, but we
must remember it is their enemies that have drawn the
picture"—and, I believe, if our enemies of the present day,
whether Chinese, Affghan, or Zulu, drew the picture, the por-


trait would be very similar.” * The features sketched by the
Chinese are identical with the representations of Julius Csesar
and Tacitus nearly two thousand years ago. To the Chinese we
are red-haired, blue-eyed barbarians. Julius and Tacitus have
repeatedly, Barbari rutiloe comoe, oculi caerulei —magna corpora.
. . . . Truces et coerulei oculi, &c. Red-haired, blue-
eyed, mighty thews and sinews, fierce blue eyes, &c. The
Gauls in CaesaPs army assured the Roman soldiers that they
could not stand the fierce countenance and the flash of the eyes
of the Germans —ne yultum quidem atque aciem oculorum
ferre potuisse. Although the notices of our ancestors by
Roman writers are few and far between, except the admirable
Germania of Tacitus, yet we may discern something to their
advantage, and to our own pride and satisfaction, in their
many good qualities, and especially in their rough and ready
valour. Carlyle, indeed, calls their religion “ The consecra-
tion of valour” —a grand expression, which, I feel sure, has
lost none of its force or significance among our countrymen of
the present day. “ They dared,” says Tacitus, “to assail
the Roman Empire, not like other kings, when in its infancy,
but at its mightiest.” Germani non primordia Populi Romani,
sicut alii Reges Ducesque, sed florentissimum imperium laces-
sierint. Tac. Annal. 2.88 Again he says, “ Triumphed over
in the streets of Rome, they yet remained unconquered on the
Rhine.” Triumphati magisquam victi—and, speaking of
Caligula, he says, “ His mighty threats were laughed at by
the Goths.” Mox ingentes C. Csesaris minse in ludibrium
versee. It was to his German soldiers that the immortal
Julius owed his crowning victory at Pharsalia: and succeed-
ing Emperors cunningly divided the strength which they could
not break , by leading Gothic mercenaries against Gothic free-
men. In somewhat more than 300 years after the conquest
of Gaul by the Franks, Burgundians and Visigoths, the power
of the Roman Emperor, and even the very title, devolved on
a German head in the person of Charlemagne. But this
rather anticipates; we must say a little more of the Goths
and the many offshoots of the mighty Teutonic race, which for
more than a thousand years has been steadily advancing
towards universal dominion over the political, social, and moral
world. Of their food Tacitus does not say much, but he
mentions beer. Potui humor ex hordeo aut frumento —and it
is worthy of remark that Xenophon, in his Anabasis, speaks
of beer in Tipper Armenia about 400 years before Christ. The
* The Fortnightly Review of September, 1879, has an interesting paper on
the Chinese ; but the light in which we are viewed by the masses is not
encouraging. A placard, issuing from the people of Hunan, declares, “The
foreign devils are beasts, and must not be permitted to enter the city. If one
enter, we kill one—if two, the pair,” &c. Hunan, it is added, is a place
where polite manners and righteous principles flourish !


bravery of these people is expressly ascribed by Diodorus
Siculus to tbeir belief in the immortality of the soul. Tacitus
says, “They consecrate woods and groves, and call by the
name of God that secret something which they see by reverence
alone,” Is not this remarkable expression something like a
heathen idea of faith in a Divine Presence—an unseen God ?
“ The Goths,” says Kingsley, “ like all other German
tribes, were ruled over by two royal races, sons of Woden and
the Asas. The Ostrogoth race was the Amalungs , the heavenly
or spotless race ; the Visigoth race was the Balthungs, the bold
or valiant race, and from these two families and from a few
others, but all believed to be lineally descended from * Woden,
and now of course much intermixed, are derived all the old
royal families of Europe, that of the house of Brunswick
among the rest. Especially interesting to us English should
Gothic fortunes be, for they are very near of kin to us, at least
to those Jutes who conquered Kent.”
How little did Hengist and Horsa dream, when they led
their troops across the sea to Britain in the early centuries,
that they were to be the founders and fathers of a race which
was to surpass, in the enduring splendour of its manifold
accomplishments, all the races of the earth : which was to
imprison the winds in its ships, and to struggle with and
subdue the sea ; which was to mint, with the effigy of its
supremacy, the coin of half the world, and countersign the
certificates of the civilization of continents, and which was
to extend its imperial sway in the East over empires which
had been rich before what Milton calls the battles of the
“ Kites and Crows ” were over in England; and in the West
over vast island continents, peopled at last with its own Anglo-
Saxons, and rich with the accumulated hoards of Nature's
own secreting during uncounted ages. “ But centuries before
the Saxon invasion of England the Goths had sailed from the
Crimea round the Black Sea, once and again plundering Trebi-
zonde, and at last also the temple of Diana and Ephesus —they
had penetrated into Greece and Athens, plundered the Par-
thenon, threatened the capital. In the third century the
Ostrogoths had spread themselves over all South Russia from
the Volga to the Dneiper, and the Visigoths or Western Goths
from the Dneiper to the Theiss at Buda (see map). Behind
them lay the Gepidoe, the Germans, says Kingsley, who had
bided behind.”
He describes them as “ a tall, fair-haired people, clothed in
shirts and smocks of embroidered linen, and gaiters cross-
strapped with hide, their arms and necks encircled with gold
* Our Saxon Princess, Matilda, who married Henry the First, traced her
descent through Woden to the Israelitish patriarchs, vide Miss Strickland’s
“Queens of England,”


and silver rings: the warriors of the upper class well horsed,
and armed with lance and heavy sword, with chain-mail and
helmets surmounted by plumes, horns, towers, dragons, boars
and other strange devices. Thus appear their ancestors and
relatives in the grand old song of Beowulf, singing of the
War-Geats, Goths, or Jutes. That they were no savages is
shewn sufficiently by their names —Alaric, all rich, all power-
ful; Ataulf, helping father; Fridigern, willing peace-maker,
&c. All the names in fact which can be rescued from Roman
distortion are tokens of a people far removed from a barbarous
state. The noble mystery of the forge, where arms and
ornaments were made, was an honorable craft for men of rank,
and their ladies prided themselves on their skill with the
needle and the loom, as in the middle and succeeding ages,”
Bishop Ulfilas, a Goth, about the year 320, translated the
Holy Scriptures, but he omitted the books of Judges and Kings,
which treat of wars, thinking, says Kingsley, the Goths rather
required the curb than the spur. More remarkable than their
indomitable courage was their chastity and respect for the
female sex; this, with their fidelity to one wife, is regarded by
all writers as the basis of what is best in modern society —the
sanctity of home, with all its tender associations. M. Guizot,
in his Histoire de la Civilization, remarks, “ Ce que les Ger-
mains ont apporte daus le monde Romain, c’est Tesprit de
liberte individuelle, le besoin de la passion de Tindependance,
de Tindividualite.” What the Germans brought into the
Roman world was the spirit of individual liberty the
passion of independence —the energetic sentiment of human
individuality. Again, p. 288, “ Les Germains nous ont
donne Tesprit de liberte —de la liberte telle que nous la
concevons et le bien de chaque individu, maitre de lui-
meme, et de ses actions, et de son sort, tant quhl ne nuit
a aucune autre.” The Germans gave us the passion for
liberty, for liberty such as we imagine it and recognize it
at the present day—as the right and property of every
individual, master of himself and of his actions, and of his
lot, so long as he does no injury to any other,
Valerius Maximus says the captive wives of the Teutons
begged their conqueror Caius Marius to give them to the
Vestal Virgins, that they might preserve their chastity —and
on being refused, they all strangled themselves during the
night. Salvian, a Christian gentleman of the fourth century,
writing of Goths and particularly of Saxons, says, “Feri sed
casti,” and again, “ Venerandi castitate ” —Fierce but chaste,
and deeply to be honoured for chastity. Tacitus speaking of
Germans, “Nemo illic vitia ridet.” No one there laughs at
licentiousness. Again Germ. Bc., “Inesse quinetiam in foeminis
sanctum aliquid et providum putant.” They really regard the


sex as something sacred, and ascribe to them a kind of
inspiration ! Of their truthfulness Tacitus says. They kept
their word, even when they staked their liberty and lost. This
he says is foolish obstinacy; they themselves call it honour.
“Ea est in re prava, pervicacia; ipsi fidem vocant." Their
reckoning of time, nay, their very punishments remind us of
ancient Israel. “ Nec dierum numerum, ut nos, sed noctium
computant.” They do not reckon by days as we do, but by
nights. “ Proditores et transfugas arboribus suspendunt."
Traitors and deserters they hang on trees.
Tacitus also relates Annal 13c. that the Frisian envoys
being in the theatre at Rome, asked who the strangers were
who occupied the seats of the senators ; they were told this
was an honour granted to the ambassadors of those nations
who excelled in valour and in fidelity to Roman friendship—
they loudly declared that no nations on earth surpassed the
Germans, either in arms or in honour, and at once walked
down and sat among the senators ; —“ Nullos mortalium armis
aut fide ante Germanos esse, exclamant, degrediuntur que et
inter Patres considunt.”
About the period of the Saxon invasion of England
A.D. 450, the Roman Empire had ceased to exist —the Goths
were everywhere masters, as Gibbon's map will show. The
Goths, says Kingsley, lived by Gothic law and ruled —the
Romans in subjection lived by Roman law. To amalgamate
the two races would have been as impossible as to amalgamate
English and Hindoos. The parallel, he says, is tolerably
exact, for the Goth was very English ; and the over-civilized,
learned, false, profligate Roman, the very counterpart of the
modem Brahmin.
Now, as the Goths have often been regarded as mere
destroying barbarians, let us inquire what sort of civilization
they superseded; we may then the better estimate the value of
what they substituted, for we have entered into their labours
and enjoy their conquests. Like the English of the present
day, they never knew when they were beaten; when at last
they threw themselves on the Roman Empire—and what an
enterprise ! with the determination to take possession of its
fairest provinces,—no difficulties nor disasters could deter
them. Though often defeated, they were never conquered ; a
wave might roll back but the tide advanced; they held firmly
to their purpose till it was attained; they wrested the ball and
sceptre from Roman hands and have kept them till now ! A
few expressions of Salvian will serve to illustrate the state of
civilization then existing among the Romans. “ Impudicitiam
nos diligimus : Gothi execrantur." Licentiousness we love—
the Goths abhor it. Fornicatio apud illos crimen et dedecus—
apud nos decus. Fornication is among them a crime and an


infamy—with us an honour. Puritatem nos fugimus—illi
amant. Parity we flee from —they cherish it. Kingsley says,
“ Good men renounced the name of Roman and adopted that
of Goth.” Again, “ Over Roman slavery I must draw a veil;
it is not to be described by the pen of an Englishman.”
Gold win Smith says, “ Private and public morality had
vanished.” Salvian speaking of the public games and panto-
mimes, says, “ Honeste non possunt accusari”—he cannot even
accuse them without saying what he is ashamed to say.
Compare St. Paul, “ For it is a shame even to speak of those
things which are done of them.” (Ephesians y., 12.) The
pantomimes would not let people be modest even if they
wished. In contrast to these abominations, Salvian sets
boldly and honestly the superior morality of the Barbarians,
“ Now-a-days,” says he, “ there are no profligates among the
Goths, except the Romans.” Blush Roman people for your
morals ! we have been conquered only by our vices !
I must transcribe Kingsley’s spirit-stirring words on
another passage of Tacitus speaking of too early marriages
not being permitted among the Goths —“ sera juvenum Yenus,
ideoque inexhausta pubertas !” This gave the Goth more than
lofty stature and mighty limbs —his purity,—his calm and
steady brain, free and loyal heart, energy, —the self-respect
which comes from self-restraint, —the spirit which shrinks
from neither God nor man, and esteems it light to die for wife
and child, for country and Queen !
I have felt compelled to quote so much in order to rescue
the Goth from the too general notion entertained, that he was
a vulgar destroying savage. We are perhaps as far from the
truth in going to Roman writers for a portrait of the Goth, as
we should be in consulting Chinese historians for a character
of ourselves. .... Before quitting our ancestors, let me
present, as a souvenir, what Kingsley calls the photograph of
a real, live, old Goth, from the studio of Sidonius, a Christian
bishop of more than 1,400 years ago; Sidonius liked the Goths,
and especially their king, “A middle-sized stout man, of great
breadth of chest and thickness of limb, a large hand and a
small foot, curly-haired, bushy eye-brows, with remarkably
large eyes and eye-lids, hook-nosed, thin-lipped; brilliant,
cheerful, impassioned, full of health and strength in mind and
body. He goes to chapel before daylight, sits till eight
o’clock doing justice, while the crowd, let into a latticed
enclosure, is admitted, one by one, behind a curtain into the
presence. At eight he leaves the throne, and goes either to
count his money or to look at his horses. If he hunts, he
thinks it undignified to carry his bow, and womanish to keep
it strung, —a boy carries it behind him ; and when game gets
up, he asks you (or the bishop who seems to have gone hunting


with him), what you would wish him to aim at: strings his
bow, and then, says the bishop, never misses his shot. He
dines at noon, quietly in general, magnificently on Saturdays;
drinks very little, and instead of sleeping after dinner plays at
tables (chess or draughts) and dice. He is passionately fond
of his game, but never loses his temper, joking and talking to
every one around him, throwing aside royal severity, and
bidding all be merry, for to speak my mind, says the Bishop,
what he is afraid of is, that people should be afraid of him. If
he wins, he is in immense good humour ; then is the time to
ask favours of him ; and, says the crafty bishop, many a time
have I lost the game and won my cause thereby. ... At
three begins the toil of state —the knockers return, and those
who shove them aside return also; everywhere the litigious
crowd murmurs around, and follows him at evening
when he goes to supper; or the matter is settled
by the officers of the court who have to stay till bed-
time. His taste in music is severe —no water-organs
flute-player, lyrist, cymbal or harp-playing woman is allowed
—All he delights in is the old Teutonic music, whose virtue,
says the Bishop, soothes the soul, no less than does its sound
the ear. When he rises from the table the guards for the
night are set, and armed men stand at all the doors, to watch
him through the first hours of sleep.”
Gibbon also gives a good translation of the Bishop’s picture
of this king of the West Goths, Theodoric by name. Having
said so much of the youth of our ancestors, we must make an
advance towards their manhood, and, says Kingsley, " If our
English law, our English ideas of justice and mercy, have
retained more than most European codes, the freedom, the
truthfulness, the kindliness of the old Teutonic laws, we owe
it to the fact that England escaped, more than any other land,
the taint of effete Roman civilization: that she, therefore, first
of the lands in the twelfth century, rebelled against, and first
of them in the sixteenth century, threw off the Ultramontane
yoke.” Now, without mentioning Crecy or Agincourt, or
speaking of the achievements of Drake, Blake, or mighty
Nelson, let us ask, are our power and civilization things of the
past ? worn out and effete ? Is Ledru Roliu’s work of forty
years ago, “La decadence d’Angleterre,” a true prophecy ?
Is the senility or decay which he predicted come to pass ?
Are we to be superseded by the heathen Chinee ? Is the
Caucasian played out ? Let the mighty energies of steam and
electricity answer for us ; let the colonies speak for their
mother —for this wonderful progress of the Anglo-Saxon race
continually invites examination, and continually compels ad-
miration. Beginning its colonizing efforts about the same
time as its equally active neighbours France, Spain and Portu^


gal, it watched their progress, it contended with their strength,
it waited for their decline, it absorbed their acquisitions, and
at length it survived and surmounted them all. Of the colo-
nizing kingdoms, Great Britain has ever been the chief: and
whoever will count the catalogue of her possessions, the
number of her subjects, estimate the extent of her wealth,
and gauge however inaccurately the weight of her influence,
will easily find reasons for believing she is destined to be
always, as hitherto she has been, the mother of free colonies—
shall we say ? nay, rather the mother of nations !
Regions Caesar never knew
Her posterity shall sway,
Where his Engles never flew,
None invincible as they !
Yes ! we have yet the blessings of Joseph—the blessings
of the breast and womb ! of the deep that lieth under—the
chief things of the ancient mountains —the precious things of
the lasting hills—the precious things of the earth and the ful-
ness thereof—and the oracles of God spread abroad by our
means more abundantly than ever. It is not wise, however,
says St. Paul, to compare ourselves among ourselves, we will
therefore try to see ourselves as others see us —this says
Burns, will Iree us from many vain and foolish notions. Let
us then quote the opinions of our neighbours. A French-
man, M. Dupin, writing fifty years ago thus speaks of the
British Empire :
“ In Europe the British Empire borders at once towards the
North on Denmark, on Germany, upon Holland, upon France
—and towards the South upon Spain, Sicily, Italy and
Western Turkey. It holds the keys of the Adriatic and
Mediterranean —it commands the mouth of the Black Sea and
of the Baltic. No sooner had its navy, the Arbiter of the
Archipelago, ceased to be adverse to the cause of Greece, than,
on the instant, the ports of the Peloponnesus found new
Liberators in the posterity of the Heraclidee, and from Corinth
to Tenedos the sea which leads to the Bosphorus became to
the descendants of the Argonauts the path to Victory, and to
a second and richer golden fleece—National independence !
In Europe the British Empire permits this conquest.
“ In America, it gives boundaries to Russia towards the
Pole, and to the United States towards the temperate regions.
Under the torrid Zone, it reigns in the midst of the Antilles—
encircles the Gulf of Mexico, till at last it meets those New
States which it was the first to free from their dependence on
Spain, to make them more surely dependent on its own
commercial industry—and, at the same time, to scare in either
hemisphere any mortal who might endeavour to snatch the
heavenly FikE of its genius—or the secret of its conquests —
it holds midway between Africa and America, that Rock to


which it chained the Prometheus of the modern world. In
Africa, from the centre of that island (Malta) devoted of yore,
under the symbol of the Gross, to the safety of every Christian
Flag, the British Empire enforces from the Barbary States,
that respect which they pay to no other power. From the
foot of the Pillars of Hercules, it carries dread into the heart
of the remotest provinces of Morocco; on the shores of the
Atlantic, it has built the forts of the Gold Coast and of
the Lion's Mountain. (Sierra Leone). It is from thence
that it strikes the prey which the Blacks furnish to the
European races of men; and it is there that it attaches
to the soil, the freed man whom it snatches from the
trade in slaves. On the same continent beyond the tropics,
and at the point nearest the Austral Pole, it has possessed
itself of a shelter under the very Cape of Storms. Where the
Spaniard and Portuguese thought only of securing a port for
their ships to touch at, —where the Dutch perceived no capa-
bilities beyond those of a plantation —is now established the
colony of a second British people, uniting English activity
with Batavian patience; at this moment it is extending round
the Cape, the boundaries of a settlement which will increase
in South Africa to the size of the States which it founded
in North America. From this new focus of action and of
conquest, it cast its eyes towards India; it discovers, it
seizes the stations of most importance to its commercial
progress, and thus renders itself the exclusive Euler over
the passes of Africa from the east of another hemisphere.
As much dreaded in the Persian Gulf and Erythrean Sea as
in the Pacific Ocean and the Indian Archipelago, the British
Empire, the possessor of the finest countries of the East,
beholds its factors ruling over eighty millions of subjects. The
conquest of its merchants in Asia begin where those of
Alexander ceased, and where the terminus of the Romans
could never reach."
This is a French view of English power, let us now
give an American opinion ; The lleport of the Committee
of Foreign Relations of the House of Representatives at
Washington, February, 1841 (after referring to the military
position of the British which gives England ascendancy
at most important points), declares, “ She moves steadily
upon her objects with an ambition that knows no bounds;
and wherever she has had a conflict of interest, she has
rarely yielded to any other power. At this moment she
presents to the civilized world, the spectacle of the greatest
military and commercial power in combination ever known.
From her vast possessions in every quarter of the globe,
and her peculiar commercial system, she has been made the
reservoir of the wealth of nations. Her positions all over the


world are, at this moment, in a military point of view,
equal to a million of men under arms. Her continued conflicts
in the mighty regions of the East, only enable her officers to
become skilful and to improve in the art of war, while her
great armies and extensive fleets draw their support from the
immense countries seized and occupied. In the present
juncture of affairs, no Statesman can overlook these things.”
Such then was the opinion of our nearest neighbours forty or
fifty years ago—almost before the Isles had began to renew their
strength, under the mighty impetus of electricity and steam
power. Passing over the colonies —nations yet in their infancy
let us cast a brief glance at the rise and progress of British
power in the East, where the Queen of England, the Empress
of India, rules over two hundred millions of subjects, hirst,
we note the astounding fact that these mighty possessions
grew up under a mercantile company, and against their wishes
—for invariably we find stringent regulations going out with
every Governor-General to avoid conquest, and not to provoke
war. * This might perhaps have been expected from a mer-
cantile community, but in spite of themselves the empire grew,
and it is now as difficult as ever to affix boundaries or limits,
however scientific. In the Edinburgh Cabinet Library, article,
“ British India, ” we read, t( In the government administered
by the East India Company, the most striking feature is, that
military force by which their extensive dominion was originally
acquired, and is still held in submission. Its composition is
perhaps more remarkable than that of any army ever levied.
India is subjected to a foreign yoke hy her own troops, paid
with her own money ! ” .
In 1786 Marquis Cornwallis began his rule in India by a
determination to engage in no hostilities unless strictly defen-
sive. In spite of this resolve the terrible war with Tippoo
Sahib ensued within five years : after a severe struggle Tippoo
obtained peace by the surrender of half his territories and a
payment of four millions sterling, and on his renewing the
war he lost the rest of his dominions and his life at the storm-
ing of Seringapatam. Sir John Shore, the next Governor-
General, followed a strictly pacific system, which he was
accused of carrying to excess. This masterly inactivity, as it
has since been styled, generally left a large crop of troubles to
his successor. In 1798 the Marquis Wellesley, Earl Morning-
ton, was sent out with the most solemn injunctions to follow
a pacific course, a directly opposite one to that which through-
out the whole of his administration he did actually pursue.
Under his rule, his younger brother, Arthur, the renowned
Duke of Wellington, learned the art of war, and won the
* This year, 1880, similar instructions have been forwarded to Zulu land.


grand battle of Assaye. Yet tbe adherents of the Marquis
contend that he acted steadily and uniformly in the spirit of
his instructions, and in deviating therefrom, he was carried
along by a current of circumstances uncontrollable, and which
existed prior to his rule. Again the Company sent out Marquis
Cornwallis to conclude peace at almost any price, to form a
defensive line, beyond which British interference was not to
extend, and to allow the native powers to treat and fight with
each other as if they were at the other extremity of the globe.
He was succeeded by that most pacific Governor Sir George
Barlow, who, rather than go to war, surrendered every point in
dispute, though his contemporaries declare that his doings
were scarcely compatible with the national faith of England.
Lord Minto, in 1807, succeeded, and soon found himself in-
volved in wars which he had no means of preventing. In
1813 the warlike Lord Hastings was sent out by the Company,
who plainly saw that their favorite policy, the defensive, could
no longer be maintained. Montgomery Martin, in his British
Colonies, points out the misfortunes and wars in India, result-
ing from the amiable Lord Cornwallis’s defensive policy.
Lord Amherst endeavoured to follow the pacific policy of
Cornwallis, but he was compelled to go to war against Durjunt
Sal, who had taken possession of the infant ruler of Bhurt-
pore —one of the most important strongholds of India; had
murdered his uncle and followers, and treated the continued
remonstrances of Lord Amherst with studied contempt. In
1834 the Rajah of Coorg’s sister and her husband, in order to
escape from the slaughter which had befallen most of their
relatives, took refuge in British territory. In most insulting
language the Rajah wrote to the Governor-General demanding
their ex-tradition, which of course was refused, and war
became unavoidable.
In 1848 Lord Dalhousie, in the bitterness of his disappoint-
ment, addresses his Council: “ I wished for peace —I hoped
for peace—l have been disappointed—war has come upon us —
and war they shall have with a vengeance !” And this war
ended in our annexation of the Punjaub. Now, from these state-
ments of history, brief as they are, what are the unavoidable
inferences? We see that the most solemn injunctions
were sent out with every Governor-General to abstain from
war, and not to add by conquest a single acre to the Company’s
territory—yet every successive Governor found himself, by a
current of circumstances over which he had no control,
compelled to act in direct opposition to his instructions. Nay
—the only two Governors who maintained the pacific policy so
continually insisted on—both did so at the expense of the
national faith, and thereby laid the foundation of future wars.
Captain Basil Hall on this subject remarks : —“ The current


belief is, that the Company hare a constant wish to extend
their dominions —but I am convinced that a very moderate
degree of inquiry into the real merits of any one, or of all the
cases embraced by these suspicions (in recent times at all
events), will not only prove the absolute necessity of these
extensions of frontier, but also show that they have been most
reluctantly made/* . . Mr. Jenkins, 1832, political resident
at Nagpore for twenty years, thus speaks, in his evidence
before the House of Commons—" Unlike other kingdoms,
ours has been, in a great degree, forced upon ds ; built up at
almost every step against our own deliberate resolution to avoid
it—in the face, I may say, of every opposition which could be
given to it by the Legislature of his Majesty's Government and
by the Court of Directors, acting upon corresponding dis-
positions in our Government abroad. . . . What shall wo
then say to these things ? Are not these nations given to us ?
Are we not made —nay, almost against our will —to rule over
them ? Were they not given as dust to our sword and stubble
to our bow ? (Isaiah xli.) But to whom is this promise given
except to the seed of Abraham ? (8 and 9v.) The latest
evidence on this subject brings out the picture in yet bolder
relief. Dr. W. W. Hunter, in his valuable lectures delivered
within the last year, and reprinted, I am glad to observe, in
Cornhill Magazine, 1880, January and February, Nos. 241
and 242, says : —“ If, as some have recently alleged, our rule
has failed to benefit the Indian races, then I can sympathize
with those who question whether we should continue to accept
or to extend the responsibilities which Indian rule involves.
For no government has a right to exist, which does not exist
in the interest of the governed. The test of British rule in
India is, not what it has done for ourselves, but what it has
done for the Indian people. By this test our work in the East
must stand or fall. If our attempt to administer that vast and
distant empire has turned out a failure, if its people are not
more free, more secure, and more prosperous under British
rule than they were under their native dynasties, then the wise
course for Great Britain would seem to be to curtail her
former responsibilities, to accept no new ones, and to withdraw,
as far as may be, from an undertaking to which she had
proved unequal. If, on the other hand, we find that our
countrymen have not failed in their splendid and difficult
task ; if we find that British rule in India means order in place
of anarchy, protection in place of oppression, government by
the law in place of misgovernment by the sword, and a vast
free people dwelling in safety, where of old each man was
beaten down beneath whatsoever was stronger than himself j
then I think that Great Britain may, with a firm heart,
continue to accept the great responsibility which has fallen to


it, and that it may calmly face the duties which that respon-
sibility involves. During 1 the last ten years it has been my
business to visit, almost every winter, the twelve provinces of
India, and to superintend a survey of their population and
resources. The Indian Government has, so to speak, ordered
me to conduct for it a great stock-taking after a century of
British rule. I have often amused myself, during my solitary
peregrinations, by imagining what a Hindoo of the last
century would think of the present state of his country, if he
could revisit the earth. I have supposed that his first surprise
at the outward physical changes has subsided; that'he had
got accustomed to the fact that thousands of square miles of
jungle, which in his time were inhabited only by wild beasts,
have been turned into fertile crop lands; that fever smitten
swamps have been covered with healthy well drained cities;
that the mountain walls, which shut off the interior of India
from the seaports, have been pierced by roads and scaled by
railways; that the great rivers which formed the barriers
between provinces, and desolated the country with their floods,
have now been controlled to the uses of man, spanned by
bridges, and tapped by canals. But what would strike him as
more surprising than these outward changes, is the security of
the people. In provinces where every man, from the prince
to the peasant, a hundred years ago, went armed, he would
look round in vain for a matchlock or a sword. He would fiud
the multitudinous native states of India, which he remembered
in jealous isolation, broken only by merciless wars, now trading
quietly with each other, bound together by railways and roads,
by the post and the telegraph. He would find, moreover,
much that was new, as well as much that was changed. He
would see the country dotted with imposing edifices in a
strange foreign architecture, of which he could not guess the
uses. He would ask, what wealthy prince had reared for
himself that spacious palace ? He would be answered that the
building was no pleasure house for the rich, but a hospital for
the poor. He would enquire, in honor of what new Deity is
this splendid shrine ? He would be told that it was no new
temple for the gods, but a school for the people. Instead of
bristling fortresses, he would see courts of justice; in place of
a Mahommedan general in charge of each district, he would
find an English magistrate; instead of a swarming soldiery,
he would discover a police. . . . As regards the northern
or Himalayan frontier of India, the wild hill tribes are no
longer invaders, but are employed as loyal soldiers or border
police. As regards the southern frontier of India, the sea, the
pirate races have been converted into cheap and excellent
seamen. Indian waters are now as safe as the English
Channel, and the Indian navy, having finished its work, is


disbanded. As regards internal disturbances, banditti are
unknown, breaches of the law are rarer in India than in
England, and the special department which was created to
deal with the old special crimes of India, now finds no more
work to do within the British provinces. Besides rural
industries, a number of manufactures have sprung up. Coal
mines have been discovered in several provinces, and now
employ tens of thousands of miners. Mills and steam factories
have followed the opening up of the coal-fields. Twenty-six
years ago there was not a single loom worked by steam-power
in India; there are now one million two hundred and fifty
thousand spindles employed in the cotton manufacture alone,
and 40,000 spindles employed in the manufacture of jute.
“ When in the last century, the English became the ruling
power in India, the country did not produce a million sterling
a year of surplus products for exportation. East year India
sold to foreign nations sixty-three millions' sterling worth of
strictly Indian produce : in 1877-78 the total trade of India,
including exports and imports, exceeded 126 millions sterling.
“ When we obtained Calcutta it consisted of three mud-built
hamlets, without any trade whatsoever. In 1874 its commerce
had risen to over 54 millions sterling, besides 45 millions of
trade with the interior, making a total commerce of 100
millions sterling a year at a town which had not ten pounds'
worth of external trade when the British settled there ! A new
industrial life has been created for the people, vast outlets
have been opened up for the productions of the country, and
the increasing population, which must, under native rule, have
been killed off or starved, can now earn a subsistence. In the
last century, education in India was a monopoly .in the hands
of the priests, a power which they employed to subjugate the
minds of the people. Under British rule, education in India
has been taken entirely out of the hands of the priests, and it
has become the emancipator of the Indian races. In ancient
India a Brahmin was forbidden, under pain of death, to teach
the sacred books to the masses. Under British rule, the State
schools offer instruction to everyone, and open the same
careers to all. In the last century the Hindus were taught
from their earliest childhood, that they must remain imprisoned
for life in the caste in which they were born. We have now
two millions of boys and girls receiving public instruction in
India. Under the British Government these two millions of
native children are learning, that every occupation and every
profession is open to every boy on the benches of an Indian
school. The rising generation in India have been freed from
superstitious terrors, they have been led to give up cruel
practices, they have learned to detest and despise their fore-
fathers' bloody rites. Widow-burning, infanticide, hook-swing-


ing, self-mutilation, and human sacrifice—these are a few
familiar relics of the old bondage under which the Indian
intellect groaned and the Indian heart bled. Great as has
been the material progress of India during the past century,
its emancipation from ignorance and priestcraft forms, to my
mind, a far more splendid memorial of British rule. Truly,
* The people that walked in darkness have seen a great
fight.’ ”
We are here constrained to exclaim with St. Paul (Romans
xi., 1.), I say then, hath God cast away his people? and
those who recognize our Israelitish origin will confidently echo
Paul’s reply —God forbid ! But how can this response be
made by those who suppose the ten tribes to be merged among
the Jews—or by those who regard them as yet hidden—or by
those who imagine the English to be descended from tribes of
savages ? The sure testimony of Holy Writ declares, “ Thou
Israel art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of
Abraham, my friend—l have chosen thee and not cast thee
away ” Isaiah xli. 8-9. I said not unto the seed of Jacob,
seek ye me in vain, Isaiah xlv. 19. I have formed thee, thou
art my servant, O Israel, thou shalt not be forgotten of me,
Isaiah xliv. 21. For a small moment have I forsaken thee,
but with great mercies will I gather thee, Isaiah liv. 7. They
that war against thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of
nought, Isaiah xli. 12. For the nation and kingdom that will
not serve thee shall perish; yea, those nations shall be utterly
wasted, Isaiah lx. 42. Now, do not the opponents of this
theory virtually admit that God has cast away His people ?
The five or six millions of Jews cannot include the posterity
of Ephraim “ and the tribes of Israel his fellows >} (Ezekiel
xxxvii. 19.) —nor can the Jews be regarded as God’s servants
and evangelizing the world. Moreover, every corner of the
world is known—a polished nation cannot be hidden, and
savage nations are outside the argument. We call upon
members of the Church of England to listen to their own
Liturgy, which seems to take for granted our Israelitish origin.
To-day if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts, as did
your fathers. Were they not your fathers ? Again, Blessed
be the Lord God of Israel for He hath visited and redeemed
His people. He hath holpen Israel in remembrance of His
mercy. And that Christ was to be a light to lighten tho
Gentiles must also be construed through the instrumentality of
His people Israel, whose special glory He was to be, and is.
Again, we have heard with our ears O God, our fathers have
told us, &c., and yet we are not to believe that they were our
fathers ! The Epistle for the Sunday before Advent strongly
advocates our view which, when the Church of England is
brought to see, we may then joyfully sing the Ixvii. Psalm


To bless thy chosen race,
In mercy Lord incline;
And cause the brightness of thy face
On all thy saints to shine.
We then as Anglo-Israelites firmly believe that God’s promises
have been partially fulfilled in the Teutonic nations, and that
they are daily obtaining increasing fulfilment, for verifications
of this view are continually and spontaneously springing up.
We claim too for Britain and her colonies the place of
Ephraim, the first-born —as, making large allowances for
human frailty and infirmity; we do recognize our position as
servants of the Almighty—to perform the duties of Israel, to
show forth the praises of our covenant God and Father, to fill
the face of the world with the fruits of Christianity, to rebuild
the waste places of the earth, to cause the desolate cities to
be inhabited. To us also the riches of the Gentiles flow, we
feel in ourselves not only possession of the blessings, but the
power to bless others, promised to the posterity of Joseph, of
which says
Hosea xiv. 15.
He shall grow as the lily
And cast forth his roots as Lebanon
His branches shall spread
His beauty shall be as the Olive tree
And his smell as Lebanon
Bishop Titcomb says
With rapidity
With strength
With extensiveness
With productiveness
With recognized favour and reputation.
Some who oppose this subject seem to fear that it would
tend to foster an arrogant, vainglorious spirit ; surely this is a
very remote dread—the more deeply blessings and responsi-
bilities are felt, the greater generally the corresponding
humility. No one accuses St. Paul of arrogance in saying,
We then as fellow-workers with God—now then we are ambas-
sadors for Christ. The language of the first Christian council
sitting at Jerusalem, though iuspired, is yet more pronounced.
It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us (Acts xv., 28).
What we are anxious to show is, “ That the merciful and
gracious Lord hath so done His marvellous works that they
ought to be had in remembrance : He sent redemption unto
His people •, He hath commanded His covenant for ever : holy
and reverend is His name (Psalm cxi.) The Almighty has
declared, “This people have I formed for Myself —they shall
show forth My praise.” How dishonouring then to God is the
supposition that this people no longer exists, and that an
alien nation has been substituted !
No wonder people now-a-days declare the Old Testament
is nothing to us ! Thus many, having attained an intellectual
or spiritual eminence, fancied or real, may admire the beauty
of the landscape and the extent of their possessions, and forget
the laborious steps of the ages, by which the ascent has been
gained, but they who “ follow after righteousness and seek the
Lord ” are exhorted to “ look to the Rock whence they were


hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence they were digged, to
look unto Abraham their father, for I called him alone” (Isaiah
Ixi. 1).
We shall then humbly acknowledge that our fathers “ got
not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did
their own arm save them : but thy right hand, and thine arm,
and the light of thy countenance, because thou hadst a favour
unto them” (Psalm xliv., 3). It will thus be seen that this
enquiry, so interwoven with our highest religious aspirations,
with our loyal trust in the Unseen, is not a winding stair of a
ruined lower, leading nowhere, but that the subject is corre-
lated to numerous answering realities, showing that the truth
of Holy Writ is specially potential goodness to the house of
Israel, and through them to the whole human race. Anglo-
Israelites may therefore sing with Zechariah his exultant
song, “ Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for He hath visited
and redeemed His people. To perform the oath which He
sware to our forefather Abraham —that we, being delivered
from the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear
—in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life ! ” If
Zechariah, by faith at the birth of John, who was to prepare
the way of the Lord, sees the mighty blessings and the per-
formance of the covenant —what shame that the veil is yet upon
so many hearts! This noble hymn should remind us not only of
our advantages, but of our responsibilities, and help to keep
us humble—it should drive us to our Bibles, that, like the men
of Bersea, we may search to see if these things are so, and the
result would be as with those noble people, “ therefore many of
them believed.” “ Then shall our mouth be filled with
laughter and our tongue with joy.”
The angels desire to look into the various and lengthened
steps of the mystery of the scheme of human redemption, and
into the growing fulfilment of God's holy covenant, yet
man, the unworthy recipient of these mighty blessings, is
indifferent; the subject which tunes the harps of archangels,
to him lacks interest; nevertheless, it is to believers a special
effluence of the fountain of all Beauty!—the handwriting
made visible to us of the Great Architect of the universe ! In
conclusion, we Anglo-Israelites challenge inquiry, and entreat
all brother Christians to look into this subject, and sift and
■examine the numerous probabilities and proofs. Slow grows
the splendid and wondrous pattern devised in the loom of
Providence, and wrought out so wistfully through a long series
of ages by the Divine hand, yet we pray you to look into and
share the contemplations of the angels on this to us, most
interesting subject; yea, from its earliest increments to the
full evolution of the mighty plan, now approaching its perfect
completion.
THE END.


jAFp
blftuo
F SW6




