

The
TICHBORNE TRIAL
PRICE TWO SHILLINGS
Verbatim
Report.
THE SUMMING UP BY
THE LORD CHIEF JUSTICE
UNABRIDGED EDITION
LONDON
WARD, LOCK, & TYLER


NEW STORY BY MISS BRADDON.
LOST FOR LOVE
BY THE AUTHOR OF “LADY AUDLEY’S SECRET” &c
See “BELGRAVIA.”
Miss Braddon’s Illustrated Magazin
Published e\ery Month. Illustrated with Four whole-page Engravings, p
separately on Toned Paper. Price One Shilling.
BELGRAVIA,
% IWon Ulappe,
CONDUCTED BY M. E. BRADDOI
AUTHOR OF “LADY AUDLEY’S SECRET,” Ac.
Acknowledged to be the Best Shilling Magazine that England posse.
MISS BRADDON’S FORTHCOMING NOVEL.
Early in April. By the Author of “ Lady Audley’s Secret,” &c. In 3 vols., at all Lib
TAKEN AT THE FLOOD.'
Now Beady. Uniform with Cheap Edition of Miss Braddon’s Novels.
Price 25.; cloth gilt, 2s. 6d.
STRANGERS AND PILGRIM
BY THE AUTHOE OF "LADY AUDLEY'S SECRET,” &c.
"Miss Braddon’s new novel is the best piece of work that she has Acme."—Athenaeum.
«, an , d It'vrims’ is surprisingly fresh, clever, and entertaining.”—-Sunday Timet.
««-wr ' St novel Miss Braddon has given to the world.”— Lloyd** News.
I ?°. sfc heartily• recommend to our readers ‘ Strangers and Pilgrims/ as a novel of the m(
tnrailing interest. —Weekly Dispatch .
~ , Strangers and Pilgrims,’ it not the very best of Miss Braddon’s novels, will be accounted
the best, and will win the admiration of its readers.”— News of the World.
T _ Stiangers and Pilgrims’ is decidedly the best novel which Miss Braddon has yet produce
In one word, Strangers and Pilgrims ’ is a novel which ought to live, and which, unless our iudl
be strange y at fault, will live for the delight of the next generation.”— Manchester Courier.
We have never read a novel with greater interest or with more curiosity.”— Western Daily Me
CHEAP EDITION OF MISS BRADDON’S NOVEL
Now ready, price 2a. eacli; cloth gilt, 2s. 6d.
AURORA FLOYD
TO THE BITTER END
ROBERT AINSLEIGH
THE LOYELS OF ARDEN
FENTON’S QUEST
RUN TO EARTH
BIRDS OF PREY
CHARLOTTE’S INHERITANCE
RUPERT GODWIN
LADY AUDLEY’S SECRET
HENRY DUNBAR
STRANGERS AND PILGRIMS
ELEANOR’S VICTORY
MILLY DARRELL
TRAIL OF THE SERPENT
JOHN MARCHMONT’S LEGA<
THE DOCTOR’S WIFE
ONLY A CLOD
SIR JASPER’S TENANT
LADY’S MILE
LADY LISLE
CAPTAIN OF THE VULTURE
DEAD SEA FRUIT
RALPH THE BAILIFF
Cheap Editions of Miss Braddon’s other Novels will follow in due course.
' one can be dull who has a novel by Miss Braddon in hand. The most tiresome iou
is beguiled, and the most wearisome illness is brightened by any of her books.”
London: WARD, LOCK, & TYLER, Warwick House, Paternoster Row.


THE TICHBORNE TRIAL:
THE SUMMING-UP
BY
THE LORD CHIEF JUSTICE OF ENGLAND.




About this time (July or August 1865)
it is probable that defendant began to
make those entries in his pocket-book,
which, though imperfect, are not un-
worthy of attention, as when he began to
write ‘Tichborne.’ This book fell into
Reardon’s hands. There is a curious
hieroglyphic, the cross swords and the
c’s put back to back, and upon this a
correspondent has written to suggest an
interpretation. Here we have the rudi-
mentary hieroglyphics, ‘R. C. T., Hamp-
shire, England.’ Then come the entries
in his own pocket-book, ‘ Thomas Castro,
Wagga-Wagga.’ ‘Roger Charles Tich-
borne, Tichborne Hall, Surrey.’ Now
you know that that must have been at
a period antecedent to the time when he
met Slate. Slate would not have told
him that Tichborne Hall was in Surrey,
and Roger Tichborne would certainly
have known that it was not in Surrey,
and would never have been likely to have
made such an entry. Then we find —
‘Melapilla, Rio de Janeiro, Rio de la
Plata, Buenos Ayres, Melapilla, 18 Au-
gust, South America, T. C., South Ame-
rica, Roger Charles Tichborne, Bart.,
Tichborne Hall, Surrey.’ Then follows :
‘Lost on the 13th of September, this
day, in Wagga-Wagga—those who find it
are welcome to keep it—two cases in the
Small Debts Court. Those who find it
are welcome to keep it’ (laughter). Then
follows this remarkable passage : * Some
men has plenty money’ and no brains,
and some men has plenty brains and no
money. Surely men with plenty money
and no brains were made for men with
plenty brains and no money. R. C.
Tichborne, Bart.’ How, gentlemen, I
must say that R. C. Tichborne, Bart.,
had no business to usurp a passage which
did not belong to R. C. Tichborne, but
which belongs to Miss Braddon, and still
less to change the words written by Miss
Braddon into such vernacular as is here
done. At the time when the defend-
ant’s counsel attributed the words to
Miss Braddon I doubted the accuracy of
the quotation, and that talented author-,
ess did me the honour to send me a copy
of Aurora Floyd, and I devoted some
time—which, perhaps, I ought to have
devoted to this case—to reading that in-
teresting and amusing novel, which I did
from the beginning to the end. I found
in the novel this remarkable passage,
which is put into the mouth of a crafty
and wily fellow. Says this man, ‘ I should
think fellows with plenty of money and
no brains must have been invented for
the good of fellows with plenty of brains
and no money, and that is how we con-
trive to keep our equilibrium in the uni-
versal see-saw’ (laughter). That is very
epigrammatic, and well expressed. — From,
the Standard.


THE TICHBORNE TRIAL:
THE SUMMING-UP
BY THE
LORD CHIEF JUSTICE OF ENGLAND.
TOGETHER WITH THE
ADDRESSES OF THE JUDGES, THE VERDICT, AND THE
SENTENCE;
THE WHOLE ACCOMPANIED BY
A HISTORY OF THE CASE AND COPIOUS ALPHABETICAL INDEX.
‘ In this extraordinary drama are wonderfully combined, and played one against the other, all the
characters, all the ranks and classes, all the places, all the circumstances, all the styles and modes, all
the spreading nations and universal languages, the chief religions, the prevailing tendencies, the
traditions and the anticipations, the old world and the new, the most fixed and formed conditions of
life and the most unsettled and chaotic, the weaknesses and the strength of a world always dying to
be bom again.’ —The Times, March 2,1874.
LONDON:
WARD, LOCK, AND TYLER, WARWICK HOUSE,
PATERNOSTER ROW.
1874.




COURT OF QUEEN’S BENCH.
Jitbjgrs.
The LOED CHIEF JUSTICE OF ENGLAND.
The HON. JUSTICE MEULOE.
The HON. JUSTICE LUSH.
€amnd for tfrc
Mr. Hawkins, Q.C.
Serjeant Parry, Q.C.
Mr. C. Chapman Barber.
Mr. J. C. Mathew.
Mr. C. Bowen.
Mr. Gray, Q.C., Treasury Solicitor.
dtattsrl for % srfmte.
Dr. Kenealy, Q.C.
Mr. P. MacMahon, Q.C.
Mr. J. Cooper Wyld.
Former Solicitor , Mr. Hendriks.
Present Solicitor, Mr. C. Harcourt.
Cjjr Spmal Jtirg.
Henry Francis Dickens {Foreman). George Best Winter.
Charles Dunsby. John George Sheppard.
William John Taylor. John Parsons.
William Paige. Jonas Turner.
John Benjamin Franklin. Eobert Edwards.
William Samuel Eichardson. William Docwra.
The indictment upon which the proceedings were founded was filed
Easter Term 1872, against Thomas Castro, alias Orton, alias Tich-
borne.
First count of indictment charged Defendant with perjury committed
in evidence given hy him on the recent trial of Tichborne v. Lushington.
Second count charged Defendant with perjury in an affidavit sworn
by bim in the Chancery suit, Tichborne v. Tichborne.
Defendant pleaded ‘ Not guilty.’




ANALYSIS.
The indictment was against the defendant by the name of ‘ Thomas Castro, otherwise
called Arthur Orton,’ in two counts, with the crime of wilful and corrupt perjury.
The first count charges perjury in his examination on the trial of the action in the
Common Pleas. in 1871 ; the second charges perjury in his affidavit in Chancery in
the year 1868, m.the course of the suit he had then pending in that court. In the
first count, charging perjury at the trial, there are distinct ‘ assignments,’ or charges
of perjury, each sufficient to sustain the indictment, and all making up only one
count. or J
1. In swearing that he was Roger Tichborne.
2. In swearing that he resided in Paris until 1845.
3. In swearing that Chatillon was his tutor.
4. In swearing that in 1845 he came to England to attend the funeral of his uncle Sir
Henry. *
5. In swearing that he had been a student at the Jesuits’ College in Stonyhurst
6. In swearing that he had been an officer in the army.
7. In swearing that he had in July or August 1852 seen Miss Doughty (now Ladv
Eadcliffe). J
8. In swearing that he had in those months seduced her.
9. In swearing that he had, after the 22d of June in that year, ever seen her.
10. In swearing that he had ever seen Miss Hales in the company of her mother at
Canterbury.
11. In swearing that he had been at Bilton Grange, the seat of Mr. and Mrs 'Washing-
ton Hibbert. ' s
12. In swearing that he had never been to Lloyd’s rooms.
These are the assignments on the Tichborne part of the case, then
follow others on the Orton part of the case.
13. In swearing that he was not Arthur Orton.
14. In swearing that he had never been at Wapping before 1866.
15. In swearing that he had never gone by the name of Arthur Orton.
16. In swearing that he did not leave England in 1848 in the Ocean, and did not arrive
at Valparaiso in that year.
17. In swearing that he was not at any time between 1848 and 1851 at Melipilla (a place
midway between Valparaiso and Santiago).
18. In swearing that he did not in 1851 come back from Chili in the Jessie Miller (the
ship mentioned by himself in his statutory declaration at Sydney as the ship in
which he had sailed).
19. In swearing that he had never seen Mary Anne Loder before 1867, and had not
kept company with her.
20. In swearing that he had not written letters to her.
21. that he did not go out to Hobart Town in the Middleton (in November
22. In swearing that he had not seen any of Orton’s sisters more than once before the
trial.
23. In swearing that he had been charged, along with Orton, at Castlemaine, with
horse-stealing.
Each and every one of which statements is charged as wilful
and corrupt perjury.
Then, in the second count, based on the affidavit in Chancery in April 1868, there were
ten distinct assignments founded on his statements in that affidavit similar to the
main assignments in the first count as to the Tichborne part of the case.
1. That he was Roger Tichborne.
2. That he resided in Paris to 1845.
3. That in 1845 he was brought to England.
4. That he was placed at Stonyhurst.
5. That in 1849 he was appointed cornet in the Carabineers.
6. That in October 1849 he joined the regiment.
7. That he remained on duty in the regiment until January 1853, when he returned.
8. That in March 1853 he took his passage on board a ship bound for Valparaiso and
in due course arrived there.
9. That from that time to April 1854 he travelled to various places in South America
10. That in April 1854 he took his passage at Rio in the Bella for New York.
Each of which statements is charged as wilful and corrupt perjury, though
the whole constitute, as in the former count, one count. ’




HISTORY OF THE TICHBORNE CASE.
(From 1 Daily News,' March 2, 1874.)
The great Tichborne Case may be compared with those unwieldy old
romances in which the main stream of narrative is always being ob-
structed, and every chapter has its episodes, and every new personage
has his little story to tell. Tale within tale and incident within incident
have, indeed, never been found in Oriental fiction more curiously exempli-
fied than in that wonderful romance of the Law Courts which has at
length bidden its last ‘ farewell to the reader.’
It seems already half a lifetime since paragraphs from the Australian
newspapers brought us the intelligence that there had arrived in Sydney
a man who, though entitled to a baronetcy and 25,000?. per annum, had
for many years led the life of a slaughterman and butcher, concealing his
true name and position. The tale was startling ; but it found faith. Sir
Roger Charles Tichborne, long believed to be dead, had at last come out
of obscurity and retirement, and, with wife and family and retainers,
black and white, was about to set sail for England to claim his own again.
Then lovers of romance got down their Baronetages, and there found it
recorded that Boger Charles Tichborne, eldest son of Sir James and Lady
Tichborne of Tichborne, in the county of Hants, born in 1829, was ‘lost
at sea, off the coast of South America,’ in the spring of 1854. But the
Australian butcher had declared that this was all a mistake. Wrecked
he had been, but not lost; on the contrary, he was alive still, and weigh-
ing nearly twenty stone. Even at that early time there were paragraphs
in the papers mentioning the Osprey, which has since become so familiar
a name; and the story of the rescue was abroad —in a rude and imper-
fect state, it is true, but sufficiently complete to satisfy, to some degree,
while it whetted the public appetite for particulars. The statement then
was, that ‘ when the Bella went down, Sir Roger and a dozen others
escaped in the longboat, and after all but four or five men had been washed
overboard, the Osprey had picked up the survivors.’ It was also an-
nounced that Andrew Bogle, an old negro servant of the family, who
happened to be at Sydney, had recognised the gentleman.
About the beginning of the year 1867 English journals began to take
up the wondrous tale. It was reported that a member of the family, en-
tering the chapel attached to the mansion near Alresford one Sunday
morning, had been startled at seeing the old black domestic, who had
left Tichborne with a pension many years before, and who now reap-
peared, bowed with age, and with grizzled locks, but not to be mistaken
by any who had known him in the past. Then it was told how an enor


mous individual, who had called himself Mr. Taylor, had —quite apart
from a gigantic ‘ E. C. T.’ upon his portmanteau—been utterly unable to
conceal his identity from gossips in the Swan Hotel in the little town of
Alresford. There he had attempted to maintain his incognito by shun-
ning the coffee-room, and living at a private chamber. Old tenants and
old neighbours, however, knew him. The farmers around had hung about
the hotel doors, only anxious to satisfy themselves ‘ whether his knee
turned in/ and his 1 eyebrows twitched.’
One enthusiastic person having obtained, by particular request, what,
in his excitement, he called ‘a full-faced view of his hack,’ at once
‘ slapped his thigh/ and declared that he ‘ would swear to the gentleman
all over the world.’ Then the Australian stranger —forgetting his thirst
for privacy in the enthusiasm of the moment, ‘ recognised many persons/
and even reminded them of little incidents of past years. There was, it
is true, a jarring note in the form of a sturdy old village blacksmith, who
had spent his life at Tichborne, and who, being asked by the gentleman,
‘ Should you think I am Sir Eoger ?’ had been so forgetful of decency and
good manners as to answer, * Ho, I’ll be d if you are.’ But his ques-
tioner had at once reminded him of how, once upon a time, when a little
boy, Eoger had set a dog upon the blacksmith’s cat —an old tom-cat—and
how the blacksmith had run after the boy to chastise him with a flail.
A few years later much grave discussion ardse as to what were the precise
words used on that occasion, and even the sex of the famous animal was
hotly debated; while Sir Eoger and the blacksmith were unhappily at
direct issue on the point of whether the mere mention of the anecdote
had not made the blacksmith ‘ jump.’ But some people are by nature
sceptical; and old Etheridge, the blacksmith of Tichborne, soon came to
be known as the one infidel in a whole neighbourhood of believers.
When, three weeks later, there came news from Paris that the Dow-
ager Lady Tichborne had thrown her arms, as far as they would go, around
the long-lost wanderer, and had declared, in the presence of his attorney,
that ‘ the back of his head was like his father’s,’ and ‘ his ears exactly
like his uncle Edward’s/ the bells of Alresford rang a merry peal; the
joyful news was confirmed that Tichborne House, which, since the death
of Sir Alfred, had been let to a stranger by the trustees of his posthu-
mous son, was going again to be inhabited by one of the old race, who-
had been great folks in that part for nine hundred years. The joy be-
came greater still when it was stated that ‘ Sir Eoger,’ having heard of
the embarrassments of his late younger brother, had determined to pay
all ‘ Sir Alfred’s debts’ as soon as he came into his estates. Old Ether-
idge, indeed, was obstinate, and while shoeing horses in his grimy old
smithy was accustomed still to grunt out rude observations. But, then,
the estate of the late Sir Alfred owed him nothing; and what did Alres-
ford care for what old Etheridge said 1
Among the most conspicuous of the converts in Alresford was Mr.
Hopkins, who, in conjunction with his intimate friend, Mr. Baigent of
Winchester, began to busy himself very early in this matter. Mr. Hop-
kins had been solicitor to Sir Janies Tichborne, but the family had ceased
to employ him. He had also been a trustee of certain Tichborne pro-
perties; but had been removed from that position by the late Sir James,
at which he had expressed himself greatly chagrined. Eoger Tichborne
had never been his client; and letters of Eoger have been brought to
light in which he expresses considerable dislike towards Mr. Hopkins.


But Hopkins had been despatched to Ireland in 1850 by Sir Janies to
obtain bis son’s consent to settlements on coming of age ; and on the
strength of this fact, Mr. Hopkins made an affidavit of his ‘ belief that
the Claimant was bis ‘ old client.’ Hopkins, however, took care to add
that be ‘ could not call to mind his features,’ and that he had been influ-
enced solely by the ‘ knowledge’ that this man had displayed of the
family properties. What this knowledge could have amounted to may
be inferred from the famous Wagga-Wagga will, in which, with a view
of dazzling Mr. Gibbes by similar ‘ knowledge,’ the Claimant disposed of
a number of Tichborne properties, all of which are now known to have
been purely imaginary.
Converts make converts, and success, according to the proverb, be-
gets success. Busy Mr. Baigent, who knew even less of Roger than Mr.
Hopkins, but who kept his eye upon all matters connected with the
Tichborne genealogy, went about industriously spreading the report that
the family solicitor had recognised Sir Roger. Then Colonel Lushing-
ton, the tenant of Tichborne House, who knew less than either,, was so
convinced, that he invited the Claimant and wire to stay with him, and
at a subsequent visit a child of the Claimant was baptised in the chapel
attached to the mansion. Colonel Lushington had never seen Roger,
and had no connection with the family beyond hiring their house, with
the old pictures, at a yearly rent. But he has explained that it was the
‘ knowledge’ shown by the Claimant of the family pictures which had
satisfied him. The Claimant did not tell him that when he came down
under the fictitious name of Mr. Taylor, he had sent old Bogle to ask
the housekeeper at Tichborne to let him look over the old place, or that
he then gave the old black instructions to observe the position of the
family pictures. Bogle, however, has admitted this, and that he at once
made a report to his new master on the subject. Hence the Claimant s-
knowledge of the pictures was certainly not so conclusive as it appeared
to Colonel Lushington. But the sojourn of the Claimant in the ances-
tral home necessarily helped still further in propagating faith in his pre-
tensions, and the baptism of his child in the old chapel was even more
calculated to add prestige. More than that, Colonel Lushington s ill-
advised step necessarily tended to increase that ‘knowledge which, how-
ever obtained, it was clear that the Claimant knew how to use. Few
weeks, indeed, could have elapsed before the Claimant was familiar with
every part of the house in which Roger Tichborne had passed so many
days with his aunt and their daughter, Miss Doughty; and
he necessarily became acquainted with the park and the country round.
A few examples of this kind are as good as a hundred. Having
once established that it was a system with the Claimant, aided by . his
numerous busy supporters, to pick up facts connected with Roger Tich-
borne’s career, and to pass them off upon people as genuine recollections,,
it is hardly necessary to do more in order to dispose of argument ftmnded
on ‘ knowledge’ than to show not only that facts were picked up, but
that they were industriously sought for. Doctors’ Commons furnished
Mr. Holmes, the defendant’s attorney, with the copious information con-
tained in Roger Tiehborne’s will, which had been proved in what ap-
peared the certainty of his decease. Before this document was referred
to the Claimant had been asked by Mr. Gosford, ‘Who made your will 1 ?’
to'which he had replied, ‘ Hopkins, of course.’ But ever after the visit
to Doctors’ Commons the Claimant affirmed that Mr. Slaughter made


Ms will, which was strictly correct. Possibly that piece of ‘ knowledge’
satisfied other people who had not so clear a recollection of the slim
young gentleman who used to come to Tichborne on short visits fifteen
or sixteen years before, either to affirm or deny the enormous Australian
butcher’s claim to be the same man.
After Doctors’ Commons the Claimant’s attorney applied to the Horse
Guards, and not only obtained copies of records of all the movements of
the Carabineers, but exact dates and periods of all leaves of absence
granted to Mr. Tichborne when serving as cornet and lieutenant in that
regiment in Dublin, Cahir, Waterford, Clonmel, and Canterbury, in the
years 1849-53.
Mr. Norris, the dowager’s solicitor, was employed to obtain from
Stonyhurst a list of all the professors and heads of that celebrated Jesuit
College during Mr. Tichborne’s three years of study there. Such docu-
ments would undoubtedly have furnished an ‘impostor’ with valuable
‘ knowledge;’ and it is important to observe that they could not have
been of the slightest use to Eoger Tichborne. It was shortly after the
date at which Mr. Norris charged in his bill for obtaining the list of the
Stonyhurst professors, that the Claimant was examined in Chancery with
regard to this subject, and on the previous day he had written to the
dowager, ‘lam in town preparing for my examination.’ These circum-
stances undoubtedly detract from the value of the ‘ knowledge’ which the
Claimant displayed in examination of the names of the Stonyhurst pro-
fessors, particularly as he pronounced those names, not as they sound to
the ear, but as they might appear to the eye. When he was heard, for
example, to pronounce Father Clough and Petre as ‘ Clo’ and ‘ Petrey,’
some Stonyhurst men who were present were struck at once with the
fact that they never heard those names pronounced other than as ‘ Cluff ’
and ‘ Peter.’
It is easy to see that ‘ knowledge’ of this sort was likely to increase
at a sort of compound interest. Undoubtedly the Claimant did display,
soon after this time, a good deal of knowledge, not only of the move-
ments of the Carabineers in Mr. Tichborne’s time, but of the anecdotical
gossip of that regiment ; so much, indeed, that several officers, unable to
account for the fact, not only came to the conclusion that no impostor
could have known so much, but began to find traces in the voice and
features of the Claimant of their old brother officer. These gentlemen
have since ceased to number themselves among the Claimant’s supporters,
except Major Norbury, who, on his second appearance in the witness-box,
admitted that he had then considerable doubts. They, however, were
certainly not aware that some months before venturing to approach any
single officer among Eoger Tichborne’s old associates, he had taken into
his house Carter, the regimental servant of Mr. Tichborne, besides Ser-
geant M'Cann and Sergeant Quin, late of the Carabineers. Carter was
a coachman, and he had left another employment to come into the
Claimant’s service; yet it is admitted that the Claimant had at that
time neither horses nor carriages. It is certain that the Croydon house-
hold was at that period greatly overstocked with male servants. Bogle
was living there, but then he was a martyr to rheumatics, and unable to
do anything unless it was to chat about old times. Carter may, there-
fore, have been useful in some honest way; but why Quin 1 why M‘Cann 1
not to speak of Moody, Dunn, Fry, and the numerous others, who, though
not quartered in the house, were equally in the Claimant’s service 1 Of


course, the retaining of all these 1 old soldiers’ may have been a mere
eccentricity ; hut when the Australian Claimant was found to he priding
himself on his ‘ knowledge’ of the fact that the officers put a young
donkey into Mr. Tichborne’s bed, and played upon him other practical
jokes —when they heard that he sought to confirm his identity by re-
membering that Cornet Tichborne’s horse, when in Dublin, kicked out
the brains of his military servant, named Clarke —whose fault was it,
under the circumstances, if some persons formed uncharitable conclu-.
sions % B
Still in the first six months after the Claimant’s arrival it could not
be denied that he had won over a great number of persons, especially in
Hampshire and in the neighbourhood of Poole, where the Tichborne
family had property. They knew that he was an illiterate man; but
then they were told by Mr. Baigent and Mr. Hopkins that it could be
shown by Roger’s letters that he made mistakes in grammar, which was
quite true, but a high authority has justly pointed out that these errors
were rather such as a foreigner would make than such as are peculiar
to an unlettered Englishman. Then they knew that the Claimant’s
habits and manners were not those of an English gentleman. But Mr.
Baigent was positive that Roger Tichborne’s chief associates were ser-
vants and stableboys, which was an entire mistake, though not at that
time very easily disproved.
But while the system of converting Carabineers and Alresford
and Poole folks was in full operation, and volumes of affidavits were
carefully circulated among hesitating witnesses’, there were some who
were aware of the full force of the fact that the Claimant held studiously
aloof from all persons who had known Roger Tichborne intimately.
Upon this point his family could be under no. mistake; for there was
not a solitary member of the numerous Tichborne and Doughty families
who received a visit, or was even allowed, except by a ruse , to see him
for some months after his arrival. There was his dear friend Mr. Cos-
ford. About Roger’s feeling towards that gentleman there has been, and
could be, no dispute. Everybody knows that the Claimant has positively
asserted,’that besides making him his executor, he confided to him a
secret of the most delicate kind; and, moreover, intrusted him with a
duty demanding the most devoted friendship and the highest prudence
and discretion. Yet the man calling himself Roger Tichborne left Mr
Gosford to track him out at an hotel at Gravesend, and when his ol
friend arrived there, rushed up to a room, locked himself in, and refused
to see him. , , ,
There were Roger’s cousins, the Greenwoods, at Brookwood, about
half-an-hour’s ride from Alresford. In no house, except Lady Doug ty s
house at Tichborne, had the real Roger been more welcome; but though
the Claimant was frequently at Alresford and at Tichborne, he never
went near Brookwood; nay, when Mrs. Greenwood expressly invited
him, he wrote the well-known ‘My Cousing Kate letter, excusing him-
self on the ground of headache, and giving a promise to come, which he
never kept. It was the same at the house of his uncles, the Seymours,
at Knoyle, and at the residences of all those numerous cousins whose
names are mentioned affectionately by Roger. They received no visit
from the long-lost Roger. Mr. Seymour, indeed, contrived to see him at
house of Mr. Hopkins; but, after questioning and examining him,
he pronounced him an impostor. The Claimant had been in England


four months when that famous interview at Croydon between him, Mr.
and Mrs. Eadcliffe, and Mrs. Towneley was brought about, not spon-
taneously, but by arrangement between the attorneys, so that the names
of the parties coming were known beforehand. Every one has read the*
story of that interview at which the Claimant addressed Mrs. Towneley,
whom Eoger had known intimately, in the words, ‘ How do you do,
Kate V evidently mistaking her for Mrs. Eadcliffe, while he not only
addressed Mrs. Eadcliffe as Lucy, but continued to converse with both
cousins under that evidently mistaken impression of their identity. Yet
Mrs. Eadcliffe was in her maiden days that same Miss Doughty for whom
Eoger had so strong an affection.
The scientific probing by Sir John Coleridge of the Claimant’s igno-
rance of Eoger Tichborne’s life in all its relations and experiences, though
not showy, or designed for popular amusement, was in fact masterly and
■complete. It was this long cross-examination which finally exploded the
Claimant’s pretence to be Eoger Tichborne, and furnished the sure found-
ations of that criminal indictment which has brought the Claimant to a
convict prison. If Sir John Coleridge would but have taken him through
all the matters he had picked up since, with funds and opportunities at
his command —this ‘ picking up’ became the business of his life-—-doubtless
a show of knowledge would have been presented which would have car-
ried conviction to the uninitiated. But Sir John’s object was to find out
what he did not know, and yet what he must have known if he were
Eoger Tichborne. When to this was superadded the damaging exposure
of the fraudulent devices to which he had resorted to maintain his claims,
and the discreditable circumstances of his past life, the case was really at
an end.
Long before this time, however, the Tichborne family had discovered
abundant evidence that the man claiming to be the dowager’s son was, in
fact, the son of Orton, the Wapping butcher. An accidental discovery
by a gentleman sent out to make inquiries in Wagga-Wagga led to a
search, in the month of September 1867, in Wapping, where, by exhibit-
ing the photograph, the gentleman prosecuting the inquiry found, not
what he expected, but something still more startling. It was on showing
it to the landlady of the now-famous Globe public-house that he was in-
formed by that lady that she did not remember any neighbour or neigh-
bour’s son in former years like that; but did well remember a stranger
of vast bulk making inquiries about Orton and other old inhabitants of
Wapping on the previous Christmas-day, the very day, in fact, of the
Claimant’s arrival. This mysterious person, she said, was the very ori-
ginal of the photograph. Farther evidence was then found that the
Orton sisters, who had been very poor, had suddenly become prosperous;
and moreover that Charley Orton had confided to a friend in the butcher-
ing trade that he had a brother who was entitled to large property, and
had promised him 51. a month at once, with a future prospect of 2000/.,
4 when he got his estates.’ Charles Orton, as is well known, confessed
the whole affair when the payments became irregular; and the Claimant,
who at first denied all knowledge of Wapping, was finally compelled to
admit his visit to make inquiries on the Christmas-eve, his allowance of
■SZ. a month to Charles, besides allowances to the Orton sisters, for which
he could give no satisfactory or consistent explanation. The Commission
sent out to Melipilla, in South America, to examine the folks whom the
Claimant had admitted to be old friends of his there, resulted, as is well


known, in their all deposing that they only knew him as Arthur Orton;
and his old employer’s widow in Australia not only said the same, hut
produced evidence of the fact in the shape of ledgers of her late husband.
There is no need to go through the marvellously complete chain of
circumstances which renders it inconceivable that the defendant can he
anybody hut the butcher’s son. Those who imagine that his conviction
on all the counts of the indictment has resulted from the jury putting
more faith in the ‘Yea’ of one set of witnesses than in the ‘ Aay’ of an-
other set have certainly not gone very deep into the evidence. It was,
in fact, the marvellous completeness of the circumstances, including records
and other documentary evidence, all independently leading to the same
conclusion, which constituted the strength of the prosecution, and placed
the guilt of the defendant, both in affirming himself on oath to he Tich-
borne and denying that he is Orton, beyond all reasonable doubt.
It was not until the 30th of July 1867, and two following days,
that the whole family circles of Tichborne and Seymour, and a number
of Carabineer officers who had been most intimate with Eoger, had a
full opportunity of seeing him. For those entire three days the Claimant
was under examination. The great hall of the Law Institution, in which
these proceedings took place, was crowded by aunts and uncles and
cousins of Eoger, who had known him well; but there was no recogni-
tion between them and the man who claimed to be their relative; and
with one accord they pronounced him an impostor. The only exceptions
were Mr. Biddulph and Mr. (afterwards Sir) Frederick Constable, who
were only remote connections; and both these gentlemen have stated
that they did not personally recognise him, but came to the conclusion
that he must be the same person from his being able to remind them of
certain facts in connection with Mr. Tichborne’s past life. Neither
Mr. Biddulph nor Mr. Constable was of course aware that when in Aus-
tralia the Claimant had shown himself entirely ignorant of Eoger Tich-
borne’s history and connections, as proved, not by somebody’s memory,
but by written records; nor did they know that he had now access to
•correspondence, and probably to diaries of Eoger, which had been reli-
giously preserved by the dowager.
They were not aware that he had taken into his house the old servant
of Mr. Tichborne, and had engaged several other persons who could give
him information; nor did they probably suspect that there were at
that time at least half-a-dozen persons busily engaged in procuring for
his use documentary information. It is easy to see that in this way a
considerable amount of knowledge might be acquired by an impostor.
But what these persons did not perceive was, that in a case of disputed
identity it is not by a man’s knowledge of what he might have learnt,
but by his ignorance of what he must have known if he were the true
man, that he is to be judged. For example, what number of anecdotes
about life in the. regiment could weigh against the admitted fact that
the Claimant s mind on the subject of his life in Paris was a mere blank?
Eoger Tichborne, as was well known, was born and reared in Paris, re-
sided there till his seventeenth year, frequently revisited the city, main-
tained old friendships of childhood, and parted there with many dear
friends and acquaintances after a visit of three weeks immediately before
embarking for South America—he being then in his twenty-fourth year.
Let him be able to tell ten thousand tales of practical jokes played off
upon Cornet Tichborne in Dublin, Cahir, Clonmel, and Waterford—still


how could we explain his total blank of memory with regard to all Paris
associations, save on the assumption that, being ignorant of Prance and
the French language, he had found it impossible to get hold of old ser-
could instruct him as Carter Bogle, and M‘Cann
could undoubtedly do with regard to Tichborne, Ireland, and Canter
I)Ur We have dwelt at some length upon the subject of the Claimant’s.
< feate of memory,’ because the history of the case lies m these beginnings.
Totny one who will carefully study the examinations of his numerous
witnesses on the civil trial, it will he apparent that; this is. the toy to the
extraordinary amount of support which he obtained. lhere are m ie
tol really impressed them was that the Claimant ™
able to remember something which they remembered. But how easy
many T y ears i^ & of y on^eittie^side,* that Smonyrf that kind
is i/some continental systems of jurisprudence altogether excluded.


THE TICHBORNE TRIAL:
THE SUMMING-UP
BY
THE LOUD CHIEF JUSTICE OF ENGLAND,
IN THE COURT OF QUEEN’S BENCH.
First Day, Thursday, January 29, 1874.
I CONGRATULATE you, gentlemen, with all my
heart, on having at length arrived at the last stage
of this very protracted and in many respects very
painful inquiry. I wish I could hold out to you
any reasonable hope that the last stage of the case
would also be a short one. When, however, Hook
at the extent of time over which the inquiry
ranges, at the host of witnesses whose testimony
we shall have to consider, at the multitude of
documents and letters which we also shall have
more or less to go through, and the complicated
nature of the facts involved in the inquiry, I fear,
gentlemen, I shall have to draw somewhat upon
your time and patience, with a view to placing the
facts before you in their various lights and bear-
ings. But, gentlemen, you have shown such un-
wearied attention to the case, such inexhaustible
patience, such a desire to get at all the facts in
order to understand it, that I am quite sure you
will bear with me while I make those observations
upon it which appear to me to be necessary to
enable you to arrive at a satisfactory decision.
Gentlemen, I have said that this is in many re-
spects a painful case, and assuredly it has been—
and this I say not only in reference to many of the
issues involved, but by reason of the course which
has been pursued in the conduct of the defence.
It is most distressing for a Judge presiding at a
trial to find himself in frequent conflict with one
of the counsel in the cause, and that unfortunately
has been the case over and over again in the course
of this trial. It is a very painful fact so far as the
Judge is concerned, because he cannot help being
conscious that in the minds of the bystanders, who
only see the case on the surface, it may have the
effect of creating a suspicion that partiality and
prejudice operate upon the mind of the Judge.
When point after point, either of attack or de-
fence, is taken of the most frivolous and unten-
able nature, the Judge has no alternative but to
overrule such points, and if similar instances are
multiplied, either through ignorance of the law,
or, as would appear to be the case here, through
a desire to produce an effect upon the outside
world, and to lead them to suppose that the coun-
sel on’his side of the case are treated unfairly, the
judge has of course no alternative. He must do
his duty, whatever may be the meaning or the
character of the points so taken. And the eternal
recurrence to this line of conduct must of itself
and of necessity produce an unpleasant impression
on the mind.
But, gentlemen, this is a very minor part of the
matter. Our position was rendered painful also
from the fact that we had again and again to in-
terfere with the address of the learned counsel in
order to correct misstatements and misrepresenta-
tions which could not be allowed to pass without
such interference on our part. When witnesses
are misrepresented, when evidence is misstated,
when facts are perverted—and that not for the
purpose of argument in the cause, but in order to
lay the foundation of foul imputations and unjust
accusations against parties and witnesses—when
one unceasing torrent of invective and foul slander
is sent forth wherewith to blacken the character
of men whose reputations have been hitherto with-
out reproach, then it is impossible for Judges to
remain silent. It is not enough to say that the
learned counsel should be allowed to go on with
his address to the end, and that the Judge should
wait until it is his turn to speak, and then to set
right matters which have been misrepresented and
distorted. And especially is it not so in a case like
this, where weeks and months might elapse before
the Judge would have an opportunity of express-
ing his opinion, for in the mean while what might
happen? A temporary impression—perhaps that
is all that it was hoped to achieve—might have
gone forth fatal to the honour and the character
of the person assailed ; wounds might have been
inflicted which possibly never could have been
healed. Therefore it was that we felt it to be our
duty to interpose and check the torrent of undis-
guised and unlimited abuse in which the learned
counsel for the defendant thought proper to in-
dulge. And in what way, gentlemen, were our
remonstrances met ? In an ordinary case, if in the
heat of argument, in the fervour of oratory, in
the zeal with which the counsel engages in a case,
in the examination or cross-examination of a wit-
ness, the strict bounds of proprietymay sometimes,
and not unnaturally, be overstepped—but this I
say for the honour of the Bar of England, that
B


happens very rarely indeed—a word nay, a hint
—from the judge is sufficient to restrain the over-
flowing zeal within its proper and legitimate limits.
But we were met by contumely and disrespect, y
insult, by covert allusions to Scroggs and Jeffries
—-judges of infamous repute—as if in days when
such a spirit as theirs animated the administration
of iustice the learned counsel would not have been
quickly laid by the heels and put aside. We were
met by suggestions that we were interfering witn
the liberties and privileges of the Bar.
G entlemen, I will undertake to say that no three
Judges ever sat on this bench or any other to
whom the liberties of the Bar were more dear or
more sacred than they are to my learned colleagues
and myself. We know full well that the freedom
of the Bar is essential to the administration of
justice. We know th&t it would be <m ill dciy
indeed for the country if the freedom of the
Bar were ever interfered with. It may be, and it
was here, abused, but this is a rare, a singular ex-
ception, which perhaps only proves the rule. We
did not interfere with the privileges of the Bar ;
we inteifered to check the license of unscrupulous
abuse, to restrain that which, instead of being fair
legitimate argument, amounted to misstatement,
misrepresentation, and slander. . The Bar of Eng-
land—as high-minded, noble-spirited, and gene-
rous a body of men as are to be found in the
world—have never claimed slander as one of their
privileges, or considered its restraint as an inva-
sion of their rights:
‘ Slander,
Whose edge is sharper than the sword; whose tongue
Out-venoms all the worms of Nile; whose breath
Rides on the posting winds, and doth belie
All corners of the world : Kings, Queens, and States,
Maids, matrons—nay, the secrets of the grave,
This vip’rous slander enters.’
The Bar of England will never claim that as a
weapon to be used in the advocacy which they so
nobly oarry on and exercise. But here, gentle-
men, unhappily, the living and the dead have been
equally aspersed.
There never was in the history of jurisprudence
a case in which such an amount of imputation and
invective has been used before, and I sincerely
hope there never will be another. Although the
prosecution has been instituted by Her Majesty’s
Government and carried on onbehalfof the Crown,
you have been told that every one connected with
it, from the highest to the lowest, counsel, solici-
tors, clerks, detectives—everybody is engaged in a
foul conspiracy—has resorted to the most abomi-
nable means in order to corrupt witnesses, against
whom I should imagine that nothing was to be
said, except this, that they might have been mis-
taken in the evidence they gave have been
charged with taking bribes and committing per-
jury. Imputations of this kind are thrown out
right and left. One man is called a villain, against
whom there is no more reason for bringing such a
charge than against any of us. The authorities of
Stonyhurst are accused upon no ground of any
sort or kind, not only with not teaching morality
to their students, but with the design of corrupt-
ing their minds. They are said to have adopted a
system under which youths are brought up to be
men with the minds of women—with a covert hint
at abominations half revealed, but from which
one recoils and shudders; and all this with no
more foundation than if the imputations had been
brought against the authorities of Eton, "West-
minster, or any other of our great public schools,
lhe dead are served in the same way. Lady
Doughty is charged with hypocrisy, because, as it
is alleged, having discovered that her nephew had
attempted the honour of her daughter, and had
succeeded in that attempt, she shows him to the
door with bland smiles and with honeyed words.
Captain Birkett, who is gone to his account, who
went down in the Bella, is actually charged with
having scuttled the ship in which he unfortunately
perished.
Who could conceive it possible that such vile
and slanderous imputations could have been
brought forward in a Court of Justice? I have,
I must say, felt it the more keenly because the
learned counsel, in the outset of his address,
thought proper to parade before you an opinion
which I had once expressed myself on an occasion
when I believed I was speaking in the name of
the Bar of England, and I am happy to say that
opinion received their unanimous assent.. I at-
tempted on that occasion to draw a distinction
between that which was legitimate and that which
was forbidden in advocacy, and I illustrated the
distinction between the fas and the nefas of ad-
vocacy by reference to the difference between the
sword of the warrior and the dagger of the assas-
sin. The learned counsel for the defendant began
by citing that illustration and applying it to his
learned adversary, charging him with having used
the dagger of the assassin in the conduct of this
prosecution. lam bound to say that a more un-
founded charge than that was never made. But
that the learned counsel for the defendant should
begin by citing with approbation that expression
of my opinion, and then proceed to exhibit all
nay, I will not say all, much more than all—the
nefas of advocacy which I had therein denounced,
I must say did surprise and astonish me beyond
measure. It seemed as though the learned coun-
sel paraded that sentiment merely for the purpose
of mockery, so utterly and entirely did he disre-
gard it. It has been very painful, indeed, for me
to make these observations, but the occasion calls
for it. The liberty of the Bar I should have
thought, until this time, incapable of abuse ; but
I have seen and heard it abused. I think the
proper corrective for it is censure from the Bench
—censure which I believe will meet, as it deserves
to meet, with the universal concurrence of the Bar
of England. (Suppressed applause.)
And now, gentlemen, passing away from these
unpleasant and painful topics, I come to the mat-
ter of the inquiry that is before us. The first
thing, then, to consider is What are the issues
that you have to decide ? The first is the ques-
tion whether or not the defendant is Roger Tich-
borne. That is the great, the main, the principal
assignment of perjury in this case.. There are
many subordinate assignments, but in the main
they resolve themselves into that. As to whether
he resided in Paris from his birth,_ whether Cha-
tillon was his tutor, and so on—it is unnecessary
to dwell upon these at length, because they ar-
range themselves under the main and principal
head to which I have referred. If the defendant
has sworn falsely in saying he is Roger Tichborne,
it is plain he swore falsely in saying he resided in
Paris, that he had Chatillon for his tutor, and in
making those other various statements. Then
another principal allegation is, that he has per-
jured himself in saying that he is not Arthur
Orton. Of course, if he is Arthur Orton, he is
not Roger Tichborne ; and the leading question
in the case is, whether he is Roger Tichborne. It
is quite true that, if he be Arthur Orton, he can-
not be Roger Tichborne; but the converse of the


proposition does not hold, for he may not be Ar-
thur Orton, and yet he may not be Roger Tich-
borne. It is now raised as one of the issues of the
case, ‘ls he Arthur Orton?’ Subordinate again
to these questions are minor questions, such as,
‘ Did he go to Wapping, and did he do this, that,
or the other connected with the career of Arthur
Orton?’ And you will have to consider whether
in swearing he was not Arthur Orton he has sworn
falsely. If you come to the conclusion that he is
Arthur Orton, the second of the charges is neces-
sarily involved in the first. But, among the minor
charges is one which stands clear of the question
whether he is Roger Tichborne or not—l mean the
assignment of perjury with regard to Lady Rad-
cliffe; because, being Roger Tichborne, he may
have sworn falsely with regard to Lady Radcliffe.
For instance, supposing, knowing himself to be
Roger Tichborne, but knowing that it is alleged
that a certain sealed packet was left behind by
him when he went abroad, the nature of which he
may possibly have forgotten, or the circumstances
under which it was given may possibly have passed
from his recollection knowing that Lady Rad-
cliffe would be called as a witness against him,
and feeling desirous of removing out of his way so
formidable a difficulty, he may have resorted to
falsehood and perjury to get out of the difficulty
in which he finds himself placed. He may, there-
fore, being Roger Tichborne, have resorted to this
vile and wicked f alsehood to relieve himself of
such a difficulty. Therefore, in that case, although
not guilty of perjury in asserting himself to be
Roger Tichborne, he would be guilty of perjury
for having preferred a false accusation against the
lady in question. There would, therefore, still
remain the question, if he were Roger Tichborne,
whether he had committed perjury in respect to
that statement. But the main and great issue is,
is he Roger Tichborne ?
Now, complaints have been made by the learned
counsel for the defendant that so large an area of
inquiry should have been included in this indict-
ment. Gentlemen, in my opinion, it was impossi-
ble to avoid it. It would have been idle to bring
this case before you without bringing in the great
and fundamental question—ls he Roger Tichborne
or is he not ? As to the degree of aggravated or
mitigated guilt involved, everything depends upon
whether he is Roger Tichborne, and whether he has
put forward a claim for an iniquitous and detest-
able purpose. The difference, morally speaking,
is at the first blush obvious. If, not being Sir
Roger Tichborne, he has, with a view to deprive
another person of his birthright and fortune, put
forth an iniquitous claim, it is difficult to conceive
a more abominable fraud; and if that fraud has
been attempted to be carried into effect by perjury,
it is impossible to conceive perjury more wicked or
more deserving of the heaviest punishment which
the law can award. Under any circumstances,
gentlemen, perjury is a wicked offence, but very
different would it be if the claim was a just one,
and the man, knowing there were weak points in
his case, should seek to make those weak points
or to remove them out of his way, by
false evidence. Supposing a man, knowing him-
self to be guilty, shouldsuborn awitness to provehe
was not at a given place at a given time, he is guilty
of suborning perjury ; but supposing he was inno-
cent, and induced some one who was anxious for
his safety, and believed firmly in his innocence, to
come forward, how different it would be from the
crime here charged against the defendant! So, if
the defendant, knowing his claim to be well found-
ed and just, should, in order to cover some weak
points in his case which made the statements ap-
pear inconsistent with truth on oath, have done so,
he would be guilty of perjury ; but how different
would be the case where perjury was resorted to
to accomplish a wicked and iniquitous fraud ! In
order, therefore, to see what was the offence com-
mitted it was necessary to embrace the larger ques-
tions.
I know there are persons, and persons in author-
ity, who have said, ‘ Why don’t they put this man
upon his trial upon one of the short questions;
whether, for instance, he was at Stony hurst;
whether the Bella went down as described; or
whether the story of Lady Radcliffe was true.’
Persons who have thus thought have not thought
sufficiently on the matter; because when you come
to think of it, it would have been impossible that
any one of the minor points should be submitted
to the jury without the whole question being
brought forward. It is true the prosecution would
have been crippled, because, having put the de-
fendant on his trial upon one of the subordinate
issues, they could not have gone into the whole
question with any decency. But the defendant
would have had this advantage—that, while they
would have been restrained within the limits they
had voluntarily prescribed to themselves, he would
be entitled to go into the whole question from the
beginning to the end. If the learned counsel for
the prosecution had suggested the charge of per-
jury in relation, for instance, to the defendant
having said he had been at Stonyhurst for three
years, the answer would have been a most plausi-
ble answer on the part of the defence—‘Why, you
have put him upon his trial upon one of these
minor issues, because you do not dare to put him
upon his trial on the whole main issue involved
in this inquiry. You knew he was Sir Roger Tich-
borne ; but you think that, upon these minor
issues, he would not have the means of proving
himself to be Sir Roger Tichborne, and conse-
quently, in order to crush an innocent man, you
have resorted to this pitiful device. But we will
not be bound by whatyou have done. We may not
be able to prove that he was the Roger Tichborne at
Stonyhurst; but we will prove that he is the Roger
Tichborne at Stonyhurst by proving that he is the
Roger Tichborne of the Carabineers ; because if he
is the Roger Tichborne of the one he must neces-
sarily be the Roger Tichborne of the other.’ That
is the vantage ground which, by pursuing the
course suggested by the learned counsel for the
defendant, the prosecution would have afforded to
his client. In my opinion, that would have been
unwise, as well as altogether unworthy of a State
prosecution of this kind. When it is complained
that the indictment has embraced the allegation
of perjury in the matter of Lady Radcliffe, my
astonishment knows no bounds. I must say that
it would have been in the highest degree unworthy
of the prosecution if they had not made that part
of the case an essential part of this indictment.
From what you have heard from the learned coun-
sel for the defendant, do you think, gentlemen,
he would have been too scrupulous to use this
species of argument? Would he not have said,
‘ Upon the former trial the case of Lady Radcliffe
and the sealed packet was made the crucial test of
the identity of the defendant. You might have
made it so now, You have not done so. Why
not ? Because you knew that the charge of per-
jury against the defendant was not a well-founded
one. 1 hold that to be the strongest argument,’ the
learned counsel would continue, ‘ that this man is


Roger Tichborne.’ Therefore, gentlemen I think
the prosecution had a perfect right to submit the
whole question whether the defendant is. xioger
Tichborne, and are right in making the inquiry
in reference to Lady Radcliffe an essential part or
the case. , ,
Now, gentlemen, the question for you will be,
first and foremost, is the defendant Roger Tich-
borne’ The issue is substantially the same as
was raised in the trial in the Court of Common
Pleas, but the position of the parties is altogether
reversed. The defendant’s counsel, in his open-
ing address, boldly challenged your verdict, not
merely for the purpose of acquitting his . client,
but, as he said, for the purpose of insuring the
restoration to him of his estates. ‘lf you, by your
verdict, should acquit him,’ it was said, ‘their
restoration must follow as a necessary conse-
quence. The people of England will rise with
unanimous fervour, and they will find the means
to enable him immediately to recover the estates
of which he has been dispossessed.’ If, gentle-
men, the restoration of the estates should neces-
sarily follow a verdict in favour of the defendant,
you should, upon the conflicting evidence brought
"before you, pause long before you find that ver-
dict. But his restoration to the possession of
those estates would not follow as a consequence
of your verdict. Here is a case where a man
claims property which is in the possession of
another. In such a case he has to satisfy a jury
beyond all reasonable doubt that he is entitled to
that which he claims. The law of every country,
as well as that of England, premises in favour, of
possession; and I cannot conceive a case in which
the wisdom and propriety of that doctrine are
more signally illustrated than in that of a man
who submits to voluntary exile for years; who
gives no tidings, direct or indirect, of his exist-
ence ; who allows rights to arise upon the suppo-
sition of his death, expectations to be formed,
the disappointment of which must be attended
with pain, and distress to be incurred ; and who
then suddenly comes forward, springs up as from
the dead, and says, ‘ I am the long-lost man;
get out of the way, you who have got possession
of the estates under an honest belief of your un-
doubted and indisputable right, and stand aside,
and make room for me.’ They look at him, and
fail to recognise in him the man he asserts him-
self to be, and they say, ‘We do not believe in
you ; we won’t yield to you. Why have you been
thus long in obscurity and exile if you are the
man ?’ But while that is the case with regard to
a claim to the possession of an estate, the position
of the parties is very different when the claimant
is charged with attempting to gain possession by
fraud and perjury. When it is a claim to. an
estate the claimant must establish before the jury
that he is what he claims to be ; but when it is
sought to visit him with the penalties of the law
for having sworn falsely the position is reversed
—it is for them to prove that perjury beyond all
reasonable doubt, and therefore the question is
not so much whether the defendant is Roger Tich-
borne as whether the prosecution has proved that
he is not Roger Tichborne.
Now, the question is one of identity, and it is
no doubt one of the most difficult questions with
which courts of justice and juries have to deal.
They are mostly cases in which the persons to be
identified have only been seen for a moment or for
a short time. A man stops you on the highway,
puts a pistol to your head, and demands your
purse; a garotter seizes you by the throat, and
■while you are half strangled, his confederate rifles
your pocket; a burglar invades your dwelling by
night, and you have only a rapid glance at your
unwelcome visitor—in all these cases the oppor-
tunity of observation is so brief that mistake is
possible ; and yet the lives of people would not be
safe if we did not act on recollections, even though
they are so brief. There are cases in which the
recollection of witnesses has proved faulty. _ I
recollect a case on the Western Circuit in which
two men were tried for murder and both convicted
—one on his identity being sworn to by numerous
persons. If execution had followed as rapidly then
as it was accustomed to do in earlier times, he
would have been executed; but it was proved af-
terwards, beyond all possibility of doubt, that
those who had sworn to the identity of the man
were mistaken. He had committed an offence of
picking a pocket hundreds of miles away,, and when
the murder had been committed he was in confine-
ment at the time under that charge. There was
not the slightest doubt in the world about it, and
the man was released. I tried a case myself not
long ago at Hereford, where a man was charged
with night poaching and with a most serious as-
sault upon the keeper, who had been most foully
and cruelly used. The keeper swore positively to
the prisoner. He was a respectable man, head-
keeper to a nobleman in the county ; nobody could
doubt his veracity or intention to tell the truth.
He swore to the man most positively. I had not
myself the slightest doubt of his testimony. The
jury convicted the prisoner. It turned out after-
wards that we were all wrong, for it was proved
satisfactorily that he had been taken for another
man. And, therefore, I quite agree with what was
said by the learned counsel for the defendant—
that identity is a very difficult point; and here it
is the question at issue.
But in the cases I am speaking of you have
merely the evidence of persons who had only a
short and casual opportunity of becoming ac-
quainted with the appearance of the person whose
identity is disputed. Here we have a much wider
range of inquiry, but at the same time it is an in-
quiry which has its own peculiar difficulties. For
whereas in the cases to which I have been referring
the recollection is called forth speedily after the
event, here we are dealing with the identity of a
man alleged to have been dead ever since the year
1854 now 20 years ago —and the asserted identity
of another man who has disappeared from the
knowledge of all those who knew the undoubted
man for a great number of years—from the year
1854 till, at all events, the year 1866 or 186/, when
he first came forward. If in ordinary cases evi-
dence of identity is calculated to mislead us or to
embarrass us, how much more so must it be in a
case like the present, where you have a host ol
witnesses confronted with an equal number on the
one side and the other ; where you have an entire
family—for I really do not value the evidence of
Mr. Biddulph—on the one side, but yon have on
the other a whole body of persons as familiar with
Boger Tichborne, whose existence is in dispute, as
it is possible for people to be, denying the identity
of the Claimant; and, on the other hand, the mo-
ther of the undoubted Boger Tichborne asserting
that he is her own son -—heaps, I may say, of wit-
nesses coming forward to say that he is not the
man, an equal or perhaps greater number comin 0
forward to say that he is ?
And we have the matter still further compli-
cated by this extraordinary circumstance, that
while the defendant says ‘ I am Boger Tichborne,


and produces numerous witnesses to swear that he
is, and another vast array of witnesses come for-
ward to say that he is not, we have the identity
of the person who claims to be Roger Tichborne
asserted with reference to a totally different indi-
vidual. And what is equally strange, the same
conflict which occurs with reference to his identity
with Roger Tichborne occurs with reference to his
identity with that other person—Arthur Orton;
and you have witness after witness produced to
say that he is Arthur Orton, and witness after
witness declaring that he is not. Now, it strikes
me very forcibly that to a certain extent both sets
of witnesses are right and both sets of witnesses
are wrong. It is impossible to suppose that there
is not a likeness between the defendant and Roger
Tichborne. It is equally impossible, I think, to
suppose that there is not a likeness between the
defendant and Arthur Orton. And possibly in the
end that may serve to solve many difficulties which
the evidence displays. I have been deeply im-
pressed with the fact that the witnesses who de-
scribe Arthur Orton have in many instances de-
scribed him in the very same terms—in almost the
identical language employed by witnesses in the
other part of the case in describing Roger Tich-
borne. It may be that there we shall by and by
find a solution of the difficulty.
But I am anticipating matter which, of course,
will come in its proper place afterwards. All I
have pointed out to you is the complicated and
difficult nature of the inquiry, so far as regards the
evidence of witnesses with reference to personal
appearance. If the case rested there, if you had
no other evidence before you than the conflicting
testimony of those who say he is Roger Tichborne
and of those who say he is not, even in that case
you would have to consider which set of witnesses
is the more likely to be right; and if you found
that all reasonable probability pointed the one
way, while improbability was to be found on the
other side, you might make up your minds upon
the conflicting testimony of the witnesses who
have come forward to assert or to deny the iden-
tity of the defendant. But fortunately, gentle-
men, the case does not rest there. We have got
besides this conflict of evidence and opinion a mass
of facts in this case which may serve to guide you
to a right conclusion. We have the life of Roger
Tichborne portrayed before us in a manner which I
think cannot mislead us, and with that you will by
and by have to compare the knowledge and recol-
lections of the defendant. By means of the ascer-
tained facts you will be able to judge of the value
of the evidence which has been adduced on the one
side and on the other.- But you have more than
that. You have that to which I should urge you
above all to direct your anxious and vigilant atten-
tion. You have the conduct of the defendant, and
you will have carefully to examine that conduct
and see how far it is compatible or reconcilable
with his being Roger Tichborne. Most of it is ad-
mitted and beyond doubt; and the facts of Roger
Tichborne’s life, and the facts which enable us to
judge of his character and conduct, his views and
intentions, and the conduct of the defendant when
he comes forward to assert himself to be Roger
Tichborne, are, to my mind, that upon which even-
tually you will have to base your decision, and de-
termine for yourselves the great issue involved in
this inquiry:
The first thing, then, is to familiarise ourselves
with the life of the undoubted Roger Tichborne
during the period of his existence, so far as we
can, and to consider the various circumstances of
that life—personal, intellectual, moral, social, all
that you have to make the sum and substance of
the individual man. Fortunately, we have most
important materials for so doing. Roger Tich-
borne was an habitual letter-writer; he was, in
that respect, almost like a school-girl; and you
find him writing in the full confidence of his heart
to two, at all events, of his correspondents, mak-
ing us thereby acquainted with the events of his
life, and with the thoughts, feelings, and passions
which were at work within him, so that we are
enabled, by following these letters, to track him,
step by step, as it were, through all the phases of
his life, so as to know his hopes and intentions.
By that means, when we have got the picture of
Roger Tichborne within and without clearly be-
fore us, we shall be able to judge whether the de-
fendant has shown himself to be that man, or
whether, in the fair view of the whole facts ex-
hibited by him, you must not come to the conclu-
sion that he is not, and cannot be, Roger Tich-
borne. In addition to this, there is another matter
of inquiry equally important. One man may re-
semble another. There have been such instances
in the world, or imposture would never have been
attempted. No man attempts to personate an-
other who does not more or less resemble him.
If a fair man represented himself as a dark one—
if a tall man came to take the place of a short
one, or a stout man to take the place of a lean
man—if a man with a turn-up nose sought to re-
present a man with an aquiline nose, without
being able to give an account for the change—in
each case such a person would be repudiated with'
scorn. Those acquainted with the history of ju-
risprudence know that imposture has been tried
on a large scale, and succeeded for a time, though
in the end it failed. We know there are such in-
stances. We know that there are cases of rela-
tions so alike that casual observers might mistake
them. Shakespeare, in his Comedy of Errors,
presents us with the instances of his two Dromios,
and we have their prototypes in the still more
amusing but less familiar Mencechmi of Plautus.
But no two men were ever alike within. If there
could be two alike, to begin with, the mind and
memory would very soon cease to be the same,
for since the Creation no two lives were ever the
same, and therefore no two men were ever the
same. The acquirements of education and the
influence of the passions would soon work a
change. If one man claims to be another, it may
fairly be asked if he knew what passed in the
mind of the man he claims to be, and in this case
we happen to have such knowledge before us.
There is no part of this case more deserving of
your attention than that which refers to the an-
swers of the defendant, in the examination he
had to undergo as to the recollections of his life.
In my opinion, and in that of every reflecting
man, there cannot be a better test of identity
than that to which I have referred, provided
always that the inquiry be conducted under con-
ditions which will insure the accuracy of the re-
sult. Two things are to be avoided. On the one
hand, we must not require too much proof, but,
on the other hand, we must not be satisfied with
too little. If you require of him some very tri-
fling individual circumstances you will be acting
unfairly towards him, or if you set the memory
of a multitude of witnesses against that of a single
individual, it would be unjust. Take men who
were m the same class at school, who were toge-
ther in the same college, who were in the same
regiment, and you will find that occurrences make


no impression on the mind of one man, while they
will remain upon the mind of another. Every
man who will take the trouble to recollect his
early life will recollect some circumstance which
has remained upon his mind, and find that he can
recall some fact which another person who was
present at the same time may not be able to re-
collect. It would not be fair, therefore, to say,
‘Here are half-a-dozen different persons who
were present on a certain occasion, and they all
recollect a certain thing which you forget;’ and
still less fair would it be if each of those indivi-
duals were allowed to set up his memory and say,
‘You are not the man because you don’t remem-
ber all the different things that those six persons
remember.’ It would be unfair and unjust to
deal with a man in that way; but there are things
which a man cannot forget, and in respect of those
things you are entitled to require that a man
should exhibit some knowledge. Eut here, again,
yon must be on your guard, because things of im-
portance pass away and are forgotten ; hut if you
find a multitude of things, which, you cannot
fairly believe a man can forget, passing away and
forgotten, it is a very different thing. There are
things which are habitual and which the mind
retains in the aggregate of things. You went to
school at a given hour, you had your .meals at a
given hour, you went through a certain routine
at college, and in business. Yon do not remem-
ber that you went into school at a given hour on
a certain day, but the aggregate remains, and
you know the hour from the habits of months or
years at which you did certain things. Here
again you have a fair test of knowledge. When
you come, therefore, to test the knowledge of a
man, to see if he had the mind and the knowledge
of the person he represented himself to be, you
may consider what is it he should remember, and,
making allowance for the imperfection of human
memory, you may get at certain results and esta-
blish for yourselves certain fixed principles which
you may apply with certainty to ascertain what
the real unaided memory of the individual is.
Let us go to the other side. You may be satis-
fied with too little if you are led to accept as true
genuine knowledge that which is knowledge de-
rived from extraneous sources, and not from the
unaided memory. I can easily conceive a case in
which a man bearing a close resemblance to the
person and features of another may be induced to
come forward. He would not have the audacity
to come forward without some knowledge ;.but he
may acquire the knowledge from without instead
of possessing it from within. Supposing a man to
establish a close acquaintance with another man
in a foreign land, from whom he learns the secrets
of his past life, and then that man having perished,
if he were to say— 1 Here is an opportunity of com-
ing forward and saying, “lam he”’—supposing
in addition to that he possesses papers and jour-
nals, and suppose that a wicked man, capable of
jmposture, possessed himself of such papers—sup-
tose that the man whom he ventured to personate
ad been in the habit of writing letters in which
4e detailed the circumstances of his life, and that
Vfcters fall the hands of a man capable
of misusing tnem, ana aonsmg .’he opportunity
thus afforded—suppose he falls in Wi'h persons
who have been in the service of the man he
intends to personate, and whohadbeen acquainted
with some of the important incidents of that man’s
life, and that these persons are either his willing
confederates or his innocent dupes, and enabled
him to get out of them a knowledge of things
which would enable him to put himself forward
as the man he desires to represent—you may have
in all or any of such sources such an amount of
apparent knowledge as will deceive even the wary
and delude even the sagacious, and yet it may be
nothing but an impudent imposture. If you find
that the man in question has sources of informa-
tion at hand from which he might; have obtained
the knowledge which he displays before you, and
you find that knowledge is not universal and uni-
form as to the events and circumstances of the
past life of the man he seeks to represent; and if
you find that his knowledge corresponds with and
is limited to the sources of information that he
possesses, these are circumstances which should
necessarily be taken into account in considering
and determining how far the knowledge he exhi-
bits is true and genuine or fictitious, obtained from
adventitious sources—in short, whether it is the
genuine production of his own unaided knowledge.
These, gentlemen, are the observations which
present themselves at the outset of the case, and
which you will have to apply if you think them
worthy of your attention as you proceed to deal
with this case in the various forms in which the
facts and evidence present themselves before you.
I shall have, I daresay, in the course of the obser-
vations which, I fear, at some length I shall have
to address to you, to advert to them again with a
view to the practical application of some of the
principles I have endeavoured to lay down for
your guidance in the future course of this trial.
I now proceed to refer to that which, at the same
time, appears to me as the very first thing with
which we have to deal, and endeavour to place be-
fore you the events of the life of the undoubted
Roger Tichborne, and from the materials we pos-
sess—above all, from the letters of Roger Tich-
borne himself —to portray to you, in as faint
colours as I possibly can, the physical, the moral,
the intellectual, the undoubted Roger Tichborne
as he lived before you.
Charles Roger Tichborne was, as you know,
the second son of Sir James Tichborne, the tenth
baronet of that name. The Tichborne family is
one of the oldest established families in this
kingdom. The ancestors of Roger Tichborne have
held the brood lands of Tichborne from a period
anterior to the Norman Conquest. The Tich-
bornes we: e one of those Roman Catholic families
who adhered to the old faith when that faith was
generally replaced in this country by the Reformed
Protestant religion. But they were not uniformly
Roman Catholic. Sir Benjamin de Tichborne was
in the reign of Queen Elizabeth one of the mem-
bers for Hampshire, and in the last year of the
reign of that monarch he was Sheriff of South-
ampton. On the death of Queen Elizabeth, as the
books tell ns, this gentleman, as soon as he heard
of the event, took the bold step of immediately
repairing to Winchester, and, without any orders
from the Administration of the day, proclaimed
in his capacity as High Sheriff the accession of
King James I. to the Crown of England. For
this service the new monarch conferred upon Sir
Benjamin’s four sons the honour of knighthood,
and upon himself the Castle of Winchester in fee
farm and the dignity of a baronet.
It is unnecessary to go any further into the
early history of the Tichborne family until we
some to the grandfather of Roger Tichborne, Sir
Henry, who died in 1821, leaving four sons—his
eldest, Sir Henry Joseph, who succeeded him;
his second eldest, Edward, who afterwards took
the name of Doughty ; his third, James Francis,


who became Sir James Tichborne, and was father
of Roger ; and Mr. Roger Robert Tichborne, who
lived for some time in Hampshire, and afterwards
resided in Bath. Sir Henry left after him, be-
sides the children I have mentioned, one daugh-
ter, who married an Irish gentleman named
Nangle. Sir Henry Joseph died in 1845, in con-
sequence of a fall from his horse while hunting,
leaving six daughters. The six daughters were
all married to persons well known to the world.
The eldest, Eliza Ann, married in May 1821,
Lord Dormer, whom you have had before you as
a witness. Lady Dormer had three sons, one of
whom has given material evidence in connexion
with this trial, and the eldest of whom is the
present Lord Dormer. There are also James and
Herbert, the former of whom I shall have to refer
to by and by. The second daughter of Sir Henry
Joseph was Frances Catherine, who married in
September of the same year Lord Arundell of War-
dour, and who died in April 1836. Her name does
not occur in the course of this inquiry beyond the
fact I have mentioned. The third daughter, Julia,
married on the Ist of July 1830, Mr. Charles Tho-
mas Talbot, and was mother of Bertram, Earl of
Shrewsbury. This name does not again occur in
the course of the inquiry. Then there was
Catherine Caroline, who married in April 1847,
William Greenwood, of Brookwood, Hants, who
became a lieutenant-colonel in the Grenadier
Guards, and who has appeared before you. The
fifth daughter, Lucy Ellen, married in 1840, Mr.
J. Townley, of the county of Lancaster; and
lastly, Emily Blanche married a Mr. Bennett,
and had by him a son John, whose name was one
of those put to the defendant. This lady married
secondly Mr. Higgins, whom we all knew as an
eminent writer. All these ladies were first cousins
to Roger Tichborne and have all been called be-
fore you. Sir Henry Joseph died, leaving these
six daughters and no son, in 1845, and was suc-
ceeded by his next brother, Sir Edward. By the
will of a relative—a maiden lady, Miss Doughty,
who died in 1826—he acquired large estates in
Buckinghamshire, Lincolnshire, Middlesex, and
London ; and assuming her name, he was known
as Sir Edward Doughty. He married a daughter
of Lord Arundell of Wardour.
Sir Edward was born in 1782 and died in 1853.
He resided at Upton, near Poole, a property
bought by the trustees under Miss Doughty’s will,
with money directed by the will of Miss Doughty
to be invested in landed property. The property
bought .by Sir Edward was not Upton as
Bogle mistakenly supposed, and as the defendant,
adopting it from. Bogle, also said—but land in its
immediate vicinity, for 13,700?. It was entirely
distinct from Upton, and I advert to this fact be-
cause it appears to me to be one not likely to have
been forgotten by Roger Tichborne. Unless his
mi nory entirely failed, he could not have made
so singular a blunder as was made by the defen-
dant in regard to it. Sir Edward Doughty trans-
ferred his residence to Tichborne after Sir Henry’s
death, but still kept Upton in hand, and we find
that Sir Roger Tichborne spent his holidays
sometimes at Tichborne and sometimes at Upton •
and it is material to note the times of the one
and the other residences. Sir Edward Doughty
had two children—a son, who died in early child-
hood ; and his other child was the lady whose
name has h ,en so painfully introduced into this
cause, Katharine Mary Elizabeth, who became the
wife of Mr., afterwards Sir Joseph Percival Rad-
cliffe. Of course, on the death of Sir Edward,
leaving no son, he was succeeded by James, his
brother, the father of Roger Tichborne. Sir James
was born on the 3d of October 1784, and died on
the 11th of June 1862, being then about 78 years
of age. He married the natural daughter of Mr.
Seymour, whose mother was a lady belonging to
one of the most distinguished families in France
- —that of Bourbon Conti —and I say so because
Mrs. James Tichborne, by right of her mother, on
the division of the property of that family, re-
ceived the large sum of 450,000 f. Their eldest
son, Roger, was born on the sth of January 1829.
They then had a daughter, who died in early in-
fancy ; and a second daughter, who also died
young, in the year 1839, when her parents were
residing in the Rue St. Honore; and lastly, in
September 1839, was born their second son, Al-
fred, who thus would be nearly ten years younger
than Roger. Alfred afterwards—on his father’s
decease in 1862—assumed the title in the full be-
lief of his brother’s death, and he himself died on
the 22d of February 1866. Mr, Tichborne lived
at Paris until he succeeded to the estates, and all
his children were born in Paris. Mrs. Tichborne
was the daughter of Mr. Seymour, of Knoyle,
whose other children have been called before you.
Mr. Seymour had two sons, both known as public
men—Mr. Henry Danby Seymour and Mr. Alfred
Seymour. He had three daughters, Mrs. Bouverie,
Mrs. Sandford (now dead), and Lady Rawlinson,
and these four have been called before you.
Now, Roger was born in 1829, and the poor lad
seemed to have been doomed to misfortune from
his birth. He seemed to have been, or at least his
mother was resolved he should be thought, a deli-
cate child, and she had him tormented with an
issue until he was nine years of age. He was born
when his parents lived in the Rue de la Ferme, and
it is not unnatural to notice the residences of his
parents in Paris, as they were made the subject of
part of the defendant’s cross-examination. These
residences could be traced in the evidence, and he
was born in the Rue de la Ferme. In 1833 they
removed to a street in the neighbourhood of the
Rue Neuve de la Madeleine. In 1837 they re-
moved to the Rue St. Honore, and there they
lived till 1845. There M. Chatillon was engaged
as tutor, and there also the Abbe Salis resided in
the entresol, and became intimate with the family.
In 1845 the family removed to another place, and
in 1848 they removed again, and then they re-
moved to the Rue Castiglione, where they remained
until 1850. In 1851-2-3 they lived in the Rue des
Pyramids. You will have, hereafter, to consider
whether a man would not remember the residences
of his parents, and it is a fact that the defendant
exhibited great ignorance of these residences as to
• time and place. How far that is material it will
be for you to consider. In the Rue St. Honore
they resided eight years—from 1837 to 1845; in the
Rue Castiglione from 1845 to 1850; in the Rue
des Pyramids from 1850 to 1853, until they left
Paris for England.
Roger was under the care of M. Chatillon for six
years, but I fear he did not learn much, though I
believe M. Chatillon did his best. Unhappily his
endeavours were thwarted by the incessant inter-
ference of a misguided, ill-judging mother. Mrs
Tichborne seems to have been herself ill-edu’
° ated ;. a J? d to have cared little for education.
Mr. Tichborne was aware of this, and desired to
send Roger to school; but in this he was always
thwarted by his wife. Ido not desire to say any-
thing harsh of her, but it is impossible not to see
that she was of a singularly selfish and perverse


disposition. She loved selfishly, with a view to
her own gratification, and not with a more gener-
ous regard to ttie welfare of the object of affection.
She was jealous to the highest degree, and could
not bear her husband’s relations, lest they should
intercept her son’s affections. Therefore they be-
came to her objects of the most intense aversion.
She was a Frenchwoman, and disliked them the
more that they were English. Her husband de-
sired that his son should be fitted to fill the posi-
tion of an English country gentleman, and he was
anxious that he should have an English education.
His wife was averse from this, and desired to re-
tain Roger entirely under her own control. The
pain this caused to her husband was portrayed by
him in a letter to her father, Mr. Seymour, which
quite revealed the truth as to his domestic life.
He laboured, it appeared, under the disadvantage
of a hasty temper, under which he often used
strong language. But when his fit of anger was
over his affection knew no bounds. His wife, cool
and self-possessed, had an advantage over him, and
he could only obtain reconciliation at the sacrifice
of his just marital control. Thus she was able to
retain Roger too long with her in Paris, and the
result was that he was in a wretched state as to
education. All this is abundantly described in the
letter of Mr. Tichborne to his wife’s father :
‘ Paris , May 21.
‘My dear Seymour,—By the time this reaches
you you will already have received a letter from
M. Chatillon, which I requested him to write to
you, saying how very ill I was, and I lament to
add that I am still suffering dreadfully from the
horrid sciatica, and can get but little rest either
night or day. . . .
• You may with good reason complain of my
great inexactitude in writing to you, “mais quand
on est aussi malheureux que je le suis, on est
guere dispose a honorer.” As all things in this
low world must have an end, I am obliged to tell
you plainly that I can no longer bear the cruel,
unkind treatment I experience from Harriett,
whose violence of temper seems to increase daily ;
and she seems to have no other idea in the world
than making me as miserable as she possibly
can, and in this, unfortunately, she succeeds to
her heart’s content, and I cannot but. attribute
my frequent indisposition to my wretchedness and
anxiety of mind. After the severe affliction it has
pleased the Almighty to visit me with, I feel daily
how necessary it is for me to pass the remainder
of my days in peace and quiet; and that with her
is morally impossible, as M. Chatillon, who is
but too frequently the object of her violent lan-
guage, can vouch for as well as myself. To my
family and relations she has long manifested the
most bitter aversion, though I will maintain they
have ever expressed themselves in the most kind
and affectionate manner towards her, and abuses
them as well as myself in no measured terms.
The grand object she seems to aim at is to alien-
ate me from ail my family and to make a French-
man of Roger. This, believe me, I neither can nor
ever will submit to. Some time ago my brother
Robert wrote to me to say that he was very de-
sirous of seeing me, and would come and pass a
fortnight with me. As you may imagine, this gave
me very great pleasure, as I am very much at-
tached to my brother ; little supposing that his
visit would have been attended with results so
painful and humiliating to me, owing to the cruel
and unkind conduct of my wife towards him, who
was constantly abusing him and quarrelling with
him during the short time he remained here, so
much so as even to astonish both Mons. C. and my-
self, though we know her so well; but she quite
surpassed herself. Figure to yourself what I must
have felt; lam obliged to own that I was in some
measure prepared for this, as she showed more
than usual ill-humour from the moment she knew
he was about to pay me this visit; but not sup-
posing it possible she would go to the length she
did, I had not the heart to tell him not to come.
I now regret it, both for his sake and my own.
‘I must now make you acquainted with my
plans, and trust they may meet with your appro-
bation ; at the same time be assured, my dear Sey-
mour, I shall ever feel most grateful for any advice
you may give me touching the subject I am about
to enter upon, as I can assure you that I have the
best opinion of your judgment and experience.
My dear Roger is now, thank God, in good health,
and the time appears to me as well as to others to
be now arrived when it is absolutely necessary that
he should go to school, and it strikes me, moreover,
that if this plan is not adopted it will be to the
greatest possible disadvantage of the child, whose
future welfare I feel myself responsible for. M.
Chatillon tells me candidly that he can be of no
further use to him, and, indeed, intended quitting
us in the course of a few months. He has done
everything he could for Roger, but he is thwarted
and worried by Henriette till he can stand it no
longer. He is very much attached to Roger, and
who deserves it, as he is an amiable and well-dis-
posed child, and I flatter myself will get on ex-
tremely well at school. This plan, as you may
well suppose, meets with the most violent and
determined opposition from Henriette, and she
abuses me with tears in the most violent manner
possible, accuses me of being a tyrant and wishing
to be the death of the child. All this I was pre-
pared for, but I feel that I have a duty to perform
towards my dear Roger; and if my plan meets
your approbation, which I flatter myself it may,
that you will support me in it. Pray have the
kindness to write to Henriette and point out to
her the necessity of this measure. Every argu-
ment I can make use of at present is of no avail,
as she declares that in adopting this plan I am not
acting upon my own judgment, but merely at the
suggestion of other people, particularly of my
brother Robert, who, she adds, has an. interest in
seeing the child dead; this, you must allow, is
particularly harsh and unkind language, as it is
totally false. In conclusion, I have only to add
that it will be the ruin of Roger if he remains with
her any longer, as she would render him totally
unfit ever to go to school.
‘ You would bless yourself if you were to see the
figure Henriette makes of herself in a morning,
generally till between two and three o’clock. It
consists of an old plaid dressing-gown, extremely
dirty and with several holes burnt in it, no wash-
ing or combing, a night-cap, which is frequently
very dirty, and a silk handkerchief tied over it.
In this disgusting costume she came to breakfast
one morning when my brother Robert was with
me. So different is this to our ideas of propriety
and cleanliness, that I felt quite humiliated and
ashamed. She does not very often wear the gowns
you had the kindness to give her, her favourite
dress being an old red gown, not remarkably clean,
and which is my aversion. What she does with
the 300 francs which I pay her regularly every
month is to me a mystery, but is perfectly scanda-
lous on her part to go about such a figure.
‘ Friday.—l began this yesterday, but was too
fatigued to finish it. My brother Robert intended


remaining a fortnight with me, but was com-
pletely driven away by the brutal treatment he
experienced from my wife, and quitted Paris last
Tuesday, and is by this time arrived in England.
Henriette’s violent hatred to my poor sister is
such that I could never ask her here during the
short time my brother was with me, though
I can positively assure you that my sister is per-
fectly innocent of ever having done anything to
offend Henriette either in word or deed. I slept
better last night than for some time past ; but
at ei"ht o’clock this morning I awoke with violent
pains all do wn tb e thigh and leg. I am oblige d to have
Gassonto shave me and assist me at my toilette e very
morning, which at other times I never required.
I have not as yet decided where I mean to place
Roo-er. I cannot decide until after I have con-
sulted with Doughty. I expect he will recommend
Piior-park, which establishment, he. writes me
word, is carried on upon a most admirable plan.
Having passed the winter at Bath, he had fre-
quent opportunities of visiting it in all its de-
tails, and approved of it most highly; so that the
objections you ever entertained towards this es-
tablishment, I am inclined to suppose, no longer
exist, and the system of education is reported to
be very good ; but of this more hereaftei.
‘ I can assure you, my dear friend, that it has
cost me many a sigh and many a tear to have
written you all these melancholy details of our
interieure. I am very low and out of spirits,
which is very natural when I see all the hopes of
my future happiness blighted and gone for ever.
I have done everything that depended upon me for
peace and quiet, but which, unfortunately, I have
never been able to obtain, and I now seem to be an
object of pity and compassion, even to my servants.
Both M. Chatillon and my faithfulGosseinhavelong
witnessed my melancholy and dejectedness. I have
not room here to tell you all I could wish; but when
we next meet I will mention some circumstances
that will astonish you. In all probability Ishalltake
Roger to England towards the middle of July,
and should it be agreeable to you and Mrs. Sey-
mour, our first visit will be to Knoyle. . I must
apologise for this very long letter. I claim your
indulgence to reflect upon its contents before you
answer me. Our darling little Alfred comes on
remarkably well, and is a beautiful child, and the
best-tempered little fellow you could wish to see.
My kind and affectionate love to all, and I beg to
offer my sincere congratulations to Jane upon her
entree dans le monde. I pray that she may find
everything couleur de rose, which cannot fail being
the case with such kind and affectionate parents
as she is blessed with, and now adieu. My dear
Seymour, —Believe me ever yours very sincerely
and faithfully, _ Js. F. T.’
For writing that letter, said the Lord Chief Jus-
tice that gentleman, now in his grave, has been
called a ‘ degraded slave.’ I confess lean see nothing
in it but the affection of a tender parent, though,
also a too weak and indulgent husband. It also
shows the folly of a misguided mother, to whom
the future misfortunes of Roger were probably
win" She yielded apparently in some degree,
but ultimately she triumphed. It was agreed
T should be sent to a school near Pans,
E bv oneof the most distinguished men in
Prance - M. Dupanloup. But no sooner was
lu w there than his mother must go and mter-
theboyt e fae should be an exce ption
fere, and discipline of the school. M.
from the ordm y he could not acquiesce
Chatillon
had given up the task ; they got another tutor,
and he soon gave it up. The Abbe Salis kindly
took the boy in hand, and found that M. Chatil-
lon’s instructions had not been quite, thrown
away, and that if the boy had had a fair chance
he would have done very well. Then they en-
gaged M. Jolival, who, however, did the boy no
good, taught him nothing, took him about to
billiard-rooms and cafis. No wonder Mr. Tich-
borne called him ‘ that scoundrel Jolival.’
At that time it appeared that Mr. and Mrs.
Tichborne had some very intimate acquaintances
—the Comte de Mandeville and M. D’Aranza,
who were there almost daily. The Comte de
Mandeville was fond of the boy, and made him
presents which he was not likely to forget —a gold
watch and a gold pin, given to him on the day of
his first communion, a day to which Roman
Catholics attached much importance. And many
years afterwards Roger wrote to his mother to
send him the gold pin given to him by the Comte
de Mandeville. Then M. D’Aranza was a very con-
stant visitor at the Tichbornes. Then there was
the Abbe Salis, who appeared a most respectable
and venerable ecclesiastic—whether he was worthy
of the epithets of vituperation bestowed on him
by the defendant’s counsel out of his rich and in-
exhaustible vocabulary of abuse he could not say.
Then there was Mrs. Nangle, an aunt of Roger’s,
with her children, his cousins, with whom Roger
used to go out walking and amusing himself.
With all these persons Roger was intimately ac-
quainted ; and he also knew Mr. Talbot Con-
stable, then a boy there. Then there were the
old servants of the family, who were naturally re-
membered by a child. There was an old servant
who had watched Roger’s growth from childhood
upwards —Gossein, his father's valet, who was
with him 14 years, and, though he left the family,
yet when Roger years afterwards was in Paris for
the last time he went to see the old servant. The
jury would have to consider whether it was pos-
sible Roger could ever have forgotten him. Gos-
sein was succeeded in 1845 by Rurden, whose
position was no doubt different, but who was in
constant attendance on Roger when he was in
Paris, and was with him the last night he was
there before he went abroad, and nursed and
tended him when indisposed. Here, again, was it
possible that such a man could have been forgotten ?
Then there were excursions which the family
were in the habit of making every year from Paris,
usually in June, July, and August. In 1839 the
father went with Roger and Chatillon to Pornic
in Brittany, and the incidents of their stay there
formed a prominent feature in the history of the
case and in the examination of the defendant. On
the occasion of that visit occurred an accident, to
which much importance was attached. Pornic
was situated on the sea, not, as the defendant sup-
posed, on a lake, and Chatillon and Roger were on
one occasion bathing there, when Roger had a fall
from a rock, which, said the defendant, cut his
head and caused a scar I have now on my head, to
which he appeals as a proof of his identity. That,
no doubt, will be important, and will have to be
adverted to. So next year, and year after year,
there was a similar excursion—twice to the Pyre-
nees; once to Germany. In 1843 the father and
the boy went to Brittany with Jolival, and in 1844
they went again to the same place. In the latter
year Roger wrote to his mother giving an account
of trip to Jersey, and referred to his little bro-
ther Alfred as 'bel tSte'— a term of endearment
applied to a pretty curly-headed boy.


In 1845 Sir Henry Joseph Tichborne died, and
it occurred to Mr. Tichborne that it was a good
opportunity to take the boy away and bring him
to England without raising a storm of opposition
from his wife. So he brought him over under the
pretext of attending his uncle’s funeral, and when
he was in this country he took care he should not
go back to Paris; and, with the approbation of
Mr. Seymour, he resolved to take him to Stony-
hurst. The father accordingly took him to Stony-
hurst, and placed him there. When they got
there, on the Ist of July 1845, they were received
by the rector. Father Bartow, who, however, being
infirm, handed them over to the Rev. Father
Waterlow, Prefect of the ‘Philosophers,’ among
whom Roger was to be placed, sending also for M.
de Brimont. a cousin of Roger’s, who went round
the place with him. It was with the joyful con-
currence of Roger himself that he was placed at
Stonyhurst, for he was sensible of the painful
position in which he was, and rejoiced at an oppor-
tunity of improvement. The day after his removal
he wrote to his mother:
*My Dear Mamma, —I entered College yester-
day, July the first. We came at half-past twelve
from Preston; when we arrived we went to see
the Superior who is a very agreeable man, and re-
ceived us very well; he showed us the establish-
ment with great pleasure. The establishment is
magnificent, the park very extensive, and one
thing which is very beautiful is the Avenue by
which one arrives at the College, which is nearly
two miles long and is very large. The appearance
of the house is magnificent; there is a very beau-
tiful Church, besides several chapels ; I am very
well where I am. I shall be in the class of philo-
sophy. I have a room, and shall work in one room
and shall follow the courses that they follow in
the College. I shall be under the direction of
Father Waitersone, who you used to know and
who will be my Superior. lam very well pleased
where I am, and my health, far from being im-
paired, stands much fatigue, and I gain health and
strength. Adieu, Dear Mamma. I embrace you
with all my heart, and be always sure of my un-
bounded obedience.—Your very affectionate son,
‘ Roger C.' Tichborne.
‘ I pray you, dear Mamma, not to make yourself
uneasy about the part Papa has taken. ’
What Lady Tichborne’s state of mind was when
she heard that her son was placed at Stonyhurst
could be imagined, and it appeared from a letter
of her husband that she had actually sent Jolival to
England to drag Roger away from Stonyhurst.
Happily, however, she did not succeed. At last
Roger wrote a strong and determined letter. There
was a deplorable ignorance of spelling in Roger’s
French letters. Roger wrote thus in French to
his mother, complaining of her opposition to his
coming to England, and telling her he went to
College of his own free will, and much regretted
that he had not been placed there earlier. This
letter of Roger produced a letter from Lady Tich-
borne to the Rector, in which she appeared to have
entered into private matters and her complaints
against her husband, and this produced a letter
from Roger reproaching her:
‘ Stonyhurst, July 10, 1846.
‘Dear Mamma, —I am very sorry that you did
not understand the letter I wrote you some time
ago. I had hoped that you would have under-
stood better what I intended to say, for I assure
you I was much surprised to receive no answer
to. all the letters which I had written to you (and
this for a whole year), so that I have determined,
though -with reluctance, to write this letter to you,
to discover what grievances you have against me.
In. the letter I had from you yesterday you say no-
thing of a heap of things which I used to be ac-
quainted with, and nothing at all of many things I
should have liked to hear of. Among other things, I
should like to know whether that nurse has left at
last, as I should then look upon your peace of mind
as assured, for the slanders and calumnies of that
woman are inexhaustible, as you know. Do not tell
any one that I have said this. I find that you have
committed an inconceivable indiscretion in speak-
ing of your affairs as you have done, in a letter to
the Rector of the College. I should never have
thought that you could so expose the differences
which exist, according to your account, between
yourself and my family, and so lay bare to every
one your private affairs, which ought to be con-
cealed from every one ; and I say, without fear of
contradiction, that you will lose more than you
will gain by it; for, believe me, we often repent of
having said too much, but seldom of having said
too little. I hope sincerely, however, that you do
not treat in this way everybody who has said no-
thing against you, for this course of conduct
proves that you do not know how to keep family
secrets, a most important matter in preserving the
honour and reputation of any family. I have no-
thing more to say at present. I hope you will
answer my letter as soon as you receive it, and then
I could say more on the subjects I have mentioned
in my letter. Embrace Alfred for me, and thank
the Abbe Grevel for his remembrances and remem-
ber me to him.—Your very affectionate son,
‘Roger Tichborne.’
Then Roger wrote another letter to his mother, in
which he wrote :
‘ You charge my aunts with a host of things they
never thought of, but so it has always been ; you
fancy things that make you miserable, and never
existed,’ &c.
And there were other similar letters. These
early letters, said the Lord Chief Justice, are very
material, and are the key to much that followed.
They showed that Roger was thoroughly sensible
of the faults of his mother and the defects of his
early education, and they explained, also, his firm
resolution not to allow his mother to influence his
future life. So much for his life before he was at
Stonyhurst. I would observe, as I have observed
before, that nothing could be more deplorable than
the state of ignorance in which Roger was left by
Chatillon. Whatever Chatillon had done for him
in the way of writing or other matters, his teach-
ing as regards the most elementary principles of
grammar must have been entirely lost. There is
no French porter or chambermaid, however hum-
ble, who could have spelt worse. You see, then,
gentlemen, how backward he was in point of edu-
cation. As soon as he learnt English grammar
Roger Tichborne accustomed himself to write in
English. He wrote to his mother in these terms :
‘ I cannot explain your long silence with respect
to me. In the first place, you have opposed my
coming to England, in which you have been very
wrong to make any opposition. But it is now done,
and one must not look at the present, but to the
future, which is far more important. You have
wanted to set me at enmity with onr family, but
I must tell you I have not always believed what
you told me, though I may have seemed to think
as you did. You have said that I ought not to go
to college, but I tell you openly and plainly that
I went of my own full and entire will, and that it
was the thing of all things most necessary, and I


greatly regret that I wa? not placed there earlier,
and then 1 should not have found myself in the
position I am. You have always spoken of my
being in dedicate health, and you have said it so
long and so often that you at last succeeded iu
making my father believe it. < . . Another thing,
although perhaps I ought not to say it, you may
remember how i detested the life you made me
lead when 1 was in Paris, and how I sought to be
delivered from it, and I assure you I had the most
thorough determination to be delivered from it as
soon as possible. An opportunity presented it-
self, and you may well think that 1 availed myself
of it with the greatest joy. Do not be offended
with me for the things which I remind you of.
They are facts too well known to you-’
It appears that letter brought an answer and a
letter to the President of Stonyhurst. From that
letter Mrs. Tiehborne seems to have been so much
annoyed that she entered into details of her family
grievances. The letter was shown to Roger by his
superior, and drew an answer from him in which
he said :
‘ I never could have imagined you would have
written as you did, and exposed in broad daylight
the differences between you and my family. . . ,
You must be well aware that one is often sorry
for having said too much, but never for having
said too little.’
In one dated the 2d of September of that year
he writes to her thus :
‘ There is no end to what you say against my
uncles and aunts. You always charge them with
a host of thirigs that never happened.’
In the course of the first eighteen months after
his arrival at Stonyhurst his English had been
greatly improved, and he was thus enabled to write
in English much better than he could in French.
The letters which he wrote at this early period are
of great importance, as showing in the first place
that he entirely appreciated his mother’s charac-
ter ; in the second place that he was profoundly
sensible of the injustice of her aversion and hatred
towards his father’s family ; in the next place that
he was perfectly sensible of the disastrous effect
of her injudicious treatment of himself; and,
lastly, what to the latest hour of his existence was
the ruling and guiding principle of his conduct—
namely, the fixed determination never to allow his
mother—however he might express a profound
sense of filial duty—to control, direct, or influence
his future course of life.
We have now reached the period when Roger
Tiehborne was placed at Stonyhurst, and we find
that he was put among that portion of the stu-
dents called ‘ philosophers,’ and it is necessary we
should have a clear and distinct understanding of
what is meant by that term. Upon the former
trial, when the defendant was under cross-examin-
ation, a great deal of confusion was created by not
distinguishing between the ‘philosophers’ as a
class at Stonyhurst and the general body of the
students receiving their education there. The
number of those called philosophers was very small.
The primary purpose of the establishment, as re-
garded the great proportion of the students, was
to serve as a school where a boy was to stay long
enough to pass through seven different classes.
Those classes were called ‘ elements,’ ‘ figures,’
‘rudiments,’ ‘grammar,’ ‘syntax,’ ‘poetry,’ and
‘ rhetoric.’ When a lad had passed through these
seven classes he had come to the top of the school.
The time had arrived for him to leave, and he did
leave. But it seems, with regard to the young
men destined for the Church, there were means of
education provided whicli enabled them to obtain
that most essential but intermediate knowledge
which comes between the learning of the school
and the preparation for the profession. Accord-
ingly. lectures were provided at which the future
Jesuit priest might be well trained in all that is
necessary to develop the powers of the intellect
and prepare him for the future warfare of the
world. Mental science, moral science, the exact
sciences—all were taught to those young men who
had ceased to be schoolboys. Accordingly, among
the Jesuit fathers were men who, as professors,
undertook to deliver the necessary lectures. But
the advantage of this more enlarged course of
study was not confined to ecclesiastical students,
but was extended to others, not intended for the
Church, but for some other profession, or no pro-
fession at all; and, accordingly, a class became es-
tablished called ‘philosophers,’ because they so
far pursued the same course of study as those in-
tended for the priesthood. They were called
philosophers because they were supposed to devote
themselves to the study of what is properly called
philosophy. But after a time the benefits of this
institution were extended to others who did not
care particularly to study these higher subjects,
and especially to foreigners who came to learn
English. Even English youths, whose knowledge
of the language would enable them to pursue that
course of study, were admitted, so long as they
conformed to the discipline of the College, to the
same advantages.
Those young men were treated on a very dif-
ferent footing from schoolboys. They were no
longer boys, but young men, and they were
allowed more or less discretion in the way of
study. If they chose to study, there was the
opportunity; there were professors in all these
various departments of science. If they wished
to go through the lectures, so much the better;
but if they did not, they were not compelled—
there appears to have been laxity in this respect.
They mixed very little at all with the boys of the
school, only occasionally joining in some of their
games, such as football or cricket. With regard
to those two branches of Stonyhurst College, it
was very much the same as though in the neigh-
bourhood of Westminster School a Westminster
University had been established, and both were
under distinct regulations. I fear sufficient dis-
crimination has not been made between those two
branches of the same establishment. Roger was
placed in the class of philosophers, which neces-
sarily implies a different residence from the resi-
dence of the schoolboys. At first the young men
destined for the priesthood lived in what was
called the ‘Seminary,’but within a month after
Roger joined a change was made; the philoso-
phers were removed from that, portion of the
College buildings they had previously occupied,
the Seminary was appropriated to them, and there
they lived during the whole of the remaining
period that Roger Tichborne was at Stonyhurst.
You will by and by have to decide for yourselves
whether Roger Tichborne did live in the first
place in the college with the rest of the body and
was afterwards transferred to the Seminary, or
whether you are to believe the defendant—that
when first he went to Stonyhurst he was put into
a cottage, where he lived for 12 or 14 months
apart from the rest of the body to which he be-
longed. It appears that Roger Tichborne arrived
at Stonyhurst on the Ist of July 1845, that he
was placed among the philosophers, that he went
away on the Ist of August for the vacation, and


that he returned in the middle of September,
when the vacation had come to a termination.
He remained until the Ist of August 1848.
Meantime there had begun that correspond-
ence with his aunt Lady Doughty which forms so
remarkable a part of his history. Being without
a paternal home in England, he would either have
to go to Paris for his vacation or to trust to the
kindness, hospitality, and affection of relations
in England. Of course there was no one to whom
his father would more naturally look for kind-
ness and protection for his son than to his own
brother; therefore it was natural that Roger
should pass a part of his vacation at Tichborne.
But there was another portion of his relations,
those on the mother’s side —the Seymours—who
were ready to receive Roger with open arms, for
although the relationship in this case was not
ostensibly and formally acknowledged, yet in re-
spect of all offices of kindness, affection, and love
it was recognised as though it had all the ties
and sanctions of legality attached to it. Roger,
therefore, passed his vacations between Tichborne
and the charming residence of Mr. Seymour at
Knoyle. You will have to judge by and by
whether there is anything in after years in which
the remembrance of the schoolboy would be more
vivid than as to the period of his holiday.
The holidays at Sfconyhurst were peculiar. In
most schools there are two or three vacations of
unequal length—Christmas, the time of family
gatherings, and summer, when the enjoyment of
life is greatest, are the two great peviods for boys
and youths returning home to rest from their
labours. Easter also affords a proper opportunity
for boys returning home. At Stonyhurst it was
not so. There they allowed only one vacation in
the year—a long one. It commenced regularly
with the beginning of August, and lasted for the
schoolboys six weeks, to the middle of September,
and for the philosophers two months, to the be-
ginning of October. But there were at Stony-
hurst two other holidays, which I may call ‘in-
ternal’ as distinguished from ‘external.’ For
two or three weeks at Christmas and two weeks
at Easter work was suspended. The boys did not
go home, but they amused themselves within the
precincts of the college, and had entire rest from
schoolwork. Sometimes the philosophers, if they
wished to make a short visit at Christmas or
Easter, could do so; but, generally speaking, it
may be taken as an undoubted fact, with respect
to the establishment at large, that there was no
occasion on which the boys returned home except
in the summer. In August every year Roger
Tichborne went either first to Tichborne and then
to Knoyle, or first to Knoyle and then to Tich-
borne. After the first vacation there commenced
a correspondence with Lady Doughty’, to which I
shall have to direct your attention.
Gentlemen, I am about to introduce to your
notice the correspondence between Lady Doughty
and Roger Tichborne, which commenced in 1816,
and which seems to me, from the beginning to
the close, to afford a very safe guide by which to
familiarise ourselves with the life and character
of Roger Tichborne. lam afraid your patience
will be tried by taking you so fully, as I propose
to do, through this correspondence, but to my
mind the letters which passed between Roger
Tichborne and Lady Doughty, and those between
him and Gosford, afford us the best means of
entering into the character, views, and purposes
of Roger Tichborne. The letters are so numerous
that 1 will not trouble you with the details of
family life relating to the ordinary events of the
day, but only with matters that 1 think of consider-
able importance—matters which appear to me to
go to the very pith of this inquiry. I shall not
trouble you with any letters until we come to one
which has reference to a disastrous incident,
which must have disturbed the even tenor of
Roger’s way. Roger was staying at Tichborne
Court in 1846, and his father was there too, when
it appears that his mother took it into her head,
uninvited and unexpected, to present herself at
Tichborne. Her position in the Tichborne family
was perfectly well known. When Robert Tich-
borne came back from Paris, having been insulted
and ill-treated by Mrs. Tichborne, he told his
story, and that explains the position in which
Mrs. Tichborne stood to other members of the
family. You may easily understand, therefore,
that Mrs. Tichborne was not in the best odour
with them. They resented the manner in which
some of them had been treated, and although
they received Mr. Tichborne and his son with
open arms, they could not entertain very cordial
feelings towards Mrs. Tichborne. Accordingly,
she had to return to the inn at Alresford. We
find her referring to the matter in a letter to
Roger, thus:
‘ VVe both felt so much that, after being so
happy together, your father ended in being so
much displeased; but it can’t be helped.’
From that time to the end of 1850 Mr. Tich-
borne never set foot within Tichborne-park, but
the son was frequently there. There are some
letters written by Roger from Stonyhurst in 1847
which deserve some notice. He now begins to
write in English, and, as he preferred to speak in
French, and as his mother was essentially a French-
woman, he would naturally have written to her in
French; but at this time he possessed a greater
proficiency in English. And now, mark, a change
occurs in the commencement and ending of his
letters : the ‘ Mamma’ of the boy is changed into
the ‘Mother’ of the man. From that time he
always writes ‘ Mother.’ In a letter bearing date
Stonyhurst, June 24, 1847, he says :
‘My dear Mother,—l was sorry to see that you
trouble yourself so much about my health. My
health has been always good since I came here,
and for that reason I wish that you would not
trouble yourself so much about it. I don’t know
why l’Abbe Salis has never answered any of my
letters, because I suppose that you gave him the
letters that I addressed you, and which were for
him; but in all cases I find it very strange on his
part. I should like to know what became of Mr.
Dumasures ; I should fancy that he is priest now.
I wish very much to have La Vie de Duguay
Trouin ei la Vie de Colbert, because I have no
more French books to read at present. I pray
mention what I send to the Abbe Salis.’
In these earlier letters you will find numerous
instances in which you have the simple translation
into English of French phrases. The fact was he
was doing in writing what he did commonly in
speaking—namely, translating French into Eng-
lish. For instance, instead of writing ‘at all
events,’ as we should do, he writes ‘in all cases,’
which is a literal translation of en tons cas. Here
is a letter to his mother which will illustrate what
I mean : ‘ Stonyhurst , July 23, 1847.
‘ My dear Mother,—l cannot conceive why I’Abbe
Salis has not received my letters. The only thing
to which I can attribute that is to your own fault,
because every letter that I wrote to him I addressed
them all to you. The only thing I can think is


that you kept the letters. If you have done that
it is very rong of your part.’
_ Eoger Tichborne went to Stonyhurst in the be-
ginning of July 1845, and the question is whether
he left it at the appointed time. The collegiate
year began always at the termination of the sum-
mer vacation, and the usual period of collegiate
life is somewhere about three years. When Eoger
was placed at Stonyhurst his father’s intention
was that he should go through a three-years’
course. That this is so I gather from two things
—first from a letter of Lady Doughty to Eoger at
Stonyhurst. She writes under date ‘Tiehborne-
park, November 3, 1847
‘My dear Eoger,—l am very sorry to have been
so long without answering your kind letter and
telling you that the books arrived safe home, but
I have had much to occupy me. and so many let-
ters daily to answer, that I have let time slip away.
We were rejoiced to find that there was a change
of masters that gave you hopes of finding much
more agreeable management in the College this
year, and so, dear Eoger, as there is always much
knowledge to be gained under any circumstances
in a college, I hope you will profit for the re-
mainder of your college life. When I look back
to my school life I think I gained more the last
year than all the previous ones. I hope you may
find the same. We were glad to hear you liked
Upton. I have spent so many happy years of my
life that every recollection of the place is dear to
me. Have you any answer yet from your father
respecting the Austrian service ?’
That seems to me to point to his last collegiate
year—the third since he had entered —which
would expire in August 1848. We now come to
a passage which relates to certain books which
Eoger was intending to read. I have no doubt
these were the French novels of which we have
heara so much. I shall have a word to say by and
by with reference to the character of these books,
the pernicious tendency of which has been very
much exaggerated. But there is no doubt that to
find her ne(jhew reading works of this kind, replete
with coarse indecency, would shock the mind of an
English lady brought up with great delicacy and
refinement. She accordingly writes to say that she
had tried to read the books as he wished, but could
not, notwithstanding certain attractions of style ;
and she adds, ‘ Surely we are created for far nobler
views than to occupy ourselves with themes of vice, ’
and she ends, as she always does, with her love to
her nephews. It is important to bear in mind that
at Stonyhurst, when Eoger was there, John Arun-
dell and his younger brother Edward were there
also. They were both at Stonvhurst, and we know
from Stonyhurst witnesses that the philosophers
who had relations passing through the school in-
variably met those relations and walked with them
on Sunday morning after mass. The two Arun-
dells were there at the time, and Eoger walked
with them Sunday after Sunday; and I will under-
take to say there never came a letter from Lady
Doughty in which she did not refer to those two
nephews and send some kind message. Besides
the letter of Lady Doughty which points to Eoger
leaving on the Ist of August, there is another from
Mr. Seymour, which plainly says that the Ist of
August, at which period the collegiate year ex-
pires, was the time when Eoger was to leave.
In November 1847 it occurred to Mr. Danby
Seymour that, Eoger’s education having been so
deplorably neglected, the best thing to do to make
up for his deficiency of training was to put him
into the army. The army is a school which,
though classical and scientific education is not to
be obtained in it, develops the man and the gen-
tleman more rapidly than could be done, perhaps,
by any other form of training. It was therefore
proposed that Roger should go into the army, and
Roger gladly listened to the proposal. Mr. Danby
Seymour seems to have talked the matter over with
Mr. James Tichborne, who agreed in thinking the
best thing for Roger was that he should enter the
army. In giving his consent to this course, how-
ever, the father made it a condition that Roger
should remain at Stony hurst till August Finally,
it was decided that he should continue at Stony-
hurst till the end of the year 1848, and then cater
the army. This was the fixed determination of Mr.
Tichborne at the time the application was made
for a commission. Sir Edward Doughty wrote to
Lord Fitzroy Somerset, the right-hand man of the
Duke of Wellington, through whom all applica-
tions for commissions at that time passed. Sir
Edward received in answer an assurance that his
nephew’s name had been placed on the list of
the Commander-in-Chief for a commission when
his turn should come. So the matter stood.
Now, in the course of the year 1848, Sir Edward
and Lady Doughty had removed to Tichborne and
settled there ; and Upton, the place they had pre-
viously occupied, by the Dormers, who resided
there for six months at least. In 1848 Mr. James
Tichborne came to England, and he brought with
him his boy Alfred, as he had done on a former
occasion, thinking it right that the little fellow
should be introduced to his English relations, and
not live isolated without their acquiring that in-
terest in and affection for him which ought to
exist between relatives. This appears to have been
displeasing and distasteful to Mr. Tichborne’s wife,
and accordingly, in a letter written by him to her
on the 24th of July, we find him vindicating hi 3
conduct. In this letter, which the Lord Chief Jus-
tice read, Mr. Tichborne expresses distress that in
the exercise of his duty towards his children, in
having his children in England, ‘ which is their
true country, as his father is an Englishman,’ he
should have made his wife unhappy. In this year
1848 I find Roger in correspondence with a gentle-
man named Walter Strickland, who was the son
of a gentleman living in the neighbourhood of
Tichborne, and who became a great favourite at
Tichborne-house, Old Lady Doughty took a great
interest in him, and treated him almost as if he
were a member of the family. An intimacy sprang
up between Roger and this young Strickland, who
was destined for the navy, which he entered as a
midshipman, becoming eventually a post-captain
in Her Majesty’s service. He wrote the following
letter to Roger, from Her Majesty’s ship Amphi-
trite, dated the 30th of April 184 S :
‘My dear Roger,—lt was with the greatest
pleasure that I received your letter from Stony-
hurst. You forgot to date it, so Ido not know
when it was written, but from your dear and ex-
cellent Uncle and Aunt Doughty I have heard of
some prospects of getting a commission in the
British army.
‘You will easily imagine that I am better
pleased at this prospect than if you had entered
the Austrian, a foreign service. It was all very
well for young English Catholics to enter such
armies when the laws of our country rendered it
impossible for them to join their own : but now
let every Englishman lend his arm to defend ‘ ; the
nag that has braved a thousand years the battle
ana the breeze.” lam sure that you are becoming
more English m your thoughts, for your letter


shows it. Pray, my dear Eoger, let us continue
our correspondence. Thank God, I am as con-
tented and happy a 3 ever in my ship. We have
been here now for two days, and shall start the
day after to-morrow for the Bights of Benin again,
where I suppose we shall remain for t wo or three
months longer. The more I see of this strange
world and the people in it, the more convinced I
am that the next is the only life worth living for.
Eeflect on this, dear Eoger, and do not defer any
longer (if you have not performed your promise
to me) to make a clean sweep of your conscience,
but for God’s sake I conjure you not to dare to
approach the Holy 7 Communion without the most
ample and awful preparation. I say awful, for
who can think of receiving his God—the Great
Being who, by His word only, created all things !
—without a feeling of awe ? But I must not turn
preacher! Is not L. S. too nearly related to you,
for you ?’
A Juror. —Was Mr. Strickland a Eoman Ca-
tholic ?
The Lord Chief Justice.—l think this letter
shows most clearly that he was. Then we have
Eoger writing to his mother on the 20th of May
in the same year. The only passage worth notic-
ing is one in which he shows the interest he always
took in the Abbe Salis. He says :
‘I suppose you sometimes see the Abbe Sa-
lis ; when you do give my regards, and tell him
I should be glad to receive a letter from him.’
To show how mistaken Mr. JamesTichborne was
as to the feeling of Sir Edward and Lady Doughty
in respect to him, Lady Doughty writes :
* Whenever this is the case Sir Edward always
frets, and especially since the unfortunate es-
trangement between your father and us. It is up-
permost in our hearts and creates much grief. Sir
Edward is sorry your father does not come to
England, as it lessens the chance of that recon-
ciliation which we hope will one day happily be
brought about. We shall be glad to see you here.
Send all the trunks you like; they shall be taken
care of.’
There was a matter which much struck me in
Lady Eadcliffe’s evidence. She stated that when
she saw Eoger at Bath in January 1849, she had
not seen him before for I know not how many
years. Well, it struck me as being strange, con-
sidering that Eoger was so often at Tichborne. for
his vacation. Here, however, is the explanation.
Lady Doughty, writing in June, says :
‘ I shall have to take our dear Katie back to
Taunton in a few days. I wish you could have
joined our merry party, but your holidays are
always at such different times of the year.’
Thi3 passage explains how it happened that
Eoger and his cousin never met till 1849. He was
then about to leave Stonyhurst, and, from the ex-
pressions in these letters, I should judge that he
was about to leave it permanently. He sent his
boxes containing his books and Stonyhurst effects
to Tichborne, which looks like a final departure
from College. Writing to Gosford on the 28th of
July 1848, he says :
‘ Dear Sir, —I took the liberty of addressing two
boxes belonging to me to you at Tichborne. I
should be much obliged if you had the kindness
to see that they are brought to Tichborne and put
in a place where I shall be able to find them when
I shall go to Tichborne. I shall leave College next
Tuesday, the Ist August, for London.’
On the 4th of August he wrote to his mother :
‘ Stonyhurst , August 4,184 S.
My dear Mother, —I quitted College three days
ago: I came to pass few days with Mr. Seymour
in London. I shall go off from London very soon
to join my father, who is in Clifton with my bro-
ther. lam delighted that my father allowed me
to pass few days in London with Mr. Seymour.
I hope that I shall have the pleasure of paying you
a visit in Paris.’
You will observe that he never says ‘a" few days,
but that he invariably translates quelques jours ,
and leaves out the ‘a.’ At this time Mr. James
Tichborne was in England. He had spent a short
time with Lord and Lady Dormer at Upton, and
afterwards he took apartments at 12 Meridian-
place, Clifton. We find that Eoger afterwards
joined him there. In the mean time, some letters
passed between Mr. James Tichborne and Mrs,
Tichborne, which are not unworthy of your atten-
tion. On the sth of July, before Eoger had left
Stonyhurst, he writes to his wife complaining of
the unkindness of her letters, and vindicating
himself from various reproaches, and then he
urges her very strongly to come and reside in Eng-
land, arguing that Bath is a warmer and safer re-
sidence than Paris. On the 3d August he writes
a letter, which has more immediate reference to
Eoger than the last. It contains these passages :
‘Eoger was to quit Stonyhurst the day before
yesterday, and is now at Mr. Seymour's. He will
remain there in town 10 days, and will then come
and join me here. Early in September I shall
take him over to Paris, and I hope you will con-
sent to return to England with us. I feel but
little disposed to take up my residence there. .. .
I do not intend that he shall remain there long.’
On the 17th, Eoger, who had spent a week or
so with Mr. Seymour in London, went down to
join his father, and I must call jour attention to
the circumstance that all the letters from Mr.
James Tichborne to his wife show that his wife
was at Paris, and not with him at Clifton. .In
this respect the defendant has made a most serious
mistake ; for in his examination he states that
Eoger Tichborne went to join his father and mo-
ther. Writing on the 17th of August 1848, Sir
James says : ‘ I have to announce to you that our
dear Eoger arrived here quite safe and well yes-
terday afternoon.’ %
Now, observe this passage : ‘ Mr. Seymour was
so kind as to go with me to the Commander-in-
Chief s office, and Lord Fitzroy Somerset’ —whose
name the defendant had totally forgotten—‘gave
him hopes that he may get a cavalry commission
in about six weeks or two months’ time, and this
delights him very much. You must recollect that
Eoger is now in his 20th year, and that his re-
turning to College is out of the question;’ whereas
the counsel for the defendant argued that, al-
though Eoger did quit Stonyhurst on the 18th of
August, he afterwards returned and stayed there
a short time. There is also a letter from Mr.
James Tichborne to his wife, dated the 31st of
August 1848, in which he speaks of the army being
a good school for a young man like Eoger. lie
tells his wife that he knows her hatred and preju-
dice against his family, and he says he believes
she would not have objected if it had been pro-
posed that Eoger should enter the army of Eussia,
Austria, Sardinia, or France; but that Lis enter-
ing the army of his own country— England was
a crime she would never forgive. Mr. James Ticli-
borne and his son went to Paris and stayed there
a few days about the middle of September. Iney
then paid a visit to the Vicomte de Brnnont, near
Eheims. From Bheims they came back straight
to England by way of Boulogne, and on the 12th


of October Mr. Tichborne writes from Boulogne,
announcing that they had spent a week very plea-
santly at the Vicomte de Brimont’s. Meantime
Roger had received from Lady Doughty a letter,
which was unimportant, except for one thing.
They were staying at the Bedford Hotel, Brighton,
and it states among Other things that Lady The-
resa Deare was there. On the 27th of October
Mr. Tichborne was at Upton, staying with Lord
and Lady Dormer, and he wrote thus to his wife :
‘ I do not like to quit England till I know some-
thing positive respecting Roger’s commission; but
I tell you candidly, if he never gets it I shall not
much care.’
This shows that the suggestion did not emanate
from him that his son should enter the army. He
goes on :
‘ However, as he wishes to go into the army, it
may be advantageous to him. As to his return-
ing to Stonyhurst, it is quite out of the question,
and for this reason—in the first place, he is not
of a studious turn of mind; and, in the second
place, Roger is nearly 20 years of age, and you
seldom find a young man at that time of life dis-
posed to submit to the rules and discipline of a
College life. I have pointed out to Roger certain
rules and regulations as to his future studies, and
he has promised to attend to them.’
He also asked her to come back to England, but
she would not return to a country for which she
had so little predilection. From Upton the fa-
ther and son go on to Knoyle, where Roger re-
ceives a letter from his mother remonstrating with
him for going into the army, and pressing him to
go back to Stonyhurst, notwithstanding what the
father had said. Roger replied as follows :
1 Nov. 11, 1848.
My dear Mother, —There is a thing which you
say in your letter which does rather surprise me,
after all I heard you say a few years ago; it is the
desire you express of my going back to College.
You know very well that I am too old to go there
again. You know very well that I should not
learn much if I was to go there again. I should
be very much obliged to you if you don’t talk to
me of it any more.’
This shows that he had a determination of his
own which he intended to follow. In the same
letter he refers, to ‘ Mr. and Mrs. Seymour.’ Ob-
serve the way in which this young man, writing
o ins mother, speaks of his grandfather and
grandmother. So inflexible, so invariable, and so
uniform was the habit of thinking, speaking, and
writing of the Seymours as if no relationship ex-
lsted. On the 13th of November 1848 he thus
writes from Knoyle House to Mr, Gosford :
, AJ”?. ~ be ver y much obliged to you if you
had the kindness to send me the “ Marseillaise”—it
is among the papers I gave you at Upton to take
home to Tichborne I went out shooting several
v Ut tlle ] )1^ s are so wild in this county
that I have not been able to kill anything. I
i sbaU b ® ab le t° go to Tichborne in about
a fortnight, and for a longer time than I have ever
been as yet.
I do not say that going out shooting is a thing
which would make a lasting and ineffaceable im-
pression upon the young man’s mind, but you
must take it for what it is worth. It is clear it is
a fact which the defendant either was never ac-
quainted with or else had forgotten, because he
stated he never went out shooting at Knoyle.
Here closes the year 1848 and the career of
Roger Tichborne at Stonyhurst. I do not pro-
pose to go at present into the details of his Stony-
hurst life, though it may be necessary to go into
those details afterwards with some degree of par-
ticularity, as you will have to form a judgment as
to how far the knowledge or the want of know-
ledge exhibited by the defendant leads to the
conclusion that he is or that he is not the Roger
Tichborne into whose identity we are inquiring.
But there are several things which we may take
along with us before leaving this particular part
of Roger Tichborne’s life. How did he pass his
time at Stonyhurst ? Was it in the indulgence of
mere unmixed idleness, or did he do his best to
profit by the opportunity and to learn something ?
At all events, did he learn something ? It is cer-
tain he acquired a decent knowledge of English.
In spite of Gallicisms and mistakes of grammar
and spelling, he made considerable progress in
English and in English writing. That cannot be
doubted by any one who reads his letters. But
his knowledge was not confined to English alone.
He learnt some little Latin, though not much.
We know from the evidence of Father Mann and
of another Father who taught him English, that
he also learnt from his reverend instructors a
certain amount of Latin. No doubt it does not
come to much. He was enabled, however, to
construe passages from the first book of Ccesar's
Commentaries. That, it is true, is an early school
book, but it contains some puzzling passages, of
which I myself have a painful recollection. Still
he did for the first year work at his Latin, and
though we do not know what occurred after
Father Mann left at the end of Roger’s first or
second year, there is no reason to suppose he dis-
continued the study of that language. He also
seems to have learnt a little of history. I cannot
doubt he had some notion as to who Julius Cassar,
who wrote these Commentaries, was. The man
who laid the foundations of the greatest Empire
which ever overshadowed and ruled the world
was not altogether beyond the range of Roger
Tichborne’s ideas. At all events, he knew very
well that Julius Caesar wrote in Latin, and not in
Greek.
Again, he studied mathematics, and, I daresay,
he did not get very far in them. But he got to
the end of the first book of Euclid before the pro-
fessor who was teaching him went away, and after
that Roger Tichborne went through an entire
year of hi 3 collegiate course, during which time,
for aught, we know, his mathematical studies
were continued. No amount of mathematical
teaching would have turned Roger Tichborne
into a Senior Wrangler, and I don’t wonder at
his stumbling on getting to the foot of the Ass’s
Bridge. Many a man thinks he is capable of be-
coming a Herschel or an Airy until he arrives at
the Ass’s Bridge. It is one of the finest pieces of
strict ratiocination that ever delighted the mind
of a geometrician, and whoever has mastered it
thoroughly can never regard it without reverence
and delight as one of the masterpieces of the
human mind. But many a man fails to get over
it. Roger, it seems, failed at it; but he must
have known very well what it was. Persons who
fail to understand the problem have to assume
the proposition which that marvellous piece of
reasoning solves in order to deal with the further
propositions to which it is necessarily a step
But as one of the professors told us, he did get
on with the other propositions and went to the
end of the book. He mastered, again, what I
venture to say is an equally sublime piece of
reasoning whereby the square of the liypothenuse
is shown to be equal to the other two sides of a


right-angled triangle. Roger became able to fol-
low the reasoning and to make out that proposi-
tion from its premisses to its conclusion. If you
had asked Roger Tichborne when he went on
board the Bella to prove that proposition, he
could not have done it any more than he could
have flown. Of the young men who pass a pre-
liminary mathematical examination at school or
college, ninety-nine out of every hundred, if asked
in after-life to work out the propositions in the
first book of Euclid, would be totally at a loss. I
believe, however, that if you want to keep your
mind alive to the true process of reasoning you
cannot do better than go over them now and then.
That is what I have constantly done. To work
out the propositions of Euclid is a discipline for
reasoning more efficient than any supplied by all
the books of logic in the world. The question
which you will have by and by to determine is
whether Roger Tichborne acquired at Stonyhurst
a sufficient elementary knowledge of mathematics
to know what mathematical science meant, and
what were the subjects with which it dealt.
Again, a learned Professor told us that Roger
attended a course of chemistry at Stonyhurst. I
daresay his knowledge gathered from these lec-
tures was of the most elementary description;
still a man does not go to a course of lectures on
chemistry without carrying away some impression,
at any rate, of the subject. Of all the sciences in
the vast range of human knowledge there is none
so fascinating as that science which seems to en-
able us to resolve the things of creation into their
primary elements, and enables us again to com-
bine those elements in new and fresh combina-
tions. A man does not go to hear even the rudi-
ments of that great science expounded without
carrying away some knowledge of the subject-
matter to which it relates, unless his memory has
been most sadly and most disastrously troubled
and disturbed. He does not confound a science
which almost half solves the mysteries of creation
with the business of a man who compounds chemi-
cals and prepares doctors’ prescriptions. And yet
this is the description which the defendant, when
questioned in the Court of Common Pleas, gave
of medical science.
But, according to the learned counsel for the
defendant, Roger Tichborne acquired no know-
ledge of any sort at Stonyhurst. He passed his
life there like a beast of the field, wallowing and
grovelling in the lowest and most miserable sen-
suality-smoking and snuffing, and making occa-
sional pilgrimages to Preston. He became de-
based, demoralised, lost in body and in .mind.
That is the account, and the alleged reason is that
he was allowed by the authorities at Stonyhurst
to indulge in continual idleness and the gratifica-
tion of these bad habits and vicious propensities.
The Jesuits taught no morals ; they did not want
their youths to grow up in habits of morality,
virtue, and honour. They wanted them to be
men with the minds of women. Vice is the foul
accusation which has been hurled against the
authorities of Stonyhurst. lam no friend of the
Jesuit Order. I believe that their principles and
their purposes are inconsistent with the freedom,
moral, intellectual, and religious, of the human
mind. But to say that this Order—which, what-
ever may be its merits or demerits, has done so
much for the furtherance of education, and for
which literary men ought to feel grateful to it—
to say that this Order would use the opportunity
of demoralising the youth committed to its charge,
and that it would do so for the purpose of those
abominations to which the learned counsel re-
ferred, is in my mind one of the most hateful,
most unfounded, most abominable, and most fear-
ful accusations that ever were brought before
against a body of men. Moreover, there is not
the slightest shadow of a foundation for it. All
that the learned counsel can point to is a foolish
habit they had of mutilating the plays which were
acted in the College. They omitted some scenes,
and by some hocus-pocus converted the relations
between men and women into relations of a differ
ent kind. Because there may have been left i
some of these plays a passage which the Father,
in their fastidiousness or s.-ndy sentimentality
thought a little too strong for the ears of some
delicate young lady, because something of tt
sort dropped from the lips of the Rev. Fati
Fitz-Simon, the learned counsel asks you to l
lieve that these dramas were converted into soi
thing of a totally different character and o
nature too terrible to contemplate. I never b
of such an accusation before, and I trust to
I never shall hear such another.
Second Day, Friday , January 30, 1874.
Gentlemen, we arrived yesterday at the close
of Roger Tichborne’s career at Stonyhurst, and it
strikes me that it would be convenient to divide
the life of the undoubted Roger into five leading
epochs. Firstly, his life in Paris until he attained
the age of between 16 and 17 ; secondly, his life at
Stonyhurst, extending from the middle of April
1845 until the end of July 1848. With these two
epochs we have already dealt—sketching merely
the skeleton of the events of his history, the de-
tails of which I shall have more elaborately to fill
in when we come to try the recollection and know-
ledge of the defendant with reference to the events
of those periods. The third epoch—and it is by no
means an unimportant one—is comprised in the
twelve months during which he applied himself to
prepare for the military service. That will bring
us to the end of October 1849. Then we have the
ourth—his life in the army—extending from his
rym Oetober 1849 down to the time of his
q i mg the army at the commencement of 1852.
We can subdivide this epoch into two periods-
that portion of the time during which he was
quartered in Ireland, and next that portion
time during which he was stationed at Cant
And then we have as the last epoch the tim
passed from his quitting the shores of this c
in the month of March 1853, down to the
his going on board the Bella, which ill-fateu. vessel,
as we know, foundered. I think it is desi.able to
keep these epochs distinct. We are now entering
upon the third of those chapters—if I may so say
—of the history of Roger Tichborne.
We left him at Knoyle, where he had written
the remarkable letter to his mother of the 11th of
November, in which he rejected her proposal and
thoroughly refused to entertain the idea of return-
ing to Stonyhurst. When he left Knowle he went
to Tichborne, and Tichborne became his home from
that time till the 9th of August 1849. It was
during that interval that he prepared himself for
his examination preparatory to entering the army.
Early in the year 1849 he made two visits—one to
Bilton Grange and the other to Bath. But before
he left Tichborne he wrote a letter to his mother,
which I think is worthy of your consideration. It


has been said that his life was spent in utter idle-
ness. That was first stated by the defendant him-
self. He said that from the time he left Stony-
hurst down to the time he left Tichborne he spent
his time in field sports, and in other amusements
of that kind ; that he never studied, as he had too
much of that at Stonyhurst, and never gave him-
self to it again. From this letter you will hear
Roger’s account of his occupation. It is as follows:
‘ Tichborne House, Jan. 1, 1849.
‘ My dear Mother,—l must apologise for having
been so long in answering your last very kind let-
ter, and in wishing you a happy new year.. I wish
you as happy a new year as 1 can, and which will
be followed by many others. I am very much ob-
liged to you for the very kind offer which you
made me of sending me some money if I had
spend the one which you were so kind as to give
me when I was in Paris last. I must say that I
have spend nearly all. I should be very much ob-
liged to you if you had the kindness to send me
some more ; but I should be very much obliged to
you if you don’t speak of it to anybody. I pass my
time here in a very pleasant way. I go.out riding
nearly every day, and walking. I read instructive
books. I read nearly all that book which you
gave me, and which is called —I don’t remember
the name of the book at present —but it is the.one
which is written by Monsieur de Chateaubrian.
[That celebrated author's Itinerary from Paris to
Jerusalem.] It is very interesting indeed—-the
description which he gives of the Holy Land is
very interesting. There is only one fault which I
found in it; it is that he makes the preface so
very long. I should be very happy if you had
tl'e kindness to send me the life of Louis 16. I
3 am sure that it must be a very interesting book.
8 I have not received a single letter from L’Abbe
Salis since I left r Pkris. I have forgotten his direc-
tion, otherwise I should have writtento him. If you
* R !ee him, will you mention it to him, and remember
ine most kindly to him. It is not necessary that
*>ou should mention this letter, because I am going
b write to my Father.—l remain your very affec-
ibnate and dutiful son, R. C. Tichborne.’ .
'‘‘/That letter would seem to me to show that his
'lie was not a life of idleness and search after
•musement such as has been represented.
As I have said, early in that year he made two
its, which have been made the subject of ques-
ns to the defendant, and which, therefore, we
■odd notice. The first was to Mrs. Washington
>«rt at Bilton Grange. There he spent a fort-
> The house was full of company, and Mrs.
lert took the opportunity of persons likely to
■fter him in Dublin : among others, that of
Lora and Lady Howth and their daughters, and
their' son, Lord St. Lawrence ; and we know he
visited them afterwards at Howth Castle. Mrs.
Hibbert also gave him letters of introduction to
Ladv Clanricarde, and to other persons of distinc-
tion in Dublin. After spending a fortnight at Bil-
■ , p rlTlO -e he proceeded to Bath, where hisuncle
Robert was’ living. Sir Edward and Lady Doughty
a daughter had come there on a visit to
Sh Edward’s'brother — Mr. Robert Tichborne.
, ’ ~ Nangle and their daughter and sons
Mr. and Mrs. iN = occasion one
things occurred, not very remarkable, but
leave a lasting impression on the
wmch | ~ or they might not. That is a
memory 01 . , e
m tt 7- for you to judge of.
Edward Doughty, whose presence at Bath
■ill defendant was ignorant of, met with an acci-
-1 nt Mr. Robert Tichborne gave a ball, and Sir
Edward Doughty, although very infirm, came
down-stairs to be present at it, but in coming
down he had a heavy fall, which alarmed every-
body. Fortunately, he was more frightened than
hurt, but still it was a circumstance that might be
remembered. There happened another interesting
circumstance on the occasion of the ball —the wife
of the butler, Allen, was brought to bed of twins,
and that fact produced a considerable sensation. It
was a question whether the ball should go on, but
it did. Another little incident happened also. It
seems that young Mr. (now Major) Nangle and
Roger had been out one evening—l suppose dining
—and as they came home they saw the Town-hall
brilliantly illuminated. They asked what was
going on, and were told it was a tradesmen’s ball.
These two young fellows thought that as dancers
their society would be agreeable, but on applying
for admission they were told, ‘You do not belong
to usand not having tickets or invitations they
were very properly refused admittance, and it was
the subject of a laugh against them. That is a
circumstance, again, which would be likely to make
an impression on the mind of a man. Well, on this
same visit Roger was thrown a good deal into the
society of young Mr. Nangle. Among otherthings,
Major Nangle tells us he was at that time court-
ing the lady to whom he was afterwards married,
and that he made a confidant of Roger. The defend-
ant was very much pressed as to whether he rode
over to the house where the lady lived. He denied
having done so, and the Major was not in a posi-
tion to say that he had, but no doubt he made him
his confidant with respect to his hopes and expect-
ations. So much for the visit to Bath.. Evidence
has been brought before you that on this occasion
Roger was in a dog-cart with Mr. Spurting, and
that it got upset; and further that the chamber-
maid saw the peculiar formation of the thumb
while he was washing his hands, and also observed
that he was devoid of tattoo marks on his. left arm.
The date of that was, however, fixed in March
rather than in April, and I can find no trace of a
second visit to Bath after his return on the sth of
February. He returned to Tichborne on that day,
and remained there until the 9th of August, and
we have Lady Doughty’s letter to him, in which
she speaks of his eight months’ stay.
It was about this time that he began to apply
himself seriously to the studies necessary to en-
able him to enter the army. A new regulation
had been introduced, requiring candidates for
commissions to pass examinations. It was thought
desirable to raise the necessary standard of edu-
cation, not that men should speak this or that
language or know thoroughly the. events of his-
tory in order to become better soldiers, but on the
well-found presumption that the more intellec-
tually developed a man was the more fit he would
be for any professional calling. It was not ex-
actly known at that time whether mathematics
or arithmetic would hold a place in the examin-
ation. It was possible that both would ; but, a
all events, it was expected that some proficiency
in mathematical science would have to be shown
by a candidate before he could enter the army.
Upon the first occasion Roger was examined in
arithmetic, and he failed, probably because he
had paid less attention to it, and more attention
to mathematics. But it is a circumstance to be
taken into consideration that, from the early
part of 1849 down to the time of his examination,
he was studying mathematics. Mr. Gosford tells
us that he used to sit in his office, and work out
problems, a number of which remained for a long
0


time among Mr. Go*ford's papers, until, being
deemed useless, they were swept away ; and that
shows the diligence of Roger in preparing himself
in this department. As the time drew near he
appears to have resorted to a Mr. Moberly, a
clergyman living at a place which is -written
Owsleshury, but which is pronounced ‘ Usslebury.’
He was in the habit of going over twice a week
to this place to take mathematical lessons, and,
of course, going there twice a week for the pur-
pose of taking lessons, even if he forgot the name
of Mr. Moberly, the defendant, if he were Roger,
would recollect the name of the place ; and when
he was asked if he had taken any lessons of any
one at Owsleshury, I should have thought he
would have known what the counsel meant. I
have a letter here, which he wrote on the 7th of
June to Mr. Hopkins, shortly before he got his
commission, in which he says :
‘ Tichborn Park 27th June 1849.
‘ Dear Sir, —I am very sorry at not being able
to go to Alresford at half-passed 2 as I intended
to do. I have a Mathematical lesson and I must
go there 6 miles. By those means lam sorry to
say I shall not be able to have the pleasure of
seeing you to-day. But if it is convenient to you
I should be happy if you allow me to go to Alres-
ford to-morrow at half passed 11 to have the plea-
sure of seeing you.—l remain Dear Sir truly
Yours R. C. Tichborne.’
It appears, too, from further evidence that
Roger Tichborne was at that time working at
mathematics.
_ ¥e now come to an event of Roger Tichborne’s
life which certainly is remarkable. The applica-
tion was made in November 1846 by Sir Edward
Doughty to the Horse Guards for a commission in
the army for his nephew. Mr. Seymour took him
to the Horse Guards, where they saw Lord Fitzroy
Somerset, and there they reminded him of the pro-
mise he had made, and pressed for the commission.
Lord Fitzroy Somerset gave an assurance that the
commission would be forthcoming before very
long. Several months, however, passed away, and
in June. Roger Tichborne began to get impatient
to obtain his commission, and he took the bold
step for so young a man of writing himself to Lord
Fitzroy Somerset for his commission, instead of
asking his uncle to write. Most young men would
be far more likely to say to their uncle, ‘ The com-
mission has not come; would you write and re-
mind Lord Fitzroy Somerset?’ But Roger Tich-
borne writes himself on the 19th of June :
‘ Tichborne Park, June 19, 1849.
‘My Lord, —I must apologise for the liberty of
addressing you this letter. But what makes me
take such a step is that I am likely to be obliged
to go abroad before long. It is for that reason
that I should be most obliged if your lordship had
kindnts to let me know if there is any hope
of naving my commission before long.—l remain,
m y lord, respectfully yours,
„ * Roger Charles Tichborne.’
~ proceeding proved successful, for on
tne of June be received the nomination, which
he thus acknowledged :
<,, ‘ Tichborne, June 21,1849.
Yon.- t i 1 received the nomination which
Tnormn™ sJl ]P,. was k ir ' d enough to send me this
shall hf’ I f or J'hich lam very thankful. I
morning of th('%T"°i Militai T College on the
turns whiVL o ® M . u y to pass those examina-
in the armv 3 ' e< i mr e<l ofme for my admission
yours. ■ ) * Lord, respectfully
Roger Charles Tichborne.’
On the same day he wrote to Lady Doughty in-
forming her of the result of the examination:
‘ Tichborne Park, June 21, 1849.
‘My dear Aunt, —I wrote to Lord Fitzroy
Somerset about my commission, and to my great
surprise I received my commission for answer by
return of post, which was this morning. I am
named cornet in the 6th Dragoon Guards, on con-
dition that I shall pass iny examination at the
Royal Military College, at Sandhurst, on the 2d
of July 1849. The delay is very short, which will
oblige me to study night and day till that time.’
Lady Doughty replied congratulating him on his
success, advising him to study, but not so as to
injure his health, and inviting him to pass some
time at Tichborne. The news of his obtaining the
nomination reached Paris, and how it was received
there we are enabled to judge by a letter from Mr.
James Tichborne to Lady Rawlinson, stating that
he was delighted at the prospect of Roger enter-
ing the army, but that the idea was exceedingly
displeasing to his mother, who was vexed with
him for having given his consent to Roger doing
so. Roger afterwards refers to this in one of his
letters as ‘the great blow up that took place’ on
his entering the army.
Well, the examination at Sandhurst was to be
held almost immediately, so his father writes to
one of the Colonels Greenwood, asking him to ac-
company Roger to Sandhurst on the occasion, for
he naturally thought that a man who spoke Eng-
lish imperfectly might have a better chance if he
were intioduced by some English officer or gentle-
man of standing. Colonel G( orge Greenwood un-
dertook this task. They went, he and Roger, on
Sunday, the Ist of July, to Sandhuist, in order to
be ready for the examination next day. When
they got to Sandhuist so many young men were
there waiting for the examination with their
friends that the hotel was found to be full, and
they could not get accommodation. The colonel
and his prottgt had then to go back to Farn-
borough, and dine and sleep at a little country
publichouse, near the railway station, called the
Tumble-Down-Dick. In the meantime Mr. Danby
Seymour had come down to see if he could help
Roger, but finding Colonel Greenwood there he
simply dined with them, and returned to town
the same evening. The next morning Colonel
Greenwood and Roger went to Sandhurst and ob-
tained lodgings at the Duke of York Inn, and the
place being very full, Colonel Greenwood gave
permission to any of the other guests to breakfast
in his room, and two availed themselves, as you
know, of the invitation. Questions have been
asked on those details of the defendant, and you
will find that his knowledge, or want of know-
ledge, of them is important. Roger was examined
and passed in history, geography, and in fortifica-
tions. He appears to have done well on the sub-
jects in which he pas sed, as they granted the com-
mission and gazetted him subject to his passing a
further examination in arithmetic. It is necessary
to remember that Roger and Colonel Greenwood
left Sandhurst immediately after the examination,
and returned to Hampshire that night, the ex-
amination only lasting one day. The next day
Roger returned to Tichborne, whence he wrote to
Mr. Seymour the following letter:
* Tichborne Park, 3 July 1849.
‘Dear Sir, —I am happy to inform you that I
have passed my examination yesterday at Sand-
hurst. I have answered to every questions which
they asked me in all the different branches of
study which they required me to know for my ad-


mission in the army. All the professors signed a
paper which proved that I knew well what they
examined me upon. That paper was sent to the
Horse Guards, and the report is to be made to-
day. I was told by the colonel who examined me
on Fortifications that I would be upon the Horse
Guards in the course of this week.’
It turned out that ho was mistaken as to having
passed in arithmetic ; but, either from having
done so weli in the other subjects or probably
from having obtained a certificate as to his pro-
gress in mathematic*, the second examination was
dispensed with, and he was gazetted. He had
given up his country tutor, Mr. Moberly, and came
to London to obtain the benefit of a master in
town—not, however, bear in mind, with a view
to his examination at Sandhurst, for that was
already over. Before going to town he wrote a
letter to his uncle, Henry Seymour, which runs
thus:
‘ Private.
‘ Tichborne Park, 25 th July 1849.
‘My dear Henry,—l received your very kind
letter yesterday. I was very happy to learn by
it that Mr. Seymour was better. I read also with
attention what you answered to my letter about
my outfit. I perfectly agree with you that there is
more time than is wanted to get it all ready. (Don’t
mention a word of what I say to anybody), but
the reason why I wish to be measured before my
father comes over to England is this. My Father,
as you know, is so very changeable that perhaps
my mother, who is not in the least partial to my
getting into the army, what I fear, for those
reasons which I have just explained is this, that
if she. gets again the upper hand over my Father,
she will make him change ; and if I am measured
for my outfit before he comes to England there
will be no drawing back. These are my reasons
for wishing to go to the Tailor so soon. For my
horses, I was advised to get them in Dublin for
this reason, they are entirely under the command-
ing-officer’s examination, and if he does not like
them he may obliged me to buy some others. It
is for that that I am going to write to the Colonel
of the 6th Dragoon Guaidsto get is advise and
to know what is best to do. Sir Edward and
Lady Doughty charged me to tell you that they
will be very happy to see you from this time to
the 7th of August, and that the sooner would be
better. —I remain, My Dear Henry, truly yours,
‘R. C. Tichborne.’
He then comes to London and stays at the
house of Mr. Seymour, in Upper Grosvenor-street.
Now, to show that he was quite aware of the
name of Mr. Moberly, the gentleman who in-
structed him, and of the place where Mr. Moberly
lived, I turn to a letter written from Upper
Grosvenor-street to Mr. Vincent Gosford on the
10th of September, which is as follows :
‘39 Upper Grosvenor-street, 10 th Sept. 1849.
‘ Dear Sir,— I should feel very much obliged to
you if you had the kindness to ride or send a note
to Mr. Maberley, at O wsbury, to let him know
that I don’t intend to take any more lessons from
him at present. What makes me write to you
about it is that I have received letters from him
to let me know that the time of joining my regi-
ment is close by, and that I ought to study. lam
going to write to him that I am studying in
London, and that I cannot go to him at present.’
You may have by and by to judge whether, if
the name had been submitted to Roger Tichborne
as the place to which he was in the habit of riding
six miles to receive mathematical lessons, he must
not have known that, although the name was
written Owslesbury, it was, in fact, the place
known in the country as Usselbury. "Well,
being in London, he got a letter from Lady
Doughty, which shows very plainly how long he
had been staying at Tichborne by speaking of the
‘eight months’during which she had been ’habitu-
ated to see him ;’ and she says, ‘ If it would give
you a little self-love or self-esteem—both of which
you require—I would tell you how very much you
arc missed by us all.’ After the character you
have heard given to Roger Tichborne, it is, I think,
important to observe with how much tenderness,
affection, and even respect his relatives wrote to
him. The letter runs thus :
' Tichborne-park.
‘ My dearest Itoger, Your uncle was much
gratified by hearing from you so soon, and I am
delighted you thought of writing to him. If it
would give, you a little self-love or self-esteem—
both of which you require—I would tell you how
very much you are missed by us all; for my part,
eight months has so habituated me to see you that
the loss of you to tease or scold, together with my
child being established in the school-room, makes
me feel quite desoeuvrt, and the riders missed you
sadly. We shall pass through town next Wed-
nesday, and embark at St. Katharine’s Wharf that
evening for Scotland. We shall reach Edinburgh
on Friday. We shall remain there some weeks,
but return at the end of September to receive
your father. Your uncle desires me to say he
should be glad to see you if you will meet us at
the station between then and embark, only we
must find some hotel to dine in. Perhaps you
would inquire what hotels Come and meet us.
Adieu! Love from us all.—Your affectionate aunt,
‘K. Doughty.’
In accordance with this invitation Roger met
them, and on that occasion Roger made a com-
munication to his aunt. He took the opportunity
of that short meeting to whisper a word in her ear
which is associated with the one romance of
Roger’s life I mean his love for his cousin.
Miss Doughty had returnedtoTichbornefromher
conventschool-lifeatTauntonfor the summervaca-
tion of 1849 while Roger was staying there. The
two cousins had only met for three or four days at
Bath at the commencement of that year. Before that
time they had not met for many years, owing to
the different periods of their respective vacations;
but in June 1849 she came back to stay perma-
nently at Tichborne, —at least it was so intended,
and Roger fellin love with his cousin. Perhaps it was
only at this time a nascent affection, but the first
germ of it was laid in his heart and never left it,
and we trace it to the last hour of his undoubted
life. It appears that he made some communica-
tion to Lady Doughty under the seal of the most
profound and. entire confidence and secrecy. I
shall have to trace this passion of Roger Tich-
borne’s throughout his whole career. It seems one
of the most remarkable and important portions of
this inquiry, and is one of the most material
topics we have to deal with, and a crucial test as
to the identity of the defendant. At this time
Lady Doughty does not appear to have discovered
it, but in the progress of time she conceived a dif-
ferent view from that which she may at first have
entertained. She may have vacillated backwards
and forwards. That she sometimes thought of
the possibility of a union between her daughter
and her nephew, and that at other times her mind
revolted from it, seems to me pretty clear from
the correspondence. Thera were matters which


undoubtedly tended to make such a thing desir-
able. There were other considerations which
tended in a contrary direction.
In the first place, in a worldly point of view, the
match was all that she could desire for her daugh-
ter. Miss Doughty by marrying her cousin would
become the matronly head of the old house of
Tichborne. She would be the mistress of Tich-
borne, with all the advantages which that position
would give. She would be the wife of a man of
large and ample fortune, so that in a worldly point
of viewnothingcould be better. Moreover, itis very
plain from her letters that in many respects she ad-
mired and esteemedßoger. It isquite clear beyond
all possibility of doubt that she loved him with the
most sincere and motherly affection. But then
there were considerations operating in the oppo-
site direction. In the first place there was that
one of consanguinity. Many persons regard the
marriage of first cousins as objectionable, on the
score of too great propinquity in the matter of re-
lationship. But to Roman Catholics this applies
much more forcibly than it does to those who are
not members of that religion, because, although
there have been dispensations granted, it is a union
which the Roman Catholic Church discounten-
ances and discourages. Then, again, Lady Doughty
knew perfectly well that this was an opinion
which was strongly entertained by Roger’s uncle,
and in which, as she believed, Roger's father
would share. There would therefore be consider-
able obstacles in the way of such an union.
But, unfortunately, there was a still more co-
gent reason operating upon her mind to make her
very reluctant to encourage this attachment, and
that was that she saw in Roger Tichborne that
which she believed to be the germ of evil. She
knew that he was in the habit of reading bad
books—books of an abandoned and disreputable
character—and it had been whispered in her ear
that Roger was not a paragon of virtue. Ido not
believe that Roger was a whit worse than half the
young men of his own age ; but it is a mistake to
suppose that he was that impersonation of im-
maculate purity which when the occasion required
he was sought to be represented. Lady Doughty
had got the notion that Roger was not as strict
in point of morals as a young man ought to be,
because a lady like Lady Doughty, unacquainted
with the ways of the world, would be very much
shocked at any departure from the strict rules
of moral propriety.
But her objections did not stop here. We
know very well what college life and military life
is in that respect. But young men sow their wild
oats, and they settle down into the calm of
domestic life and happiness, and everthing goes
smoothly and well, although in early life they
ttjay have been somewhat wild. But there is a
vice which when it takes possession of a young
man is very seldom shaken off, and that is the
vice of intemperance. And Lady Doughty saw
this tendency in Roger Tichborne. I think it has
been grossly exaggerated in the course of this
case. It has been implied, if not asserted, that
■Koger was an habitual drunkard —that he des-
troyed. his health and weakened his mental
powers by giving way to that degrading vice of
drnv en ? ess ‘ -frog 6l, w as not an habitual
£ do Dot suppose he drank more than
, . °r GO years ago have been considered a
thov flr lrt i Ue ‘ T ith our forefathers the more wine
greatS Tv, Ut - f i lling . under the table the
who taken a th rl^, soclal mt tit; but now every one
a. little more than what is allowed by
the ordinary social standard is looked upon as a
lost man. Now, Roger was a person of a sluggish
and inert nature, physically and mentally. His
physical strength had been drawn away by the
abominable seton, and by the pernicious practice
of bleeding, which I am happy to think is now
gone out of fashion. He was subject to fits of
despondency. Instead of looking at the cheerful
and bright side of things he rather contemplated
the dark and gloomy side of life and its surround-
ings. But when he took a little wine he found
himself in lively and good spirits, and was induced
to take more than was good for him ; once or
twice, and only once or twice, he exhibited the
effects of over-indulgence, and Lady Doughty
saw it. There is, of course, nothing a mother
would shrink from with greater abhorrence than
the idea of uniting her daughter to a man who
was or had the disposition to become a drunkard.
Nothing so degrades or debases a man. Nothing
has so great a tendency to make domestic life
miserable and the wife and children unhappy as
that the husband and the father should be a
drunkard. She shrank from the thought, but
Roger’s protestations of reform were so strenuous
and apparently so sincere that her disposition to
put an end to the attachment gave way, and she
still considered the union as possible.
I am not sure whether she was not playing a
little with Roger, for a very honest and legitimate
purpose, but still in a manner which was not quite
candid. She had a dread of his weakness, but he
was the hope of the family. He was the future
heir. He was the one to whom they all looked
as the future head of the Tichborne family, who
was to perpetuate the race. There were but two
left, himself and his brother. If they failed the
name of Tichborne was extinct. If Roger, the
elder of the two, went to India, there was the
possibility of his being engaged in warfare, and
the certainty of his being exposed to the dangers
of the climate, and the thought may have struck
poor Lady Doughty and his other relations with
horror. She on more than one occasion suggests
that as a reason why he should not go with his
regiment to India, and that if he was ordered
there he should exchange into another. She puts
it to him that he is capable of creating an attach-
ment and that he might form a union—pointing,
I cannot help thinking, plainly to her daughter—
by means of which, instead of exposing his life to
the dangers of a foreign climate and the chances
of war and battle, he might lead a happy and
domestic life in the old halls of Tichborne, sur-
rounded by every means of enjoyment in this
world. I cannot help thinking that Lady
Doughty did to a certain extent use that topic
for the purpose of keeping Roger Tichborne in
England without having altogether made up her
mind to permit the marriage or to use her
influence with her husband to consent to it. The
matter, however, was brought to a crisis by the
visit Roger paid to Tichborne in 1851, and which
extended to January 1852. But all that matter
I shall have to deal with by and by. I have only
given an outline of what I conceive to have been
the weakness of Lady Doughty’s mind in the
earlier period in order that when I come to give
you the letters more in detail you may be able. to
see whether your judgment goes along with mine
as to the motives by which she was actuated, and
what were her intentions in writing those letters.
Gentlemen, there is another subject which arises
in dealing with the same period ; yet it is one of
equal importance as a test of the defendant’s iden-


tity, and it is that which relates to the estates of
Tichborne and Doughty. In Roger Tichborne’s
time vast and important changes were introduced
into the disposition of the family property ; in
those changes Roger Tichborne bore a prominent
part, and tne question will be whether, in what
Roger Tichborne did in the alteration of the legal
position of the estates, he was a passive tool or
an intelligent actor. If he understood all that
was done by himself in respect to these alter-
ations, which were carried into effect, Roger
Tichborne, I apprehend, could not have possibly
forgotten what he then did. You will have here-
after to consider whether the defendant, who
was asked as to what was done with the property,
had the most remote conception of what was the
state of the Tichborne or of the Doughty pro-
perty. If you think he had a fair knowledge, I
cannot conceive anything which ought to weigh
more strongly in his favour, provided always that
you should be satisfied that this knowledge was
the genuine reproduction of his own mind, and
not derived from extraneous sources. But if, on
the other hand, you come to the conclusion that
he knew nothing of the disposition of the pro-
perty, it would, in my opinion, be equally strong,
unless you come to the conclusion that this is a
matter which, as was urged on his behalf, a
man could possibly have forgotten. It would, it
seems to me, be one of the best and most practi-
cal tests which could be found.
Let me give you a short account of the property
as it stood at that time. Roger Tichborne came
of age on the sth of January 1850, and upon his
coming of age a settlement of the Doughty es-
tates could be effected. What I want you to con-
sider is, how far Roger Tichborne was, as I said,
a passive tool or an intelligent actor in that which
was about to be done ; but in order that you may
be able to form a sound judgment on that point,
it is necessary that I should tell you what he did,
and in order to make it intelligible you must be
made aware of what was the state of things prior
to Roger Tichborne being called upon to act.
The property to which the heir of Tichborne
would be entitled consisted of two estates, estates
acquired and held under different titles. In the
first place, there was the old Tichborne property,
which, had been in the family from generation to
generation ; and added to the Tichborne property
were two other estates, one of which had been re-
cently bought—that was Old Court, at Prior’s
Dean, and a place close to Tichborne called
White-ears. Now an estate may be held either
in what is called fee-simple, in which case you
have absolute power of disposition, or it may be
entailed; that is to say, that although you may
have the present enjoyment of it, it is not in your
power to prevent the title to and possession of the
estate going to the person upon whom it may be
settled. You have an estate conveyed to you,
and to the heirs of your body. You cannot, with-
out first getting rid of the entail, dispose of that
property to the prejudice of those who are in the
entail. But you may get rid of the entail by a
certain process which law has recognised and
established. In order, however, to do that you
must be in a certain position. If you are tenant-
in-tail in possession, you may, by a disentailing
deed get rid of the entail and liberate the estate
altogether from its operation, and so convert that
which was an estate tail into an absolute estate
in fee-simple. In that way you dispose of it. But
suppose you are not in possession as a tenant-in-
tail, but you have what is called the remainder
in you.; that; is to say, that upon the expiration
of the present estate the estate will be yours in
possession, then, if the two parties concur—the
man who is at present in possession, and. the
man who has the remainder, and who will come
into possession at the expiration of the present
estate —between the two they may execute con-
currently a disentailing deed and resettle the
estate.
The two estates of Tichborne and Doughty
stood, in this respect, upon a different footing.
The Tichborne estate was limited; first to Sir
Edward Doughty for life, with remainder to
the heirs of his body in tail; then came Mr.
James Tichborne for life, with remainder to his
eldest son—not in tail, but for life—with re-
mainder to the heirs male of the body of Roger
Tichborne in tail. So that you see Roger Tich-
borne’s father having only an estate for life,
and Roger only an estate for life, they were
neither of them in a position to bar the entail of
the property. Roger Tichborne would not, there-
fore, be able to get rid of the entail of that
estate until such time as he himself should have
a son who should attain the age of 21, when he
might do so concurrently with such son. When
Roger Tichborne had a son who attained that
age, if that son concurred with Roger as a tenant
for life to bar the entail, they could execute a
disentailing deed, and get rid of it. But as things
stood, Roger not being married, and having no
children, and having only an estate for life, he
could not do so, and Tichborne could not be
touched. There was no power to enable any-
body to get rid of the entail of the estate. Now
the Tichborne property was heavily charged. _ A
settlement was executed, under the limitations
of which the estate stood as I have described, but
in that settlement the estate was charged with
heavy encumbrances. First, it had been charged
with 24,000?. for the benefit of Sir Henry Tich-
borne’s daughters, and then with an additional
sum of 32,000?. There was only power to charge
the Doughty property in the sum of 8000?. for
Miss Doughty's benefit, and 8000?. would be a
very inadequate dowry for the only daughter of
a man possessing an estate worth 15,000?. or
20,000?. a year. Sir Edward, then Mr. Doughty,
was able, however, to make suitable provision for
his daughter in another way. It seems that, in
some prior disposition of the Tichborne property,
whereas it was intended there should be a re-
mainder to Sir Edward Tichborne, not in tail, but
for life, by some mistake of the conveyancer he
was made to take the estate tail in remainder;
and the effect of that would have been this : that
as soon as he came into possession he could dis-
entail the Tichborne property and dispose of it as
he pleased, and if he thought proper, instead of
allowing it to go, as it always had done, with the
Tichborne title, he could have given every stick
and stone of it to his daughter. But he did not
desire to do anything of the kind. All he wished
was to make a fair provision for his daughter.
His power was limited by Miss Doughty’s will,
and he could not charge more than 8000?. to the
Doughty estates. But, by a fresh settlement exe-
cuted between his brother and himself, they could
get rid of the entail and agree to charge the
Tichborne estate with such a sum as should make
up what would be a competent and proper pro-
vision for Miss Doughty. The whole of the
Doughty estates would come into the possession
of the future heir of Tichborne when he came of
age, and a resettlement of the Doughty estates


could be made, -when a charge might be put upon
it to liberate Tichborne.
A Juror.—The rental of Tichborne was not, I
belie to. more than 5000/. a year.
The Lord Chief Justice.—Yes, the effect
would be Yery grievous indeed on Tichborne, be-
cause its whole rental would not exceed 6000/. a
year, and an. encumbrance of 50,000/. is a very
heavy charge indeed on such an income. But then
by a resettlement sufficient could be taken from
Doughty to set Tichborne free, and the scheme
was. when Roger came of age, to disentail the
Doughty estate and to sell as much as would raise
the sum they afterwards did raise. It occurred
to the brother s, and very wisely, I think, that two
family seats were one too many, and that Upton
was an encumbrance. The old ancestral seat
where the family had lived for many generations
was Tichborne. It was there where they were
known as one of the most distinguished families
in Hampshire, and where they were of conse-
quence. Except for their money value, what to
them were their estates io Bucks, in Lincolnshire,
in Suffolk, in the neighbourhood of Gray's-inn-
lane, and in Dorset ? The scheme, therefore, was
to sell Upton and everything belonging to it, and
other property belonging to the Doughty estates,
or, by mortgage, to raise the sum to one sufficient
to set Tichborne free. This was a very sagacious
and taking scheme, and those who proposed it—
and. at the bottom of it was Mr. Hopkins, the old
family solicitor, who knew everything about the
property—thought it might be easily done. The
estates, by the will of Bliss Doughty, were settled
upon Sir E. Doughty for life, and he having no
son, on Mr. James Tichborne and the heirs male
of his body. The heir male of his body was Roger
Tichborne, and the moment he came of age a
resettlement was possible.
On that period approaching it was proposed to
carry, into effect, what the father and uncle had
had in their minds ever since the settlement of
1844.. Mr. Hopkins, who propounded this scheme,
took it for granted that there would not be the
slightest difficulty with Roger Tichborne. and that
be would enter into the scheme, and give his ready
acquiescence to what was proposed by his father
and uncle. But they were all three mistaken in the
young man. Roger Tichborne was not a person
t° be dictated to in a matter of that description,
and, having conceived in his own mind a totally
nmerent scheme, he persisted in it, and carried
it out. He had it in his mind to create a second
lannly which should owe its weight and position
i estates to him. Ido not know whether he
tun T notion that 20,000/. or 25,000/. a year was
1 property for one person, but it is quite
coitlri f at ’ fr . om tbe earliest time at which he
tor nf i? roa . a . Pigment and intention upon a mat-
tt, , 1 , at "icd, he had made up his mind that
wDh n Sa ° u ]d become the seat of a second family,
the estates, or thereabout, appro-
couVoc u a t particular branch. If he lived, of
joym. r,f V±i tended that he should have the en-
made im°i . e . w hole undivided property; but he
in order tli' 1 ,! n Y n< * that Upton should not be sold,
Upton shmu 7\ en £ e died > if lle had a sec °nd son,
He had , 0 e sea t of the second family,
second son P “is mind that if he had not a
with reference toT’ 6 should be established
in bis mind® tw! rother Alfred. He had that
wards carry i n + n ‘ sc *eme which lio would after-
municate it to Lnb au Ti u Ut h . e did not com-
ba recesses of his tie kept it locked up in
13 ° wa brea *t until such time as
the scheme was ripe for execution. But when Mr.
Hopkins proposed to disentail the Doughty es-
tates and resettle them, and so acquire the power
to sell Upton, together with such other property
as might be necessary for raising the sum to free
the Tichborne estate, he resolutely resisted the
proposal. I want you to follow me in these letters
in order that you may be able to satisfy your
minds whether in this resistance, and whether in
what Roger Tichborne afterwards did in respect of
the settlement of the Doughty estate in 1850, and
in that far more important document, the will
which he made in 1852, he was a passive instru-
ment, or whether he was acting on his own judg-
ment, by virtue of his own intelligence, under-
standing everything that he was doing.
It has been suggested on the part of the learned
counsel for the defendant, with a view to cover
the ignorance—I cannot mince the matter—l must
call it the absolute ignorance exhibited by the de-
fendant as to the disposition of this property, that
Roger Tichborne was merely a creature of Mr.
Gosford. There are very strong reasons, I think,
for coming to a very different conclusion, inas-
much as it seems to me very plain that Mr. Gos-
ford's interest was to keep the property together,
so that his stewardship should not be divided!
But. quite independently of any such consideration,
I want you carefully to follow these letters so as
to be able to form your own judgment whether or
not Roger Tichborne did not take the utmost pains
to make himself perfectly master of the subject,
and exhibit a firm resolution not to be hurried on
to any step of so serious a consequence ; and whe-
ther, before he finally executed an instrument
which in the event of his death would be irrevoca-
ble, he did not do his utmost to master the details
of the instrument he was asked to execute. When
I come to show you by and by what the defend-
ant has said upon the subject of the disposition of
these estates, whether under the settlement of
1844 as regards the Tichborne property, or that of
1850 under the will of Robert Tichborne with re-
spect to the Doughty estate, you will see the in-
finite importance of the inquiry I am to propose
to you—namely, whether Roger Tichborne did or
did not understand the meaning of the various
proposals for their disentailing and resettlement.
When Roger came up to town on the 9th of August
to pursue his mathematical studies, Mr. Hopkins
was quite surprised and staggered to find the re-
solute position which he had taken on the subject.
He writes the following letter to Mr. Hopkins :
‘ 39 Upper Grosvenor-street,
‘ London, August 18, 1849.
‘My dear Sir, —I have not been able to answer
your letter yesterday, as I wished it at first. I
have been very busy all day long yesterday, so that
I had but little time to myself. lam sorry to see
by your letter that the conversation which we had
on Wednesday embarrasses you so very much
about the Doughty estates. I refuse, that is true,
to give a definite answer before I come to 21, but
at the same time I cannot help thinking, when I
think of what those papers which you were so kind
as to send me, and which I read with much atten-
tion, that many of those papers which are to be
drawn could be drawn during this time and next
January, as they are relative to family settle-
ments. I hope that you will excuse my not writ-
ing a longer letter to-dav, it is nearly’ 5 o’clock;
but on Monday I will make it a point to write you
a longer letter. —I remain, my dear Sir. truly
yOU r S) _ R. 0. TIOHBORNE. ,
Mr. Hopkins appears to have written again on


the subject, for in three days after comes the fol-
lowing :
‘ London, August 21, 1849.
‘My dear Sir,—l was not able to give my letter
all the extent I could have wished, for want
of time. I should be sorry that my too long a
delay should trouble you in the least to know what
answer to make to my father. I shall be of age
in four months and a half, and I ask that time to
be able to make up my mind in such a way that
later in life I may not reproach myself to have
acted without having thought well about what I
was to do.’
In the meantime Lady Doughty and her party
went to Edinburgh, and we have a letter from her
which shows that Roger Tichborne was not ad-
dicted merely to French novels, nor did he take up
his time in hunting or shooting; but he read
works of the highest kind of literature, among
which was Moliere’s celebrated play, the Misan-
thrope. He had sent Lady Doughty the book, no
doubt; for she makes some observations on the
two leading characters of the piece, one of whom
is a man of the world, w T ho looks on everything
from the pleasant side, and who accepts the con-
ventional views of social life as by no means con-
tributing to vice or folly, but to the general en-
joyment and happiness of mankind. The other is
the morose rigorous moralist, who looks upon
everything from the dark side, and can see no-
thing but folly and vice in his fellow-men, and
thinks it better to shun society than to seek its
enjoyments. Roger professes to be of the latter
rather than the former character like Alceste
rather than Philinte, taking a gloomy view of life
and a desponding one of his own position. Lady
Doughty, for her part, gives expression to the
opposite view, and talks of resuming the discus-
sion in ‘the smoke-dried’ room at Tichborne.
Then comes a letter to Mr. Gosford on the subject
of the settlement of the estates :
‘ London, August 24, 1849.
‘Dear Sir, —Mr. Hopkins wrote me a few days
ago to tell me that he wished me to write to him
to tell what was my last determination about the
settlement; that he wanted my answer to give it
to my father. I answered him that I was very
soon of age, and that I wanted that time to think
more deeply upon it, to be able to think about it
in such a way that I may not repent later in life
of having given my consent without having well
thought about what I was to do. He showed that
letter to my father, who approved of my delay to
be able to think more about it.’
There is another letter, which is of importance
only as showing that this young man had serious
pursuits apart from sport and other amusements ;
for he asks that Lardner’s work on the Steam En-
gine may be sent to him. Then there is another
letter from Lady Doughty in Edinburgh, which is
important in this way, that it introduces the name
of Lady Neeld, her half-sister, which was after-
wards put to the defendant to test his knowledge.
She says she was shocked by seeing in the papers
the death of her poor sister, Lady Neeld. Tiien
we have a letter from Lady Doughty to Roger of
a painful character, which introduces Mrs. Tich-
borne on the scene as a woman whose querulous
disposition was constantly creating unpleasantness
in the family, and marring the peace of those with
whom she came in contact. She says :
‘Are you going to see your father again? Of
course you are aware that after all seemed happily
settled between your father and uncle that your
father wrote to say your mother was not satisfied,
and he requested Sir Edward to write to her; but
your uncle wrote kindly but firmly to your father
to decline this, saying that, never having seen
your mother for 15 years or ever written to her,
he was convinced no good could result from his
writing now. Dear Roger, I want to offer one
little bit of advice, and that is still to improve in
letter-writing—in style, spelling, ko. Now don’t
be angry with me, or write less often; but as it is
so very necessary for you to know different styles
of let ter-writing, so forgive me for venturing to
advise you. And with kind love from your uncle
and cousin, believe me always your affectionate
aunt, EL Doughty.’
"Whether Roger Tichborne provided himself
thereupon with that work which beginners have
found so useful—the Complete Letter Writer —l
know not, but the consequence is that he cer-
tainly does improve, though not to the extent of
being able to shake off his habit of French trans-
lation. But you will find that he has fluency;
his thoughts appear to come quickly, and his lan-
guage readily adapts itself to the ideas that are
presented to his mind; and, as my learned brother
reminds me—and I am very much obliged to him
for doing so—with one or two exceptions which
were not intended to go beyond the persons to
whom they were addressed, his letters are in
good taste, and are the letters of a man used to
good and refined society. This is a point which
will be of consequence by and by in the decision
at which you will arrive.
On the 15th of September he writes to Mr. H.
Seymour that his father wished him to join him
on the 25th of that month, and on the 18th he
writes to his aunt that his father was at Knoyle,
and was to join him on the 29th, that he intended
to go to Dublin on the 21st of October, and that,
if she would allow him, he would be most happy
to pass a few days at Tichborne before joining the
Army. On the 11th of October we find him at
Knoyle, for he writes :
‘ I shall leave Knoyle on Monday, the 15th, as
my uncle and Lady Doughty allow me to pass a
few days at Tichborne before I go to Ireland.’
There, again, is an instance of the accuracy of
Lady Doughty’s diary, for in the diary it appears
that he was there on the 15th. Mr. Seymour was
at that time dying of dropsy, being then in the
last stage of that troublesome complaint. He
had gone to Bath, to the house of Mrs. Hop-
kinson, his wife's mother, in order to have the
benefit of the advice of better physicians. It so
happened that Mr. Seymour died at her house at
Bath, and she herself died a short time after-
wards. But the fact is unquestionable that Mr.
Seymour died in her house at Bath, and I don’t
think there can be a doubt that Roger went over
from Knoyle to take his leave of his grandfather.
Whether that last visit, as it proved, was in-
tended to have about it all the solemnity of a
final leave-taking, or simply a leave-taking be-
cause Roger Tichborne was going to Ireland in a
week or two, Ido not know. Possibly the visit
combined the two things. It may be that
did not go to take a final leave of his grandfather
at this side of the grave ; still, he probably knew
that he would see his grandfather, on this side of
the grave, no more. Mr. Seymour was known to
be dying. _ It was now the month of October and
he died in the ensuing month of November
Every one knew that he was at the last gasp and
Roger could not have failed to be acquainted’with
the state m which his grandfather was. Though
he might only say, ‘I am come over to see you


before going over to Ireland,’ and may have said
nothing about an eternal farewell: and, though
his grandfather may not have been aware that he
was about to see his grandson for the last time,
Roger must have been perfectly aware of it. Now
comes the question—lf you go to see some rela-
tion who has been as kind as a father to you and
you know he is rapidly approaching the final
termination of this world’s existence, you take
his hand for the last time and you know the fare-
well which he utters will he the last words you
will ever hear from his lips, and in a short time
that loved relation must pass away from the
world and you will see him no more, is that a
circumstance which will be impressed on the
memory, never, never to be forgotten, or is it one
that will easily escape? And whereas you saw
him at Bath for the last time and knew he died
there, will you forget it and say, ‘He did not die
at Bath, he died at Knoyle’ ? That is a question
you will have to decide by and by. You have
heard the defendant’s account how he went to
see his grandfather. I call your attention to it
now, because it is one of those things which may
fairly and justly he taken into account in deter-
mining whether the recollections of the defendant
are Roger Tichborne’s recollections.
Well, gentlemen, Roger went to Tichborne,
crossed the Channel, and arrived at Kingstown on
the 25th of October. T)n the 26th he proceeded
to Dublin, and on the 27th joined his regiment.
He then presents himself to the Colonel—Colonel
Jackson—when a very curious scene occurred, ac-
cording to the account of Colonel Bickerstaffe,
then adjutant of the regiment. The young man
presents himself, and the Colonel looks at him,
and, whether from the seedy appearance of his
dress or not, takes him for some man who was
coming to assist the cook in preparing for a regi-
mental dinner. So he says, ‘ Take him to the
cook.’ The Colonel was surprised when Roger
produced the document signifying his appoint-
ment by the Horse Guards.
I should have observed that before he left Tich-
borne he had a conversation with Lady Doughty
on the subject nearest to his heart —his relation to
his cousin Miss Doughty. He renewed the con-
versation which he had before with Lady Doughty
when she was passing through town ; and I think
it cannot be doubted that Roger took a very de-
spondent view of his own capacity to please, his
own pretensions as regards his power to win his
in the world, and, above all, his power to win
his way in the affections of a young lady to whom
he was attached. Lady Doughty writes to him
the following kind and encouraging letter :
, ‘ Tichborne park, Saturday, 27th.
My dearest Roger,—We were most agreeably
surprised to-day to hear of your safe arrival in
b ij i. BO soon - I had not dared to hope we
should have heard before Tuesday. I have thought
o you incessantly since our sad parting on Tues-
mf. as t. I earnestly hope change of scene
in" ■ lve employment will give you a more cheer-
m“i, Tle f, life, and draw you from your own
tup , nc k°ly thoughts. Write speedily again ; tell
offi™ y °.? ll ave ,heen received by your fellow-
life vm, a ni yk a t i s your first impressions of the
your f a +^ U T, ha 7? t° lead I rejoiced to find
and Alfrprl pictures of yourself
thefamiW 5 we have hung them under
your portraitmatures rnthe drawing room, and so
over that very stoo^wh^ 618 ' 11^ b ° y ’ 1 lo ° k at
an hour talking to i have P assed many
anting to me by the fireside in the draw-
ing-room. . . . And now, my dear Roger, adieu.
Be assured that the confidence you have placed in.
me will be quite safe with me ; that, whatever may
be your future destiny, I humbly pray the Author
of our being that He will guide you to love Him and
be grateful for the existence given you here below to
work out and gain happiness hereafter ; and that,
if you do feel affection for a human being, let it
stimulate your exertions to conquer your faults
and lead a life that could render those you love
happy. Remember, if ever you wish to say any-
thing in confidence to me you have only to put
“Private” at the top of a separate sheet enclosed
in your letter, and I shall never show it; and be
assured I am ever your affectionate aunt,
‘ Katharine Doughty.’
There was encouragement for him. She does not
say ‘ The affection which you feel for a human
being you must get rid of as soon as possible; but
let it stimulate your exertions to conquer your
faults and lead a life that could render those you
love happy. Whatever you have to say on the
subject write with confidence to me.’ Then he
writes to her on common subjects. I refer to it
only to show that at that time, instead of indulg-
ing in misanthropy, he was eagerly entering into
Dublin society. Here is one of his letters :
‘ Dublin, Nov. 9,1849.
‘ My dear Aunt, —I begin to know some persons
in Dublin. I went to a small evening party at
Lady Burke (sic). The next day I went to dine
with Lord Howth ; his three daughters and his
son (Lord St. Lawrence) were there. The party
was rather large. I went on Monday to dine with.
Lady Clanricarde ; the party was rather small.’
The mention of this lady’s name reminds me of
the practical joke played upon Roger.by Major
Foster. Lady Clanricarde, kindly wishing to get
upon friendly terms with the young cornet, in-
vited him to dine with her, and upon his telling
Major Foster of the invitation, he said, ‘O, you
will meet all the grandees there —perhaps the Duke
of Cambridge. You must go in full uniform.’
Roger accordingly put on his uniform and brass
helmet, and all his other paraphernalia; but when
he arrived at Lady Clanricarde's he found himself
tite d-tete with that lady. When he next saw
Major Foster he complained good-naturedly of the
trick played upon him. There are other letters in
which he speaks of the society he went into in
Dublin:
‘ Dec. 7, 1549.
* My dear Aunt, —I went to dine at Mr. Ball (sic).
I found there a large party, and among other per-
sons I met Lord and Lady Bellew, and they were
kind enough to invite me to go and see them.
They told me that Edward Bellew was not to
come back to Ireland befoie April. I was sur-
prised to receive, a few days ago, the visit of
Gerald Dease. I received a letter from Henry
Nangle, two days ago, &c. R. C. Tichborne.’
Itistoberem arked that Roger sometim es omitted
the final s in the possessive, or, as it is called in
Latin, the genitive case. He should have said ‘ at
Lady Burke’s,’ but he leaves out the s. That is a
characteristic of the defendant. But, as far as my
observation has gone, Roger does not fall into that
error except after the word 1 at,’ meaning ‘at the
house of,’ and then he translates the French chcz
— chcz Lady Burke. The letters of the undoubted
Roger Tichborne omit the s only under the circum-
stances I have mentioned.
It was stated by counsel for the defendant as a
reason for not calling Sir Talbot Constable, that
it had presented itself to his mind that Roger had


conveyed some offensive idea with regard to the
lady whom Sir Talbot Constable married, in the
following letter : ‘ Dublin, Nov. 29, 1849.
‘My dear Aunt,—l received a few days ago a
letter from my father, in which he tells me news
which he tells me he can scarcely believe. It is
that Talbot Constable is going to be married to a
French girl, Mademoiselle de Grammont. I was
very much surprised to receive such news.’
If I thought that was the intention or effect,
most unquestionably I would not read it, because
Sir Talbot Constable is not before us, and anything
relating to his domestic affairs that could give
him a moment’s pain or displeasure ought not to
be brought forward on such an occasion when it is
wholly unnecessary for our present purpose, and
would have been even if he had been called before
us. And that the learned counsel anticipated that
Sir Talbot Constable, if called, would have been
insulted in cross-examination, is one of the most
astounding things one has heard in this strange
and extraordinary trial. Why, Mdlle. de Gram-
mont belongs to one of the best families in France,
and to say r that there is something offensive in
■peaking of the lady as a French girl is one of the
strangest things of all. Why, no one could take
offence if it was said that he was about to marry
an English girl, or a German girl, and why it
should be thought offensive that a man’s future
wife was called a French girl, I cannot under-
stand. Then there is a letter which Lady Doughty
writes to Roger, speaking of the death of Mr.
Seymour, and calling him not ‘ your grandfather,’
but ‘Mr. Seymour.’
Besides the peculiarities I have already pointed
out in Roger’s letters, there is another which is
characteristic of a Frenchman. He always uses
the future tense with regard to a future event
where we use the present. The French are much
more grammatically correct in that respect than
we are. We say in every-day language, ‘When
I get to London Igo see so and so.’ We ought
to say, ‘ When I will or shall go to London, I
shall go and see so and so.’ Instead of saying,
‘ When I receive such a sum of money I pay so
and so,’ we ought to say, ‘When I shall re-
ceive such a sum of money I will pay so and
so.’ The French, as I have said, in such cases
invariably use the future, and when Roger uses
the French form it strikes upon our ear as. some-
what incorrect. Another peculiarity which is to be
found in the style and grammar of the disputed
and the undisputed Roger Tichborne is the employ-
ment of the present tense for the past. You will
find it especially in the word ‘ use.’ ‘I use to do
so and so’ for ‘I used to do so and so.’ Then, again,
we have Roger using the plural for the singular,
as in the folio wing letter,‘informations’ for infor-
mation, but that is only a French idiom. Roger
writes to Gosford : ‘ Dublin, Dec. 14, 1849.
‘I shall have no end of business to transact
with Mr. Hopkins, and I have not time to spare.
I received a letter from him ; he mentioned to
me that he has received those papers back again.
I was glad to learn that he had them back again,
because they may be very useful tome in London.
He offers to give me all the informations (sic) in
his power; and he says that if lam not able to
<ro to London he will come over to Dublin. The
objection I have to go to Tichborne at present if
I can get leave, is that by refusing to agree to the
settlements my uncle might get vexed with me
and get me into trouble, a thing I wish to avoid
as much as possible Yours, &c.,
‘R. C. TiCHBOENE.’
Then in another letter he speaks of getting into
‘debts,’ instead of into ‘debt’—a French idiom
again.
Then he writes to his mother and talks about
his drill, and from what he says one would draw
the inference that this young man was very de-
sirous of making himself as efficient a soldier as
possible. There is another point of view from
which the letter is remarkable ; it was written on
the point of his coming of age. He went to Tich-
borne on the 2d of January 1850. On that occa-
sion, as he was coming of age, there was more or
less festivity, and among other things there was a
servants’ ball. That was on the sth of January or
thereabouts. At this ball, unfortunately, he took
a little too much punch, and out of that grew the
incident to which Miss Braine has deposed, but
upon which I shall not dwell at present. There is
no doubt, however, that Roger did indulge a little
too much on that occasion, which, perhaps, found
its way to the ear of Lady Doughty, and made her
apprehend that in after life Roger might give way
to this propensity. On the occasion of that visit
the subject of the re-settlement of the Doughty
estates again came up, and Hopkins found thesame
disinclination as formerly on Roger’s part to con-
cur in the scheme —the same reluctance to sell the
Upton property. Some letters passed between them
which show that Roger was quite alive to the im-
portance of being madethoroughly acquainted with
the details, and was equally determined to have
his own purpose carried out. He writes thus to
Mr. Hopkins:
‘ Tichborne, Jan. 6, 1850.
‘My dear Sir, —I am sorry that many engage-
ments have prevented me from giving as full a
consideration to the different papers which you
gave me as I could have wished. Ido not, there-
fore, think it right to take up your time to-day,
but will to-morrow give in writing my views upon
the subject. In the meantime I approve of. the
scheme as a whole, but subject to some alterations
which I will point out.’
When Roger Tichborne would not consent to
sell the Upton estates or the Dorsetshire estates,
or any portion of the property, then it was said,
* Let us raise on the Doughty estates, without sell-
ing any of the property, a sufficient sum to pay off
the encumbrances on the Tichborne estates.’ To
that plan Roger consented, because it left him the
power to deal with the property as he intended,
and it was accordingly carried into effect. It se-
cured to him 500?. a year independently of all con-
trol while his uncle lived, and .1000?. a year at his
uncle’s death. That is a question which will be of
importance when you come to the period when the
defendant accepted the position of a herdsman.
100,000?. was to be raised to pay off an encum-
brance of 56,000?. on the Tichborne estate, and the
residue was to go to purchase land to increase that
6S A*Juror asked whether the portrait of Roger
with the melancholy expression mentioned by
Lady Doughty had been laid before the jury.
The Lord Chief Justice said it had not, and he
was sorry an inquiry had not been made about it.
Mr. Hawkins observed that he had done all in
his power to get it, but had not succeeded.
The Lord Chief J ustice.— Roger now goes back
to his regiment, and he writes to his aunt a re-
markable letter marked * piivate.’ It is this:
‘January 15, 1850.
‘My dear Aunt,—l was very anxious to have,
before I left Tichborne, a private conversation with
you j but I saw with much sorrow, when I had the


pleasure of seeing you last, that it would have
fatigued too much to have begun that conversa-
tion. It is for those reasons that I have taken
the liberty of writing to you upon the different
subjects which I was anxious to tell you by word
of mouth, if I had been able to do so before I left.
You mentioned to me once in the drawing-room
that my conduct towards you since I was at Tich-
borne had been very reserved. I don’t think the
accusation quite correct. Have I made any show
of reserve when I last had the pleasure of meeting
you in London ? .... I don’t think I have ; on
the contrary, if 1 could reproach myself of some-
thing it would be of having open [sic] my heart
too much and to have by those means laid (sic) you
too much into my feelings and the nature of my
thoughts. But I don’t repent of it. There is also
another accusation which can be put against me,
which is, that during the time which 1 passed at
Tichborne, I took, perhaps, too much to drinking.
I quite agree that, perhaps, I have drunk sometime
too much. The reasons which I can give to ex-
cuse myself for having donse so are these. I had
my mind raised to a feverish state by the lawyers
with whom I was obliged to discuss about those
settlements, that, joined with other thoughts which
occupied my mind to the state I have just men-
tioned, it made me take to drinking as a kind of
relieve. You will, perhaps, say that it is a very
absurd kind of remedy ! I agree. I remember that
one evening in the drawing-room you were going.
to say something to me when somebody came in
and prevented you from speaking to me. I should
be much obliged to you if you had the kindness to
let me know what it was.
‘ Now I am going to let you know a piece of
news, which will, I am sure, surprise you more
than anything I ever told you as yet. I intend
going to confession and communion as soon as I
shall be able. That will be the beginning of the
reformation which I intend to begin in my way of
living, and which I hope, with the help of God, to
carry into execution, and keep to it in future
times. I never had, as you know, much religion,
but whatever little I had, I always stood by it. 1
know very well that I have been' more of a shame
to my religion than anything else for 21 years. But
whatever little religion 1 had, I cannot accuse my-
self of having ever denied what I believed when
called forth to confess what I believed. I was
fully determined of telling you all these things
which I have said in my letter, if I had been able
to talk to you, before I left Tichborne. If there
are some points which you don't well understand,
pray write me that I may explain the meaning of
each word, that you may understand everything
which I have said thoroughly well. My spirits
have been very low since I have left Tichborne.
I don't feel so much the pain at the moment of
parting with the persons who I love and who have
been kind to me; but it is when I find myself
alone that the reaction is very great with me, be-
cause I cannot cry. Pray be so kind to answer a
very long letter, and answer each word which I
fV* *** this letter. I have given some time to de-
nf “ 1 s ‘ lo uld send you this letter or not. —1 re-
neni,L dear your very affectionate
‘ • , B. O. Tichbokne.
of Tufi.u n Vi m 7 barrack room on the afternoon
or iuesday, the 15th Jany., 1850.’
the wroUBllttllis change in
said, ‘ l WB O ? erTlchb “ rne? Why was it he
for twenty-one yeaTs° than a t 0 reliBion
why was he determined to + nythlng else ? And
ueiermined to turn over a new leaf ?
I cannot help thinking that the love he had
formed for his cousin was the motive. There is,
as you know, a purifying influence in the love of
a man for a worthy object, and this young man
knew very well that unless he led a life which
would inspire his cousin’s parents with confidence
in him his hopes in that quarter might be disap-
pointed. At all events, the first step towards
future happiness was to get rid of intemperance,
and to abstain from the indulgence of that pro-
pensity which he knew his aunt had observed,
otherwise an insurmountable obstacle would be
presented to his hopes. He says, ‘My spirits
have been very low since I parted with you.
When I find myself alone the reaction is very
great.’ One cannot help seeing there were very
strong emotions working within that young man’s
mind; and when we are afterwards told that this
feeling towards his cousin was nothing more than
animal desire, I must say the man who said so
cannot have studied those letters and followed
Eoger Tichborne through all the passionate emo-
tions which they betray, or cannot have read those
letters in the spirit of truth, or he never could
have put such a construction on his conduct.
And now comes a letter in reply from Lady
Doughty. I think it necessary to read those let-
ters, because they vividly depict the relations be-
tween Lady Doughty and Eoger Tichborne. But
that is not all. You will by and by have to form
your judgment of them yourselves ; and when you
have read this correspondence, at all events that
part of it which touches the heart and soul of
Eoger Tichborne to the very core, you will have
to say whether this is a correspondence which a,ny
man could ever have forgotten. Upon that point
you must exercise your own unbiased judgment.
But it is a fact in the case that as to the whole of
this correspondence relating to the habits, reli-
gion, and morals of Eoger Tichborne, his present
and future prospects, and, above all, to the deep
passion of his heart, which extends over hundreds
of letters, the mind of the defendant is an abso-
lute and entire blank. I ask whether such a cor-
respondence would ever pass from the mind of a
living man, and it is necessary for you to have the
correspondence impressed on your memory before
you retire to consider your verdict. This is Lady
Doughty’s letter:
‘ 1850. Tichborne Park,
‘ begun 29 Jan., finished 31si.
‘ My dearest Eoger,—-After three weeks being
between life and death it has pleased God to
restore me so far that I have this day for the first
time been in the wheel chair to the drawing-
room, and I hast’n to begin my thanks to you for
your letters, especially that private one, tho’ it
may yet be some days before 1 finish all I wish to
say to you, for I am yet very weak, and my eyes
scarcely allow of reading or writing. Oh, dear
Eoger, it is when completely prostrated by intense
suffering that you feel the immortality of the
soul, and that it is God only who holds your des-
tiny in his hands, and how dreadful it must be to
appear unprepared before an Almighty Judge and
receive the sentence which would decide one’s lot
for all eternity. In the long sleepless nights and
days I have had pass before my mind bright and
beautiful days again a long distant view over a
calm rippling sea, and then again a clear brilliant
starlight night; and in a distant blight spot tried
to discern that Supreme Being who guides and
directs all these beauties to draw our minds to
dwell upon Him, the great Creator of all human
things, and then how little does man appear, and


how infinitely daring such a man must be to dis-
obey the commands of a God who created heaven
and earth ; and then my thoughts dwelt with in-
tense feeling on the present and future destiny of
all those most dear to me ; and when I saw the
anxious countenance of my dear infirm husband
and the bright affectionate look of my dear child,
whose career of happiness and danger in this
world of trial is just beginning, my heart clung to
life, and I said, Oh! my God, tho’ resigned to
Thy blessed will, if you see I can be of use still to
those I love and prepare myself still more for my
future end, grant me life ! And he has given it
to me, and in the midst of my worst sufferings I
had the consolation of receiving your letter, my
beloved Roger. I blessed God for it, and prayed
that you might have courage to persevere and
carry out your resolution of going to the Sacra-
ments. Most earnestly do I hope you have found
time to do so well and thoroughly, and derived
consolation from those great Sacraments of our
Holy Religion.
4 You request me to answer eacn. word or your
letter.” I wi'l do so in the order you have named,
for I was truly sorry to have been too ill to speak
when I saw your kind face by my bedside. In
the first place I do not intend to reproach you
with circumstances which caused a reserve dunng
your last visit between us, tbey arose naturally
from your resolution not to speak upon the dis-
cussion gf'ing on with regard to the future settle-
ment of the property, and my mind being full of
tbe thought I felt it difficult, when wm were to-
gether. not in some manner to allude to the sub-
ject which clearly harassed your mind, and. yet I
had no wish to force your confidence ; so this un-
avoidably threw reserve between us when we were
alone, and 1 grieved to see that instead of finding
relief from the worries of lawyers by conversing
with a friend deeply interested with and for you,
you rather sought relief in that fatal pernicious
relief, tbe dreadful stimulant of drink. Remem-
ber dear Roger, that by that conversation in town
you vave nre every right to be deeply interested
in your fate, and therefore doubly do I feel grieved
when I see you abusing that noblest of God s gifts
to man, reason by diminishing its power. Do not
deceive yourself ; you think it lists not permanent
effect upon you now, but sooner or later it must
tell on the mind or health; but it is the far higher
consideration, tbe offence against God. which
should prevent one’s yielding to a vice which is,
after all, degrading to a reflecting mind, and I re-
joice to find you condemning this bad practice.
‘I cannot recall to my mind the subject you
say I was beginning in tbe drawing-room when
interrupted; probably it might have had refer-
ence to the confidence which you say you do not
repent having placed in me. No, dear Roger
never repent it; be fully assured that i never shall
betray that confidence. You are young, and in-
tercourse with life and tbe society you must mix
with might very possibly change your feenngs
towards one now dear to you or rather settle
them into the affection of a brother towards a
«ister- hut whatever may be the case hereafter,
mv line of duty is marked out and ought steadily
TJbe followed —that is. not to encourage anything
that* 3 could fetter the future choice of either par y
before they had fully seen others and mixed with
Jhe world, and with all the fond care of a mother
endeavour, while she is yet so young, t° prevent
her heart and mind from being occupied by ideas
not suitedV what should be her present occupa-
and hereafter, with the blessing o, God,
guard her against the dangers she may be liable to
be ensnared into by the position in which she is
placed. Do not think 1 have said too much; you
always beg me to speak openly and sincerely to
you. Ido not object to affectionate cousinly in-
fluence, which only tends to good, and I feel our
conversation on that night in town authorises
indeed, obliges—me to write, as I had not the op-
portunity of speaking to you. You have been, I
rejoice to hear, raised in the opinion of all with
whom you have lately had to transact business by
your firmness and decision. You are in an honour-
able profession, which gives you occupation, and
if you will only pursue your present good resolu-
tion and let the high motives of doing your duty
in life and resisting the bad passion to which each
one is inclined from a desire to serve God and
save one’s soul, I feel that ardent hope that you,
whom it pleased Providence to place in that situ-
ation in our family my angel child was removed
from—that you will yet fill it as I had fondly
hoped to have seen him do, with credit to yourself
by your charities and good example, and be a
blessing to all who may hereafter belong to or be
dependent on you ; but for this you must turn
your heart to God, resist drink or a rash throwing
away life, or wasting in any way the energies,
of a naturally strong, sensible mind and really
attached heart.
‘ Now, write to me soon ;_tell me truly if I have
tried your patience by this long letter which I
venture to send, for it is when returning to life as
I now feel that renewed love for all dear to one
seems to take possession of our hearts, so you must
forgive it if you find it long. Your uncle and
cousin send their kindest love. We are now quite
alone, with the exception of Mr. Brindle. I can-
not help telling you that I heaid with satisfaction
your decision about Upton, though I tried to think
it might be best to sell it. I really love that place,
where I had spent the happiest days of life, too
well not to rejoice that it remains in the family.
I hope you have been to the Castle and joining a
little in the gaieties of Dublin. Poor old Mrs.
Hopkinson’s death will he much felt, I should
think, by the Seymours. Adieu, dearest Roger.
Ever be assured of the sincere affection and real
attachment of your aunt.
‘ Katherine Doughty.
‘ I got Mr. Brindle to let you know I had re-
ceived your letter for fear you should have been
uneasy about it.’ .. »
‘ Raised,’ says Lady Doughty, ‘ m the opinion of
all with whom you have had to transact business
by your firmness and decision. Is that the man
who has been represented to be only an ob l ec *
supreme contempt to every one with whom he bad
to do ? * Resist drink or a rash throwing away of
life and wasting in any way the energies of a na-
turally strong, sensible mind and really attached
heart.’ That this woman writes taus in all the
sincerity of the most warm, affection towards her
beloved nephew I think it is impossible to doubt;
and when she speaks of her oppoitunities of ob-
serving and judging him-when she speaks of him
as a man who has naturally a strong mind and at-
tached heart —are we to believe that that was the
true character of tho man, or the hypocritical flat-
tery of some one usiug the language of adulation,
instead of that of sincerity and truth? I cannot
but believe that' that letter expressed the real
mind of Lady Doughty towards her nephew. From
a letter written soon after, it appears that he had
received the new scheme concerning the Upton
estates, and in it reference is made to various


clauses, and alterations are in some cases sug-
gested. He also asks for an epitome of the scheme,
that he might the better understand it. Refer-
ring to Mrs. Hopkinson’s death, he says it will be
feU much by the Seymour family. Mrs. Hopkin-
son’s name occurs in the cross-examination of the
defendant. Upon that I will not dwell farther at
present, for it is sufficient to note the fact that the
event was known to Roger Tichborne.
Then comes the first indication of a desire, whe-
ther his regiment went to India or not, to go on
foreign service, and he writes on that subject to
his aunt in a private communication. He gets an
answer from Lady Doughty, expostulating with
him in the strongest terms against this intention.
What the exact motive was which led him so ar-
dently, as it would appear, to desire to go to India,
either with his own regiment or by exchanging
into another, I have not been able in a manner
satisfactory to my own mind to decide. I hardly
know whether he was sincere in the matter, or
whether it was not intended to operate on Lady
Doughty’s mind. On the 29th of March Lady
Doughty wrote to Roger with respect to his desire
to go to India. In this letter she cannot under-
stand why he desires to go there, unless it is that
he had not fulfilled the excellent resolutions he
had formed, and slighted the voice of consci-
ence. To this he replies that he should not think
of exchanging before he had finished his drills;
and as that would be five months, he should have
time to reflect upon it. He goes on :
‘ I have told you many times that I should like
to go abroad. If I should die I leave a brother
to take my place who would fulfil the duties of
the situation better than I should. What should
I be worth supposing I were the head of the f a*nily?
It would be better to bring one up to the station
so that he would fulfil his duties before God and
man in a satisfactory manner. As for me, nobody
can ever care for me.’
If this last utterance gave expression to his real
thoughts it may supply the key to his desire to
leave this country. If his heart were set on a
marriage with his cousin, and he had reason to
think his passion was not reciprocated by her, or if,
in the event of its being reciprocated, it was very
doubtful whether they would obtain the concur-
rence of her parents, I can understand a man with
this one passion perpetually haunting him, and
despairing of a happy result, longing to get away
from home duties and to serve in foreign countries.
Active service and change of scene might efface
thoughts and hopes which could only end in dis-
appointment and disgrace.
Up to this point we have been following Roger
Tichborne and his correspondence while his regi-
ment was at Portobello, but in the month of April
the head-quarters of the regiment were changed.
I ought to have told you that when Roger entered
the Carabineers he was at once attached to the ‘ F’
troop, commanded by Captain (subsequently Major)
Jocelyn. When the head-quarters of the regiment
were transferred from Dublin to Cahir, Jocelyn’s
troop was sent to Limerick, but as Roger had not
completed his drill he was detained at head quar-
ers and transferred to the ‘A’ troop, commanded
y Captain Polhill Turner. I ask you to bear that
ac m mind. While on the march to Cahir he
writes on the 10th of April to Mr. Vincent Gos-
thinii- Sa K 1D ? been impossible for him to
he wrolA° + U n t f he I , deeds - , After bis arrival at Cahir
He wrote the following letter to Mr. Hopkins :
‘Mv a- tt. ‘ Gahir ' A P ril 14 > 1850.
My dear Sir,—l have not been able to write
sooner because my occupations having much in-
creased have left mo but very little time to think
about the deeds, especially upon the new plan
which has been brought forward ; but if you will
give me a few days longer I shall be able to think
well upon them and to write what opinion I have
formed upon the subject.—Truly yours,
‘R. C. Tichbobne.’
_ All these letters in which he desires to have
time to reflect upon these schemes are to my
mind important, because they were written at a
time when he was not, and could not be, under
the influence of Mr. Yincent Gosford, who, it has
been argued, suggested the settlement and the
will. Roger Tichborne writes to his aunt on the
13th of April in the following terms :
‘ Cahir, April 13, 1850.
‘My dear Aunt,—Colonel Jackson is going to
leave the regiment; he is much regretted by all
his officers. It will give me a step. I went to
Barmouth to see Edward Bellew. I saw Lord
Bellew. ... I was glad to receive a letter
from Walter Strickland. It gave me great plea-
sure to hear from him, &c. Pray give my love to
my uncle and to my cousin.—l remain, my dear
aunt, your very affectionate nephew,
‘ R. C. Tichbobne.’
Next comes this letter about the property,
written on the 15th of April to Mr. Yincent Gos-
ford :
‘ Cahir, April 15, 1850.
* My dear Sir, —I have not yet been able to write
to Mr. Hopkins about the deeds for want of time,
but I intend studying them, and write what opin-
ion I have formed upon them. Write me a long
letter to let me know what is going on at Tich-
borne, and what those lawyers are doing. I know
nothing but what Mr. Hopkins tells me, and he is
very partial.—Truly yours, R. C. Tichbobne.’
You will contrast the way, gentlemen, in which
his father allowed himself to be led and guided by
Gosford, instead of reading the deeds and master-
ing their contents as Roger Tichborne himself did.
Then comes a letter from Lady Doughty, who
mentions that the Greenwoods were going over to
dine with them on his cousin’s birthday, and she
says that Miss Doughty sends her love and wishes
him to say a prayer for her on the day, before the
crucifix. In reply to a statement of Roger that
no one cared for him, Lady Doughty says: ‘ It
is your own fault if they do not.’ Roger next
writes to Lady Doughty from Cahir, and the letter
is important as showing his power of description.
His style i 3 not that of a literary man, but still, it
is the style of an educated person. In this letter
he adverts to the number of old churches in the
country round Cahir. One thing is very noticeable
in it. He speaks of the Major, which he spells
‘ Magor.’ It may be an accident, but in this letter
he spells the word ‘major’ with a ‘g. ’ I should have
passed this by as a mere accidental circumstance,
but I am bound to mention it, because the same mis-
spelling occurs in the letters of the defendant, and
a coincidence so striking ought to be taken into
account. Then there is a letter to Mr. Gosford
about the probability of his exchanging, and so
forth. In it there are two instances of his having
written ‘has’ for ‘ as,’ and that occurs frequently
in the letters of the defendant. It is not a fre-
quent occurrence, however, with Roger Tichborne.
On the 11th of May he writes as follows to Mr.
Gosford:
* I have received a visit from Mr. Hopkins, who
brought with him the different deeds and settle-
ments, which I had to sign before he left this


place. You will be glad to learn that I have signed
them, and that the great business has at length
been brought to a conclusion. I fancy you have
sometimes had conversation with Lady Doughty
about these deeds.’
Then comes another letter to Gosford, on which
some comment has been made as showing the
coarse, indelicate mind of Roger Tichborne. In
this letter he refers to the arrangements which
had been made for the disposition of the furniture,
and ridicules the idea of such a clause being in-
serted in the deed. We know that the settlement
was eventually signed. That settlement vested in
Roger the reversion of the Doughty estates after
the life interest of his uncle and father, and au-
thorised the trustees after a term of years to raise
100,000?. to relieve and aggrandise the property,
and Sir Edward to charge 10 000?. on the estates.
You will see there is a distinction between the
Tichborne and the Doughty property. As regards
the Tichborne estate the limitations and disposi-
tion of property under the settlement of 1844
could not be touched; but, on the other hand, the
settlement of the Doughty estate in 1850 enabled
Roger Tichborne, subject to the prior rights of his
uncle and father, to dispose of that property in
such manner as he might think fit. This settle-
ment having been executed, there is a letter —I
think the only one—from Sir Edward to Roger, in
which he says he was much pleased with him for
having so promptly signed the deed, after which
comes this passage :
‘ I have not been successful in letting Upton,
which I regret, as it is not in my power to keep
it in proper repair. The value of it will become
less and less if it is not occupied. It will be an
advantage to us all if you would consent to its
being sold.’
On the 26th of May Roger writes to Mr. Gos-
ford that he was much amused at the different
articles which Lady Doughty was to have after
Sir Edward's death, and he adds : ‘ How absurd
to mention that in the deed! lam sure it is
worthy of being sent to Punch' This shows
what an eye he had at that time to his own inte-
rest, even in small minor matters. Lady Doughty
had succeeded in getting these articles, and the
concession is made to her, at which he makes
this sneering remark.
He writes to his mother on the 6th of June,
and speaks about Alfred having been sent to
school and about his mother’s fretting and fuming
agaiD. In the same letter he mentions two of his
old schoolfellows, showing that he had not left
college without having some recollection of them.
He also mentions the inspection of the regiment,
and I will call your attention to what he says on
this subject. He writes : ‘ The General’—that
is, General Napier—‘came from Limerick to in-
spect the regiment. He was, I believe, much
pleased with the regiment, and with the different
evolutions which we performed before him.’ I
take it for granted, therefore, that this could not
have been the inspection at which the defendant
said there was confusion, where the troop which
he belonged to got into a difficulty, when, as he
says, Captain Polhill Turner forgot the word of
command, and he gave it in his stead, and so
brought off the troop, which otherwise must have
remained standing in the barrack-yard with their
backs to the wall. It is evident, therefore, that
Tichborne could not have written of that
inspection when he used the words I have just
read to you. On the 13th of June he writes a
letter to Mr. Gosford, the only important part of
which is what he says about Upton. He repeats
his intention not to consent to the sale of Upton,
and expresses a hope that the subject will not be
mentioned to him again. Next there comes a let-
ter to Roger from Walter Strickland. It was writ-
ten from her Majesty’s ship Amphitrite, and shows
the confidential intimacy which existed between
the two young men. Then comes a letter from
Roger, and in referring to it I must make one
remark. A question was put by the defendant’s
counsel to Mrs. Higgins which I think might well
have been spared, because it insinuated that Roger
was displeased at her marriage with Mr. Higgins. I
cannot see why that insinuation should have been
made except to. gratify a sort of spiteful, vindic-
tive. feeling which appeared to be part of the
Bpmt of the defence, whereas all Roger says iu
the letter wherein he mentions the subject, is to
express surprise to hear of the intended marriage,
as he had not known before that Mr. Higgins had
made any proposal.
And now comes a letter, which is important,
as showing that Roger was perfectly well ac-
quainted with his mother’s Christian name. What
son, I would ask, grows up to the age Roger had
then attained without knowing his mother’s Chris-
tian name ?Of course he had heard his father,
hundreds of times, address her by the name. That
Roger actually did know his mother’s name is
certain, from the fact of his writing to her about
her Saint’s-day. You are all aware, I have no
doubt, that instead of wishing people joy on their
birthdays, as in England, congratulations are
offered in Roman Catholic countries to people on
their Saints’-days. Now, there is in the Roman
Catholic calendar a Saint Henriette. Of the cir-
cumstances of the life of that female Saint I can-
not profess myself to be at all aware. lam not
familiar with the calendar of the Saints. I con-
fess, to my shame, that I know nothing of St.
Henriette. But Roger Tichborne, at all events,
did; and he wrote to his mother to express his
good wishes on St. Henriette’s-day. He forgot
the exact day, however, and apologises in a letter
sent from Cabir on the 22d of July. In the en-
suing month of August he writes to Mr. Gosford
a letter, in which he states very explicitly what
are his views and intentions; although in it oc-
curs the only instance in which, as far as lam
aware, he shows any want of knowledge of the
property or talks nonsense about it. The letter
is as follows :
‘ Cahirßarracks, Tipperary, 15 th August 1850.
‘Private and Confidential.
‘ My dear Sir, —I had the pleasure of receiving
your last letter yesterday. lam not in the least
surprised at several remarks which you made
about Lady Doughty. I know enough of her
character to see that all what you say is perfectly
true. There is a peculiarity which has taken
place a short time ago and which is the cause
that Lady Doughty and I are not on the best terms.
It is what explains to me why she never mentions
my name before you or never writes to me. The
last letter which I received from her is, as far as I
can remember, more than six weeks ao-o. I never
would have thought that such a trifle would have
been the cause of a kind of rupture between us.
lhe cause is, as far as I can judge, this: I wrote
several times to Lady Doughty about my inten-
tion of going to India till, about as far as I can
remember, six weeks or two months, when I
wrote to her that not receiving any more answer
to my private letters, I thought that our private
correspondence was nearly brought to a conclu-


sion. I have never heard or received any letters
from her since that time. My intention is to go
to India for ten years. I hope that in that time
the property will be set right again, because it is
not even the difficulty of paying the debt which
is on the property, which is very great, as it has
debts upon it nearly twice its value, thanks to my
blessed relatives. Instead of that, going abroad
as a cavalry officer, I receive 400/. for my pay,
which, with the 500/., gives me nearly twice as
much money as I can spend in this country. You
misunderstood me when I spoke of giving Upton to
Miss Doughty. Jf I ever did such a thing it would
never be my intention of giving her at the same
time the power of selling it or doing with it what
she chose ; that has never been my intention.
But what I thought of doing was this : I took, as
you know, a great fancy for my cousin, more even
so than I ever felt or care to feel for any other
young lady of her age. And as I know that she
was very fond of the place I thought that when I
should go abroad I should give her leave to go
there whenever she liked, and remain there as
she chose. I never ment (sic) more than that.
I make no doubt of the truth of what you say as
to Miss Doughty being engaged to marry at this
time next year. She will be, I doubt not, a fine
high-spirited girl. I hope she will make a choice
which will make her happy.’
In another letter Roger Tichborne expresses
great impatience at the cost of the deeds of the
re-settlement. He says that the family ought to
pay the lawyers, as they wished to employ them,
and that he ought not to pay them, as they only
annoyed him. I wish conveyancing were reduced
within the limits to which common sense ought to
confine it; but unfortunately, it was not at that
time, although there has been some reform in the
matter since. I trust that now our deeds are
something more like common sense than the tau-
tological, voluminous, and barbarous documents
which were in vogue some years ago. In this let-
ter Roger Tichborne corrects an impression which
Mr. Gosford appears to have entertained that he
had it in his mind, with reference to Upton, to
tender it as a residence to his cousin. Mr. Gos-
ford had said—l cannot help thinking rather hast-
ily—that this was a boyish notion. I cannot think
that at any time it entered the mind of Roger
Tichborne, but at any rate it did not long remain
there. Mr. Gosford says he afterwards knew he
could do nothing with Upton unless he came into
possession of it by the deaths of his uncle and
father. A great deal was made of this matter, as
showing that Roger Tichborne did not really know
what the nature of his position was with regard to
the Doughty estates; but it is obvious he knew
that he could not immediately deal with them.
There is another letter, which is somewhat re-
markable as showing that Roger Tichborne was
not the ignorant creature that the counsel for
the defendant endeavoured to represent him. He
must have had fair average information—as much,
perhaps, as is to be expected from a young man
whose education has not been all that could have
been desired, and whose intelligence has not been
developed as much as it might have been under
nrore auspicious circumstances. The letter, ad-
‘).< eS i S o-A , ° ki s ‘ dear Aunt,’ and dated Cahir, fcept.
44, 1850, is as follows :
„ kave made of late several excursions—one
ohl M hers \° the old Castle, at Cashel. That
formerly the residence of the Kings
l-uins h'r. IV s certa mly one of the most curious
luma wuicn I have seen for a long time. Among
other curio-ities which are to be seen there, there
is one of those old Irish towers which were built
before Christianity. It has never been known to
a certainty for what purpose they were built. The
way they are built has made some persons think
that they were built to worship the fire. What
has given rise to that opinion is that many towers
of the same kind have been found in Persia, where
they used to worship the fire. The to wer at Cashel
is 130 high ; the door, as in all tbo-e buildings, is
between 12 and 16 feet from the ground. 1 saw
there another piece of curiosity. It is an idol
which the Saxons used to worship ; it is certainly
one of the ugliest things which 1 have seen. I
am sure that the Egyptians, among their various
collections of gods, had one nob half so ugly as
the one which I saw at Cashel Castle. lam in
hopes of getting my lieutenancy soon. I have
passed my examination, which, fortunately for
me, was on nothing but on regimental matters and
on Courts-Martial; still, it took me much time to
read through all the hooks, because they are so
very dull that I use generally to go asleep when
reading them. It was very lucky for me that I
was not obliged to study Euclid, because I am cer-
tain that I never would have passed.’
Here is aman acquainted with the historical fact
that fire was worshipped in Persia ft om the earliest
times. It also appears from this letter that Roger
Tichborne knew about the Egyptian mythology,
and was aware that the gods of the mythology
were, as regarded their outward representation in
the form of idols, in numerous instances a strange
compound of beast and bird and man. Is that the
letter of a man who is either an idiot or who has
not the slightest trace of education or ordinary
common knowledge? This is one of the facts
which we ought to use for the purpose of deter-
mining the intellectual character of Roger Tich-
borne, and by and by 1 shall invite you to con-
sider the catalogue of his books and to judge for
yourselves whether he was a poor sunken, miser-
able wretch, as stated by the defendant’s counsel.
In another letter Roger Tichborne expresses his
gratification that he had not to pass an examina-
tion in the six books of Euclid. His words were :
‘lf I had been obliged to pass an examination in
the six books of Euclid I am afraid I should not
have succeeded.’ Thus it appears Roger knew not
only the department of literature or science with
which Euclid was connected, but also that his
work was in six hooks, whereas the defendant was
obliged to admit that even the name of Euclid was
to him unknown. It is impossible, I think, to go
through this correspondence, and the facts I have
brought under your attention, without seeing that
Roger Tichborne had studied and endeavoured to
master at all events some portion of the great
work of Euclid, although his aptitude for mathe-
matics may have been very small.
Writing to Mr. Gosford from Cahir on the 7th
of October, Roger Tichborne says :
‘ I was happy to hear some time ago Mr. Sey-
mour’s good success at the Poole election. I was
much amused at the details while I read about it
in the Dorchester paper.’
And, again, writing to Mr. Gosford in Novem-
ber, he says :
_ ‘ I have not heard from Henry Seymour for some
time. I suppose be intends going soon to Poole.’
On the 9th of October he wiites to Mr. Gosford
that his father had been to see him and was much
pleased with the regiment and the place, though
if he had stayed there for three weeks he would
have had enough of it. A question will arise by


and by, whether, when Mr. Tichborne visited his
son at Cahir, the son accompanied him as far as
Dublin when he returned to England. The son
says over and over again in his letters that he did,
and the father also mentions the fact that Roger
accompanied him to Dublin. On the 18tli of Oc-
tober Roger writes to Lady Doughty, stating that
his intention was to exchange into a cavalry regi-
ment in India. Then he writes the following let-
ter to Mr. Gosford;
‘ Cahir, Nov. 2, 1850.
‘ Lady Doughty wrote to me; I was much sur-
prised at some of the news she gave me, especially
one, among others, that Miss Doughty is to go
back to the convent for the winter. It appears to
me very strange that she should go back to school
after having left it for more than a year. It looks
to me very much as if Lady Doughty and the
governess could not agree well together. I hope
to stay some time at Tichborne during my stay in
England.’
This letter tends to show the unreserved confi-
dence with which Roger Tichborne treated Mr. Vin-
cent Gosfoj d. All things, even the communications
between his father, mother, and aunt, were com-
municated to him in the confidence of unreserved
friendship. In his letters to his father, his mo-
ther, and his aunt he does not mention matters
half so unreservedly as he does when writing to
Mr. Vincent Gosford. There are several other
letters from Lady Doughty, but they are only in-
teresting as showing the very warm, sincere, and
affectionate attachment of this old lady to Roger
Tichborne. I have now completed the correspond-
ence up to the end of 1850, and I will begin the
year 1851 on Monday.
Third Day, Monday , February 2, 1874.
Gentlemen of the Jury,—We brought Roger
Tichborne, on Friday last, down to the end of the
year 1850. There was one date which I did not
give you which will by and by be of importance —
namely, the date of his promotion. He was pro-
moted to a Lieutenancy on the 22d of November
1850.
A Juror.—Had he to undergo an examination ?
The Lord Chief Justice.—He had to pass an
examination, not, as I understand, in mathematics,
but simply in regimental affairs. I see that in
one of his letters he congratulates himself on hav-
ing passed the examination. I am obliged to you
for asking the question, for it reminds me that he
puts the place of examination at the head-quarters
at Cahir. He did not go to Dublin, as the defend-
ant said he did. That is not so. In the beginning
of the year 1851 we find him at Cahir, and he
writes thus to his aunt:
‘ Cahir, Jan. 4, 1851.
‘ My dear Aunt, —I had the pleasure of receiv-
ing your last letter a few days ago. I am much
obliged for all the affectionate wishes which you
make in my favour for a happy new year. I wish
you, my dear aunt, as also to my uncle, a happy'
new year; which I hope may be followed by many,
many others.
‘ I was happy to learn that you had heard lately
from Alfred. I was glad to hear that he is al-
ways happy at Downside. I am not at all pleased
with Tom [Tom Muston, his valet], he does not
pay attention ; he is quite a different servant now
to what he was when he came from your house. I
am almost certain that he must have fallen into
bad company, and the sooner he gets out of it the
better. I told him this afternoon that was not
my intention to keep him any longer, I told him
that I should try to place him. I shall give him a
certificate,’ &c.
So that Muston was wrong in stating here that
he gave his master warning. It was his master
who gave him warning.
Well, Roger Tichborne gets leave of absence for
a fortnight. At that time Sir Edward and Lady
Doughty were staying at Upton. Roger’s present
object was to pay a visit to his parents at Paris,
but he resolved to take Upton on his way, and
stay a day or so, and on his return to call there
again. On the occasion of his second visit he ap-
pears to have had some confidential communica-
tions with Lady Doughty upon the subject that
was uppermost in his mind —namely, his attach-
ment for his cousin. 'When he returned to the
barracks, on the 31st, he wrote her a letter, in
which he refers to such a conversation. It runs
thus :
‘ Jan, 31, 1851.
_‘ My dear Aunt, —I was sorry that we had not
time on the morning of my departure to have some
conversation on subjects which might have proved
themselves useful to me. You asked me a ques-
tion, if you remember, I had not time to answer sr
plainly as f could have wished, for want of time.
You asked me if I formed an affection for some
lady it would prevent me from going to India.
I would most as certainly (sic), and at the same
time leave the army at once. The army is very
good for a young man like myself who has not
a home in the wide world to bless himself with.
But it appears to me almost impossible that
a young person could form an attachment for me,
that I can scarcely believe it. I cannot, at the
same time, but wish most sincerely that it could
be, for many reasons; it would, I have no doubt,
give me a brighter aspect of life, for which I have
so very little at present. Secondly, it would make
me lead a quiet and steady life, and give me a happy
home to live in, which is most undoubtedly one of
the greatest blessings a person can enjoy in this
world. But it is, unfortunately, too much happi-
ness for me, so that I much better not think about
it, because it makes me unhappy. I shall do much
better to go to India for a certain number of years
and come back to be able to see my brother well
settled in life, and retire afterwards quietly into
the country far from the world, and do as much
good to my relatives as I possibly can. That I
have explained to you last Tuesday night in your
room, which conversation I hope you have not for-
gotten. If you have a moment to spare to answer
this letter it will give me much pleasure to receive
one in answer to mine. I hope that you know
enough of my character to know that anything
which you may say in your letter to me is quite
safe ; nobody in this world has ever known me to
repeat, and you know, moreover, that I have
never taken any offence to whatever you told me.
—I remain, my dear aunt, your very affectionate
nephew, _ R. C. Tichborne.
‘Pray burn this letter when you have finished
reading it.’
“Whether Lady Doughty at that time contem
plated a marriage between her daughter and Ro-
ger I cannot say; but this I cannot help thinking,


that, wisely or unwisely, she used his affection
tor his cousin as a motive for inducing him to de-
sist from his determination to go abroad,
. Well, resolving to go abroad, he moves again
in the matter of his will, and writes to Mr. Slaugh-
ter upon the subject, asking him first to explain
to him how he was situated with respect to the
estates, and what his power of disposing of them
was. The letter was a perfectly well-written one,
but it was not his own. It was written at the
dictation of Mr. Gosford, to whom, at Upton, he
had communicated the fact that he desired to
know exactly ho whe stood. Mr. Gosford, although
he knew the position perfectly, very properly re-
ferred him to Mr. Slaughter, the family solicitor,
instead of taking the responsibility of advising
Roger Tichborne upon the subject. In reply to
the letter, Mr. Slaughter wrote a letter, in which
he explained in the clearest and most intelligent
form Roger’s rights and powers with respect to
the property. Now, by and by the question will
arise whether the defendant had any knowledge
whatever of those rights and powers, or whether
he was not wholly ignorant with respect to them.
It has been sought to explain the ignorance he
has professed, by asserting that Roger himself
never understood what he was about either in
executing the settlement or the will—that he was
the mere creature and instrument of other people.
"Well, of course, if that be the case, the answer is
a good one. If, on the other hand, you are satis-
fied that Roger did. thoroughly understand what
, e Y as then it is one of the circumstances
in the case which, as it strikes me, presses most
hardly against the defendant. Mr. Slaughter,
after speaking of the derivation of the Doughty
property and of the charges on it, says :
. Subject to this sum of 118,000/,, and to cer-
tain annuities under the will of Mr. Doughty
amounting to about 600/. per annum, and to the
contingency of Lady Doughty surviving her hus-
band and taking the jointure, the whole of the
JJoughty estates in the counties of Middlesex,
-Lincoln Buckingham, and Surrey are limited to
you in fee—that is to say, to your absolute dis-
posal. And the Upton property is also, in like
manner, limited to you absolutely, subject to a
mortgage debt of 13,700/., charged thereon in fa-
vour of Captain Gardnor. Although you do not
come into possession of the several estates until
after the deaths of Sir Edward Doughty and Mr.
Tichborne, it is now competent to you to dispose
by will of your reversion in those estates in any
way you may think proper. I should also name
to you that, as regards the sum of 100,000/.
charged on the Doughty estates, the deed of
settlement provides for the disposition of this
charge as follows: For payment of the several
sums of 16,000/. and 8000/. charged on the Tich-
borne estates in favour of daughters of Sir H. Tich-
borne, 21,000/. ; trustees of settlement of Mr. and
Mrs. James Tichborne, 3000/. ; portion secured
for Miss Catherine Doughty, 32,000/. ; purchase
of Whitears Farm, 2200/. ; ditto of Old Court
Farm, 2374/. ; total, 63,574/. And the residue
of the 100,000/., viz. 36,426/., is directed to be
laid out in the purchase of lands, &c., to be settled
to the same uses as those declared of the several
properties released from charges thereon by the
application of this mocey. Under this arrange-
m the event of your own and your brother’s
death without leaving male issue, and of your
lather having no other son, the absolute rever-
sion of these properties and of the 100,000/. appli-
cable in reference to them would devolve to your-
self, and as such would be disposable by will.
You have also an absolute reversion in the furni-
ture, &c., at Tichborne, after the deaths of your
father and uncle, subject to the payment of such
portions of a sum of 1620/. as, under the provi-
sions of a deed of arrangement, may not have been
paidoft by annual instalments at the death of the
survivor of those parties. I hope the foregoing
will prove intelligible and satisfactory, and I need
not assure you that I shall feel very great plea-
sure m conveying any further and more detailed
explanation if you consider it desirable.’
Well, Roger having received that intelligible and
explicit explanation as to his position, the thino- is
sleep again for a certain time. On the
4th of February he wrote to Mr. Gosford :
‘ Cahir, Feb. 4, 1851.
My dear Sir, —I arrived at Cahir the 30th
after a tolerable journey from Upton. I was
obliged to remain in London on Wednesday • I
was not sorry at that delay, because it allowed me
to spend the day with Henry Seymour, whom I had
not seen for a long time. One of my first occupa-
tions on arriving at Cahir was to write to Mr
Slaughter about what I told you I intended to do
the last time I saw you at Upton. I wrote him
the letter which I wrote in your room before you.
I feel rather anxious to settle that business as soon
as possible. . I hope that Mr. Slaughter won’t wait
long to write to me. I have written to Lady
Doughty to let her know of my safe arrival at
Cahir. I hope soon to have the pleasure of re-
ceiving a letter from her which will give me some
news of Upton. Do you know when Lady Doughty
intends taking away Miss Doughty from convent?
I hope to have soon the pleasure of hearing from
you- I remain, my dear Sir, truly yours,
‘E. C. Tichbokne.’
.You will remember what I said about a conversa-
tion between Lady Doughty and Roger Tichborne
at Upton. Lady Doughty, in reply to his, wrote
a very remarkable letter. It shows how her mind
vacillated to and fro : sometimes feeling disposed
to allow these young people to marry, and at
other times setting herself strongly against it ;
still not positively saying it shall not be, but usum
the affection for her daughter as a sort of lever to
keep him in the right path. She savg :
<, T , . _ ‘Upton Feb. 9, 1851.
My dearest Roger,—l have wished for a quiet
moment to sit down and answer your private let-
ter which you so kindly wrote me, to answer
openly and sincerely. I cannot see you throwing
life away and running heedlessly perhaps to eter-
nal misery without the strongest efforts to rouse
rZ wn "m I™ 1 ' posltion ’ and the blessings
shower down oa you if you would not
throw them away. Examine well your wish to go
tL ? d f’ ? nd r UWIU See ifc originally arose from
J}®^ f ° rt i Unat< ; circumstances in which you were
placed early m life, and, therefore, India being so
remote had, to your imagination, dreams of hap-
piness. This was very natural, and without a
friend your thoughts became concentrated and
thrown back upon yourself, and hence impercepti-
i y° u acc iu ire d intense reserve, in which also vou
placed happiness and afterwards you flew to "the
reading bad books to gain a knowledge of life,
which prematurely you were acquiring before your
judgment was formed. This familiarising your
mind with vice weakened by degrees your religi-
ous principles, and when passions began, princi-
ples were too weakened to stand the test. Now
all this has given you a false idea of life. . .
Your present isolated position most deeply I re-


gret, because, again tnrown out of society, this in-
clination is fostered from not hliving other sensible
amusements and varied society ; but this cannot
last many months. Would it not be possible to
exchange to another regiment, without goino- to
India ; where for years, if not for ever, you throw
yourself from friends, and the possibility of bet-
ter principles guiding your conduct ? I did cer-
tainly put a question to you on that unhappy
morning when we parted, arising from our con-
versation the night before, and wishing to ascer-
tain if any thoughts of a future life at home could
arrest your headlong course.
‘ But to return to our question. I ask you tore-
fleet and think if a parent; could be justified (even
supposing the almost insurmountable objection of
such near relationship could be set aside), in en-
couraging the affection of a person to their child
•who lives in determined opposition to the practice
of their religion, who defies Almighty God, even
in His holy temple, by not praying, or even read-
ing other works at the same time, and drown
thoughts of the future in drink, and offends Al-
mighty God by profane language. Could a young
innocent being full of religious feeling be encour-
aged to risk her happiness in this life, and possibly
in the next, by being united to such a man ? No,
a parent would be a traitor to their child who
could give such encouragement. Still, dear Roger,
I am fully aware that these are—you would say—
bad habits, but not unconquerable, if I had the
motive of strong attachment to induce me to try
and lead a steady life; very true, it would be a
strong motive; but without the higher one of en-
deavouring to serve God, the other motives alone
would not, probably, last after you had attained
your object. Yet Ido most firmly believe that if
you could once give your entire confidence and go
to confession—to one who, beside piety, had ex-
perience and good sense to be a guide and friend
to you—you would feel a calm of soul and peace
of mind which would enable you to judge of your
real disposition and views for the future. If you
would make up your mind to marry a sensible
person, you would find the calm and true happi-
ness of a home, the habits and duties of which, if
undertaken from good motives, draws down the
blessing of God to support trials, which, more or
less, in this world must occur; but there is a hap-
piness in fulfilling one’s duties, which no exciting,
but criminal pleasures can give. Alas, you have
misery which has disgusted you at the state! but
remember it was always a mat assortie marriage,
possibly not entered into with mutual affection ;
but you have already seen that there are those
who might be in every way suited and inclined to
attach themselves to you. This surprises you;
it does not me; however much you may stifle it a
person may see that naturally you have not only
strong good sense and judgment but a heart and
character particularly calculated to insure the de-
voted attachment of a virtuous woman ; but you
must give proof that you could permanently lay
aside bad habits. Then indeed marriage would be
a preservative from vice. Yet the affections of
the person to whom you allude is a sacred subject
to me; she is far too young even to be supposed
to have formed any attachment, and the obstacles
®re far too strong for me to encourage you to look
eyond the affection which a brother and sister
ight have, and which, if there never was a
thought beyond, would be a happiness to both.
0 , most earnestly do I entreat you to endeavour
see good English society, and judge fully of
gland and your future position before you
throw yourself, possibly for life, out of it. If op-
posed in one idea you may see some person here-
after in reality more suited to you, and that this
may be the case I earnestly pray. Have patience
now with this long but candid letter. Pray write
quickly to me and tell me how far you will at least
reflect on what I have said ; and be assured that
no one could feel more deeply interested or more
devotedly your friend than your attached aunt,
.. ... , ‘Kate Doughty.’
Well, it is a long letter. "Whether it is a candid
letter is another matter. If I had been in Roger’s
place I confess I would have read it over and over
a S a *P- without knowing what it really means.
Well, Roger writes this answer:
~, ‘ Cahir, 16 Feb. 1851.
My dear Aunt, —I am sorry at not having been
able to answer your two last letters ; you have put
me so many questions in your last that it will, I
am afraid, take me more than one day to answer
them all in a satisfactory manner. Pardon me if
you find me long and tedious. You ask me to see
as much of good English society as I possibly can
before (as you say) throwing away my life. I
thought that I had answered that question when
I was last at Upton. I have seen as much good
society when I was in Dublin as I could ; not that
~, ca ' r t about it myself, but to be able to say
that I have not left the world without knowing it,
and that I have seen a,s much of it as I was able!
I cannot help remarking a passage in your letter
about my wish to go to India. You have perhaps
forgotten that my first wish to get into the army
was to get into the East India Company’s service.
My father objecting to it, and my being under a°n
prevented me from going, and obliged me to keep
quiet till I was able to go. I then entered the
English service with the intention of learning my
duty, and then exchanging into a cavalry regiment
abroad. But in all cases it matters very little if I
go or remain in my dispositions. It is quite im-
possible for me to think of marrying and settling
in life. I might meet persons in the world for
whom I should wish to form some kind of attach-
ment, but no lady would ever form one for me.
But supposing even so that it might be possible.
I never would on any account whatsoever be the
cause of a person regretting afterwards that at-
tachment which she would have formed for me,
and by those means having her existence made
unhappy on my account. So, my dear aunt, I’ll
sooner be anything you like to call me. But it
will never be said that I have been the cause in
any way of a person being unhappy on my account.
I know well enough that I am very liable to form
some attachments in the world, but I keep away
from, it because my intention being of not marry-
ing, it is much better for me that I should not
form any. Marrying is certainly one of the greatest
blessings of God, but it is so very seldom that two
persons agree well together. A man may be most
anxious to make another’s happiness, and she may
not care for him. Marriage is, if I may use the
word, quite a lottery. I have almost made up
my mind never to try it. Napoleon use to say
that the two extremes are close to each other.
There are rather too much chances in extremes
for me to try.
‘ You ask me to go to confession to a priest
who would be a friend and guide to me. I don’t
know the priests in this place; they are certainlv
very respectable persons, but I doubt if thev
have enough knowledge of the world to be a younu
man’s guide; besides that I have had enouo-h of
the Irish way of confession. I have, I believe, said
D


in my last letters and in my conversations with
you at Upton as much about my plans as I possi-
bly could. I have said what I intended to do for
my brother. But I am quite of your opinion, for
parents would be to blame if they encouraged an
affection between a young person and a man who
drinks and swears and has not as much religion as
would be wished, undoubtly [sic) repent of it after-
wards. But I must say that I don’t drink so much
as you think; and even so, I don’t drink so much
now as I use to do formerly ; and besides that, in
a moral point of view, I am very steady ; it is
perhaps surprising, but it is the truth ; and more-
over, I don’t read profane books in capel (sic) ;
and moreover, I never frequent lose (sic) society.
I know well enough that I am more than anything
else a shame to my religion; but I have always
stood by what I believe to be the truth, and
backed it against anybody. Now, my dear aunt,
I must conclude by assuring you that I shall al-
ways find myself happy when I may be of any use
to my family, and in some future times you should
require my services, I should be too happy to do
anything to oblige you, because you have been
always kind to me; and in some years hence,
when I shall most likely be behond (sic) seas, I
should hear that I could do something to oblige
your daughter, I should find myself but too happy
to do it in any way which I had in my power. I
don’t suppose that you will hear from me in this
private way for some time, because I have said, I
believe, all what I could possible say.—l remain,
my dear aunt, your very affectionate nephew,
‘ R. C. Tichborne.’
He tells his aunt—
‘ I should be sorry to leave the regiment, as I
do not think I shall find one with such a selection
of gentlemen as there are in this.’
Well, we know that his brother officers used to
play practical jokes upon him. One regrets to see
the extent to which they were carried, and I hope
that such things exist no longer. We see, how-
ever, the good-natured way in which he speaks of
them. They appear to have been fond of him,
and he seems to have returned their kindly feel-
ings. When, however, he said, ‘it is impossible
for me to think of marrying and settling in life,’
which he does in the same letter, I ask what
can it possibly mean ? for we know that if there
was anything in the world which animated his
whole mind it was the passion he had conceived
for his cousin. Well, then business mingles with
romance, and he writes to Mr. Hopkins about
money matters. You have the letter before you,
and I allude to it and others like it not because it
has any direct bearing on the main question, but
because they may enable you to form a judgment
as to how far Roger was a man of business or not.
He writes thus to Mr. Gosford :
‘ Private.
‘ Cahir, Feb. 17, 1851.
‘ My dear Sir, —I have received an answer from
Mr. Slaughter. 1 hope that I shall be able to
settle that part of the business about which I
spoke to you very soon, I feel very anxious about
it. Pray remember me kinkly to Mrs. Gosford.—
I remain, my dear Sir, truly yours,
‘R. C. Tichborne.’
And again:
. ‘ Cahir, March 12, 1851.
My dear Sir,—l have received letters from my
parents mentioning that they had heard that my
was likely to go to India, and telling me
at they could never give their consent to my
going abroad. My mother is telling me she would
die of sorrow if I am going. That is all nonsense ~ T
my father and mother have never been so happy
and enjoyed such a peace of mind as they have
since I left their house. —Truly yours,
‘ R. C. Tichborne..’
We must not take that expression as meaning
that he personally added to the domestic dis-
cords, but it seems to be that the father saw
what was necessary for his proper training and
bringing up, and his mother, with misguided ma-
ternal tendency, did not wish him to be out of
her sight. His absence would seem to have caused
a cessation of these contentions. These and all
his letters, however, are remarkable for the
thorough determination he expresses to act for
himself according to his own views. Other young
men, if they knew how anxious their fathers and
mothers were that they should not go to India,
would fall in with their wishes, or do all they
could to mitigate the circumstances. Not so
Roger. He had a determined, inflexible will of
his own. Neither father nor mother could influ-
ence him in forming his resolutions, and much
less, when once formed, to alter them.
He next writes to Mr. Slaughter about the
settlements; and on the Bth of April, Troop A,
to which he was attached, was removed to Clon-
mel. He writes to Mr. Gosford, expressing the
utmost surprise at a suggestion made to him by
his father, that he should endeavour to get mar-
ried to a young lady he mentioned —a lady, who,
Mr. Gosford tells us, was not much known to Mr.
James Tichborne and still less to Roger, and he
asks Mr. Gosford to give him all the information
in his power on the subject. On the 12th of April
he wrote again to Mr. Gosford :
‘ Clonmell, April 12, 1851.
‘My dear Sir, —I have received a letter from
Mr. Slaughterer in answer to mine. I see quite
plain by what he sais, that it will be a long busi-
ness to settle the Doughty property as I wish.
The present deeds —which I will, in all probability,
be obliged to sign—almost frighten me out of it al-
together. ... I shall write to Lady Doughty very
soon. —Yours, truly, R- C. Tichborne.’
Then on the 20th, he wrote to his aunt to tell her
that in arranging his papers he came across a slip
from her, which he had perused with much plea-
suce as it brought back ‘ gone-bye days’ to his
mind. To this letter Lady Doughty replied as
follows : * Tichborne-park, April 24, 1841.
‘My truly dear Roger,—l have three of your
letters to thank you for. ... I see perfectly by
your private letters the depressed, lonely feeling
you had when you wrote. I never can forget the
many conversations we have had, and believe me
lam as fondly interested for you as ever. Never
think you can tire me by writing, and would to
Heaven that my poor prayers and those far more
worthy may snatch your soul, in spite of yourself,
from the dangerous paths in which it is going. I
see you alone and sorrowful in your room, when as
a Christian you ought to feel joy on that glorious
day, Easter Sunday. Till your mind and con-
science are at ease, you cannot judge of life as you
ought. Did you put a withered leaf in your let-
ter? Was it an emblem of yourself? If so, throw
it aside; look to the bright green leaves now
opening around us in spring, and say, “ I will not
be the withered leaf, but resisting every inclina-
tion to drown care and shorten my days, turn to>
the blessings our gracious God has yet in store for
me if I ask for them and follow His direction.”
Truly do I hope you may be restored to the Church
this Easter. Let me hear very, very soon again,


and with kindest love from your uncle, believe
me your really attached friend and aunt,
‘K. Doughty.’
Gentlemen, I pass the withered leaf by for the pre-
sent. It has been so strenuously urged upon you,
as having some mysterious and hidden meaning,
that we shall have to consider it by and by; but
I must say that, in my opinion, what was said of
it ought never to be forgotten as one of the curi-
osities of forensic oratory.
Now comes a matter which has been introduced
by the. defendant in his history of his military
career in connexion with Captain Polhill Turner
—namely, some confusion that Captain Turner’s
troop is said by him to have got into at an inspec-
tion. I have pointed out to you that in the year
1850 there were two inspections at head-quarters
at Cahir. This seems to have been an inspection
at Clonmel. Writing on the 15th of May, he says:
‘My dear Aunt, —I was much interested at the
details you gave me. ... We have had the inspec-
tion at the beginning of this week ; the General
commanding this district came to inspect the
Clonmel garrison. It was rather a pretty sight
to see nearly the whole of an infantry regiment, a
battery of artillery, and a troop of Cavalry drawn
up all together in the square. . . . Pray give my
love to my uncle. —I remain, my dear aunt, your
affectionate nephew, R. C. Tichborne.’
He says of the former inspection that the General
was extremely well pleased with the way in which
the regiment performed its evolutions. In this in-
stance he says nothing except they looked very
well, and makes no observation which will bear
out defendant’s statement. I find no reference to
an inspection in October 1850, but it is possi-
ble.there may have been some incident on that oc-
casion such as the defendant mentioned. We shall
have to consider that by and by. In a letter of
the 23d of May, Lady Doughty advises him to'be
more careful about his dress and appearance in
the morning, adding—
-11 cannot but feel gratified by your very kind
remembrance of those months, never to be for-
gotten by me, that you spent with us here. I
only wish that you would not think so despair-
ingly of your own character, and then much that
I have said to you would have that effect which
Iso ardently wish for, &c. Believe me your aunt,
‘K. Doughty.’
To this letter Roger replied as follows :
‘ Clonmel, 26 May 1851.
My dear Aunt, —I nearly guess who is the
person who has the kindness to make these
remarks about me ; the same who last year tried
to make you believe I tried to corrup John
Dormer’s character, and that I tried besides to
lead him into bad places. But in all cases I am
sure I am not far from the truth when I think of
one person I cannot now name.—Your affectionate
nephew, R. c. Tichbornb.’
Subsequently,. Roger got leave of absence for a
fortnight, and his aunt wrote to him asking him
to pay them a visit:
_ r , ‘ Upton (no date, July 1851).
My dear Roger,—l am very glad you have got
leave. ... I shall be glad to hear from you
to say if you can spend a few days with us. I am
sorry to say the whole of next week I have not a
room to give you, as we have a large party of
bishops and priests. . . . Your uncle and cousin
send their love.—Your affectionate aunt,
‘K. Doughty.’
His leave extended from the 15th to the 29 th of
July, and he arrived in Clonmel on the latter day.
He could not, therefore, have been at the
Brighton Races—a fact to which I shall have again
to direct your attention when I come to address
you as to the Brighton card-case. On the day
after his arrival he wrote : ‘ Clonmel, 30, 1851.
‘My dear Sir, —I arrived here last night after a
very tolerable journey from Upton. 1 spend few
days at Upton with my uncle and Lady Doughty.
I told Lady Doughty it was fully my intention to
go abroad with my regiment. There were several
persons at Upton—among others the son of Lord
Lovat. I don’t think I am mistaken if towards
the end of the year you don’t see in the newspaper,
in the column devoted to marriages in high life,
the announcement of the marriage of Lord Lovat
and M. D. What I have just mentioned strucked
me. the very first day of my arrival. .Walter
Strickland is in great favour at present. I don’t
know how long it will last. Lady Doughty has, I
believe, been disappointed about me. You may,
perhaps, know why.—Dear Sir, truly yours,
‘ It. C. Tichborne.’
He feared that some brilliant admirer was
making way in her affections. We know that in
the middle of 1851 Miss Doughty had begun to
feel a tender inclination towards Roger Tich-
borne, whose attentions to her she must have
been perfectly aware of. But young ladies will
sometimes—even if there be a favoured lover on
whom they have fixed their choice—indulge in a
little bit of coquetry at the expense of the lover
who really has possession of their hearts, and will
show a temporary preference to some one who
pleases their imaginations without touching their
affections. I cannot help thinking that perhaps,
when Miss Doughty saw Roger look grave and
sullen at the Master of Lovat, she played him
off a little instead of undeceiving him, and
hence this sort of expression, which we find in
his letter, of having no doubt that in the next
year there would be in the columns of the news-
papers the announcement of her marriage with
the Master of Lovat. It had not, however, struck
Mr.. Gosford in the same way, because he did not
‘ think there was anything serious in what was
passing at Upton.’ He writes to Roger in that
way, and Roger writes to him : ‘ I was surprised
you did not make the same observation that I did
when I was at Upton.’ Again he wrote to Mr.
Gosford on the 20th, complaining of not having
heard from Lady Doughty, and stating : ‘ She
has something against me ; but I cannot make out
what the D—l it is.’ He, however, soon after-
wards received a letter from his aunt, which he
described, in a letter to Mr. Gosford, as being
‘ cold, long, but very polite,’ and in a former let-
ter to him, dated the 10th of October, he says :
‘ Lady Doughty has evidently given me up as a
bad job,’ and he adds : ‘ If you observe anything
further as to what I mentioned let me know,’
evidently alluding to the Master of Lovat and Miss
Doughty.
Roger determined to pay a visit to Paris, and
applied for leave of absence from the 15th of De-
cember till the 15th of February, and, writing on
the subject to Mr. Gosford, he says :
‘ I expect much blowing up in Paris. I intend
to stand some of it; but if it comes too strong I
shall go away at once. I am not going to remain to
be scolded all day. That won’t do ; it does not pay ’
Well, he got leave on the 15th of December and
it was to continue until the 15th of February
Ohristmas-eve he arrived by invitation
at Tichborne. From what he himself tells us
there can be very little doubt that if he had any


misgiving as the result of what he had seen at
Upton as to the state of Miss Doughty s feelings
towards him, her reception of him was such as to
dissipate all anxiety on that score, and to satisfy
him that his affection was returned, as far as a
young lady of her age, brought up with all the
sentiments of delicacy and maiden modesty, could
by her manner disclose what was really passing in
her mind. He saw this, but no doubt he was pei-
fectly aware of the difficulties which, stood in the
way of the accomplishment of his wish to marry
his cousin. In the first place, he knew very well
that Lady Doughty was by no means anxious that
the marriage should take place. In the second
place, he knew very well that neither his uncle nor
his father would look with favour upon a mar-
riage which the Church discountenanced, and
which, in their own private and personal opinion,
was one which, on the ground of propinquity,
had better be avoided than sanctioned. He knew
all that, and he talked it over with Mr. Gosford,
from whom he had no secrets, and to whom he
confided everything connected with his desire to
marry his cousin. We know that once, when
conversing with him on the subject, he sprang up,
as Mr. Gosford has described, and, getting pen
and paper, wrote down a vow to build a church in
the event of his marriage. That there was such
a document is beyond the possibility of doubt.
Whether that was the sealed packet is a matter
for you to consider by and by ; but that he did
place in the hands of Mr. Gosford a paper in the
form of a vow to build a church in honour of the
Blessed Virgin Mary I think it is impossible,
looking at the letters we have under his own
hand, for a moment to doubt.
Well, what the position of the two cousins was
was pretty evident to every one. Roger was in
love with her, and of course could scarcely con*
ceal that he was. The probability is that the
young lady returned his affection, and while, per*
haps, she was not quite so strong or ardent in her
reciprocal feeling, still she entertained a feeling
of growing attachment towards him, and doubt-
less showed that she was not displeased with his
attentions. This state of things, of course, soon be-
came manifest to every one who was interested m
the matter. Lady Radcliffe was questioned here
as to whether she was aware of Roger’s feelings
at that time, and her answer is a very touching
one —‘I hoped.’ She was no doubt perfectly
aware of it; but Lady Doughty had by no means
made up her mind to approve the match or to
assent to it. On the contrary, from the obstacle
of relationship, which might, however, be got
over, and from her fears as to Roger’s tendency
to drink—although I cannot but think that that
matter has been exaggerated—her inclination was
at that time all the other way. Accordingly, on
Sunday, the 11th of January, Roger received a
summons to his uncle’s room. Sir Edward
Doughty stated at once to him his disapproval of
Roger's attentions to his cousin, and told him
that the relationship between them was a serious
objection. ‘ It would be better for both of you,’
he said, ‘that this should be put a stop to at
once. The longer you remain together the more
this attachment will grow. It is only by imme-
diate separation, by the cutting of the tie asunder
once and for all, that pain and unhappiness will
he spared to both of you, and therefore, Roger,
the sooner you leave here the better, and I wish
you to go at once.’ It was accordingly settled
that he should go. Roger did not see anything of
his cousin that afternoon. She knew he had been
summoned, but did not know what had passed.
"What he felt on that occasion he tells us himself.
It has been urged by the learned counsel for
the defendant that the love of these two persons
for each other was a sham —the expression, 1
think, was that it was humbug—a word for the
first time introduced into forensic language. At
another time, however, it was said not to be hum-
bug so far as Roger was concerned—that he had
a passion for his cousin, but that it was de-
graded into mere personal desire, and he denied
to it all the higher qualities of that divine passion
which, among other things, distinguish man from
the lower animals. In order that we may judge
of that let us see how Roger Tichborne described
his own feelings. Writing to his cousin on the
subject, he says: , ~ .
‘ What 1 felt when I left my uncle it is dilh-
cult for me to explain. I was like thunderstruck.
I came back to my room. I tried to pack up my
things, but I was obliged to give up the attempt
as my mind was quite absent. I sank in the chair
and remained there, my head buried in my hands,
for more than half an hour. What was the na-
ture of my thoughts, my dearest K., you can
easily imagine. The idea that I was obliged to
leave the next day and not see you again perhaps
for years, was near bursting my heart. You can-
not conceive what pleasure it gave me when my
aunt told me you wanted to see me. I saw di-
rectly that you felt my going, and therefore de-
termined to tell you all I felt towards you. What
I told you, my dearest K., I do not think neces-
sary to repeat, as I suppose you remember. I
promise to my own dearest E. that I will be back
in England, if she is not engaged, either towards
the end of 1854 or the beginning of 1805, and that
if she is engaged I will remain in India 10 or 15
years, and do all I can to make her happy.
J He added, that when he left her he went to his
room, but was so much oppressed that to think ot
sleep was impossible, and that he remained up
until 3 o’clock in the morning. Well, he left next
day, and soon afterwards he wrote to Mr. Gosford
stating that he had executed his will, adding,
‘The only thing I have left out is about the
church, which I will only build under the circum-
stances I have left with you in writing.
He then went to Paris, and returned to London
on the 30th of January. Next day he received a
summons which must have surprised him. It was
to hasten to Tichborne, where his uncle had
been taken suddenly and, as it was feared, fatally
ill. He at once went to Tichborne, and found ms
uncle in a very critical condition. _lt seems to
have occurred to Miss Doughty at this period that
if at any future time when she should be her own
mistress, and, her affection for her cousin con-
tinuing, she should determine to marry him it
would be a very painful thing that her father
should go out of the world leaving a prohibition
on the subject behind him. Accordingly, she
wished that Roger should see her father and
endeavour to induce him to withdraw hm pro-
hibition, and prevail on him, if they should marry,
to leave his blessing upon tlieirunion. Eoger
waited upon Sir Edward; the old man seems to
have been touched by the expression ot his
nephew’s affection for Ins daughter and the inter
view ended by his withdrawing the Portion
and giving a conditional assent. j
nailer what occurred; the language evident yis
his P own, but I cannot doubt that hej gives substan-
tially what passed between his uncle and himself.
His uncle is supposed to speak as follows .


‘My dear Roger,—l know the mutual attach-
ment which exists between you and your cousin.
If you were not so near related, I should not
object at all to a marriage between you two. But,
however, wait three years; then, if the attach-
ment still exists between you two, and if you wet
your father’s consent, as also leave from the
Church, then it will be the will of God—then I
won’t object to it any longer.’
Then Roger is supposed to answer:
‘Ever since I have had the pleasure of knowing
you and my cousin I have always tried to act
towards you two, as also towards my aunt, in the
most honourable way I possibly could. The
Church, as. you know, grants dispensations on
these occasions. Of course, if I think I would
get my father’s consent, as also the leave of the
Church, and do it in an honourable way, in the
eye of God and of the world.’ In the course of
his visit, which continued until the end of his
leave, conversations were held between his cousin
and himself, and at her request he put his
thoughts on paper. These documents remain as
memorials of Roger’s affection, and as his love
has been called in question, and it has been
sought to convert it into some low, base passion,
I will give you his own account of it in his own
words. It has been said by the counsel for the
defendant that what I am going to read is the
effusion of a drunkard, and it has been suggested
that the numerous mistakes and the badness of the
composition may be accounted for in that way.
But let us read it. If written under the influence
of drunkenness, don’t you think there would be
more likelihood that any evil or sinister purpose
which might be lurking in his mind would crop
up to the surface ? It is as follows :
‘ Tichborne, Feb. 4, 1852, half-past one in the
morning.
‘My dearest K., —You have asked me for the
last two days to write my thoughts, and I shall
try to satisfy your wish on that point now, when
my thoughts are somewhat calmer than they were
during the day. I had, as you may suppose,
much to think of. At present the nature of my
thoughts is, I grieve to say, of a melancholy
character. I will, however, make an effort and
disclose my thoughts in the clearest way. My
dearest K., I am at present in a great state of
mind about my uncle and my father. I expect
my father to come to-morrow, and I hope he will
be able to bear this severe trial with courage. He
was not all well when we left Paris last Thurs-
day, and I think he will before long have a very
severe illness. I may perhaps surprise you when
I tell you I feel a kind of comfort about my uncle.
It is a very severe trial which God has sent upon
him. I feel it more than I can express, but this
is the time when you must show the power of re-
ligion, and offer up prayer to God. God will
then comfort and reward you by sending you new
grace and fulfilling your wishes. God only gives
the grace of a good death to those who lead a
good and virtuous life. It is a reward to those
who practise virtue and give a good example to
others. You, dearest K., may perhaps be sur-
piised to hear me talk in this way and not follow
the practice.
‘ I was going on with my confessions, and only
stopped to ask you to give me some indulgence
3i you find it too long and tedious. You, my
dearest K., are the only person for whom I ever
formed so strong an attachment. I could not
have believed a few years ago that I should ever
get so attached to another.
‘lt is painful to acknowledge my thoughts, but
as I have undertaken the task I must note them
I had a wrong idea when I left Ireland that you
had forgotten me. I wished to show my uncle
and aunt that my mind was so impressed with
that that it was not my intention to come back
from India for 10 or 15 years. To see all these
things with a dry eye and an unbroken heart is,
in a person who had some feelings of attachment
towards another, almost beyond human power.
When I came here, however, I found I had been
mistaken in the opinion I had formed, and I re-
proached myself bitterly for ever having enter-
tained such an idea. What took place between
myself and my uncle I think it unnecessary to re-
peat. Until I was obliged to leave by the first
train to London I never felt what it was to part
with the only person I ever loved, and I shall
explain what I mean in the next chapter.
„ 4 What I have suffered since and during last
night I cannot easily explain to you, my dearest
K., what my feelings were towards you. You
cannot conceive how much I felt. It breaks my
heart, my own dearest K., to think how I
shall be away by myself. The feeling is more
than I can tell. You have the comfort of a home
and persons to whom you can speak. I have none.
lam thrown on the world without a friend; but,"
however, I shall try to take courage, and I hope
when you see me next you will find me changed
for the better. I shall employ these three years
in reforming my conduct and becoming all you
wish to see me. I shall never forget the few mo-
ments I have spent with you ; on the contrary, I
consider them the happiest of my life. You may
rest assured, my own dearest K., that nothing in
the world will prevent me, except being kept by
active service, coming back from India at the time
I have stated—theautumnof 1854, or January 1855.
‘ It will be a great comfort, my own dearest K.,
when lam in India, to think of you. It will be
the only pleasure I shall have. It is such a plea-
sure to think of the greatest friend I ever loved.
If you wish me to come back sooner, I shall not
remain five minutes longer in the army than I can
help.—Believe me, my own dearest K., your very-
affectionate.’
Can any one read these words and doubt that
the man loved the lady to whom they were ad-
dressed with all the sincerity of a warm and de-
voted attachment ? Can any one doubt that
attachment was of a pure and noble kind, not of
the base and grovelling nature which the counsel
for the defendant sought to render it? No, I
think it impossible that any candid mind, anxious
only about the truth—whatever may be his opi-
nion of Roger Tichborne otherwise—can read
these documents without being convinced that, as
far as his passion for Miss Doughty was concerned,
there was not a single trace of a feeling that was
not noble, tender, generous, and pure—
‘ H} s love sincere, his thoughts immaculate,
His tears pure messengers sent from his heart,
His heart as far from fraud as heaven fiom earth.’
Gentlemen, there is a letter written at this
time by Roger Tichborne to Mr. Slaughter, in
which his wishes with respect to the disposition
of the estates are to be found so clearly expressed
that I do not know any language of mine could
make it clearer. _ I do not suppose the letter is
his own composition, though I entertain very
little doubt that the instructions contained in it
are substantially his own. It was probably
written from the dictation of Gosford. It is as
follows :


* Tichborne-park, Jan. 5, 1852.
• My dear Sir,—As I expect shortly to go
abroad, it is my wish to complete certain arrange-
ments in regard to my property, which in a former
letter I informed you that it was my intention to
make. I have thought much of the subject, and
it is my wish and intention to leave the Doughty
estates in the following manner :
‘ If I die, my brother Alfred will, of course, suc-
ceed to the title and to the Tichborne estate,
which, by the settlements of last year, would
then be freed, by the aid of the Doughty estates,
from the charges upon it.
‘ With regard to the Doughty estates, I wish
to leave them by will to trustees on trust to settle
them as follows : First, to pay to my brother
Alfred, on his attaining the age of 21 years, an
•annuity of 2000/. per annum, and an additional
-sum of 1000/. per annum on his marriage. I
wish him to have the power to charge.upon the
Doughty estates as a jointure for his wife in the
case of his death.
‘ I next desire particularly to carry out the
object which, if I live, I propose to myself—l
mean the clearing from the Doughty estates the
encumbrances with which they are with
the object of clearing the Tichborne estate s en-
cumbrances. I desire, therefore, that from the
times that these estates shall come into the pos-
session of my trustees the whole of the surplus
rents, subject to the above annuities to my brother
Alfred, shall be devoted to this purpose.
‘ As soon as these encumbrances are paid off,
then I give to my brother Alfred, for his life, the
whole of the rents of the estates. If my brother
should marry and leave sons, the eldest son will,
of course, succeed to the title and Tichborne pro-
perty. I wish him also to take the London
Doughty property for his life, or, in the event of
his death, then the same to go to the eldest sur-
viving son of my brother. But I desire that Up-
ton-house, and all the property in Dorsetshire,
Buckinghamshire, and Lincolnshire, should at my
brother’s death go to his second and other sons,
except he should have but one, when I desire it
to go to him, upon this condition, nevertheless,
that whichever son succeed to this property shall
assume the name and arms of Doughty, and
in addition to his own name of Tichborne, or shall
forfeit the estates to the next heir.
‘ If my brother Alfred dies unmarried, or mar-
ries and has daughters only, the Tichborne estate
is to go to my relation, James Dormer.
‘ As my Doughty property, by the settlement of
last year, is now chargeable with the encumbran-
ces hitherto existing upon the Tichborne estate,
and as a further sum of near 40,000/. is also rais-
able to make additional purchases for the benefit
of that estate, I desire that my brother Alfred
shall have the power to charge upon those pur-
chases, or upon whatever interest I have in those
charges, to the amount of 20,000/., to be divided
equally among all his children except the eldest.
And I give up in favour of my cousin, James Dor-
mer, all further interest in those charges; pro-
vided that on coming into possession of the Tich-
borne property he uses and assumes the names
and arms of Tichborne after and in addition to his
name of Dormer.
‘ In the event of my brother Alfred’s death
without leaving sons, then I desire to continue
the succession to the second or other sons of my
cousin, Katherine Doughty, or, if she has but one
son, then to him. But if my brother or cousin
should have daughters only, I wish the estate to
go to the eldest and other daughters of my bro-
ther Alfred in succession and their heirs ; or, fail-
ing them, to my cousin for life, and then to the
eldest and other daughters of my cousin Kathe-
rine Doughty. And if I should he in actual posses-
sion of the estates at my death, I direct that my
trustees shall offer to my cousin, Katherine
Doughty, till her marriage, the free use of Upton-
house and the gardens attached, for a residence.
I further desire to give my brother Alfred the
power to charge 30,000/. on the London Doughty
estates for the benefit of all his children (except
the eldest son) in equal shares, but that money
not to be raised till my brother’s death.
‘ As to the Surrey property, I give the power to
my trustees to sell it and apply the money to the
clearing off of the encumbrances on the Doughty
estate. # ,
‘ My private wishes and intentions, as I intend
to have them carried out if I live, I have confided
to Mr. Vincent Gosford.’
And on the 17th of January he wrote to Gosford :
‘ I have written my will and left it with Slaugh-
ter ; and the only thing I have left out is about
the church, which I will only build under the cir-
cumstances which I have left with you in writing.’
Gentlemen, it is important you should bear
these testamentary dispositions in mind, because
we shall see by and by what the defendant said
on the subject. If you are satisfied Roger Tich-
borne made these testamentary dispositions with
a perfect knowledge of what he was about, if
they were the production of his own mind and his
own independent will, and if you compare, them
with the knowledge or ignorance of these disposi-
tions exhibited by the defendant, y op will be able to
form a judgment whether he can be Roger Tich-
borne or not. Seeing how painfully his aunt and
Miss Doughty were affected by this circumstance
—that he had sometimes drunk too much im-
mediately on his return to Clonmel he wrote a
paper in which he records a vow never to drink
spirits again. Writing to Miss Doughty, he says :
‘My dearest Kate,—l give you my word and
honour that I never will, from this day, drink a
single drop of spirits of any kind whatever.—l re-
main your very affectionate cousin,
‘ R. C. Tichborne.
‘ Feb. 15, ’52, 3 o’clock in the afternoon.’
At this time Lady Doughty, having been in-
formed of what Sir Edward had done, gave also a
conditional assent to the future marriage of the
cousins ; but her daughter was to wait until she
came of age. And, if in the mean time she should
see some one whom she likes better, it was to
be no engagement. Then Roger writes to Lady
Doughty a remarkable letter, showing what a
resolute effort he was making to reform his con-
duct as his aunt desired. He says :
‘ Artillery Barracks, Clonmel, Feb. 28, 1852.
‘My dear Aunt,—l hope that you will excusethe
long delay in fulfilling my promise. I was not able
yesterday week to write as long a private letter
as I could have wished for want of time. I. shall
try to do so to-day, though I cannot promise to
finish it this evening, as I have much to think of
before I write.
‘ I have, as you are aware, begun in a firm and
determined kind of way to reform my conduct in
every way in which 1 thought it required altera-
tion. I have, among other things, begun by giving
up drinking altogether. It is not without much
struggle and firm determination of mind that I
have been able to keep the promise which I gave
Katty before I left Tichborne. It is so much more


difficult for me to keep from it that I am at pre-
sent in low spirits (I don’t wish in the least to
excuse the vice of drinking), but it is in those cases
when a person feels himself low that he wishes to
drink, not to do wrong, but as a relieve. I think
twice, my dear aunt, before I give my word of
honour, because I consider it as such a sacred thing
that if ever I was to act contrary to what I have
promised, I would consider it as such a disgraceful
spot on me that I would not dare to show my face
before you or anybody else, because I think that
a man who cannot keep his word of honour never
■can be believed or trusted, and he is for that
reason worse than a brute. I am at present
taking care of myself, thing which I have never
done before in my life. lam taking the different
physics which Mr. Lypscomb advised me to take.
I hope with the help of God to become before
long what you wish to see me.
‘Several persons have remarked how much I
was changed, especially in the drinking line. To
all inquiries I answer that drinking might do
some time or other in England, but never would
do in India. To that they told me that I was
perfectly right, but that they never would have
thought that I could have brought myself to a
change so suddenly.
‘ I have, at least I hope that I have, fulfilled my
promise. I have written in this private letter
what lias been my line of conduct since I left you.
I hope that you may approve of the effort which
lam making. If there should be any expressions
which you do not like pray excuse them, because
I should be sorry if you were offended against
me. If there should be anything further which
you wish me to tell you or to explain Pray let me
know. I shall do it with pleasure. I received
your last letter this morning, and read it with
attention. Pray let me hear from you soon. It
will give me much pleasure to receive an answer
to this letter. —I remain, my dear aunt, your very
effectionate nephew,
‘R. C. Tichboene.’
Then comes a letter, in reply, from Lady
Doughty :
* Tichborne, March 4,1851.
‘ Yes, dearest Roger, be assured 1 am gratified
and delighted with your private letters, and I
bless God for the change that He is effecting in
your disposition, for it is His holy work ; many a
hard struggle you must have had, I know, to
conquer the bad habits of yours, and very strong
temptations to return to them. . . . On one
more subject perndt me also to touch, that is you
have often argued that because you have read
every bad book, and therefore, alas, know every
shade and refinement of vice, it can do you no
harm to continue : be assured that this is a device
of the devil : we cannot let our mind dwell—as
it must in reading a vicious story—on vice, with-
out, more or less, being tainted by it. This also
may cost you much, but it is worth the struggle,
and far best to turn over a new life at once. 1 can
well understand you being out of spirits—l hope
God will support you. . . . With kindest
love from your uncle and cousin, be assured how
obliged I feel by your own expression that you
hope soon to be all I could wish to see you. I
have, indeed, prayed to see you filled with reli-
gious and noble feelings and with steady habits,
so that all around you may respect and love you.
It is ordained by God that a wife should look up to
her husband. O how deplorable the fate of that
being whose life is to be spent tied to a man
addicted to degrading vices. So, dear Roger, I
trust to your sincerity. You have never yet de-
ceived me, I believe. God grant that I may ever
feel that I am your affectionate aunt,
‘K. Doughty.’
To this letter Roger sent the following reply:
‘ Clonmel .
‘My dear Aunt, —I am much obliged to you for
the confidence you place in me. lam now, lam
happy to say, quite changed for the better. I
have given up drinking spirits altogether, and I
am besides very careful about what quantity
of wine I drink. I moreover take of myself—
which is a thing I have never done before in my
life. I am, as you may fancy, low in spirits, in
mind. It requires a strong determination when a
person finds himself low in spirits not to take
drink as a relieve (sic). It is not without a struggle
that the good may have the best. But, however,
I hope with the help of God to keep the promiss
(sic) which I have given, and to become in course
of time what you wish to see me.—Believe me
your very affectionate nephew,
‘ R. C. Tichbokne.’
At this time the troop in which Roger was left
Clonmel and went to Waterford. Roger, however,
remained in Clonmel, with the incoming troop.
But in the month of October, between the 20th
and 29th, he left Clonmel and rejoined the A
troop under Captain Polhill, to which he properly
belonged. Soon after rejoining that troop at
Waterford we find him back again in Clonmel,
and writing from that town on the 14th of Feb-
ruary, and there he stayed, as far as we are
aware, until his troop joined the rest of the regi-
ment, when it was about to be converted from a
heavy into a light corps for the purpose of going
out to India. On the 2Cth of March we find him
settled at Portobello Barracks and carrying on
his correspondence from those quarters. Writing
to Mr. Gosford, he informs him that Mr. Slaughter-
had sent him a copy of the deed that he might
study it himself; so that it was not merely that
he had sent instructions to Mr. Slaughter, but he
had said to that gentleman, ‘ Have the kindness
to send me the draft to study myself,’ that he
might fully understand it. He writes to his aunt
on the 17th of April 1852, from Dublin :
‘My dear Aunt, — ... I went to the St.
Patrick’s Ball. I met there C. Bellew and S.
Berkeley, both having the militia disguise for the
occasion. Bellew has, lam sorry to say, broken
his arm out hunting. . . Pray give my love to
my cousin.’
And again, in a few days after, he writes the fol-
lowing letter : ‘ Dublin, April 22, 1852.
‘My dear Aunt, — ... I saw Lord and
Lady Bellew, when they were in Dublin, with C.
Bellew. They were kind enough to ask me to go
and spend some time with them at Barmeath, but
I was not, to my great regret, able to accept their
kind invitation. I have also seen S. Berkeley. I
don’t know if his visit te Ireland was caused by
his love to Lady St. Lawrence, &c.—Your very
affectionate nephew, R. C. Tichborne.’
It would seem from these letters that at this
time Roger saw a good deal of society in Dublin.
Then we come to a subject which was always a
sore point with Roger—namely, the proposal to
sell Upton. Gosford had been commissioned to
write to him on the subject, and he wrote back
two letters, one marked ‘private and confidential’
to be seen only by Gosford, in which he com-
plained that, after having granted to his family
all that they desired in the deeds and settlements,
they should have annoyed him by the proposal in


Gosford’s letter. Soon after, it appears that he
had an attack of illness, for we find Lady Doughty,
who was then in town, writing to him thus :
* London (no date).
‘My dearest Roger,—By a letter from your
father I am aware he has written to you respect-
ing your health. I was aware of the report that
you have had another attack upon your chest,
and that the surgeons think that India will be
most dangerous, if not fatal. Do, dear Roger,
let me know the real truth. ... I cannot
express how anxious I am to hear from you.
Dear Roger, pray take care of your health, which
is so precious to your friends.—Your affectionate
aunt, K. Doughty.’
Now, there was nothing which hurt and ex-
asperated Roger so much as to have anything
said about his health. Whether it was that he had
some idea that any illness of his would be attri-
buted to bad habits on his part, I don’t know;
but at all events he writes very angrily and even
coarsely on the subject. In one letter he says :
‘ I am sure Dr. Brown writes about things that
he knows nothing about.’ In another place he
says: ‘lt is wonderful I have seldom come
within the reach of a priest or a bishop that they
have not done me some mischief or other. That
is one of the reasons why I seldom go near them.’
Then he writes to his aunt: ‘I regret that the
persons who spread the report about my illness
did not take more trouble to ascertain whether it
was true.’ He writes, in the same cross way, to
Mr. Danby Seymour, who also inquired about his
health. He goes on to say that he had been at
several balls ; and that shows that in his second
residence in Dublin in the middle of 1852 he was
entering into all the amusements which a young
man in his station of life would be likely to do.
The last letter which I shall read from Ireland is
dated Dublin, May 31, 1852, the day before he
left Dublin to go to Canterbury. The letter is to
his mother, who had also made inquiries about
his health : ‘ Portobello Barracks, Dublin.
* My dear Mother, —Many thanks for your last
letter, which I had the pleasure of receiving the
day before yesterday.
‘ You ought not to make yourself unhappy about
me. I enjoy very good health. lam very sorry
that Dr. Brown before writing to you did not take
the trouble to get better information. I have had
the opinions of the very best doctors in Dublin,
and they all told me that there was nothing what-
soever the matter with me, so I wish, my dear
mother, that you set your mind at ease about me.
‘We are to leave Dublin for England on Tues-
day morning. I shall not be sorry to spend a short
time in an English quarter before leaving the
country.
‘ I have not been able to see Lady Bellew since
I received your last letter. She has not been in
Dublin for some time. I went some time ago to
spend the day with Lord and Lady Bellew at Bar-
mesCth. They had the kindness to ask me to spend
some time with them there, but I was sorry not to
be able to spend more than a day there. I was
sorry that you have not been able to see Edward
Bellew, —he is a nice sort of young man.
‘ I have been lately to a very great many halls,
and parties, which has made my time pass on
rather quickly.
‘ Monday. —l was not able to finish my letters
yesterday on account of all the bustle and packing
up of my things.
‘ I fancy that Paris must be, I have no doubt,
very gay at present.
‘ The last fete which the President gave must
have been one of the finest things in the world to
see.
‘ I hope that you feel yourself better at present,
and that you take more care of yourself. It is
certainly a great misfortune that you will not take
any of the doctor’s advice. In your state of health,
you would find yourself by far the better from it.
‘Pray excuse this hurried note. I have so
much to do at present, that I have not time to
write any more.
‘ I shall write to my father soon after my arrival
at Canterbury. We will be sometime to arrive
there, as we are going all the way by sea, which
will take us two or three days. We are to land at
Hearne’s Bay, which is the nearest point to Can-
terbury ; it is only 7 miles distant.
‘Pray give my love to my father. —I remain, my
dear mother, your very affectionate and dutiful
son, R. C. Tichbokne.’
Gentlemen, you will form your own opinion,
whether those letters I have read from Roger
Tichborne on a most important subject, together
with the letters received from Lady Doughty,
were likely or not to leave a lasting impression on
the memory of that young man. That memory
must have been one upon which time has made
cruel inroads if such a correspondence could be
entirely obliterated.
We have done for the present with the life of
Roger Tichborne in Ireland, and we now come to
the second branch of his history as connected with
his career in the army— namely, the time he
spent at Canterbury. The regiment left Dublin
and marched immediately to Canterbury. On
his arrival there he received a letter from Lady
Doughty, stating that she and her daughter were
about to pay a visit to London, and asking Roger
to come up to town to see them. He does so, and
is in London on the 9th. The first thing which
occupied his mind after arriving at Canterbury was
the completion of his will, with regard to which
he addressed the following letter to Mr. Gosford:
‘ Canterbury, June 9, 1852.
‘ My dear Sir, —I went up to London yesterday.
I went to see Mr. Slaughter. I settled with him
about my will. It will be ready for signature on
the 14th of this month. An order came this morn-
ing for us to get back our horses ; we are not, it
appears, to go abroad for two years at least. I
don’t know what to do, &c.—Yours truly,
* R. C. Tichborne.’
On the next day he writes in the following terms
to Lady Doughty : ‘ Canterbury , June 10, 1852.
‘ My dear Aunt, —I have forwarded my applica-
tion for leave from the 15th to the 23d of this
month. I have no doubt I shall obtain it. I shall
leave on Tuesday by the first train. I shall go
straight to your hotel to see you. Pray give my
love to Katty, and believe me, my dear aunt,
your very affectionate nephew,
‘R. C. Tichborne.’
He came to London on the 9th, and saw Lady
Doughty and his cousin. It is evident he had
some conversation with Lady Doughty on the sub-
ject of her daughter. Whatever may have been
the state of her mind at the commencement of the
year, when the proceedings took place at Tichborne
in January and February, it seems that at this time
Lady Doughty was inclined to oppose the marriage,
and to prevent it if she could. She was not pre-
pared to break off the engagement, but seems to
have been desirous of putting it on this footing—
that while Roger Tichborne should pledge his
troth to be ready to marry his cousin at the end


of the prescribed time, supposing he still enter-
tained the same affection for her, Miss Doughty
should be under no pledge whatever, but should
be at liberty to accept the offer of some one else.
I cannot help thinking Lady Doughty had a wish
in her mind, though it was not openly expressed,
that some such offer might be made by an eligible
party. She was very fond of Eoger evidently, but
while she did not want to break off the engage-
ment entirely, she was anxious to keep him, as it
were, in reserve. This was plainly the state of
Lady Doughty’s mind, as will be seen by the
letters I shall read to you. She was playing fast
and loose with Roger. On the 11th of June she
addressed to him the following letter :
‘ York Hotel, London, June 11, 1852.
‘ My dearest Roger, —Never think I can be of-
fended by your asking me any questions ; I love
you too sincerely Now to answer your let-
ter as to our being reserved to you, and, secondly,
as to the reports I have heard. I feel the diffi-
culty of answering, because we are all in a false
position towards each other, which ought to be
cleared, no party really knowing the exact posi-
tion or present feelings of each other; nor can this
be cleared partly by any one but yourself, and my
part is most difficult; and I must now trust to
your honourable feelings and write the truth. The
world has given out so decidedly that you and
your cousin are engaged that though we contra-
dict it—for you know there is no engagement—
still it has prevented any one coming forward, and,
in fine,, the report has met us everywhere, and
must, perhaps, have caused reserve. Now, in
reality, neither of you have made up your minds
to any final decision ; but it would be but sincere
and honourable, and a guide, if you kindly told
me, in confidence, your wishes. Recollect, how-
ever, we have no reason as yet to think that the
resolutions you made in the winter have been
kept. It is not keeping a resolution against drink
if any persons or circumstances have power to
draw you into it; moral courage should rise above
the temptation. I have no reports to repeat
more than, of course, your illness is said to have
been caused by smoking and the usual attendant
—drink. You deceive yourself, I fear, and in real-
ity take more than you think. Be that as it may,
without .real religious feeling to guide you, you
will throw life away, and ruin your own happiness
in this world and the next. Still, dear Roger,
thoughyour constitution has received great shocks,
a resolute change of habits might save you; but
it must be an entire change—it is a crisis in your
life ; do reflect, and when you speak to me do it
openly and sincerely. This I feel your own sense
of honour should dictate, and then be assured I
am your affectionate aunt and sincere friend,
‘K. Doughty.
‘ P.S. When you write or speak to me it should
be without reserve and perfect candour. The fu-
ture is too much at stake for mystery.’
He writes this letter in reply :
‘ (Private and confidential, to be burnt as soon as
read.) Canterbury, June 12, 1852.
‘ My dear Aunt, —I shall do what I can to ans-
wer your last letter, which I had the pleasure of
receiving this morning, with the same confidence
which you have showed me, and for which I feel
very grateful.
‘ You may rest assured that whatever confidence
you may place in me is quite safe, and that I shall
always do what I can to make myself worthy of it.
‘ I don’t know what has given rise to the differ-
ent reports to which you allude to in your letter. I
have never told anybody whatever what engage-
ments might or might not exist between me and
my cousin. I have certainly my reasons of sus-
pecting some persons, who spread those reports
about for the sake of doing mischief ; but persons
who take so much trouble in meddling in other
persons’ business are those, generally speaking,
who know least about it. It is, I must acknow-
ledge, rather disagreeable for you and another per-
son. For my own part, it is not so much so, I
must confess. My mind is fully made up, and I
am quite ready to hear anything for or against it,
because I am fully aware what persons who spread
reports of that nature are worth.
‘ For my own part, dear aunt, I have told you
last winter, and I daresay that you have not for-
gotten that day (January 4, 1852) what I said on
that day. I had been long to think about it, and
to take my final determination. I studied my own
heart and feelings. I saw quite plain that I had
habits which you or anybody else could not ap-
prove of. I knew quite well that I had strength
of mind to correct those bad habits, though the
task was not an easy one, but I thought twice
over before I could make up my mind to let you
know what my feelings were (I think it more
honourable to acknowledge my own faults, though
it is to my confusion). When I was quartered at
Waterford all by myself, with some few infantry
officers, we did not know what to do with our-
selves all day long, so when we used to assemble
together in the evening we used to drink very
hard only for the sake of spending the time ; for
nothing else. It brought on me, as could be ex-
pected, a violent illness, which, not being properly
cured, came back again when I was in Dublin.
* Since I came back from leave it has been my
daily study to try to improve. I don’t drink
any thing to what I used to drink formerly. I have,
I can say, improved in many other respects.
‘ What has taken place during the latter part
of the time which I spend at Tichborne, you will,
I daresay, remember it so as to make it unneces-
sary for me to write it over again.
‘ What affection I have felt for my cousin when
I was at Tichborne, instead of decreasing, is much
stronger now than it ever was. Whatever the
case may be now or in future, I shall always be but
toohappytodo anythingto please and obligeherin
any way which I have in my power, though I shall
be most likely far away very soon. If you hear
any more reports going about, you may rest as-
sured that they never come from me.
‘ But, however, my dear aunt, I am in hopes of
making am exchange into the 12th Lancers at the
Cape of Good Hope before long. I shall remain
there most likely two, if not two years and a half.
If my cousin has not changed by that time, then
what can be done will be done at once. I hope
and trust, my dear aunt, that you think I have
acted in an honourable manner j at least such has
always been my wish.
‘ If you wish me or if you like to give out your-
self my final decisions about me and my cousin, I
shall do so or you are at liberty of doing it your-
self, but, however, I leave all to you. 1 hope and
trust, my dear aunt, that I have not offended you.
If I have done so I am very sorry for it.
‘ I rely on your word of honour to keep every
word contained in this letter a perfect secret to
everybody, and moreover to burn the letter as
soon as you have read it. —Believe me, my dear
aunt, your very affectionate nephew,
‘ It. C. Tichbokne.
‘Nobody whatsoever will ever hear from me a


single word of what l have said toyou in this letter.’
Here he does not give a specific answer as to what
his intention is or what he will pledge himself to
with regard to his cousin, but he says in effect :
You know what passed when I was at Tichborne
at the commencement of the year. I refer you to
what I then said, and you can give out any final
determination you please about me and mv
cousin.’ J
°n the 13th he writes thus'to Mr. Gosford about
‘iv/r J o- ‘Canterbury, June 13, 1852.
My dear Sir,— l went to town last Wednesday
for the day, saw Mr. Slaughter, I read my will
over with him. I was much pleased with it, as
it expressed exactly what I wished. It will be
ready for my signature on Tuesday. I saw Lady
and Miss Doughty when I was in London. My
cousin seemed to enjoy my stay in town very
much. I was happy to hear my uncle was better.
R- C. Tichborne.’
While Lady Doughty and her daughter were in
town, Roger appears to have accompanied them
to places of public entertainment and to have
gone out with them of an evening, and I dare-
say he did not feel the slightest apprehension of
having the relations between himself and his
cousin brought to a speedy termination, as after-
wards happened. On the 19th there came the
tidings that Sm Edward Doughty was taken seri-
Hof iJ 11- • Th T erel ?P° n the stay of his wife and
daughter m London was brought to an abrupt
, 16 was necessary for Lady and
to go to Tichborne, and Roger was
X accompany them and to stay there
during the two or three remaining days of his
leave. It turned out, however, that Sir Edward’s
snnn SS Jf a H f, 0t ° f mi. Serious nature, and he very
soon got better They arrived at Tichborne on
Saturday, the 19th. Roger stayed there on the
Sunday and Monday, and on the 22d he left Tich-
borne. One of the questions in this case is, whe-
ther he was really at Tichborne again. In proof
that he was there are the oaths of Lady Radcliffe
of Lady Doughty, of Mr. and Miss Nangle, who
were staying in the house at the time, and of Mr.
Orostord. It seems his cousin thought it would be
desirable that an attempt should be made to per-
suade her father to allow her to marry Roger
£± borDe a * °nce, m which case he would have
f™ UP a i d !u of golng to India and have
entirely quitted the army. But Sir Edward was
upon the point Very likely he spoke on
the subject to Lady Doughty, who kept him up
to the mark. His answer was that the cousins
™ ‘ w % IL , Lad y Radcliffe has given fis an ac-
i°f occurred. She says that Roger
consent t° tried to induce hi '» to
to thelr belng ma r»ed at once, but he
J J° u I m . u I st wait tiH the time comes, and
we will not abridge the intermediate period.’
ihis being so, I take it for granted some conversa-
tion on the subject must have been held between
Roger Tichborne and Lady Doughty, and she
must have promised to give him fuller particu-
tt”;-! , ed to the Rtter of the Ist of July.
ntil Lady Doughty gave her evidence, and it
appeared that Roger had asked for an abridg-
never °AI ? Per !,° d ? f Probation, I confess I was
jX abl . e *® understand tbe letter of the Ist of
Jiily, but that evidence fully explains it. By
seeking to precipitate matters, Roger only de-
Sn him" if bj f Ct r an / il° Ugbt disa Ppointment
ence vl L 7 D ° Ught y used her influ-
ence with S,r Edward, and not only absolutely
prohibited all notion of marriage at an earlier
period than had been fixed, but wanted Rover to
give a more express pledge than he had given in
lllle she made him distinctly
understand that his prospect of marrying her
daughter was altogether a precarious one. While
he on the one hand was to pledge himself, Miss
Doughty on the other was to have perfect liberty
to choose any one else. J
After Roger had had this interview with his
uncle and the conversation with his aunt, but be-
fore his hopes were completely crushed, as they
were by the subsequent letter, he was walking
th his cousin, and produced a paper the genuine-
ness of which cannot be doubted, wherein he re-
cords a second time a vow to the Blessed Virgin
to build a church in the event of the union with
his cousin taking place. This was on the 22d of
June, and the paper was in the following terms:
< t i Tichborne-park (22d June 1852).
1 make, on this day, a promise that if I marry
my cousin Catherine Doughty this year, before
three years are over at the latest, to build a church
or chapel at Tichborne to the Holy Virgin, in
thanksgiving for the protection which she has
* h Q r °* n ? V i e « r ,Y S i and in prayin S God that our pistes
may be fulfilled. R. C. Tichborne,’
-there is no doubt about the genuineness of that
document, and it is a strong confirmation of the
evidence given by Mr. Gosford to the effect that a
similar document was left with him at an earlier
oL the y f ar - y ell > Ro « er leaves Tichborne
on the 22d, and goes back to Canterbury.
According to the view last propounded by the
learned counsel for the defendant, which is cer-
tainly not in conformity with the original state-
mentof his, client, it was on the occasion of this
visit to Tichborne, between the 19th and the 22d
ot June, that the seduction of his cousin took
place, and the learned counsel refers, among many
other things, to a letter written by Roger Tich-
borne on his return to Canterbury. He says that
Roger Tichborne, having done this, was in a be-
wildered state of mind, and that that state of mind
is shown by what he wrote immediately on his
arrival at his quarters. On the 26th of June
writing from Canterbury to his aunt, he says : ’
1 have been in such a state of confusion ever
since my arrival at Canterbury that it has been
quite impossible for me to write to you sooner.’
That confusion, says the learned counsel, arose
trom the disorder into which his mind was thrown
by the consciousness of having committed a grave
crime—of having sinned against hospitality and
against honour. If the learned counsel had turned
over the page—and it is a pity he did not-he
would have seen that this confusion receives a per-
fect explanation. Roger Tichborne writes the same
hay to Mr. Gosford excusing himself in like man-
ner for not having written in consequence of the
state of confusion ‘ arising on account of my chang-
ing my quarters.’ It is a confusion, not of mind
but ot furniture, boxes, and things of that kind
which have arrived from Ireland, and are being
set to rights. I must say Ido not think it is con-
sistent with forensic propriety to read the first
letter, which is capable by possibility of a twofold
interpretation, and to omit to read the second
which clearly explains what was meant. On the
outh of the month he writes again to Mr. Gos-
‘ Canterbury , June 30, 1852.
My dear Sir,—l have forwarded two boxes. . .
1 cannot make out why I have not received any
letters from Lady Doughty. I don’t know what is
going on at present at Tichborne. I have not heard
from that part of the world since I left. I don’t


intend writing there again till I hear from Lady
Doughty. I feel very anxious to receive a letter
from her.—Yours truly, R- C. Tichborne.’
In a previous letter, dated from Canterbury on
the 26th of June, and addressed to Mr. Gosford,
he says : ‘ Canterbury, June 26.
‘My dear Sir, —I have been ever since my
arrival at Canterbury in such a state of confusion
on account of my changing my quarters that it
has been quite impossible for me to write to you
sooner to inquire how things in general are going
on at Tichborne. I am in hopes of hearing from
Lady Doughty soon. I hope that she won’t show
too much diplomacy in her letter; things are much
too near a crisis for it; moreover, her ladyship is
rather a poor politician. I can see through it
quite clear (sic), i should feel much obliged if you
had the kindness to send me aFrench work which
I bought in London, which I have forgotten at
Tichborne.
‘ The work is called Mon Voisin Raymon, in
four volumes. You will find it in my sitting-
room. —Believe me, dear Sir, truly yours,
‘ R. C. Tichborne.’
Mr. Kenealy enlarged very much on the last pas-
sage in this letter, asking how Roger could have
been in love with his cousin if, just after having
left her society, he wrote to Mr. Gosford for a
copy of an immoral French book. The work in
question is one of Paul de Kock’s novels, and of
course it is an indelicate and immoral work. I
daresay the learned counsel for the defendant
knows its character better than I do, because I
daresay he has read it, whereas happily I have
not.
A Juror.—Did he not read an extract from it ?
The Lord Chief Justice. —I think the extract
was from Balzac, but I am not sure. Perhaps it
would have been better if Roger Tichborne had
read some purer book, but because a young man
reads Paul de Kock in his leisure hours and finds
delight in the racy humour of the writer, even
though it be contaminated by coarse indecency, I
don’t know why you should assume that young
man is necessarily unprincipled and black-hearted,
as the learned counsel has sought to impress on
your minds.
Well, after Roger Tichborne gets back to Can-
terbury, Lady Doughty, who had promised to
write and tell him what were the views of her hus-
band on the subject of his proposal to marry hi 3
cousin at an earlier period than was originally in-
tended, sends him the following letter, dated the
Ist of July 1852 :
‘ Tichborne-park, July Ist.
‘ My dearest Roger,—l thank you for your kind
letter, and should have answered immediately,
only your uncle wished for full time to consider
over all that has passed, and though it is a painful
task to me to write what may give you pain, it is
no use delaying longer without telling you that he
says he sees no reason to change from the decision
he made during his illness, “ that of not giving
consent till our daughter was of age, and that she
must be at perfect liberty to marry any person ;
in fine, that no engagement whatsoever should
take place between you,” added to our considering
her too young to decide upon a choice that
involves goiDg contrary to the wishes of parents
(we presume on both sides) and which is against
the rules of the Church. You have not given any
real proof of changing habits that have been the
cause of endangering your life by bringing most
serious illnesses, and which without resolute and
determinately giving up will certainly bring on a
return of the same illness. Now, without a long
continued proof of these bad habits being entirely
conquered, no parent (even if there was no
relationship) would think themselves justified in
giving their child to a person who, neither from
a sense of duty to God or the attachment to their
child, could conquer habits that would be the
ruin of the happiness of both ; these, then, are
our objections, and it is best you should clearly
know them. You asked that our child might have
permission to write to you. We certainly see
great objections to this, for, being under age, she
cannot act without the consent of parents ; there-
fore the less communication you have under these
circumstances the more free it leaves both. Now,
dear Roger, though I have fulfilled the duty that
devolves upon ns, you are, of course, at perfect
liberty to act in this matter as you consider best
for your own happiness. I only ask that you
will write and tell me your decision after you
have well considered over this letter, and that you
will not take any precipitate measure, but write
clearly your own views in a letter that may equally
be read by your uncle as well as myself. _
‘ Your uncle and cousin send ttieir kind love.
Write soon to your affectionate aunt,
‘K. Doughty.’
Of course Roger felt that these were very hard
and very unfair terms, and while Lady Doughty
puts forward as one of the reasons for insisting
on them the plea that he had not given proof of
his reformed conduct, he resents this allegation,
and complains that she should have listened to the
statements of anybody else against his word of
honour pledged as a gentleman. On the 2d of
July Roger wrote from Canterbury to Mr.
Gosford : .
‘ It is quite plain by the letter I received to-day
from Lady Doughty that she has at last gained
her end. I was sorry to see in her letter some
remarks to which I never thought of being
subjected. It is the first time I can remember
of mere reports being received in preference to
my word of honour.’
He adds in a postscript: ‘lt is not my intention
to go back to Tichborne for a long time to come.’
About this time the election was going on for
Poole, and Mr. H. Danby Seymour, thinking that
Roger, as future proprietor of Upton, might have
some influence with some of the voters there—
and the election was a close one —writes to ask
him to come and help him if he could. Accord-
ingly Roger went, after having got leave for the
purpose. From Poole he sent the following letter
to Lady Doughty : . ko
‘ Poole, July 7,1852.
‘My dear Aunt, —I shall sleep at Winchester
to-night on my way to London. If you would let
me know if you are coming to Winchester to-
morrow I shall wait, because I know that I can
make more in half an hour’s conversation than m
a week correspondence. Believe me, my dear
aunt, your affectionate nephew,
‘ R. C. Tichborne.
‘ Pray don’t be offended, but I don’t wish to go
back to Tichborne for a long time to come.’
He refers to the subject in a letter which he
afterwards writes to Mr. Gosford, making an ap-
pointment to meet him at the White Hart, in
Winchester. He stopped at Winchester on his
way back from Poole, but somehow or other Lady
Doughty missed him. So, after waiting for the
next train, he proceeded on his journey. _ On the
12th she writes to him, suggesting that it would
be better for him to let his father know his real


feelings before a report, then widely circulated,
reached his ears. Then he writes her this letter
datTto it herS ° f the lBt ° f July ' There is n °
My dear Aunt, —I have perhaps delayed too
long to answer your letter received last Friday •
, b , u V l a ; m SUJ ; e y° u will excuse me when you think
that I have to answer on a subject which requires
much consideration before answering in a manner
which can be satisfactory to you as well as myself.
alluded in rather a strong manner to
bad habits which I had, I acknowledge, to a strong
degree last year, but I have told you (and I believe
you can believe me) that it has been my daily
study ever since the beginning of this year to
break myself off from those habits which were
not all what I ought to have, especially in my
future station of life. I should feel sorry M. D.
A. if you thought that I kept my C. under any
kind of engagement towards me. If she thinks
for a moment that she can be happier by marryino-
who she fancies let it be so. I have always been
uncommonly fond of my C. (as you perhaps 7 know)
ever since l saw her the first time, but I never
A her Self ODIy ’ and if 1 see that she
will be happy by marrying I will be the first to
encourage it. _ And if in some future time I can
be of any service to her it will always be a great
pleasure to do anything I possibly can for her
And moreover what has taken place will never be
to . a “ ybod y whatsoever by me as long as I
live.. As far as lam concerned it is fully my in-
tention if I, my C. marries to make the army my
profession to go abroad with my Regiment. (There
is a strong rumour that we are to go either to
Australia or India in the Spring.) I care little
were my Regiment will be send to. I shall go
with it to any part of the Globe where it may be
send to. I am m hopes that I have answered your
y ° U .rt hed it 1 h °pe you wo/t be
ofiend ed y o a u S S Jfi S r m b aTner my
the C “ e m ‘ y be ’ ,onr
‘ P.s. It is not my intention to go to Tich’borne
again for a long time to come, unless you and my
uncle express a wish to see me either no w or
duung the leave I applied for in the winter.’
nni+v I6Ve ’ Sputlemen, he could not have written
Ladv Do g „Jb + lC^ W ° U A d be more satisfactory to
Lady Doughty than the words conveying his in-
tention not to go to Tichborne again. Lady
Doughty answers the last letter in this way : 7
‘ tit.- xr. t ' tichborne Park.
bv Mr d r?f Roger,-- 1 received your kind letter
oy Mr. Gosford; it is perfectly satisfactory to
have lf ’. A You need not, however,
the hab v Spl f aSe \ W i th Wbat 1 said respecting
Jwned Rv wh /t h whioh you candidly
owned. By what I said I did not express doubt
of your word or intention-only that under cer-
tam circumstances proof of change for a consider
uncnanged. J ray if you cannot write or sneak
openly to Mr. Gosford, to tell us. The report 5
fathT lddy circul , ated that it must read? your
for I* + ea t’ and therefore wo uld it not be best
or you to know your real feelings Be assured
Slid E d ™ ”„ r S
sine , yoU , j find y°ur uncle and myself
SSLn““ ted t 0 rou - “ d 1 «.»V
ftem, B rtL o .°i‘. o ,r r ‘w- ‘H Primary objection to
are sSed + 116I 16 relatl °- S v ,p > and adds = ‘We
are satisfied that you are right in not naming any-
thing to your father unless questioned, and then
sincerely stating the facts as they are.’
+ Roger Tic h borne writes as follows
to Mr. Gosford:
‘at t «• ‘ Canterbury, July 13, 1852.
My dear Sir,—l was rather surprised to hear
how very fast things are going on at Tichborne. I
had no idea that her ladyship was in such a hurry.
Have you heard? &c. I should greatly feel obliged
i ,^ 0U you tad the kindness to write to me to
let me know how things are going on and if the
crms has taken place, as it is not my intention to
go to Tichborne again. Pray let me know if my
cousin is changed.—Yours, &c., R. c. T.’
The allusions in the correspondence to his father
are important, because the defendant, in one of
his statements about the sealed packet, says ‘his
father pressed him to marry his cousin.’ It is
however evident from the letters that his father
knew nothing at all on the subject until all rela-
tions between the cousins were put an end to.
Writing to Mr Gosford, Roger Tichborne says :
Lady Doughty in her last letter says it will not
be prudent to mention matters to my father un-
less he mentions them, but says in that case I had
better answer in an open and sincere manner. I
have always done that, and it appears to me I
have acted too openly when I found idle tales are
believed m preference to my word.’
Then he writes to Mr. Henry Danby Seymour:
~, , __ Cavalry Barracks, Canterbury.
f'y 1 ' Henry,—l was very happy to learn by
yesterday s paper you send me this morning on
my departure from Poole that you had at last been
elected. I was sorry that my being so little known
prevented me from doing more for you. I heard
from my father about a fortnight ago. He men-
AI of coming over to England
with Alfred towards the latter part of this month
or the beginning of next. I was almost at loss for
news. Everybody seemed to have given up the
habit of writing to me. My uncle is, by what I
have heard, passed through Winchester, one day
well another very low. 1 could not help remark-
ing, the last time I saw him, how much weaker
t than when I saw him last winter. lam
afraid the autumn and winter will be very trying
to him. Much has been said lately of giving ns
a compensation for all the different expense” to
which we have been put; but I don’t think that
the chance of the Government giving us any sum
of money is worth altogether sixpence. Pray re-
member me very kindly to Mrs. Seymour and y our
sisters, and believe me, my dear Henry, yours
truly, q Tichborne
July 19, 1852.’ chborne.
Doughty 6 28th IIG WfiteS as follow 3 to Lady
'■Cavalry Barracks, Canterbury, July 28,1852.
~, y ~ e . a T Aunt, Many thanks for your last
letter, which I have the pleasure of receiving the
day before yesterday. You must have been no
doubt much amazed when you heard of my goino-
to the elections. Henry Seymour wrote to me
expressing a wish that I should be with him at
the time of the election, thinking, no doubt
might have some kind of influence in Poole i
started at once, trying to find out what on earth
had put it in Henry’s head that I had influence in
a place where I am not much more known than the
man in the moon. As soon as I arrived I
my campaign with Mr. Woollet, who I find very
obstinate in refusing to give his vote. I talked
about two hours on the subject but to no pur-
pose. I might just as well have sung “lam afloat ”


fori got—l don’t think you have seen in the
papers what have taken place at Limerick. The
mob was so violent against the 3d Dragoon
Guards, who had been brought there on the oc-
casion, were ordered to charge the mob was given
(which duty they performed, I am sure, with no
small degree of pleasure). Three priests were
knocked down in the charge, who were exciting
the mob against the troops in the most violent
manner. Their major, a lieutenant, and 11 men
were knocked down from their horses, and near
killed with stones. As they were not able to take
care of themselves, fresh troops have been send
over from England to take care of them. Ireland
is a delightful country, where civilisation and
polished manners are well understood. I was
very sorry to learn by your letter that you
had not been so well lately as you could have
wished. I hope that you feel yourself better. I
suppose that my father and Alfred are arrived
at Tichborne by this time. I hope that Alfred
has such a good full moon face as he had last
winter. Is it true that he wishes to go into the
Marines ? If such be the case, he better get his
name put down at once, because, promotion being
very slow in that wonderful regiment, he will
have to wait a long time for his commission.
This is not bad quarter, though very slow; by far
better than the quarters in the south of Ireland.
We have to deal with civilised persons about
here, which we have not in Ireland. If I was
obliged to go for five years in the north frontier
of the Cape of Good Hope, or three years in the
county of Tipperary, I would sooner go to the
Cape to-morrow than go to Ireland again. The
weather has been of late very hot indeed, and if
it goes on much longer I shall have to wear some
of the clothes which I had made when I was going
to India. Several of our officers have gone to the
races. They have obtained few days for that pur-
pose. There are a great many rumours going
about £us, but it will all end, 1 believe, in our
going to India in the course of two or three years
to relieve the 14th. Having been made light, we
must go to India some time or other. I hope that
my uncle feels better now. Pray give him my
love, as also to my father and mother, and also
to my cousin.—l remain, my dear aunt, your
affectionate nephew, R. C. Tichborne.’
It certainly does not appear likely that he had
received a deputation asking him to stand as a
candidate for Poole when we find him stating
he was no more known there than the man in the
moon.
On the 30th of July 1852, Roger wrote to Mr.
Gosford from Canterbury:
‘ I have received a letter from my father inform-
ing me of his arrival at Tichborne, and expressing
very strongly his wish that I should go there for
.a short time, but that is a thing to which I should
strongly object.’
At this time Roger Tichborne’s mother con-
ceived the idea of visiting England while her hus-
band and her younger son were at Tichborne, and
she wrote to Roger saying that she should come
to see him at Canterbury. In reply he sends her
this characteristic letter:
‘ Canterbury , 2c i August 1852.
‘My dear Mother, —I am much obliged for your
kind wish of coming over to see me, . . . but I
have written to my father, and if he approves I
shall take a house for you and him at Dover. I
shall write you again in two or three days.—Be-
lieve me, my dear mother, your very affectionate
son, B. C. Tichborne.’
Then we have a letter from him on the 7th of
August, which is important, because this is the
critical period with reference to the Brighton card
case. There are three days on which it is impos-
sible to prove positively that he was at Canter-
bury, but still there are circumstances which tend
to show that he had not been away from that city
on the 4th, sth, and 6th of August, on which days
the Brighton races were run. Writing to Mr. Gos-
ford on the 7th, he says he has for a long time
given up all hopes of pleasing his family, for if he
pleases one he is sure to displease the other, and
this, he adds, was one of the causes which made
him act for himself.
A Juror.—Have we the date of his first illness
which was spoken of by Colonel Jones?
The Lord Chief Justice.—No; the date is
not sufficiently defined to enable us to speak with
any certainty about it, but I shall come to that
subject by and by. There i 3 a passage in the let-
ter about the election to which I ought to direct
your attention. It has been suggested by the
learned counsel for the defendant that if you
should be of opinion that what has been called the
Brighton card case could not have occurred at
'Brighton races in 1852 it might have happened at
the Goodwood Races. Now,! that letter of the
28th of July contains a passage which appears to
me to show to demonstration that Roger did not
go to Goodwood Races. Writing from the bar-
racks at Canterbury he says : ‘ Several of us are
gone to the races. They have obtained a few days’
leave for that purpose.’ In speaking thus he could
not have included himself in the number of those
who had gone. On the 7th of August he sends a
letter to Mr. Gosford, and on the same day he
writes to his mother. If he had lost money at
Brighton on the 4th, sth, or 6th, and had not the
means to satisfy the debt he had incurred, and it
was necessary to have recourse to his mother for
means, he could only have done so by writing to
her at Paris. Now, there is no such letter. On
the 7th, when, if he had lost, he must have known
of his liability, the mother was contemplating a
visit to England, and if he had been in a predica-
ment from which he could not escape without her
aid, you would naturally suppose he would have
written to her about it. Yet this is what he writes
to his mother:
‘ Canterbury, August 7, 1852.
‘ My dear Mother, —I strongly advise you to
give up all ideas of coming over to England.
. . . If such was your wish, you should have
thought of it sooner and have come with my
father. ... It would be quite impossible for
me, if you came to Canterbury, to look after you.
—Your affectionate son, R. C. Tichborne.’
On the Bth he writes as follows to Lady
Doughty:
‘ Canterbury, August 8, 1852.
‘My dear Aunt, —I have not been about much
lately. I have nearly explored all the places in
the neighbourhood. There are still one or two
places I am anxious to visit, among others Maid-
stone; if I can possibly obtain a day’s leave I
think I shall be able to go there some time during
this week.—Your affectionate nephew,
‘ R. C. Tichborne.’
And then he writes to Mr. Gosford :
‘ Canterbury, August 10,1852.
*My dear Sir, — ... I have not heard from
Lady Doughty for a long time. I fancy she must
be back at Tichborne. I fancy she has asked you
if you have heard from me. I wrote to her
yesterday. I don’t know what I shall do this


■winter—if I shall apply for leave or not. If I do,
I think that I shall go and settle somewhere
where I can have good hunting.—Yours,
* R. C. Tichborne.’
On the 17th August he writes from Canterbury
that he supposes they are getting on well at Tich-
borne ; and that he intends getting a short leave,
which he proposes to spend in London. His aunt,
in writing to him, assures him that never a day
passes without their thinking of him, and she
also informs him of his uncle’s serious illness from
spasms. He replies to her in these terms :
‘ Canterbury , August 23, 1852.
‘My dear Aunt, —I was sorry to learn, by your
last, such a bad account of my uncle. I sincerely
hope he will get over it. I should feel much
obliged if you had the kindness to let me know
daily how he feels. Pray give my love to my uncle.
—Dear Aunt, your affectionate nephew,
‘R. C. Tichborne.’
In reply, Lady Doughty writes a letterwhich con-
tains a very important passage, because it is
impossible his uncle could have sent such a
message to Roger if the latter had been guilty of
dishonourable conduct towards them or their
daughter. She says :
' Tichborne-park.
‘My dearest Roger,— Thanks for your kind
inquiries, at which your dear uncle is much
gratified. He spoke of you again to me with the
greatest affection, when he thought himself dying;
he said, “Give my love and blessing to dear Roger,
and my hope that the time is not far distant when
he sells out and settles down, and truly glad
should I have been to have seen him make a
happy marriage.” I give you these words as he
said them to me. . . . Your father and uncle
Alfred leave next Monday. Your uncle and
cousin send their love. Ever, dearest Roger,
your affectionate Aunt, Iv. D.’
It is not likely that people would speak in that
way of a man who had succeeded in overcoming
the honour of their daughter. On the 30th of
August he writes a letter to his aunt giving a
detailed account of the gaieties that had been
going on throughout the whole of the past
autumn, and the description he gives conveys the
idea that he had taken part in them. The letter
runs thus:
‘ Canterbury , August 30.
‘My dear Aunt, —I was happy to hear such a
good account from my uncle by your last letter.
. . . These two last weeks have been very gay
at Canterbury. The first week was the cricket
week—the great matches of Kent against All
England were played. There were some picnics
given at the same time. Several officers went to
these parties, but I did not go. I have now given
up altogether going to these parties of pleasure.
But I could not escape going to the ball which
was given at the latter end of the week. Last
week was the racing week ; Thursday and Friday
were the two days. I went to both; the racing
was very good. They had, of course, a race ball.
—Your affectionate nephew, R. C. Tichborne.’
That brings us to the end of August, and
looking to the correspondence, the question pre-
sents itself whether you entertain any doubt that
throughout the month of August Roger Tichborne
was stationary at his quarters in Canterbury. On
going through the letters one by one, we find no
reason to believe that he ever obtained leave of
absence, and it is impossible to suppose that he
went to Tichborne during the time. If we follow
him through the month of September we shall
find the same thing. Sir Edward Doughty having-
improved in health, Lady Doughty went to Hyde
at the beginning of September, and there is no
reason to believe that while she was there
Roger went to Tichborne. She writes to him as
follows:
‘ Hyde, Isle of Wight, Sept. 10, 1852.
‘ My dearest Roger,—We came here on the Ist
of September, and have been ever since with my
sister. My Katty came on Wednesday, and we
return to Tichborne together. . . . Your father
was very low when he quitted Tichborne,
but nothing unpleasant ever passed between us
and your father; he never even alluded to any
conversation with you, and we all parted the same
friends we had met. He never named you in any
way to us. Write soon to me at Tichborne. I
have had a kind letter from your father. With
your cousin’s kind regards, ever dear Roger, your
attached and affectionate Aunt, K. Doughty.’
On the 18th of September, Roger Tichborne
writes as follows to Mr. Gosford :
‘ Canterbury, Sept. 18, 1852.
‘My dear Sir, —I went up to London on the 15th
to see my father. We had a long conversation
together, in which he strongly expressed his wish
that I should leave the army. ... I told him I
should most likely take during the winter a sport-
ing tour, and not to go to Tichborne. He entreated
of me to go and spend some time with my uncle
at Tichborne. Now, it is not my intention to go
to Tichborne (unless my uncle and aunt express
a very strong wish that I should go and spend
some time with them during the winter) —to go
to Tichborne at all this winter. I have my
reasons for doing so, which I doubt not you
know. ... I told him about my not wishing to
go to Tichborne this winter. It may, perhaps,
bring things to a sort of crisis, but what crisis
it will be I cannot say. I suppose that every-
thing at Tichborne is much as usual. How is my
uncle ?—Believe me, yours truly,
‘R. C. Tichborne.’
On the 25th he wrote to Mr. Gosford to say
he had made up his mind to leave the army if
no order for foreign service came. He also states
that he should like to have a hunting-box in
Hampshire, with stables for four horses. On the
30th of the month he wrote another letter to his
aunt, which shows he was still at Canterbury.
The proposal to take a hunting-box in the neigh-
bourhood of Tichborne created the greatest com-
motion in the mind of Lady Doughty, whose
great object was to keep him away from her
daughter. Mr. Kenealy says this was because
she had a knowledge of some dishonourable con-
duct on his part, and was apprehensive of some-
thing. You will judge for yourselves whether
this was the case. In her letter she says the
world had given out that he and his cousin were
engaged, and she pointed out that this belief
would be confirmed if he went to reside in the
neighbourhood of Tichborne. During the month
of October Roger was never near Tichborne, but
was still at Canterbury. Writing to his aunt on,
the 10th of October he says :
‘ My dear Aunt, —I beg to say that, if I settle
in Hampshire, it is not my intention to be within
reach of Tichborne, as, if I take a hunting-box
for the season, I shall so manage that it may be at
least 15 or 20 miles from the house at least, if
not more. The idea of leaving the army never
would have come into my mind if there had been
the least chance of the Regiment going to India.
... If I had been able to make an exchange into


a regiment in India or the Cape I should have
gone, and not thought of leaving the service.
. . . I intend remaining, and hunt in England
during the season, and to go in spring to travel
in South America and Mexico, which are two
countries which I wish to see. I intend going all
over that part of the world and finish my travels
by Europe. I should be sorry if you thought for
a moment that if I settled in Hampshire I should
be in your way. I should so contrive that you
would not see or hear of me. . ... Pray give
my love to my uncle and to my cousin. —Relieve
me your very affectionate nephew,
4 R. C. Tichbobne.’
On the 25th of October he wrote to Mr. Gos-
ford from Canterbury that he was soon to start
for Upton. It was arranged that he should go
there. On the 28th of October Lady Doughty
wrote to Roger:
4 The deed being done, it is useless to refer
more than necessary to the arguments which I
put as forcibly as I could when first you allowed
your intentions to be made known to us, because
certainly you have thrown us all into difficulties
without real necessity for doing so, for by your
wish to settle in this country, and our objecting
to it unless we could have made you as welcome
here as formerly—and therefore we offered Upton
—our duty compelled us not to throw you con-
stantly together when we disapproved any attach-
'ment beyond that cousinly affection which we
hoped might ever continue. I must remind you
of what I told you, that, having had a subsequent
conversation with my child, and finding that her
mind was far from being made up, but that she
was much agitated and wishing for a
longer time to consider whether she really did
give you that decided preference to all those she
had ever seen, that with a safe conscience she
could give a decided consent to your asking your
father’s consent, and it is painful to us not to see
you; but our duty must supersede inclination,
and we could not be justified, after what has so
recently passed, to run the risk of any renewal;
but the trial is augmented by the step you have
taken. We earnestly hope you may be comfort-
able at Upton, and I always cherish a hope that
the day may come when you are a settled and
happy man.’
At the end of October he writes to Mr. Vincent
Gosford, informing him that he had accepted the
invitation to go to Upton, and his letter throws
considerable light on parts of the case which
might otherwise _ appear mysterious. Writing
from Canterbury on the sth of October 1852, he
says :
4 1 should feel obliged if you had the kindness
to bring down with you at the same time all my
things, such as my four brass instruments with
the mouthpieces and crooks, my two guns and
two rifles, two pair of jack boots, brushes (I have
two pairs left at Tichborne), two red coats, two
pairs of shooting shoes, and perhaps some light
ones, which I have forgotten there ; shooting
jackets, coats of every description, as also trousers
of every colour, as also my books and music
books, my six or eight hats and caps of all shapes
and colours, as also my backgammon board, my
haversack, pipes, tubes, if there are any, hunting
cap, whips with the lashe3, hunting spurs (I had
two pairs left in my sitting room), scarfs ; in fact
everything which you may find in the house that
belongs to me.’
It will afterwards be important to consider
what became of all these things, for there is no
proof of their having been disposed of or sent
away from Upton, and of course Roger Tichborne
would not take them with him to South America.
On the 28th of October he went to Upton.
The correspondence to which I called your at-
tention will enable you to judge whether, be-
tween the 22d of June and the 28th of October,
Roger Tichborne ever set his foot in the Tich-
borne mansion or in the surrounding neighbour-
hood. It is for you to solve that question. I
cannot help thinking, on looking through the
correspondence, that Lady Doughty was dealing
ungenerously with the young man. It would
have been much better for her to have said at
once that there must be no further hope of a
future union between him and his cousin. Instead
of doing that she endeavoured to get him to plight
his troth to her daughter, while her desire was
that her daughter should see some one whom she
would like better, in which case poor Roger was
to be thrown overboard and left to bear his dis-
appointment and sorrow in the best way he
could. Roger saw through her drift. From that
time he declares positively and expressly that he
will not go back to Tichborne, except on the ex-
press invitation of Sir Edward and Lady Doughty,
and, as far as I can see, he never departed from
his resolution. His proposal even to come into
the county was met by strong remonstrances on
the part of Lady Doughty. Then comes the
compromise under which he accepts the loan of
Upton, where we shall trace his proceedings to-
morrow.
Fourth Day, Tuesday , February 3, 1874.
Gentlemen of the Jury,—We left Roger Ticli-
bome yesterday afternoon settled at Upton, which
hisuncle and aunt—Sir Edward and Lady Doughty
—had placed at his disposal, while he required it
as a residence, instead of his taking a shooting-
box in Hants. This brings us to the end of Oc-
tober, and now the facts and date of the corre-
spondence, especially in the ensuingmonths of No-
vember and December—at all events the first half of
December—will be of great importance when we
come to another part of the case—l allude to what
has been called the sealed packet. When we come
to that case, every date and every letter it will be
essentially necessary you should be thoroughly
conversant with ; and, as I desire that then all
those things should be perfectly fresh in your me-
mory, I think it better to pass them over for the
present. There are only one or two tilings con-
nected with it which I think you ought now to be
reminded of. It appears that between the time
Koger went to Upton and his final departure from
England he visited Paris, with a view to see his
father and mother, three times. That fact will
be important when you come to consider what
were his relations to his family when he went
abroad. It appears from the correspondence that
he left Upton on the sth of November for Paris,
returning on the 13th. Again, on the 17th of
December, he went from Upton to Paris, return-
ing, not to Upton, but to Canterbury, on the 31st,
where he joined his regiment and sent in his
papers with a view to sell out. Again, on the


20th of January, he is in Paris, from whence he
returned—as we know from a letter of his to Mr.
Gosford—after a stay of 19 days. It therefore
follows that the defendant could not have been
right when he stated that his last visit to Paris
only extended to a day or two.
It was, you remember, during that last visit to
Paris that those things occurred of which the wit-
nesses spoke—the breakfast, or dSjeHner, at M.
Chatillon’s, when he and Madame Chatillon saw
the tattoo marks ; his walking out with Chatillon,
when the silver chain was purchased which his
father subsequently paid for; his meeting with
Gossein, and subsequent call upon him ; the poul-
ticing of his throat by Burdon, who had succeeded
Gossein as his father’s valet; the dinner at his
father’s, at which were assembled the Abbe Salis,
M. Daranza, and M. Chatillon. There is one
other matter of importance for your consideration,
because it was one of the tests applied by Mr. Gos-
ford to the memory of the defendant to see if he
recollected what took place with the poachers on
Branksea Island, as to which Roger wrote letters
to Gosford and to Lady Doughty; and I shall have
to advert to that matter further on. The only
letter to which I wish to call attention up to this
period is one from Lady Doughty, addressed to
Roger at Canterbury on the first day of 1853, when
he had returned from Paris. She wrote to say
that she had heard of his return to England, and
that, as his brother Alfred was there, his uncle
would be glad to see Roger at Tichborne from
Tuesday to Friday, but not to let his uncle be-
lieve that it was a final leave-taking. She stated
that she and her daughter would be at War dour,
as, however much she wished to see him, it was
better that they should not meet.
Now, I must say I think it was one of the dark-
est traits—and there are many—in Roger Tich-
borne’s character that he did not respond as he
ought to have done to that invitation. He thought
he had reason to complain of his uncle’s proceed-
ings towards him. But his uncle had been a se-
cond father to him, and he was evidently dying.
Roger knew very well, as his letters abundantly
show, that he never would see his uncle more. In
leaving England he was leaving a man behind him
who had always been kind and affectionate to
him, and yet, so strong is his feeling of resentment
against his uncle, and against Lady Doughty more
especially, because in asking him to Tichborne to
see his dying uncle she said that she and her
daughter would be out of the way, that he refused
to go. He writes to Mr. Gosford:
‘ Private.
* Cavalry Barracks, Canterbury, Jan, 5, 1853.
‘My dear Sir, —Many thanks for your last let-
ter, which I had the pleasure of receiving half an
hour ago. I received a letter from Lady Doughty
last Monday, asking me to go to Tichborne on the
4th, and requesting me besides to have the kind-
ness to leave on Friday morning, the 7th. It is
not certainly my intention to go to Tichborne, and
if her ladyship still thinks that she can make a
tool of me as in former days, she is, I must say,
greatly mistaken. It would have been quite im-
possible for me to have gone down there at pre-
sent, but even so, if I had been at liberty, I cer-
tainly would not have gone. All my arrange-
ments about selling out are getting on very fairly
at present. I hope that it will be all over in the
course of a few days. I shall be obliged to go
back to Upton for a day or two before, so that you
may meet me at the Winchester station and go
down to Upton with me. lam greatly in hopes
of being able to go to Paris either on Sunday or
Monday morning. I shall remain there till about
week before my embarkation for the Conception or
Valparaiso, if you write to me in Paris, direct to
my father’s house. —Believe me yours truly,
‘ R. C. Tichbobne.’
I must say that it was to his disadvantage cer-
tainly that a feeling of gratitude did not prevail
for all the attention and kindnesses he had re-
ceived.
Now, gentlemen, I don’t know that in the cor-
respondence up to the time of his leaving England
there is anything to which it is necessary for me
to call your attention. The time had arrived for
his departure. He had taken his passage on board
the French ship La Pauline, and it is not unworthy
of observation, as showing his business habits,
that he mentions in his letter to Mr. Gosford as
his reason for going in a French ship that he could
thereby go cheaper than he could in an English
ship. The ship sailed from Havre on the Ist of
March, and met with contrary winds and stormy
weather, and, after knocking about the Channel
for some while, she put back into Cherbourg roads.
She started again on the 3d, but was again met by
contrary winds, and on the Bth of March was still
in the Channel, where she remained windbound
for four days, finally running into Falmouth. In
the meanwhile Roger writes hometo inform them
there what had become of him :
‘ Falmouth, Feb. 9 (mistake for March), 1853.
‘My dear Aunt, —We have been obliged to get
in the harbour on account of contrary winds, which
we have had nearly since we left Havre yesterday
week. ... It would be difficult for me to give you
a description of the life which we lead on board
the ship. We are only three passengers—myself,
Moore, and another passenger, who is generally
sick. The ship is a very fine and comfortable ship.
The cabin is large and comfortable. As there is
not much to be done on board I have taken to read
and study Spanish, which will be very useful to
me on my travels. lam happy to say that lam
remarkably well and in good spirits, which I hope
I shall keep on to the end of the voyage. I sin-
cerely hope that my uncle feels himself better.
Pray give him my love, as also to my cousin. As
I don’t think it likely that I shall be able to write
to you again till I arrive at Valparaiso, unless
some opportunity should occur by which I might
send letters to England.—Believe me, my dear
aunt, your affectionate nephew,
‘ R. C. Tichborne.
‘P.S. I am greatly in hopes to have the plea-
sure of finding a letter from you at the Post-office,
Valparaiso.’
They expected to sail from Falmouth in the
evening of the day he wrote, but they did not sail
until the 12th of March. The stay at Falmouth,
therefore, was four days. It is necessary to men-
tion that, because it was one of the tests of the
defendant as to whether they had put in at any
port. But of that hereafter. The ship arrived at
Valparaiso on the 19th of June.
We now come to a very critical and interesting
part of this case, and I must ask your very careful
attention to the facts and dates that relate to it.
We are now going to enter upon the ground trod-
den by Arthur Orton, in whom a third person is
introduced upon the scene, the defendant stand-
ing, as it were, between Roger Tichborne on the
one hand, and Arthur Orton on the other. The
question is whether the defendant is the one or
the other, or, as of course is always possible, a
third person. The letters to which I shall have


to call your attention have been printed from a
copy made with most remarkable inaccuracy,
there being scarcely a line in which there has not
been some mistake as to the spelling of the ori-
ginal committed. The original letters are, how-
ever, more or less illegible, more especially where
he has written rapidly, and then he has the abo-
minable habit of crossing his letters, in which
some people will indulge. The consequence is
that it is very difficult to make them out. I took
the course, which I think was a wise one, of ask-
ing our excellent and indefatigable officer, Mr.
Davis, to be so good as to go through the letters,
comparing them with the originals, and marking
with red ink all the various inaccuracies, so that
we might have a perfect transcript of the letters
of Boger Tichborne before us. Therefore what
I read to you you may perfectly rely upon.
In the first place, it appears that Boger, on
landing at Valparaiso on the 19th of June, found
no letters there from England. He had expected
some, as we know, and did not move from Valpa-
raiso until he got intelligence from England. He
did not receive that intelligence until June 29, .
and then he heard, by a letter from Lady Doughty,
of the death of Sir Edward Doughty, which hap-
pened while he was beating about the Channel
on the sth of March, 1853. In reply he wrote
from Valparaiso on the 29th of June to his aunt.
He said:
* Valparaiso, June 29,1853.
‘ My dear Aunt, —I feel very deeply indeed the
sad news which I learned only a few moments
ago by your last letter. I feel it much more, as I
felt almost certain that my uncle would have re-
covered from the severe attack of illness which
he had when I left England. I have always been,
though perhaps I never showed it much, sincerely
attached to my uncle. He has always been on all
occasions very kind to me. I was certainly not
able to show it as much as I could have wished,
but I felt, nevertheless, as deeply for him as I
could. I never saw my uncle’s death in any news-
papers at Falmouth. I looked as soon as I came
here over all the old English newspapers, but I
could see nothing. As I learned by your letter
that you were going abroad, it is not likely that
any of my family will see or hear of this letter,
and of the private remarks which I may make on
it. I am not, as you are perhaps aware, on very
good terms with the whole of my family. All the
causes of that disunion I know perfectly well.
It is, I believe, better for you not to know it at
present, at least by me. All those different rea-
sons which I had fully time to take to their full
value, when I was last in London and in Paris,
make me thank Heaven that I was out of the way
at my uncle’s last moments, though it may have
appeared strange to many persons. It would have
been quite impossible for me to have been able to
keep my temper in the middle of all the different
parties which exist in the different branches of
the family. It would have been, moreover, im-
possible for me to have put up with my father
and mother’s character.
‘ We sailed from Falmouth on the 12th of March
at 9 o clock at night. . . . Towards the latter part
of the month we came in sight of the Pic de Te-
neriffe (sic), which I saw quite plain though at a
distance of more than 90 miles. On the 2d of
April I saw for the first time the flying fish, and
as several had fallen on deck during the night, we
had them for breakfast the next morning. I never
tasted such a good fish before. We passed the
Line on the 10th of April, at 10 o’clock at night.
We had about a fortnight or three weeks of very
calm weather near the Line. The heat during
these calms was intense. The hottest days I ever
felt was during the first week in April; the ther-
mometer went up to 130 degrees in the sun at 12
o’clock. The wind kept much more favourable
when we had crossed the Line. When we were
near the Straits of Magellan, when I was takiDg
my usual walk on deck after breakfast, I saw quite
on a sudden at least 15 or 20 whales quite near
the ship, sending water in the air as so many jets
d'eau. We came near Cape Horn toward the
middle of May, and, as the coast is dangerous,
captains always keep as far from it as they pos-
sibly can, so that we went as low as the 62d degree
south. The cold there was intense; any water
falling on deck has frozen up directly. But what
was the worst of all were the long nights. We
had only six hours of daylight and 18 hours of
night. We remained there 15 days before we
could get round Cape Horn. When we came into
the Pacific Ocean the weather came gradually
milder and days longer. I arrived at Valparaiso
„on the 19th of June at 12 o’clock. I was not able
to go on shore that day, it being Sunday.
‘ I spent my time very agreeably during the pas-
sage ; the captain and his two officers were very
nice sort of persons. I used to spend my time in
reading, and as there were always a great many
sea-birds following the ship I used to amuse my-
self in catching them with a fishing-line or shooting
them with my gun. There was only one passenger
on board with me, who has been more or less sea-
sick during the whole time. lam happy to say
that I never had a single moment of any kind of
illness ever since I left. If you answer my letter
by return of post, you had better direct it here.
As we are now in the country at the beginning of
winter (though it is as warm as in England in
summer), I intend sailing on in the same ship in
which I came from Arica, Coquimbo, and Lima to
visit the north of Chili and the south of Peru
during the winter, to see all the copper and silver
mines which are in that neighbourhood. If you
are not able to answer this letter by return of
post, you must direct your letter to Buenos Ayres
or Montevideo, where I shall go towards spring,
when I have visited the south of Chili, which I
intend doing in spring. I have not time to give
you a description of Valparaiso in this letter, as I
have so many letters to write to-day. Pray give
my kindest love to my cousin, and tell her that
though far away I feel deeply how this moment
must be painful to her, and moreover that if ever
I can be of service to her to make use of me by
letting me know what I can do for her, as it will
always be a pleasure for me to oblige her in every
possible way I can.—Believe me, my dear aunt,
your very affectionate nephew,
‘B. C. Tichboene.’
Now with that letter he enclosed, as was his habit,
a letter which he marked ‘ private and confiden-
tial.’ It runs thus:
* (Private and Confidential.)
‘ June 29, 1853.
‘My dear Aunt, —I should not have written this
private note if circumstances had not forced us to
some kind of explanation, and it was not my in-
tention to remain a long time out and far away
from England. The letter to which you allude at
the end of yours has certainly produced a deep im-
pression on my mind, because a person, who has
given his word of honour as a gentleman that he
was doing his best to correct certain faults which
he had acknowledged, cannot but feel deeply when
E


he is told in plain terms that his word is worth
nothing, and that he is, in fact, a liar.
‘ There is always a way of refusing a persons (sic)
without making such strong allusions. But, how-
ever, it is now passed. I have not the slightest
rancour against you for those words, which you
have said, I hope, without thinking about it; but at
the same time it is very difficult to forget it altoge-
ther. It is not likely, as I have told you many
times before, that I shall go to Tichborne to make
any long stay, and. moreover, it is not my inten-
tion to go back to England lor some years to come.
I have thought that I might write this note, hoping
at the same time that what I have said won’t
offend you. Though I fully expect to be far from
England for such a length of time, if there is any-
thing which I can do for you and my cousin, it will
always be a pleasure to oblige you both to the ut-
most of my power. You may rest assured, my
dear aunt, that what has passed between me and
my cousin (though I feel as much attached to her
as ever I was) has never been told by me to any-
body, and, moreover, never will be spoken by me
to any living soul, and that I shall always be
happy to do anything in the world for her.
‘ I little thought a short time ago that I would
write a private letter again.
‘I intend, as you know, visiting all South
America and Mexico, which will take me about 18
months. I intend afterwards embarking for India.
But those are plans too far distant to be of any in-
terest to you at present.—Believe me, my dear
aunt, yours truly, It. C. Tichborne.
‘P.S.—This letter must be burnt when read.’
It was his intention then to travel for 18 months
in South America, and then to proceed to India.
He writes on the same day to his father, and these
letters show that the defendant was altogether
wrong when he said that it was on arriving at
Valparaiso he found the letters from his father
and mother. He got no letter until he received
Lady ;Doughty‘s. The letter to his father is to
this effect:
‘ Valparaiso, June 29, 1853.
‘My dear Father, —I am perfectly at a loss to
find out why I have not received any letter from
you since my arrival here. I learned the sad news
of my poor uncle’s death this morning by a letter
which I received from Lady Doughty. I felt it so
much more as I never expected to receive such
painful intelligence, Isailed from Falmouth on
the 12th of March, at night, by a strong wind and
a heavy sea, which was fortunately all in our fa-
vour. We were in sight of the Ke de Tenerif to-
wards the latter part of the month. We saw it
quite plain, though at a distance of more than 90
miles. On the 2d of April I saw, for the first time,
the flying fish. As many had fallen on deck dur-
ing the night, we had them for breakfast the next
morning. lam sure that I never tasted such a
good fish before. We passed the Line on the 10th
of April, at 10 o’clock at night. We had near the
Line about a fortnight or three weeks of calm wea-
ther. The heat during those calms was intense.
The hottest day I ever felt was at the beginning
of April; the thermometer went up as high as 130
degrees (English measure) in the sun at 12 o’clock.
When we were near the Straits of Magellan, as I
was taking my usual walk on deck after breakfast,
I saw quito on a sudden at least 15 or 20 whales
quite near the ship, sending water into the air as
so many jets d'eau. We came near Cape Horn
near the middle of May. As the coast is danger-
ous, captains always keep as far from it as they
possibly can, so that we went as low as the G2d
degree south. The cold there was intense; any
water falling on the deck was frozen up directly.
Eut what was the worst of all were the long nights;
we had six hours of daylight and 18 hours of night.
We remained 15 days about there before we could
get round Cape Horn. But as soon as we came
into the Pacific days became to be longer, and the
weather gradually milder. I arrived at Valparaiso
on the 19th of June, at 12 o’clock. I was not able
to go on shore on that day, as it was Sunday, but
I went the next day.
‘ The captain and his two officers were very nice
sort of persons. I used to spend my time in read-
ing, or, as there were always a great many sea
birds folio wing the ship, I used to catch them with
a fishing line or kill them with my gun. I have
been, I am happy to say, perfectly well ever since
I left; I had not a single moment of any kind of
illness during the whole of my passage. It was
not the same case with the other passengers, who
have been more or less sea- sick during the whole
time. If you answer this letter by return of post,
you had better direct it here, because, as we are
at the beginning of winter, though it is as warm as
in England in summer, I am going to sail in the
same ship in which I came at the beginning of
July for Arica, Coquimbo, and Lima, to go and
see the copper and silver mines, which would be
seen in the north of Chili and the south of Peru.
I shall go and visit those places in winter, and at
the beginning of spring I shall work my way to the
South. If you are not able to answer this letter
by return of post, you must direct your letter
either to Buenos Ayres or Montevideo, where I
shall go when I leave Chili.
‘Valparaiso is a town quite different from any
town which I have ever seen in Europe. All the
houses are built low and are of wood. Valparaiso
is without exception the dearest town in Chili;
everything almost is sold for its weight in gold.
I wanted, for instance, some visiting cards some
time ago. I liad to pay 20 francs for 100 of them.
Everything is more or less in the same proportion.
I took up my lodgings in a French hotel, where I
am very fairly. Almost all the hotels there are
kept by French or Englishmen. I hope that my
mother is quite well. Pray give her my love, as
also to Alfred, who I suppose is with you at
present, and believe me, my dear Father, your
very affectionate and dutiful son,
‘R. C. Tichbokne.’
Then he writes to Mr. Gosford as follows :
‘ Valparaiso, June 29, 1853.
‘My dear Sir, —I am perfectly at loss to find
out why you have not written to inform me of
my poor uncle’s death. ... I supposed that
by this time my father and mother must be set-
tled at Tichborne. The only letter which I have
received this morning was from Lady Doughty,
who gave me the sad intelligence. I am very
mnch surprised at not having received any letters
from my father since iny arrival here. I cannot
make out why he don't write to me. I left Fal-
mouth on the 12th of March. . . . We crossed
the line on the 10ch of April; we had near the
line a fortnight or three week of calm weather,
the heat during those calms was extreme, the
hottest day I ever felt was at the beginning of
April. The thermometer was up as high as 130
degrees in the sun at 12 o’clock. We came near
Cape Horn towards the middle of May. . . .
We remained there 15 days before we could get
round the Cape. But when we came into the
Pacific Ocean, day began to be longer and the
weather gradually milder. I arrived at Val-


paraiso on the 19 th June. ... I spend my
time very pleasantly during the passage. I use
to read much, and as they were always a great
many sea birds following the ship, I used to catch
them with a fishing line, or kill them with my
gun. I have not had a single moment of any
kind of illness ever since I left. It was not the
case with the other passengers, who had been more
or less sea-sick during the whole time. I intend
going on in the same ship at the beginning of
July to Arica, Coquimbo, and Lima, to see the
copper and silver mines. I intend to visit the
north of Chili and the south of Peru during the
winter, and work my way to the south at the
beginning of Spring. If you are not able to
answer this letter by return of post, you must
direct it to Buenos Ayres or Montevideo, where
I shall go, leaving Chili.
‘ Believe me, yours truly,
‘E. C. Tichbokne.’
Well, he has determined to go to the north of
Chili, and to sail by La Pauline for the port of
Arica, but the vessel did not start so soon as lie
expected, and he took advantage of the delay to
make a visit to Santiago, the capital of Chili; and
it appears from a letter to his mother, which I
am about to read to you, that he left Valparaiso
for Santiago on the 30th of June, the day after
writing these letters, and arrived there on the
2d of July. He stayed there until the 6th, and
then set out on his return to Valparaiso. He
sailed thence on the 27th July for Arica. Now,
it would, take two days to get from Santiago to
Valparaiso. Between the 6th and the 27th there
would be 19 days. If you take olf two days for
the journey, that would leave 17 days before his
departure. There will be a question presently
whether he availed himself of those 17 for the
purpose of going to a place which becomes of
paramount importance in this case, called Meli-
pilla. At present I pass that by, but shall have
to return to it, as it is of vital importance in the
case. There is a letter written from Lima to his
mother, giving an account of his journey to Sant-
iago and back, and of his further progress to the
north. On a passage in that letter, or on a simple
word in that letter, may hang the solution of this
case. Let us follow him in his onward course.
He goes by La Pauline to Arica, and then to
Lima, where he stayed some time. He goes on
to Callao and up the River Guaquilla with his
servant and two Indians. He remains some time
in the neighbourhood, shooting the birds of
varied plumage with which a tropical climate
abounds, and then he goes back to Lima. He
takes the steamer, which brings him back to Val-
paraiso some short time before December 20, be-
cause he writes on that day and says he is about
e . . om ) olparaiso to Santiago for the purpose
or taking his departure across the Pampas to
Buenos Ayres and Montevideo. Two roads were
open to him. The hill route was a shorter, but
there would be great hills to get over. The longer
route, which was the lower one, goes by Melipilla.
He went from Santiago to Valparaiso. At length
parted from Santiago across the Andes.
Whether lie stopped at Melipilla on either of
those occasions is one of the leading questions
J 0? T l * V \ to , consider . If you should be
satisfied, after hearing these letters read, that he
did go to Melipilla it will be to the advantage of
the defendant. If you are satisfied that Roger
Tichborne did not go to Melipilla, the defendant’s
cause falls to the ground, for most undoubtedly
the defendant has been at Melipilla. He not only
put that forward, but he says that it was his
intimacy there with Don Thomas Castro which
induced him to assume the name of Thomas
Castro while he was in Australia. That Arthur
Orton was at Melipilla you will not entertain the
shadow of a doubt. The defendant was at Meli-
pilla—Arthur Orton was at Melipilla. It would
not be a logical deduction to say that if Roger
Tichborne was not there, and if the defendant
was there and Arthur Orton was there, the defen-
dant must be Arthur Orton, although no doubt it
is a step in that direction. It is, however, a
perfectly logical deduction to say that if Roger
Tichborne was never at Melipilla, the defendant,
who was there admittedly, cannot be Roger Tich-
borne. Therefore, it is of the utmost importance
to establish whether Roger Tichborne was ever at
Melipilla or not.
A Juror. —The length of the interval is of great
importance.
The Lord Chief Justice.—Doubtless it is.
The Foreman. —And it is seventeen days at the
outside.
The Lord Chief Justice.— That is, beyond
doubt, a very important point for your considera-
tion. Now was Roger Tichborne at Melipilla?
Here is the letter to which I have referred, and
which he wrote to his mother. It is dated Lima,
August 25, 1852:
‘My dear Mother, —Many thanks for your let-
ter, dated 23d May, which was brought to me on
board the ship. I hope you will excuse this letter,
as it is nothing more than extract from my daily
journal. The day after I had written to my father
I started on an excursion to Santiago, which is
the capital of Chili. I was obliged to make my
journey in one of those wonderful carriages which
go from Valparaiso to Santiago, which are nothing
more than our old cabriolettes, with three horses
and two postillions. As there are no posthouses
on the road, when they want to change horses
they use the lasso, and then put to the carriage,
leaving the others to follow. The distance be-
tween Valparaiso and Santiago is seventy-five
miles; as it is the custom, I stopped and slept
halfway. All the roads between the two towns
are remarkably hilly. The country is not very fer-
tile for want of culture. The only trees which I
saw all the way were large palm-trees, which were
certainly beautiful; but the scenery became finer
and finer as I came nearer to Santiago. I saw
from the top of those very high hills, over which
I was obliged to go, the immense range of the
Andes, and of the Cordilleras. I arrived at Sant-
iago on the 2d of July, at 6 o’clock in the even-
ing. The churches in this part of the world are
all built in the Spanish fashion. In the middle of
the night my servant, John Moore, was taken very
seriously ill. The landlord and half the waiters
in the hotel began to go all about the town to try
and find a doctor, but could not find one. I went in
the morning and found one, and explained that it
was the third attack of the same kind that he had
had. When I had settled all about Moore I went
to make my arrangements to go to Valparaiso—to
start the next morning—as I was anxious to be in
time for La Pauline. When I arrived there I
found that she would not sail as soon as I had
thought at first. I sailed from Valparaiso for
Arica on the 27th of July, and arrived at Arica
on the 11th of August. I went on shore the next
day.’.
It is of importance to remark that Roger savs
he kept a diary or journal, and that the letter was
an extract from this daily journal. Well in the


letter there is no mention of Melipilla. Now,
even if the place were uninteresting, if a man re-
ceived great and unexpected hospitality, the place
would acquire an interest of its own for him, and
would he not be likely to make some mention of
it, and of the kind treatment he received, in his
journal ? Again, he mentions the lofty hills he
had to cross, and therefore he could not have gone
to Santiago by the lower road which led through
Melipilla. The letter then goes on :
‘ I left Arica on the 20th on board one of the Pa-
cific steamers for Callao and Lima, where I arrived
on the 23d. I found when I was at Valparaiso a
Frenchman who had eighteen years’ certificate, as
good ones as I wish to find anywhere, and the
very high character which received for him from
everybody make me take him, as I wanted a valet
to come with me. My health has been remark-
ably good ever since I left Europe. I am going
to start in a few days for Quito, from which place
I shall write to you or my father a short letter.
I shall not remain there above a few days, but
shall come down again to Valparaiso or Santiago,
to go to Buenos Ayres and Montevideo by land.
So when you answer this letter pray to direct it to
either of those two places, where I shall find any
letters, as I shall be there in six weeks or two
months, or perhaps later. I cannot exactly say
the time cf my arrival in those towns. When I
shall be there I will let you know where you are
to direct the other letters. Don’t direct any letters
to me at Valparaiso or Santiago, because I would
not receive them. I have no doubt you will like
Tichborne very much.
‘ Pray give my love to father and Alfred, and I
remain, my dear mother, your very affectionate
and dutiful son, R. C. Tichborne.’
You will remember that he left Moore behind,
and that the defendant has told us that having
left Moore behind, the captain of the Pauline
allowed him to take one of the people of the
Pauline—the second mate, I think—as his servant.
Is that statement consistent with what Roger
writes to his mother at the time ? He says that
at Valparaiso he engaged as valet a Frenchman
who had eighteen years’ certificate. Does that
apply to a servant with eighteen years’ character,
or does it refer to a man who was one of the crew
of the Pauline? If you think that the term
‘ Frenchman with eighteen years’ character’ meant
a servant,it is inconsistent with the statement the
defendant has made. The death of Roger’s uncle,
of course, made a difference in his position, and in
reference to that change he writes to Mr. Gosford
and Mr. Slaughter. To the latter he says :
‘ Lima, Sept. 11, 1853.
‘My dear Sir, —In consequence of my poor
uncle’s death, many changes must have taken
place in the family affairs, in which you and Mr.
Gosford must have been obliged to come forward
to use the power of trustees which I have given
you both before leaving England. Knowing how
important it would have been for me to have as
soon as possible the different alterations which had
been made of late in the family settlements, I am
perfectly at lost to find out why I have not received
any letters from either you or Mr. Gosford since
my arrival in America. As my income has increased
since my uncle’s death, I should feel much obliged
if, on receipt of this letter, you had the kindness
to go to Messrs. Glynn and Co.’s office to inquire
if it is necessary, in consequence of the increase of
my income, to change the letter of credit which I
received from him the day before I left London,
which is of 2000/. for three years, for one of 3000/.
for the same period of time, which will be nothing
more than the full [amount of my income. I should
also feel obliged if, at the same time, you had the
kindness to mention to Messrs. Glynn and Co.
that he would send at the same time a letter by
which I might draw some money, if I am in want
of it, at Ilio de Janeiro and Bahia, which are two
towns through which I shall pass on my way from
Montevideo to Mexico. I have enclosed for that
purpose a number of my signatures, which he may
require to send in those different towns. I should
feel greatly obliged if you will have the kindness
to answer this letter, and direct yours either to
Buenos Ayres or Montevideo, where I expect to
be in about three or four months, if not more.
Pray excuse this short note. Pray remember me
very kindly to Mrs. Slaughter, and believe me,
yours truly, R. C. TICHBORNE.’
To Mr. Gosford he writes on the same day as
follows:
‘ Lima, Sept. 11, 1853.
‘ My dear Sir, —It is quite impossible for me to
account why I have not received any letters from
you since my arrival in America. I have written
by this post to Mr. Slaughter to try to get some
kind of information about the different changes,
and to what extent you have been both obliged to
use the power of trustees which I have given you
before leaving England. I have no doubt that my
father has been wishing to make some alterations
in some of the different family settlements, which
changes would have been very useful for me to
have known as soon as possible. I have sent back
to England on board the same ship I came two boxes
containing some of my linen and clothes which I
don’t want. I have directed those parcels to you;
I should therefore feel much obliged if you will
have the kindness to pay what little expenses it
may cost from Havre to Southampton. If you
answer this letter pray direct yours either to Bue-
nos Ayres or Montevideo ? where I expect to be in
about three or four months, if not more. Pray
remember me very kindly to Mrs. Gosford and
believe me yours truly,
‘R. C. Tichborne.’
Again, on the 25th of November, he writes as
follows to Mr. Gosford :
* My dear Sir, —I should feel much obliged if
you forward the letters. I have no time to write
any details about my travels, as I only arrived
here yesterday, and am starting to-morrow for
Valparaiso, and from thence to Buenos Ayres and
Montevideo. lam in great hopes of finding some
letters from England at either of those places. I
shall nevertheless call at the P. O. at Valparaiso.
Will you give my love to my father and mother,
and tell them that I shall write to them from Val-
paraiso ? My direction will be at Rio de Janeiro.
—Yours truly, R. C. TICHBORNE.’
On the 20th of December, a date which is of
some importance, he writes to Mr. Gosford on his
arrival at Valparaiso as follows :
‘ Dec. 20, 1853.
‘My dear Sir, —Are you dead or alive ? I have
enclosed in this letter a letter for Lady Doughty.
I have forwarded from Lima two large boxes, one
containing a collection of skins of very fine birds
which I have killed, and prepared the skins my-
self, which I intend to have set up properly on
my return to England; the other is a fine collec-
tion of old paintings which came from one of the
old convents. There besides that a lot of different
curiosities which I picked up in Lima and else-
where. I should be obliged if you would have
somebody on the look out when the ship will come


into docks. There is a small skeleton of about
seven inches high which is in a glass case. I wish
you to take it out and keep it for me. There are
besides some beautiful crosses and statues made
by the Indians. These pictures must be hung up
somewhere till my arrival, which won’t be for some
time to come. Be so kind as to be very particular
about these boxes, because I had so much trouble
in gettmg the birds, which are beautiful, and the
paintings and curiosities. lam going to cross the
Cordilleras of the Andes in about a fortnight on
my way to Buenos Ayres. I shall go from Men-
doza right across the Pampas. I shall write to
you from there. I shall write to you from Buenos
Ayres or Montevideo. —Yours truly,
‘R. C. Tichbobne.’
On the same day he wrote to Lady Doughty,
giving her an account of his proceedings :
‘ Valparaiso , Dec. 20, 1853.
‘My dear Aunt, —I hope that you won’t be of-
fended at the long delay which has taken place
since I have written to you ; but then I give for
excuse that I have ever since the beginning of last
July been rambling all along the cost from here
as far up as Guayaquil, and from there I went
almost 300 miles in the interior of the country. I
stopped at several places on the coast, where I
thought there might be something worth seeing.
I made a longer stay at Lima than I had thought
of doing at first, because there was much more to
be seen in the town than I had thought at first.
Lima is a very large town, the finest which I have
seen on all the cost. The inhabitants of Lima are,
as far as appearance goes, remarkably Religious.
The town has within its walls 72 churches, with-
out counting all the different convents of men and
women of all orders which are in Lima. The riches
which do exist in some of the principal churches
are something quite wonderful. The cathedral
among others, which is a large and fine church,
has all the ceiling thickly gilded, and above the
altar there are four pillars which measure about
18 ft. high by 3 ft. in circumference, which are
made of silver. I shall say nothing more of the
other principal churches, which are all decorated
in the same way. What I found to be very pic-
turesque was to see every evening all the country
people in their national dresses talking or sitting
all round the large square on benches which are
desposed for them. I went to see the bull fight,
at which I was, as you may easily fancy, much
interested. It is a kind of rendezvous for all what
Lima has of aristocracy and fashionable.
‘ When I had seen all that I could see in Lima
I embarked at Callao on board a sailing vessel to
go to Guayaquil. We were about nine days going.
r * ver from the sea up to the town is very large,
and the scenery on each bank is magnificent
There is not much to be seen at Guayaquil except
that the houses are built rather differently from
what they are in other parts of South America.
I wo days after my arrival in Guayaquil I found a
boat to go up the river. I was obliged, though,
before I left to take provision with me for a fort-
night. AV e went up as high as the line. The heat
about there was something fearful. I had some
good sport up the river. I killed some very fine
birds, which I used to take to the boat and pre-
pare their skins. I have sent a large box from
Guayaquil to England of the most curious birds
which I have been able to kill in the tropics. I
made several excursions afterwards, but not for
such a length of time. I left Guayaquil at last to
come down and spend a few days in Lima before I
embarked on board the Pacific steamer for Yal-
paraiso, where lam now. I shall not remain here
for more than a week. lam preparing as fast as
I can to cross the Cordilleras of the Andes and
go straight across the Pampas to Buenos Ayres,
and afterwards Montevideo. You can easily see
the road which I shall follow by looking at the
map. I shall go from thence to Santiago, from
there to St. Philip’s, from there across the Cor-
dilleras, and come down at Mendoza; from there
across the Pampas to New Cordova; from there
to Santa Fe; and from there, at last, to Buenos
Ayres. The mountains are crossed on mules’
backs, and all the rest of the road is doDe on horse-
back. I don’t think that I shall remain long in
either of these towns, but go on straight to ftio
de Janeiro and Bahia, where, if you answer this
letter, you will have the kindness to direct yours,
as I intend making some stay there before going
to Mexico. The only news about J. Moore is that
he is at Santiago. Pray write to me, and direct
your letter at Bahia. —Dear aunt, your very aff.
nephew, R. C. Tichborne.’
Well, gentlemen, we see by a letter which Roger
wrote to Mr. Slaughter, and which is dated the
31st of December, that he had reached Valparaiso
from Santiago on or before that day. He gives in
that letter a description of Lima, and says, ‘I
there saw tropical vegetation in all its beauty.’
And I cannot help here observing that whatever
Roger’s intellectual or educational deficiencies
may have been, he was not without a very high
sense of the beauties of nature in its grandest
forms, and not too without very considerable
powers of describing what he observed, and the
satisfaction which beautiful scenery produced in
his mind. Writing to Mr. Gosford, he expresses
his surprise at the news he had received from him
as to his father and mother, and adds :
‘ I have for many years foreseen what is taking
place at Tichborne. It was one of the reasons,
although I did not tell you at the time, why I
was so very anxious to get away from England
before my uncle’s death, because, if I were there
at the time, I should have been thrown into the
midst of the different parties into which the
family is divided, and should have been obliged
to take part with some against others, or probably
to go against all. lam very sorry my mother’s
character is so disagreeable, because it must make
Tichborne a kind of hell for my father and every-
body in the house.’
That, gentlemen, is Roger's own description of
his mother's temper ; and he adds :
‘lf I were there it would make matters ten
times worse. There is, unfortunately, no remedy.’
Now, it is quite clear that, while Roger felt that
there was some fault on his fathers side, whose
hasty temper only made matters worse in these
unhappy domestic disputes, still it is also clear
that he felt deeply it was his mother who was
principally in fault. That his sympathy was
with his father rather than with his mother is
quite clear from his letters. Ido not think there
is any instance in which the learned counsel for
the defendant has gone more counter to the facts,
and in his observations tended to damage his
client’s case more than by holding up Roger’s
father to reprobation in consequence of the un-
happy relations which subsisted between him and
Roger’s mother. The learned counsel held the
mother up as an example to all women of all that
was super-excellent in womanly qualities. He
sought, at the same time, to disparage the father,
and applied to him the most offensive epithets —
calling him a cowardly, degraded, contemptible


slave. That was the language which was used
and applied to the alleged father of his own client.
And the client sat by and listened with silent
assent. Would Roger Tichborne have done so,
think you ? An incident of that kind occurring in
a cause is one not to be altogether lost sight of.
What son would listen to opprobrious terms of
obloquy being applied to his dead father, whom
in his lifetime he loved, although not, perhaps,
with the warm and ardent affection with which
some sons love their fathers ; but, still, whom he
loved, with whom he sympathised, whom he
pitied, whom he would have assisted if he could
in the domestic discords which unhappily pre-
vailed. When the woman who claimed the rights
of maternity was willing that the child she said
was hers should be cut in twain rather than given
over to her who also claimed that right, the wise
man said she cannot be the mother. But when a
son sits by and allows his father's grave to be spat
upon, allows contumely and insult to be heaped
upon his father's memory, what can we say?
Would not the son have risen indignant at hear-
ing such opprobrious terms applied to his father,
and have stifled the slanderous language in the
utterance? But it was allowed, as I have said, to
go unchecked and unreprehended by the defend-
ant. At the same time he may have been so as-
tonished at hearing this torrent of abuse levelled
against his father's memory that he may not have
had the presence of mind or the self-possession to
remonstrate against that which if he were the son
one would have thought would have excited his
indignation. It is quite clear that Roger felt it
was his mother's temper that made his father’s
house a hell, and that it was his father who was
the sufferer, the aggrieved sufferer, and not the
aggressor.
Roger then goes on in his letter to allude to some
Italian princess whom his mother was anxious he
should make the acquaintance of, and says, ‘ I
would not give sixpence for a whole cargo of
them’—adding that he had done a great many
foolish things, but would keep clear of marriage.
‘ Still harping on my daughter,’ he comes then to
Miss Doughty, and says, ‘ I do not think the Lon-
don season will go over this year without Miss
Doughty being married. I expect to see the an-
nouncement in the papers. I have mentioned to
Lady Doughty that it is not my intention to
return to England for two or three years.’ And it
seems that when he went on board the Bella it
was his intention to complete a course of travel
which he had laid out for himself, and to return
to England about the time he here mentions. It
is noticeable throughout this correspondence that
he never omits mentioning Lady Doughty and
Miss Doughty. They are always in his mind.
Here he asks for news of them. Then there
is business. He inquires what changes had been
made at Tichborne—what had been sold after the
death of Sir Edward. And then there is jollity,
for in the P.S. he tells Mr. Gosford he would
at Jamaica drink his health in a glass of punch,
which would enable him to sing ‘ Come with me
to fairyland,’ or ‘ We won’tgo home till morning.’
But he adds, ‘ Be assured I would not live in
a house like Tichborne for anything in the world.’
One of the letters he sent to Mr. Gosford was the
following, for Lady Doughty :
‘ Buenos Ayres, Feb. 28, 1854.
‘My dear Aunt, —Where are you? In what
part of Europe have you fixed yourself? Not
knowing where you are, have directed this letter
to the care of Mr. Gosford, who will forward it to
you 'wherever you are. When I was in Santiago
last time I had two very fair likenesses taken of
me. I sent one to my parents, and one to you,
though I doubt that you will know me again.
My personal appearance, of which I always took so
much care, has been so much improved by the tro-
pical sun, that I think I look more like a red skin
Indian than anything else. But, however, it is
not worth thinking about. I arrived here on the
13th of this month, coming from Mendoza, where
I had remained a week. X left Santiago on the
11th of January to cross the Cordilleras of the
Andes, which took me a week to do. If you
favour me with a letter, will you have the kind-
ness to direct it to Kingston, Jamaica, West
Indies, where I shall be in about three months,
to get my letters on my way to Mexico ? I shall
leave Buenos Ayres, I expect, in a few days for
Montevideo. Pray excuse this short letter ; I had
not time to write more by this post. Pray give
my love to my cousin.—Believe me, my dear aunt,
your affectionate nephew, B. C. TICHBORNE.
‘To the Hon. Lady Doughty.’
The two portraits he there mentions are the
daguerreotypes which have played so large a part
in this inquiry. He next writes to Mr. Seymour,
giving a detailed account of his travels and of his
crossing of the Andes. From this letter it is clear
he could not have gone to Melipilla on his return
journey from Santiago to Valparaiso. He could
not have gone there on his way from Santiago to
Valparaiso the first time, because he only took
sufficient time to ride there. He could not have
gone on the second occasion because then, again,
there was not sufficient time. He performed the
journey in a manner which amounted to an actual
feat, riding the distance—seventy or eighty miles
—on the horses of the country in a single night.
Therefore if he went to Melipilla at all, it must
have been on the occasion of his return from-
Santiago to Valparaiso before he went to Lima at
all. Bear in mind that he kept a journal, of
which he sent several people copies, and that
there is no mention whatever of Melipilla in any
one of his letters. When you observe that there
are only seventeen days unaccounted for, you
will perhaps think that a very short period for
the accomplishment of all that the defendant says
he did at Melipilla, and you will judge for your-
selves whether all that could be comprised in sa
short a time. Did Boger Tichborne stay on the
way from Santiago to Valparaiso ? 1 am going
to ask whether, in the whole of this correspond-
ence which has reference to the return jour-
ney from Santiago to Valparaiso, there is any-
thing which would indicate that Boger Tichborne
stopped at Melipilla by the way ? Let me put a
case. Suppose an Englishman, a friend of yours,
was going from London to some foreign port by a
ship called the John Smith—suppose he was going
to sail from Bristol to Jamaica, and you were per-
fectly aware he was about to do so. Your friend
has to write to you when he gets to Jamaica to
give you an account of the incidents of his voyage,
and he writes to you thus, ‘I left London for
Bristol on the Ist of June to be in time for the
John Smith, which was to sail on the 2d, but
when I got there I found she would be detained
ten days.’ What would you understand him to
mean by ‘ when I got there ?’ Would you under-
stand him to mean the place where the ship was,
or some intermediate place at which he received
the information that the ship was to be delayed?
It appears to me that this is a matter for your
serious consideration. Boger says, * When 1 had


settled all about that matter, I made my arrange-
ments to start next morning for Valparaiso, as I
was anxious to be in time for La Pauline to sail to
Arica. When I arrived there I found she would not
sail as soon as I thought.’ Now, does that mean
‘ When I left Santiago, I left in order to be in time
for the sailing of the La Pauline, but on my way
from Santiago to Valparaiso, having received in-
telligence that the vessel would not sail so soon, I
went to an intermediate place and stayed there ?’
When you look at this passage and read it by the
light of surrounding circumstances, what is the
meaning you attach to it? If it is the conclusion
of your minds that what Roger Tichborne indi-
cates in that passage is that he went to Valparaiso
and found that the ship would not sail for a given
time, it negatives the possibility of his having
stopped by the way. In that case you have facts
leading to the logical conclusion which I have be-
fore indicated. Now, Roger goes on giving an
account of his crossing the Andes, and the letter
is very remarkable in point of narration, happy
powers of description and language. It is, there-
fore, deserving your attention. It is dated Monte-
video, March 12th, 1854, and is to his aunt:
‘ My dear Aunt, —I was not able to write the
details of my journey from Santiago to Buenos
Ayres. I shall, therefore, give you an extract
from my daily journal. I left Santiago on the
11th of January, with my valet and guide, two
horses and four mules. Nothing occurred during
the first two days, except that the scenery became
wilder and wilder as we came nearer the chains of
the Cordilleras of the Andes. ... At last we came
to what is in this part of the world a hill not worth
speaking of, but which in England would be con-
sidered very high. One of the mules carrying my
luggage commenced running down the descent.
We thought she would soon stop at the end of a
short time, but it was too late, so she was obliged
to go on until at last the ground gave way, and
then rolling on her back about 30 or 40 feet she
fell a height of 50 or 60 feet and broke one of her
legs. Then we all three went down.’
Here I would observe that the defendant, in his
cross-examination, said that his servant refused to
go down the hill, that they had a quarrel in con-
sequence, and that one of the muleteers and he
went down and collected the baggage which had
fallen from the mule. Roger Tichborne says,
‘We all three went down’—himself, his valet,
and the guide—‘and found that she had one of
her legs broken. During that time a troop of
muleteers came up and gave us the greatest help.
.... We then set to work, unloaded the mule,
put the baggage on another one, and left the mule
with the broken leg to die as best she could.’ A
very inhuman thing to do. Then Roger con-
tinues :
‘ The view from the top of the first chain of
mountains was certainly magnificent; the im-
mense extent of country which I saw from the
high point where I was, with the number of very
high hills all round, is a sight which I believe
cannot be met with anywhere in Europe. . . .’
There is very graphic power in his description
of the scene. . It seems as if the magnificence of
the surrounding scenery had stirred his heart to
its depths. He was now on the very spot of which
Campbell so finely says :
‘ Andes, giant of the western star,
His meteor standard to the winds unfurled,
Looks from his throne of clouds o’er half the world.’
‘ I saw before me for the first time the Pampas,
which extended before me as an immense sea—
and behind me the immense chain of the Cordil-
leras of the Andes, which are always covered with
snow. . . . We all got into the Pampas about
mid-day. I then followed the road which is
traced in the grass, until I reached Mendoza two
days afterwards. I remained eight days at Men-
doza, waiting till the mail left, as it was my in-
tention to go to Buenos Ayres with it. At last
the day for leaving Mendoza came, at which
I was glad, as I found the place one of the
dullest towns I had ever seen. I started from
Mendoza on the 27th of January, and arrived at
Buenos Ayres on the morning of the 13th of
February. We galloped over the 400 leagues
or 1200 miles in a shorter time than it had been
done for a long time, considering that we had
been obliged to remain in different little towns
which are to be met with in different parts of the
Pampas ten days to get letters. I had left my
valet to follow me with the luggage; he arrived
about ten days after me at Buenos Ayres. _ It is a
large town, but there is little to be seen in it. I
embarked on board an English steamer on the 4th
of March for Montevideo, where I arrived the next
morning. lam going back to Buenos Ayres to-
morrow to embark shortly for Bio de Janeiro and
Bahia, on my way to Para, where I shall remain
some time exploring the Amazon, which is the
most interesting point to visit on this side of South
America. I shall go from thence to Kingston, Ja-
maica, West Indies, to get any letters which may
have been’ written to me from England. I shall
go from thence to Mexico, to explore that part of
the world. As to my future plans, it is quite im-
possible for me to let you know at present. I
shall write to you, if I have time, from Bio de
Janeiro or Bahia ; but I may, perhaps, wait till I
find a letter from you at Kingston. You have, I
fancy, received my picture which I sent to you
from Santiago. I did not know if you would care
about it, but if you don’t you only want to throw
it in the fire; and it will be an end of it, that’s
all. I only thought at the time that it might.be,
if we are not to meet again, a kind of souvenir—
that is what was my idea; but still, at the same
time, you might not care about it—there is no
harm in it I expect to find a letter in King-
ston which will be at least of 16 pages. Give my
love to my cousin, and believe me, my dear aunt,
your affectionate nephew, ‘E. C. Tichborne.’
In a letter to his mother written prior to that
date he promises to send her an extract from liis
journal, and I cannot help supposing when he sat
down to write the extract from his journal to
Lady Doughty he did it in the same terms. We
have been strongly pressed by the counsel for the
defendant about the accident to the mule and the
defendant’s knowledge of it. But if Boger sent
to his mother the same extract from his journal
as he sent to Lady Doughty, the accident to the
mule is fully described. And I think the de-
fendant admits that a copy of the journal had
been sent to his mother. Now, the question is,
what became of the letter sent at the same time
to the mother? If there was such a letter, it has
been withheld. If that letter ever reached Lady
Tichborne it must have contained the account of
this accident, and coming into the possession of
the defendant, given him tlie necessary information
with regard to the accident as well as the other
incidents of the journey. On the Ist of March
1854, Boger writes the following letter to his
mother: 1 Buenos Ayres.
‘ My dear Mother, —It is certainly strange that
every one of your letters, as far back as I can re-


member, have always been, and are still now,
always on the same subject, without the least
variation. Those subjects are invariably the duties
of a son towards his mother, which fill up, as a
matter of course, at least the two first pages. The
two other pages are generally filled up with all
kinds of imaginary fears, and a list of accidents,
the illness and sickness of every description which
are quite unknown to any body else but yourself.
It must be certainly the work of your imagination
which makes you think of so many things.
Another thing also, where I think you don’t at all
treat me fairly; you treat me in your letters
usually like if I was twelve or thirteen years of
age, and, moreover, as if I was quite incapable of
taking the least care of myself. I beg to say that
I am quite old enough to take care of myself, and
that just as circumstances require it. After-
wards, if you were always determined to think
that I am ill or sick, or anything else, when I tell
you in my letters that I am very well, it is per-
fectly useless for me to write to you to let you
know how I am, as you don’t appear to believe
wliat I say in my letters. I shall not in future
wait for your letters to write, as they don’t con-
tain any news from you or my father, or any kind
of news which require an answer. I shall, there-
fore, write to you from the principal towns at
which I shall stop, without waiting any more for
your letters.
The servant which I took at Lima suits me
very well. I have had him in my service now for
some time, and I have no doubt that he will go
on as he has begun, and follow me in all my
travels, and come back with me to England. It
is quite impossible for me to fix in any kind of
w ?y Jh 0 time of my return to England. The life
which I am following suits my taste too well for
me to leave it in a hurry, especially as my health
is remarkably good, and promising to keep so for
a long time to come. I left Santiago in the middle
of summer, which is the month of January—that
is to say, on the 11th of January, to cross the
Cordilleras of the Andes. We did not though
reach the foot of those high mountains till the
morning of the third day, when we began to
ascend the first chain of mountains ; we got down
the other side early in the afternoon ; we pushed
on with our horses and mules, so as to be able to
reach the foot of the second chain of mountains,
but it was not possible for us to reach it that day.
We had, therefore, to build up our camp and cook
up our dinner which we all took with delight, as
we had all of us very good appetites. After
dinner we prepared our beds, which was nothing
more than sheep skins, and after rolling ourselves
in our cloaks went fast asleep. The next morning
we were up before sunrise, and after loading our
animals started. We crossed the second chain of
mountains which is called the Portillo, which is
highest of the two. We arrived down
tf * e ot . hor side rather late in the afternoon, and,
alter following the valley for some time, made up
our camp for the night in the same way. We got
down in the Pampas the next morning early.
Nothing more worth notice took place till we
arrived at Mandoza. I have seen certainly a great
many countries in my life, but I never saw one
where the sceneries which a person sees from the
top of the Cordilleras of the Andes, for the wild-
ness and magnificent scenery which he sees before
him I don’t think that there is anything to be
compared to it in the wo. Id. The distance from
Santiago to Mandoza by the way I came is 78
leagues. I was eight days in performing my jour-
ney, Mandoza is a well-built town; it has the
Cordilleras on the one side and the Pampas on the
other; as there is no commerce in the place it
makes the town very dull. I left Mandoza on the
27th of January with the post for Buenos Ayres,
where we arrived on the 13th of February. The
Pampas are very large grass plains, where small
towns and post-houses are met with from place to
place to change horses. The number of persons
crossing the Pampas now is very great. Buenos
Ayres is rather a large town ; it counts about
60,000 inhabitants, chiefly all Europeans. This
town is very wholesome; there is not any kind of
sickness in or about the place. I expect to leave
it in a few days for Montevideo, where I shall re
main a few days before Igo to Brazil. When yo
answer this letter direct yours to Post-office
Kingston, Jamaica, West Indies, where I shal
only call to get my letters on my way to Mexico
where I expect to be in about three months and
half. I have not time now to send you an extrac ;
of my daily journal to-day, but I shall write it ou i
for you as soon as I shall have time. I suppos
you must be by this time accustom to the Englis i
country life, which is by far the best life to lead.
Tichborne is a very nice place in all seasons in th
year. I received your last letter by this last mail
‘ Pray give my love to my father and Alfred
and believe me, my dear mother, your very affec
tionate son, It. C. Tichborne.
‘Lady Tichborne, Tichborne Park, Alresford,
Hants, England.’
From Buenos Ayres he writes to Mr. Gosford the
following letter:
‘ Buenos Ayres, March 17, 1854.
* ‘ Private and confidential.
‘My dear Sir,—l reply to your letter which
found waiting for me at Montevideo. I think it
quite necessary to alter the will which I had writ-
ten by Mr. Slaughter in London, in June 1852, so
far, at. least, as Everard Arundall is concerned.
As he is going into the noviciate at Stonyhurst,
to become a Jesuit, I don’t think that in case there
should be no male issue from either me or my bro-
ther, it would be desirable to leave him such power
as named in my will in the property. I, there-
fore, wish that on the receipt of this letter you
will write at once to Mr. Slaughter to have E.
Arundall’s name scratched out of my will. I don’t
wish anybody at present to be named in his place.
There is another thing on which I have thought
for a long time; I and my mother never could
agree together. It would, therefore, be desirable,
in case my father should die during the time I am
travelling, to insure her (if it has not been done
already) so much a year, to live where she liked
except at Tichborne, as it would be quite impos-
sible for me to put up with her character. I wish
you to speak on the subject with Mr. Slaughter,
and write to me what you thought upon it, and
direct your letter where I told you in my last
letter.—Believe me, yours truly,
‘R. C. Tichborne.’
. It would appear from this that Roger, in the
simplicity of his mind, thought that a man could
alter his will merely by writing to his agent to
strike something out of it. That was a notion he
had got into his head, and a very foolish notion it
was. Again, there comes a second letter to Mr.
Gosford on the subject of Moore :
‘ Buenos Ayres, March 20, 1854,
‘My dear Sir, —I have not yet alluded to a sub-
ject concerning Moore. . . . When he was so ill at
Santiago last July, I was foolish enough to tell
!iim that if on my return to England I was obliged


to get up a house I would take him as a butler; I
forgot that to tell him when I was last in Santiago
that it is now a thing quite impossible for several
reasons. First, when I came back to Valparaiso,
I was quite surprised to hear from everybody on
board what extraordinary rumours he had been
spreading about me. . . Secondly, it is not my in-
tention to set up a house, as it is not my intention
to marry. I don’t think it ever likely that I shal
ever make any long stay in England during my
parents’ lifetime. ... I fancy that Lady Doughty
inquires sometimes if you had heard from me, anc
what may be my intention of coming back to
England or other things, I don’t know. I suppose
the whole subject of myself and my cousin has
never been alluded to by her to you either by
word of mouth or writing, I never mention any
thing to her about it in any of my letters ; and !'
never write any of those private letters she usee
to like so much. Letters she receives from me
are very curt, but there is nothing in them which
cannot be shown to everybody. I am sorry you
never told me what my poor uncle Doughty lefi;
me by his private will. I hope I shall learn-it in
the letter which I expect to find at the Post office
at Kingston.—Believe me, dear sir, yours truly,
‘R. C. Tichborne.
‘ P. S. Moore thought himself put, I believe, as
a kind of tutor over me by my family, which is a
thing I won’t stand from anybody.’
Here again is a very remarkable letter to
Gosford :
‘ Buenos Ayres, February 20, 1854.
‘ Private.
* My dear Sir, —Many thanks for the only letter
which I received from you since I left England,
which came by the last mail, and which was deli-
vered to me this morning. lam not, I must say,
the least surprised at the news which you give me
about Tichborne and my mother. I have for
many years foreseen what is taken place there at
present. It was one of the reasons (though I did
not tell you at the time) why I was so very anxious
to get out of England before my poor uncle's
death. Because if I had been there at the time I
should have been thrown in the middle of all the
different parties which unfortunately divide the
family, I should have been in consequence of it
obliged to take part for somebody or to put myself
against everybody, which would have been most
likely the case on that occasion. I am really very
sorry that my mother’s character is so disagree-
able, because it must make it a kind of hell for my
father and everybody in or about the house. I
was very sorry to learn at the same time, though
f don’t wonder at it, that my father felt so low in
spirits ; still I know but too well that I can do
nothing for him, and I know, moreover, that if I
was there it would be ten times worse than it is at
present. There is unfortunately no remedy for
it. I suppose that by this time you must have
heard something about those Italian Princesses
whom my mother is so anxious that I should
choose one to marry. I used to hear nothing
spoken of whilst I was in Paris from morning to
night about them, though I always used to say
that I would not give sixpence for a whole cargo
of them; but all that I could say was to no pur-
pose. I have seen and known too well what is
married life so as not to go and marry myself. I
have done certainly a great many foolish things in
my life, but I hope to keep clear from that one at
any rate, notwithstanding all what my parents
and relatives may or may not say. The life which
I am leading now suits me remarkably well. I am
perfectly independant. Igo and do what I like,
and I have no lady to act as spy over me, which is
a great blessing, among several others.
‘lt it quite impossible for me to fix the time
when I shall come back to England, where I have,
I assure you, but little wish to come back to wit-
ness scenes like those which must occur daily at
Tichborne, and I have not received any letter from
Lady Doughty since the one which I received
shortly after my arrival in South America. I
don’t know what became of her different letters if
she has written some since, which I am rather in
doubt of, as I answered rather sharply to some re-
marks and allusions which she made in her letter.
I am not in the least surprised to hear that she
had taken a house in London for six months,
knowing how fond she is of London life. I shall
write to her by this post if I have time, because I
have a great many letters to write by this post.
But in all cases, don’t forget the first time you
write to her, to tell her if she favours me with a
letter to direct it to Kingston, Jamaica, West
Indies, where I shall bs in about three months on
my way to Mexico. I shall call there to get any
letters which may have been written to me from
England. I shall write to you from there to let
you know where you are to direct your letters after-
wards. But don’t fail yourself to write, that I
may find a letter from you there.
‘I don’t know why I never received a letter
from my father since I left Europe, though I have
written him several times. The only letter which
I received was from my mother at the beginning
of last August. I found, to my great surprise,
J. Moore selling pills at' Santiago. He appeared
to me to be at the tip-top of happiness to be able
to take as many pills a day as he liked, and to sell
so many boxes to so many credulous persons who
thought that those pills could cure from all kind
of illness and sickness known and unknown. I
was very sorry to hear of his father's death; I
fancy that he must know it by this time. I ar-
rived here on the 13th. I was very glad to find a
letter from Mr. Slaughter waiting for me here, as
I had not heard from England for ever so long. I
don’t fancy that the London season will pass over
this year without Miss Doughty being engaged to
marry. I expect to see first the news of her
marriage when I shall be travelling about in the
British Colonies, in some English newspapers. I
mentioned to Lady Doughty that it was not my
intention to come back to England before two or
three years are over. Perhaps you have heard of
it already. But now I trouble myself little of
what her ladyship thinks about me or about what
I intend to do. You have forgotten to tell me in
your letter what my poor uncle left in your charge
for me, and what had been sold at Tichborne at his
death. I have not time to send you an account of
my travels in this letter, but 1 shall send you a
copy of my daily journal from Rio de Janeiro or
Bahia. Don’t forget to write to me and direct
the letter where I told you. Pray remember me
kindly to Mrs. Gosford, and believe me, dear Sir,
yours truly,
‘R. C. Tichborne.
‘ P.S. I shall drink a good glass of rum punch to
your health in Kingston, Jamaica. Do you want
some, so as to be able to go to bed singing “Come
with me to fairyland,” or “We won’t go home till
morning, till daylight appears.” I am obliged to sing
those songs all by myself in this part of the world.
I am going to Montevideo, I hope, in a few days,
on my way to Brazil. Be assured that I would
not live in a house like Tichborne is, not for any-


thing in the world. There is a bust in the large
box which you will receive, which I bought for my
brother, so will you have the kindness to give it
him for me from my part when you see him?’
In this letter we have sentiment and interest
side by side. We may again see appearing marks
of affection for his cousin, to whom he still
remained as attached as ever. He had gone away,
from love of travel natural to a young man, to
see modes of life and habits which he could not
see at home, and partly to drown, if he could, the
painful recollections of a life of disappointment.
I cannot help thinking that the wound had never
healed, even in the midst of the magnificent
sceneiy through which he was passing. As the
Roman poet says, the deadly arrow still remained
fixed in his side —he could not shake off the
fatal dart. I see plainly from this correspon-
dence that he endeavoured to shake off his feel-
ing for his cousin, but, as Horace says, a man
may fly from his country, but he carnot fly from
himself. He never shook off and could never
shake off that first affection which any one read-
ing those papers and watching the whole course
of Roger's career cannot help seeing was deeply
rooted in his heart, not a feeling of low, base
passion, as the counsel for the defendant painted
it, but of real and pure love. This matter has
little to do with the question we are trying, but
it is only just to the memory of Roger Tichborne
if he is dead, and to his character if he be living,
that point should not be misrepresented.
There is a passage in a letter to Mrs. Seymour
from Buenos Ayres which is very remarkable as
bearing on the question whether Roger Tichborne
intended to return to England. This is the pas-
sage : ‘ I shall feel much obliged if Henry had
my name put up at the Travellers’ Club, as I
should like veiy much to be a member when I
come back to England.’ I don’t think you can
have better evidence that he did intend to return
to England, and that expatriation was not then
contemplated by him. The defendant's counsel
represented that Roger was weary of the w'orld,
and therefore that he had determined to retire
from it and devote himself to a life of contempla-
tion. The Travellers’ Club would be the last
place I should fancy for a life of meditation and
retirement. Unfortunately the most recherche
cookery, the rarest wines, and the pleasantest so-
ciety would be the lot of the anchorite who had
his name put up at the Travellers’ Club. The
passage I have read shows that Roger contempla-
ted not a final expatriation, but a temporary eo-
journ abroad, and that he intended to return to
England, but, if his father and mother were alive,
to make only a temporary stay there.
Now, gentlemen, we have traced Roger Tich-
borne to the close of his career in South America
until at length we find him taking a passage on
board the Bella. The account of Captain Oates is
this. Roger had got to Rio de Janeiro, the place
at which he intended to embark. It is said that
he got into difficulties, and that his funds were
exhausted. Accordingly he proposed to Captain
Birkett, of the Bella, to give him a passage on
board, telling him that he did not mean to pay
just then. Captain Birkett was not indisposed
to do so, but, thinking it might displease the
owners, he consulted Captain Oates as to what he
should do. Captain Oates, being a good-natured
fellow, said ‘lt will be all right. He will pay you
when he gets to New York, and if be does not I
will bear you out, and explain all the circumstan-
ces to the owners.’ So the matter was arranged;
but then there was another difficulty. Eoger had
to give notice to the authorities at Rio of bis in-
tention to leave, and there was a difficulty about
getting a passport. ‘ So,’ says Captain Oates, ‘we
agreed to smuggle him away.’ The evening before
the vessel was to start, accordingly, Roger went
on board, and, that his presence there might be
concealed from the local officers, it was arianged
that he should be put out of sight of everybody.
While the vessel was preparing to get under way
and the local officers were coming on board, they
put Roger into the lazarette, below the captain’s
cabin, and the hatchway of the lazarette was
covered with a table, upon which some coffee for
the officers was placed. There was no suspicion
of anything wrong on the part of the local officers.
Captain Oates came on board in the morning, but
returned to his own vessel when the Bella was
going to sail. The evidence in this matter is alto-
gether conflicting, and it is impossible to reconcile
the two statements. The defendant’s case is that
instead of being put into this lazarette he was put
into one of the after cabins, which had been before
used as a store room, that he never left it, that
he was in such a state of thorough debauch and
drunkenness in Rio that he was incapable of find-
ing his way to the ship, and that they were obliged
to hunt for him for two days before they could
find him.
On the morning of the 20th the Bella sailed,
and four days afterwards facts came to light which
could leave no doubt that the Bella had foun-
dered and gone down in the deep sea. Her long-
boat was found bottom upwards, and in the im-
mediate vicinity were articles of wreck which
belonged to the ship. The question remained
whether those on board had perished. When a
ship goes down, and nobody knows how far out
at sea in the great deep, the presumption is that
every one on board goes down with her ; but still
there is always a hope, as long as hope can be rea-
sonably entertained, that those on board may have
escaped. Accordingly, for a time that hope would
be naturally entertained, in spite of the presump-
tion that it would be most unlikely that those on
board would reach the shore. But here there was
this additional circumstance against the hope—
the longboat was found bottom upwards, so no
one could have been saved in her. But it might
bo said there were other boats on board in which
some persons might have been saved. But then
there was this awkward circumstance—that the
longboat was found bottom upwards in the imme-
diate neighbourhood, and articles of wreck which
belonged to the Bella. So that it would appear if
any persons got into the longboat they would have
remained exactly in the same spot where the ar-
ticles of wreck were found, which was highly im-
probable. Therefore the inference was that the
longboat had never been taken to by persons at-
tempting their escape. As long as hope could be
kept alive hope was kept alive; but there is an end
of everything, and the idea that Roger Tichborne
was saved was given up. Everything was done
that could be done under the circumstances. A
vessel was sent out by the Admiral on the station
to scour the surrounding seas, and see whether any
other boat was to be found, but there was not a
trace of any.
Well, gentlemen, Eoger Tichborne being for a
time supposed to have gone down, let us see
upon the whole review of Roger Tichborne’s life,
from what we have heard and read about him,
whether we can form any satisfactory estimate of
what he was, so as to apply it by and by as a test


to the defendant, with a view of seeing whether
in the defendant we recognise the man whom as
Roger Tichborne we are able to portray to the
mind’s eye, physically, intellectually, and morally.
Because it is certainly very essential, that in making
this comparison between them as a test of identity,
we should have a very clear and definite view who
and what Roger Tichborne was. Next let us form
a correct judgment as to what, when Roger Tich-
borne went on board the Bella, were his intentions
and resolutions with regard to the future. If Roger
Tichborne had certain definite intentions with re-
gard to his future career, does the conduct of the
defendant square with those intentions?
There are certain points of personal appearance
which are common to both parties. Roger Tich-
borne was a man sft. Sgin. in height, as we know,
when he entered the Army. He was then 20 years
and six months old, or thereabout, and he probably
never grew after that period. The military tailor
does not suggest that he had to take his measure a
second time. Then we know that he was a very slight,
slim, spare man, so small about the hips that arti-
ficial means had to be adopted to enable him to
keep his sword from falling down about his feet.
We know what kind of hair he had, for we have
some of it which was cut off by his mother in 1852,
and we can by inspection satisfy ourselves as to it.
No doubt lean men may grow into stout men, but
Roger Tichborne was not the kind of man that
you would suppose would have grown into great
bulk. It is quite clear, whatever the physique of
Roger Tichborne, he must have been a man of
considerable nervous and bodily energy. He was
fond of hunting, of shooting, and of fishing. What
the amount of his'physical energy may have been
is manifest from this—that we have him not giv-
ing himself up to the pleasures of bed or table, or
idleness, but he is anxious for active service, he
wants to get to India, and he is dissatisfied with
the Army only because he cannot get active ser-
vice in it. He therefore makes up his mind to go
and travel in South America and Mexico, and
when he gets to South America we find that he
rides 70 miles in one night. That does not show
a man so weak that he can hardly get along. No
doubt his health had been bad in England, but
the sea air may have had an invigorating effect on
him.
Then, as to Roger’s intellectual character, he was
a man whose education had been grossly, shame-
fully, I might almost say, as far as his parents are
concerned, sinfully neglected. Chatillon had done
something for him, but after that he fell into the
hands of as bad a preceptor as could possibly be.
He was brought to England, and put into a place
where education may not have been carried on
upon the highest possible principles or in a
manner to impart the highest degree of proficiency;
but, nevertheless, ho undoubtedly did learn some-
thing there, and though much given to the pleasures
of the field, and perhaps to the bad propensities
of drinking and smoking, he still seems to have
found time for reading, and had a taste for
literature. We have not his books before us ;
they were sold at one of the forced sales which
wereheld when the Sheriff’s officers took possession
of his brother’s place. But there is a list of books
in the shape of a small memorandum for future
study, and among them appear some authors of
the highest class, such as Virgil and Livy, Corneille
and Molicre, in whose Misanthrope we know that
he was able to appreciate the distinctions between
one character and another, which shows he was
not the utter blockhead which has been represen-
ted. Th en there were the works of C hateaubrian d,
and there were some mathematical books of a
high order, which I do not suppose he read, but
which show that he had some appreciation of
science. His intellect, I am ready to admit, was
not one which would have gone far, but with
ordinary cultivation it would have been capable
of a great deal of information as the world goes.
Next, as to his moral character, every one
seems to agree that he was a person of very
amiable disposition and pleasing manners. _ They
were the manners of a man of kindly feeling. I
don’t suppose there was much beneath the
surface, or that he was a man capable of very
warm affection. In the first place, it is quite clear
from his letters and his language where he opens
himself in the fulness of confidence to Mr.
Gosford or Lady Doughty, that he had not much
love either for his father or mother. If he loved
his mother much, filial affection would have led
him to draw a veil over her faults.. He treats his
father much more tenderly, and it is possible that
his affection as between his father and mother was
for his father and not for his mother. But even
there he is never found consulting his father’s
wishes or yielding to his desires. He forms his
own judgment on everything, and does not make
a friend of his father as a son should. And yet
it is impossible to doubt, however foolish Mr,
Tichborne and his wife’s treatment of Roger may
have been, that they both loved him. Then, witn
regard to Sir Edward and Lady Doughty, they
had been a second father and mother to him, their
house had been his house, and their home his
home. Nothing could have been kinder. But
the moment Lady Doughty crosses him in small
matters or in great, whether in the matter of some
small article of family furniture or in his affection
for his cousin, he speaks of her in terms of
alienation and resentment. Then, as to the
Seymours, Mr. Seymour dies, and his death
appears to have had no effect upon Roger, who
speaks of it quite coolly. He was on very pleasant
terms with the lest of the family, but I don t see
anything which shows that he had a warm or deep
affection for them. But, though I cannot believe
that Roger had a warm affection for those for
whom one would naturally expect that he would
have it, there is one thing not to bo lost sight of
—that under no circumstance was Roger Tich-
borne ever wanting in the decorums, decencies,
and proprieties of life. He never fails to write
habitually to every member of his family, and to
desire to have news from them. _ He writes to his
father, to his mother, to his aunt, to Mr.
Seymour. He writes constantly to his family.
That is a circumstance which must be taken
into account in considering the conuuct of the
defendant. But, though in writing to his father
and mother he does not write in the terms of the
unbounded confidence which one would naturally
show to a father or mother, there is one in whom
his confidence appears to have been unbounded,
and that was Vincent. Gosford. There is no
subject, however near his heart, that he does not
write to him about. To him he opens his heart
with the utmost confidence, and that is a circum-
stance you will have to consider by and by when
the defendant and Gosford meet in this country.
The scenes which he had lived through with his
father and mother made him from a very early
age determined to judge for himself. Others
might lean on the judgment or advice of parents ;
the contrary was the case with Roger Tichborne.
Suggestions of any kind from his father or


mother were enough to make him set his back up.
His mother was very much dissatisfied at his going
to Stonyhurst; he determines to go and stay there,
and he rebukes her sternly. When he leaves Stony-
hurst, she wishes him to go back, but he sternly
refuses. He wishes to go into the army; his
father and mother oppose it. He goes into the
army. His regiment is not going on foreign ser-
vice, and he makes up his mind not to stay at
home. He says, ‘ I will go to India.’ ‘ For God’s
sake,’ they say, ‘ don’t go. Your uncle is old, your
father is old ; don’t go to a foreign country.’ But
he says, ‘ I will;’ and when his regiment came to
effect an exchange, he makes up his mind to go to
South America on foreign travel. There is the
same lamentation on the part of the father and
mother, there are the same remonstrances ; but
they have no more effect on him than the wind
which passes him by. So, as regards property,
he had made up his mind that the Upton property
should not be sold. His father, his uncle might
remonstrate, but all in vain. The great object of
a long line of ancestors was to aggrandise the
Tichborne family by acquiring land in Hampshire,
and making themselves of still greater conse-
quence in the county. That was not the view of
Roger Tichborne, who thought the property in
Hampshire was too much, and he would cut it in
two. He goes to his lawyer and gets a will made
which would cut his uncle and father to the
heart. As it turned out, the effect of that will
would not be to divide the vast property, worth
25.00 01, or .'lO,OOO/. a year, in the way he desired.
It is the opinion of many people that these vast
properties are not desirable. Ido not deal with
that question ; I only point out that Roger Tich-
borne in that will was running counter to the
wishes of his father and his uncle. With respect
to his want of warm affection for his family, I
have to make an exception in favour of his brother,
whom he always speaks of with the tenderness
and affection that are shown to a pet child. On
the whole, he was a person who looked very
closely to his own interests, and when Robert
Tichborne dies, and when his uncle Doughty dies,
though very little affected by their loss, there is
one question which immediately occurs to him :
‘What has been left to me by their wills?’ His
father was careless in business habits, and left
himself in. the hands of the lawyers. Not so
Roger. His words always were : ‘ Let me see a
summary of your scheme ; let me see the deeds
that I may make myself thoroughly master of
them.’ ‘ I give you instructions about my will.
Let me have time to study it before I sign it.’
Well, then the question is, was the knowledge
which the defendant exhibited of Roger Tich-
borne’s affairs such as you might expect from
Roger Tichborne ? In order to answer that ques-
tion, you must appreciate for yourselves what it
was that Roger Tichborne knew as well as what it
was that Roger Tichborne did.
There is one more point connected with the
character and the habits of Roger Tichborne. It
is impossible to hold him up as a sort of paragon
of virtue and morality, and I dare say that he, like
many other people, had his sins to answer for. But
the point now to be considered is his propensity
to drink. There cannot be the slightest doubt
that Lady Doughty’s view of Roger Tichborne in
this respect was the right one for a considerable
time, and that he had from an early period a
tendency to drink, although it is nonsense to say
he was an habitual drunkard. It is going a great
deal too far to say that he drank so much as to
impair his intellectual faculties, and there is no
evidence at all which leads to the conclusion that
he was an habitual drunkard. His depressed state
of mind may have sometimes made him resort to
the bottle as a means of raising his spirits, and
a few occasions he may have taken enough ;o
make the effects of drink perceptible, but that lie
was an habitual drunkard I cannot bring myse
to believe. Several officers deny altogether tha :
he was given to drunkenness, although Capta n
Conolly said that Roger Tichborne, while
Ireland, used to ‘ soak his brain,’ and that it w
sometimes doubtful whether he was perfect r
master of himself or not. However, we kno 1
he wrote to Lady Doughty saying he had effectec
a reform, and I cannot help thinking that whe
Roger was at Tichborne and Canterbury in th
early part of the year 1852, Lady Doughty wa
rather too hard upon him, for, though he ma - r
still have occasionally indulged in drink a litt e
too much, he was not then in the habit o:'
drinking to the same extent as he did at a forme
period. With regard to this part of the case, it : s
not of so much importance to determine whethe r
Lady Doughty was justified in opposing his unio
with her daughter as it is to ascertain whether th
contention of the learned counsel for the defen
dant is well founded when he says that Roge
Tichborne, by his excesses in drink, had brough ;
his mind into such a state that his faculties were
impaired, and his memory was seriously affected.
By and by we shall find indications of total wan ;
of knowledge on the part of the defendant o
important periods of Roger Tichborne’s life
which want of knowledge the learned counse
ascribes to defect of memory. Therefore, gentle
men, it is necessary for you to satisfy yourselve
as to whether Roger Tichborne was in the habit o 1
sottish enjoyment of the brandy or the wine
bottle so as really to damage his intellectua
faculties.
So much for the general character of Roger
Tichborne. of whom we now for the present take
leave, until we see him reappear—if indeed he
does reappear—in a new form, and certainly es-
sentially unlike the Roger Tichborne of whom 1
have hitherto spoken.
The Bella went down, portions of the wreck
floated about, and her boats disappeared. Weeks,
months, years passed, and there came no tidings
of her. There was no voice either from the sea or
from the shore to lead to the belief that any of
the persons on board the Bella had survived her
wreck. The owners made a settlement with the
relatives of the members of the crew, the insur-
ance was claimed and paid, and in brief every-
thing was done as if the Bella had perished, and
with her all who had been on board. After the
lapse of 15 months the executors of Roger Tich-
borne’s will produced and proved it, and, though
their conduct has been reflected upon by the de-
fendant’s counsel, I must say they only performed
their duty in acting as they did. So far from
Mr. Slaughter and his fellow-executor having
been to blame for proving the will, they would
have been guilty of a dereliction of duty if they
had any longer neglected to do so. Everybody
supposed that Roger Tichborne was dead with the
single exception of Lady Tichborne, who clung
with desperate tenacity to the hope that her son
was still living. Time passed on. Alfred Tich-
borne, the brother, came of age, entered into
possession of the Tichborne and Doughty estates,
rnd obtained the hand of a daughter of a noble-
man of distinguished lineage, Lord Arundell of


Wardour. Sir James Francis Tichborne, the
father of Roger, died on the 11th of June 1862,
at the ripe age of 78.
Nobody dreamed that Roger Tichborne still
survived in any corner of the earth, however re-
mote, when on a sudden, towards the end of the
year 1860, there came a startling report that he
had reappeared. It was rumoured that from some
nook in Australia a man had come forward saying,
‘I am the long-lost Roger Tichborne.’ People
could hardly believe their ears when they heard
this startling announcement made. However,
time wore on. That which at first appeared like
a romance or a dream gradually assumed the cha-
racter of reality, and the defendant, who was for-
merly known as the Claimant, at last made his
appearance. But then, to the astonishment of
every one concerned, he appeared not the lean,
slim, spare Roger Tichborne, but a man of prodi-
gious bulk : not a Frenchman, who spoke French
by preference, and English only with a French ac-
cent and imperfectly, but a man who could not
speak a single word of French, who had lost the
French accent in speaking English, and who no
longer spoke English with foreign idioms, but
spoke simple unalloyed vernacular English, though
certainly not of the finest quality. Moreover, to
the still greater astonishment of those who had
been related to or intimately connected with Roger
Tichborne, instead of hastening to seek them out,
he kept himself aloof from them, moved about more
or less stealthily and in concealment, and seemed
to shun and avoid all those persons who were best
able to recognise Roger Tichborne, or to judge as
to the Claimant being an impostor, if, in fact, he
were one. Perhaps all this can be explained satis-
factorily, but undoubtedly such a course of con-
duct on his first arrival in this country was not
calculated to remove the distrust which his reap-
pearance and the circumstances of his past life in
Australia were likely to engender. Therefore he
did not meet with the recognition he hoped for on
the part of the Tichborne and Seymour families.
The public at large and the persons most inter-
ested in the question of his identity remained for
a long time unacquainted with the circumstances
connected with his escape from the shipwreck.
Those who first identified the defendant as Roger
Tichborne do not appear to have been desirous to
inquire into these details, as to which I should
have thought they would have at once requested
information. Nor do they appear to have been
anxious, to know the phases or the various forms
of the life he lived in Australia.
At last the time arrived when it was necessary
that these details should be gone into by the de-
fendant, when he sought the assistance of the
Court of Chancery, because after the silence of 12
long years it would have been vain for a man who
was not recognised by his family to ask the aid of
that Court unless he gave a full and satisfactory
account of himself during the time he had re-
mained absent and silent. The defendant accord-
ingly made an affidavit in which he gave succinctly,
but sufficiently for the purpose, an account of his
escape from the shipwreck, of his landing in Aus-
tralia and of the life he had there lived. The
details I shall endeavour to place succinctly before
you, not merely with reference to the affidavit,
but with reference to his examination, first under
the direction of the. Court of Chancery, and also
with reference to his examination and cross-ex-
amination on the trial in the Court of Common
Pleas. At the present moment Ido not propose,
however, to place these in juxtaposition, and to
point out the differences between various state-
ments made by the Claimant; but I will take his
account as it was last stated. I will simply analyse
that statement and see what degree of merit it is
entitled to, irrespective of all other considerations
calculated to detract from its merit. Now, his
statement is this:
He says that he went on board the Bella in a
state of drunkenness, and that for two days pre-
viously he had been in that condition. He got
more drink on board, and remained drinking for
three days, so that he was unable to go on deck.
On the fourth day, however, having partially re-
covered, he went on deck about 10 o’clock in the
morning. The sea had been rough during the
night, but it was then smooth, and while he was
looking out one of the crew came up and told the
captain that the ship was very low in the water.
Accordingly the captain at once ordered the well
to be sounded, and found there was 12ft. of
water in the hold. As the ship was one of be-
tween 300 and 400 tons burden, 12ft. of water in
the hold must of course have brought the ship
into such a condition that she must have been in
immediate danger of sinking. The captain, who
had not observed this before, immediately ordered
the men to go to work, but after five minutes’
pumping it was found that instead of the pumps
gaining on the water, the water was gaining on
the pumps. Thereupon the captair gave up all
hope of saving the ship, and ordered the boats to
be lowered. There were three boats—the long-
boat on the deck, and two boats slung upon the
davits. One of these boats had a hole stove in
her and was useless. The other boat was ordered
to be lowered, and the longboat was also got into
the water. The captain took with him into the
longboat—of which he assumed the command—
compasses, charts, and the ship’s papers, together
with provisions and water. Then arose the ques-
tion as to who should go in the longboat, and
who in the other. The captain took charge of
the longboat and asked the mate to command the
other; but the man refused to do so, and went
with the captain. And now what becomes of
Roger Tichborne? He says: ‘I got into the
small boat in which there were no provisions or
water, but we were directed by the captain to
follow the other boat and to come up to her
every night and morning for provisions and
water.’ Then he goes on to say that during the
whole night and the next day and night they
followed the longboat and got their food.
Neither boat, I ought to remark, appears to
have had either mast or sail. On the second
night, he says, it comes on to blow; the sea is
rough and the night dark ; they lose sight of the
larger boat, and never see her again. During
the whole of the third day they are without food
or water; and on the morning of the fourth day
they descry a sail in the distance, but they are
disappointed in their efForts to overtake her, for
a breeze springs up, and she sails away, leaving
them baffled in their hopes. At last it occurs to
one of the sailors to take off his red shirt and
hold it up as a signal of distress. It is seen, and
after a time the vessel picks them up. The
defendant goes on to say, ‘By this time, having
been three days and nights in the open boat, and
having been exposed to the scorching rays of the
sun, I was so exhausted that I became insensible,
and in that condition I was taken on board. I
remained in that state for some time. I was not
merely insensible, but I became delirious, and
for a long time I was subject to fits of delirium.


Not that I was always delirious, for sometimes I
was well enough to dine at the captain’s table.
At other times I was unable to leave my berth. I
was treated by the captain with the greatest
possible kindness ; but during the greater part of
the time I was in such a state that I could not
give you any account of what happened.’
The first and natural question to put to him
would be : ‘You say you were picked up by a
vessel when hope must have disappeared. At
the same time your story is strange, and with the
view of ascertaining whether it is true we ask
you what is the name of the ship and where did
she come from?’ To this he replies, ‘I don’t
know.’ ‘What was the name of the ship?’—
‘Well, I believe—my impression is—that it was
the Osprey.’ ‘Can’t you tell us the name of the
captain?’ ‘No ; but I think it was Owen Lewis
or Lewis Owen.’ Now, gentlemen, do you think
it possible that a man could have been saved
from impending death, and that after having
remained for three months on board the vessel
which saved him, he should be unable to state
her name or the name of her captain? He says:
‘I was so ill that I could not ascertain.’ But he
also says he was well enough to tell the captain
his own name, and he informed him it was Roger
Tichborne. Further, he states that he was treated
as a young English gentleman, and that the
vessel which picked him up was larger than the
Bella, and ship-rigged.
Then the defendant tells us that when the ves-
sel got to Melbourne he landed with the captain,
whom he accompanied to an establishment which
he believes was the Custom-house, where of course
it would be the first duty of the captain to go.
The captain, he says, then took him to another
place, where he endeavoured to obtain for him a
passage to England. The answer given to the
captain was that Melbourne was then in a state
of disorder, in consequence of the gold fever; that
the owners of ships could not get crews to navi-
gate them back to the places whence they came,
and that, therefore, intercourse with England was
suspended. The defendant tells us that he re-
turned with the captain to the ship, slept on
board, and went on shore again the next day.
"Wandering about Melbourne, he finds himself in
a yard where sales of horses by auction were held.
There were some horses exhibited, and one of
them was vicious. A stranger says, ‘What do
you think of that horse?—do you think you can
ride him?’ ‘I am sure I can,’ says the defen-
dant. The defendant does so, and a conversation
ensues, in the course of which the stranger says,
‘ If you can ride like that I can find you employ-
ment. I am a stock-keeper at a cattle station
some 300 miles in the interior ; and if you have
a mind to go, there is thirty shillings a week for
you. It is a pleasant employment, and the life
is an easy one, You only have to look after the
cattle in the runs, to bring them in, and occa-
sionally to slaughter them. Besides, if you are
fond of sport, there are opportunities of a little
hunting and shooting.’ ‘ So,’ says the defendant,
‘I accepted the offer. I did not go back to take
leave of the captain, but I followed the stranger
to his hotel. The stranger turned out to be Mr.
W. Foster, the manager and superintendent of a
cattle station at Boisdale. Next morning we
started on horseback for that place. After stay-
ing there several months he transferred me to his
station at Dargo, where I stayed about nineteen
months, and there my wages were raised to forty
shillings a week. Then, in consequence of a man
being murdered, finding myself in this lonely sf
tion, I would not stay there any longer, but wen
back to Boisdale for three or four months longe
after which I finally left Mr. Foster’s employmen
After knocking about the country for some time
I set up a butcher’s shop, but failed at the end o
seven months through want of capital. Then !
went to "VVagga Wagga. Before I set up the br
clier’s shop I took the employment of driving t]
mail between two places. The distance betwee
them was forty miles. It was a rough life, whic
exposed me to dangers, but I earned my bread b;
it, and continued at that employment for severa
months. Then I went to Wagga Wagga, wher
I finally settled. I entered the employment o
Mr. Higgins, who kept an hotel and a large bu
chering establishment. I became his servant
weekly, wages. After continuing with him fo
some time I again set up for myself, but agai
failed for want of capital. Then I determined 1
go back as a journeyman to Mr. Higgins. Th
ended in my being in debt, poverty, and distres
more especially after I married. I was disco
vered in a singular manner by Mr. Gibbes, an at
torney. He found me out, drew me forth from
the obscurity in which I had lived, and impellec
me, or rather compelled me, to come forward a
Roger Tichborne.’
Now, gentlemen, it is impossible to say that thi
account given by the defendant, whether it be tru
or not, does not labour under inherent difficultie
of a most formidable character, passing by all th
difficulties attached to his narrative of the found
ering of the Bella and his being saved by a vesse
which he believes to have been the Osprey, ant
taking only that part of the narrative which de
scribes his landing and his subsequent life in Aus
tralia. In the first place, is it possible to suppose
lie would not have written a letter, even if it con
sisted of only a few lines, to say that he was alive
and safe in Melbourne ? Is it conceivable that he
should allow 12 years to pass by without writing
home? It is true there are men who are perfectly
callous and indifferent to the sufferings of others.
Arthur Orton was such a man, for we know thai
from June 1854, till October 1866, no tidings
came from him to gladden the hearts of the old
people in the shop in Wapping. His father and
mother went to their graves in total ignorance of
what had become of him. But was this the charac-
ter of Roger Tichborne, the incessant letter-writer
and reader of news ? Did he intend to cut off all
communication with his family and his confiden-
tial friends ? Why, he earnestly entreated all the
friends to whom he wrote to continue their corre-
spondence with him. Judging of the man by all
we know of him, can it be supposed he would allow
father, mother, and friends to remain in perpetual
perplexity and ignorance of his fate ? Would you
not rather have expected that long before the ship
cast anchor in Hobson’s Bay Roger Tichborne
would have put down every incident of his voyage,
and especially the facts of his almost miraculous
preservation ? At all events, if he did not do that
during the progress of the voyage, as soon as the
anchor was cast at Melbourne and he landed, would
he not have written to relieve the misery and
anguish which he knew must exist in the minds of
father, mother, and relations, as to what had be-
come of him ? He was perfectly well aware that
they knew of the Bella being missing, and even if
the men in the other boat had been saved, the
same doubt must remain as to himself, and they
would in time assume that he was dead. He must
know that before that time arrived they would


Buffer the agonies of ‘ hope deferred which make
the heart sick ;’ that every morning on hearin
the postman’s knock they would rush to the do
to see whether there were any tiding 3 of him; tha
they would look daily to the shipping intelligen
in the newspapers to learn whether any news hac
heen received of the Bella or her shipwreckec
crew.. It is impossible that the man could hav
been insensible to these things. Besides, he mu
have known that every day’s delay, though i
might tend to put an end to the agonies of su
pense by making the assurances of his deat
stronger, would add something to the anguish
his friends at home. As a reason for not writii
the defendant alleges that he was about to underg
a sort of social degradation. There might, indeed
have been some force in that argument if the d
fendant had been compelled to adopt such a cours
toaa’ bu t should be remembered that he hac
LOGO', a year at his own disposal, and migl
easily, by writing to his banker or his friends
have extricated himself from his new mode of lil
as soon as he found out that there was nothing o
romance or adventure in it. Even if he had bee
attracted at first by the representations of Mr
roster, and had anticipated pleasurable excite
ment in pursuing the emu, the kangaroo, and th
dingo, he niust soon have become alive to th
realities of his position. Besides, assuming he hac
endured the wretched life at Boisdale and Dargo
whatever romance there may have been in tha
wild kind of life came to an end when he em
barked in the business of a butcher. Nor wa
Koger Tichborne the kind of man to associate wit!
bushrangers, whom he must know violated the
law. every day of their lives.
* ' ( Y! tlernen > y°u must judge for yourselves whe
, , le * these considerations will not lead you to think
that the story of the defendant is open from the
outset to very grave suspicion. At the same time
be it tar from me to say that the facts are impos-
sible, because the eccentricities of the human mine
are multifarious. Nevertheless, it is necessary to
]udge of human actions by some standard which
v a 9 le common experience of man-
+lln / ine counsel for the defendant referred to
ie instances of Bamfylde Moore Carew, a Devon-
-lr e, gentleman, who gave up his fortune and
j ned the gipsies, and of a nobleman who became
A a^or . Pu t we d 0 not know whether
■tsamtylde Moore Carew was ‘cracked’or not, as
P , laS - e ®° es ’ nor have we any evidence as to
1 pi ? vlous career of the nobleman whom the
learned counsel for the defendant has referred to.
homiw^ e ;l 1 COUn , Sel suggested that Roger Tich-
examnle nf n '^ c ed to leave all his friends by the
freer uentlv reW* wllose history bad been
was a remarSl • hlm by P6re Lefevre 5 but it
-the learned name of 1 ore Lefevro. Again,
attracted to°a lifeof been
■rohleii venture by a robber s song
but nnf ' + Ul l^i ln f a piay acted at Stonyhurst;
exm,rJiedT ate ll for this theory, the song was
•expurgated from the copies of the play used in the
college. Then the learned counsel urged that
ftoger Tichborne, filled with remorse at having
seduced his cousin, wished to go into solitude in
Australia, in order to amend his life and make
atonement for the past. This sounds charming:
but the misfortune is, that he never meant to go
to Australia at all, but took his passage for New
York, with the intention of proceeding to Mexico.
That does not look like an intention of leading the
life of an anchoret or a hermit. When the learned
counsel is reminded that his client comes back to
this country with an immense amount of physical
strength, lie says, ‘ O yes, that was the effect of
the pure air of the bush, and of active life.’ If
you speak about his intellect and his morals, the
learned counsel says, ‘ I can easily explain to you
how there has been a perfect illustration of im-
provement in that respect. Has he not been asso-
ciating with Arthur Orton? It is true, Orton was
a coarse low brute; it is true, he was a ruffian -
it is true, he was a robber, and was shrewdly sus-
pected of murder. Therefore, if you bring toge-
ther the two extremes of depravity and ruffianis°m,
combined with bodily vigour on the one hand, and
enervation of body and mind produced by de-
bauchery on the other, the result will be that you
will get a perfect man.’
If this view of the case were true, I should
deeply lament that we can no longer send the
scum of our society to Australia. According to
the learned counsel, if you have an incorrigible
scoundrel, send him to Australia, and only let°him
find out Arthur Orton, if he can, and let him as-
sociate with him and see a little bush-ranging, and
he will become a perfect character in an incredibly
short space of time. With King Henry I would
say:
‘ Now, neighbour confines, purge you of your scum :
Have you a ruffian that will swear, drink, dance
Bevel the night, rob, murder, and commit ’
The oldest sins the newest kind of ways ?
Be happy, he will trouble you no more.’
Let him go to Australia, and he will soon be-
come thoroughly reclaimed and reformed. It is
true that some men, sick of the conventionalities
of the world, have turned hermits; that others
have turned visionaries, and that some have been
attracted by the love of adventure to join the In-
dians and other savage tribes; but in such cases
there is something which accounts for and supplies
a motive for a departure from the ordinary stand-
ard of human action. But here there is nothing
of the kind. It seems to me that no explanation
has been afforded which is at all satisfactory. The
difficulty I have pointed out is one of a formidable
character, which must not be overlooked, and it
is of a nature which ought not to command our
confidence, but rather to excite our suspicion. It
is true that truth is sometimes stranger than fic-
tion ; but this is no reason why we should too
hastily assume the truth of a story which, at first
sight at all events, bears the appearance of being
a fiction. Whether the defendant's story is a fic-
tion it will be for you to judge after you have
taken into consideration all the additional facts.


Fifth Day, Wednesday , February 4, 1874.
Gentlemen of the Jury,—l noticed yesterday one
of the difficulties which suggest themselves to a
thoughtful mind in reflecting upon the story of
the defendant in reference to his life at Rio and
embarkation on board the Bella, and it will >e
necessary, in consequence of those difficulties, ;o
examine somewhat critically and minutely tie
general bearing of the narrative, and the detai s
he has himself given in his various examinatio
as to the shipwreck, his preservation from deal 1,
his subsequent landing in Melbourne, and his 1: 'e
in Australia. Now, no one has been heard of b
longing to the Bella but the defendant, if, as le
alleges, he was on board the vessel. We canno
therefore, look to any other source of information
as to how the Bella came to founder and how le
came to be saved than to his narrative. He r
turns after twelve years’ absence and twelve year
total silence, and there is a failure on the part o: !
those whose veracity no one can doubt to recog-
nise him. He applies to the Court of Chancei y
to get over the leading technicalities which stooc
in his way, and it became necessary that he shou
give some account of himself, and as to how it wa
that during all those years—with his high ran c,
and considering the relations which hadsubsistec
between himself and his family—he never hac
given them the slightest intimation of havin
been saved. Accordingly it -was necessary that h
should make an affidavit, stating with more or les
minuteness what had become of him. He did so
and in the first paragraph of the affidavit h
says :
‘ln April 1854, the ship Bella, Captain Birkei ;
master, was at Kio; and learning she was bounc
for New York, I took my passage by the Bella fo
that city. The Bella left the port of Rio on th
morning of the 20th of April, with myself on
board, and proceeded on her voyage. To the bes ;
of my belief the crew of the Bella, including th
captain, consisted of about seventeen persons,
being tbe only passenger on board. All went wel
until the fourth day after the Bella had left Rio
and was far out of sight of land, but on the morn
ing of that day the mate reported to the captaii
that she had sprung a leak, and all hands were in
stantly set to work at the pumps, and every effon;
was made to save the ship, but without effect
Veiy shortly after the mate reported the leak i ;
became apparent the vessel was fast filling with
water, and the captain announced that all further
efforts to save the ship were useless, and that al
on board must instantly take to the boats.’
Now, that did not go into details, nor was it
necessary that it should do so, but the parties in-
trusted with maintaining the rights of the child
who was supposed to be the heir desired to know
something more as to the particulars of this
wreck, and accordingly they claimed the right
they undoubtedly had to cross-examine the de-
fendant upon the affidavit he had made. One of
the subjects upon which Mr. Chapman Barber
examined the defendant before Mr. Roupell
was the shipwreck of the Bella. I must say that
the defendant did not on that occasion exhibit
the frankness and fairness which one would
have expected from a man who was pressed to
face a Court of Law and the world in the asser-
tion of his right. He was asked to give a descrip-
tion of the shipwreck, and over and over again he
replied, ‘ I will answer any question you put to me, ’
once adding, ‘I hope the learned gentleman does
not want me to make a speech.’ Then Mr. Chap
man Barber says, ‘You have in your affidavi
given a long statement as to the shipwreck ; can
you repeat the substance of it ?’ ‘ Most undoubt
edly I can,’ was the answer ; ‘I will answer any
question you put to me.’ Asked again to repea'
the substance of the statement, he said, 4 It woulc
be very amusing, no doubt, to you, but I am no
going to do it.’ Then Mr. Serjeant Ballantine in
terferes, and finally the defendant says, ‘ Well,
cannot tell you much about it, for I was not ve'r
much upon deck’—the reason he alleged beinj
that he was tipsy, and only recovered on the
morning of the wreck.
That was his first account; but afterwards he en
larged upon it in the Court of Common Pleas when
under cross-examination there. Now the question
whether Roger Tichborne went on board the Bella
drunk or sober is important, in this way—that ii
he was sober he must, if he were living, remembei
what had happened on board. He would be on
deck looking about him, and if any collision or
any accident happened he would know all about
it. But, you see, the difficulty is got rid of if it
can be shown that he was drunk all the time, and
that only on the morning of the wreck did he
come to his senses. If you are satisfied that
Roger was sober when he went on board, of course
that fact would very seriously affect the credence
you might otherwise be disposed to place on the
defendant’s narrative. The account he gives is
that he and Captain Birkett had been living in a
state of debauchery of the grossest possible kind.
Here is what he says in his examination in
Chancery on that subject:
‘ While at Rio did you become acquainted with
the captain of a vessel there?—l did. What was
his name ?—Birkett. How did you become ac-
quainted with him ?—I met him at the hotel.
Hid you have any conversation with him as to
where you were going?—Yes, I did. Did he tell
you where he was going ?—He did. What did he
tell you ?—He told me he was going to New York,
that he would have to call at Kingston, Kingston,
Jamaica?—Yes. Did he tell you how soon he
was going to sail ?—He told me he was going to
sail the next day. Did you make up your mind
to. go with him or not?—Well, I made up my
mind to go with him if I possibly could. What
steps did you take in order to go with him ? —I
applied for my passport. Were you able to get
it?—No, I did not get it. How came that to
pass?—Because you have to give forty-eight hours’
notice before they will grant you a passport.
What happened upon that?—He detained the
ship. Did you determine to go or abandon the
notion of going in that ship?—Yes, I determined
to go. What had you with you at that time in
the way of money?—Not more than 20 L, I think.
What had become of the sum you said you had
drawn at Rio during your stay there ? You say
about 2001. ?—I spent it. In what way had you.
spent it ?—Principally in drink. There was 30f.
out of it I paid tfhe captain. How did you get on
board?—l went on board in a boat. What con-
dition were you in when you went on board ?—I
was the worse for liquor. How did you manage
to get on board without a passport ?—I was hidden
away. After you had got on board, did you ap-
pear on deck or remain below?—No, I did not
come on deck again until the day the vessel went-
down.


Now I am anxious, whenever there is a conflict
in evidence, to see what the defendant himself
cays. It is only fair and just to do so, and there
you have his account of it; and I must remark
that why the vessel should have been detained
with the view to the obtaining of the passport
and yet that no passport was procured seems to
require explanation. Well, we have had Captain
Oates before us, and have heard what he said as
-to appealing to Captain Birkett in favour of th
young man in order to obtain a passage for him
although he had not money to pay for it. The
defendant now wholly ignores the existence o '
Captain Oates. Here is what he says on being
cross-examined as to his knowledge of him: —
‘Before you went on. board, did you come
across a person of the name of Thomas Oates ?
On board where ? Before you went on board the
Bella?—You are speaking now of Eio Janeiro'
I am speaking of Rio; that was the place the
Bella sailed from first, was it not ?—Yes. Before
you went on board did you come across a person
of the name of Thomas Oates ?—I did not to my
knowledge. That you swear?—That I swear
How do you mean to your knowledge?—Well,]
have no knowledge or recollection of any such
person. Do you recollect going on board the
Bella ? Did you see Mr. Oates about three days
before the Bella sailed ? Do you recollect seeing
him about three days before the Bella sailed?—l
cannot say whether I have seen him; he might
have been at the hotel. I can safely say this, I
did not know who he was. Had you a passport ?
—I had not. Did you go on board the Bella
without a passport the night before she sailed ?
No, I did not. Did you leave Rio without a pass-
port ?—I did. Was it a rule at Rio that no cap-
tain should take a passenger out of harbour with-
out a passport ?—lt was. Did you go on board
about 5 o'clock in the afternoon the day before
the Bella sailed, and did you have tea or supper
with the captain or Mr. Oates ?—I did not. And
did he go away about 9 o’clock?—He did not,
because he was not there; at least, he might have
gone. I was not there. You have no recollec-
tion ? -I was not on board at all the night before.
Had you any conversation with him and the cap-
tain as to your being without a passport?—How
could I have any conversation with a man I did
not know ? I told you just now I did not know
him. Answer my question. Had you a conver-
sation with the captain and Mr. Oates about your
being on board without a passport ?—I had no
conversation with Mr. Oates at all. With the
captain in Mr. Oates’s presence ?—I spoke with
the captain, but not in Mr. Oates’s presence. Are
you speaking of the previous night? lam speak-
ing of the night before the Bella sailed ?—I had
no conversation with the captain that night at
all. Did Mr. Oates come on board the Bella the
next morning early again ?—As I do not know
Mr. Oates I do not see how I can answer that
•question. You know who I mean by Mr. Oates ?
vi k uow w h° you mean. You have read his
evidence ?—Certainly; and never read so many
lies put together in all my life before, I think.
\ou say you have never seen so many lies put to-
-1? in an affidavit. Not in an
affidavit. I will not say about an affidavit; this
is not an a,ffidavit. I thought you were reading
his affidavit.
‘ Do you recollect—-was Birkett the name of the
captain of the Bella?—He was. Do you remem-
ber Cap fain Birkett and Mr. Oates advising you
to go down into the lazarette underneath the
deck as tlie Bella was being towed out of the
harbour?—l went down in the lazarette. You
did go down in the lazarette ?—Yes. Was the
object of that—did you get out of the port with-
out the cognizance of the Government officers
because you bad no passport?—lt was. Did
Captain Birkett advise you to go there ?—He did.
And you mean to swear that Mr. Oates was not
there, and did not hear and join in that advice ?
—I mean to swear that I did not know Mr. Oates
at all. Was there any man who do not belong to
that ship—a captain of another ship; another man,
whether his name was Oates, Smith, or Johnson
—was there the captain of another ship in the
harbour at Rio at that time you were there ?
No, there was not. No one ?—Yes, there were
people there. No, one not belonging to a ship of
that description ?—No. Did you go to the laza-
rette ?—I did; I imagine from what you allude
to it is the lazarette. A room in the afterpart of
the ship, kept apart from the cargo?—No, it was
not; it was a room where the stores were kept.
Did the steward cover the entrance to the room
"Vith light packages, tea-chests, and the like ?—I
I cannot say what he covered it with, I am sure.
Was it covered?—l believe it was blocked up.
Did Captain Birkett remain on the scuttle or
trap-door, do you know ?—Really I do not know.
Cannot you tell me ?—Considering I was inside,
how could I see who was outside ? I do not say
you could see ; you might hear or know, although
you could not see ?—I do not remember having
heard it. Do you know whether the cabin table
was put over the scuttle ?—What do you call the
scuttle ?—The trap-door. It was not a trap-door
at all. The door ?—You could not put a cabin
table over it. There was not a cabin table put over
it ?—You could not put a cabin table over it. Was
the ship visited by the Government officials after
you were put into the lazarette ?—I suppose it
would be. Did you hear the Government officials
having conversations and taking a cup of coffee
with the captain while you were in the lazarette ?
—I have no remembrance of it. Can you say it
was not so ?—I should not think it was so; Ido
not think I could have heard it. Were you
aware of the Government officials going away ?
That I cannot say; of course, I could hear when
they had gone away afterwards—that I have no
doubt of. Were there any other passengers on
board the Bella except yourself ?—There was not.
And then I suppose the Bella was towed out and
went on her voyage?—Yes. Now,you say you did
not see Mr. Oates then. Did you ever see anybody
who was pointed out to you or who you were told
was Mr. Oates afterwards ? You say you had no
knowledge of him at that time. Have you since
seen any person who has been pointed out to you
as Mr. Oates?—l believe I have; ye 3. Where?—
At Croydon.’
Now, here he denies all knowledge of Captain
Oates; but he admitted being placed in the laza-
rette. Afterwards he states that he remained in
the place he was put in three days and three nights.
Inasmuch, however, as he could not have remained
three days and nights in a place where there
was no window and no light, he states afterwards
that it was in a passenger’s cabin—which was
then used for stores, and in which there was a
berth —he was placed. If Roger Tichborne was
placed in the lazarette, as Captain Oates swears
lie was, he would only have remained while the
officers were on board, and when the vessel had got
out of the harbour he would have gone on deck.
If he were in a condition to go on deck he must
F


have known all that was going on. In the course
of his re-examination the defendant was asked by
his counsel whether he had a habit of drinking,
and he replied he was sorry to say he had. And
to the question ‘ What did you drink ?’ he gave
the very sagacious answer, ‘I always found it
best to drink the spirit of the country wherever
you are.’ He had, he said, been drinking very
heavily all the time he was in Rio, and he
added: —
‘ I was two days intoxicated at an hotel, and
they could not find me. When you got on board
were you sober? Yes. When you got on board
the Bella were you sober or drunk ?—Well, I was
about half way, I think. What part of the vessel
did you go into ?—The store-room (a cabin not
being wanted) was turned into a cabin. Was it
fore or aft?—Aft. The cargo was stored there.
It appeared to me as if the partitions had been
taken away. It had all the appearance of cabins
in the saloon part. There were two skylights. I
remained there until they told me to come out,
I never went on deck until the morning she went
down.’
Now, the statement of the defendant that he
went on board drunk is entirely denied by Captain
Oates, who stated that the young man to whom he
had induced his friend Captain Birkett to give a
passage to New York had no money to pay bills
ho owed in Rio, and therefore could not obtain a
passport, and that in consequence he was brought
on board, being then quite sober, and on the
morning of sailing was placed in the lazarette
while the officers were on board. It appears that
Captain Birkett and Captain Oates took a liking
to the young man. Whatever may have been the
real character of Roger Tiohborne he seems to have
been extremely amiable, gentle, and pleasant in
his manner, and to have won his way with every
one with whom he came into social contact. Cap-
tain Oates adds that on the night before the Bella
sailed he supped with Captain Birkett and the
young man on board, and left for his own ship,
promising to return and bid his old friend good
bye in the morningthat he did return in the
morning, and that Roger was placed in the laza-
rette, over which he placed a grating, and over the
grating a table, upon which the port officers were
served with coffee, and that all being ready for
the sailing of the ship he left her shaking hands
with Captain Birkett, whom he never saw again.
This is a direct contradiction of the defendant’s
second statement that it was into the after-cabin
he was put.
Well, but Captain Oates’s statement is met by
a counter-statement by the witness James Brown,
otherwise Captain Brown, who says that Roger
and Captain Birkett and Captain very
Captain Oates whom defendant swore he never
knew—were in the habit of haunting the hotels
and billiard-rooms at Rio and getting drunk to-
gether night after night; that Roger got so drunk
that two nights he had to accommodate him in
his bed-room, 12ft. by 10ft. in whioh there were
two beds; that he (Brown) was on board the
Bella on the morning she sailed to obtain payment
of a bill for brandy, and that he saw Roger and
Captains Birkett and Oates and Hoskins all come
on board drunk at 6 o’clock in the morning; and,
indeed, no one on board was sober; and that he
prized a hole in the partition dividing the cap-
tain’s cabin from the passengers’ cabin, which was
used as a temporary store-room, and put Roger in
there, placing tea-chests and other things against
the door and the aperture. Why he had made an
aperture v hen he hail the door to put him through
he did not explain. All this is positively contra-
dicted by Captain Oates and by Captain Hoskins
—as fine an old seaman as you would wish to see—
who told you there was no truth in Brown’s state-
ment so far as he was concerned. Well, the Bella
sailed, and here is what the defendant states in
his affidavit as to the wreck. The defendant, in
his affidavit on the subject, swore as follows on
the subject of the wreck :
‘ All went well until the fourth day after the
Bella had left Rio and was far out of sight of land,
but on the morning of that day the mate reported
to the captain that she had sprung a leak, and all
hands were instantly set to work at the pumps,
and every effort was made to save the ship, but
without effect. Very shortly after the mate re-
ported the leak it became apparent that the vessel
was fast filling with water, and the captain an-
nounced that all further efforts to save the ship
were useless, and that all on board must instantly
take to the boats. The Bella carried a long boat
on deck, and two smaller boats, one of which was
slung from the davits on each quarter. One of
the small boats was stove in and rendered useless,
but the crew succeeded in safely lowering upon
the sea the long-boat and the other boat, which
was the larger of the two small ones (hereinafter
referred to as the second boat), and in stowing
some provisions and casks of water into the boats.
I and, to the best of my recollection and belief,
eight of the crew got into the second boat, and the
captain and, to the best of my recollection and
belief, the rest of the crew got into the long boat,
and immediately pushed off from the Bella, and
the ship Bella soon afterwards sank.
A Juror. —He says elsewhere she had twelve feet
of water in her. If there were would not the laza-
rette have been filled with water ?
The Lord Giiikf Justice. —No doubt it would,
and the captain, who was on deck, must have seen
that the deck was almost level with the water.
The whole of the lower part of the vessel would
have been under water. That part of the story
must necessarily be abandoned. He says here
that the boats were ordered to be lowered. The
narrative of the shipwreok divides itself into three
things—the foundering of the Bella, the lowering
of the boats, and'the saving of the men. We stop
for a moment here to ask ourselves whether this
statement as to the quantity of water in the hold
can possibly be true. You have had nautical evi-
dence on the subject, which is unanimous on the
point—first, that the ship could not have remained
afloat with that body of water in her hold—she
would have been waterlogged and unmanageable.
Again, even supposing, from any sudden accident,
that the ship should have made that quantity of
water it must have been discovered long before. No
cause has been suggested on the part of the defence
which would account for so sudden an influx of
water —no collision, no getting on a rock or upon
a sandbank. If anything of that kind had hap-
pened it must have been observed by the defen-
dant. It was urged by the learned counsel that
from the hot climate her seams may have opened,
but the owners say that she was a new vessel and
was carefully examined before she left. Again, it
was suggested that the bolts might have corroded,
but if they had, we are told that she would have
streaks which would show the fact, and which
were not seen, although the vessel was painted.
The ship left Rio, Captain Oates tells us, in a
perfect state of seaworthiness.
If it had rested there I own I should have been


very glad; but a -witness was afterwards called for a
totally different purpose—namely, a gentleman
who had been managing clerk to a firm of
merchants at Rio, who chartered the vessel and
loaded her with her cargo, and he was asked as
to whether he could throw any light at all upon
the cause of the Bella foundering, and he said
that various theories had been started, such as
collision, running down, sudden squalls, and so
on. Then he was asked this terrible question—
‘Among the rumours, did you hear a rumour
that she had been scuttled ?’ ‘No ’ was the
reply, and I wish the learned counsel had been
satisfied with it. But no, he went on, and
entered into minute particulars as to the nature
and value of the cargo, and the amount it was
insured for, leading you to believe that the vessel
had been purposely sunk by the captain to enable
the owners of the cargo to realize the amount of
the over-insurance. The answer was an indig-
nant denial, the witness telling us that the firm
was one of 00 years’ standing, and of the highest
character, and that such an imputation upon
their honour and integrity was perfectly atrocious.
And so it was. The very same counsel who had
endeavoured to show that the opening of the
seam and the corroding of the bolts had occasioned
the disaster suggested to you that the ship had
been scuttled—l know not at whose diabolical
instigation—because there is no milder term, in
my opinion, applicable to it. The suggestion was
made, but I must say that a more hideous
accusation—made without the slightest shadow
of pretence for it—l never heard of; and you
will remember it was explained that the cargo
was by no means over-insured. If the learned
counsel, animated by a spirit of justice, had
paused for a moment before he raised that fear-
ful accusation, and considered what the captain
did, would he have made it ? The vessel was 400
miles from the land. Would the captain have
scuttled the ship without making some prepara-
tion for escape ? Would he not, at all events,
have placed masts and sails in the boats, and not
have left himself to the chance of the men being
able to row such a distance ? However, other
considerations prevailed, and this charge is pre-
ferred, which I do not say came from the defend-
ant—l do not desire to intimate the faintest
belief that it did. Ido not know where it came
from, but I say a more infamous charge never was
preferred iri a oourt of justice—infamous because
it involves a most heinous offence on the part of
those against whom it is directed, because it was
made without the slightest shadow of foundation,
and because it was inconsistent with the course
the defence had taken up to that time.
But, whatever may have been the cause of the
Bella making the quantity of water she did make,
if it were the fact, one thing is perfectly clear
from all the nautical evidence—that it would be
perfectly impossible such a state of things could
anse without having been long before a matter of
observation. All vessels are regularly pumped,
and the well is regularly sounded, and the pumps
are used if necessary. The owners of this vessel
tell us that Captain Birkett was an old and ex-
perienced officer, who had their entire confidence
not the vagabond which Captain Brown would
represent him to be. The discipline on board
their vessels was exact and regular, and it was one
of the rules which their captains regularly fol-
lowed, and which every prudent captain would
follow that the well should be sounded night
and morning. Now, if the -well of this ship had
been sounded—and we must presume it was
sounded on the morning in question—it would
have been impossible, if the ship had leaked
from any of the causes suggested by the learned
counsel other than that of being purposely scuttled,
that any large quantity of water could have
existed in the well witheut leading to some
further inquiry. But it is quite clear nothing of
the kind took place; and we have the further
fact that the captain was upon deck; and you
will ask yourselves, was it possible that there
could have been 12ft. of water in the hold, and
the captain be perfectly unconscious of the im-
pending danger ? It is impossible to suppose that
such a state of things could have existed. Indeed,
practically the account of the defendant was given
up by his counsel, and even Luie would not
accept it. He said the defendant had told him-
the story, but he pooh-poohed it, and would not
believe it, and he added that the crew he had picked
up told him a different story. Then wo have the
account the defendant gives of the crew taking to
.the boats. In his original affidavit he says
‘The Bella carried a longboat on deck and two
smaller boats, one of which was slung from the
davits on each quarter. One of the small boats-
was stove in and rendered useless, but the crew
succeeded in safely lowering upon the sea the
longboat and the other boat, which was the larger
of the two small ones, hereinafter referred to as-
“the second boat,” and in stowing some provisions-
and casks of water into the boats, I and, to the
best of my recollection and belief, eight of the
crew got into the second boat, and the captain
and, to the best of my recollection and belief, the
rest of the crew got into the longboat, and im-
mediately pushed off from the Bella, and the ship
Bella soon afterwards sunk.
‘ The captain, who had in the longboat the ship’s
charts, ordered that the second boat should keep
in sight of the longboat, which she did for two-
days, but in the night of the second day a high
wind and storm came on, and the boats were soon
out of sight of each other, and the longboat was
not again seen by those in the second boat. The
man who had command of the second boat then
determined to let her drift with the wind. On
the morning of the fourth day after the Bella had
sunk the crew of the second boat descried a ship
in the distance, and used every means to reach
her and to attract notice, and for that purpose a-
red flannel shirt which one of the crew of the
boat wore was attached to an oar and hoisted as a
signal. Ultimately a signal was made in reply,
and the crew of the boat rowed to the ship, and I
and the whole of the crew on board of the second
boat were thus saved, after we had been three
days and nights at sea in an open boat.’
You will observe that here, in his affidavit, he-
states that the provisions and water were placed
in the boats, and he repeats that statement in hie-
examination before Mr. Koupell, but in the Court
of Common Pleas he told a very different/ story.
He is asked u—
‘ How many boats had the vessel got ?—There
were three. Were they all in good condition ?
No, one was not. What was the matter with
that one ?—She had a hole in her. What were
the other two boats in respect of size?—One was
a large one, the other was a small one. What was
done? Were the boats prepared?—Yes. What
was done with them?—All things that were in
it were thrown out. There was a lot of things
in the boat—l do not know what—all thrown out-
on deck. What was done with the boat after the
F 2


things were thrown out of it ?—There was water
and provisions put in. I don’t know whether
you said ‘them’ or ‘ it’ ?—No, it was only in one
boat. "Which was that?—The largest. Do you
remember how the provisions were packed, or
what packages they were in ?—There were some
bags of biscuit and some barrels of biscuit. Any
other kind of provision?—Yes; there was a
quantity of preserved meat in tins; preserved
provisions of some kind, I cannot say what. After
both boats were lowered what was done with
them, which boat were you in?—l was in the
smaller boat. Who was in the small boat with
you ? There were eight of the crew. Any one in
command?—No. Did you hear anything said
between the captain and the mate?—Yes; there
were a few words. Do you mean a quarrel?—
Yes; it was a kind of quarrel. What was it
about ?—The captain wished the mate to take
charge of the other boat, but he would not do so.
He went into the same boat as the captain. How
many were in the larger boat?—l could not tell
you to one. I should think there would be six or
seven. There was a less number in the larger
boat on account of the provisions, being loaded
with water and one thing and another. What
were the orders given to the smaller boat ?—Only
to follow the other boat. About how long did
these preparations take in getting you all into
these boats after you first heard that conversation
between the sailor and the captain about the
vessel making water ? I do not believe more
than an hour and a quarter; it might have been an
hour and a half. Did you see what become of the
ship, the Bella?—We saw her go down after-
wards. How long after you got into the boats
was it before she went down ?—lt was about 12
o’clock when she went down. What time was it
when you all got into the boats ?—I think it must
have been a little past 11 when we left the ship.
Did you continue to follow the large boat ?—Yes.
For how long?—We followed the boat all that
day and all the next night and following day.
How came your boat not to follow any more ?
We followed the next day and part of the next
night, when it came on very rough, and the night
very dark, until part of the second night, when it
came on very dark, and we lost sight of her. The
next morning was the large boat in sight?—No.
How had you been supplied with food and drink
during the day and the night, and the next day
you kept together?—We used to go up to the
other boat night and morning for food and water.
Do you remember how those biscuits came there ?
One of the sailors threw them in in small bags,
just before we got into the boat; but they got so
soaked with salt water that we could hardly eat
them.’
We see, then, that four years after he had made his
affidavit, and been examined before Mr. Rouped,
he alters his statement, and says that all the pro-
visions and water were placed in the longboat,
and that the other boat was left without any at
all except a few biscuits. Whether he changed
bis statement to intensify the sufferings he had
undergone, and thus account for his loss of
memory, I do not know. He, however, says, in
answer to Mr. Gifford, that the boat in which he was
pulled up night and morning to the long boat for
provisions and water as long as they remained in
sight of each other. It is plain that there are
such great improbabilities in this story as to
render it incredible. In the first place, when a
ship is in a sinking condition, and the captain and
crew take to the boats, who ever heard of all the
food and all the water—things absolutely essential
to life—being put into one boat, and those in the
other boat being without, and under the necessity
of pulling up night and morning to obtain the
means of existence ? Why the crew would have
repelled the motion. The learned counsel for the
defendant, as I have said, gave it up, as he did also
the story of the 12ft. of water in the hold, and he
argued that Arthur Orton, being a sailor, would
not have told such a story. The assumption that
Arthur Orton was a sailor is, although he had made
three voyages in some capacity on board ship,
questionable, but we know sailors have a saying
as to anything that is incredible, “ Tell that to the
Marines,” and a sailor might say, tell that story
to a landsman.
But the learned counsel forgot that he had two
propositions to maintain—first, that the defendant
is not Arthur Orton, and next, that he is Roger
Tichborne; and what, you will ask yourselves,
could ever induce Roger Tichborne to invent such
a story ? Was it not his interest to tell the truth,
to narrate the facts ? Would Roger Tichborne
have invented these stories and narrated them,
knowing them to be false ? This, I cannot help
thinking, becomes a matter of serious moment
when you come to weigh the evidence for and
against the identity of the defendent. He was
called upon properly and rightly to give an account
of how he was saved from the wreck, and would
you not have expected a man who had been in-
volved in impending shipwreck, and who had
been picked up from an open boat at sea, to give
a plain narrative of the facts, one which, instead
of being false and impossible, would have carried
on its face the stamp of sincerity and truth ? It
is impossible not to feel the force of that reason-
ing. It presses upon me with very great might
and cogency. The only explanation the learned
counsel for the defendant, who rejects and aban-
dons the story of his client, can offer is that the
defendant’s brain has suffered so much by all he
has gone through, that truth and fiction became
in his mind involved in one inextricable mist, and
that it is just as likely he will tell you something
which is the creation of his own brain as tell you
the truth or give you the facts which any one
whose brain is not disordered would remember.
It is a fair argument of the learned counsel, if on
the whole you should be of opinion that it is a
solution of the difficulties which are otherwise
apparently insurmountable. Here is the defen-
dant’s account of the rescue of himself and the
crew: —
‘ Did you see anything or anybody beyond the
people of your own boat ?—Yes ; we saw a ship in
the distance, on the fourth morning.—Was any-
thing done to attract the attention of the vessel ?
Yes; there was some time atterwards. —What did
your boat try and do first? They pulled very
hard to get up to her, but unfortunately the wind
seemed to have sprung up, and instead of getting
closer to her it seemed to take her further away.
It was not till the third attempt we got any
nearer and made a signal. A breeze of wind
seemed to spring up and seemed to take her away
again, and then she became becalmed again, and
then we went very hard towards her and she went
away again, and they were so exhausted they
could hardly pull any more, but they did make a
third attempt. Were you yourself able to give any
assistance ?—No, I did nothing, only threw the
water out of the boat with a tin. AVas anything
else done besides pulling?—Yes, one of thesailors
took his red shirt off and put it on one of the


sculls or one of the oars. What was the result
of that ?—The vessel hoisted a flag. What hap-
pened after that ?—I suppose they rowed to her.
Do you not know ?—No, I do not—that is to say,
I became insensible; therefore I could not say.
Do you remember being taken on board the
vessel ?—I do not. How was it you became in-
sensible?—Well, no, without it was over excite-
ment. How long before you lost your senses do
you remember having food or water ?—lt must
have been very near 60 hours ; not food and water
—water. You said it was very hot?—Very hot.
The sun out ?—Yes, very hot indeed. What food
had you had ?—Yes, we had some biscuits. Some
of the biscuits soaked with water?—Yes.’
Then he was cross-examined as to the vessel he
alleged had saved him:—
‘ You were nearly three months on board, were
you not ?—I was. Did you never find out what
port she hailed from ?—No, I did not. Did you
ever think to ask ?—Well, I suppose not. Three
months on board?—Yes, ill very nearly the whole
time. Did you never ask where she came from ?
—No, I did not. Nor are you quite sure even of
the name of the captain who saved you?—l am
under the impression that his name is Owen
Lewis or Lewis Owen. Did you inquire of the
captain whereabouts he picked you up ?—No, I
think not. You went by the name of Tichborne ?
—Yes, I did. Did you live with the captain?—l
did; that is, when I was able to get to table. Did
you never find out from him what port he belonged
to ?—I did not. Was she a passenger ship ?
There were passengers on board. Where from ?
I do not know; very probably I inquired, but I
don’t recollect. Did you make any acquaintances
or friends on board the Osprey during the three
months ?—I might have made friends, but don’t
recollect their names. . . . She went straight
to Melbourne, did she? —No, I cannot be sure of
it; I was delirous for a long time. How do you
mean, for a long time ?—I should think over two
months. Over two months delirious ?—Yes. Did
you ever find out who the owners were?—No.
Did you pay the captain anything ?—I do not
know; I have a faint recollection of giving him a
cheque. He nursed you when you were delirious
for two months, and you lived at the table the rest
of the time. Have you no more than a faint re-
collection ?—I have not.’
Well, having mentioned the name of the vessel
and the time of her arrival at Melbourne, every
inquiry was instituted at the Custom-house,
Melbourne, where it was the duty of the captain
to have reported the fact that he had picked up
a shipwrecked crew; but no trace of an Osprey
was found save the little Glasgow Osprey, of 66
tons, and of a Liverpool Osprey engaged in the
coasting trade, and which had been wrecked
before the time the defendant says he arrived at
Melbourne. It was the duty of tho revenue
officers and Officers of Health to board every
vessel arriving in the bay, and the local
authorities were also active to prevent the intro-
duction of convicts; but no tidings of the
Osprey could be procured from any source. You
had before you, too, the reporter of the Argus,
whose duty it was to report the arrival of vessels
in Hobson’s Bay, who had, indeed, a marine
residence in the shape of a vessel for tho purpose,
and he produced the list of the Argus, which
paper had a speciality for recording everything
interesting in reference to the voyage of incoming
ships, but the name of the Osprey does not occur
in the list. One can hardly conceive it possible
that the defendant could have been three months
on board the vessel which had saved him from
death without knowing all about her, and you
can scarcely conceive any one who had received
such an inestimable benefit as the defendant
states he received at the hands of the captain of
the vessel by being picked up, and subsequently
treated with such kindness and hospitality—even
though he may have been delirious at first, yet
on his recovery refraining from asking to whom
he was so greatly indebted, and learning all about
him in order that at the earliest opportunity he
might express his great obligations in the most
fitting manner. The defendant says, ‘I was
deprived of the opportunity of making those
inquiries, because when I went on shore the
second time with the intention of seeing the
captain again. I met a man who offered me service
in the interior of the country. I went with him
to his hotel, and so lost sight of the captain.’
But the question is, would not a man who had
been saved from shipwreck and had received so
much kindness, knowing that the captain was on
■Shore, and that he must return to his vessel from
the same place at which he had landed, be likely
to go back to the landing-place to the man who
saved him and say, ‘ Captain, I am come to say
‘ Good-by ’ — I have had an employment offered
to me, and as I have no immediate means of
returning to my own country, I have accepted it.
But I could not go away without coming to thank
you for the great kindness you have shown me ’ ?
Bat he does no such thing; he goes away without
making the least effort to seethe man who had
saved him. Is that in itself probable, or may the
defendant’s account of the matter have been the
result of the fact that he did not know the name
of the vessel or of the captain ? If the defendant
at once admitted that he went to take leave of
the captain, then it would be natural to say he
could not have done so without asking, if he did
not know before, the name of the captain and of
the ship, where they had come from, and so on.
Well, under these circumstances, it is natural to
say it is impossible the story can be true that he
could have been saved by the vessel without
knowing its name, and therefore if he was saved
at all the vessel must have been the Osprey.
Well, then, it was said on the other side, ‘ Let
us make a search. The arrival of a ship having
shipwrecked persons on board must have been
known, and there must be some record of it at
Melbourne.’ They search, and no such record is
found. That is a strong point in the case for the
prosecution. The defendant meets it by saying
that there was an Osprey at Melbourne at the time,
that it is a mistake to suppose there was not,
and he produces evidence to that effect. But then
the answer is, ‘ Well and good, but you don’t show
us that the Osprey which you say was at Mel-
bourne at the time brought a shipwreked crew,
and it is impossible that the Osprey could have
come into Melbourne without its being known at
the Custom-house and by persons whose duty it
was to ascertain the name of everybody who came
into port, among others the nautical reporters of
the newspapers, whose business it was to get an
account of any particulars of interest which might
have happened to a vessel on her voyage, such as
the picking up of a shipwrecked crew with a
young gentleman of position and distinction
among them.’ It is said, on the other hand, that
the reason why it was not known was that, owing
to the gold fever and the number of ships bringing
multitudes of passengers eager to rush off to the


goldfields, the confusion at Melbourne was 30 great
that the staif of the Custom-house and the local
police were quite inadequate to the occasion. And
they bring a considerable body of evidence on the
subject. It is met by another body of evidence to
show that, though the gold fever did exist, it had
to a great extent subsided, and that the regula-
tions of the port might be and were, in point of
fact, enforced. With respect to this matter, the
first thing to be considered is whether the evidence
lias established to your satisfaction the presence of
an Osprey in the port at the time ? What con-
sequences will flow from it is another question.
You have to inquire whether, besides the Glasgow
Osprey of 66 tons, there was another vessel named
the Osprey in the port of Melbourne; for the de-
fence has not only adopted the impression that the
vessel which is said to have saved Roger Ticli-
borne was named the Osprey, but has assumed it
as a fact. We must, therefore, inquire whether
there, was any vessel called the Osprey at that
time in the port of Melbourne, and we must go
further and see whether the Osprey which may be
so found wiil adapt itself to the defendant’s story.
He says, ‘ I arrived in an Osprey on or about the
of July. T landed the day after with the
captain, and returned on board with him for the
night. I landed with him a second time, and I
returned with him no more. I left all the men
who were wrecked with me behind me on board
the vessel.’ Now, it would be very hard to tie
down the defendant in this matter rigorously to
an exact or precise date. Because ho has said the
-4th of July, I don’t think we are entitled to say,
If you cannot show that at that time an Osprey
arrived we must assume there was no Osprey.’
1 hat would be too hard. But, on the other hand,
we must consider not only whether there was at
Melbourne at the time a vessel called the Osprey,
but whether it arrived about the 24th of July, and
whether it agrees otherwise in substance with the
stoiy of the defendant. You may be of opinion
that the evidence establishes that there was an
Osprey; but you will have to consider whether
the vessel arrived before or after the time the de-
fendant landed at Melbourne, having picked up a
shipwrecked crew off the coast of Brazil.
Ihe witnesses for the defence on this part of
the case are as follow. A man named Nash states
that he was in Melbourne in July, 1854; that he
went on board a vessel called the Osprey. The
vessel was three-masted, originally bark-rigged,
but she had no yard on her foremast when he
saw her. fehe was painted black, was round-
sterned, and nearer 300 than 400 tons burden.
He is not certain whether he saw her name on
her quarter or stem, but believes she was a vessel
from Baltimore. He swears he saw the word
Baltimore ’ somewhere on tho vessel. It appears
that he had said a moment before, * I think I saw
Baltimore on the vessel;’ but now he says he is
sure he saw it. Now, with respect to this we
have evidence as to the vessels named Osprev in
the American mercantile marine.and the evidence
is very strong that there was no vessel named
Osprey from Baltimore.
I he next witness is a man named Goodger, who
says he saw people landed as a shipwrecked crew.
He represents them as dressed in what may be
called ‘go-ashore’ clothes. They had on blue
jerseys and white trousers, and had with them
sailors’ bags, which appeared to be full. There
was with them a landsman, not dressed in nau
Heal clothes, who was presented to you as Ro<*er
Tichhorne by the defendant’s counsel. This looks
very like the man you want to get, except that
there are some difficulties about it. In the first
place, the men saved from the Bella had nothing
but the clothes they had on; they could not be
men dressed out in holyday attire, and who had
got full bags. That would hardly square with the
men who had been saved. Then there is the
landsman That could not be the defendant,
because the defendant, as he tells us, went on
shore with the captain, leaving the seven or
eight other men, said to have been saved, with
him behind. Therefore, that won’t do Now
this man may be telling the truth, but his evi-
dence as to date is of the most unsatisfactory
character. He gives the 24th of July as the date,
and being asked whether there was anything to
fix it in his memory, he cannot say there is, and
when asked again, ‘Why do you say it?’ his
answer is ‘ Because Ido say it.’ A man must have
a very extraordinary memory indeed who, at such
a distance of time is able to fix a particular date
toi an event of that kind without any special
reason for it.
The next witness is a Mr. Russell, a very dif-
ferent man indeed. Mr. Russell is a merchant,
who, in 1854, came from Sydney to Melbourne on
business. He said that a small vessel called the
Osprey was for sale, and he came from Sydney to
look at her. Having gone on board the small
Osprey, he is told there is, by an odd coincidence,
another larger vessel called the Osprey close by
and curiosity induces him to look at her. He
describes her as a vessel between 300 and 500
tons, does not recollect whether she had any
colours flying; she had, he thinks, a round stern;
and then he tells an important fact, and here he
differs from other witnesses. To the best of his
recollection she had a white figure-head, a bird
representing the Osprey. She had three masts,
she was what is generally called a three-masted
schooner or Baltimore clipper. Now, that this
gentleman did go on board the vessel one cannot
doubt. He is asked whether it may not have
been in May or June. But he says ‘No,’ inas-
much as he went on board the smaller Osprey, it
must have been later. And he is quite rmht
because the smaller Osprey did not arrive until
the 27th of July. Therefore, we have it proved
by this gentleman that there was an Osprey in
the port, and this circumstance give the defend
ant’s story a degree of probability to which, from
the other evidence, it is not entitled.
Another witness, Mr. Liardet, tells us he came
to Melbourne in July, 1854, and when he arrived
he saw an Osprey there. He says that on the
following morning, being out in a boat belonging
to his brother-in-law, who was the principal Emi-
gration Commissioner in Melbourne, his attention
was directed to a particular vessel which turned
out afterwards to be the Osprey, a very fine-
looking craft. He went on board, when he saw
only one or _ two persons, and somehow or other
they told lnm she came from South America.
Ihe men looked like sailors. No doubt this gen-
leman did go on board the vessel, which he was
told was the Osprey, and had come from South
America; but with respect to the date it turns
out lie is under a deep misapprehension. It was
not until the ensuing year that he could have
been in Melbourne at all, because he fixes the date
with respect to a particular circumstance. He
says he knows when it was because it was con-
temporaneous with the departure of Sir Charles
litzroy from Sydney. Having about that time
ootained a month’s leave of absence from Sir


Charles Fitzroy, who was Governor of New South
Wales, he went to Meluourne. But we have Mr.
and Mrs. Marsh, who loft Sydney in the same
vessel as Sir Charles Fitzroy, proving a very dif-
ferent thing. Mr. Marsh came over as a com-
missioner from Sydney to the Paris Exhibition of
1855; and not only is the fact fixed in that way,
but Mrs. Marsh keeps a diary, which she produces,
and shows that they left Sydney on the 27th of
January, 1855. It is thus proved to demonstra-
tion that Mr. Liardet could not have been in
Melbourne and gone on board the Osprey in 1854.
Then there is a witness named Loskhart, who
was in the service of a large firm, Lumsden and
Lockhart, who had 200 ships on their books which
they supplied with stores. He speaks to a square-
built vessel with two or three masts, a good bit
off, being pointed out to him, which was said to
have picked up some shipwrecked men, and as he
was going from Williamstown to Sandridge he
saw certain men dressed as sailors, who were
going to Melbourne, but he did not see any boxes
or bags with them. He said he believed it was in
June, July, or August, but on a former occasion
he thought it might have been May, June, or
July. Being pressed by Mr. Hawkins he could
not get easily out of it. He said he knew it was
some months previous to October. It was summer
in that country, and it was very hot weather.
The seasons are the reverse of what they are in
this country. July is winter there. When
asked, ‘ Are .you sure it was one of those months ?’
he says,‘No, I went up the country in October,
and it was fearfully hot at that time.’ After-
wards he says, ‘ It was two months prior to the 7th
of September,’ and then he produced a piece of
parchment which related to a solemn event in
which he was interested, which happened on the
7th of September. When asked, ‘ You say it was
two months prior to the 7th of September ?’ his
answer is, ‘You may make it two months before
or two months later, as you please.’ Two months
before the 7th of September would take us back
to the 7th of July, which would make it too
early, and though I don’t want to tie a man down
too closely to dates, still it must not be left out of
sight that what we are dealing with now is a
matter of dates.
Then there is a witness named Norman, who
was at Melbourne in 1854. He says he was at
Sandridge in July in that year and met three
American sailors, one of whom he had himself
sailed with from America previously, and whom
he knew again. He took boat and went on board
■a ship named the Osprey, a three-masted schooner,
painted black. He is not certain whether she had
a- house on deck. ‘ The sailors,’ he says, ‘ went
on board the Osprey, and I went on board with
them. I remained on board perhaps an hour,
ihey went on board the Osprey to seek for their
mates. Witness says they went back as they
came. ‘I kept them two or three days at my
house. I. gave them food and some clothes, be-
cause they were destitute.’ They afterwards took
ship to Oallao. You see, gentlemen, this is the
tmrd shipwreck. We have now three sets of
Ospreys the men who go on shore in blue Jer-
seys and white trousers ; the sailors who were in
a low condition, without bags or boxes ; and now
the third set, who have mates, and who are taken
on shore by the last witness, men whom he feeds
and clothes, and whom he knows to havo em-
barked on board an outbound ship for Callao,
this is what a frenchman would call evibarras de
viehcdsvts —to have thiee Ospreys to choose from- -
but Dr. Kenealy says, ‘ What is that to me ? I
t .off three Ospreys at your feet. Take your
eli hce.’ Well, gentlemen, that is all very good ;
but when you have to select an Osprey which saved
the defendant and the shipwrecked crew you must
take care to select the right one, and it must
bring with it a crew that corresponds with the
crew which was saved with the defendant.
Then there is the witness Tizard, who says that
towards the latter end of July, having arrived in
the Queen of the South, he saw a three-masted
schooner lying in Hobson’s Bay. She must have
been a bark dismantled, or with yards down. She
was painted dark, either black or a dark green.
She was called the Osprey. He says ‘ I won’t be
sure the name was painted on the quarter. I took
her to be an American ship at the distance I was,
which was about a quarter of a mile from her.
We were two or three days in the bay, when she
came in. I saw the Comet come alongside the
Osprey; the Comet then came alongside us, and
she made a statement with respect to the Osprey
which fixed the fact that she was the Osprey in
-my recollection.’ This witness speaks very posi-
tively about the name of the vessel. He says, ‘ I
saw her name upon her somewhere I am sure.
The vessel had a round stern. The name was on
both quarters.’ Being asked whether He could
make out where she hailed from, he answers, 4 1
did not look.’ He remembers another ship,
which was there at the same time— the Royal
Charter.
Then there is another witness, who was in the
employ of some auctioneers at Melbourne, and who
says that about September his employers received
a quantity of general goods in store marked
* Osprey,’ which had been brought up to Mel-
bourne. They were American goods, consisting
of lobster cases, oyster cases, preserved fruits,
windows and doors for houses, &c. Those goods
were afterwards sold out of the warehouse of his
employers. He further states that in September
he was asked to subscribe for some shipwrecked
sailors, and he did so. He states also that a year
or two later, iu 1850 or 1857, he being then in the
employ of another firm called Throgmorton, a
vessel called the Osprey came into Mr. Throg-
morton’s possession as a dismantled vessel. He
represents that the vessel had evidently been
originally of American build; they had taken her
masts out of her and cut her down to her bul-
warks, so as to convert her from a ship into a
lighter, and she was used for the purpose of con-
veying goods from Hobson’s Bay to Melbourne.
When he first saw her, he says, there was no
name upon her, but when she was going up the
river they used to chalk on her the name
‘ Osprey,’ and that the goods had the same name
branded on them.
Then there is John Richards, a sailor on board
the boat belonging to the quarantine establish-
ment. He was in the habit of rowing the medical
officer whose duty it was to see that there was no
danger of infection coming into the harbour. He
tells us that about the middle of 1854 he took the
doctor on board a vessel which had the name
‘Osprey’ upon her quarter or stern. He does
not remember the month. She was of foreign
build, either American or Norwegian. She was
about 300 tons burden, had three masts, and was
painted black. With regard to her nationality,
it was remarked by one of the jury that she could
not have been of Norwegian build or she would
not have been called the Osprey. But the suppo-
sition is that the sLip was originally Swedish,


according to Luie, and that being purchased
an American firm she had her name changed fro
the Helvetia to the Osprey. This man Richari
who is a credible witness, fixes the date in th
way. He says he got a silver-gilt cup in Januai
1854, and four or five months afterwards he wen
alongside. But that would be too early for t'
arrival of the vessel which picked up the crew
the Brazilian coast.
There is one more witness, Mr. Harrison, wh
went out in the Queen of the South, and wh
states that he arrived on the 11th of July. ]
the latter part of that month he met, he say
with a ship called the Osprey, with three mas
and white deck-house. This gentleman was, '
think, rather a flippant witness, because, as h
tells us, he thought it necessary to come forwarc
in consequence of the evidence of Mr. Childer
with respect to the gold fever with which he wa
dissatisfied. As to the ship, he says her hi as'
were all standing, there were yards to the masts
she was rigged as a schooner, whatever might hav
been the state of her foremast.
Then, another witness, George Bell, says tha
he arrived in Melbourne in 1854, he went to cer
tain diggings, but was back in Melbourne in th
beginning of July. He came there to spent
his mo n fey and enjoy himself, like some of th
other witnesses He amused himself by sailing ant
rowing in the bay. His attention was called to
vessel which looked like a slaver. Her nam
was painted on her quarters ; it was the Osprey
He asked about her figurehead, but could no
give a description of it, as he never went on boart
the vessel.
Then we have Captain Browne, who says ther
was a bark called the Osprey at Rio in 1853, an
American vessel. Having heard that the Bella
was lost, it occurred to him that, from the course
which the Osprey would take sailing from a por
in America to Australia, she was likely to pass
over the spot where the Bella had foundered anc
to pick up the crew. A strange speculation to
enter into the mind of any one, even if there ’har
been no other evidence to detract from the credi
bility of his evidence.
A Juror.—Would a vessel sailing from Rio to
Australia sail northwards or southwards ?
The Lord Chief Justice. —Southwards.
The Juror.—But the Bella was going to New
York; therefore she would sail northwards.
The Lord Chief Justice.— That is so; but
don’t think the evidence of Captain Browne on
this point very important. No doubt it was a very
considerable difficulty in the way of the plaintiff’s
case in the former trial that no Osprey could be
found. The defence was able to say ‘We have
searched the Custom-house at Melbourne and
found no trace of an Osprey at that time.’ But
the difficulty then felt would be doubtless re-
moved if you were satisfied that there was an
Osprey, or more than one Osprey at this parti-
cular conjuncture at Melbourne. It gets rid of
that very substantial difficulty with which the
defendant’s case had formerly to contend. But it
all depends on this, whether there was an Osprey
there concurrently with the time at which, if he
landed at all after having been saved from the
Bella, the defendant must have landed at Mel-
bourne. It would be perfectly useless to make out
that there was an Osprey there in the month of
June or the month of September. A vessel may be
expected, except under extraordinary circum-
stances, to perform in a given time a voyage
between the spot where the Bella went down and
the port of Melbourne, find muking - allowance
for the variations which will occur between on
voyage and another, you will bring it withi
reasonable limits either as above or below th
common average, which I take to be about a thre
months’ voyage.
Let us ask ourselves whether the evidence lead
to the conclusion—first, that there was- an Osprey
and, secondly, that she was the vessel which coulc
by possibility have saved part of the crew of th
Bella. It is a startling fact that in the record
of the Custom-house at Melbourne during th
months of July and August no trace of the Osprey
is to be found. The records refer to no vessel o
that name except the little Osprey, a schooner o:
some 66 tons, which obviously could not be th
vessel described by the defendant. That was
vessel of some 400 or 500 tons burden, and is i
possible that she could have entered the port o
Melbourne and brought with her a shipwreckec
crew without the fact being known to the autho
rities and in someway placed on record ? On
behalf of the defendant it is urged that the por
of Melbourne was then in such a state of confusion
owing to the rush to the goldfields from all parts
of the world. However, Mr. Childers, who a-
the period referred to was at the head of the
Customs at Melbourne, says that, although
people were then flocking in large numbers to
the goldfields, yet the gold fever had in a con
siderable degree subsided, and there was nothing
to prevent the local regulations concerning the
registration of vessels from being carried out
Mr. Childers has been abused for coming forward
as a witness; but I think that anything more
uncalled for than that abuse cannot possibly be
conceived. I cannot understand why, when a
prosecution is instituted by the Government, a
member of the Government should not be called
upon to give what information he can in order to
elucidate the truth. In my opinion, Mr. Childers
would have been wanting in his duty, when called
upon to give evidence, if he had declined from a
false feeling of delicacy to come forward. How-
ever, Mr. Childers did come forward in this case,
and gave us all the information in his power.
His statement was corroborated by other evidence,
especially by that of Mr. Marshall, who said that
at the period in question there was no difficulty
in obtaining either Custom-house clerks or crews
to navigate vessels to England. The difficulty at
one time felt had then ceased to exist. I can
quite understand that, with every endeavour to.
carry out the local regulations, a crew of seven or
eight men who had been picked up at sea and
brought into the harbour might possibly escape
the vigilance of the authorities and succeed in
getting on shore without being noticed ; and it is.
also possible that no mention may have been
made by the captain about his having had those
supernumaries on board his ship.
But the real difficulty is with regard to the
ship itself. Here is a Custom-house establish-
ment on a large scale, and we are asked to believe
that a ship of 400 and 500 tons could come into.
Hobson’s Bay, lay there for weeks together, and
altogether elude the vigilance of the authorities.
That is a somewhat startling proposition to assert-
Would the Custom-house officers have allowed a
ship to lie there for a considerable time without
going on board of her ? And now I have to ask
you to consider whether, even if you should not
reject the evidence which tends to show that
there was an Osprey in the port, you will not
very much doubt that she came in the month of


July or August, and come to the conclusion that
she must have arrived at some antecedent period.
Unfortunately, the gentleman who went out to
Australia to ascertain from the records of the
Custom-house whether the Osprey came into
Melbourne only searched the books relating to
the particular period at which the defendant’s
Osprey is said to have arrived. I cannot help
thinking that if he had looked at the books of a
month or two before he might have found an
Osprey corresponding to one of the Ospreys which
bave been mentioned in this case.
A Juror.—l cannot reconcile the date with the
entry in the pocket-book that on the 3rd or 4th
of July he arrived in Hobart-town.
The Lord Chief Justice. —That is a matter to be
dealt with afterwards, when we come to consider
the pocket-book. I am now merely taking the
defendant’s own statement, and seeing how far the
evidence as to there being an Osprey in Hobson’s-
bay is consistent with his statement. Now, has
the defendant uniformly adhered to the statement
that the vessel which picked him up was the
Osprey ? Has he made that statement with such
a degree of certainty as to enable you to attach
to it the character of truth ? The first time he
ever mentioned the Osprey was on the occasion of
his being asked to make a declaration at Sydney.
On that occasion certain questions were put to
him in order to enable the solicitor to draw up
the declaration on the defendant’s behalf. Among
the questions put to him was the following:—
‘ What was the name of the ship that picked you
up ?’ and he answered without qualification, ‘ The
Osprey.’ ‘ What was the name of the captain ?’
He replied ‘ Owen,’ without any hestitation.
Now, when thus called upon he may either have
spoken truthfully from his recollection, or he may
have taken the name of the Osprey in order to
cover the imposture he proposed to carry into
effect. If he were not Roger Tickborne, and had
not been picked up by the Osprey, yet it would
be necessary, in order at some future time to make
his story plausible, that he should be prepared
with the name of the vessel|which, according to his
account, picked him up. If the story was a fiction,
either he would invent a name or pitch on a ship
with the name of which he had somehow or other
become acquainted. At all events, he unhesitat-
ingly gave the name of the Osprey. When after-
wards he came to England, one of the earliest
things he did was to go with his legal advisers to
Lloyd’s to ascertain particulars of any vessel called
the Osprey, although when interrogated on this
subject in his cross-examination in the Court of
Common Pleas, he steadfastly denied that he had
ever been at Lloyd’s at all. In the course of his
cross-examination, he was thus examined as to his
denial of being at Lloyd’s to inquire after the Bella,
as follows :
‘ How soon after your return to this country
did you go down to Lloyd’s?—l never went to
Lloyd’s to my knowledge; I do not even know
where it is. Will you swear you did not go down
to Lloyd’s and see some of Lloyd’s clerks, and look
at Lloyd’s books, soon after you came home?—l
did not. Did you not go to Lloyd’s twice over,
at an interval of two or three days, announcing
yourself as Sir Roger Tichborne, and making
searches in Lloyd’s books ?—I have no knowledge
of anything of the kind. Could you have done so
without your knowledge ?—I should think not;
therefore, not knowing it, I feel sure I was not
there. Will you swear on consideration?—Yes;
I will swear that I never was there. Do you
really mean to swear that you did not make
inquiry about the Osprey, the Bella, and other
vessels ?—No; probably some one went on my
behalf and not myself; I have no knowledge of
going. I think Mr. Holmes told me a search had
been made.’
At a later period in the same day a gentleman,
apparently one of the clerks from Lloyd’s, was
confronted with the Claimant, and the subject
was resumed:—
‘ I think I understood you to say you denied
being at Lloyd’s?—Yes. And did not know where
it was ? [The Attorney-General here desired the
clerk to stand up.] That is one of Lloyd’s men ;
will you swear in the presence of that gentleman
that you were not at Lloyd’s yourself making in-
quiries and having the books for three or four
years ?—I swear I have no recollection of being
there. You must recollect it ?—I do not believe
I ever was there. Will you swear you were not
at Lloyd’s for two or three hours having the
books out and making examinations with him ?
I certainly was not. I have never seen this gen-
tlemen to my knowledge. Will you swear you
were not ? —I swear I have no remembrance of
being at Lloyd’s. Ido not know where the place
is. Will you swear you were not ?—Really I do
not know. I have no recollection whatever.’
After a great number of similar questions and
answers the examination proceeded :
‘ I ask you in that gentleman’s presence, did you
yot yourself ask to see the books at Lloyd’s re-
lating to the Bella and the Osprey ?—I did
nothing of the kind. Upon your oath ?
Upon my solemn oath I never did. Did
Mr. Holmes in your presence ?—I do not
know; I cannot answer for him. In your
presence ?—Not in my hearing to my knowledge.
Not in your hearing to your knowledge ?—No ; I
have no recollection. Could he have asked with-
out your knowing ?—I have no recollection of be-
ing there. Will you swear he did not go with you
and ask in your presence to see the books relating
to the Bella and the Osprey ?—I have no recollec-
tion of his doing so. Will you swear he did not ?
—No, I will not swear he did not. Did you ever
go anywhere with Mr. Holmes to see any books
relating to the Bella or the Osprey ?—I do not
think I ever did. Cannot you be sure?—l cannot
be sure ; I have no recollection of seeing anybody.
You cannot be sure whether you ever went to a»
place to see the books about a ship in which you
were wrecked and a ship which picked you up ?
Ido not think I did. Will you swear you did
not ?—No, I will not swear I did not. What made
you Bay early in the day in positive terms that
you had not been there ?—Because I am under
that impression now. Will you swear it ? No ' T
I will not swear it. If that gentleman says it is
so, I dare say he has a good reason for saying it is-
so. I have no recollection of it. Did you not go
again after an interval of three or four days to
the same place for the same object and stay there
a considerable time ?—No, I did not. Will you
swear that ?—I will swear I have never been
twice. lam quite certain I have never been in
the place twice. That I swear. I might have for-
gotten having gone there once. I could not forget
twice.’
Next day the subject was resumed by the Attor-
ney-General, who asked him whether he had not
got at Lloyd’s certain particulars he had given as
to the boat of the Bella. He admitted that he.
had heard that the long boat was picked up on
26th of April, 1854, but not the other particulars.


* Will you swear you did not go to Lloyd’s and
Slave it brought under your notice ?—I swear I
■did not go to Lloyd’s, and that it never was
brought under my notice. The Attorney-General
then handed one of Lloyd’s books to the Claimant,
and said, pointing out an entry marked Now’
tell me, upon your solemn oath, did you not see
that, where the mark is ?—Upon my solemn oath
I never saw it; I never saw that book before;
I acknowledged a part of the boat being picked
up. Mr. Holmes told me my statement to him
had been corroborated. He had got news from
Bio that the boat had been picked up, &c. Will
you swear that he did not read you that passage
from Lloyd’s books ?—I swear ho never did read
any passage whatever out of any book at Lloyd’s.
Did you read any part of it ?—Yes- the first part
was read by Mr. Holmes. I cannot say anything
about this entry, because I know nothing about
it. Mr. Holmes told me he had received news
that a boat of the Bella had been picked up and
a barrel of biscuits found under her thwart. Will
you swear that you never went to Lloyd’s and
saw a number of those books?—l will swear I
never went to Lloyd’s and saw any of those
books.’
there was a good deal more cross-examination
ms to this, the drift of which was that in the view
of the prosecution it showed the origin of the
defendant’s statements as to the wreck and rescue.
Mr. Gardiner distinctly swore that he went down
with the defendant and Mr. Holmes, his legal
adviser, into the cellar at Lloyd’s in which the
books are carefully preserved. He said that they
searched in the books of the year 1854, and found
there was no Osprey except tho little schooner of
60 tons, which hail sailed from this country for
Australia in that year, and a three-masted
schooner, which could not have been tho vessel
referred to by the defendant. They then searched
lor the Bella, and ascertained all the particulars
relating to her, although I think there was no
entry as to her loss. The witness says they
remained searching for two hours, at the expira-
tion of which time Mr. Holmes remarked that
they could not stay any longer, as Sir Roger was
leaving for Paris.
Up to this time the defendant had stated with-
out any qualification that it was the Osprey
which had picked him up. On his voyage to
England he told Mr. Hobson the same thing when
he was talking about his resoue. But after hav-
ing made this search at Lloyd’s, and having found
there was no entry in the books to correspond in
point of the character of the ship, and in point of
time with his arrival, his confidence may have
been shaken in his recollection of the name of the
ship. At the same time, as he had said it was the
Osprey, it would be difficult altogether to abandon
that position. So we next get a qualified state-
ment, for when on his examination before Mr.
Roupell he is asked what was the name of the
vessel, his answer is not that it was the Osprey,
but ‘ I am under the impression that it was the
Osprey. Do you not know for certain?—No, I
■do Can you give us tho name of the
captain?—lt was Owen Lewis or Lewis Owen.’
He is asked further on the next day:— ‘ You said
yesterday you were under the impression that the
name of the vessel that saved you was tho Osprey
Cannot you be certain of the name of the vessel ?
—No, I cannot.’ During the defendant’s ex-
amination-in chief in the Court of Common Picas
this question is put to him by Mr. Giffard:
‘Now I will ask you what was, as far as you can
remember, the name of the vessel ?—My own
piossion is that it was the Osprey. Is that yo
impression still ?—lt is. Do you remember th
name of the captain ?—I don’t remember it di
tinctly, but it was either Lewis or Owen/
cioss-examination a matter of this importance
of fully gone into. He is asked :
‘ Do you recollect when you were picked up b
what, I think, you are under the impression wa
the Osprey, what sort of a vessel was she ?—SI
was a large vessel. Larger than the Bella (abou
4UO tons) ?—Yes, I should think she was large
than the Bella. Where did she come from; c
you know what was her port ?—I do not know
am sure what her port was. Was not the Osprc
of—something or other painted on her boats o
<lock ? Not that I recollects You were near]
three months on board, were you not ? I was
Did you never find out what port she hailed from
—No, I did not. Did you ever think to ask ?
v\ ell, I suppose not. Three months on board ?
Yes, three months on board, and ill very nearly th
whole time. But you never thought to ask whei
she came from ?—No, I did not. Nor, if I recol
lect right, to be quite sure even of the name o
the captain who saved you ?—I am still under th
impression his name is what I stated. What ?
Either Lewis Owen or Owen Lewis. But which
went first, you do not know ?—I do not. Did you
learn at all, can you tell me, whereabouts she
picked you up ?—Whereabouts in the sea ? Yes
in what latitude?—No. You never inquired o
tlie captain whereabouts you were when you were
picked up ?—No, I think not. What did you do
you went then by the name of Tichborne ?—Yes
I did. And were you known to be a young Eng
lish gentleman ?—I was, and treated as such
Did you live with the captain ? I did; that
was when I was able to go to the table. Canno
you recoileot for certain the name of the man
with whom you lived when you were able to
go to table for three months ?—I told you whai
was his name. Did you never find out from
him what port he belonged to, what he was
about, or what he was doing, or where he was going
? I did not. Was she a passenger ship or
what ?—There were passengers on board ; yes.
Could you give the name of any one of them ?
No, I cannot. Where were they going, do you
know ?—Where were they.going? Yes. They
were going to Melbourne. Where from, do you
know?—No, I do not know where from. Had
you not the curiosity to inquire where the pas-
sengers were going from and where they wore
going to?—Very probably I inquired, but I do
not recollect at the present time. This was three
months; Melipilla was three weeks. Did you
make any acquaintances or friends on board the
Osprey ? that three weeks was a great deal
more than the three years or three months that I
suffered there. So it seems. What I wanted to
know was did you in fact make any acquaintances
or friends on board the Osprey during the three
months?—l did not. Not a single one ?—I
might have made friends, but do not recollect
their names. You might or might not ?—I cer-
tainly was not enemies with them, if you ask
me that. I did not ask you that. I ask you
whether you made friends or became intimate ?
Not more than passing the time of day or the
weather.’
\ou will see from the evidence I have read to
you that that which was stated as a matter of
jertain knowledge at Melbourne was converted
into a very qualified statement in his examination


before Mr. Roupell, and also in his examination and
cross-examination in the Court of Common Pleas.
Bat we have a fact which is not at all unim-
portant as shaking one’s confidence in the state-
ment of the defendant either that the Osprey
picked him up or that he believed the Osprey to
be the name of the vessel. In 1868 we find him
entirely giving up the Osprey and taking to the
Themis as the vessel which saved him. But there
is a difficulty before we come to that. You may be
of opinion, judging from the whole body of evi-
dence which is before you, that there was an
Osprey in the port of Melbourne—nay, you may
even be of opinion that the Osprey did bring in a
shipwrecked crew which she had picked up some-
where. Taking it for granted that there was an
Osprey, she may have come in, but without a ship-
wrecked crew, or another ship may have brought
in some other crew, or the Osprey may have
brought a crew which was not the Bella’s crew-, and
it is more probable, though she brought in a crew,
that it was not the crew of the Bella. Again, it
might be the crew, but it does not follow that
therefore the defendant is Roger Tichborne.
Now, let us ask ourselves whether there is any
reasonable probability of the Osprey having picked
up and brought into Melbourne the shipwrecked
crew of the Bella. According to the account given
by the defendant, there were six or eight passen-
gers on board. The Osprey was a vessel of 400 or
500 tons, she had a captain and officers and a crew
of 17 or 18 men; so that, including the eight
shipwrecked men, there were 28 or 29 souls on
board. Yet from that hour to the present no per-
son has come forward—with a single exception,
which I will notice by-and-by—to say either that
he belonged to the Osprey or that he was present
when a portion of the Bella’s crew were picked up.
The story of the Tichborne case, I may say, is
known in all parts of the globe, except, perhaps,
among savage tribes and nations. Certainly
wherever a newspaper in the English language cir-
culates or penetrates, wherever the English lan-
guage is spoken, the story of the trial must have
beoome as familiar to men’s minds as ‘ household
words;’ and yet, although this case has been
pending for years, never, with one exception, has
a human being come forward to say, ‘ I was either
one of the Bella’s crew,’ or ‘ I was on board the
ship which saved a portion of the Bella’s crew, and
therefore I will depose to the facts which are es-
sential to the elucidation of the truth and to the
securing of justice in this case.’ Communications
have been made without end from all parts of the
world. Heaps of letters have been received on
both sides as to what could be said on the subject,
but no one to whose testimony the slightest value
can be attached has come forward as a passenger
or officer of the ship to vouch for the statement
that although the Bella foundered in the ocean
and lies buried in the depths of it, yet some por-
tion of her crew were rescued and taken to Mel-
bourne. In weighing the facts you must include
the cogent and weighty fact that nobody, with
one exception, has ever come forward to vouch
for the truth of the story told by the defendant.
"With regard to the one person who has come
forward, I may say on the evidence before us, and
without waiting to prejudge any evidence which
may be taken elsewhere, that his testimony is
false and perjured. For the purpose of this trial,
after what has occurred, and after the unqualified
avowal of the defendant’s counsel of his utter
-disbelief in the particulars of that man’s story, we
must take it that the evidence he gave was per-
jured evidence. If Luie’s tale is false, the de-
fendant must know it to be so. This is, indeed,
too plain to admit of any reasonable doubt. Luie
says:—‘l was on board the vessel that picked
you up; I watched over you, nursed and dressed
you from day to day when you were as helpless
as a child ; and I remind you of the circumstance
that I have crooked fingers which you used to ob-
serve when I washed you.’ If tbe defendant sits
by and allows a statement of that kind to be
made on oath,you may feel that it reflects on him,
and you may naturally infer that it he will sanc-
tion fraud and falsehood in another person he
may not shrink from doing something of the kind
himself. At the same time, it does not neces-
sarily follow that the whole case is a tissue of
falsehood and fraud.
We now come to another part of the case. In
July, 1868, a man named Smith, who had been on
board a ship called the Themis, which arrived in
Hobson’s Bay in July, 1854, made some communi-
cation to the owners of the vessel with reference to
-having picked up a shipwrecked crew, and this
induced the owners of the Themis to communicate
by telegraph with Mr. Holmes, who at that time
was attorney for the defendant. He immediately
sent down an agent named Bridger to search the
books of the firm, Messrs, de Wolfe, to look at the
log of the Themis, and tc ascertain whether that
vessel had picked up any shipwrecked crew. The
defendant goes down himself, and writes to Mr.
Rous saying ho was now satisfied that the Themis
was the ship that saved him. He goes forthwith
to Liverpool and with Mr. Bridger examines the
log of the Themis. For a time they seem to have
entertained the notion that the circumstances
connected with that ship would square with the
representations of the defendant as to his having
been brought into Melbourne, but when the log-
book is examined they cannot find any entry about
a crew being picked up. Now, according to the
evidence of all nautical men, such a circumstance
would be certain to be entered in the log, because
when any ship’s crew is picked up the owners of
the vessel pic ring them up become entitled to the
cost of maintaining such sailors while on board
the vessel. Well, although there was no such
entry in the log of the Themis, another entry was
discovered which it was thought might suit.
It appears that when the Themis arrived at
Melbourne she had on board as a passenger a
young man who in point of age and appearance
might have agreed with Roger Tichborne. Upon
this fact Mr. Bridger and the defendant appear to
have fastened. The defendant saw the owner,
and in the course of a conversation with him gave
him a most remarkably acourate description of the
Themis and of the office of the firm in Melbourne.
It turns out, however, that the young man sup-
posed to have been shipwrecked was an ordinary
passenger after all, and the only passenger the
ship carried to Melbourne. And now comes the
curious part of the story. As long as the defen-
dant was going upon the statement that the
Themis was the vessel, and that he was the pas-
senger who was taken by the captain to the office
of the agents of the ship at Melbourne, he pro-
fessed to have a perfect knowledge of where that
office was; but he abandoned tbe Themis alto-
gether, and between the time of his examination
before Mr. Roupell and his examination in the
Common Pleas he reverts to the former statement
relating to the Osprey, and then we have a


singular change and adaptation of his recollection
to toe new state of circumstances.
. When he reverts to the Osprey he is in total
ignorance of what the place was to which the
captain took him. He believed the captain took
mm to the custom-house, and afterwards to
another place, but he did not know what place it
was. That, gentlemen, is a remarkable circum-
stance. Another remarkable circumstance is that
when the defendant first mentioned the Osprey
lie did not say anything about her being an
American ship, but after the search at Lloyd’s
when an English Osprey could not be found to’
meet the requirements of the case, the suggestion
was first made that the Osprey was an American
ship. Now, some of his witnesses say it was an
American vessel, and if we could have found an
American vessel corresponding with this Osprey
we shouid have been relieved of much difficulty
the genera l register kept at Washington of
ail the ships in the American mercantile marine
has been searched by Mr. Purcell, who tells us he
could find no vessel called the Osprey with the
exception of the New Bedford Osprey, which
could not have been the Osprey which arrived at
Melbourne, because she never went there, and
because it is known that in 1554 she was in other
parts oi the world. In addition to that we kappei
e that r* ains ha ve been taken on the part
ot the defence to support the evidence of Luie
and to ascertain whether no trace could be found
ot an American Osprey other than the New Bed-
ford Osprey, which clearly would not do. These
endeavours also failed. lam quite sure that in-
defatigible gentleman, Mr. Whalley—who has
taken such trouble in his behalf, and who has
been so anxious to support Luie—if he had dis-
covered any trace of an American Osprey which
would fat m the case, he would at once have told
jIV. If ’ h° wevei > the Osprey falls to the
giound the case of the defendant does not neces-
sanly fall with it, because he may have been
taken to Meibourne by another ship, though there
is still the difficulty that it is in the highest
degree improbable that he should not be able to
state the name of the captain. On Friday I shall
enter upon a very interesting subject—the life of
the defendant in Australia.
+n A^ Ur °£~iP ld , not the Baltimore Osprey and
ship? eW Bedford 0s P re y tui 'b out to be the same
The Lord Chief Justice. —Yes.
Sixth Day. Friday , February 6, 1874.
Gentlemen,—lt has occurred to me that in mv
H $* to detain you beyond the appointed
f,I i ff d ! S f a I Idld not lay before you as
fully as I ou g ht to have done the different views
which might be taken in reference to the V oZ
criw to BP . r % haVlU ° brought a shipwrecked
ZZJi I J obs T on ’ s £a y at the time stated by the
defendant. I shall endeavour very succinctly to
place before you the different speculations which
have occurred to my mind on the subject. In the
fast place it is possible that there may at the
t me named have been an Osprey in Hobson’s
Bay, and it is possible that that Osprey may have
brought in a shipwrecked crew, and yet that they
may not have been the crew of the Bella. When
long wiTf circumstances under which the
upwards if n\ Be f a Was discovered-bottom
fe P rmce if f f l ' yOU to say whether the in-
+U D ° t * hat they could not have been the
authorities 6 been told Usby nauti cal
norities that the circumstances warrant the
sjua r^rhafbo 116 Belk W • “* d ° Wn in a sudden
snediLi™ ’«??!■- again, is mere matter of
bmn ff 18 Possible that the Osprey
brought in a portion of the crew of the Bella
Kot 6 rV P h h OUt ° f the Smaller boat > “d /et that
Itoger Tichborne was not among them. The pro-
thiftha W 7 be tbe otber Way - We are told
tnat the ordinary course, and the one likely to be
pass S e U nfei W wfh h' etbat Cap ? ain would take his
one thft wT th f m 5 and cortainly ifc would strike
one that when there were two boats the passenger
would naturally desire to cling to theLaptafn
who was in the large boat, having with him charts
and compass Here, again, we are d.aling in pro!
andefthff’ at f Ugh it; is hardly probable that,
. “ d ® r , the , Clrsa,u stance, Roger would be in the
am?wl and hff 1 f r 0at ’ yet ifc is a Possible thing,
possibL atthG Wb ° le CaS6in aU itS
Melbo t „ e rn en -ff oger T ichbornewas broa ght into
defemW i L 8 “ eces sarily follow that the
relieve tbf lio ° er }\f ho ™e- No doubt it would
relieve the case of the defendant from a vast
amount of difficulty which now attaches to it, but
it would leave the other and ascertained and
admitted facts of the case standing and untouched.
Vve must deal with these possibilities simply
matters to be considered in the cause, and not
being conclusive one way or the other. You ma
be of opinion that the weight of probability
against the proposition that the crew of the Bella
second boat was ever picked up at all; still les
that it was picked up by the Osprey, and still les
that iioger Tichborne was among them. Th
weight of probability may be all one way, but s
long as there is a possibility the other way, tha
possibility becomes an element for consideration
in the cause. The statement of the defendan
may be perfectly true or it may be perfectly false
and when I advert to those speculative matters
all 1 mean is that they are things which, in addi
tion to the facts of the case, are to be taken into
account, but certainly not as being conclusive on
either side.
Suppose you had come to the conclusion that
Koger Tmhborne had been brought into Melbourne,
but that all the other facts of the case preponder-
ated against the defendant. We should have, as
sensible men, to seek some solution of the diffi-
culty presented by the fact of the disappearance
of Koger Ixchborne. He may have died and been
borne to an obscure and unknown grave. It may
be asked, How did the defendant-come to put for-
ward the name of the Osprey as the vessel that
saved him ? If the statement were true, it was
natural that he should have known and stated the
tact, it, on the other hand, it was not true, then
the defendant would know it would never do to
say ne did not know the name of the vessel that
saved him; he would have to seek forsome vessel.
Suppose that in his numerous wanderings he had
fallen m with some of the Osprey’s crew. Sup-
pose that some of the Bella’s or of the Osprey’s
crews did escape to the diggings, the story of the
loss of the Bella and the single passenger would
no doubt be often told in the tents of the diggers,
or around the camp fires of the stock-drivers, of
which we have heard so much in the course of the
defence; and if there should be a man in those


parties disposed to take up those facts thuf
brought to his knowledge, and set himsel
up as the lost passenger, that is just a conjec-
ture which may be taken by you into consideration.
In like manner Roger Tichborne may have landed,
and then, years afterwards, finding that Roger
Tichborne never comes forward, some other person
who had learnt the facts and concluded that Roger
Tichborne, not having been heard of during all
those years, must be dead, may have been led to
assume his name. I am merely putting these
things as possibilities, to which you should look if
you are of opinion that Roger Tichborne landed,
but that the story told by the defendant cannot
be true.
There is one other thing which I must mention
before quitting the subject of the Osprey. I have
alluded to one or two difficulties arising from the
inability of the defendant to tell us things con-
nected with the Bella and the Osprey which we
might have expected him to have known. I
pointed out the difficulty arising from his want of
knowledge as to the name of the ship or captain.
But another difficulty arises from his want of
knowledge to which your attention should be.
directed. One would naturally have expected
that the defendant, if he were Roger Richborne,
would have been able to give some account of his
companions in misfortune who were saved from
the shipwreck, who suffered privation with him in
the open boat, and who were saved with him. It
would have been absurd to suppose that a pas-
senger who had been only three days in a ship,
especially if he were, as described, in a condition
of drunkenness during the whole of that time,
would know the names of the crew; but it be-
comes a very different thing when the man is
launched in an open boat with seven or eight men
and goes through peril and suffering with them.
He would then be thrown into their close com-
pany, and have heard their names as they spoke
to each other; and you would naturally expect
that he would take an interest in them, have
talked with them, and have learnt the names by
which they were called; and he might in the same
way have taken an interest in the men after they
were picked up, and have made inquiries and
learnt who they were, and more especially if he
was three months with them on board the Osprey.
Would he not have inquired who they were—
whether they were family men, and whether they
had the means of communicating with those who
were so deeply interested in their fate and safety ?
You would therefore expect that the defendant
would have been able to tell you, if not the names
of all, at least the names of one or two of the per-
sons who were associated with him in such strange
and adventurous circumstances.
The defendant may have felt that, for he pro-
fessed to know the names at one time. He not
only stated he did to Mr. Hopkins, but he did so
when under examination upon oath. It appears
that there -was a young man named Evans on
board who was apprenticed, but whose name was
not among the list of the crew, and he was a rela-
tive of a Mr. Killey, who wrs part owner of the
vessel. When Mr. Killey heard of the claim made
by the defendant, and the assertion that some of
the crew of the Bella were saved, he naturally
inquired of Mr. Hopkins whether his kinsman
was among those who were picked up, and Mr.
Hopkins wrote to him a letter, which was evi-
dently dictated by the defendant. Before I read
the letter let me call your attention to the evi-
dence of the defendant on the subject. He is
asked:—
‘ During any portion of the year 1867, what in-
formation had you as to any of the crew of the
Bella being saved ?—There was a report, I believe,
of three or four of them saved. . . . Did you
hear their names ?—I believe I did at the time.
At the time ? Do you remember them ?—No, I
do not. Did you make no note of them ?—I
hardly ever made a note in my life. You told us
you kept a diary from 1852?—Yes, that is so; I
am speaking of since I have been in England.
Cannot you tell us the names, how many the
reports referred to, and what names they were—
people who, according to you, were wrecked with
you, and were three days and nights in an open
boat, who were suffering the extremities of danger
in the Atlantic, and three months in another ves-
sel going to Australia—to Melbourne ? Do you
not remember the names ?—I do not remember
the name of one of them. Had you not the
curiosity to try to find out about them, what their
names were ?—Yes, I have seen their names since.
Can you give me their names ?—No, I cannot.
Cannot you give me one name ?•—I could not give
you half a one; I have no recollection ; Ido not
recollect any one name, or a portion of a name.
The reports you say you had heard were that
three or four were saved?—Yes, I have an im-
pression that was so. That is your impression.
Was it so small a matter, the saving of a part of
the crew of the Bella, that you had been ship-
wrecked with, that you can only give me the im-
pression?—l do not remember what happened
three or four years ago. Cau you tell me any
single fragment of a name, any one name now?—
I dare say I could if I collected my thoughts to-
gether. Just collect your thoughts, and give me one
name ?—No, I cannot think of a name just when
I want it. Just give me one name ?—I will give
you the whole of the names to-morrow if you want
them. We will have them, please, to-morrow, if
you will be so good as to furnish me with the
names ?—lt is very easy to get them.
‘ How will you be able to give me the names
to-morrow, if you cannot give me them now ?—I
will cause inquiries to be made to ascertain what
the names were. From whom shall you ascertain
that ?—From my solicitors, of course. The solici-
tors know it, do they?—l should think so. You
should think so ? Have you any doubt that they
know ? —No, I have no doubt whatever. How
long do you think they have known ?—What is it
lam asked now ? How long do you think your
solicitors have known the names of the survivors
of the Bella—some months ? —I did not say the
survivors; I thought you said the crew. Well,
the crew ? The survivors are what I want—the
names of the survivors. People who were down
below at the bottom of the Atlantic ; that is not
of the slightest use ?—Not at all. Do you know
the names of any of the survivors ?—I cannot say
that I do. Did you ever ?—Did I ever ? Yes, of
course I did. The names of the survivors ?—Yes.
When did you forget thorn ?—I forget them now.
Do you think you will remember them by to-
morrow ?—Very probably I should —some of them.
I will ask you. Perhaps you will write them
down, and let me have them ?—I will try my best
endeavours. Just see now if you can give me one
or two names, and you can give me the rest to-
morrow ?—I am trying if I can think of them. At
times I can think of them easy enough. I cannot
now. ... I think I can give you the name of


one—Hivvins. What did you say?—l am not
aware I said anything. It is suggested to me I
did not repeat it correctly. What name did you
give me ?—Evans ? Did you ever give anyone
this name? Do you recollect a man of the name
of Pebbles ?—I believe I did give that as one of
the names. As one of the names of the survivors
‘lid you ?—I think so. To Mr. Hopkins ?—I do
not know whether I gave it to Mr. Hopkins or
not. You gave it, at all events. Was he the
second mate and carpenter ?—He was the car-
penter, I think. Pebbles second mate and car-
penter. Do you recollect that Pebbles was the
second mate of the Bella, and was one of the
survivors saved with you?—l cannot say for a
certainty; I faucy that is one of the names.’
Now here is the letter which Mr. Hopkins
wrote to Mr. Killey from information given to
him by the defendant:—
‘ A Ires ford, 10 th Feb., 1867.
‘ Dea : r Sir »—I gladly give you all the in-
formation I can, in reply to your note of inquiry
and as Sir Roger Charles Tichborne is at present
a guest in my house, I am enabled to do so.
The wreck of the Bella took place four days
after the ship sailed from Rio. In this time Sir
Roger could not, of course, be acquainted with the
names of the crew, and can only speak of those
who were in the same boat with him after the
wreck. He names the following (you must, of
course, make allowance for my spelling the
names):— °
Sheers, Williams, Dobbin, Pebbles, second
mate and carpenter; Yankee —nickname, an
American; a native of Valparaiso; a young man
who was known as Yorky—a nickname, as he was
a Yorkshireman, aged 16 or 17.
there was also another man whose name Sir
Roger does not remember—a man about 30 years
of age. Sir Roger does not remember the name
of Evans at all. On the arrival of the Osprey at
Melbourne Sir Roger went on shore with the
captain, and returned to sleep on the boat. The
next day he went ashore and tried to get a passage
to England, and failed. He slept that night on
board. All this time the men named (who had
worked in the navigation of the ship) still re-
mained in the ship. Sir Roger went ashore the
next day, and while admiring some horses in a
horse market attracted the attention of the owner
a Mr. W. Foster, who, inquiring as to his know-
ledge of horses, offered to take him into his
service, to go with him to Gippsland. This Sir
Roger accepted, and slept that night at Mrs
Hickey’s hotel, the Rocksburgh Castle, Elizabeth-
street, Melbourne, and at daylight the next dav
started with Mr. Foster for Gippsland— not even
seeing and taking leave of the captain before he
left. I give you these minute particulars that
you may see how it was Sir Roger saw and knew
no more of the persons named who escaped with
him in the boat. People were wild as to the gold
diggings at the time the Osprey arrived at Mel-
bourne. How glad I should be to give you such
ridings as would bring comfort to the mother of
Evans, and rest assured it would be a source of
much gratification to Sir Roger could he give
more information that would enable you to pursue
the inquiry further.
‘ Pray do not hesitate to write to me again and
again. I am most anxious to show you I fully
reciprocate the kind consideration with which you
treated my application to you in 1854.—1 am
■dear Sir, yours truly,
‘ Edward Hopkins.’
So that he gave four names to Mr. Hopkins—
Sheers, Williams, Dobbin, and Pebbles-but did
not remember the name of Evans at all; but
when pressed in cross-examination, he said ‘I
tiiink 1 can give you one name.’ < What is that ?’
said the Solicitor-General, and the answer was
Evans. Now, that is a very remarkable fact.
Mr Hopkins states in his letter, ‘ Sir Roger does
not remember the name of Evans,’ but afterwards
under cross-examination, he gave that name as
one he remembered. He is asked, ‘ How came
you to remember that name ? Is it in consequence
of the letter of Mr. Killey ?’ and he replied, ‘lt
may have been, although I was not conscious that
that was the way it was brought to my mind ; but
it may be so.’ ’
v A Juror.—The letter mentions the nickname
Xoiky. That was also mentioned by one of the
witnesses.
The Lord Chief Justice.— That fact had es-
caped me.
r p} ie Juror.— l think it was mentioned by Luie.
The Lord Chief JusTiCE.-l’he evidence ranges
over so vast an area that it is impossible to bear it
all in mind. However, the defendant mentions
four names through Mr. Hopkins. One was
Pebbles, another form of Peebles, and Peebles was
second mate of the Middleton, in which ship
Arthur Orton sailed. The defendant also spoke
of one of the crew as being named Owen Lewis or
Lewis Owen, and Owen Lewis was also one of the
crew of the Middleton. Now, on the assumption
that Roger Pichborne was brought into Melbourne
an attempt has been made to show that he gave a
cheque to the captain on Glyn’s bank for between
177. and 18 1. Let us see what the defendant said
on the subject. He is asked:—
Did the captain ask you for anything?—l
have some faint recollection of giving him
t ? h f. q J u . e - 1 cannot say positively I did so.
If I did it was on blank paper. You had no money
with you ?—I had no money with me and no
cheque; therefore if I gave him one it was on
blank paper. You have a faint recollection ?
Yes Did he ask you for it?—l cannot say
whether he did or not. You lived at his table,
and he nursed you when you were delirious for
two months, and you lived at his table the rest of
the time. Have you not more than a faint recol-
lection whether you gave them anything ?—I have
not Whom could the cheque have been drawn on ?
it would have been drawn on Glyn’s. That
would have turned up, I suppose ? Mr. Serjeant
Ballantine.—That we cannot have. The Solicitor-
General. \ou would have had it supplied to you.
In your banker’s book with Glyn’s you would have
seen whether it was or was not ?—I do not know.
When the cheque arrived there were no funds.
They had all been taken out. Did you find out
you gave the cheque, and it had been dishonoured?
I did not find out at all. What do you mean by
saying when the cheque arrived here all the funds
had been taken out ?-Simply as Mr. Hopkins told
me. Excuse me. Mr. Serjeant Ballantine.—You
stopped him. The Solicitor-General.—What
cheque? Mr. Serjeant Ballantine.—There is only
one. The witness.—l am speaking of one cheque
tnat may have been given to the captain. I told
you I have a faint recollection of giving him a
cheque. Mr. Hopkins told you ?—Mr. Hopkins told
me during my absence a cheque came to Glyn’s.
lhe money had been taken from Glyn’s before
this arrived, and they asked to have the cheque left
for a short time. The cheque was sent down to
Hampshire. It was acknowledged to be my sig-


nature by Mr. Greenwood, whom Mr. Hopkins
sent it to. It was returned to Mr. Hopkins and
returned to Glyn’s. Glyn’s have got it ?—l cannot
tell. I tell you what Mr. Hopkins told me. That
you think is the cheque drawn for the captain ?- -
It must have been the cheque. There is no other
cheque. Where did you draw tbs cheque ?—lt
must have been on board the ship. Before you
left ?—Before I left. Having a faint recollection,
cannot you tell me positively whether you did or
not ?—No, I cannot. If I did you would imme-
diately ask me to swear to it, and I cannot. Can
you tell me what you drew it for ?—The only
thing I could have drawn a cheque for would have
been for such articles that I required to wear,
that we took from the ship’s stores, and what
grog I had. Did you not pay the captain anything
for his medical care and provisions ?—No, I did
not. You had nothing except what you drew
from the ship’s stores when you went away ?—I
had not. I understood you to say so ?—I never
said anything of the kind. You asked me what
would it have been for. My answer was it
would have been for clothes, which I had taken
from the ship’s stores, and any one I might have
had. That is exactly what I supposed.—You need
not put it down that I said so. Did you pay the
captain anything for what he had supplied you
with ?—What he had supplied me with ? You
lived at bis table ?—lf I gave him the cheque.
lam not sure whether I did or not. Can you
recollect the- amount?—No, I cannot. Are you
asking can I myself ? Yes ?—No, Ido not. You
do not recollect at all about the amount ?—I know
the amount. Mr. Hopkins told me. Ido not un-
derstand that to be the question. You may tell
me what you say the cheque is, so that we can
follow that cheque. Mr. Giffard. —This is whu ;
Hopkins told him. The Solicitor-General.—
What did Mr. Hopkins say the cheque was ,J
Between 17 1. and 18/., I think. For three
months ? Mr. Giffard.—This is what Mr. Hopkin
told him.’
Now, it is absurd to suppose that any cheque
was drawn by Roger Tichborne at Melbourne anc
sent home, and that that cheque came to the
Knowledge of Mr. Hopkins. Why, the very fac ;
that Roger drew a cheque at Melbourne would
have put an end to the notion that Roger hat
perished in the Bella. If that cheque had come to
hdyns, and had been sent on to Mr. Hopkins
what would he have done ? Why, he would have
rung his bell and ordered his fastest horse to be
put to his lightest trap. He would hardly have
stopped to put on his hat before he was on the
roa .d driving his quickest to Tichborne-house, into
which he would have rushed in a state of excite-
ment, crying out ‘ Hurrah ! ’ Here is great news
r ? r y°«- Roger is not dead ;he is alive. Here is a
cheque of his which proves the fact,’ and the father
and mother would have put off their mourn-
+W xJa t *' e countl T round would have rejoiced
at the heir of Tichborne had been rescued and
as alive. Again, would not the mother, who by
“ Persistent belief in her son being alive, con-
stantly opened the wound in the father’s breast
• a was healing— would she not have mentioned
r, e advertisements she had inserted in the
g ish and Australian newspapers that Roger
ac signed a cheque at Melbourne ? Would she
i »? Te communicated the fact to Mr. Cubitt
ana Mr. Gibbcs in her letters ? Why, the evi-
ence would have been decisive. But the thing
spea-s for itself. We can only suppess that the
eque, which Mr. Hopkins thought important,
was one of three things—either that it was a
cheque which Roger had drawn before he had
embarked on board the Bella, or a cheque of some
other date drawn by Roger Tichborne, and which
ii'i i, , ma produced for the purpose of showing
that the handwriting of the defendant was like
the handwriting of Roger; or it was a cheque of
the defendant s own, which Mr. Hopkins produced
in order to induce Mrs. Greenwood to think that
the signatures of the defendant and Roger Tich-
orne were alike. It is unnecessary to say more
than that the whole thing broke down entirely*
and it was absurd to attempt to establish it.
i * en a witness is called who says that the
defendant put his name as an attesting witness to
a receipt from him at Castlemaine in Australia
where the witness, a man named Summers, bought
a grey mare for ‘6Ol. or 40and as the man°he
bought it of was, as be said, ‘next to a bush-
ranger, and one of a bad lot,’ Summers wished to
have the receipt for the amount attested. Oastro
whom he recognised as the defendant, attested it
in the name of R. 0. T. Tichborne, or R. C. D.
Ticnborne, he could not tell which. Castro, ho
says, was more or less intoxicated. Summers
asked him how many more names he had to go
by, to which the defendant made no reply. This
man represents that the defendant, who at that
time had sunk his name and was going by the
name of Castro, in a moment of forgetfulness,
ansing from his being drunk, signed the name of
lichborne, a thing which the defendant himself
does not profess ever to have done in all his deal-
mgs with the people he was brought in contact
with in Australia. There is an improbability in
the statement, and there is a still greater inherent
improbability in it when you come to look at it.
ihe man represents that the defendant, in the
year 1857 or 1858, signed the name with three
initials ‘R. C. T.’ or ‘R. C. D.’ Now, Roger
never could have signed ‘R. C. D.,’ because he
never had a third Christian name, and at this
time he did not know that his father had assumed
the name of Doughty, and that he was entitled
by royal license to put the name of Doughty
before the name of Tichborne. In addition to
that, when we find him beginning his correspon-
dence with Lady Tichborne he never adds the
third name, showing plainly that at that time he
was not aware, as he could not possibly have been,
that the third name had been assumed. This
man says he had the receipt, and no doubt it
would have been a very valuable document if it
could have been produced. He says that he told
a faimer named Mundy at Prior’s Dean that he
possessed such a receipt, and, in fact, showeditto
him. Mr. Mundy, evidently a very respectable
man, is called, and says, ‘ He told me he had this
receipt, and promised to show it to me, but never
did.’ It appeared that Mr. Mundy attached so
little importance to it that it never occurred to
him to communicate to Sir James or Lady Tich-
borne a word about this receipt, which, if it
existed, would tend to show them that their son
Roger was alive. What makes the case very sus-
picious indeed is this—the witness must have
been sensible of its importance from the fact of
his mentioning it to Mr. Mundy, and yet he si,™
his wife, with his consent, deliberately 7 destroyed
the document by burning it. J
Now, when Roger Tichborne landed at Mel-
bourne we should have expected him at once to
seek a passage to England. The scheme which
he had conceived of foreign travel had been en-
tuelv fiustiated by the disaster to the Bella, and


instead of being on his way to Mexico and thence
to India he found himself in a part of the world
which probably would have but limited attrao
tions for him. The first thing to do under these
circumstances would be to obtain a passage to
England. The defendant, if he really be Roger
Tichborne, of course did so. If he is not Roger
Tichborne, being that whichlßoger naturally would
have done, he tells us that he did it. He says he
went with the captain first to the custom-house,
and then to another establishment, where the
captain endeavoured to obtain a passage for him,
but no passage could be got, he says, because the
gold mania prevailed, and crews could not be
kept. In his affidavit made in the year 1863 he
the first day after I first landed at Mel-
bourne I was strolling about the town, and went
into a yard called Row’s-yard, situate in Burke-
street, Melbourne, where a large number of horses
were being sold. I was much attracted by what
was being done, and a person, whom I afterwards
discovered to be Mr. "Willram Foster, an extensive
stock-keeper of Gippsland, spoke to me, and, after
ascertaining that I was a good rider, offered to
take me with him to Gippsland, where there was
good hunting and shooting. I accepted such off er,and
for family reasons I assumed the name of Thomas
Castro, after that of a friend named Don Tomas
Castro (whose acquaintance I had made at Meli-
pilla, in Chili), and I continued to use and was
known in Australia by the name of Thomas Castro
until shortly prior to my return to England, as
hereinafter mentioned. I immediately afterwards
left Melbourne with Mr. Foster and his horses,
and proceeded to Mr. Foster’s station at Boisdale,
in Gippsland, on the Avon River, nearly 300 miles
from Melbourne, where I remained about 19
months. Mr. Foster then gave me charge of the
Dargo station, in the Australian Alps, about 115
miles further inland, where I remained for about
18 months, and then returned to Boisdale, where,
after staying for about three months, I travelled
about, and remained at various places, as in the
38th paragraph of my said bill mentioned.’ <
The account he gave in his examination in the
year 1871 was as follows:
‘ I recollect nothing of any report being made
at the Custom-house, nor what became of the
other eight, nor the captain. I left Melbourne
the day after, and my departure was unknown to
the captain. While walking in the streets of the
town I went into one of the horseyards in Burke
street. I saw a horse kicking in the yard, and a
person standing near, supposing I was a new
arrival, asked me if I could ride the horse. I said
I thought I could, and he then asked me if I would
go with him to Gippsland. His name, I learnt,
was William Foster. He said that if I would go
with him I should have nothing to do but to ride
about after stock. I could ride very well at the
time, and I accepted his offer. I changed my
name, and assumed that of De Castro.’
Asked why he took that name he said: —
‘ I cannot say why I adopted that name, except
that I had known De Castro when I was at Chili.
I accompanied Foster from the horse-yard to the
hotel at which he was staying. It was called the
Limerick Castle Hotel, and was situate in Eliza-
beth - street, and was kept by a Mr. Hickey. I
did not know at that time what * riding after
stock’ meant, but I subsequently learnt by ex-
perience. Mr. Foster also told me, as an induce-
ment to go with him, that there was plenty of
hunting and shooting at ‘ the station ar.d that it
would be a very merry life to read. I have ber-n
to the Limerick Hotel since that time. I don’t
remember Foster supplying me with anything
before we started from Melbourne to Gippsland,
which was at five o’clock the next morning. We
were accompanied by the men he brought with
him.’
You will observe that the statement to Mr.
Marshall is altogether abandoned. Mr. Marshall
said he asked the defendant whether he knew his
office at Melbourne, and drew a plan of tne place,
and the defendant put his finger on the position
of the office into which he said he went to inquire
after a ship to take him to England. At the last
trial, however, he said he went with the captain
of the Osprey to a place he understood to be the
Custom-house, and to some other place of which
he had no recollection whatever.
We come next to the narrative of the defendant
with regard to what he had been doing after he
landed at Melbourne. From the time of the
wreck, it would take a ship to sail from the coast
of Brazil to Melbourne about three months, and
he says he arrived there on or about the 24th of
July. From that time to his coming forward to
make his claim was a period which it was neces-
sary for him to account for; and his account is
that on the second day after the Osprey cast
anchor he was ashore, and while the captain went
about his business the defendant says he strolled
into an auction yard where there was a sale of
horses. One of the animals plunged and ‘bucked,’
as it is called, and attracted the attention of the
bystanders. A stranger accosted him and asked
him if he could ride that horse. He said he
could, and the stranger offered to take him into
his service as a stock-driver. He inquired what
that was, and hearing that it was a very jolly life
—little or nothing to do but ride after the cattle
and keep them in the run—and that occasionally
there was hunting and shooting to be had, the
defendant asked what was the wages, and was
told 30s. a week. He accepted the terms and
went on the next morning with the stranger, a
Mr. Foster, to a station called Boisdale, 300 miles
up the country, and he says that he took the
name of Thomas Castro, which was suggested to
him by his knowledge of a family of that name
in Chili. This statement he afterwards repeated
in his examination before Mr. Roupell. So that
you see, according to his account, he is attracted
by the description of the occupation in which he
was to be engaged, and accepts the service at 30s,
per week. Then, he says they started the next
morning, and rode the journey, which Mr. Gibbes
tells us was upwards of 300 miles. He arrived
at Boisdale, and enters upon the life of stock-
keeping, driving cattle, and occasionally slaughter-
ing. We must observe very carefully the dates
which he gives us to fix the period of his service
with Foster. In the affidavit he gives this
account: —
‘ I immediately afterwards left Melbourne with
Mr. Foster and his horses, and proceeded to Mr.
Foster’s station at Boisdale, in Gippsland, on the
Avon river, nearly 300 miles from Melbourne,
where 1 remained 19 months. Mr. Foster gave me
charge of the Dargo station, on the Australian
Alps, about 115 miles further inland, where I re-
mained for about 18 months, and then returned to
Boisdale, when, after staying for about three
months, I travelled about, and remained at various
places.’
Now these would give a period of 40 months, or
three years and four months. The engagement


iwith Foster, he says, was at the end of July,
that this would give us from J uly, 1854, to
month of November, 1857. In his examinat
in chief his statement coincides with the a
davit. In his cross-examination, some little ti
after, he varies as to the period, stating that
was at Boisdale 12 months, at Dargo 15 or ;
months, and finally at Boisdale again for two
three months ; so that that would give us a perioc
of 30 months, against 40 as set forth in the af
lavit, and you will find that that is not altoget]
immaterial.
Now, during this period of service at Boisda
ind Dargo, he tells us that he formed an acquain
mce with a person whom I must now (introdu
■o your notice as being a very important pers
u the development of this drama. He is ape
onage whom it is difficult to follow and some wha
lifficult to fix. It is a large and stalwart for
io doubt, but one that often assumes occasionai
■ very shadowy appearance. It sometimes seem
o divide itself into two and unites togeth
gain, and again severs itself and again reunite
i.t times the form seems to blend itself with th
f the defendant and again to separate from him
o that at last one is almost bewildered to decic
diether it is two men or one; and I must ask yo
ire fully to watch the details of the history o
le man whom I am about to introduce and I neec
ot say that that person is Arthur Orton. No'
iat I am going into the question whether tl
efendant is Arthur Orton, because things are no
pe for that. I am not in a condition just a
'esent to put before you all the facts which it
icessary to take into account in dealing wit
iat highly important question. But to under
and the story of the defendant as Castro, it
scessary that you should have before you th
itline of the history of Arthur Orton.
Arthur Orton is known as the son of old Georg
• ton, a shipping butcher of High-street, Wap
ng, and according to the witnesses for th
fence I have been led to believe that old Georg
i’ton was a thoroughly respectable man wh
joyed the esteem of his neighbours. But one
d only one, of the witnesses called for th
fence spoke of him as an unprincipled man wh
t into debt and did not pay what he owed. I
not very material in this case, except that some
aes an 'unworthy example set by a father i
lowed by the son. Old George Orton lived fo
my years in the High-street, and had a nume
is family, and it may be necessary to mention
; names of them in the course of the inquiry
! had eight sons and four daughters, making
lily of 12, all of whom were born within the
us 1819 and 1834; so that old Mrs. Orton
ssed her husband with as numerous a progeny
as short a space of time as a husband and fathei
|ld well desire. The dates of the births of the
family are as follows :—Thomas, August
1819; Elizabeth (Mrs. Captain Jury), March
1821; Charles, June 5, 1822; George (captain
a ship in the Eastern seas), September 16,
o; Margaret Ann (the other Mrs. Jury),
ober 9, 1824; Mary Ann (Mrs. Tredgett), June
1825 ; William (‘ Gentleman Orton’), March 21,
7 ; Robert (who died away, and of whom we
e heard nothing, but as to whose career I
lid like to have heard something), April 15,
8; Alfred, August 17, 1829; Edmund, March
831; Matilda (who died), September 13,1832;
Arthur, March 20, 1834. Arthur Orton went
ame school in the neighborhood, and after-
1s went to a more advanced school, but he
never seems to have made much of his letters
The reason for this was to be found in the fact
that when he was nine or ten years old he was
afflicted with St. Vitus’s dance. We have had the
evidence of the medical gentleman who attended
him and who was informed by his parents that
the. cause of his disorder was fright—the boy
having awoke in the night and been greatly
alarmed at a fire which occurred in the neigh-
bourhood of his father’s house. The malady per-
secuted him for some time, and to a certain extent
affected his intellect. He was taken early from
school and employed in his father’s shop, and was
taught the business of a butcher. The nervous
affection, however, continuing, his father deter-
mined to send him to sea as a remedy for it, and
accordingly he was apprenticed to Captain Brooks,
of the ship Ocean, in which he proceeded to Val-
paraiso—the vessel being commanded by Captain
Preston. The Ocean made some coasting voyages,
and was back in Valparaiso in June, 1849, on the
25th of which month Arthur Orton deserted from
h(y\ Being afraid of being brought back by the
local police aud possibly roughly handled, he made
his way to Melipilla, 40 miles inland. In that
village—for it is not a town, though it has a con-
siderable number of inhabitants—the boy re-
paired to the house of Dr. Hayley, an English
doctor who was settled there. He told a sorrowful
tale of ill-treatment on board the ship and was
kindly received. The young fair-haired English
boy, with his sad story, found his way to the
hearts of the people. He ingratiated himself
with them and they received him into their
houses one after another. They were extremely
kind to him and he remained among them for a
considerable period. That fact is shown not only
from the positive evidence of Donna Hayley, but
from the Castro correspondence.
At length, however, Arthur had a natural yearn-
ing to return home and see his parents, brothers,
and sisters. He engaged himself on board the
Jessie Miller, and on the 11th of June, 1851, he
arrived in this country. For Some time he swag-
gered about in a sailor’s suit of blue and weariiTg
a ship officer’s cap, which he had no right to dot
but soon afterwards we find him again assisting in
his father’s shop, and taking meat on board the
ships his father supplied. All that remained of
the nervous affection was an involuntary raising
of the eyebrows, which may have been an here-
ditary propensity, as some of the witnesses speak
of it as being a peculiarity of his father’s also.
The young man remained in London until the end
of November, 1852, and in the meantime, being
now 18 or 19 years of age, he thought it necessary,
at all events pleasant, to have a sweetheart, and
addressed himself to a lady, now a widow, whose
maiden name I do not know, but who was ex-
amined before you. She did not, however, like
him, and told him a little feminine fiction, that
she was already engaged. He then addressed
himself to Miss Mary Anne Loder, and she as-
sented to his attentions with a view to become his
wife.
Towards the latter part of 1852 he determined
to seek his fortune in Australia, and an opportu-
nity of going there presented itself. Mr. Chap-
man, of Hobart Town, required a pair of Shetland
ponies, in which old Mr. Orton and his son Thomas
dealt, and Arthur engaged to sail in the Middle-
ton as butcher, and to take charge of Mr. Chap-
man's ponies. He obtained a fresh register ticket,
in which he was described as a butcher, as being
sft. 9£in. high; complexion, fair; marks on per-
G


son, none. We have been told that the officer
only mentions marks that are visible on the face
or hands, but takes the word of the person as to
marks on the parts of the body which are not ex-
posed. I should suppose that if Arthur Orton
had any mark on his face the officer would have
stated it. Now I have a list -of the crew of the
Bella before me, and I find among them Henry
Allen, who has been examined here; James
Peebles, second mate; Arthur Orton, and Owen
David Lewis.
A Juror.—The captain’s name, I think, was
Storey.
The Lord Chief Justice.—lt was. The vessel
left the dock on the 29th of November, but was
detained in the Channel. Before the Middleton
put to sea Arthur Orton wrote the following let-
ters to Miss Loder:—
‘ Sunday, -Dec. 12 52.
‘ Dear Mary Ann, —I now take the first oppor-
tunity of wrighing to you which i hope will find
you & your Mother quite well as it leaves me the
same We have been lying here ever since we
came away. We went away once but had to come
back again it blew so hard. I hope you will write
to me as soon as you can. If you write to me to
Day i shall get it as we are lickly to lay here 3 or
4 Days more yet. you must excuse my writen as
the ship is piching very much we lost one of our
Anchor last night it blew so hard that it very near
blew us on the sand. I hope you will not show
this to any one as it is wrote so bad, if i get a let-
ter from yon i will write again so Good bye. give
my Love to all enquireen friends and except the
same from
‘ Your affectionate
‘ Friend Arthur Orton
‘ you must put them Directions on the letter Mr
A orton on bourd the ship Midleton Hobart
Town.’
‘ Torkeye, Christmas day.
‘ My.ctear Mary Ann, —I take the opportunity
of writing these fue lines to you which i hope will
find you quite well as it leaves me the same i little
though thati should not been farther than this now
or i should have had my Christmas at home. I have
had a happy Christmas it is true Becuse i am quite
well, but not very mery. as there was Plenty of
Work, i receved your letter in the Downs but
not in time to answer it. as we was jus a goin a
way so my Dear you must excuse me in not
answering it before as it was no neglect of myn. I
hame Steward of the ship now So i have got 31.
per month for the passage out which will be a few
pounds for a begaining, i am very comfotable on
board we have had very bad weather we was
a blage to put in here for Shelter and not very
Good Shelter either as it is a blowing a gale of
wind now 2 anchors downs and Draging, it is now
a 11 o Clock and i am geting sleepy so must ex-
cuse the shortness of the letter give my Love to
your Mother and all enquiren friends and except
the same from your affectionate and well wishing
friend,
* Arthur Orton.
*)•’(■ ‘ Good bye
M ’ ‘ Middleton Capt Storie
‘ Hobart Town.’
He wrote the two further letters, which are before
you, to Miss Loder, dated December 28, 1852, and
New Year’s Eve. The letters are as follows•
‘ Arthur Orton to Miss Loader.
‘New Years Eve.
My dear Mary Ann,—l receved your letter
this evening, and was very Glad to hear that you
are quite well, as it leaves me the same. I wrote
you a letter the day we left the downs. But one
of the men found it behind one of the water cast,
so i suppose the Boatman i give it to —Dropet
But I will send you it so as you shall see it was so
—not that i think you will doubt my word. I was
at first afraid that you would not answer my
letter when i found the other. So my Dear Mary
Ann you must excuse me on your not getting it.
‘ I hope we may not continue lick this long as i
am miserble without a fair wind.
* I will as soon as possible write My Dear when
we get' out.
‘ I have never been on shew here yet-—they are
frighten i will leave her Because i said so the other
day in joiking. I have not lost my sences yet
awhile excuse the shortness of the letter—as it is
very late, J to 12 and i am very sleepy so Good
bye.
‘ Give my Love to all enquirean friend and
except the same from
‘ Your affectionate friend
‘ Arthur Orton.
‘ Give my best respects to your Mother and tell
her i thank her kindly for her good wishes. Good
bye.
->
There is one more letter, dated January 16th
Torquay, which was the last that he wrote to her
from England, and I must observe that all those
letters have at the bottom, beneath the signature,
that curious hieroglyphic which Arthur Orton
appears to have been in the habit of using. It was
something like two C’s back to back, with two
dots between and one in the middle of each C,
and a W reversed with a stroke under it at the
bottom. It appears that in South America they
are in the habit of using signs of that description.
Arthur Orton acquired the habit, and he annexed
that peculiar hieroglyphic to all those letters.
The Middleton, in which he sailed, arrived at
Hobart Town in May, 1853. Part of the time he
was on board he appears to have acted as steward,
then to have resumed his office of butcher. He
had charge of the Shetland ponies, and took them
to Mr. Chapman. After a time he seems to have
got employment as slaughterman with some
butcher at Hobart Town, and, having given it up
after a while, he became drover and stock-keeper
to Mr. Johnstone, a gentleman who had a station
in the neighbourhood. Then we hav e this letter
to Mary Ann Loder: —
‘ September 18, 1853.
‘My dear Mary Ann, —I take the opportunity
of writing these fue lines to you which i hope will
find you quite well as it leaves me the same.
Henry Angel arrived here last Tuesday and i was
very much surprise at not receving a letter from
you. I have being (sic) here 5 rnenth and not re-
ceved a letter from anybody but Elizabeith (sic) i
suppose you have quite forgot me now but i have
not forgot you yet, nor wont until i get reasons
for it. My dear girl I hope you will be comfiteble
until i como home that will be in about 15 months
the gold diggers and solgers are fighting like tagers
in Melborno as soon as they have done I shall go
over and try my luck they sent here last week for
500 more solgers to guard them. Frank Jury is still
at port Arthur i have not seen him yet. Mrs. Jury
had a baby last week. lam very glad my Dear
you did not come out when i wanted you because
this iB a Dreadful place to live in. I should not
been able to have made you comfitable and i
would sooner luse all I got than made you un so i
dont know what my Brothers and Sisters could be


thinking of not to send me a letter by Henry
Angel, they must have knewn that i should have
seen him when he got here, but never mind i shall
settle with them when i come home i hope you
tell me all the news when you do write so good
by.
‘ Give my best respects to your mother, and my
•mother and father, sister, and brother, and all the
family, and all enquiren friends. I remain your
affectionate lover,
‘ Arthur Orton.
* Give the young uns a kiss for me.’
After this letter, which arrived about Christma
all further correspondence with Mary Ann Loder
was dropped, and he seems to have retained on y
a faint recollection of his former love. Throug 1
the influence of a gentleman named Mansfiel ,
Arthur Orton got, as I have mentioned, a situatio
with Mr. Johnstone. He writes at this time
letter of some importance to his sister Elizabeth,
■dated March 31, probably 1854. There is no sue
date on the letter as 1854, but judging from the
time it arrived in this country, it was probably
that year. This is the letter :
‘March 31 (1854 or 1855).
‘ Dear Sister, —I came back from the Sounc s
yesterday and received a letter from Mary An
dated December 30. She says she wrote foil
times but this is the first i received. Oaptai
Angel was here some time, but he brought n
letters—in fact i came about 80 miles from th
run to see him, but I only see him once after al ,
he was so busy with one and other that he had n
time to speak to me. I met Mr. Jury once anc
had a long talk with him. I go to the Sounds
once every 10 days so I shall see him every month
I wrote to George several times, but never re
ceved (sic) an answer let me know my dea
sister weather (sic) you have heard from him o
not. i feel very ancous (sic) to know. Give my
best respect to Captain Jury and tell him i should
very much like to see him and little Emily again
I shall never go to England again, dear Lisy.
have made up my mind to that. lam now living
with Mr. W. Ladds of Elizaberth-street (sic).
have been stock riding for him now two months
I use to land the imported stock before but this
pay me better, so i shall continue. Give little
Lrnely a Dozen Kisses for me and tell her to give
you one for me. So good by, hoping to hear from
you soon. Father and Mother ware (sic) quite
well when she wrote, but Thomas was rather ill
Lett me know how my Dog was getting on when
you left—i will write a long one to you when :
know where you are for certain. I don’t mean
Mary Ann Loader that I got the letter from.—l
remain yau (sic) affectionate brother,
... * Arthur Orton. •):(•
Addressed to Mrs. E. Jury.
ihese are no doubt genuine letters of Arthur
f 10 ?' It was said by the counsel for the de-
fendant that the man who wrote them showed
such a wretched state of education and manners
that he must be taken to be a low, coarse brute,
ihat was the way in which he described poor
Arthur Orton. Now I must say, judging from
tnese letters, I see nothing which warranted the
application of such language to him. The man
was uneducated and illiterate ; he could not write
or sjiell correctiy, but it is not because a man is
illiterate or has not had the educational or social
advantages that some of his superiors may have
had that you are warranted in calling him a low,
coarse brute. The man shows in those letters
kindly, genial, tender feelings towards bis sweet
heart, he speaks affectionately of his relations anc
friends, he has a fond and tender feeling for h
little niece, to whom he sende kisses, and last, no
least, hp inquires kindly about his dog. All tha
shows a good deal of heart, and does not in an
way justify the language which has been used b;
the defendant’s couusel. It is not because ama
cannot write logically and grammatically that yo
are to look down upon him with contumely anc
disdain. There is many a rough, honest ma
whom I should be as glad to shake by the hand
and whom I should value as much as I should th
highest nobleman. And are such men to b
spoken of in that way ? Arthur Orton may hav
become a ruffian and a robber afterwards, if you
please, but up to this time I can see no reason fo:
the unsparing abuse lavished on him.
Well, Arthur Orton was in the service of Mr
Johnstone in 1854 when he wrote that lettei
Whether he remained in the neighbourhood o
Hobart-town throughout 1854 is doubtful. It i
a-matter I should be glad that we could solve
because we shall find evidence by-and-by that h
was seen elsewhere. Therefore, if we could fix
the date when he left Hobart-town it would b
of some assistance. The only witness, I think
who helps to throw any light on the matter is
man named Hawkes, who speaks of the Shetland
ponies as being extremely rare in that country
and who says that he left towards
the end of September, 1854, and came back in
December, when he does not remember seeinj
Arthur Orton ; that before he went Orton was
keeping a stall in the new market recently opened
by the Governor with some pomp and ceremonial,
and that the name of Arthur Orton was over the’
shop. But this must be a mistake, because there
is no reason to believe that Arthur Orton opened
a shop until 1855. Whether he went away and
came back again we do not know, but undoubtedly
we find him in Hobart-town in May and June
1855. According to Mrs. Jury he was there the
whole time, but I don’t know that she specifies
occasions in which she came into actual contact
with him so as to show that he was there. In
May, 1855, however, he wanted to set up a stall in
the new market, but had not funds for the pur-
pose ; so he applied to Mrs. Mina Jury’s husband
the brother of Captain Jury, who married one of
Orton’s sisters. Mr. Jury declined to give the
money, but Mrs. Jury, who had saved some money
of her own, lent him 14f., for which he gave a
promissory note for three months, dated May 22
1855. J
The account which Mrs. Jury gives of the cir-
cumstance was this. She met him in the street;
he asked for the money; she wanted him to go to
her house to complete the transaction, but he
declined, saying that he was in a hurry. She took
out a purse, and happening to have a baby with
her at the time, and the wind blowing very hard,
the baby became troublesome, so she gave him a
5f.-note in mistake for a lf.-note.’ She became
conscious of the mistake immediately afterwards
and said, ‘ I have give yon a 5f.-note instead of a
If.-note.’ But he said she had not, and while
she was taken up with the baby he contrived to
slip the 5f.-note beneath the other notes. That
was Mrs. Jury’s account, and whether it was that
his conscience smote him afterwards he wrote to
her as follows: —
‘ June 23, 1855.
‘ I have not wrote before on account of not
getting settled before last Tuesday [here is a
break], my dear friend, that I didn’t find out that


you had paid me 18?. for 14?. until last Tuesday,
when I went to pay [here is another break], and
accept the same from your truly humble, &c.,
‘ Arthur Orton.
‘ 25, Newmarket, Hoiart-town .’
And this note also she positively swore was in
the handwriting of defendant. The promissory
note was due on the 22nd of August, but Mrs.
Jury never got the money. After this period,
the middle of 1855, the accounts relating to
Arthur Orton are more or less open to doubt with
respect to dates, though I think we can follow
him pretty deary and satisfactorily up to the
period to which I am about to invite your
attention.
We next hear of him in the service of Mr.
Johnstone, at Newman-park. Mrs. M’Alister
(then Mrs. Foster) had a brother, Mr. Hopwood,
who managed Newman-park for this Mr. John-
stone. Erinvale, where Mrs. M’Alister was, and
Newman-park were on opposite sides of a creek.
She saw her brother one day driving in with a
man she did not know, but who afterwards was in
her husband’s service. This man was Arthur
Orton, no doubt; but whether he was the
defendant is another matter. Mr. Hopwood was
at the same time engaged in a very extensive job
at Newman-park, making fences of split wood.
This was in 1855, and he said there was then in
Mr. Johnstone’s employment, for eight or nine
months, as stock-keeper, a man named Arthur
Orton. Then he stfys that this same Arthur
Orton went into the employ of Mr. Foster at the
opposite side of the river, that he was in the habit
of seeing Arthur Orton very constantly, and that
Arthur Orton told him he had first come to
Hobart-town, and had been engaged by the same
Mr. Johnstone of Newman-park. The next au-
thentic information we have about Arthur Orton
is when he was in the employment of Mr. W.
Foster at Boisdale. Mrs. Foster says, * Arthur
Orton same into our employment, I think, in
November, 1856,’ but in that she was mistaken.
It appears that for many years they kept at
Boisdale books in which were contained accounts
relating to every man employed on the cattle or
sheep farm. A regular debtor and creditor
account was kept. In those stations, very often
isolated and at a great distance from any place
where things can be purchased, and in a country
where means of communication are extremely
limited, they necessarily keep stores of things
required for their daily use by the people
employed on the farm, and an account in which
the men are credited on the one side with the
wages they have earned and debited on the other
with the goods they have received from the
stores is kept. The books at Boisdale appear to
have been kept in a very methodical manner.
We are thus enabled by the inspection of these
books to determine whether at a given time any
particular person was in employment there. Now,
an account was opened with Arthur Orton in the
early part of the year 1857. but it records that he
entered the service on the 15th of December,
1856. When the accounts came to be made up
at Christmas, 1856, he was too short a time in
the service to make it worth while to set out his
account in full. And, accordingly, on the 31st of
March, when under ordinary circumstances he
would have had an account for the quarter only,
they furnished him with an account beginning
from the 15th of December. Thus:—‘ March 31.
From December 15 to this date, 15 weeks and one
day, at 255. per week, 18?. 18s. 6fd.’ Then, on
the 12th of May, they furnish another account-
It appears that at this date (the 12th of May) a,
fresh agreement was made, and Arthur Orton, in-
stead of serving as stock-keeper at Boisdale, was
transferred to Dargo, where he must have been
head-man, Mr. Foster not being able to overlook
that station himself. It was agreed that Arthur
Orton should have 807. a year, which would be
more than 30s. a week, and the accounts are
stated accordingly.
He remains at Dargo all the rest of 1857 and up
to the Ist of July, 1858, when he makes up his
mind that he will stay at Dargo no longer. Mrs.
M’Alister gives us this account of it: —She and
her husband were one day at the station outside
her own house, when they saw a horse coming
which was perfectly familiar to Mr. Foster.
1 Oh !’ said he, ‘ here is roan Tommy, and this must
bo Arthur Orton.’ Orton rides up, and Mr. Foster
says, ‘What brings you here ?’ The other answers,
‘ I won’t stay at Dargo any longer. Since “ Bal-
larat Harry ” disappeared the place is too lonely.’
* Ballarat Harry ’ had disappeared ; he was mur-
dered, and it was not known who murdered him.
It was said it was a man named Toke, but a strong
suspicion attached to Orton himself, and that sus-
picion his survived in the colony to this day. It
is quite unnecessary for us to determine whether
he did it or not. But at all events the reason for
his refusal to go back to Dargo was that he could
not bear to be there by himself since ‘ Ballarat
Harry ’ had disappeared. Mr. Foster consents to
his staying at Boisdale, and by-and-by he says to
Orton, ‘ You cannot expect the same wages as
when you were at Dargo. Your wages must come
down to 30s. a week.’ But Orton refused to accept
the terms, saying that he had not got proper
notice, and Mr. Foster says, ‘ Well, then, you must
leave my service altogether.’ ‘lf so,’ says Orton,
‘ you must pay me a week’s wages for sending me
away without notice,’ and then he institutes a
suit against Mr. Foster to recover the higher rate
of wages. The suit having been brought, it was
agreed that it should be referred to arbitrators.
Mr. Montgomery, formerly manager at Boisdale,
was arbitrator on Mr. Foster’s part, and a Mr.
Richardson on the part of Arthur Orton. They
could not agree, and they appointed an umpire,
and the case was entered upon at Sale. On the
27th of January, 1859, they decided that the
plaintiff, Arthur Orton, was not entitled to the
wages he demanded.
So much for Arthur Orton, of whom more here-
after ; but for the present I drop him and return
to the defendant. He tells us that he went to
Boisdale immediately after he had engaged with
Mr. William Foster, the day after he landed at
Melbourne, and that he remained in his service at
30s. a week for 19 months, that he was then trans-
ferred to Dargo at 40s. a week, that he stayed
there 18 months, and that he then came back to
Boisdale, where he remained three or four months.
In cross-examination he reduces the period of
time, representing himself to have been in one
place for 12 months, at the other for 15, and again
on coming back at Boisdale for a short period
corresponding with that when Arthur Orton was
there. By this means the defendant in his state-
ments covers a period of either 40 or 30 months,
as you take the one representation or the other.
In either case it is a long period. In the one case
the time is from three to four years, in the other
nearly approaching three, which this service at
Boisdale and Dargo is represented to cover. But
what if it turns out that at this period the


defendant never was there at all ? You are you
selves the sole j udges of the credibility of th
evidence that he was at Boisdale and Dargo at tl
time he says. If that period of time is cut awa
from the defendant, it is obvious that the who
foundation of his Australian story falls to th
ground, and with it you must judge whether
not the superstructure which has been erectec
upon it does not fall to the ground also. Youai
to consider whether, if the defendant’s statcmen
on this part of the case is disproved, a breach ha
not been made in his defence which no ingenuii
and no power of eloquence can repair.
This part of the case against the defendant res
principally upon the statement of Mrs. M’Aliste
the widow of William Foster, by whom the de
fendant represents himself to have been engagec
as Thomas Castro, and under whom he says 1
had served at Boisdale and Dargo. Now, Mr
M’Alister says there never was such a man
Castro at either place at all. ‘ There was Un
doubtedly,’ says Mrs. M’Alister, ‘ a person namec
Arthur Orton at Boisdale and Dargo, but never
person named Castro. And not only was that so
hut my husband and I never went to Boisda'
until 1856.’ She was married to Mr. Foster, wh
was then managing the Erin-vale station in 1852
In 1854, during which they were still at Erin-vale
a sister of hers married Mr. Montgomery, wh
was manager at Boisdale before William Foster
As regards July, 1854, she says she received in tha
month the tidings of her brother’s death, upon
which she and her husband got on horseback anc
rode over to the station at which Mr. Montgomer
and her sister were then living, to communicat
the intelligence to them. They then came ban
to Erin-vale, and she and her husband took no
journey to Melbourne in that year. His busines
relations from Erin-vale were not with Melbourne
but Hobart-town, and, therefore, she is able posi
tively to state that her husband did not go to
Melbourne at that period. ‘ And not only did h
not go to Melbourne at that time,’ says she, ‘ bu
he had nothing whatever to do at that time eithe
with the Boisdale or Dargo stations.’ Therefore
he could not engage any person to manage those
stations. ‘But then,’ says the counsel for the
defence, ‘ this is a mistake. The defendant may
have confounded John Foster the uncle with
William Foster the nephew, and John may have
been at Melbourne.’ But the defendant himselJ
vvas asked who the gentleman was in the auc-
tioneer’s yard who engaged him, and he said he
discovered it was William Foster, nephew of John
r oster. . Therefore he could not have gone into
the service of a man named William Foster and
not known that that was the person with whom he
had engaged. Why, every letter that came, and
every account that was made out, was in William
■poster’s name, and the defendant distinctly states
that the man with whom he engaged and with
whom he rode to Boisdale next day was one and
the same. Mrs. Foster is positive that her husband
never went to Melbourne until November, 1856,
and consequently the defendant could not; have
been in Mr. William Foster’s service through 1854,
1800 and 1856. You heard the woman, and she
appears to have been a perfectly respectable
witness. Her present husband, Mr. M’Alister, also
hav , in S shite l that he married her after
Mr. William Foster’s death, having been employed
as second under Mr. William Foster, he declares
that during the time he knew the station there
was no one there of the name of Castro.
Are you to believe these persons? Is the oath
of Mrs. M’Alister of less value than the defen-
dant’s ? Counsel for the defence .says, ‘ Yes ; be-
cause she and her husband have received l,00l)Z. to
come over and give evidence.’ Well, I,ooo£. is a
large sum to receive, but it is open to explana-
tion. Mrs. M’Alister says, ‘ I had a large family
I would not come without my husband, and if my
husband and I were to come I would not com
without bringing my children also. Then we hat
to shut up our establishment; the expenses of th
journey were very gieat. There is this to be con
sidered, and there is the disruption of our ordi
nary relations and pursuits, the danger of th
voyage, and the inconvenience and discomfort o :
going away from home. For all that we are en
titled to remuneration.’ There is also this to b
said, that witnesses of that sort are beyond th
jurisdiction of the Court; you cannot compel them
to come, and you must drive a bargain with them
if you want their testimony. But we have th
means of testing her evidence and seeing whethe
the had the slightest influence in deter
mining it. Mrs. M’Alister was examined unde
the Commission which went out to Australia, anc
for the evidence so given she was to receive n
further remuneration than the ordinary remune
ration for loss of time. That evidence was given
before she had the most distant idea she wouli
be required in this country. When, therefore
the learned counsel suggested that Mrs. M’Alister’
evidence had been influenced by the sum of I,ooo£.
which she and her husband received, I remindec
him that the evidence given in this Court die,
not vary one hair’s breadth from the evidence
given before the Commission, as he would see by
looking at that evidence. ‘Oh !’ says the learnec
counsel, in a supercilious tone, ‘ I did not trouble
myself to look at it.’
I did not make any observation on that, thougl
it rose to my lips to say it was his duty to have
looked at it. But though the learned counsel die
not take the trouble to look at that evidence, the
second counsel, Mr. M’Mahon, did. And here let
me say that throughout this trial, as on other oc-
casions, Mr. M’Mahon has never been wanting- in
his duty. He has done his duty like a lawyei
and a gentleman, and in a manner perfectly
worthy of a member of the English bar. But we
have another and still more effectual way of show-
ing whether Mrs. M’Alister’s evidence is true, be-
cause we have the Boisdale books, and we turn to
them to see whether we can find any mention of
the name of Thomas Castro, and we find none.
The books are produced for 1854, 1855,1856, 1857>
and 1858, and in none does the name of Castro
occur. Is there any reason to doubt the perfect
genuineness and accuracy of those books ? None
whatever.
Now, gentlemen, you must judge for yourselves
—it is altogether a matter for your consideration.
I have brought the evidence before you, and you
must make up your minds upon it. The question
is whether the defendant under the name of Castro
—for it is under that name he represents himself
to have been at Boisdale and Dargo—was there or
not. If he was not he fails to account for himself
during a period more or less of three years. Then
what becomes of his Australian history ? Can you
believe the rest of it, so far as relates to him in
his character of Roger Tichborne, any more than
you can believe this ?
It is necessary now to follow the defendant in
the accounts of his various migrations in Aus-
tralia. It would be desirable in the interest of
the defence that wo should find consistency in the


narrative of the defendant’s lifo from the time
that he left Boisdale and Dargo until we find him
coming forward, in this matter. I am sorry to
say that I do not find that consistency, that
there are a great many variations in the state-
ments made at different times, and that it is very
difficult to fix places and dates with reference to
his whereabouts at this time. He says of himself,
‘When I left Mr. Foster I went down to the
township of Flodden Creek, in the district of Sale,
for about a fortnight. After I had been to
Flodden Creek I went up to the mountains, and
first to the Nicholson River gold diggings. I was
there about a couple of days, and then I went to
Dargo, where I remained four or five days. I
never settled on any particular place for any time
for three years after that, except in Omao, where
I was about six months. I first went to Wagga-
Wagga about 1861 or 1862. In the interval I had
been at various other places. I used to run the
mail from Boree to Miranda, about 74 miles. I
was at a place called Myers’ Flat about seven
weeks in 1858. It is a suburb of the Bendigo
diggings. While there Arthur Orton was with
me. There was an hotel there. I don’t remember
the name of the man who kept it, but I knew him.
On the first occasion I spent about ten days at
Wagga-Wagga. Afterwards I spent two or three
days there. The third time I remained about
two years. I superintended a butchering busi-
ness, which belonged to Mr. Robert Higgins.’
Well, gentleman, it is for you to consider how
far you can believe that Roger Tichborne, with
all the advantages of rank and fortune, would
have been leading the sort of life described by the
defendant—breaking horses and slaughtering first
for one man and then for another, without any
settled occupation. And I should observe further-
more, that in these details the year 1859 remains
wholly unaccounted for. That is a year in which
you will see presently that he and Arthur Orton
were always together according to his own account,
and many of those things happened about which
he declines to answer, lest he might incriminate
himself. But in 1862 we find him finally at
Wagga-Wagga in the employment of Mr. Higgins,
who carried on the twofold business of hotel
keeper and butcher. The defendant becomes his
foreman ; at one time he slaughters, at another he
does the general business of butcher’s foreman.
He was engaged in this way in 1863 and 1864, and
with respect to the latter year we have a witness
whose evidence, if we can rely on it, is certainly
very remarkable, Mr. Petit Smith.
Mr. Petit Smith bolds an office of twist in that
country. Mr. Smith had been foreman in a store
at Wagga Wagga, and afterwards he was an auc-
tioneer and general agent there. He remarked
that Mr. Castro used to cut up meat in an artistic
manner, and not in the rough-and-ready way cus-
tomary in a country where there is a super-
abundance of animal food. Indeed, Mr. Smith
complimented him on the admirable manner in
which his shop was kept, and the meat cut up.
He received answer, ‘lf I don’t know how to cut
up meat, I don’t know who does in this district.
Why, I was apprenticed to a butcher in London,
and used to cut up meat in Newgate Market ? ’
Surely this was a most extraordinary answer to
come from Roger Tichborne. On another occa-
sion, the witness, referring to this conversation,
said, ‘ By the way, you were telling me the other
day that you were in Newgate Market. Do you
know the Kings, of Newgate Market?’ The
Kings, I should observe, are connections of Mr.
Petit Smith’s. Says Caati'o, ‘Well, there are
several Kings in the market.’ ‘ Yes, but did you
know John and Henry King?’ ‘Oh, yes, they
were brothers, but they were not in business to-
gether.’ Castro went on to describe Henry King
as being a man of about the same height as the
witness, and he mentioned that his stall was the
second or third from Newgate-street. Mr. Smith
next asked, * And what kind of a man was John
King ? ’ Castro described him as a big stout
man, weighing about 15 stone. He added that
John had two stalls in the same passage as his
brother, and that he had cellarage under them.
Now it happened that John King had married the
aunt of the witness, who had a thorough know-
ledge of both the Kings and of their places of
business, and he says this account given by Castro
was correct.
If the witness’s statement be true, what is the
result winch necessarily flows and results from it?
Could Roger Tichborne by any possibility have
had this knowledge? We have traced with
minuteness the history of Robert Ticliborne’s life
and education, and it is for you to consider
whether he could possibly have acquired a know-
ledge of all these details about Newgate Market.
The question as to whether the person who gave
these details was Arthur Orton I postpone for
future consideration. But, independently of that,
do you think the details are such ns could pos-
sibly be within the cognizance of Roger Tich-
borne, unless you adopt the suggestion of the
learned counsel for the defendant that Arthur
Orton and his client, having been intimately ac-
quainted with each other in Australia, Roger
Tichborne, who was then passing by the name of
Castro, had become familiar with all the details
of Arthur Orton’s life ? I certainly do not see
why Roger Tichborne should assume the character
of a man who had been brought up in Newgate
Market, and, even if he knew all about ■the
market, such knowledge would not give him the
skill to cut up meat in an artistic manner. How-
ever, there is the evidence, and it is for you,
gentlemen, to make up your minds whether you
believe it or not.
A Juror.—l think the learned counsel attri-
buted Roger Tichborne’s skill in cutting up meat
to his early fancy for dissecting cats.
The Lord Chief Justice. —Well, I don’t think
it worth while to dissect that argument. There
is something ludicrous in it. In the course of the
year 1864 the defendant thought of setting up in
business, so he took a shop and some other pre-
mises as a slaughtering yard. But the business
did not prosper, because he had no capital to carry
it on. He could not pay his rent, an action of eject-
ment was brought against him, and he was turned
out of the premises. During the proceedings in
ejectment Mr. Miller acted as his legal adviser.
The defendant was obliged to quit his premises,
and then be appears to have returned into the
employment of Mr. Higgins, and to have continued
in it until the latter part of 1865. While he was
still in Mr. Higgins’s employ, an event of very
considerable importance occurred—namely, his
marriage.
On the 29th of January. 1865, he married a
person named Ann Bryant, and his marriage is a
circumstance of considerable importance in this
case in more than ono respect. I don’t wish to
say a word which could give the defendant's wife
a moment’s pain or disquiet. Whatever may be
the result of this inquiry, she is an entirely un-
offending person in the whole matter, and it is.


cruel, perhaps, that her name should be in any way
brought forward in it; and yet it is impossible to
overlook the defendant’s marriage. We know
from his own statement that bis wife was a
domestic servant, that she was perfectly illiterate,
being unable to read or write, and that to the
marriage register she affixed only her mark. We
know something else which I do -not wish any
further to refer to. I will only ask you to look at
the Wagga Wagga will, and to the description of
her in the marriage register. I advert to these
circumstances only because I think it right you
should consider how far it is likely that Roger
Tichborne would have formed such a union.
Roger Tichborne would, of eourse, have been per-
fectly aware who he was, and there: is apparently
no reason to suppose he had abandoned the inten-
tion finally and for ever of returning to his native
country and resuming his station. He must have
known that if ev.er lie did so the marriage he was
forming would ereate a difficulty, as he oould not
place his wife in the position which the wife of
Roger Tichborne ought to occupy as regards -
society and intercourse with persons of equal
rank and station. Nor do I find that there was
such a romantic attachment as would suffice to
induce a man in spite of all such considerations
to say:— ‘ I don’t care; I love this woman with
such intense love that I will forego society and
give up all s icial pretensions for her Bake.’ I say
this because we shall find that when the defen-
dant made up bis mind to come tO'Bngland and
assert his claims he for a loug time contemplated
leaving his wife in the oolony and keeping the
fact of his marriage entirely secret. He told one
of the witnesses he deeply regretted having
married beneath him, thereby putting an obstacle
in his way. I say this is one of the circumstances
you ought to take into consideration as affecting
the probabilities of his case—mamely, that we find
the defendant forming a uuion which is apparently
incompatible with his position as Sir Roger Tich-
borne.
But that is not all. We must next consider
where and how the marriage was celebrated.
Roger Tichborne was the heir and the representa-
tive of one of the ancient Catholic families of this
country, and though I cannot say I think he had
any great veneration for the priests of his Church,
or for the Church itself as a body, yet he tells us
again and again that he always stood up for his
own religion when occasion required. In fact,
there is no reason to doubt that as far as he could
be attached to anything he was attached to the
Roman Catholic Church, and that he was a true
and real Roman Catholic. Now, if there is any-
thing a Roman Catholic would be likely to shrink
from it would be having the marriage ceremony
performed by a Dissenting minister in an ordinary
habitation, and not in a church belonging to his
own faith. Yet we know that the defendant, then
passing under the name of De Castro, had the
marriage performed in a private house by the
minister of a Wesleyan congregation. Let any
Roman Catholic judge whether that is a thing
likely to be done by a member of his Church.
And what is the explanation ? Was there no
Roman Catholic chapel at Wagga Wagga and no
priest who could unite these two persons in holy
matrimony i The defendant does not allege this,
but he gives two reasons, hardly compatible with
each other, why the ceremony was performed by
a Dissenting minister. The first is that he was
not on good terms with the Roman Catholic priest,
but I do not see that is a valid reason why a
Roman Catholic who regards marriage as a sacra-
ment should allow it to be defiled. Another rea-
son the defendant gives is this:—• I knew the
priest would not perform the ceremony unless I
first went to confession, and I oould not do so
without avowing who I was, beoause giving a false
name would be in itself a sin.’ We had some
clerical evidence on that subject, and as far as I
can make out there is no sin in concealing ones
real name, unless it is done for the purpose of
fraud, and in order to impose on the woman. If
for social reasons a man is living under an assumed
name, there is no sin in the concealment, and he
is not obliged to reveal the fact in confession.
Still, the defendant may have thought he was, and
have consequently refrained from asking the priest
at Wagga Wagga to'marry him.
At all events the defendant takes a wife—Ann
Bryant. He chooses to take her from a very hum-
ble sphere of society. Still she is as much his
Wife as if she had been a woman of rank
and title, and one would naturally suppose
• she would beoome the recipient of his secret,
if he had a secret, respecting his social posi-
tion. One would have thought he would have
said to her, ‘ I am not Tom Castro, as you
have believed me to be; lam Sir Roger Tichborne,,
the heir to a baronetcy and to a large fortune.’
There is another fact concerning his marriage that
is deserving of attention. Roger Tichborne, on
the 29th of January, 1865, was 36 years of age,
whereas Arthur Orton was only 30 years of age,
he having been born in March, 1834. It is remark-
able, therefore, that the defendant, at the time of
his marriage, stated his age to be 30 and not 36.
It i« also a curious thing that in the register he is
described as a native of Chili.
The next event to which it is necessary that I
should call your attention is the writing of what
has been oalled the Richardson letter. In April,
1865, the defendant goes to a schoolmaster at
Wagga Wagga and asks him to write a letter. The
schoolmaster accordingly did so, and, as it was to
bear the name of Thomas Castro, he asked the
defendant to sign it, but the defendant would not
do so. The schoolmaster, therefore, signed it him-
self. The letter was addressed to Mr. James
Richardson, who had carried on business in High-
street, Wapping, two or three doors from the es-
tablishment of old Orton. To this man, who was
well known in Wapping, the defendant addressed
the following letter:—
‘ Wagga Wagga, April 13, 1865.
‘Mr. James Richardson, Sir, Although a
perfect stranger, I take the liberty of addressing
you, and as my residence at present is in this dis-
tant colony, I trust you will pardon the intrusion
and oblige me by granting me the favour I seek. I
believe there was some years ago living in your
neighbourhood a person named Orton. To this
man I wrote several letters, none of which has ever
been answered. The letters are of importance to
Orton or his family, and to no other, so that I
must conclude he has not received them, as I am
certain they would be answered. Besides, as this
district is or lately was in a very disturbed state
through a lawless set who styled themselves bush-
rangers, and who respected neither life nor pro-
perty, I concluded my letters fell perhaps into
their hands. If Orton or his family live near you
still, or if you have or can give any information
respecting them, I shall feel ever grateful. I beg
to say here with pleasure that one of the most
notorious of the bushrangers has fallen by a rifle
ball, and that on the news of his death and doings


being properly chronicled I will send you the
paper containing such. I trust you will not fail to
oblige me by sending any information whatever
respecting Orton or his son Arthur. I am, Sir,
your obedient obliged servant, Thomas Castro.
Should you write, address Thomas Castro, care of
R. J. Higgins, Esq., Australian Hotel, Wagga
Wagga, N.S. Wales. To James Richardson, Esq.,
72, High-street, Wapping, London.’
In his cross-examination the defendant said he
never wrote a letter to old Orton at all. He was
asked:—
‘ At what period of your life did you first begin
to inquire about Arthur Orton ?—I do not see how
I can remember that. Just look at that letter.
Was it written by your direction to Mr. Richard-
son ?—Yes. . . Now, what was it that made
you on the 13th of April, 1865, at Wagga Wagga,
so anxious about Orton or his son Arthur ?—I
wish to explain first that the dictation of that
letter is not mine—that I merely asked a school
master to write and ascertain whether anything
had been heard of Orton, as I had not seen him
for two or three years. To write and ascertain
whether anything had been heard of Orton there ?
—ln England—whether he had returned or not.
As you had not heard from him for two or three
years ?—Yes, that is the lapse of time which I
gave you. “Or if you have or can give any infor-
mation respecting them I shall feel for ever grate-
ful ?”■—As I said, the letter was nothing dictatious
at all. Did you read it before you sent it?—Pro-
bably he read it over to me— yes. What did that
mean ? What was it would make you feel for
ever grateful for any information respecting Orton
or his family ?—I did not want to know about his
family. It was only about him. Cannot you tell
me what you wanted ? This was read over to
you, you say, probably?—Yes, probably it was.
“ If Orton or his family live near you still, or if
you have or can give any information respecting
them, I shall feel for ever grateful.” What was it
would have roused your sense of gratitude so
much in April, 1865, by the receipt of any infor-
mation about Orton or his family?—You see I did
not dictate that letter at all—it was a school-
master’s. So you have said, and I have asked
whether it was read oves to you, and you said pro-
bably it was ?—Yes; it is likely it was. Written
by your direction. What made you say you would
be very grateful?—l do not know that I was
grateful at all. It was put in as a matter of
course. What, pure Castilian! You mean that
was a flourish ?—I did not mean it was Castilian.
No. You meant it as a flourish, did you ?—I do
not know, I am sure. It was the schoolmaster
wrote; not me. He ought to be a better judge of
what he put in.
‘ What made you anxious to know at that time
where Arthur Orton was—about Orton and his
family ?—Well, I was anxious to know where he
was. If you directed information to be obtained
about Arthur Orton, it is curious there is not a
single syllable said about Arthur Orton till the
very last words of the letter ?—Still, that is what
I told him to write about. It is all about Orton’s
family, and at the very end it says, ‘ Orton or his
son Arthur.’ It is singular, if that was read over
to you, why that should be. Can you explain it ?
How came you to let that letter go in that shape ?
Ido not know. Ido not suppose I took much
notice what shape it was in. Had you seen any
of the family at that time named Orton, except
Arthur ?—No. Was there anything at all at that
time interesting or important to Arthur Orton
that you wished to communicate ?—Yes there
was. What was that ?—I shall decline to answer
that question. But lam afraid I must press you
for that.— I decline to answer that question. The
Lord Chief Justice: Why ?—lt might have a ten-
dency to criminate myself. The Solicitor-General:
It would not criminate you here, would it ? I
ask you, on your oath, do you mean to say that
answering the question would tend to criminate
yourself ?—On my oath it would. “To this man
I wrote several letters, none of which has ever
been answered.”—Well. I have never written any
letters to them. Then that is untrue ? —I suppose
it is. I certainly had never written any letters to
them before. How came the schoolmaster to write
that ?—I can’t say I’m sure how he came to write
that. You told me it was written by your direc-
tion ?—lt was. The schoolmaster was sitting in
the office, and I asked him to come in and write
them. And then it was probably read over to you ?
—Well, I should think it was. Where on earth
did the schoolmaster get the information that you
had written several letters to a man named Orton
in the neighbourhood of High-street, Wapping,
none of which had ever been answered ?—I do
not remember that being written at all. Will you
swear you did not?—Yes, I will swear I did
not.
‘The Lord Chief Justice: Just before you an-
swer in that way, bear in mind that it is not
simply in one part of your letter, but the whole
substance of the body of the letter has reference
to the letters you have written, and it is men-
tioned three times. Therefore in three places
letters are mentioned, and are mentioned with
reference to the substance of them. Do you mean
now you never wrote to Orton ?—No, I think on
reflection I must have written. The Solicitor-
General: You must have written, on reflection ?
—I have no recollection of having done it, but
there is no doubt from the tendency of that letter
I had done so. The tendency?—When Orton
went away he left two addresses with me. The
Lord Chief Justice : The letter was read more than
once, and you swore positively “I had never
written any letters.”—lf I did so, I did so purely
from my thoughts, my lord. The Solicitor-General:
Do you remember what the letters were about ?
If I wrote, they were to Arthur Orton himself.
But you say to Orton ?—Yes, not to any one else
I certainly should not have written. But that
Orton is not Arthur, but the father of Orton ?--
No, I certainly never wrote to him. Why did you
say you dill?—I can’t say I am sure, what I did
then, and I am not aware that I did do it ?’
Why should Roger Tichborne,the habitual letter-
writer, have had recourse to a schoolmaster in-
stead of writing himself, and why should he want
information about old Orton and his family ? If
Arthur Orton had the address of Mr. Richardson
be might have had a reason for writing to him,
but this will have a stronger bearing when we
come to the Orton part of the case. So much for
the Richardson letter.
I have already said that the defendant, having
set up business for himself, got into difficulties,
and employed Mr. Miller, an attorney, as his legal
adviser. Mr. Miller did his best, but could not
prevent his being ejected from tne premises he
occupied. About this time—the month of April,
when the letter was written—Mr. Miller entered
into negotiation with Mr. Gibbes for the transfer
of the Wagga-Wagga business to that gentleman,
and on the 20th of July Mr. Gibbes took the busi-
ness of Mr. Miller. For professional services, and


also in respect of some horse-dealing transaction,
the defendant remained indebted to Miller in the
sum of about 6 1. AVhen Mr. Gibbes took the
business, he took the debts with it, and there was
this claim against the defendant for the sum of
61. Shortly after he began business Mr. Gibbes
was opposed to the defendant on behalf of a
client, in a suit which the defendant brought
against Mr. Elliot to recover for wages, or for
rent —it does not matter which —if for rent, in
respect of some premises Mr. Elliot had taken of
him. The defendant, who conducted his own
case, prevailed; and, as Mr. Gibbes afterwards
said he thought, prevailed justly. Mr. Gibbes
reminded the defendant of the claim against him
for the balance due to Mr. Miller, to which the
defendant said he was not in a condition to pay.
Mr, Gibbes urged him to go through the Insolvency
Court, and the defendant agreed to do so, saying
to Mr. Gibbes that he might as well prepare the
schedule. Then the defendant says to Mr. Gibbes,
* I have been thinking whether I can go through
the Insolvency Court with safety. The fact is 1
have got a little property in England; and should
not I have to state that ?’ ‘ Oh, certainly,’ says
Mr. Gibbes. So the defendant shakes his head
and says, ‘ I have property in England.’ Mr.
Gibbes gives us rather a confused account of the
earlier communications of the defendant on the
subject of the property. I have perfect confidence
in Mr. Gibbes to this extent, that I do not believe
he intended to tell us anything that was not true.
He was extremely anxious to do justice to both
parties, but I would not trust implicitly to his
recollections. His account is that he understood
first that the property was in the South of Eng-
land, and afterwards in Hampshire, but that it
was small and insignificant, and that it was en-
tailed property which, in the event of his death,
must go to his cousin. The matter rested there
for the moment; but out of these relations between
Mr. Gibbes and the defendant arose the claim
afterwards brought forward.
We know that all interested in Roger Tichborne
had resigned themselves to the belief that he had
perished. His mother, Lady Tichborne, still re-
fused to believe in his death, and clung, in spite
of everything, to the irrational belief that he still
survived. AV e have been told how she and her
husband had words on the subject, when she would
harass him on that theme. Both Sir James and
his wife loved that boy with a fond parental love.
His mother hoped against hope, and clung to the
belief that he would re-appear. As long as the
father lived, Lady Tichborne was kept under some
control; but as soon aB the father was dead she
gave the reins to her unceasing desire to inquire
about her son. Even in the lifetime of her hus-
band, any idle tale brought by a beggar in the garb
of a sailor had eager credence from her. Brand,
the gamekeeper, has told us that the beggars
waited until Sir James went out and then made
their way up to the mansion. In 1862, when Sir
James died, his widow immediately began to take
steps to see whether she could discover her long-
lost son. In 1863 she advertises in The Times and
other papers in three languages —English, French,
and Spanish.
, In this year the defendant was settled at Wagga-
Wagga, where at the hotels and institutes the
English papers are taken. Therefore, when the
defendant was settled there, there was the possi-
bility of the defendant seeing these advertise-
ments ; and besides that, two or three copies of the
Illustrated London News —one of the leading fea-
tures of which is an obituary of the births, parent-
ages, and arms of persons of distinction —go to
Wagga-Wagga. There is no evidence that he saw
this particular paper, but it is probable that he did
so. In May, 1865, it happened that the Dowager
Lady Tichborne chanced to see an advertisement
in The Times of a Mr. Cubitt, of Sydney, who had
a Missing Friends’ Office there. No sooner did
Lady Tichborne see this than she made this Mr.
Cubitt and his Missing Friends’ agencies the
means of discovering her son, whom she believed
to be still alive, and whom she had taken it into
her head was in Australia. The following letter
was written from London, bearing date May 19,
1865:
Lady Tichborne having read in The Times of
the 19th of May the address of Mr. Cubitt missing
friends office thinks that she might write to Mr,
Cubitt to ask him to make some inquiries whether
Mr. Roger Charles tichborne now eldest son was
by chance in his neighbourhood. Roger Charles
tichborne is at present 32 years of age & cannot
be found anywhere, all what they could possibly
guess is that he embarked at Rio Janeiro on the
20th April 1854 but since that he never was heard
of. however there are some rumours about his
having been picked up by a vessel going to Aus-
tralia possibly to Melbourne. They say that some
people have been saved, & that only part of the
crew has been drowned but to what part of South
America did they go they do not know, still they
say that certainly part of the crew of the bella
has been saved, and has been picked up by a
vessel going to Melbourne, and that afterwards
they dispersed themselves, and Lady tichborne has
not been able to get any other information. She
was reading The Times this morning, and she saw
that there was a Missing Friends’ Office in Sydney,
New South Wales, and she thought that perhaps
Mr. Cubitt could take some informations respect-
ing her son. he is of a delicate constitution rather
tall and thin with very light brown hair and blue
eyes the name of the vessel on which he embarked
is “ la bella” he is heir to a very large property
and it is a subject of very great sorrow to his
mother that he should have quitted both his
father and herself his Father Sir James tichborne
is unfortunately dead since he went away and his
mother is always trying to get some informations
wherever she can if Mr. Cubitt can hear anything
respecting her son Roger Charles tichborne she
would be most grateful to him and to whoever
could find him out, and though he had no reason
whatever to hide his name however he might bo
under a feigned name in some business house or
somewhere, the person who could give his sor-
rowful Mother some information respecting her
son would be handsomely rewarded. They think
that the ship La Bella has been wrecked, but that
part of the crew has been saved and taken to
Melbourne, and that afterwards they dispersed
themselves in every part of America and that is
what gives rise to many conjectures. Lady Tich-
borne will feel so much obliged to Mr. Cubitt to
take all the informations he can respecting her
eldest son who went away in 1853 only for the
sake of knowing the world and who most unfor-
tunately has never returned home and has never
been heard of since the 20th of April, 1854 when
he embarked at rio janeiro to go to New York in
the ship La Bella.’
The Dowager signed herself ‘ Henriette F. Tich-
borne,’ and she added in a postscript:—


thinks that her son may have
married, and does not like his family to know it
and perhaps, has changed his name.’ ’
°! l l bltt writes, on the 22d of July, acknow-
mattei of s e n 1 m e ° elpt ° f + the letter ’ and mentions a
mattei of some importance to a gentleman carry-
ome n fee I??/ business, that it is usual to remit
ome tee m advance, but he observed that her
name was sufficient. Then he leads the pool lady
Chase - He tells her he believes he
has heard her son, Roger Charles Tichborne, is
mentthe GW and that he is in some regi-
ment there. The mother is in great distress and
her son will be killed by some of the natives
which °l oSe f a °?py of the following advertisement
papers mSerto,i in SoVeraf ooloilial news-
‘ A handsome reward will be given to any per
c? can furnls h such information as will dis-
saded m X 6 ° f ?T r Charles Tichborne. He
Anrif th<s ?i° rt °l m ° Janeiro on the 20th of
beS heard nf m - the £'? La Bella ’ and b*s never
tothc/llfeff 6 ’ but - a report reach ed England
eff . ect that a portion of the crew and pas-
en o ers of a vessel of that name was picked up by
a vessel bound to Australia-Melbourne, ft is
CharffT' l^ 8 not kn ° Wn Aether the said Roger
saved f lchboi '?, e was amongst the drowned or
:p> ve? a H f W ° U dat tlle time be about
talf with f age ’ r °f a delicate constitution,rather
m ’tT?K ery - h l ht blown hair and blue eyes.
]irt T ? b °/ e 18 SOD ° f Sir James Tichborne,
The t ;;f + deCCaSe< ’ and 18 heir t 0 all his estates.
nSrafrewf/ ls .!, DBtructed to state that a most
thffrn «--1,? 1 , be glven for any informatim
that muy definitively point out his fate. Gentle
bfable t 0 refer t 0 shi PP in fe r reports may
?i abl ® ? bnd s °me record of the saving of the
shipwrecked persons from La Bella, and a very
amflv 1 SearCh ’ lf With a successful result, will
irf e/if +? y ° ne Wh ° will take the trouble to
investigate the matter. The replies to be
addressed to Mr. Arthur Cubitt, Missing Friends’
ffice, Bridge-street, Sydney, New South Wales.’
As m Lady Tichborne’s letter, so also in the
advertisement, mistakes are made as to Roger
the?//? 8 ag ®,f nd the colour of his hair, and as
the que stion will arise by-and-by how far you c*i
rel y on the judgment of Lady Tichborne with
her ?? it - he ldentit y of the defendant with
obLrfe ’l? f f ot unim portant once more to
observe ail that passes in her mind when she
makes the statement which is sent, first to Mr
Cubitt and afterwards to the defendant. No one
can doubt that a mother’s recognition of her son
is, generally speaking, a circumstance to which an
° T ® rw -helming importance would bo at-
tached, but every rule has its exceptions, and it
! na J he that after you have considered the state of
r? y J IChb ? r “° 8 mind on this Particular point
and observed her conduct down to the last moment
t nei life you may be of opinion that this is an
exception to the general rule. However, that
conclusion ought not to be too hastily arrived at.
wen, Mr Gibbesgocs on writing to Lady Tich-
borne about the New Zealand discovery, which
however, ends in smoke. On the 17th of October,
Cubitt • La<ly Tlcbborne writes thus to Mr.
n/bfV? h T a T e received your welcome letter last
Zf?’ n v 1 hasten to answer it; the one you
has n/v/f aVID f addressed me in Wyndham-place
Las never reached me, and I have never had it
as vo/Tl/V* a I IDg v, glVen yOU mj hanker’s address,
as youi letter has been safely delivered to me. I
need not tell you what inexpressible joy it will be
to me if your informations are true, and I fervently
hope they may prove to be so. lam only sorry you
th nk fifT m 0 1 • letter the reward you may
S£i^SoSd B^n timab i e affair - 1 have «o 32
The fimwlf f hlm 7 ho will devote himself to
tnefanding out of my dear son, and I wish to be
guided by you m that matter. Had you named
verv much “Ttf ’ ifc Would have shortened time
y much, as letters are so long cornin' l, How-
SfuTS th Dding gr?at tobe
gratetul with the person who will give me some
mfn U d b that n T Ol if latlon ’i I am obli * e(1 to Put you in
been °^ J “ y i ointure > which has
been shortened by circumstances too long to be
mentioned in this letter. If you succfed the
reward will come out of the estate, and my son
my dear Roger, will enter fully into my ideas and*
paid out of™ ’ he expenses will and must be
paid out of my own money, and my own personal
resources are not so very great. It is an affair l
have undertaken all alone, and at my own risk
havmg never given up the idea of E 5
beloved son again, and I cannot help feeling very
anxious at the idea of his being in a regiment
where he b shot at any moment, especTaHy
as the war in New Zealand appears to be a very
murdeious one; therefore, in every way the sooner
he is out of it the better it will be. If you could
persuade him to write to me I would very soon
1 have the greatest pos-
w^ th + * J°o may not s P are an y trouble in
eveiy way to find out my beloved son, and I
not show myself ungrateful.
him and Vn nd 1“* pnnCl P al object will be to find
him, and tnen to persuade him to come and ioin
../“If 18 as soon as he can conveniently do it.
wil/sLn h K ? one T n . ecessar y for his discharge, it
18 a very necessary thing,
and absolutely indispensable, so be very cautious
musTbpnhf 0 th ) at a sf ir ’ aQ(I thy greatest secrecy
must be obtained, at least in England, for manv
reasons which it is difficult to explain in E
reward b f Ut S °k ' ® ° f tkese reasons will prevent the
reward from being very handsome if you succeed
‘H seems to me that if Roger will consent to
give his own name, and let a banker know where
he hides th ? m ° ney ’ as 1 aDI afraid
he hides his own name, and is, perhaps, unwilling
be wiET iB ‘ lt wol ' W . however^
be without any ground or reason for it and I
could not myself account for it except through
the love of adventures. I also think it would be a
veiy desirable and necessary thing to find out and
ascei tain whether he is married or not. He was
not so when he quitted England, but perhaps he
TL haVG *T? ied since - and he may have
11 R h P a^ iculars ought to be ascer-
th RwhJ alI u th 7 i 4 will a most important
yourself an 7 ? g ° ° Ver and s P eak to him
Paris PerhapS accom pany him back to
;’ Jn : t lam at Present, and bring him back
those neenl , s ? that perhaps some of
with in t tbat f baS Very likel y acquainted
mevent S' * f CoUntry “light keep him back and
fr r comin g to join me either in
i!° L ? ndon - When he quitted Paris, just
before his departure, his father, after having
• nly tried to make him give up the idea of
going away, at last told him that at least, if God
was to take him, he hoped he would come back
immediately to be his mother’s protector To
that my son readily consented, and he said that in
that melancholy case he would return to his


mother. I mention this as a motive to induce
him to come back to me. And now that I have,
I think, entered into all the particulars necessary,
I recommend you once more not to spare either
time or trouble to succeed in this truly interesting
affair, and to bring it to a happy conclusion. My
address will be for your next letter at my banker’s,
as he will always forward me my letters, wherever
I am, and, in hope to hear soon what progress you
have been able to make, I remain, very sincerely
yours, ‘H. F. Tichbornk.
‘ My address is Messrs. Callaghan’s, 40, Hue
Neuve des Mathurins, Chaussee d’Antin, Paris. I
prefer you addressing all your letters in future at
my banker’s as it is the safest way to get letters. ’
So the matter stood after the New Zealand
story had been given up until Mr. Cubitt received
what was no doubt a welcome letter from
Mr. Gibbes, of Wagga-Wagga, informing him that
he had unearthed the real Roger Tickbome. On
that a correspondence ensued between Mr. Gibbe3
and Mr. Cubitt. Mr. Gibbes told us, as you re-
member, that the defendant asked him what
would be the consequence if he omitted property
he had in England from his schedule in bank-
ruptcy which he said was entailed. Gibbes thought
it odd that property should be entailed on a man
who gave a foreign name, and told him so. Upon
that he replied that Castro was an assumed name,
that he was a member of an English family, and
that a distinguished one. Then says Mr. Gibbes,
‘ Are you the heir to the title ?’ and he said, ‘ I
am the eldest son; ’ and a little time afterwards,
while they were talking about the weather and so
forth, Mr. Gibbes said, ‘ I wish I were at Sydney
again, on that noble bay.’ ‘ Oh,’ exclaimed the
defendant, ‘ if you had been shipwrecked as I was,
you would not want to go on the sea again.’ So
Mr. Gibbes went home, and while chatting with
Mrs. Gibbes on the curious vicissitudes of human
life, mentioned his connexion with the eldest son
of an English gentleman of title who managed
Higgins’s shop. Thereupon his wife says : —‘ Why,
that must be the man who is advertised for.’
‘ Advertised for! Why, what do you mean ?’
‘What! Did you not seen the advertisement in
the Melbourne Argus ?’ ‘ No.’ ‘ Oh, that is the
man, you may depend upon it.’
Away goes Gibbes to the Institution, searches
the papers, and comes to the conclusion that the
defendant is the man to a certainty. He meets
the defendant again and speaks to him about the
climate. The defendant says, ‘Ah, it is not so
fine as the climate of South America.’ Gibbes
says, ‘ Oh, you have been in South America, have
you?’ and concludes there can no longer be
the slightest doubt about the man, as the Bella
had gone down near the coast of South America.
He was pursuing the matter further when the de-«
fendant said, ‘Ask me no more questions; you
are fishing.’ But Gibbes had made up his mind
to get at the secret, and on a subsequent occasion
meeting the defendant who was smoking a pipe,
he said, ‘ Shall I call out your real name ?’ ‘ No,’
exclaimed the defendant, ‘ for God’s sake, don’t.’
‘ Oh, I know who you are; you are Tichborne:
‘ Is that it ?’ asked the defendant, holding up the
pipe on which the letters ‘ R. C. T.’ were carefully
cut. ‘Arc those the initials?’ ‘Yes,’ answered
Gibbes.
After that, says Mr. Gibbes, he became much
less reserved. One day they walked to the post
office, and they talked about the spelling of the
name. The defendant went on to say that he was
the heir to a large property, including Tichborne-
park. Mr. Gibbes sits down and writes to Mr.
Cubitt a letter on October 9, 1865, and asks him
whether he is in possession of further facts as to
Roger Tichborne beyond those mentioned in the
advertisement. This, perhaps, struck Mr. Gibbes
on reading what Lady* 1 Tichborne said about her
son’s personal appearance. He says that he
‘ spotted’ him some time ago, and that the defend-
ant was disgusted when the name of Tichborne
was first spoken between them. This letter must
have been written before the name had been dis-
closed. Mr. Gibbes said the conversation took
place before the 7th of September, but I am
inclined to think he was mistaken on this point.
Seventh' Day. Monday, February 9, 1874.
Gentlemen, when we broke up on Friday we
had reached the point at which the defendant had
been brought into contact witji Mr. Gibbes at
Wagga-Wagga, and Mr. Gibbes had become so
satisfied of the fact of his being Roger Tichborne
who was sought after by advertisement that he
wrote the letter of the 9th of October, 1865, to
Mr. Cubitt, to which I have already directed your
attention. After that date—up to which he had
not, as it seems from the letter, given his name
—he became mote unreserved with Mr. Gibbes,
and made a variety of statements to that gentle-
man connected with his history and his family
and his property. Now, before I proceed further
with the correspondence between those various
parties, I think it would be more convenient at
once to draw your attention to those statements,
for what the defendant said at that time must
obviously be of the utmost importance in ena-
bling you to arrive at a satisfactory result in this
inquiry. At that time you see the defendant
was thrown upon his own resources. During the
later period he is surrounded by persons who
could and possibly did assist him. Ido not say
that they did. That is a matter for consideration
hereafter. But when he came to England he is
surrounded by Bogle, by the Dowager Lady
Tichborne, who was impressed with the belief
that his hair had become fair by reason of the
various vicissitudes through which he had passed;
by Baigent, than whom no one knew more of the
Tichborne family; by Rous, than whom no one
knew more of the property and settlements; by
Carter and M’Cann, who knew of the military
life of Roger Tichborne. But at the time we
are now speaking of he was in Australia and had
no such source of information. And therefore any
knowledge of Roger Tichborne he may have dis-
played, or any ignorance be may have manifested,
is far more important than what he said or did
at an after period, when his mind may have been
informed of matters of which he before knew
nothing, or his memory refreshed as to things he
might have forgotten.
Now, these conversations with Mr. Gibbes are
somewhat remarkable. When you want to know
a man’s past it is natural that you should ask him
where he was born, where he was brought up, and
where he was educated. Mr. Gibbes had taken
the defendant up, and manifested at this time
a warm interest in him. He believed he had got
the right man; and he knew that, if he had, no
small amount of credit would attach to the saga-
city of the Wagga-Wagga attorney, who had dis-


covered the lost man whom nobody had been able
to hnd Possibly, too, there might appear to the
5 68 Gibbes a glimmer in the distance of the
possibility of a considerable reward. However
that may be, Mr. Gibbes took a great interest in
the defendant, and he naturally asked him where
he was born. We all know where Roger Tichborne
" as born Ibe was born in Paris. The defendant’s
answer was that he was born in Dorsetshire, and
lie accounts for the fact of his birth there by
stating that his father had, and had long had, a
seat at a place called The Hermitage. First, as to
» bls bl rth of course no man knows from personal
recollection where he was born; but there is
hardly a man, I suppose, from wbat he has heard
ID u 18 childhood and boyhood, who does not know
where he was born. The defendant then added
that his mother, immediately after her confine-
ment, went over to Cherbourg, and that he re-
mained in France until he was 11 or 12 years of
age, all which we know to be perfectly incon-
sistent with the fact. He tells Mr. Gibbes further
that he had two sisters, who were born in France
which is perfectly accurate. Roger Tichborne had
two sisters born in France—Mabel, who died an
lniant, and Alice, who died young. We know he
had a brother Alfred; but, according to Mr.
Gibbes, the defendant made no mention of him
until a later period, and then mention is made of
Airred in connexion with his birth in England
whereas we know quite well that Alfred, as well
n-ir° S f£’ 'T , born at Paris ' He a l B o told Mr.
Oabbes that he had property tied up in England,
and that m view of his death it would go to his
cousin We know perfectly well it went to Alfred,
asked Mr. Gibbes if he said anything about his
® r ' a ad be replied, ‘My memory is not
min 1 ’ 0n * s an impression on my
At a later period of his examination Mr. Gibbes
sanl he mentioned that a cousin would succeed
him. He made no mention of Alfred. Then he
was asked, ‘ Did you ever hear of Alfred until the
IJowagers letter came, in which he was referred
"V, ““ b 0 replied, ‘ I cannot say. I know he
saicl that two sons were born in England and two
daughters in France.’ Now, it is important to
observe that he mentioned about the two daugh-
ters at W agga-Wagga, where he had no external
sources of information; and according to Mr.
Gibbes he made another statement—as to bis
birth which, if Mr. Gibbes is right as to the
period at which he made it, would also be very
much m his favour. He said he was born on the
sth of June, 1829, which date is, no doubt, cor-
rect as to the date of Roger Tichborne’s birth, and
which is a thing he could not have got at out
tiler o . Slate, the Hampshire man, could not have
told bun that. The advertisements for Roger
lichborne did not give the date of his birth, and
a// no J B, PP eal ' i Q the advertisements of the
London News. The question is whether
• 5’ j bbes who I have not the slightest doubt
intended to tell us the truth, who is a man of
somewhat flighty mind and memory, told us the
precise date of the conversation; for if it was
alter the defendant had been at Sydney, where
£e had a Baronetage and looked at it, he could
acquired the information from that source.
fW 0 iV lu ? ther P° int here observable—namely,
* bat - bllo the defendant told the exact date of his
mi th, he did not know his own age, when, only a
bew«°35 hB w?t^ at bi g marriage, he said tit
h , etll ? a "” e of Roger Tichborne, as
we know, was then 38. Another thing seems to
I have struck Mr. Gibbes, for he put this question,
You say you were in France till you were 11
years old—do you speak French?’ He replied,
iNo, 1 speak Spanishand thereupon Mr. Gibbes,
wbo understood that language, tried him, and
told us that he spoke it volubly and with con-
siderable rapidity and facility. Mr. Gibbes was
nimself a Spanish scholar, and knew the difference
between pure Spanish and the sort of Spanish
which is spoken in South America. He observed
tiiat whether the defendant is Roger Tichborne
or whether he is not, the Spanish he spoke
was the Spanish which would be learnt in that
part of the old world. Here a difficulty, of course,
piesents itself, although it more properly belongs
to another part of the case. But it does strike
one as being very remarkable, the Spanish having
been acquired by Roger at the time French was
spoken by him with perfect facility and fluency-
tile french having been perfect as far as conver-
sation was concerned, and the Spanish necessarily
imperfect, as learnt while travelling about the
country,—l say it is remarkable that the French
which was his mother tongue, should be wholly
forgot ,en and the Spanish retained. That struck
Air. Gibbes and it would naturally strike anybody.
I do not say it is an impossibility, but it is one of
the striking things in the case.
Connected with this matter is the subject of
education. It was natural for Mr. Gibbes to ask,
''v here were you educated ? Were you at any
public schoo l ?’ He replied, ‘ No; I could not be
educated.’ ‘Why?’ ‘I had a nervous affection,
which prevented me from being properly educated,
and all that could be done with me was to com-
nnt me to the charge of a Jesuit’—or, as was said
at the later period, ‘to a Christian Brother at
Winchester—who took me about and taught me
by snatches and at intervals when it was possible
to do so. That led to the inquiry, ‘ What was
the matter with you ?’ Thereupon the defendant
explained that he had a nervous affection of the
lace, and Mr. Gibbes, on hearing his description
of it, said, ‘ Why, bless me, that must be St.
v ltus’s dance.’ And says the defendant, ‘ Yes
nut was . wbat tbe y ca l lec l I*-’ Accordingly Mr.’
Gibbes, in communicating with Mr. Cubitt, and
mentioning vaiious particulars connected with the
defendant which he thought essential to his iden-
tification, and in writing to the Dowager Lady
lichborne afterwards, dwells upon this same mat-
ter-. That there may be no doubt about this,
which is one of the most important questions in
this case, I will read what Mr. Gibbes said. He
was examined on a passage in a letter from him to
Mr. Cubitt, and in cross-examination on the same
P 0 . 1 ? 1 * sau ’ ' J- suggested St. Vitus’s dance, and he
said at was St. Vitus’s dance, giving that as a rea-
son for his not being able to be educated.’ Now
Roger Tichborne never had St. Vitus’s dance or
any similar affection. It has not been suggested
from the beginning to the end of the case that he
ever had, and Lady Tichborne, the mother, when
sbo hears of it, immediately repudiates it. Now,
what says the defendant on the subject ? He was
cross-examined as to it, and he gives Mr. Gibbes’s
statement a positive contradiction. He is asked :
■Dhl you not tell your own attorney, Mr.
Gibbes, that you had been afflicted with St.
V dance from your childhood ?—Certainly
not. That you swear?—l swear, to tho best of
my belief, I did not. Never mind about “from
your childhood.” Did you tell him that you had
been afflicted with St. Vitus’s dance ?—No, I do
not think I did. Will you swear you did not ?


I swear Ido not remember doing so. You will
swear you do not remember doing so ?—Was
Gibbes called by your counsel and attorney at
Wagga Wagga?—You have read the Australian
evidence. You have read his deposition, have
you not ?—No, I have not. Do you mean to say
that you have not looked at your own attorney’s
deposition ?—I will swear solemnly on my oath
that I have not. Have you not looked at your
own attorney’s deposition in Australia? —I have
not read it. You have not?—Not one particle.
Have you had it read to you ?—Not a word. Not
a word? —Not a word. The Lord Chief Justice. —
Or a copy of it ?—I did look at one or two of
them, but not at Gibbes’s. The Solicitor-Gene-
ral.—You did not see what Gibbes had sworn on
your behalf in Australia ?—No, I did not. Mr.
Serjeant Ballantine. —Do not say “ on his behalf.”
The Solicitor-General. —I do say “on his behalf ”
—called by you. Do you mean to swear that you
did not tell Mr. Gibbes that you had been afflicted
with St. Yitus’s dance from your childhood ?—I
do not believe I did. Will you swear you did
not?—l might do so. You might do so? —I
might say I swear. Was it true you might do so ?
I might do so. I might swear positively. Will
you ?—I do not see why I should object to do it.
Will you? Will you swear that you did not tell
Mr. Gibbes, your own attorney, that you had been
afflicted with St. Yitus’s dance from your child-
hood ?—I will swear that Ido not remember tell-
ing him so. Will you swear you did not ?—Yes,
I will swear it. You will swear you did not?—l
will swear I did not. If he has said that it is
untrue ?—lt is untrue. It is a falsehood ?—lt is
a falsehood. An absolute falsehood ?—An abso-
lute falsehood. Without any foundation P—With-
out any foundation. Did he ever talk to you
after he received this letter from your mother in
which she said that you never had—that Roger
Charles Tichborne never had—St. Yitus’s dance ?
Did he ask you to explain how you came to tell
him that ?—I think you will find he received that
letter after my departure. That may be so. Can
you account for his writing to Lady Tichborne, as
it appears he did to say you had told him that
you had St. Yitus’s dance ?—No, I cannot accoont
for it. Can you account how Mr. Gibbes came to
tell Lady Tichborne that you had said that you
had St. Vitus’s dance if you had not?—No, I
cannot. Now, upon your solemn oath, did not
you tell him that you had?- Upon my solemn
oath I did not.’
Now, either Mr. Gibbes or the defendant must
have sworn that which is false. You must judge
between the two witnesses. It is for you to say
whether you believe the defendant on his oath, or
whether you believe Mr. Gibbes’s statement on his
oath. If he told Mr. Gibbes that he had St. Vitus’s
dance, he could hardly be supposed to have made
the statement without it being supposed that he
had had it. It is a question of credit, for if he
has sworn a deliberate falsehood in this it must
shake your confidence as to the truth of his other
statements, as to which he is contradicted by other
witnesses. But it goes further, because Roger
Tichborne never had the affection at all. In addi-
tion to the statement of Mr. Gibbes, we have the
fact that he wrote to Mr. Cubittand the Dowager
Lady Tichborne, soon after the conversation to
which he swears, referring to St. Vitus’s dance as
a means of identifying Roger, his object and wish
then being that he should be identified. But it
does not rest there. There is the evidence of
another witness —Mr. Hodgson, who came over in
tli 3 ship with the defendant. Mr. Hodgson is
struck with the fact that a man who had been
brought up as the head of the Tichborne House,
and who had for a long time occupied the position
of a gentleman, should speak English in .the un-
educated form and style in which the defendant
spoke it; and Mr. Hodgson could not help saying
so to him. He put it to him delicately: ‘lt
strikes me as odd that you don’t speak English as
I should expectand he makes the same answer,
‘ I could not be educated because I had St. Vitus’s
dance.’ Mr. Hodgson says he observed that his
conversation was not the conversation of an edu-
cated man, and his reply was that he had had St.
Vitus’s dance, and till he was 15 years of age he
could not learn his letters. Now, the defendant is
asked as to that, and he denies that he had ever
said to Mr. Hodgson or any one else that he ever
was afflicted with St. Vitus’s dance. We have
Mr. Gibbes supported by his own letters as well as
by the evidence of Mr. Hodgson, who represents
the same thing as having occurred.
There are one or two other things worthy of
observation in the early conversations with Mr.
Gibbes. He told Mr. Gibbes that he was a gam-
bler, but, as far as we know, Roger never gambled,
with the exception of the Brighton card case, and,
according to the evidence of the family, Roger
Tichborne was not a gambler. Mr. Gibbes was
asked, ‘ Did he speak to you in the early part
about gambling ? ’ and he replied that he said
something to the effect that he had a weakness
for gambling, or was addicted to it. Now, there
is no trace of Roger Tichborne ever having gam-
bled. It was hardly in keeping with his character.
There is, however, this qualification—it may have
been that, though he had not gambled in England,
he might have acquired the habit in Australia.
The defendant made one or two other singular
statements. He told Mr. Gibbes that his family
had been giving 3s. in the pound to the Roman
Catholic Church, but there is no evidence before
us which would lead us to believe that the family
did anything of the sort. Mr. Gosford, who was
steward of the property for many years, had never
heard nor dreamt of anything of the kind. There
was what is called the ‘ Tichborne Dole,’ but the
defendant did not know what it meant. This
dole was practised in the Tichborne family for a
long period, and there is a celebrated picture of it
in Tichborne House.
Now, as regards the property, his statements
are certainly remai’kable. In the first place, he
represented the property in terms which led Mr,
Gibbes to believe that it was small and insigni-
ficant. He said that at his death it would go to
a couiin, and when he got a little more familiar
in his conversation and more unreserved in his
statements he told Mr. Gibbes that the estate
comprised Tichborne, and that there was also pro-
perty which had come from a relative, and he
mentioned in connection with this property the
name of Doughty, but he did not say it had come
from any one of that name. We must cast about
to see where he could have obtained that know-
ledge, unless he was the real Roger Tichborne.
That matter we shall consider presently. He
does not appear to have said a word as to any
Doughty relation of his; he never mentions his
uncle Sir Edward, nor his aunt Lady Doughty,
but he did un ioubtedly mention the name in
connection with property which had recently come
to the family from a relative. When we come to
look at his entire account, we shall find there is a
serious per contra on the other side. For in-


stance, lie tells Mr. Gibbes he was bora in Dor-
setshire at bis fathers seat, called The Her-
mitage, and speaks of that seat as one which had
belonged to his father and at which his father
had resided. Not only had Mr. James Tich-
borne no seat in Dorsetshire, and still less a
seat called The' Hermitage, but he never had
a residence in this country during the vrhole
period of Roger Tichborne’s stay in it. He was
the third son, and had no landed property, no seat,
no residence here. Besides that, the defendant
told Mr. Gibbes he had property consisting of a
terrace or crescent of houses at Cowes and Ryde.
We know that the Tichborne family had no pro-
perty either at Cowes or Ryde. So much for posi-
tive statements. Let us now look at what is
omitted. Up to this time, in these conversations
with Mr. Gibbes, he makes no mention of his-life
either at Stonyhurst, where Roger Tichborne was
for three years, or of his having been in the army,
which he afterwards denied. These are very
striking omissions, because those epochs are the
most important in Roger Tichbome’s life. It is
plain we have a most extraordinary medley of
ignorance and knowledge. Let us see whether
there were any sources of information open to
him.
As early as 1863 we know that Roger Tich-
borne was advertised for in The Times. We know
that Lady Tichborne advertised in The Times in
three languages. The advertisement in the
Spanish language communicates rather more than
the others, but what it told fell far shoi-t of the
knowledge the defendant exhibited. It stated
that Roger went on board of the Bella at a certain
date, that the vessel was lost, and that there were
hopes that Roger might have been picked up.
There was nothing about the Tichborne property,
the name of Doughty, or the second son, or the
two daughters ; but he had another source of in-
formation. There was a man named Slate at
Wagga Wagga in humble circumstances, but who
is described by Mr. Petit Smith as a man of very
superior education. We know that in the ups and
downs of this life we find men, especially in the
colonies, where so many persons who are driven
out of this country by one circumstance or
another, find a refuge, who have seen better days;
and this appears to have been the case with Slate.
Well, Slate, as a Hampshire man, may have had,
and particularly if he had moved at all in a better
sphere of life, considerable knowledge of Hamp-
shire families, and may have known about the
Tichbornes. He may have heard, as a sort of local
gossip, that they had property in Dorsetshire, and
it is possible he may have seen the undoubted
Roger himself. It is possible, too, he may have
bean struck by the likeness between the defend-
ant and Roger. I do not find from the defendant’s
statement that Slate ever professed to have known
him or identified him. It is now evident that he
took some interest or other in the history of the
Tichborne family and in the discovery of Roger,
because the defendant himself tells us that it
was Slate who first called his attention to the ad-
vertisement Mr. Cubitt caused to be inserted in
the Australian papers. Slate had gone from
Wagga Wagga with a lot of cattle to Melbourne.
The defendant was prevented going, and Slate
went in his place, and he brought back in his
pocket a Melbourne newspaper with the adver-
tisement in it, and drew the attention of the
defendant to it; and nothing would be more
natural that the advertisement so produced would
have been the subject of conversation be L wern
them. The inference I draw from it is this—that
Slate took an interest in the matter, and that that
interest arose in all probability from his
some knowledge of the Tichborne family. I do
not think that that is an unjust or unfair infer-
ence to draw.
But there was another source from which infor-
mation may have been derived—it is, however
merely speculative—namely, from the statements
made in the Illustrated London News. We know
that that journal was taken in at the Mechanics ’
Institute at Wagga Wagga, and the defendant, as
a man of intelligence and being able to read, may
have gone there. The first things that attract
one, I am afraid, learned and unlearned, are the
pictures, and they were very likely the first
things the defendant would look at. One of the
specialities of the Illustrated London Newsis the
obituary, in which an account of the death and
a narrative of the history of every distinguished
person is inserted. On the 12th of March, 1853
the death of Sir Edward Doughty is recorded. I
do not think it likely that that copy of the
journal in question ever passed into the de-
fendant’s hands, although it is possible that with
a view to obtain information in reference to the
family he may have turned back on the file and
seen it. It is a remote probability. The notice
of that date says :
‘Sir Edward Doughty, Bart. This gentleman,
the heir-male and representative of the old and’
eminent family of Tichborne, of Tichborne, seated
in Hampshire before the Conquest, died on the
sth inst., aged 71, at his seat Tichborne-park, near
Alresford. He was the third son of Sir Henry
Tichborne. the sixth baronet by Elizabeth Lucy
his wife, daughter of Edmund Plowden, Esq., of
Plowden. In 1826 he succeeded at the decease
of the late Miss Doughty, of Snarford-hall, Lin-
colnshire, and of Richmond-hill, Surrey, to that
lady’s extensive estates, together with her pro-
perty in the neighbourhood of Russell-square
including Doughty-street, etc., and assumed in
consequence the name of Doughty. In 1834 he
served as High Sheriff of Dorsetshire, and in
1845, by the death of his elder brother, the late
Sir Henry Tichborne, without male issue, became
baronet of Tichborne. Sir Edward married
June 26, 1827, Katharine, daughter of James’
Everard, ninth Lord Arundell of Wardour, and
had one son, Henry, who died in youth, and one
surviving daughter, Katharine Mary Elizabeth
Doughty. The present inheritor of the title and
estates is Sir Edward’s only surviving brother
now Sir James Francis Tichborne, ninth baronet’
He is married to Harriette Felicita, daughter of
Henry Seymour, Esq., of Knoyle, Wilts, and has
two surviving sons, Roger Charles and Alfred
Joseph.’
Now, I do not think it is at all likely that the
defendant ever saw that. But that observation
does not apply to the Illustrated London News of
the 21st of June, 1862, which records the death
of Sir James Tichborne, Roger’s father. It con-
tained the following notice: —
‘ Sir J. F. Doughty-Tichborne, Bart. Sir James
Francis Doughty-Tickborne, tenth baronet of
Tichborne, Hants, was the fourth son of Sir Henry
Tichborne, the seventh baronet, by his wife Eliza-
beth Lucy, eldest daughter of Edmund Plowden
Esq., of Plowden, in the county of Salop, and his
wife Lucy, daughter and co-heir of William
Thompson, Esq., of Fyston, Oxon, and grand
daughter of Sir Berkeley Lucy, Bart. He wa"
born on the 3rd of October, 1784, and succeedc 1


as tenth baronet, on the sth of March, 1853, his
brother, Sir Edmund Tichbome, the ninth baronet,
who assumed the surname of Doughty in 1826.
On succeeding to the estates of his relative, the
late Miss Doughty, of Snarford Hall, Lincolnshire,
and Richmond Hill, Surrey, Sir James Francis
Tichborne, the subject of this notice, obtained, in
the Blay after his accession to the baronetcy, a
Royal licence for himself and his heirs to bear the
name of Doughty before that of Tichborne. He
married, the Ist of August, 1827, Harriette Feli-
cita, daughter of Henry Seymour, Esq., of ICnoyle,
Wiltshire, and had issue two sons, the elder of
whom, Roger Charles, was lost at sea, off the coast
of South America, in 1854, and two daughters, who
both died young in Paris. Sir James died at his
seat, Tiohborne Park, Hants, on the 11th inst. He
is succeeded by his only surviving son, now Sir
Alfred Joseph Doughty-Tichborne, the 11th
baronet, who was bom on-the 4th of September,
1339, and married, the 17th of April, 1861, The
resa Mary, eldest daughter of Henry Benedict,
11th and present Earl Arundell of Wardour. This
very ancient Roman Catholic family of De Tich-
burne, or Tichborne, was of importance in Hamp-
shire before the Norman Conquest, and we hear
of the De Tichburnes as knights and men of posi-
tion, and prominent in the reigns of the early Nor-
man kings. They were staunch cavaliers under
the Stuarts. When Queen Elizabeth died, Sir
John de Tichborne, Knight, then High Sheriff of
Hampshire, at once proclaimed King James I.
The monarch mai’ked his sense of this signal ser-
vice by knighting Sir John’s four sons, and con-
ferring on himself the Castle of Winchester in fee-
farm, and the dignity of a baronet, the Bth of
March, 1620. Fi’om this Sir John the baronetcy
has descended through a long and loyal line of
cavaliers and worthy gentlemen to Sir James
Francis, the baronet just dead, and his son and
successor, Sir Alfred Joseph Doughty-Tichborne,
the present baronet.’
Now, gentlemen, if that publication was ever seen
by the defendant or by Slate, it would convey
the knowledge of several facts with reference to
Tichborne—such as that the name of Doughty
had been assumed by Sir James, and two
daughters had been born in France, but it would
leave the reader in ignorance of the fact that the
sons were born there also. It would further con-
vey the information that there had been two ways
of spelling the name Tichborne, one with ‘ u ’ and
the other with ‘ o.’ Whether the knowledge dis-
played by the defendant grew from any perusal
° l . “ us obituary you must form your own
opinion.
A Juror. It would have given information of
Ins mother’s Christian name, whioh he subse-
quently mis-stated.
The Lord Chief Justice :—Certainly it would.
I was going to say so. But the observation which
piesented itself on the other side is this :—Sup-
posing it to have been carefully studied, so as to
cany away all the facts in the memory of the
person who studied it, one would have supposed
he would have had more information than the
defendant appears to have had. It is for you to
consider whether it is not possible that a man
may not have borne everything ssfficiently in
mind to be able at a moment’s notice when asked
questions, to reproduce it.
, Jui '°. r ; A CCol 'ding to another part of
Mr. Gibbes s evidence, at the time when the de-
fendant made his will, he said ho knew what was
going on in England, as some one had kept him
informed from England.
The Lord Chief Justice. —I am aware he did,
but I dot attach much importance to that, for if
he had any such source of information he would
have known more than he did. There are many
things his ignorance with repect to which we can
only account for, if he be Roger, by supposing
that his memory most signally falied him. If he
had any such information as he spoke of he
would have been better informed than he
evidently was.
Gentlemen, I now come to the correspondence
between Mr. Cubitt and Mr. Gibbes. You
remember that, in his last letter to Mr. Cubitt,
Mi. Gibbes, to use his own words, expressed his
belief that he had ‘ spotted ’ the right man.
Writing again on the 25th of November he
says :
‘ Wagga Wagga, JVov. 25, 1865.
‘My dear Cubitt,—l told you in my last that if
the necessary funds and something to leave be-
hind could be got I could send on the missing
man at a very few days’ notice, but that I had
promised not to reveal the secret before the end
of March next. He is so far changed from his
original intention that he is anxious to go, but
that his present identity must be totally discon-
nected from his future. I suopose you received
my letter acquainting you with the certainty
that he is really Roger Charles Tichbome.
‘ Yours, &c., ‘ Wm. Gibbes.’
Mr. Cubitt replied on the 29th :
‘ Bridge Street, Sydney, JVov. 29, 1865.
‘My dear Gibbes, —I shall bo prepared, so soon
as the next mail arrives from England, in the
event of receiving advices from Lady Tichborne to
make all necessary advances, not only to get Mr.
Tichborne to Sydney, but also to send him home,
and at the same time, as in a previous letter I
expressed a wish that this should be a business
transaction, to compensate you for the assistance
you have given me in this matter. Of course,
while I am desirous of carryingout your wishes as
to secrecy, you must bear in mind that I, as well
as yourself, must be satisfied that I get the right
man.—Yours truly, A. Cubitt.’
To Lady Tichborne Mr. Cubitt wrote as follows
on the 21st of December :
‘ Sydney, Bee. 21, 1865.
‘ Madam, —Your favour of October 17 is only
now to hand, and the few hours left me to reply
compel me to be as brief as possible. My pre-
vious correspondence will have convinced you of
the perseverance with which I have instituted the
search, and the care with which I have made my
reports will be sufficient to assure you that I was
most anxious to avoid stating anything that the
facts did not justify. You will therefore not fail
to put credence in my present statement that Mr.
Roger Tichborne is alive and well, and that he is
now in this colony within 600 miles of Sydney,
and that it is my intention to proceed at once to
his place of abode, and to the best of my ability
carry out all your wishes. While you might not
have been able fairly to estimate what would have
been a proper compensation in the event of my
search proving successful, I must say that I did
expect a draught by the mail at least to pay the
great trouble end expense I have already been
put to, especially in the face of the fact that I
might have had to make a voyage to New Zealand
and back, and I trust that this intimation will be
sufficient to secure me witlout further delay a


compensation in part. From circumstances that
have come to my knowledge I agree with you that
it is necessary I should accompany your son to Eng-
land or to Paris, but if this can be averted I have
no desire to put you to the additional expense of
uiy passage to England and hack and the remunera-
tion that would have to be made to me for loss in
my business during my absence. As to the ulti-
mate reward, I understand by your letter that in
the event of success this is to be paid out of the
estate, and that in the event of failure I am to
look to you for the expenses contracted upon this
inquiry. Mr. T. will not publicly reveal his own
name, and when he leaves here will do nothing by
which the public prints will be aware of his de-
parture hence, or in England of his arrival. Here,
so far, the secrecy you desire will be maintained,
and I’see no difficulty in the way of confining all
this business to the parties interested. Your son’s
circumstances are of such a character that he has
not even the means to come to Sydney, much less
outfit and passage-money. This will all have to be
provided by me. A letter from you to your son I
shall be glad to deliver personally—Yours, &c ,
‘ A. CUBITT.’
Gentlemen, we have now brought this story
down to the end of the year 1865. At this period
the defendant had made up his mind to come for-
ward as Sir Roger Tichborne and to return to Eng-
land to prosecute his claim. Mr. Cubitt wrote to
Mr. Gibbes on the 10th of January
‘ Sydney, Jan. 10, 1866.
1 Dear Sir, —Letters of a most important nature
having been received by me from Lady Tichborne,
it becomes a matter of necessity that I should at
once have a personal interview with her son. I
therefore beg you will be kind enough to send
him on to Sydney.—Yours, &c., ‘A. Cubitt.’
7\r v Gibbes replies on the 13th :
Mi. W i , Wagga Warjga> jan, 13. 1866.
«Dear Sir, —I received yours this morning, and
making instantly the necessary inquiries, dis-
covered that Sir R. C. T. has left his last place of
abode. He has lately shown signs of restlessness,
but I think that he has not gone far as yet. As
for my showing him to you, mature reflection has
shown me that to be out of the question without
his consent, even if I could at present, as after the
present lapse of time I should feel myself justified
in claiming, on behalf of the real discoverer, the
reward. I should wish to know if the letters you
have received from England give anything definite.
As I told you, the amount should not be less than
200 J. or 250 1. That amount lam willing to divide
equally with you. You need not expect T. to
start unless he can leave some money behind for
the person I spoke of. I found on observation his
nose is not aquiline, but straight ; his eyes nearly
grey (they change from blue in after-life); mouth
rather narrow, with a retreating expression, sub-
ject formerly, and still partially, to the nervous
twitch termed St‘ Vitus Dance. In case you may
deem it desirable to send this letter home, it may
be gratifying to his relatives to know that, low as
he has descended in the social scale, his character
for honour has stood unimpeached. Have you
told Lady T. of the pipe with his initials on it ?
‘ Yours truly, ‘ Wm. Gibbes.’
Well, on the 17th of January the defendant an-
nounced to Mr. Gibbes that he wished to write to
Lady Tichborne, but not having written for so long
a time he did not well know how to begin. To
this Mr. Gibbes replied that he would draught a
letter for him to copy, and accordingly he sat
down and commenced with a formal ‘ My dear
Madam,’ more like a letter to a client than one
from a long-lost son to his mother. The defen
dant had too much shrewdness and sagacity not
to see that that would not do, and he at once said
‘ Oh, she will know that that is not my styleso
he took up the pen, saying ‘ she will know my old
way and my handwriting.’ ‘I asked him,’ said Mr
Gibbs, ‘ whether he wrote the same hand as he
did when he last wrote to his mother,’ and he re
plied ‘ that he wrote better—but I am not sure
whether it was better then or now.’
The letter is accordingly written, and I cal
your attention to it. You have before you letter
of the undoubted Roger, and I invite your carefu
and vigilant attention to the various matters o
handwriting, spelling, and style in the one set ant
in the other—making allowance for the interva
of 12 years, and the life the defendant had been
leading during the interval. You will compare
that one style with the other, and say whether in
that style, in the tone and spirit and thought, in
the composition, grammar, and spelling of the
respective letters, you can find identity or simi-
larity between the one and the other, or whether
a different spirit is not breathed in the one as
compared with the other, a different style mani-
fested—whether everything is not different that
characterizes letters written by one man and dis
tinguishes them from letters written by another.
Here is the letter: —
1 Wagga Wagga, Jan. 17 63.
* My dear mother, —The delay which has taken
place since my last letter, dated 22d April 54
Makes it very difficult to commence this Letter.
I deeply regret the truble and anxiety I must
have cause you by not writing before. But they
are known to my Attorney and the more private
details I will keep for your own Ear. Of one
thing rest Assured that although I have been in
A humble condition of Life I have never let any
act disgrace you or my Family. I have been A
poor Man and nothing worse. Mr. Gibbep suggest
to me as essential That I should recall to your
Memory things which can only be known to you
and me to convince you of my Idenity. I dont
thing it needful My Dear Mother although I send
them Mamely the Brown Mark on my side And
the Card Case at Brighton. I can assure you My
Dear Mother I have keep your promice ever since.
In writing to me please letter to Mr.
Gibbes to prevent unnecessary enquiry as I do not
wish any person to know me in this Country.
When I take my proper position and title Having
therefore made up my mind to return and face the
sea once more I must reqest to send me the means
of doing so and paying a few outstanding debts.
I would return by the Overland Mail. The pass-
age Money and other expences would be over Two
Hundred pound, for I propose Sailing from Vic-
toria, not this colonly And to sail from Melbourne
in my own Name. Now to annable me to do this
my dear Mother you must send me’—
The rest of the letter is not forthcoming. With
reference to his statement that he had never let
any act disgrace him, it should be remembered
that he avoided answering questions put to him
in reference to bush-ranging and other matters
by saying the answers would tend to criminate
himself. It should, however, be stated in his
favour that during the time he resided at Wagga
Wagga he was a well-conducted man, and secured
the respect of his employers and of all who knew
him. The way we come to have the letter and so
many others is this, that the defendant, claiming
to be the next of kin to Lady Tichborne, took


possession of her papers, which included many
letters from the undoubted Roger, but, his claim
being disputed, he was directed to lodge all the
papers in the Court of Chancery, and so we have
them. It is clear from the reply that there was
some mention of his grandfather in the missing
part of the letter, and also of a horse called
Plenipo, which he said he left in this country.
Now he did leave a horse in care of Mr. Gosford,
but it was, he states, not so called. There is
evidence how that Mr. Johnston, of Newburn-
park, had sold a horse of that name.
Mr. Gibbes wrote also to the Doiyager Lady
Tichborne, stating that her son, though occupying
a humble position, had never done anything to
disgrace himself, and in reference to his own posi-
tion he adds, ‘ I am as well born and connected as
your own son.’ Well do ne. Mr. Gibbes! Mr.
Cubitt then takes up the correspondence and
applies to Lady Tichborne for the funds necessary
to send the defendant home, reminding her that
she had not furnished any facts or particulars by
which her son’s identity could be set beyond
doubt. In answer to a former letter of Cubitt,
who asked Gibbes to have the defendant come to
see him, the latter writes that Sir R. C. Tichborne
would not see anybody. On the 15th of February
Mr. Cubitt, in writing to Lady Tichborne, com-
plains that an attempt was being made to deprive
Rim of his emoluments in connection with the
matter, and he reminds Her that it was by his in-
strumentality alone that the discovery had been
accomplished. And now comes the following
letter from Lady Tichborne: —
‘ February 15,1856.
‘My dear Sir, —Your welcome letter reached
me only yesterday. I had been anxiously expect-
ing it. I only regret that there are no more details
about my dear son’s circumstances, and I feel
much grieved at the idea that they may be very
bad. lam anxious to know more about it. The
only thing is that if Roger would consent to say
who he is to a banker I am almost certain the
other would advance him money. My opinion is,
and also my wish is, that you should go imme-
diately to speak yourself to my son and arrange
the things personally with him, so that you may
start to come to join me immediately. A thing of
that sort ought to be done ’nstantly, and without
losing a moment in deliberations, as if Roger has
contracted some intimacy there they will perhaps
do everything in their power to keep him there and
prevent him coming over to me. I think it will
be necessary that you should accompany him till
you have brought him safe in my hands; that is,
. I think, absolutely necessary. lam going to send
you a cheque for 40/., which I will ask Mr. Cal-
laghan to forward to you, as I suppose he knows
some bankers at Sydney. You will have money
enough, and send even mors than you want, to go
to see my son, as I am told conveyances are not
so expensive there as in England, as Mr. Callaghan
will advance me the money, and more if neces-
sary. I find it necessary to tell him my object in
sending money over to Sydney. He is a friend of
the family, and knows all about my son and his
very strange disappearance.
. * le seoi ;et that I wish to keep is only of course
till I can either speak or write to Roger myself,
and my reasons for doing so you would very well
understand if I was to mention them in this let-
ter ; but of course the secret (evidently meaning
secrecy) that I recommend will only be for five or
six months; but as for the reward and all the ex-
penses, you need not have a doubt as to its being
paid. There will be amply to pay back all tht>
expenses. The difficulty is for the present, as my
means are small and very different, of course,
from the income that Roger has a right to since
he was unfortunately with his poor father. Had
he been there he would have come to an income
of at least 12,000?. a year, and even twenty• be-
sides that it will increase later. There has been,
of course, difficulties after his dear father’s death;
however, when he comes he will have a very fine
income; therefore it is something wonderful to
me his remaining hid under a feigned name. I
do trust and hope that you will succeed in bring-
ing him over to me as soon as possible.
‘ There is a man of colour at Sydney who could
tell you how the family stands. His name is
Bogle, and is quite black ; Roger knows him verj
well; he was valet to Sir Edward Doughty, uncle
to Roger, and he lives now at Sydney. Sir Edwaro
Doughty Tichborne left him 50/. a year, and with
his savings he can live at Sydney, he says, pretty
well. Ido not know his address at Sydney, and
only know he lives there, but I am afraid that
man, as soon as he has seen Roger, will write it
back to England immediately, and I am afraid of
the consequences, which would be bad if not at-
tended to. lam very sorry indeed that you did
not go over to my son as soon as you received my
last letter, as, letters being so long a time coming,
it makes that business go very slowly. Still, you
may easily conceive how desirous I am to see my
son. I believe I said in my last letter everything
that can be said on the subject, and I beg you to
be so good as to read it over again. I will again
remind you of the necessity to ascertain whether
Roger has some particular intimacy, or whether
he is married and has children, it is a very neces-
sary thing to know. I will write a letter to him.
You will be so good as to give it him, and ask him,
was it only for our own personal satisfaction, to
answer it immediately.
You will see, gentlemen, there is nothing in
this letter from beginning to end by which hei
son could be identified. Well, time goes on, and
in the month of March we find the defendant in
very serious difficulties. He was apparently doing
nothing, and was without funds. Here are two of
his letters to Mr. Gibbes: —
‘ Dear Sir, —If you could spare me two pound I
shall feel oblidge. I wish to settle with Cater, the
baker, before he leaves for England. If its con-
venient, you can Likewise send mo an order on
Love for three pound Yours truly,
‘P. C. Tichborne.’
Then there is another letter :
‘ Sir— ‘ Wagga Wage/a, March 14.
* Dear [this word and some others are barely
legible]. My for writing instead of seeing
you personly Is. lam really ashamed of trubiing
you so often. Your kindness to me. Will be
remembered mor§ than a Medal of Honor on my
brest. What I wish to consult you about is this
—my being Idle is drawing remarks from many.
And what to do I no not. I don’t wish to leave
the Town before we recevee our letters from
Mother, which I hope will not be long first. But
how to live in the mean time is what trubiing me.
I paid the Baker with part of the Cash, you were
so kind as to lend me. Ido not wish to impost
on your good nature for more cash. But what I
wish you would do is to speak to one at the store-
keepers to let me have what necessaries I would
require for the House. If you think you could
do so with safety, I would rather it be Mr,
Forsyth, if anywhere I expect Mrs. Castro will
H


be confined before Saturday And believe me Sir
I am more like a manick than a B. of B. K. to
think that I should have a child born in such a
hovel. ‘ I remain, Dear Sir, your
‘ Truly,
‘ Roger Charles Tich-
‘ BORNE.’
We have here, as it were, the culminating point
in the 12 years’ life of the defendant in Australia.
He had led an unsettled life without house or
home, had followed servile employments, made
attempts in trade which had ended only in failure,
and the result of all this was distress, penury, and
privation. We naturally ask—for we cannot
avoid the question which forces itself upon us—
* How can we understand a man of rank and posi-
tion, and with all the means of affluence at his
command, thus inflicting on himself self-imposed
exile, penury, and privation ?’ The theories of
the learned counsel for the defendant on this sub-
ject are hardly worthy of criticism, they are
nothing better than the bubbles blown by a child
in sport. What the defendant says is this— ‘ I
made up my mind not to return to England while
my father lived.’ He is asked why, and he de-
clines to answer. The notion of a quarrel has
been entirely given up; he never had any quarrel
with his father. However, it is just as well you
should know what he says on the matter. In the
first place, when questioned on the subject by Mr.
Chapman Barber, he says he won’t tell him. The
latter inquired whether the defendant had any
quarrel with his father, to which the defendant
answers, ‘ You had better leave that out; I decline
to answer. I won’t answer the question.’ Again
he is asked, ‘Had you any quarrel with Lady
Tichborne ?’ His reply is, ‘ I decline to answer
that question.’ When, under cross-examination,
he is asked whether he had any quarrel with his
mother, he says he had not. And then he is
asked why, when in examination before Mr.
Roupell, he had declined to answer. His reply is,
‘ I decline to answer because there are few sons
that do not have quarrels with their mother.’
Then he is asked, ‘ Why did you say “ No” ?’ and
his answer is, ‘ I don’t know, I’m sure, only that I
did say “ No.” I thought it a very impertinent
question.’ Why, gentlemen, it was a most natural
question to ask of a son who had been 12 years
absent from his family. In another place he says
he had no peculiar reason for what he had done.
He said he was glad to get down into the country,
and there are not there the same conveniences as
in England. In answer to the Lord Chief Justice
he says he bad no reason. That, of course, dis-
poses of the notion of a quarrel. The only other
reason he gave was this: —Mr. Gifford asked him
whether, when he went abroad, he had made up
his mind not to return as long as his father lived.
He said that was so—that his home was an un-
happy one to him, and that he was determined not
to return as long as his father was alive.
Now, gentlemen, I would here call your atten-
tion to the correspondence of Roger from South
America, and in it there is nothing to show that
he did not intend to return during his father’s
lifetime. He certainly said he would not go back
to Tichborne to live, but there was no passage in
those letters which implied that he did not in-
tend to return to England while his father lived.
But let us for a moment assume some such idea
had taken possession of Roger Ticbborne’s mind.
Suppose for a moment that Roger landed in South
Australia, and that when he sought to take ser-
vice or find occupation there he said he would not
return to England so long as his father lived.
From 1854 to 1866 is a perisd of 12 years. How
long did he expect his father to live ? The age of
man is threescore years and ten, and but one in
100 lives to fourscore. There are happy organiza-
tions and vigorous constitutions that live longer.
One of many hundreds lives to 90, and one in
many thousands to 100. These are exceptions
Now when the defendant, if Roger Tich borne
landed at Melbourne, Sir James Tichborne wa
within three months of threescore years and ten
the usual span of human life, and when he diet
on the 11th of June, 1862, he had arrived at the
good old age of 78 years. At that time the de
fendant, if Roger Tichborne, was engaged in the
hard service of riding postman between Boreo
and Miranda, and within a month or two he was
foreman to Mr. Higgins in his butcher”s business
At that time the undoubted Roger Tichborne was
entitled to estates worth 20,0007. per annum. Can
any one understand how a man would voluntarily
remain in such a position as the defendant was in
without ever taking the trouble to inquire whal
had become of his father ? Do you suppose the
man could have had so little affection for his
father that he would make up his mind he would
never see him again, that he would not care to
receive that which most sons would desire to re-
ceive, the parting blessing of his father before he
died ? You may easily imagine that a man having
such sentiments as these, and caring very little
about his father, would not weary Heaven with
prayers to grant his father an unusual degree of
longevity. On the contrary, he would keep a keen
look-out for his father’s early death. Roger
Tichborne was entitled to an income of 1,0007. a
year during his father’s lifetime; do you think
he would be careless whether his father lived or
died, or regardless of the position and rank which
tho possession and ownership of the estates would
give him ? You are to consider, gentlemen,
whether eccentricity or any other motive may
have led the defendant to adopt this course. You
are to consider whether it is a satisfactory ex-
planation that, not caring whether his father was
alive or dead, ho was led voluntarily to embrace
a life of this sort, to renounce fortune and all tho
enjoyments which it brings, and to continue to ad-
here to the life to which he had given himself up,
and that in truth he was only dragged from his
obscurity and retirement and induced to take his
proper position by the interposition of Mr. Gibbes.
You must consider whether this is a solution
which would recommend itself as satisfactory to
your minds.
On the 19th of March the defendant’s wife was •
delivered of a daughter, and he writes to Mr.
Gibbes to send him 27. under cover by the bearer
of the note. There is another somewhat remark-
able circumstance. A man named Cater, a baker
of W'agga-Wagga, was about to go to England,
and he receives from the defendant a letter en-
dorsed ‘ To be opened at sea.’ It is dated Wagga-
Wagga, April, 1866. This is the letter:—
‘At any time when you are in England you
should feel inclined for a month pleasure go to
Tichborne, in Hampshire. Enquire for Sir Roger
Charles Tichborne, and you will find one that will
make you a welcome guest. But on rto account
moncion (sic) the name of Castro, or allude to me
being a married man, or thatjl have being (sic) has
a butcher. You will understand me I have no
doubt.—‘ Yours truly, ‘ Thomas Castro.
‘ I sail by the June mail.’
Now, it is plain from this letter, as well as


from the evidence of Gibbes, that the defendant
desired to conceal two or three things, one that he
had gone by the name of Castro, another
that he was married, and the third that he had
been engaged in the butchering business. When
he first contemplated taking the name of Roger
Tichborne he intended to leave his wife behind
and conceal his marriage. What could be the
motive for concealment in these respects ? No
doubt it would be at first sight a strange thing
that a man of rank and fortune should become a
horse trainer, a stockkeeper, or a butcher. But as
long as a man pursues an honest calling, there is
nothing disgraceful in it. But it may have struck
the defendant that it would be desirable to leave
the colony without having it known that he, a
man of rank and position, had condescended to
those courses of life to obtain the means of exist-
ence. Or he may have thought that Lady Tich-
borne, with all her anxiety to recover her lost son,
might be staggered by knowing all the circum-
stances of his life; but, by the way, she was not.
Again, in all his wanderings, if persons who haej.
known him by the name of Castro or some other
name had also known that he had gone by the
name of Orton, they might prove troublesome to
him, and perhaps denounce him as an impostor.
On the other hand, his desire for concealment
may have arisen simply from a feeling of pride.
He might say to himself, ‘ I do not choose, when I
take my position as Sir Roger Tichborne and ap-
pear in the world again as a man of fortune, that
anybody should know that I condescended to em-
ployments incompatible with the station to which
it pleased God to call me.’ It might be false pride,
but as Roger Tichborne he might think that these
things, if known, might militate against his being
received by the world. Then with respect to his
marriage, it appears plain from the letter to Cater
that ho wished it should be concealed. He might
have thought that if known it would detract very
much from the credit people would give to the
assertion that he was Roger Tichborne. But, on
the other hand, if this consideration was thus
present to the mind of Roger Tichborne at this
period, it would naturally have suggested itself at
the time when he made this marriage. He might
have supposed that such a marriage would indis-
pose Lady Tichborne to acknowledge her son, and
so he might have wished to conceal it from her.
But though at first he contemplated leaving his
wife behind, it seems that when he became a
father he gave up the idea and determined to take
his wife with him.
At this period Cubitt appears to have thought
that the time was come for taking more energetic
action in the matter, and that it was necessary to
stir up Gibbes, so he writes to him on the 18th of
April, saying that he was anxiously expecting to
hear about Lady Tichborne and receive the pro-
mised reward. ‘ I have promised you,’ he says,
your share of the spoil, and as we are both in-
t-ested we must both work together.’ But Gibbes,
who has got the man in hand and is master of the
situation, is by no means inclined to hand him
ov . er j'° < -'' u fritt. On the contrary, he is deter-
mined that the honour of restoring him to his
mwr mD be all his own. So he writes to
t-mbitt, leading him to suppose that Roger Tich-
borne was not then residing at Wagga-Wagga, but
at some distance from it. Cubitt was not pleased
with Gibbes’s communication, so he writes on the
com Plaining of want of candour on
Gibbes s part. And now come two letters from
Gady lichborne—one to Mr. Cubitt and one to
the defendant, which certainly deserve the most
careful consideration. They were written prior
to the receipt of the letter written by the de-
fendant on the 17th of January. She had re-
ceived from Cubitt the assurance of his conviction
that her son was found, and also the letters from
Mr. Gibbes in which he said he had ‘ spotted ’
him. The first is a letter marked by the most
perfect prudence and sound judgment. The
mother was very naturally most anxious to find
her long-lost son, but still we find her requiring
proofs of his identity before she rushes into
action. This is the letter to Mr. Cubitt:—
‘ 25 th February, 1866.
‘My dear Sir, —I did not answer your letter
immediately as I wanted to arrange with my
banker, Mr. Callaghan, how to send you 407.;
btlt he has no correspondent at Sydney. I cannot
send more at present, but I repeat once more that
you cannot have any doubt as for what regards
the payment of the promised reward, which will
be very handsome, and in proportion with the
very great happiness I shall have to see my
beloved son again. But that reward will be paid
out of the estates. At the same time you cannot
wonder if the money is not paid beforehand, the
more so as you do not give any details whatever
about the person you believe to be my son. You
do not name even the town where he is, and
you do not say anything about the way he was
saved from the shipwreck. I cannot do more at
present, but later, when the things are explained
to me, and when I know more about my son, of
course the money will not be wanting. But now
you have not said anything at all about my son,
and I hardly know anything of the person you
supposed may be my son. I will send you a
letter for him, and I shall expect an answer from
him, as I know his handwriting well. I shall
know at once whether it is him. In hopes to hear
soon from you, and also in hopes to hear more
details about my beloved son, I remain sincerely
yours, ‘H. F. Tichborne.
‘ I will ask you to be so good as to read my last
letter over again. I believe I said all that could
be said on that subject. It is necessary to know
whether Roger is married, and whether he has
children.’
This is a very sensible letter. She says in effect,
‘You ask me for money. I send just enough to
enable my son to go to Sydney; but you have not
given me any information about him, not even the
details of the shipwreck, and I must have theso
details before I do more. Now, it is difficult to
understand how a lady who wrote such a letter,
marked with such strong common sense, could, on
the very same day, and probably with the same
pen, have written to the defendant acknowledging
him as her son, and addressing him in the mosii
endearing terms. This is the letter: —
‘ Paris, 25th Feb., 1866.
‘ My dearest and beloved Roger,—l hope you
will not refuse to come back to your poor afflicted
mother, who is still living. Jusqu’a ce moment je
n’ai jamais perdu l’espdrance de te revoir. I
have had the very great misfortune to lose your
poor dear father, and lately I have lost my beloved
son Alfred. I am dow alone in this world of
Borrow, and I hope you will take that into con-
sideration, and that you will come and join me as
soon as possible. You need not be afraid about the
money; only come and see your poor old mother.
Remember the promise you made to your dear
father before you went away, that if God called
him to Himself, you would come back and be your
H 2


mother’s protector. I have lately lost my beloved
j■’ and do bo P e you will come back.
U rite and give me some details about yourself.
You know that if a banker knew who you were he
wouid advance the money for you at once. If you
w!!! not do that, let me send the money in safety;
but that will be the longest way. And now, adieu,
my beloved son, my dearest Roger. Write to your
fond mother, who is thoroughly unhappy at the
losses she has had to bear, and whose only happi-
ness and consolation will be to see you again
Your own mother, H. F. Tichborne.'’
Here tnere is the most unqualified acknowledgment
of this supposed son. I could readily conceive from
the information she had received from Cfibitt and
,bbes she should have written that letter to
acknowledge her long-lost son. But I own I am
puzzled to account for the fact how she could at
the same time have written to Cubitt saying ‘you
have not given me any details.’
Well, the letter that was written to Mr. Cubitt
18 t °r. C l l , bbeS ’ who takes i* to defendant,
ar ! c ! hlr. Gibbes gives us some account of the scene
which then arose. Much was attempted to be
made by the learned counsel for the defendant of
what occurred when the defendant received this
letter from his mother, the first for many years
conveying the intelligence of his brother’s death!
He said it caused in the defendant powerful emo-
tions, which was manifested by him in tears. Mr.
Uibbes, in cross-examination, says—‘When he
evp d fill 'f 8 blled with tears. I won’t say his
eyes filled with tears, but they looked as if they
were watery. As you may well imagine, you don’t
stare at a man in that case, you rather look away
from hmi.’ And again-* I won’t say that his
eyes filled with tears, but they appeared to have
watei in them. In answer to Dr. Kenealy, he
says he belieyea the defendant’s sorrow was
genuine. And here, in connection with this mat-
-r ally de , nounce i* as a mere pretence
to say that it was only when the death of his bro-
ther became known to him that Mr. Gibbes
°, btai ° ed his consent to return
to En o land. He had made up his mind to go home
f Pr T OUS , ]S . oVember > and had made prepara-
gcst th°a r t 7 m J * llWdr y- Therefore, to sug-
of bi« h! it “V" 1 ? ln consequence of hearing
of hrs brother’s death that he consented to go
home, is, as I have said, a mere pretence.
A ow, gentlemen, before we quit this part of the
subject, I want you to consider when it was that
tne defendant first conceived the design of coming
01 ward as the lost Roger Tichborne. When Mr
Gibbes first went up to him and said, ‘ You are
not going under your right Christian name and
surname; I know who you are; the initials on
the pipe discover you,’ Mr. Gibbes tells us he
as ,, ba = u iy d^ & u8 1ed. The defendant also tells
that he told Mr. Gibbes to mind his own busi-
ness and not to lnterfere witJl him Nowwas
SiL la + n?UaSG Slmulated or real ? Was he in
earnest in representing himself as annoyed or dis-
tressed, or, to use Mr. Gibbes’s strong expression
10 dls °' I sted ’ at this discovery, or asserted*
d covery ? A good deal of light will/l think, be
taken on P ° n C T from tbe view that may be
Sav h 3K Way + f other of this matter. It
iiieats f!™ t honest expression of his senti
i - ‘ ‘ have had no desire to return to
Sth 0 S» T y h!lve been Ba^ed
dition hn h i le , adln « in the humble con-
it ffiw wl d t, V 0 UU i ar v. l yreduced himself to. But
it ma.j have been dishonest. It may have been
-at he put on the pretence of this reluctance to
be dragged into the light as Roger Tichborne,
instead of remaining in the obscurity he had
sought. But then it has been said to retire from
the world seems hardly consistent with the earnest
zeal with which he has sought to recover his
alleged rights, both of rank and of fortune, from
the moment he came forward. Because no one
has been more strenuous in asserting his claim
and none more indignant, apparently, with those’
who, professing their disbelief in it, have stood in
the. way of that claim being enforced. And to
this I must add the observation that if his re-
luctance to be discovered and put before the
world as Roger Tichborne be real, he would have
been more strenuous in concealing the fact that
e was Roger. There was no necessity for acknow-
ledging the fact to Gibbes at all, and we don’t
hnd in the character of the defendant that
scrupulous and nice regard to truth which
St °° d “ Way ° f his tellin g Gibbes
But even suppose he did not choose to deny the
tact, what was there to compel him to return ?
He was not like a school-boy who had run away
from school, and might be brought back again, or
like a criminal who had escaped and might be
dragged back to his fetters; and we know what
the inflexibility of Roger Tichborne was. Here
it is that an acquaintance with the character of
Roger Tichborne comes into play. Do you sup-
pose that Roger Tichborne, who never followed
anybody s advme, who always acted upon his own
will and determination, if he had chose to follow
the life he had chosen in Australia, and any person
told him his mother was anxious that he should so
home, would not say, ‘ I won’t go home to my
mother. My mother always made my home a
ell upon earth.’ And we know in one of the
last letters that Roger Tichborne wrote from
bouth America he says he will never live with his
mother. Therefore, there is no reason to suppose
that he was induced to come forward on Mr
Gibbes s representations. But his reluctance mav
have been real, for this reason—not that he did
not intend to come forward as Roger Tichborne,
but that he was not yet prepared to take that
step. To press his claim to the title and estates
required no small degree of courage, and perhaps
he had not yet braced bis nerves to take that step
which, once taken, could not be withdrawn from’
It may be, too, that this claim, though in embryo
in his mind, had not yet fully developed itself.
Or it may be that, having made up his mind to
take the step, he was not as yet fully furnished
with the information or the means to enable him
to do so The answer to the Richardson letter
may not have been sufficiently satisfactory. If it
ta w® that # the ( ! efendaut bad not conceived the
intention of coming forward and claiming to be
tao D er, how do we account for the fact that he
himself, as regards outward appearances, did so
w n V hIDgS 7 llch only Ro S er Tichborne would
have done, unless the man who was coming for-
nerfnl “ R °? er Tichborne was taking steps to lead
nv r tu Ually o lnto the belief that be was
tanf? Tmhborne ? Why the initials cut on the
IP . Why E. C. T., as he tells us, cut upon trees
and any pieces of wood which came to his hands »
And this he represents himself as doing for a con-
thd«ew!tatl? I ®i' • W !, don ’ t hcar that R °g° r was in
he habit of doing that. We have heard in the
days of pastoral poetry of shepherds and love-
sick swains going about carving on the bark of
trees the name of the lady they loved. But per-
sons do not go and cut their own names unless it


be in places which are of much resort. That is
not a thing Roger Tichborne would be desirous of
doing, especially if he was anxious not to be
brought to light-
In adverting to the various circumstances which
tend to throw light on the period when the
defendant conceived the notion of coming forward
as Roger Tichborne, it seems to me that though it
may have been in embryo only, the idea had been
in his mind for some time. But still, I cannot
conceive that he had any definite intentions on
the subject until he saw the advertisement,
which could not have been earlier than July or
August, 1865.
The entries in the pocket-book, though of an
imperfect character, are not unworthy of atten •
tion in connection with this subject. In that
pocket-book we have again that curious hiero-
glyphic to which I have before called attention—
namely, the two C’s back to back, though the marks
are not so complete as in other cases. In the first
page of it we have 4 Thomas Castro, Wagga Wagga.’
4 R. C. Tichborne, Tichborne-hall, Surrey.’
That entry must have been antecedent to the
time when he met with Slate, for the latter could
have told the defendant that Tichborne was not
in Surrey. If he was the real Roger Tichborne,
would he have called it Tichborne-hall ? It was
never called Tichboroe-hall, but Tichborne-park;
and would he not have known that it was not in
Surrey? Then we have 4 Melipilla,’ 4 Buenos
Ayres,’ 4 Rio de Janeiro,’ &c. 4 R. C. Tichborne,
Tichborne-hall, Surrey. Lost 13th September
this day, those who find them are welcome to
keep them, two cases in the County Court.’ Then
comes the entry, 4 Some men has plenty of money
and no brains, and some men has plenty of brains
and no money. Surely men with plenty of money
and no brains were made for men with plenty of
brains and no money. R. C. Tichborne, bart.’
Now, I must say that R. C. Tichborne, Bart., had
no business to appropriate a passage which does
not belong to R C. Tichborne, Bart., but to Miss
Braddon, and still less to change Miss Braddon’s
language into such unmistakable vernacular as
that which he uses. That distinguished authoress
sent me a copy of the work, Aurora Floyd,
in which the passage occurs, which caused
me, perhaps, to spend too much time over it, for I
read that very interesting novel from beginning
to end. She puts into the mouth of one of her
characters these words:— 4 1 should think fellows
with plenty of money and no brains must have
been invented for the good of fellows who have
plenty of brains and no money, and that is how
we contrive to keep our equilibrium in the uni-
versal see saw.’ Very happily expressed! The
next is ‘Sir James Tichborne.’ Then we have
4 R. C. T. bart. some day I hope.’ Now, would a
man knowing himself to be fully entitled to the
rank, write 4 Some day I hope ’ ? Then there is
this remarkable passage, 4 R. 0. T. arrived at
Hobart Town July 4,1854.’ What can have been
in the mind of the writer ? What can you gather
from that? Was it his intention originally to
have represented Roger Tichborne as having
landed at Hobart Town ? lamat a loss to see
what elso it can mean. And it is curious, too,
with reference to the date. There is in the same
page 4 Stephen Butts Metrop.’ It appears that
Butts kept the Metropolitan Hotel at Sydney. I
don’t know whether wc must conclude from this
entry that it was written at Sydney. Then there
is an interesting entry about 4 Miss Mary Ann
Loder, 7, Russell’s-buildings, High-street, Wap-
ping, London.’
The ‘ Richardson Letter’ was written in April
and it seems to have been connected in some way
with the defendant’s idea of coming forward.
Afterwards there was an exhibition of the initials.
The question is whether this idea may not have
been conceived and been present to the mind of
the defendant some time before he really made
up his mind to come forward, and whether the
action of Mr. Gibbes may not have precipitated
matters and hurried them on more rapidly than
the defendant oi igically intended. If he intended
to come forward in his real or assumed character,
he must have been placed in an awkward dilemma
when Gibbes said, ‘ I know who you are. You
are Roger Tichborne.’ If he denied the fact the
denial might seriously interfere with his preten-
sions when he did come forward, while, on the
other hand, if he admitted it at once he might
have been hurried into a course of action for
which he was not prepared. Under such circum-
stances a man would probably not admit the fact
for some time. Eventually, however, the defendant
surrenders at discretion, and says to Gibbes, ‘ Yes,
I am Roger Tichborne, and I will tell you all
about it.’ By the end of the .year 1865 it should
be borne in mind he had got into a most serious
position of distress, and was obliged to have re-
course to Gibbes for the loan of small sums of
money.
There is another fact which ought not to be lost
sight of—namely, that when he first acknowledged
to Gibbes that he was Roger Tichborne be did so
only under the stipulation that Gibbes slou'd not
reveal his secret until the ensuing month of March.
Why was that ? The answer which sugg sts itself
—though I don’t know whether it be the rig.t
one—is that he was not prepared to come forward.
Perhaps he had not got the materials he required
for showing that he was the real man, and there-
fore he wanted as long a delay as possible before
presenting himself to the world as Roger Tich-
borne. The Dowager Lady Tichborne had up to
May, 1866, declined in her correspondence with
Mr. Cubitt to send any money till she was more
fully satisfied of her son’s identity. The defen-
dant had sought to borrow money from the Wagga
Wagga branch of the Australian Joint Stock
Banking Company, which was presided over by a
gentleman named Cottie, and while he was nego-
tiating with Mr. Cottie through Mr. Gibbes, he
writes this letter to his mother :
‘ Wagga Wagga, May 24, 1866.
‘My dearly beloved mother, —I received your
note dated 25th Feb., and was very glad to hear
you were quite well. I was very sorry to hear of
poor father and Alfred (sic) death. I Hardly
know, my Dear mother, how you have borne the
suspence of knowing my fate so long. You must
not blame me, mother, for I beli#ve fate had A
great deal to do with it. I wrote to you on the
16th Jan., for the first time since I been in
Australia. You will wander why I have not
wrote before, But that I will tell you myself,
should God spare my life to reach England. I
am trying to get away by the Panama rout, which
leaves Sydney on the 15th June. But Ido not
know whether the banker here will advance me
the Money or not. My attorney has promice to
see him this morning. He is a gentleman, and I
have no doubt he will advance me the Moyney
speaking of Mr. Gibbs my attorney, he is the
only friend I ever had since I been in Australia.


Bat I will be able to tell you more of bis kindness
when I see you which I hope please God will not
be long. I watched the last Mail when it ar-
rived with great anjoitty, hoping to have had an
answer from you; but I suppose you had not time
to write by the mail. Hoping to see about the
2dth August, I remain, your beloved son.
‘ Roger Charles Tichborne.’
There are one or two peculiarities in the de-
fendant’s composition. First of all there is the
omission of the final s in the genitive case, and
this omission is constantly occurring, and next
there is a frequent omission of the auxiliary verb
‘to be,’ . Sometimes the words *to have ’ are
dropped in like manner. Another peculiarity is
that instead of a comma where it is necessary he
puts a full stop. With regard to the sentence
‘ You must not blame me, mother, for I believe
fate had A great deal to do with it,’ you will
doubtless remember the eloquent remarks of the
learned counsel for the defendant on that passage.
He read it as if it were an extract from the
chorus of a Greek play; but if you, gentlemen,
can find anything of that sort in it I confess I do
not.
Mr. .Gibbes and Mr. Cottie were not altogether
unwilling to advance money to the defendant, for
by this time they had brought themselves to the
belief that the party with whom they were deal-
ing was the real Roger Tichborne. It was possi-
ble, however, that the defendant might die, in
which case it would bo inconvenient to send to
some unknown person in England in order to get
back the money which had been advanced,
whereas i, die defendant made a will and ap-
pointed c: utors they could always be applied
■co for rep., ment. Accordingly Mr. Gibbes in-
sis’s that he shall make a will and appoint exe-
cutors ; and the defendant, seeing that the money
he. wants is not to bo obtained otherwise, ac-
quiesces in the proposal, and says, ‘ Very well, I
will make a will. He goes to the office of Mr.
Gibbes, who takes his instructions, and drafts
the will, which the defendant afterwards executes,
and which in these terms—
‘ last will and testament of Roger Charles
licnborne, of Tichborne, in the county of Hamp-
shire, in England, but at present of Wagga Wagga
in the colony of New South Wales, Baronet. I
give, bequeath, and devise to my wife, Mary Ann
Tichborne, known in New South Wales as Mary
Anno Castro (I having married her in tho name of
iiiomas Castro), lior lawful dower out of my
estates. I give, bequeath, and devise to my
mother, Lady Hannah Frances Tichborne, in addi-
tion to her dower, the whole of my property in
Cowes, in the Isle of Wight. I give, bequeath,
and devise to my daughter, Mary Agnes Teresa
(she being the issue of my marriage with my said
wife), the whole of the Wymmering estate, in
Hampshire, in England; and also the property at
and near Hermitago, in Dorsetshire, in England
inherited by me from my father, the late Sir
James Tichborne; and also my property at and
near .Ryde, in tho Isle of Wight, subject always to
the annuity hereinafter mentioned as to the said
.ast-mentioned property; and also all other my
property of every kind over which I have any
disposing power. And I give and bequeath to
Annie Bryant, tho daughter of my wife before her
mamage with me, the yearly sum, or annuity, of
two hundred pounds, to be paid out of tho rents
and profits of my estate at or near Ryde, in tho
“ le . of . Wl 2 b f’ tffimig the term of her natural
life, for her sole and separate use, independent of
any husband she may marry, without power of
antieipation. And I appoint John Jarvis, Esquire,
of Bridport, in Dorsetshire, in England, and Lady
Hannah Fiances Ticliborne, at present of Paris,
my mother, executor and executrix of this my
will, and in case of either of them being deceased,
or unwilling to act, f appoint Sir John Bird, of
Hartfordshire, executor in the stead of such exe-
cutor or executrix so dying or unwilling to act.
And I appoint William Gibbes, of Wagga Wag<m,
solicitor, to be guardian of the persons and estates’
of- my children; and in case of his death or
inability to act, I appoint Henry Angel, Esquire,
of Dorset, in England, to be guardian in bis stead.
Given under my hand, at Wagga Wagga, in the
said colony (in duplicate), this Ist day of June,
‘ Roger Charles Tichborne.
Signed by the testator, in the presence of us
who, m his presence, have immediately after set
our names as witnesses, the day before mentioned.
William Love, Store Keeper, Wagga Wagga
‘ William Gibbes, Solicitor, Wagga Wagga.’
The way in which this document was drawn up
was no doubt as follows. Here is Mr. Gibbes
sitting at his desk with a sheet of foolscnp before
him, awaiting instructions. Beginning in the
usuai formal way, he would naturally say,
What do you propose, in the first place, to do
for your wife ? I presume you will give her her
dower.’ _ I do not know whether the defendant
knew what dower meant, but ho would say, ‘ Yes,
by all means, let her have her dower.’ ‘ Well’
then,’ says Mr. Gibbes, * what are you going to do’
for your mother? I supposo she has her dower
out of your father’s estate.’ ‘ I suppose so,’ the
defendant may have answered, although it so hap-
pened that she. had not, because a wife has no
claim to dower in an estate, which is not of in-
heritance but only for life. Nevertheless, I admit
that a man who was not conversant with law might
think that any provision made for Lady Tichborne
was her dower, and it is true that Sir James Tich-
borne did make two charges amounting to 2,000 1.
a year on the Doughty property for the benefit of
Lady Tichborne during her life. This, however,
was not known until after Roger Tichborne had
left England. She had no lawful dower, but he
assumes that she has. Then Gibbes says—* What
will you give her in addition ?’ He replies, ‘ I
will give her the whole of my property at Cowes
in the Isle of Wight ’ Although, in fact, there’
was not a brick nor stone nor a clod of earth in
the Isle of Wight belonging to the Tichborne
family. The next question is, ‘ How much will
you give your daughter ?’ ‘ I give, bequeath, and
devise to my daughter, Mary Agnes Teresa, the
whole of the Wymmeiing estate in Hampshire, in
England, and also my property at Hermitage, in
Dorsetshire, in England, inherited by me from my
father, the late Sir James Tichborne; and also my
property at and near Hyde, in the Isle of Wight,
subject always to the annuity hereinafter men-
tioned as to the said last-mentioned property, and
also all other my property of every kind over
which I have any disposing power.’ But there
was no property belonging to the Tichborne family
either at Wymmeiing in Hampshire or at or near
ltyde. When under cross-examination in the
Court of Common Pleas the defendant is asked
whether he had any property in the Isle of Wight,
at Hermitage, or at Wymmering, he answers with
the most imperturbable coolness and sang froid
‘ None whatever.’ Then he is questioned now ho
came to speak of property existing which had no
existence, and he says in reply that it was wholly


a fictitious will, and that he did not choose that
Gibbes should know what property he had. In the
course of his cross-examination ho admits that his
object in making the will was to obtain money
from Mr. Cottie. He is asked :
4 What was your object in trumping up the will
and putting all the contents of it as wrong as you
possibly could ?—Because I did not choose to give
him any information about myself or family.
Was the object of your will to give him security ?
—No, I cannot say exactly to give him security.
Did you obtain money from him on the making
of the will ? I did. How much ?—3OO/. at that
time. And how much afterwards ?—I think 400/.
Was it your object to give him a security that
would be worthless ?—Certainly not; I did not
give it to him as a security. What was your
object?—To satisfy a whim that he had. What
was his whim?—Well, he wished me to do it.
What did he say ? —ln the event of my dying in
my return to England, or anything in that way.
What was the uso of the will ?—I never intended
it should be of any use. Was it executed, then,
in fraud of Mr. Gibbes ? —I cannot say in fraud.
What was it ?—lt was certainly executed wro#gly.
Did you obtain tbe money upon the execution of
the will?—I obtained it afterwards. In conse-
quence ?—I cannot say whether it was in conse-
quence. Did he make it a condition ?—He might
have done; I cannot say. Did he ?—I believe he
did. Why did you put your mother’s name
wrong ?—On the same principle that I put every-
thing else wrong. Did you think that putting
Hannah Frances instead of Henriette Felicitd
would make the will a bad one ?—I never intended
it to be a good one. Did you think it would make
the will a bad one ?—I did think so; yes. What ?
—I did think so, I have no doubt. You did think
so?—Yes. You knew your mother’s name, of
course ?—I did. Have you got that letter ?—Yes.
And that is signed H. F., is it ?—Yes. That is
how you came to put Hannah Frances?—lt is not
how I came to put Hannah Fiances. You say
you got a letter from her signed H. F. ?—Yes.
Is that why you put Hannah Frances ?—I believe
it was. Sarah or Elizabeth would have done as
well?—No doubt you would find a hundred
names. Who was Mr. Henry Angell ?—He was a
person I have seen since. Then he was a real
person ?—He was. You believed Henry Angell to
bo a real person ?—Yes. Why did you put in Sir
John Bird?—l cannot tell. Is there such a
person ?—I do not know. Who was John Jarvis ?
—I do not know, I am sure. Now, were not both
■John Jarvis, Esq., of Bridpcrt, Dorset, and Henry
Angel, of Dorset, in England, close and intimate
friends of Arthur Orton’s father?—Ah, that I
cannot tell. It was Orton suggested the name to
mo to put in. They were known to him, no
doubt.’
According to the defendant’s account, the will
was designedly a fictitious will. The will may
have been fictitious under two sets of circum-
stances. If a man has been called upon to make a
will for some ulterior purpose, and he represents
himself as being possessed of certain property, he
must mention the estates of which he says he is
possessed; but suppose he \ioes not know the pre
perty, he has to drawupon his imagination. That
may have been the case with the defendant, or
the case he himself puts may be the true one—
namely, that knowing, as Sir Roger Tichborne,
what estates he was entitled to, he would not com-
municate the names of the estates to Mr. Gibbes,
but substituted false ones. In either case, accord-
ing to the admission of the defendant,'he intended
to execute a gross fraud, which amounted more or
less to a swindle, and to obtain money by leading
Mr. Gibbes to suppose he had made a genuine
will. In any case thi3 would be a scandalous
fraud which might expose a man to a charge of
obtaining money under false pretences, and yet it
only affects the defendant’s case in this way. If
you believe he put in a false statement as to the
property because he did not know what property
the Tichborne family possessed, such ignorance on
his part is incompatible with the supposition that
he is Roger Tichborne. With regard to the ques-
tion as to how this name of Hermitage could have
come into the defendant’s imagination, it was
asserted by the Attorney-General on the former
trial that it arose from his association with Wap-
ping, there being a Hermitage Wharf and a Her-
mitage Bridge in the immediate neighbourhood of
old Orton’s residence. But it may have arisen
from a different cause. Shortly before Roger
Tichborne left England there was a Hermitage
estate put up for sale, and there are two letters of
Roger Tichborne’s in which he says he approved
the plan of purchasing it, but the purchase was
not effected during Roger Tichborne’s stay in this
country. Whether the defendant had this in
mind or whether it was from his Wapping asso-
ciations I don’t know.
Another extraordinary circumstance is that in
that will be gives his mother’s name as Hannah
Frances. Mr. Gibbes tells you how that hap-
pened. He says, ‘ What are you going to do for
your mother ? ’ and he says, ‘ Oh, let her have my
estate in the Isle of Wight.’ But says Mr. Gibbes,
‘ I have only got her initials,’ and the defendant,
after some hesitation, said that her name was
Hannah Frances, when as we know her name was
Hnriette Felicite. On being asked by the Soli-
citor-General why he put his mother’s name in
the will as Hannah Frances, the defendant re-
plied, * Upon the same principle that I put down
everything else wrong.’ It was then suggested
that he had put his father’s name in right, and
he was asked why he did not describe his father
as Sir John, Sir Julian, or Sir Jasper Tichborne.
The defendant answered, ‘There was no use in
doing that because Mr. Gibbes knew better.’ The
defendant said he thought the Solicitor-General
was very insolent in his insinuations, whereupon
the Solieitor-General retorted that he meant to
be so. The Solicitor-General was provoked and
used a hasty expression, which I think is to be
regretted. The defendant says he gave his
mother’s name as Hannah Frances because he
wished to make the will fictitious and delusive in
that respect as well as in respect of the properties
he mentioned. Do you believe that, gentlemen,
or are you of opinion that he gave the Christian
names of his mother as Hannah Frances because
he knew no better? Is it possible that a person
grown up to man’s estate, who had been in con-
stant intercourse with his mother, should not
have known her Christian name ? I could
understand his forgetting her second name, but
Henrietta was the name by which his father
always addressed her in writing, and probably in
domestic intercourse, and, if so, he must have
heard his father address her as Henriette hun-
dreds and hundreds of times. Besides, we know
that Roger Tichborne wrote to his mother about
her name-day on the festival of St. Henriette.
It may, indeed, be said he had forgotten his
mother’s Christian name, but every man must
judge for himself on this point. Is the Christian


name of a mother ever forgotten as long as
memory remains ? Judge for yourselves. If you
think he inserted ‘ Hannah Frances ’ because he
did not know the Christian names of Lady Tich-
borno, can you resist the inference that it was not
owing to want of ability to recollect them, but
because he had never had any knowledge of
them ?
As soon as Mr. Gibbes got to the last part of
the will ho would naturally ask who were to be
the executors. The defendant answers ‘ John
Jervis, Esq., of Bridport, in Dorsetshire, and my
mother, Lady Hannah Frances Tichborne.’ Was
John Jervis a fictitious personage, it may be
asked? No, he had a real existence. The will
goes on to provide that Mr. Henry Angell shall
be the guardian of the defendant’s children. He
also lives in Dorsetshire, I think. In cross-
examination the defendant cannot say of his own
knowledge whether there is or is not a John
Jervis of Dorsetshire, neither does he know
whether there is a Henry Angell. Another ex-
ecutor is Sir John Bird, of Hertfordshire, who
turns out to be a purely fictitious person. When
the defendant is asked about him he says he put
in his name because he was an imaginary person,
and he does not know why he put in that par-
ticular . name. There comes now an inquiry
which is of considerable importance, and that is
the mention of the names of John Jervis and
Henry Angell, who were close and intimate
friends of the Ortons. Then the question is put
to him, ‘ What I ask you is whether Arthur
Orton had told you of John Jervis and Henry
Angell, and whether that induced you to leave
tiiem guardians over your infant children ? ’ To
that he says, —‘ I don’t remember what he told
me; I don’t think he told me anything about
them more than the name.’ The first thing
which strikes me is that the names of Jervis and
Angell could not possibly be known to Roger
Tichborne, and if, therefore, they were used by
Roger Tichborne they must have been suggested
to him from without; but, on the other hand,
Arthur Orton would have been familiar with the
names, and they would naturally have occurred
to him, while they would not have occurred to
Roger Tichborne. The defendant, of course, felt
this disadvantage, and therefore says that Arthur
Orton expected to receive part of the money
which was to be obtained by the execution of the
will. Then, the defendant says, he suggested
that John Jervis and Henry Angell might be
named as executors.
The difficulty here is to understand how Roger
Tichborne could be at a loss to find names to put
in his will as his executors without having re-
course to Arthur Orton. Mr. Gosford would have
given him a name in a moment, Mr. Slaughter
another, they being the two executors of his
original will. He could have had 50 names. This
is the defendant’s explanation, which is apparently
simple and straightforward,— ‘ I did not want to
make the will, but I could not get a certain sum
of money without executing it. If I had been left
to myself, I should not have executed it, but the
fact is I was associated with a man who pressed
me to make a will because I promised to give him
250 1., and he prevailed upon me against my better
judgment to make it. Then, he supplied me with
the two names and I took them and put them in.’
That explanation you can accept or reject. But
the learned counsel for the defendant, whose busi-
ness, as I should have thought, would have been
to support the statements of his client as far as he
could by fair argument and reason, instead of
doing so in this instance, passed the defendant’s
explanation over in the most sublime scorn. ‘ Oh,’
said he, ‘ I cannot say, in the face of the evidence,
where Arthur Orton was at the time the will was
executed. He was somewhere or other in the
bush; but I cannot say he was at Wagga Wagga.
Therefore, I must have recourse to another and
more specious and plausible explanation.’
I can fancy the learned counsel sitting down, and,
with poetic fervour, painting a picture something
like this: ‘ When Roger Tichborne was with Arthur
Orton in the woods of Australia, miles and miles
away from any human being, sitting up during the
greater part of the night under the magnificent
and cloudless skies of Australia, conversing about
old times, Arthur Orton’s stronger mind impressed
the weaker mind of Roger Tichborne with the
adventures and persons connected with his own
life, and so when the defendant is asked for
names he jots down the first that occur to him,
and those at the moment most familiar were
those told him by Arthur Orton.’ Then the
learned counsel asks—‘Am I departing from the
path of logical argument or of common
sense in asking you to believe that this is what
happened {' If the question had been put to me,
I should have replied,— ‘ You are not only depart-
ing from the strict path of logical argument, but
from every conceivable path of logic or common
sense.’ We have all heard of the wonderful doc-
trine of the transmigration of souls, which sup-
poses that when a soul is disembodied it pops into
the' first empty body that presents itself; but the
learned counsel asks you to believe in the trans-
migration of one living mind into another living
mind. According to him, in consequence of the
conversations under the canopy of heaven, and the
magnificent cloudless skies of Australia, the recol-
lections of Arthur Orton passed into the mind of
Roger Tichborne, turning out all recollections of
the latter, and taking their place. The only thing
that I remember at all like this is the hermit crab.
It is a fish destined by nature to inhabit a shell,
but which has no shell provided for it. At length
it finds another shell-fish, puts in its claws, which
are long and sharp, pulls out and devours the
innocent, unoffending owner of the shell which it
desires to innabit, and takes possession. This is
the process by which the learned counsel wishes
you to believe the mind of Arthur Orton occupied
the mind of Roger Tichborne. He wants you to
suppose that Roger Tichborne had no recollection
of things appertaining to himself and remembered
only the things told him by Arthur Orton. Is
this a theory which any rational man can enter-
tain for a moment ? So much for the remarkable
will, which is one of the most striking features in
this case.
After it was executed, Mr. Cottie still hesitated
to advance the money, and preferred that the de-
fendant should wait till he got to Sydney, where
the head office of the bank was situated. The de-
fendant accordingly goes to Sydney, whence he
sends a telegram to Gibbes asking for an advance
of 51. Then Mr. Cubitt sends this letter to the
Dowager Lady Tichborne: —
‘ Sydney, Jan. 22, 18C6.
‘ My dear Madame, —After a long, anxious,
tedious, and expensive search I have at length
succeeded in discovering your son, who, as you
will learn from him, is now in Sydney, and with
whom I have now had several interviews.
‘ From Mr. Tichborne himself you will learn all
particulars relating to myself, and my simple


reason for now addressing yon is that I may add
my part towards clearing myself of serious impu-
tations against my character through the perfidy
and deceit of one of my agents, who, with a view
to acquiring gain for himself, has not hesitated to
vilify me in a manner disgusting to the feelings of
any honourable man.—Yours, &c.,
‘ A. Cubitt.’
The defendant writes the following letter to Lady
Tichborne: —
‘ June 23,1866.
‘My dear Mother. —I have not received your
letters yet. Has they will have to go to Wagga-
Wagga nrst, I entinded to go by the mail steamer
on the 14 July. But they have altered the date
of departure to the first of Aug. very annoying. I
have found Mr. Cubitt a very different person to
what I represented him to you in my last letter.
I have every reason to be please with him and the
way in which he has enquired for me. I have my
arrangement with him for the expense and truble
he been to. I likewise enclose a note from him.
Hoping my beloved mother soon to be with you I
remain your affectionate son
‘ Roger Chas. Tichborne.’
Now comes a letter from Lady Tichborne to Mr.
Gibbes, dated May 10:
‘ Mr. Gibbes, —I wish to acknowledge your
letter and also to thank you for it. I must begin
by saying that to see my dear son again would be
the greatest' happiness I could have in this world,
and having had the awful and most melancholy
misfortune to lose my youngest son, Alfred Joseph,
I should, of course, appreciate all that happiness
still more, if possible; but, notwithstanding all
that, Roger's identity must be beyond any doubt,
and he cannot be identified till he comes where I
am, either in England or in Paris. I cannot send
400£. unless I am perfectly sure of his identity;
and you must understand that Roger has been
three years at the Jesuit College at Stoneyhurst,
and when he was 19 years of age, in 1852, he went
into the Dragoon Guards, where he remained
nearly two years. He passed his examination
well before he got into that regiment; he never
knew his grandfather—Sir James’s father was
dead even before I married his father. Roger was
born in Paris, and spoke French, I believe, better
than English. I should be glad to know whether
he is married or not. I enter into all these details
that you may be able to know him; but I repeat
I cannot send any money till he has been iden-
tified, and that cannot be done, I am afraid, till he
comes to England. Perhaps his creditors would
allow him to come over, and would consent to
wait to be paid till he has been identified in Eng-
land, and if he will not tell them who he is he
must, under one pretence or other, contrive to
come to England. Before I conclude this letter I
must recommend you once more to try to find out
the truth, so that it should be beyond doubt that
young man is my dear son, roger Charles Tich-
borne.’
She signed herself ‘ Lady tichborne.’
‘ I must, however, beg of you to bestow the
greatest attention on that business and that poor
young man who, I repeat it once more, cannot be
identified till I see him. Perhaps his creditors
could allow him to go over to London to meet me,
and would consent to wait to be paid till he is
identified. If he is really roger Charles tichborne,
my son, of course there will not be any difficulties.
May I ask you to answer this letter by the next
mail to this address.’
The information contained in this letter was in-
consistent with the statements made by the de-
fendant to Mr. Gibbes at Wagga-Wagga. Forth-
with either Mr. Gibbes or Mr. Cottie telegraphs
to the defendant at Sydney, who replies that his
brother was educated at Winchester College,
Yorkshire, an establishment which has no exist-
ence. Possibly this question may have been put
to the defendant to test the accuracy of his state-
ment, because in the obituary of the Illustrated
London News, which paper was taken in at the
Institution at Wagga-Wagga, it was recorded that
Sir Alfred Tichborne was educated at Prior-park,
a well-known Roman Catholic College. At all
events this is the only way in which I can account
for such a question being put to the defendant.
In reply to other telegrams, the defendant stated
that he was a private in the 66th Regiment, that
he was educated in the High School, Southampton;
that he did not know who wa3 the agent at
Tichborne-park at the time he left. These replies,
he repeated in a subsequent conversation at
Sydney. On the 9th of July, 1866, the defendant,
having left his wife at Goulburn, returned there
from Sydney and was re-married to her by a priest
according to the rite of the Roman Catholic
Church. It has been suggested that he went back
for this purpose, because he had learnt for the
first time while at Sydney that the Tichbornes
were Roman Catholics; but, on the other hand, it
is natural enough, assuming him to be Roger
Tichborne, that he should wish to take home with
him a certificate showing that his marriage had
been duly celebrated according to the forms of the
Church of Rome, and not merely by a Dissenting
minister in a private house.
Eighth Day. February 10, 1874.
Gentlemen of the Jury,—We left off yester-
day at a point where the statement of the de-
fendant had been taken by Mr. M‘Carthy, the
solicitor to the bank, and I have called your
attention to the contents of that statement, of
rather to Mr. M'Carthy’s short summary of it, and
to the fact that in it the defendant said that the
regiment into which he had enlisted was the 66th
—agreeing in that with the telegraphic message
he had sent in reply to the inquiry by Mr. Gibbes
on the subject. I am now going to call your
attention to a still more remarkable document
—indeed, perhaps, I may say, the most remark-
able document which presents itself in the whole
course of this singular cause. Notwithstanding
the statement made by the defendant to Mr.
M‘Carthy, the bank still hesitated to advance the
500 1. Mr. Gibbes was about to leave Sydney. H>
was desirous, if he could, of befriending the defen-
dant, and oi getting the money for him, a,ud he
had recourse to a friend of his own, a solicitoi, a
man named Milport, in whose hands he placed
the defendant. It occurred to either of them
that it would advance the interests of the defen-
dant if he would make what is called a stututory
declaration. You are possibly aware that by
modern legislation power is given to parties who
wish solemnly to verify statements where an oatn
is not admissible to make a statutory declaration
—a declaration made under certain forms and
certain solemnities, and to which penalties are at-
tached in case of false statements being made
similar to those which attach to false statements
made on oath. Mr. Gibbes thought it right to


accompany his request to the defendant with an
explanation of the consequences she would bring
upon himself in the event of there being any false
statements in the declaration. His answer was,
‘ Oh, yes, I quite understand that; lam willing
to make the declaration.’ Accordingly, Mr. Mil-
port took one of the blank forms and wrote down
the statements of the defendant in answer to
questions he put to him. They were afterwards
copied out fairly, and Mr. Gibbes tells us the de-
fendant went before a notary public and made
and subscribed the declaration. The declaration
so signed by him was retained by him with the
view to obtain the money from the bank. Whether
in the sequel he was successful in doing so it is not
important to us to inquire. It is, however, most
important that we should know what he affirmed.
The original is not forthcoming, but the draught
is produced, and it is one of the most important
documents and facts in this case. In it he says :
‘ I, Roger Charles Tichborne, of Tichborne-park,
in the county of Hampshire, in England, but lately
residing at Wagga Wagga, in the colony of New
South Wales, Baronet, do solemnly and sincerely
■declare that I have been lately residing at Wagga
Wagga aforesaid under the name of and generally
known as Thomas Castro, and that the annexed
photograph, marked A, is a true photographic like-
ness of myself. And I further declare that I was
born on the sth day of January, 1829, and that I
am the eldest son and heir-at-law of the late Sir
James Francis Doughty Tichborne, of Tichborne-
park aforesaid, Baronet, by Harriette Felicia, his
wife.’ So far, assuming him to be Roger Tich-
borne, the document is not open to question ; but
now comes the part to which your atteution must
be most particularly directed ‘ That I arrived
at Melbourne on the 24th day of July, 1854. That
I left England in the “ Jessie Miller” on the 28th
of November, 1852. That I sailed from Rio
Janeiro on the 26th of April, 1854, in the “ Bella,”
which was wrecked, and the boat in which I was
picked up by the “ Osprey,” Captain Owens, by
which vessel I was conveyed to Melbourne, where
I first assumed the name of Castro.’
‘ I left England in the Jessie Miller,’ and ‘ I
left on the 28th of November, 1852. 5 You must
ask yourselves, gentlemen, whether it is possible
that Roger Tichborne could have made that
statement. ‘The Jessie Miller’—Roger Tich-
borne never set his foot on board the Jessie
Miller in the whole course of his life. And un-
less he heard of the Jessie Miller from Arthur
Orton when they were consorting together in the
bush, most surely Roger Tichborne never heard
the name of tho Jessie Miller pronounced. The
Jessie Miller was the ship in which Arthur Orton
sailed from Valparaiso from London. Then again
lie says he left England on the 28th of November,
1852. Roger Tichborne left England in the*
month of March, 1853, and sailed in the French
ship La Pauline. But who had left England on
the 28th of November, 1852, or at all events on
the 29th ?—Arthur Orton. Arthur Orton left
the river in the Jessie Miller on the 29th of
November, 1852, and one of the witnesses for the
defence states that they were to have left by an
earlier tide. You will boar in mind that one of
the statements made by the defendant was that
he got into some scrape in consequence of some
money matter and enlisted, and that he was
bought out by his father, who kept him under
close surveillance until he loft England in the
month of November. Can you reconcile that
statement of his leaving in the Jessie Miller and
in November, 1852, with the fact that Roger left
in La Pauline and in March, 1853 ? It may be
asked how did the name Jessie Miller and the
date November, 1852, present themselves to the
mind of the defendant. The answer may be
that it is possible the statement may be true; but
it must not divert us from the real question
whether the statement could ever suggest itself to
the mind of Roger Tichborne.
I can quite understand how it may come to pass
that a man who was suddenly asked the name of
the ship in which he sailed, and the time at which
he sailed, and not having a knowledge of the real
facts, having one of two things to do. He must
either draw upon his imagination or upon his
memory for some ship and some date. He will
imagine them, or, if he has sailed himself in some
particular ship, nothing is more likely than that
the ship in which he sailed and the time at
which he left would suddenly present themselves
to his mind. The questions were put and had to
be answered, and if he did not know the name of
the ship or the time it sailed, he must invent ship
and date or state the name of a ship in which he
himself Lad sailed and the time of his own de-
parture.
There is no amount of improbability so great as
would be the supposition that Roger Tichborne,
never having heard of the Jessie .Miller, had hit
upon that combination of names, and upon the
month of November, 1852—that date having no
reference to himself whatever; because on the
20th of November, 1852, Roger Tichborne wrote
to Lady Doughty from Upton telling her he was
going from London that day, and should take a
horse with him and leave it at Winchester, with
a view of hunting at WestTisted on Tuesday, the
30th. Therefore, it never could have occurred to
Roger Tichborne that in November, 1852, he had
started in the Jessie Miller from England for Val-
paraiso. . How, then, can you account for these
recollections of Arthur Orton as to the ship and
time of sailing being stated by Roger Tichborne
as part of the events of his life ? I confess I have
sought in vain for any solution of that'question.
The only one which has been offered is the ex-
planation suggested by the learned counsel for the
defendant, that the recollections of Arthur Orton
had become the recollections of Roger Tichborne;
that having dwelt so long with him in the bush
and Arthur Orton having so frequentlynarratedjtho
incidents of his life and his adventures, they had
become impressed upon the mind of the defendant,
so that when he was asked as to events that oc-
curred in his own history, his memory brought up
not those events, but events which occurred in the
history of Arthur Orton. Whether that would
become reciprocal, according to the somewhat ne-
bulous metaphysics of the learned counsel, I do
not know. Wnether Arthur Orton is now wan-
dering about with the recollection of the
events of Roger Tichborne’s life so impressed
upon his mind that if you could ask him in what
ship he left England he would say La Pauline, and
when he left he would say on the Ist of March,
1853, lam sure I don’t know. It is, however, the
only solution which has been suggested, and it
appears to be-altogether illusive, then the case
stands thus: —Unless you believe that Roger
Tichborne could have forgotten these two matters,
and could have adopted, instead of them, the dates
of Arthur Orton, it seems to mo that this docu-
ment can only lead to one conclusion.
Tichborne could have confounded important events
in Arthur Orton’s life with recollections of his own


life is what, as I have said, I cannot understand.
These are the observations which present them-
selves to my mind as to the statutory declaration.
At this time the defendant received a letter from
Lady Tichborne, which is not forthcoming, but
which must have been contemporaneous with the
letters to Gibbes and Cubitt. In the reply to that
letter the defendant says :
‘ Sydney , July 24.
‘My dear Mama,—l received your letter yes-
terday morning, and was somewhat disappointed
that you do not acknowledge me as your son.
Surely, my dear mama, you must know writing
you have caused me a deal of trouble, but it
matters not has I have to leave a country ware I
enjoy sich good health. I have grown very stout.
Yesterday one of Uncle Edward’s old servants call
on me, he being here a long while. He is name
Guifloyle. You must remember him ; he was re-
modlying the garden at Tichborne when I was
staying at Uncle Edward’s. Ho knew me as soon
s he see me. His wife was with him. She looks
very young yet, and yet she has 11 childien. You
speak of Bougie in your letter to Calvert. I have
made inquiries. I can’t find him. Mr. lurvel is
here with Sir John Young. I have seen and had
a long conversation with him. I heard that the
liev. Fewton Phillips was out here, but I cannot
find him. My dear mama the post closes in ten
minutes more for France, so I must say good-bye.
In case I am too late I will send this to England
has the English mail does not close for two hours
after the mail for Fiance.
‘ I enclose photograph of myself that you may
see how greatly I have improve. I wish, my dear
mama, to see you once more, but I am afraid not,
as I can’t get surficience money to come home,
Good by, my dear mama, and may the blessed
Marie have mersy on your soul.
‘ I remain, your affectionate son,
‘ Roger Charles Tichborne, Metropolitan
‘ Hotel, Pitt-street, Sydney.
‘ To Lady Tichborne, 40, Rue Neuve les
‘Mathurins.’
There are several observations which arise upon
that letter, and first the adoption of the term
* mama,’ which you will find perpetually recurring
in the form of ‘ dear mama ’ or ‘ my dear mama.
And it is remarkable for this reason—that Roger
Tichborne from the time he became a man never
used the term ‘ mama ’ in any one of his letters,
and ho never even repeats the term ‘ my dear
mother’ in the body of his letters, althouga occa-
sionally at the end of a letter he says, ‘ I remain,
my dear mother, your affectionate son.’ In the
second place, Roger Tichborne never introduces
religion or religious observations or ejaculations in
the course of his letters to his mother. I don’t
remember a single instance of it. And, therefore,
one is struck by this expression of hope, that ‘ the
blessed Maria may have mersy on your soul.’
And this, I can Dot help remarking, was written
after the letter from Lady Tichborne had been re-
ceived, in which she states that they were all
Roman Catholics, and that Roger had been a good
Roman Catholic. And another thing occurs to
me, but I don’t know whether I am right—l can
not help thinking that ‘ the blessed Maria ’ must
have boen a South American importation. I ap-
prehend that an English Roman Catholic would
have said ‘the Blessed Mary.’ In this country
they speak of the Blessed Virgin Mary, not Maria.
Maria is Spanish. Now, the letter which I have
just read to you is remarkable for its composition,
style, and grammar. Handwriting, composition.
grammar, and orthography are tests by which you
can judge between an educated and uneducated
man. Now there are here in 20 lines 18 misspell-
ings and eight mistakes of grammar. As an in-
stance, the word ‘ as ’ is spelt in six instances
with an ‘ h.’ _
On the same date Cubitt writes to Lady Tich-
borne stating that her son has accepted bills
drawn in his favour, and payable at the Oriental
Bank, London. Now, this certainly was a very
strange proceeding on the part of Cubitt, because
he had distinctly agreed with Lady Tichborne
that his ultimate reward was to come out of the
estates when they were recovered. He gets the
defendant at Sydney, and gets the bills out of
him. Mr. Gibbes in September, 1866, writes to
the Dowager Lady Tichborne: —
‘ Wayga- Wayqa, New South Wales,
1 6th September , 1861.
‘ Madam, —In all probability before you receive
this you will have seen your long-lost son, for in
spite of the discrepances between his statement
of his youthful career and yours, such I am con-
fident he is. I wrote you by the May mail
inclosing some photographs, and they should
have reached you by the time you wrote, the
18th of July, but as some other letters, posted
by the same hand, on the same day, all miscar-
ried, I conclude I have to thank the untrust-
worthy messeuger. In case of any unforeseen
delay in your son’s return voyage, I beg to in-
form you that he, together with Lady Tichborne
and infant (girl), and a servant named Bogle, who
had been valet to his late uncle (and who I bcdieve
has been receiving 5 01. per annum from the Tich-
borne family through the Union Bank at Sydney),
all sailed in the Panama mail steamer on the 2nd
of September inst. from Sydney. Previously to
this he had been identified positively, not only by
Bogle, but by one Guilfoile, a market gardener m
Sydney, who was gardener to his father, the late
Sir James, and who is now a wealthy man—also
by his wife. I was previously satisfied from Mr.
Turville’s statement that really was. the man.
His delay in coming was merely attributable to
the difficulty of getting a sufficient advance to go
home properly ; as, however convinced I was oc
his identity, £ could not persuade others to be
equally so, especially without mentioning matters
that Sir Roger would not have wished. I trust,
however, ere this comes to your hand, that you
will a"ain have had the satisfaction of seeing your
son, and that your maternal anxieties will be at
an end.’ , . , , ,
Well, the bank might not have been induced to
advance the money had it not been for a gent e-
man named Turville, who I cannot help thinking
has taken a rather foolish part in tins matter.
Mr. Turville had known the parents of Roger, but
he bad never known Roger himself, therefore ho
was not competent to form any opinion as to the
identity of Roger Tichborne or of the defendant
with Roger. However, they have an interview
with Mr. Turville, who puts three test questions
to the defendant, as Mr. Gibbes tells us. The first
(luostion was whether his mother was stout or
thin, and he said that she was stout, and a very
tall, large woman. Now, it is scarcely possible
that ho could have made a more unfortunate
statement, because it is admitted on all hands
that Lady Tichborne was leanness itself. She was,
if I may say so, the incarnation of leanness. It
so happened that Mrs. Butt, the wife of the pio-
prietor of the National Hotel, where tho defen-
dant was staying, was a tall, stout woman, and the


defendant, referring to her, said that that was the
sort of woman his mother was. We hear now of
a touch of filial piety, after so many years of
silence and neglect, for he says, ‘ If I come into the
property I will do something for Mrs. Butt, be-
cause of her great likeness to my mother.’ Then
Mr. Turville asked him if he remembered where
his parents were in 1852, and the defendant, after
leaning his head upon his hand for a short time,
said, * They were in Paris and I was in Dorset-
shire.’ To this Mr. Turville answered, ‘You are
right. I was living in the house with them at
that time.’ It is possible that Mr. Turville was
with them in Paris, but it could not be that Roger
was in Dorsetshire, because at that time he was at
the Portobello Barracks, in Dublin. Mr. Gibbes,
however, says it might have been 1853 he said;
but that could not be, because Roger Tichborne
was then on bis way to Valparaiso. Either Mr.
Turville must have been altogether out, or Mr.
Gibbes must have been giving us, from want of re-
collection, an erroneous statement. The third
question, whatever it was, Mr. Gibbes has unfor-
tunately forgotten, but if that question and answer
had been as unsatisfactory as the other, that in-
terview was not attended with any very satisfac-
tory results. However, Mr. Turville seems to
have been satisfied. He shook hands with the
defendant, and said, ‘ What convinces me of your
identity more than anything else is your strong
resemblance to your father, especially about the
mouth.’ The conviction of Mr. Turville must, I
think, have been a faint one, because I find him
writing to Lady Tichborne a letter, dated ‘ Gov-
ernment House, Sydney, Australia, Nov. 23, 1860,’
in which he says :
‘ My dear Lady Tichborne—Your letter of Sep-
tember 20 reached me on the 15th inst., and I
will at once assure you that you need make no
apologies for troubling me, as I shall be most
happy to be of any service to you. Throughout
your letter you speak as if perfectly satisfied with
the identity of your son, so of course I shall
speak of him as such. I called on him twice while
he was here, but as I had never seen him before,
and as my name even was quite unknown to him,
it was impossible for me to be sure of his identity.
But I thought it right to make myself known to
him, as I was. probably the only person out here
acquainted with his family, and I should have
been happy to have given him any advice, which,
however, he did not seem to stand in need of from
me. Under these circumstances, I felt myself
unwilling to force myself upon him. I mention
this in reply to your wish that I should “ seek him
out,” “ give him advice,” and “ be kind to him.”
He will ere this be in England, as he left this
early in September, if I remember right, vid Pa-
nama. I saw the manager of the Bank of New
South Wales, who had received the 400 f. you sent
for Sir Roger. The bank had instructions to re-
turn the money to you if Sir Roger had already
left. I agreed with the manager that this would
be the proper course, and I enclose a note which
he wrote to me at my request. I also called on
Mr. Cubitt and gave him to understand that you
were not well pleased with him for having obtained
Sir Roger’s signature to a bill for the reward. The
amount of this bill Mr. Cubitt declined—very
civilly, I must admit—to give me. That your son
had signed the bill he freely admitted, but said
that the act was quite voluntary on Sir Roger’s
part, and that he, Mr. Cubitt, had used no pres-
sure whatever. I see no cause, however, for your
alarm as to this bill. Should Sir Roger prove his
title he will of course have to pay the amount,
but that, I take it, will be all the inconvenience
that will arise. For until he does prove his title
his signature, I suppose, is not worth much, and
Mr. Cubitt and others similarly situated (for I
regret to hear that there are others j but your son
of course will tell you of all these matters) can
have no interest in proceeding against your son
before he has proved his title ; their interests lie
clearly all the other way, and would lead them to
giving him every facility.’
Now, I cannot help thinking that Mr. Turville’s
recognition, such as it was, was calculated to ad-
vance his interests and to lead to the banker’s
advancing the money that was required.
Then there comes another incident which seems
to have bad considerable effect on the mind of
Mr. Gibbes, who was already much disposed to
believe in the identity of the defendant with
Roger Tichborne. They go together afterwards
to a jeweller’s shop, where there is a stereoscopic
representation of Paris. Mr. Gibbes takes up the
transparency, and while he is looking at it the de-
fendant says : ‘ Oh, that is Paris,’ and he states
the part of the Boulevards which it represented,
and, as it turned out, correctly, because there
were stereoscopic slides of that part of the Boule-
vards, at which Mr. Gibbes looked, and found
that the answers of the defendant were correct.
That would be a very striking fact, if the defen-
dant had never had an opportunity of seeing the
picture. But Mr. Gibbes cannot tell whether he
had ever been in that shop before. If he had been
there, he of course might have seen the slide as well
as Mr. Gibbes. We know that he had been to a
jewellers shop to get the Tichborne crest put upon
the stone of a ring, and it might, I think, have
struck Mr. Gibbes as singular that a boy who had
left Paris at 11 years of age should, after the in-
terval of so many years, have remembered the
streets so perfectly. However, it is a fact that
the defendant did recognise the street, and it is
uncertain that he ever saw the slide before. You
must not assume that he did. If he recollected
it, he could not have recollected it as Arthur
Orton, because Arthur Orton certainly never was
in Paris.
Then comes the question how he could have
known of the Tichborne crest. If he had had no
means of learning what it was, his knowledge of
it would be a very striking thing. How could
Arthur Orton or anybody who was not Roger
Tichborne or one of the family, or connected with
them, have known what the crest was ? The
answer, I think, is this The defendant admits
that in Sydney he saw a Baronetaye, and looked
into it. He must have had some object in doing
so. Of course, he did not see it without looking
at the name ‘ Tichborne,’ and there he would
have seen the crest. lam reminded by my learned
brother that he might also have seen it in the
Illustrated London News, which contained a notice
of the death of Sir James Tichborne.
And now we take leave of Mr. Gibbes with this
fact: —before he left Sydney he wrote to Lady
Tichborne before pointing out discrepancies be-
tween her statements and the defendant’s. Did
not those statements suggest any doubt to the
mind of Mr. Gibbes ? They were certainly of a
very grave and startling nature. He does not,
however, seem to hesitate in his expectation of re-
ceiving the very large reward of 1,000 f., of which
he had actually, indeed, received acceptances to
the tune of 500 1. Yow, there certainly is some-
thing very singular in this. The defendant, as


originally represented by Mr. Gibbes, was very
reluctant to be dragged forth from his security,
yet he gives 5007. to the man who discovered him
and brought him forth from the obscurity to
which he had voluntarily consigned himself. But
he also gave acceptances to Mr. Cubitt for 5001.,
and in addition he gave a very high-flown testi-
monial to the man who had been instrumental in
taking him out of the darkness by which he had
surrounded himself, and that, as he says in it,
‘after many months’ toil,’the toil consisting in
putting some advertisements in the newspapers.
Mr. Cubitt wrote the memorial, indeed, but it was
signed ‘R. C. D. Tichborne, Bart.,’ and it spoke of
Mr. Cubitt’s ‘unflagging diligence’ when there
was little hope of success, and adds that persons
who had friends missing could not do better than
put themselves in his hands, with a firm convic-
tion that their interests would be properly attend-
ed to. Why, as I have intimated, all that Mr.
Cubitt did could have been done by the common-
est newsagent. The whole of the discovery, if
merit was in it at all, was due to Mr. Gibbes, but
Mr. Cubitt got 5007. worth of acceptances, and*
managed to get them paid as a reward, which if
he had had any sense of propriety, would never
have gone into his pocket. Well, on the 27th of
August Lady Tichborne wrote to Mr. Gibbes a
letter, in which she says:—
‘The idea that my beloved son, Sir Roger
Doughty Tichborne, could be wanting the neces-
saries of life is a very distressing thing to me, and
more so than I can explain; therefore I beg that
you will continue your assistance to him, and see
that he is not wanting in anything, both in
clothes and also for his food, as I assure you that
you will be amply rewarded for it, and I will re-
turn you everything even in supposing that the
executors did not do it; in fact, you may rest as-
sured that you will not lose anything if the things
go on so slowly, it is surely owing to the very
great distance you are from me, it is a sad thing
to consider that you cannot have an answer to
my letters before 6 months are over. I would
have sent him 207. to-day, but as I cannot say his
real name, and I do not know the other, I could
not send it straight to him, therefore I send it to
you, and I think it would do to pay his journey
from Wagga-Wagga down to Melbourne, and to
buy, perhaps, a little linen for the time he has to
spend in the vessel. Your own journey I beg
you to advance it, and it will of course be re-
turned to you afterwards —I mean your own
journey from Wagga-Wagga down to Melbourne.
As for what regards your passage from Melbourne
to England, I will pay both yours and Roger’s at
the office in London, as they told me it was the
same thing, and they will send an order to their
captain to desire him to bring Sir Roger Doughty
Tichborne and his friend Mr. Gibbes over without
asking them any money whatever. It is not neces-
sary to have any outfit; it is even better for him
to buy his clothes in England, as they will be
more fashionable and better suited to him ; but
I must return to the subject that interests me so
much.
‘ I trust that you will continue to advance him
the money for his food, lodging, and also his wash-
ing, as I will return every farthing of it to you by-
and-by, and you will be amply rewarded for
everything you have done for my beloved son, and
as you begun or embarked in that business, I hope
you will go through it, and you will find in the
end that you have done a good and advantageous
thing, and what men of business call a capital
affair by doing it, only the distance is so great
that it prevents the things from being quickly
done. As for his creditors, their good sense must
tell them to let him come to London to be iden-
tified, for what can he do without it, and as soon
as he is the things will go straight, and his debts
will be paid immediately, all the fortune is in the
hands of the Chancellor. My poor dear son
Alfred left a little boy only three months old, and
he is a ward in Chancery, but notwithstanding all
that my solicitor told me, that they cannot keep
Sir Roger out of his possessions for one hour when
he has been identified. I fancy that the photo-
graphies you sent me are like him, but of course
after 13 years’ absence there must have been some
difference in the shape, as Sir Roger was very
slim. I suppose also those large clothes would
make him appear larger than he is. I am, how-
ever, much obliged to you for having sent them
to me. I think it will be an advantage to him if
you will accompany him, therefore I beg you to do
so. I shall be delighted to see you with him. He
will require a very clever man to be with him, as
having been so long away from England, he is no
longer accustomed to the English manners. I
suppose you will like to come to England, where,
perhaps, you would be better than where you are.
My son Roger will, I know, be very happy if you
accompany him, and you need not wait six months
again before embarking; but if you could embark
as soon as you have had this letter, it would be
the best plan.
‘ I hope my dear son Roger Doughty Tichborne
will have patience, and that you will have the
kindness to take great care of him, as I felt very
unhappy at reading in your letter that he was
near falling into despondency, he must have
courage ; and now that he is near reaching the
port, he must go through his passage home with
courage, and certainly his creditors cannot set
themselves against his coming home, as it is the
only way to settle that business, or rather to pay
his debts —you might read them this letter if you
think it can be of any use to you. I shall go to-
morrow to the office, and desire them to let you
and Roger know when their vessel sails, then he
will soon be near me again after so many years’
absence, and as for the banker, my solicitor told
me how extraordinary it is that that young man
will not make himself known and tell them who
he is, and also perhaps refer them to me, as he
would have as much money then as he requires.
The Doughty property brings in fifteen thousand
a year, and it is when they inherited it that the
Tichbornes have added the name of Doughty to
their own family name, and the Tichborne pro-
perty brings in, I believe, five or six. thousand a
year; therefore, you see that there will be amply
to reward you, and also to return you what you
may advance for him at present. —I remain, dear
Sir, sincerely yours, H. F. Tichbokne.
‘My best love to my dear son Roger. I trust
that the 20 1. will do for the present and to pay his
journey down to Melbourne. Roger has in his
own power to get as much money as he requires
from the banker if he tells them who he is and re-
fers them to the London and Westminster Bank,
where lam well known and where I bank. If he
will not get any money that way, could they r.ot
advance a little to you at once, not to pay for his
passage, since I will pay for it in London, but in
case he should require a few things to take with
him. I think the creditors will not and cannot
prevent him from returning to see his mother, if
you make them understand what is certainly true


that it is the only way he has to pay his debts ;
and l cannot help repeating you once more that
the sooner Roger comes home the better it is even
m his own interests, as soon as he is with me,
he LT ! b ® ldentlfied - and things will soon be
settled afterwards.’
Mr. Gibbes writes as follows on the 16th of Sen-
tcmber:— r
‘ Lad / Tichborne.—Dear Madam,—ln ease of
any unforeseen delay in your son’s return voyage
I beg to inform you that he, together with Lady
Tichborne and infant (girl), and a seryant named
Logie, who had been valet to his late uncle (and
who, I learn, has been receiving 50 1. per annum
S V fa , m i ly - tbl ' oUsb the Union
Bank at Sydney), all sailed in the Panama mail
steamei on the 2nd of September inst., from Svd-
ney Previously to this he had been identified
positively, not only by Bogle, but by one Guil-
f°yle, a market gardener in Sydney, who was
gardener to his father, the late Sir James, and who
is now a wealthy man; also by his wife. I was
prevmusiy satisfied from Mr. TurviU’s statement
that he really was the man. His delay in coming
was mainly attributable to the difficulty of getting
a sufficient advance to go home properly, as, how-
evei convinced I was of his identity, I could not
persuade others to be equally so, especially with-
out mentioning matters that Sir Roger would
not have wished I trust, however, ere this comes
sanction ‘ of thaty ° U WiU affain bavo llad the
satisfaction of seeing your son, and that your
maternal anxieties will be at an end. I Vul
almost forgotten to mention that he is accom-
panied on his journey by a young lad, a protege of
his one Master Butts (Butts), the son of a citizen
of Sydney, who could be sent on to England as an
envoy in case of accidental delay. I hope by the
ZLT ’ many fears to 7 the
contiaij, to hear from you that you have received
left r S v 1 ° U " h ph ? to ? r!l P lls °f your son. By your
letter you seem to imagine that Sydney is near
Wagga-AVagga (pronounced Wogga Wogga-a
water, as we are surrounded
on three sides by a river); but you will be sur-
prised to hear that it takes three days’ travelling
° D * place t 0 the other
and fs 335 mfl 7* °J ? ny size in *he interior,
bourne t fl '° m I S 7 dl \ ey and 311 from Mel-
R njid me ; l le f lld to tbe s °t- you purpose to
- il me, it is no longer requested, as Sir
has given me draughts on England for SOW., which
has moio than requited me for any services I
have performed. I am, Madam, yours obediently^
HowMr Gitbss withtho^
he speaks before him between the statement nf
(Stnlr* “,5 Hj- TickW*L m "Vu
3 outhful life, could take it on him to say he was
the man I confess seems to mo a very astonishing
tiling. I cannot help thinking that, the wish so
that * he i ud S“ent,Mr. Gibbes desired
Tirhhl defendant should be proved to be ltoger
andth&t tWfH I*° 1 *° pay the P romised 1,000/.,
, - a ? tbad ; a .g° od deal to do with the
confidence winch Mr. Gibbes professed to have.
writes:- 17th f September Lad y Tichborne
‘Mr. Gibbes,— l am much obliged to you for
will I n kl t n i dn<?SS t 0 my S 0D ’ and 1 assure you you
ill not lose any money by him. . . . I believe
you a boot my r, n ’ “‘withstanding what he told
made to 1U " Vf the other statements he
ho has “ i erC " from mine - 1 think that
no Has been through so many things since ho
hi \! ka d probably so much to
put u p With and perhaps to suffer, that it has
rUdYa'wa ‘tT B A> ¥’ 1 ™ » “
neu in and he was born, I believe tw^
years afterwards; but that will be easily ascer
f™ 6 ? I “ the re fster of the parish of LaMade-
me, m Pans, where he is born, and also in the
register of the parish of Tichborne, where he was
also registered. I do not think anythin, of his
not knowing his age exactly, as I have met other
people who did hot know their own ages eiacUj"
K^t-fandS
know thaThl W ° know , of Roger Tichborne, wo
know that he was a man who took his own course
and refused to be directed or influenced by othei s’
ask von°if Sh th ° Wh ° le C ° m ' 9e of his lette rsl would
flighty or giddy. Is not that one of the in-
stances in which this good lady reconciles dif-
+ lat COllld not othe rwise be got over?
to Sto a dea ! to ° much to attribute
that 11688 ; ? Ir ' Gibbes seems to intimate
that it would not be well to suggest to the de-
mT4t n det e Th“ St f anCeS of . contradiction, as it
mi ?~* deter him from coming over to England
and that it would be better not to say anythin,
We to Mr nSf tM i tim ° La dy Tichborne
w ote to Mr. Cubitt, enclosing him 400/ to mv
BU PPosed son’s way home. Up to this time
she had acted on the very prudent and proper
advice of her brother and of her solicitor Mr
Bowker—who, I think, from all we have seen of
have had noTt &n adviser !ls sho colll(l
nave had—not to advance money until she had
identitv C bntT nta if dSati - fied herself as t 0 his
identity, but here her anxiety to get him over to
England prevails over her prudence, and she sent
tne money. As the amount required had, how-
ever, been obtained from the bank, the 400/ was
saved to her. In her letter to Mr. Gibbes Lady
Tichborne said that Mr. Gosford was not Sir
incent, but Mr.’ We know that in June the
defendant did not know the name of bis father’s
nfme ; of U M ter 7 ardB i, he D ° *"*»*»?*£
name of Gosford, perhaps from Guilfoyle the
gardener, to whom the name of the steward must
havo been a household word, and the word ‘Mr ’
may ? have been written so that it resembled
ofHaZr™ the defendant €ive the name
The Lord Chief Justice.—He did, and Mr
{£? of T nected tbe name with
that of Hallett, the friend of old Mr. Orton. That
was a fair argument for counsel to urge? but to
my mind it was not conclusive. &
Brfdport? Juror -~ The defendant said, ‘Hallin of
no'iJT ? n , r ! F Jus tice.—He did, and that,
Hawking support the argument of Mr.
Hawkins, as no Hallett lived at Bridport. lam
to Lv ormng t - th f last I . etter of L ady Tichborne
• y person in Australia, and it is one of great
importance. Mr. Gibbes had told her of diifi-
of nfp uT D S fr ? m 7° contradictory statements
n defendant and herself, and reminded her
hat she had said nothing about the brown mark
winch the defendant gave as one proof of his
identity: You do not,’ ho said, ‘ refer to either
the Brighton card case or the brown mark,’ which


lie thought ought to be sufficient to lead her t
recognize the Claimant as her son. Mr. Gibbe
had said that Lady Tichborne had never mad
any reference either to the mark on the side o
the Brighton card case. So she writes a
follows:
‘ London, Sept. 17, 1866.
‘ Mr. Gibbes, —I have made up my mind to sene
the money—4oo7. They will forward it at th
Westminster and London Bank, or rather th
London and Westr. Bank—where I bank, and i
Sir Roger has sailed it must remain at the ban
till further orders. It is sent to Sir Roger Chas
Tichborne. I did not know, how to send it.
hope it will not make any difficulties. You say
that I do not mention anything about the mar*
that he has on his left side, it is because I do no
recollect it, and I do not believe I ever saw it
but it does not signify, as he may very well hav
had it without me knowing it.’
Well, there is the established fact that sh
never saw the mark, so far as her memory serve
her. Now, gentlemen, ask yourselves whether i
is likely that the mother of a child who had on
the side a mark some sin. in length by l|in. in
breadth would have known nothing about it. I
may be that in the case of one in Lady Tich
borne’s position, who did not wash and dress her
child herself as mothers in a humbler life do, she
may not have had the same opportunities of seeing
her child undressed; but a mark of that kind—B
congenital mark —is naturally a thing which
occasions remark. Is it possible that at some
time or other she did not see her child undressed
or, at all events, that the nurses did not tell hei
that the baby had got a brown mark on his side
We may, I think, fairly suppose that the mother,
whether by ocular inspection or from the nurses
who washed and dressed the child, would have
known about the mark if it had been there. Then
she goes on :
‘As for his preceptors, he was one of the
Christian Brothers, and I think he may have
made a mistake and thought he was a Jesuit—he
has confused one with the other. He told me when I
saw him in Paris that if Roger was to come back,
he would of himself go over from Paris to have
him acknowledged, as he knew him very well.
He is very honest and very good natured, and he
said so because I said that after so many years’
absence there are sometimes difficulties that you
do not expect. I think my poor dear Roger con-
fuses everything in his head just as in a dream,
and I believe him to be my son, though his state-
ments differ from mine.’
Gentlemen, you must judge for yourselves
whether the defendant is a person likely to con-
fuse everything in his head. An attempt has been
made to produce that impression on your minds,
whether successfully or not I don’t know; but
one thing is certain—that Lady Tichborne, in her
irrepressible desire to adopt the defendant as her
S °/b without either having seen him or conversed
with him, and notwithstanding that some of the
statements made with respect to him are directly
contrary to her own knowledge of facts, instead of
re aming those doubts which the circumstances
vci e likely to create, gets rid of all doubts and
X* yS ’ e confuses everything in his head, he has
ceeds ._l roUgh 80 muc h.’ Then the letter pro-
There is one thing which struck me, which is
, a . ln ,, e Photograph both him and you sent me
as the same small hands that he used to have,
xtoger had a remarkably small and a very pretty
hand, for a young man especially; and I thin!
that in that photograph the hands were small,
remember when he was 20 it was very startling
and if you add 13 years to it you will find, I think
the same small hands that he had—that peculiai
thing has done a great deal with me to make mo
recognize him. As for St. Vitus’s dance, he nevei
had that malady ; but when he was travelling ii
South America his servant wrote to me or to Sii
James’s agent, Mr. Gosford, that Sir Roger hac
rheumatism, and could hardly walk, but that he
was better. I think, again, Sir Roger has mistaken
one thing for the other.’
There is here a confusion of ideas which one
cannot well understand, for if there be two
maladies unlike one another, it is certainly rheu
matism and St. Vitus’s dance. How any one couh
confound the two I cannot imagine. In fact
gentlemen, that men believe readily what they
wish to believe is as true now as when the Roman
wrote ‘Quod homines volunt id facile credunt.
The letter then goes on:—
‘ I hardly like to write my ideas upon that sub-
ject. Ido it because I know his disposition
thoroughly, and it will not prevent me from re-
cognising him for my son, though his statements
differ from mine. But when you come to London
yourself, you will, of course, let me know more
than lean through a few lines in a letter. I will
thank you to take all the informations (sic) you
can about his marriage, and who his wife was,
and whether she has brothers and sisters; also
whether they have any fortune; all those infor-
mations I beg you to take before you sail. I have
shown Mr. Cubitt’s letter to my solicitor, and he
says it is a very improper way of acting—very un-
fair on poor Sir Roger and also on me, as he does
not ever say the amount, and Mr. Cubitt knows
very well my agreement with him was that the
reward should be paid out of the estates and
when Sir Roger was in possession of them; he
ought to return my bills, or at least to give six
months to give time to get money, instead of 3
weeks. I will thank you to explain all that ,to
Mr. Cubitt yourself before you go away. I trust
you will excuse this long letter, but it is so im-
portant a business to me as a mother that I am
obliged to give you all these details.—l remain,
sincerely yours, ‘L. J. Tichboenb.’
Then comes this very remarkable postscript:—
‘ I have also written to Mr. Turville to recom-
mend my dear son to him. I remember Mr. Tur-
ville well. I think the photograph very like
Roger, at least to what he was when he was 20,
always adding 13 years to it: for instance, he
used to be very slim, and was very thin; now he
has grown stouter a good deal than he was before
he went away. I have not mentioned to any lady,
and I do not mean to say anything about
Brighton, as I think it might turn people against
him; but when you come we will talk that busi-
ness over, and you had better not say a word
about it to my lady. And you had better tell him
not to mention it to anybody.’
That language with respect to the Brighton
card case is strikingly ambiguous; it neither
admits the fact that he had got involved in some
card case at Brighton nor does it deny it. She
merely says, ‘lt is better to say nothing about it,
as it might turn people against him.’ If he had
been swindled at Brighton it might certainly show
that he had been the dupe of others ; but how
could it turn anybody against him as Roger Tich-
borne ? Had Roger been involved in such a tran-
saction it would be a proof of his identity that


would be certainly worth purchasing at the cost
of lowering him a little in some people s estima-
tion. What the true interpretation of this lan-
guage may be must depend, as it strikes me,
upon whether there was any reality in this
asserted participation of Roger in the card
case at Brighton. It will be necessary, by-and-by,
to go into that transaction, in order that you
may judge whether Roger Tichborne was mixed
up in it or not. ,
A great deal has been said about Bogle, ana
there is no doubt that the recognition of the
defendant by him is a point that is strongly, in
his favour. You must therefore consider im-
partially the circumstances under which Bogle
met and recognized him. Bogle had married a
second wife, the schoolmistress at Tichborne, and
had gone out to Sydney after Sir Edward
Doughty’s death, and was living there. . Sir
Edward had promised to leave him an annuity in
consideration of his faithful service, but had died
without carrying his promise into effect. Lady
Doughty, knowing her husband’s feelings, acted as
if he had really the disposition be intended, and
she allowed Bogle 50 1. a year. His second wife
was now dead, but his two sons by his first marri-
age, John and Andrew, were settled at Sydney,
and a young son by his second wife was living
with him. Bogle had heard through the news-
papers that the long-lost Roger Tichborne had
been discovered and that he was about to come
forward to assume his proper place ; and he hears
also that he was at that moment in Sydney at the
Metropolitan Hotel. He hears that in the even-
ing, and next morning first thing he does is to go
to the Metropolital Hotel. The defendant is out,
and Bogle sits down quieTy in the courtyard of
the Hotel waiting to see him. After a time he
sees the defendant coming out from the billiard
room and crossing the yard, and as the defendant
passed him he looks at him and says, Hallo!
Bogle, is that you ?’ ‘ Yes, Sir,’ says Bogle. The
defendant says, ‘ I shall see you shortly/ and he
afterwards summons him upstairs. When he
goes up, Bogle says, ‘ I came here to see Sir Roger
Tichborne.’ The defendant says, ‘I am Sir Roger,
but I have grown so stout you may not have
recognized me.’ Then he mentions one person
and another, and brings to Bogle’s mind so many
recollections that the latter recognizes him. For
instance, the defendant asked Bogle whether ha
remembered going out to shoot with him and
Brand, the gamekeeper? Ho mentions various
persons by name, and asks Bogle whether he
remembers them. He inquires about Bogle’s
wife and his two sons, John and Andrew, men-
tioning their names ; but on this point my brother
Lush reminds me that Roger could not have
known Bogle’s wife, because his first wife had
died before Roger Tichborne left Paris, and he
did not marry the second wife until alter Roger
had left England. The. knowledge which the
defendant showed naturally impressed Bogle, and
accordingly he recognized him, without the
slightest doubt, as Roger Tichborne.
Now, the first question that presents itself is
this—was Bogle honest in his recognition ? A
great many remarks have been made upon Bogle,
and it has been said, assuming the defendant to
be an impostor, that Bogle was a co-conspirator,
and that Bogle had embarked his fortune with
the defendant in the hope of getting some large
reward by acknowledging him and assisting him
to assert his claims. Ido not believe in anything
of the kind. We saw the old man here, and cer-
tainly a better specimen of the negro race I would
not wish to see. He was from a boy in the service
of Sir Edward Doughty, and remained his servant
until his death. Sir Edward, when he went to
the West Indies, found Bogle a boy there, and
took him into his service, in which he continued
to the last, and during the whole of the time hp
maintained a character byond all question for
respectability, honesty, and fidelity to his master
which is above all praise. I cannot believe that
a man who for so many years maintained so high
a character would take up what he knew to be a
scandalous and iniquitous fraud; for assuming,
for argument sake; that the defendant’s claim is
not an honest one, still the circumstances werp
such as might have well led Bogle to believe that
the man he was conversing with was Roger Tich-
bome. He knew very well that Lady Tichborne
believed that her son lived, he heard he was in
Sydney ; he goes in search of him, and while sit
ting waiting for his arrival a person suddenly
comes up to him and says ‘ Hallo, Bogle ! is that
you?’ and he tells him that he is Sir Roger
Tichborne. There was nothing to lead Bogle to
assume that he was an impostor; and indeed there
is something so startling in a man having the
audacity to come forward and prefer a claim
when he is not the true man that the first con-
sideration that would occur to Bogle’s mind was
that he must be the true man or he would never
have come forward.
The defendant knew perfectly well that Bogle
was in Sydney, though in cross-examination, I am
sorry to say, he swore that he did not. He must
have been able to form a very shrewd guess as to
Bogle’s age. He knew from Lady Tichborne’s letters
that Bogle had been left an annuity; he knew
Bogle was a black, and seeing a negro of a certain
age, sitting in the courtyard of the hotel, it did
not require any great stretch of thought to bring
it to the defendant’s mind that this must be
Bogle. At any rate, there could be no harm it
filing the shot. If he turned out to be wrong he
would say, ‘ Oh, I beg pardon, I thought it was
Bo"le.’ If, on the contrary, he brings his bird
down, then it is all right. But while I give Bogle
unreserved credit for his sincerity in his recog-
nition of the defendant as Roger Tichborne, it is
a different matter whether we can place implicit
reliance on the evidence he has given. He has
committed his fortunes and his fate irretrievably
to the issue of the defendant’s claim. Lady
Doughty was thoroughly persuaded of the dis-
honesty of this claim, and that Bogle was a party
to it, so she cut off his annuity. She is re-
proached for having done so; but one cannot be
surprised at it, if you look at the matter from her
point of view. I regret very much that ‘old
Bogle ’ has lost the reward that his long services
to Sir Edward Doughty fully entitled him to. I
om afraid it would be impertinent on my part or
I should express a hope that when all this is over
the old man might still be considered with re-
ference to his past services, not to anything that
he may be thought to have done amiss with
respect to this long and difficult controversy. But
we must be on our guard against receiving with
implicit confidence the statements which he makes,
because having embarked all his future hopes
and prospects in the same vessel with the de-
fendant, if the defendant sinks he must sink too,
and, therefore, he is naturally under the influence
of strong motives to do all that he can in the
defendant’s favour.
There were one or two things which struck me


as boms very much ia favour of the defendant if
they stood uncontradicted, or had not been shaken
in cross-examination; for instance, that the de-
fendant should have known the names of the two
sons of Bogle—John and Andrew—that is, unless
he had seen Gnilfoyle beforehand and heard about
them from him. Then when Bogle brought some
pictures of Bpton to the defendant the latter was
stated to have said, ‘Oh, there is old Upton.
However, when pressure was put upon Bogle he
was constrained to admit that it was he himself
that first mentioned Upton, not the defendant,
and that the defendant recognised it only after
Bogle told him it was Upton.
lhere is another thing of which it is desirable
wo should have a distinct; view—how it happened
that Bogle was induced to come to this country,
rhe first question is, whether it was a suggestion
of his or of the defendant. I think the explana-
tion comes in the end to this. After the first in-
terview the defendant tells Bogle to come and see
mm again, and on one of those occasions he says
that he was going to England. Upon this Bogle
remarks, ‘ There are a good many friends there
wno will be glad to see you. I wish I was goin"
with you.’ The defendant says, ‘Well, I will
take you.’ But Bogle wctuld not go without his
youngest son, and to take both would entail con-
siderable expense. But why should Bogle desire
to go i His wife was dead, but he had his three
sons about him he had a little business, and his
annuity of 50/. a year. If he came to England he
would have no business, though he would have
his annuity. The only explanation offered is that
n England the people are more sociable, and that
uavmg 50/. a year he was glad to go back to his
old daunts and associations. But what was the
motive of the defendant in bringing him? That
is a point to be considered bv-and-by when we
come to see the surroundings of the defendant,
and who were the persons he may have used for
me purpose of advancing his claims. Well,
having recognised the defendant, takes him
among other things some leaves from a book pro-
uced here, and no sooner did he do that than the
defendant writes to Mr. Cottie thus :-
/ u , ncl ° valet is now living with me he hap-
nnvi; 0 r ave r th him “y uncle likeness, and a
P i tion (sic) of the Hermitage estate.’
Ancl again:—
'^ his . le ave (leaf) is taken from a book which
my uncle valet brought from Tichborne with him.
namf/' ?° , Dou S bt y and Tichborne crest. His
and 18 now iiving with me. He
ha * two woodcut of Upton the seat my
uno {® b ° u ght ln Dorsetshire, and likewise my
them e lk . eness - 1 have i n my possession to get
(it™ T ° Ple n’ as you have a dought of my iden-
ne y ' \tn! U Send you a Co P ie of m y uncle like-
other T m ll y ° U See the one you will see tfa e
or tier I mean myself.’
ture of Um Vfe ° meant portrait or pic-
iure ot the Hermitage estate.
that ww these extracts there were two things
Bo l ® re Certai , nl y untrue. In the first place
Sent h T ing with tlim - But that state-
to brina T* i 6 ® x P{ aine( l by the fact that he meant
he inq v h ° gle t 0 with him, and therefore
ahead/ a ye considered him as attached to him
nor less than . otber thing was neither more
hood for i a nnmistakeable, direct false-
SXt likc “*’ ot * k « Hermitage
defendant’s • b ° lng entirely a creation of the
The ief. < But that is not all.
° an t says, ‘He likewise has two wood-
leut of Upton the seat my uncle bought in Dorset-
shire. blow it is perfectly certain that Upton
was never bought by his uncle, Sir Edward
i-Joughty; and that fact, as it seems to me, must
have been known to Roger Tichborne, because a
constant source of unpleasantness between Roger,
his uncle Sir Edward, and his father was his per-
sistent refusal to consent to the sale of Upton.
Ihe only reason why Roger Tichborne refused to
consent to the sale of Upton was that Upton was
included m the Doughty property, which had
come to the family under the will of Miss
Doughty, whereas if the estate in Dorsetshire had
b f e Jl b y Sir Edward it would have been
at bir Edward s disposal. He could have sold it;
it would not have been in the settlements, and,
therefore, the consent of Roger would not have
been necessary. But how the defendant made
the mistake is obvious. Bogle believed, and no
doubt told him, that it was bought by Sir Edward.
But the fact was it was bought by Miss Doughty’s
trustees with money which she left for the pUr-
pose, and Bogle fell into the mistake in this way.
there was not much land going with Upton, and
some neighbouring land being for sale, Sir Ed-
ward bought it and amalgamated it with Upton,
liogle was well aware that his master had bought
property at Upton, and knowing that Sir Edward
vent to take possession of both at the same time,
laturally concluded that Sir Edward had bou-ht
Jpton. °
Now, gentlemen, I have come to the end of the
Australian part of the case, and let us see
whether we can state the account fairly as
etween the knowledge and the want of know-
edge thus far exhibited on the part of the de-
mdant, and strike a balance between the two.
Ie knew that Roger was the son of Sir James
loughty Tichborne. That he would know from
he advertisements he had met with in the papers,
to also knew that Roger Tichborne had a brother,
nd he knew the date of Roger’s birth and stated
i correctly both as regards the month and year.
'n the other hand, he did not know where Ro ,r er
r his brother Alfred was born. He stated they
ere born in England, whereas they were both
irn in Paris. Again, he stated that he had re-
tained in Paris until 11 or 12, whereas in point
: fact he did stay there until he was between 16
„ 17. He said he had been educated at the
ign School, Southampton, whereas Roger was
;ver at Southampton at school for a single hour,
e says that his education was interfered with in
nsequence of his suffering from St. Vitus’s
nee, which unquestionably Roger never had or
ything approaching to it. Further, he knows
at the Tichbornes are a Roman Catholic family;
t unfortunately with that comes a statement
it they used to pay 3s. in the pound to the
man Catholic Church, which we may safely
ume they never did. With regard to his educa-
n he makes this further grievous mistake—he
its all mention of Stonyhurst, and exhibits no
owledge whatever of that portion of Roger’s
i which was passed there. And again, with
poet to the next portion of Roger Tichborne’s
! , hi** being in the Army, he exhibits entire
oranca of it. And when his mother’s state-
nts are repeated, that he had been at Stony-
•st and had been an officer in the Army ho
lies both, and substitutes for a service of three
rs in the Army as an officer 13 days’ service as
invate in a regiment that could have no
jtence whatever. With regard to the property,
'he first place he represents it as entailed, and’
I


that at his death it would go to his cousin, ignor-
ing the fact that he had a brother who, with the
heirs of his body, would come between himself
and his cousin. He confounds this with a different
.fiass of property, which his cousin would not
inherit. Then we come to the sale of estates,
which had no existence whatever except in his
imagination. Certainly there is, in the Wagga
Wagga will, a most striking disposition of pro-
perty which never bad been in the possession of
the Tichborne family at all. These are-, matters
deserving the most serious consideration. Still
more striking is the fact that in making that will
he inserts as executor and guardian the names of
persons whom Roger Tichborne never knew. And
when we come to deal with one or two important
facts of Roger Tichborne’s life —namely, the ship
in which and the time at which he sailed for
Europe—he fails to show any knowledge of the cir-
cumstances, and substitutes a ship and a time of
sailing appertaining to another and entirely dif-
ferent person.
All these are facts you will have to weigh in
the scale; but then there is knowledge exhibited
on the other side which you must take into
account. I have mentioned several instances of
it. He manifested a considerable knowledge to
Bogle. He has got many of the-recollections of
Tichborne, and we do not know that these were
derived from any source but his own memory,
but then he asks Bogle about a man named Ethe-
ridge; but when he meets him afterwards at
Alresford he does not know him. All these
things are to be taken into account. There are
exhibitions of knowledge and exhibitions of ig-
norance, and the question is to which of the two
the greater weight is to be attached.
A Juror.—Was Guilfoyle at Tichborne as well
as at Upton ?
The Loud Chief Justice. I think he was
gardener at Tichborne as well as at Upton.
Mr. Hawkins. —Yes, he was at Tichborne.
The Lokd Chief Justice. —Well, he left Sydney
for Panama, and the captains of the different
vessels in which he sailed were struck by his want
of information. That forms an important element
in this inquiry, unless you come to the conclusion
that twelve years’ residence in Australia, the sort
of life the defendant led there, and the persons
with whom he came into contact, had so destroyed
the effect of his former education as to account
for the change. One thing strikes me, and I am
sure I do the defendant no injustice in stating it,
if there was an interval of as many months as
there were years between the disappearance of
Roger Tichborne and the appearance of the defen-
dant as Roger Tichborne, and if the two had been
placed in juxtaposition, it would have been im-
possible to say that the man who had had the
education and manners of Roger Tichborne could
have been the man who presented himself to our
observation as Roger Tichborne in 1866. I am
quite certain that the man who wrote the letters
from South America and sent the extract from
his journal to Lady Doughty could not by pos-
sibility be supposed to have been truly represented
-by the man who, in 1866, wrote the letters to
Lady Tichborne and the various persons he was
in correspondence with, which we have read. You
can only account for the difference by the utter
undoing of all that Roger Tichborne had acquired
by the life led by the defendant. Well, on board
the vessel, which was bound for Panama, some
theatricals were got up, and an address was pre-
sented to the captain. This address the defendant
was asked to read, and we have evidence to the
effect that the attempt on his part was a signal
failure. He exhibited in his conversation striking
marks of a defective education. He showed a
signal instance of this in the case of that ill-used
letter h. I have known men of education and
attainments who had this defect. But Roger had
it not. No one ever said that Roger put the hin
the wrong place or omitted it where it ought to be.
But with the defendant it was quite different,
and he explained to Mr. Hodgson that the de-
ficiency in his education was owing to the circum-
stance that he had been subject to St. Vitus’s
dance. When they arrived at Panama, the de-
fendant became remarkable among the passengers
for being able to speak Spanish, but so far as we
are aware Roger did not know Spanish. He
spoke French, as we know, to the last, as the
language of his preference. Having stayed some
time at Panama, he then went on to New York,
and thence took a passage to London, where he
arrived on Christmas-day, 1866.
And now we start with a new epoch altogether
in the history of the defendant. Coming up the
river something occurs to which it is necessary to
direct your attention. You remember in the his-
tory of Arthur Orton that old Orton and his son
Thomas dealt in Shetland ponies, which used to
come up to London by the Dundee steamboat.
Arthur Orton, while assisting his brother Thomas,
used to come to the Dundee Wharf to help to
bring the ponies to their stables, and, of course,
he became acquainted with the people belonging
to the Dundee boats, and among others with a
man named Fergusson, who always acted as their
pilot. If we can believe the evidence of the man
Bromley, this striking conversation occurred
between the defendant and him as the steamer
was coming up the river. The defendant goes to
him and says, ‘ Do you know a pilot named Fer-
gusson ?’ 4 Well,’ says Bromley, ‘there are two or
three Fergussons, I don’t know which you mean.’
4 1 will tell you,’ says the defendant, 4 1 mean the
man who used to pilot the Dundee boats.’ 4 Yes,
I knew him,’replied Bromley, 4 his name was John
Fergusscn.’ 4 Oh ! yes,’ said tha defendant, 4 that’s
him.’ That was called a highly improbable story
by the defendant’s counsel, but I confess I see
nothing improbable in it. Well, coming up the
river, according to Bogle’s statement, young Butts,
the defendant’s secretary, comes to him and says,
4 Bogle, what hotel have we got to go to ?’ Bogle
says, 4 Bettor go to Ford’s, in Manchester-square.
That’s where the family always stay.’ Butts takes
the message back, and from the wharf defendant,
his wife, and family go to Ford’s hotel, Bogle and
Butts being left behind. The defendant says it
wa3 within his own knowledge that the family
was to stop at Ford’s. At all events he goes to
that hotel and must have arrived there about five
or six o’clock in the afternoon.
The first thing to be done was to order dinner,
an essential necessity of human life, whatever
other object we may have in view. What does
the defendant do ? It was Christmas-day. Ar-
rived alter a long voyage glad to be relieved from
the tossing of the waves, in a comfortable hotel,
with a nice fire and cheerful rooms, you would na-
turally expect that the man would say 4 I’m very
glad that I am here at the fire-side with my wife
and children. I will put off any matter of busi-
ness until the next day. But not so, says the de-
fendant. We learn that that very evening, a
cold December evening, the defendant sends for
one of those shapeless, rumbling vehicles, which


are a disgrace to a civilized country, a four-
wheeled cab, and away he goes to the extremity
of London, to a district called Wapping, and there
is enacted a scene which, if true, is certainly of a
very remarkable character. The defendant ar-
rives between 8 and 9 o’clock at the Globe pub-
lic-house, kept at the time by a widow named
Jackson. The defendant, in a pea packet, with
a muffler about his throat, and a peaked capon his
head, enters. It has been suggested that this
dress was intended as a disguise. But then it
must be said that this was a time and season when
a man would wrap himself up so as to be able to
better encounter such an ungenial climate as ours.
There were no persons in the house but Mrs.
Jackson and her mother, Mrs. Fairhead. The
stranger asks for a cigar and a glass of sherry.
They give them to him. Then he begins to talk.
He asks, ‘ What has become of the Ortons ? They
used to live in the High-street. I have been
there knocking, and I cannot get in.’ ‘ Oh, no,’
says Mrs. Fairhead, ‘ they are all gone. Old Ox-ton
is dead, and so is Mrs. Orton, and the family are
all dispersed.’ Then he asks, ‘Where is Mary
Ann ?’ ‘ Oh, Mary Ann was married to Mr. Tred-
gett, but she is a widow, and is keeping a lodging-
house somewhere in the East India-road.’ ‘ Could
you give me her address ?’ says the stranger. ‘ No,
but I can easily get it for you. Her brother
Charles has set up as a butcher, and is here at the
end of the street. We can send up to him.’
‘ Oh, no, says the defendant. I don’t want to have
anything to do with Charles, I only want to know
about Mary Ann and to get her address.’ While
she is preparing to go and get the address he says,
‘ Did you take this house of Mrs. Mac—Mac ’ —
‘ Macfarlane, suggests the lady. ‘Yes, that’s tho
name,’ says the defendant. Then he looks out
through a glass door which opens on the street
and inquires about the Cronins and others who
used to live about the place. The defendant then
walks along the passage which led up to the par-
lour, then he walks back again and says ‘ I declare
this house has not altered a bit.’
Meanwhile, Mrs. Fairhead has made all her
preparations for going out to get tho address, and
being very much surprised by this conversation
and the knowledge manifested by it, she looks up
at the defendant, and being struck by his likeness
to old Orton, she says, * You must be the Orton
who left some 12 or 14 years ago and has not been
heard of sinco.’ ‘ No,’ said he, ‘ I am not, but I
am a friend who has come to assist the family.’
‘ Well,’ she replies, ‘ you are very like the family.
You are very like the old gentleman.’ Then she
make an observation about his knowing the place,
and she says, ‘ You seem to know all the people
about here.’ ‘Yes,’ says he,‘l was at Wapping
some 12 or 14 years ago.’ Fourteen years from
1866 would be 1852, which would be about the
time when Arthur Orton was last at Wapping,
but would be inconsistent with anything connected
with Roger Tichborne. Mrs. Fairhead having
gone out, Mrs. Jackson gets into conversation with
him, and at the end she says, ‘ You must be Or-
ton.’ He asks, * What makes you think so ?’
‘ Because,’ she replied, ‘ you are really liko both
the father and mother.’ And then she says, when
he had asked her so many questions, ‘ You really
know Wapping better than I do. You must know
it very well.’ Then he varies the date and says
that he was there 16 years ago. That would
take.us back to 1850, but, though that is not the
precise time, we know Arthur Orton was there in
1851. Well, Mrs. Fairhaad comes back and gives
him Sirs. Tredgett’s address. Then -we get from
the defendant that he went to Sirs. Tredgett’s
that evening. Both these witnesses concur in
saying that the defendant was from three-quarters
of an hour to an hour talking there, smoking his
eigars and drinking the sherry which they supplied
him.
Now, it is right we should have the defendant’s
statements with regard to this story. What tho
defendant has said on the subject must be borne
in mind, as you are called upon to decide whether
the witnesses told the truth. The defendant him-
self admits that he did go down to Wapping on
this particular night; that he did visit the Globe
public-house; and that he had a conversation with
the woman who kept the house. In cross-examina-
tion he was asked: —
‘ Where did you go to in Wapping ?—I had an
address on a bit of paper, but really I cannot re-
member. Whose address ?—lt was the address of
his father, I think. The address of Arthur
Orton’s father ?—Yes. And you went there to see
not your mother, but his father ?—I know I went
there to make inquiries. The first night you
landed ?—Yes. Did you find the father ?—Thero
was nobody there. Was the house pulled down,
or empty, or what?—Empty, I should imagine.
What else did you do ?—I went into an inn closo
by. Do you happen to know the name ?—I do
not. Did you have a glass of beer ?—I cannot
tell Where did you go to next ?—They gave mo
some address; lam sure Ido not know it. Gave
you some other address. Whose address?—l
think it was the name of Tredgett. Man or
woman?—A woman. Quite a strange name to
you?—Quite. Did you go to her?-I went to
the address.’
Further on the examination was as follows :
* What time did you get down to Wapping ?—lt
must have been between 9 andlO. Were you not
at the Globe as early as 7 ?—No. Kept by Mrs.
Fairhead —no, Mrs. Jackson? —I do not know who
it was kept by. Did you go alone ?—I did. To
Wapping?—Yes. How were you dressed; were
you muffled up ? Tho probability is I was. Now,
was the first question you asked the person you
saw there whether she could givo you any infor-
mation about the Ortons?—Yes, and where they
had gone to. Did you say you knew of the death
of the old lady ?—No, I certainly did not say that.
Mrs. Fairhead was the person I suggest you said
that to?—I do not know what the name was.
Did she tell you that Mary Ann Orton had mar-
ried a Mr. Tredgett, and that Mr. Tredgett had
died within about nine months of the marriage?
—I believe she did say that. Did she tell you
that -Mrs. Jury, another sister of Orton’s, was at
the time living with Mrs. Tredgett, her sister ?—I
do not remember that part of it. Did you then
ask if she could give you Mrs. Jury’s address ?
No, Mrs. Tredgett’s address. Mrs. Jury’s address
is what I ask ?—No. Did she say she could obtain
the address for you close by, and send to an old
servant of the Orton family ?—No. I think she
gave it to me there and then. While you were
there did she mention the name of Charles Orton ?
—No. And did you say, “ I do not want to see
him ?”—I did not. Did you ask if a Mr. Cronin
still kept the grocer’s shop opposite ?—I did not.
Did she say, “'Well, Cronin failed, and has gone
away?”—She did not. Did you say, “I am sorry
to hear Cronin has failed ?”—No. Did you then
ask after a Mr. John Warwick?—l did not. A
butcher who lived close by ?—I did not. Did you
ask if the son of a Mr. Wright, ship-chandler, living
i 2


next door to Orton, had come back from aea ?—I
did not; neither do I know such a person. Did
,?ru ay—l am s P eakin o now of Mrs. Fail-head—
Why you must be one of the Ortons ?’—She did
™ t - ■“ nd dld yon say to her, “I am not one of
the Ortons, but lam a friend of theirs No
such conversation passed. I ask you whether,
?*' j taken place, another woman who
had been present (the landlady herself of the
Ulobe, Mrs. Jackson), whether she did not inter-
fere and say, “You arc an Orton; .you are like
both the father and mother ?”—She certainly did
not. Did you say, in answer, “ No, lam not; lam
merely a friend of the Ortons; I have come from
a brother to;assist Mrs. Jury?”—l did not. Do
you recollect did she say, after you had been talk-
ing some time about these people, “ Well, if you
are not Orton, you seem to know Wapping pretty
well, at any rate?”—She did not. Were you not
there nearly an hour ?—Certainly not. Havin" a
long conversation about Wapping and the people
at Wapping?—l was not there more than seven
minutes.’
The learned connsel for tho defendant asked
you to give your decision in favour of his client,
on the ground that the witnesses have committed
perjury, because they were bribed and tutored by
W hicher to give evidence respecting these conver-
sations. The old lady, Mrs. Fail-head, appeared
to be veiy hurt and indignant at this suggestion,
and the daughter appeared to share the indigna-
tion of her mother. Whether that indignation
were ieal or simulated you had an opportunity of
judging To me they appeared to be two very
respectable people of their class, and, as far as I
could judge, they did not give their evidence in a
way calculated to excite distrust. This, however
is peculiarly a matter for a jury to judge of. Sup-
posing you believe these witnesses to be tellino-
the truth, it will be for you to consider whether
diogei- Tichborne could possibly have been pos-
sessed of the information which is implied in all
o inquiries about persons formerly known in
Wappmg. How could Roger Tichborne have got
the information unless, indeed, we adopt the
theory of the iearned counsei for the defendant
)at, during their intimate intercourse in the bush
in Australia, Arthur Orton talked to Roger Tich-
ttrCr*, a r o ?, t people livin S in Wapping
w!l ww\ Dd 1 ° f lioger Tichborne became im-
b a! Ti th the - knowled Se of all these people?
Another point to be decided is, ‘Why should
Roger Tichborne have gone to Wapping ?’Accord-
ing to the defendant’s account he went there be-
f G ■T ante< il t ° , make inquiries about the
Oi-ton family, partly because Arthur Orton had
asked him to get information on the subject, and
pai tly because he had promised Arthur Orton to
assist the Ortons in case they should be in indi-
gent circumstances, and required pecuniary aid.
What would you have expected a man to do under
such circumstances ? Instead of starting at ni-ht
and going to Wapping in the dark to make “in-
quiries, would it not have been abundantly suffi-
cient for him to have gone there the next day ?
ou must of course look at these things with the
eye of reason and common sense. If the defendant
went to Wapping immediately on his arrival in
n ly, would it not be in consequence of some
more pressing motive than a mere desire to per-
foim an act of friendship? 1
UD A w ! + n r , let , US , Bfio llow the defendant followed
first + i had d ° ( n ° ° n the ni £bt before. The
down to W he neXt m " rnin g he starts and goes
down to Wapping again, when he goes to Mrs
Tredgett a address. He is told by a neighbour,
Mrs. Moore, that Mrs. Tredgett was not at home,
but there was a Mrs. Pardon, who, I think, was
the sister of Mrs. Tredgett. She sent the defendan
to Mrs. Pardon, and he introduces himself by sene
ing in a card on which was written, ‘ W. I
Stephens, of Australia.’ He tells her that he calle
the night before, and found the house closed, anc
could not get an answer. She, knowing the Orto
family said, ‘ Are you an Orton?’ and he sah
Ao, but lam a great friend of Arthur Orton
who is one of the wealthiest men in the colony
and I promised him that I would inquire after hi
“fto*-’, He some account of himself, sayin
that he had come over to report upon the Fenian
movement in Ireland. In course of conversation
he showed her a locket containing the likeness o
a lady and a baby, telling her they were the like
nesses of Arthur Orton’s wife and child, and ho
ends bv giving her a letter addressed to Mary
Ann Orton, at 69, High-street, Wapying, and re
questing her to forward ifc. She is so impressed
with the likeness that she put it to him a second
time whether he was not an Orton. In the after-
noon Mrs. Tredgett receives a letter and opens it
in the presence of Mrs. Pardon, That letter is as
follows :
. * ™ a 99 a - Wa 99 a i NS. TV., June 3rd, ’66.
. dear & beloved Sister, —It many years now
since i heard from any of you. I have never heard
a word from any one I knew since 1354. But my
r ' Steph® 118 is about starting for England.
And be has promised to find you all out. And
write & let me know all about you. I do not
intend to say much because he can tell you all
about me. Hoping my dear sister he will make
him welcome has he is a dear friend of mine so
S° od b ye- ‘Arthur Orton.
‘M.’
To this _ letter is affixed the Arthur Orton
hieroglyphic, which is attached also to the letters
written by him to Miss Loder and his sister in ,
13o(). Therefore, who ever wrote that letter must
have perfectly well known the hieroglyphic of
Arthur Orton. That this letter was written by
the defendant there is both internal and external
evidence. It could not have been written at the
place or on the day of its date, for the defendant
by his own admission, did not make theacquaint-
V °i°! ? lr ‘ ? te P h ,®“ 8 untl , l his Passage from New
Yoik, when he fell in with him and he gave him
this card. Now, let us hear what account the de-
fendant gives of the transaction in his cross-ex-
amination. The card of W. Id. Stephens, of
Australia, is handed to him, and it is acknowledged
by him, but not until considerable pressure is nut
upon him. He is asked— P
.Did you ever see that card before ; just look
at xt , ! ~Yes (reads) “W. H. Stephens.” And who
wrote Australia ”on it ?—I certainly cannot say.
Keep it in your hand.—lt looks very much like
my wilting, the word “ Australia but still it is
not mine. It looks similar, but Ido not think it
is mine. Whose writing is the “W. H. Stephens” ?
Do you know ?—No. Ido not; I should think it
would be Stephens. Did you ever have
to do with that card before ? Did you ever see
it ?—I do not remember. I might have done
I do not remember that I did. Did you re-
ceive that card from Mr. Stephens, or write it
yourself?—lt is not my writing. Look at the
signature of these two letters, signed “ W H
Stephens.” Is it anything like that ?—I do not
think it is. Does it look as if it had been imi-


tated?—Good gracious me! no. We’ll see in a
minute. Did you leave the card at Mrs. Pardon’s ?
—I don’t know who she is at this moment. Did
you leave that card with the person to whose house
you went to inquire about the Ortons ?—I believe
I left the card. I don’t know about the word
“ Australia.” ’
After a long cross-examination, the defendant
admits that the word ‘ Australia’ was written by
him, but only that word. All along the defend-
ant fences with the question, when he had no
doubt in his mind that ‘ Australia’ was in his
own handwriting, and that that was the card
which he left at Mrs. Pardon’s, so as to pass him-
self off as W. H. Stephens, a reporter who had
come over to report on the Fenian movement. He
admits having asked Mrs. Pardon for the address
of Mary Ann Orton, but he denies that Mrs.
Pardon taxed him with being an Orton. He is
then asked about a locket which Mrs. Pardon says
he exhibited to her as containing the photograph
of the wife and child of Arthur Orton. But this
he denies. Ido not think this point is one of
very much importance as regards the main sub-
jects of inquiry, but it is important as testing the
truth of the defendant’s story. What was his
reason for saying he was Stephens, a reporter,
was a question pressed on him by tbe Attorney-
General, and his answer was that he merely
wished that they should not know who he was.
He admitted in cross-examination that he knew
the substance of the letter signed Arthur Orton to
Mary Ann. Of course he did, as he afterwards
admitted that he wrote it himself. At first he
denied that Miss Loder was mentioned, but it
was as follows :
‘lf you will kindly “commicate” with me, you
will hear of something to you advantage. Please
send what information you can concerning a lady
named Mary Ann Loder and your own family,
and what became of Thomas Orton’s children.’
Further than the admitted facts that he went
there under an assumed name and character—-
that of ‘ W. H. Stephens’—that he kept up a
correspondence in a feigned hand, and made use
of forged letters, I do not know that the con-
versations with Mrs. Pardon are of any import-
ance, but it swells the number of persons who
are at direct variance with the defendant and
who are charged by the defendant’s counsel with
telling direct falsehoods. On the 7th of January
he writes to one or other of the Orton sisters in
terms which necessarily imply that he had
received a communication from the person to
whom the letter was addressed. It was in these
terms:—
‘ Gravesend , 7 Jan. ’67-
‘ Dear Madam, —I receved your kind letter this
morning and very sorry to think you should be so
mistaken as to think i am your brother, your
brother is a very great friend of mine and whom
i regard has a brother. And i have likewise pro-
mised to send him all the information i can about
his family I cannot call on you at present but will
do so before long. I sent jour sister a likeness of
your brother wife and child this morning I
should have sent you one But i have only one left
which i require for Copying I have likewise one
of himself which i intend to get some copy of I
will then send you some of each My future
address will be R. C. T. Post Office liverpool
Liverpool. Hoping to have the pleasure of mak-
ing the acquaintance of my friends sisters before
long. ‘ I remain yours respectfully
‘ W. H. Stephens.’
The defendant says he cannot recollect which
of the sisters the letter was addressed to, but he
admitted it was written in a feigned hand. The
whole drift of the cross-oxamination is to make it
appear that Mrs. Tredgett or Mrs. Jury had con-
ceived the idea that the defendant was her bro-
ther from the similarity of the handwriting; but
I do not know that this is of very great import-
ance, for it could only have been an opinion,
which could not amount to anything like a positive
certainty.
Then there is a long cross-examination as to tko
contents of the letter, and also as to why he sent
a photograph of his own wife and child as being
the likeness of Arthur Orton’s wife and child.
All the explanation he can give is that it was in-
discreet. He promised to send one of Arthur
Orton, but he admits that he had no photograph
of .Arthur Orton, and only one of himself. He is
asked what was his motive, and first he says ho
cannot tell, and then he gives this motive—
‘ Having said I had a likeness of his wife and
child, they bothered my very life out until I sent
one of my own.’ One of the most curious inci-
dents in this story is his sending a photograph of
his own wife and child as the likeness of Arthur
Orton’s wife and child. Not, however, that I
think this of any great importance. I take it
that his real object was to sever as much as possi-
ble his own identity from that of Arthur Orton,
and to lead these people to believe that he was a
distinct person from Arthur Orton ; and he sent
the photograph of his own wife and child because
that was the first to come to hand. Then the
defendant is cross-examined as to why he desired
farther communications to be addressed to Liver-
pool. At first his explanation is that he had an
idea of going to Ireland; but after a bit he gives
that up, and then offers what probably was the
true explanation. ‘Probably I did it because I
did not want to be bothered any further with
them.’ Ho had got all that he wanted in the way
of information, and then he desired to discard
these correspondents. Next he is asked as to the
statements contained in that letter. ‘ls there a
single word of truth from beginning to end, in-
cluding the signature; or is it false from begin-
ning to end ?—I think it is all false from the
beginning to the end.’ The defendant states that
one of the letters was shown to Mr. Scott, and
that, although he had written it, he at that time
denied it, and denounced it as being a forgery.
The questions naturally present themselves —
For what purpose was all this elaborate machinery
of fraud and forgery of correspondence under a
feigned name carried on? Why should all this
have been employed ? Why should Roger Tich-
borne have done all this ? The only way in which
one could suppose that such action was used would
be as a means of getting information from tho
Orton family without letting them know who he
was. But then the question arises, Why should
he hesitate to let it be known who he was ? Why
should he hesitate about being recognized as Roger
Tichborne when he came home to this country to
claim his position ? Where was the necessity of all
this concealment ? I confess I cannot see what
purpose Roger Tichborne could have had in his mind
for adopting such a course of action. The de-
fendant, in the course of his cross-examination,
gives another reason: He says, ‘ I went to Wap-
ping to ascertain whether Arthur Orton had ar-
x-ived.’ Can this be really true ? If the defendant
was Roger Tichborne, could he have supposed
that Arthur Orton arrived in England at the same


time as himself ? The defendant says that at the
time the will was executed Arthur Orton
was at Wagga-Wagga, and that he afterwards
wont away; and in a letter to Rous he said that
Arthur Orton wa3 living at Wagga-Wagga under
an assumed name. Nor does it aopear that when
the defendant went to Wapping he made any in-
quiries about Arthur Orton. He says he did. On
tne other band, Mrs. Jackson and Mrs. Fairhead
say that ho did not make one single inquiry about
Arthur Orton, but that, on the contrary, they
charged the defendant with being the Arthur
Orton whom they formerly knew. Therefore, I
cannot accept the defendant’s last explanation as
the true one. It does not appear either that he
ever communicated to any one what he had ascer-
tained from the Ortons. Then, with reference to
giving assistance to the Orton family, it does not
appear that he acted in that manner, but he put
them on .the false scent by stating that he had-
gone to Liverpool, and in his cross-examination
he said he told them so because ho wanted to get
lid of them. AVhat motive could the defendant
have had for this concealment ?
"Well, his counsel starts a theory, or rather two
or three theories, but they are not the explana-
tions of his client; they are his own theories. Ho
says that Arthur Orton and Roger Tichborue were
associated together in the forests of Australia,
and that it is not at all improbable that they were'
mixed up in some transaction which would not
bear the light, and Roger Tichborne may have
been a party to or, at all events, privy to, some
deed of violence; or that the defendant may have
been in some affray in which Arthur Orton saved
his life, for which the defendant may have felt
himself under some debt of gratitude. In the
lirst case the defendant’s counsel suggests that
Arthur Orton, under threat of exposure, com-
pelled the defendant to look after his family. It
is strange that these explanations have never been
suggested by the defendant, and a more remark-
able thing is that when the defendant’s counsel
first started these theories he did not say to the
defendant, ‘ Now, which of these is the truth ?’
The learned counsel, who starts half-a-dozen of
these thoories, would have done better if he had
said to his client, ‘ How came you to go to Wap-
’t, l ea niecl counsel for the (lefen
dant has laid down for himself a totally different
course. He says, ‘I am not my client’s confessor,
ana don t choose to ask him impertinent ques-
tions.’ That is the principle of the action of the
learned counsel when it is divested of its orna-
mentation. I should have thought that the first
thing a counsel would have done would have been
to ask his client, if he had been able, to tell him
the truth in a question of difficulty, but that is
not the course pursued by the defendant’s coun-
sel. Perhaps the course which he did pursue was
the most convenient, as leaving the conscience
free to give full scope to the imagination, provided,
of course, you have not first taken the trouble to
ask your client the truth.
AVhatever theories may be put forward, I can-
not help looking back to the question with which
I started—What could have been the motive of
Roger Tichborne for t 1 is concealment? The
moment the suggestion was made that the defen-
dant was Arthur Orton, the defendant might have
been advised by his friends, if he had consulted
them, to go at once to the members of the Orton
lamily and challenge them to say whether he was
or was not Arthur Orton. That would be the
short way of settling the question. But that
course was not adopted; on the contrary, the
defendant not only avoids seeing the Ortons until
a much later period, when things are further ad-
vanced, but he actually denies to his own inti-
mate friends and supporters the fact of bis ever
having been to Wapping at all. The suggestion
that he wa3 Arthur Orton was first made in 1867,
and it came to his knowledge in October of that
year, and he refers to it when he writes, on tho
20th of October, 1867, to Mr. Rous. He is cross-
examined on this point:—
‘ Why did you tell Mr. Rous that you had never
been at Wapping?—l did not choose that he
should know. Why did you tell him?—Why
should I not ? Because it was a gratuitous lie, if
you ask me. Why should you have said you had
never been there ? you might have held your
tongue. Why did you tell him that; you had
been there, you know?—Yes, I had been there.
Had you forgotten you had been there on Christ-
mas-day, 1866 ?—Probably I had, when I wrote
that letter Why did you not mention to
anybody you had been down to Wapping?—l do
not see why I should mention it. Did you take
care not to mention it?—Probably I did. Why ?
—Because I had my reasons for going there, but
I should not cai-e about telling.’
Tho learned counsel for the defendant made a
great point of the visit to Wapping, with re-
ference to the Arthur Orton part of the case. He
said, ‘ Can you suppose that if he were Arthur
Orton he would go to the place whore he would
be most likely to be known, and expose himself to
the risk, of being told ‘You are Arthur Orton’?
This point we shall have to consider when we
come to the Arthur Orton part of the case, but
I now put it to you whether you think the evi-
dence and the conduct of the defendant on that
occasion are reconcilable with the conduct you
would have expected from Roger Tichborne. On
the same day that the defendant went to Mrs.
Pardon’s and left a letter for Mrs. Tredgett ho
took his family from Ford’s Hotel to the Claren-
don Hotel at Gravosend, though Boglo remained
at Ford’s. Now, this seems a somewhat strange
proceeding. Here is a man who comes to England
to put forward his claim to the title and
estates of Tichborne. You would have sup-
posed that on his anival he would have com-
municated with his mother and with his relatives
and friends in this country, but instead of doin'"
so he. goes to Gravesend, and there remains in
a species of concealment for several days. He
says his purpose was to keep out of tho way. A
great many inquiries after him were made as soon
as he arrived at F ord’s Hotel, and he had promised
his mother faithfully to see no one until he had
seen her. What time could there have been for
the announcement of his arrival at Ford’s between
the evening of the 25th and the afternoon of tho
*-6th of December, seeing that nobody except Lady
Tichborne knew by what route he wa3 coming
home, and she, be it remembered, was in Paris ?
Well, on Saturday, the 28 th of December,
he goes to Alresford and takes up his quarters
at the Swan, which was kept by Mr. Rous,
formerly a clerk to the solicitors of the Tich-
borne family. Mr. Rous had a perfect know-
ledge of all the settlements and deeds pre-
pared by the firm relative to the Tichborne
and Doughty property; therefore, he would, of
course, become a valuable ally even to
Tichborne himself, as he would be able to inform
him of many things which had occurred since he
left home; and still more valuable would the.


alliance of Mr. Rous be to anybody who had
never had a knowledge of the things which Roger
Tichborne ought to have known and might be
expected to know. The defendant establishes
himself at the Swan under the name of Taylor, he
havin'* as he says, assumed that name because of
there being the initial ‘T ’ for Tichborne marked
on his carpet bag. tit n
He tells us that on the Sunday ho took a walk.
He went towards Tichborne, and saw the people
coming out of church. On that occasion he met
an old blacksmith named Etheridge, but nothing
can be more conflicting than his statement and
that of the defendant as to wbat occurred.
Etheridge says he was going to get shaved when a
stout man, whom he (lid not know, stopped him
and asked the way to Tichborne. _ Etheridge said,
‘ Why there is the church,’ which, I should re-
mark, is on an eminence. Thereupon the stranger
says, ‘ Would you like to have a glass of beer (
He says ‘ Yes,’ and the defendant gives him cer-
tain small coins. Etheridge drinks his beer and
gets shaved, and is going back to Tichborne, when
he falls in with the same man again. The man
says to him, ‘They say Roger Tichborne has come
back ’ ‘ Oh! no, he has not,’ replies Etheridge, he
was drowned.’ After some further talking the
stranger says, * Do you believe I am Roger Tich-
borne ?’ ‘ No, I’ll be if you are. ( Laughter.)
If you are you have turned from a race-horse to a
cart-horse.’ Of course Roger Tichborne must
have known every inch of the road perfectly well,
but then ho may have asked the way to TichDorne
merely in order to draw Etheridge into conversa-
tion. The defendant, however, gives a totally
different account of the conversation which was
held between them, and there was also a dis-
crepancy as to Etheridge’s story about Roger
Tichborne striking Etheridge’s cat in consequence
of which the blacksmith pursued him with a flail.
The statement that this story of the cat was
talked over on various occasions during the defen-
dant's passage home from Australia is not quite
consistent with one of Bogle’s statements that he
had no conversation with the defendant respect-
ing his being Roger Tichborne on the passage from
Sydnoy to Panama, or during the month they
' stayed at Panama, or on their voyage home.
With all my predilection to think Bogle truthful,
that is one of the things which I cannot bring
myself to believe. j
On the next day, the 30th, the defendant com- |
municates to Mr. Rous tue fact that he is Roger
Tichborne. He says he did so in consequence oi
Mr. Rous directly putting the question to him.
Then the defendant telegraphs to Bogle, who was
in London, to come down to Alresford imme
diately. Bogle accordingly goes down the same
evening, and at the station he finds 400 or 500
people assembled in order to welcome him back.
Next day, being the Ist of January, Bogle attends
the Catholic chapel at Tichborne, where he meets
Mrs. Greenwood, who procures for him admission
into the old house, where he observes two pictures
of the Dowager Lady Tichborne, which were not
there in his time. But, on his return, the omy
picture the defendant asked him about was the
‘ Queen’s Picture ’ —a portrait of Queen Elizabeth
with a ruff round her neck. The circumstance of
Bo"le going down and announcing to all the world
that the defendant was Roger Tichborne was cal-
culated to produce a powerful impression on iho
Hampshire people. I can, therefore understand
the defendant saying to himself, ‘I dont care
what my mother has said ; I will have Bogle down
to Alresford, as he is the best proof I can produce
of my being Roger Tichborne.’ But then the
question arises why the defendant himself wenu
to Alresford. I can understand Lady Tichborne,
who hated tho Seymours, wishing him not to
declare himself till she ha,d seen him. He gives
two explanations of his going to Alresford, one in
his evidence and another in a letter addressed to
his mother. In his evidence he says, ‘ I went to
Alresford to look at the dear old place again, but
surely he had a much more powerful motive to go
to Paris to see the ‘ dear old mother’ again. Ho
says he did not go to Paris because he had not
sufficient funds, though this is somewhat doubt-
ful. The only motive I can see—and 1 suggest iu
for your consideration —is that, before he went to
see Lady Tichborne, he desired to acquire a know-
ledge of the localities, lest in any conversation
with her he might betray such ignoranco of tho
things connected with Alresford and Tichborne as
would excite suspicion and create distrust in Lady
Tichborne’s mind. This is the only way in which
I can account for conduct that otherwise appears
to me to be incapable of explanation.
Ninth Day. February 11, 1874.
Gentlemen, —We finished yesterday with the
visit of the defendant to Alresford. Bogle, you
remember, had been to Tichborne-house and had
seen the pictures there. He had, no doubt wo
may, I think, fairly assume he had—made a report
on the subject to the defendant, and veiy soon
after they left Alresford, and the defendant pro-
ceeded to Gravesend. Two or three days after-
wards, and while the defendant was still at the
hotel there, Mr. Gosford went down to see him-
The fame of his arrival in England a,nd of his
having visited Alresford had been bruited about
and created a st;ong interest and curiosity in the
minds of those who had been previously well ac-
quainted with lioger Tichborne. Of course Mr.
Gosford felt a deep interest in the fact of Roger’s
return, and was very anxious to know whether
the Claimant was the real man or not. Accord-
ingly he went down to Alresford, but, unfortu-
nately, as I cannot but think, he was induced by
some circumstance or other to take with him Mr.
Cullin CT ton and Mr. Plowden, a distant relation of
the family. It was an unfortunate course to adopt,
because it naturally offended the defendant to find
that Mr. Gosford had come to see him accompanied
by a lawyer and a comparative stranger. 1 uiiiiX
say the whole proceeding was rash and improper.
They had no possible right to disturb the privacy
of the defendant, whether he was Roger lichborne
or whether he was not. Mr. Gosford had no right
whatever to go down with two strangers and en-
deavour to force himself, either with them or
without them, upon him. Still less bad they a,ny
possible or conceivable right to treat him m the
way which they did on that occasion. He did not
choose to see them. He went to his room and shut
himself in, They made a disturbance, spoke dis-
paragingly of him to the landlord, told him to take
care of his spoons, talked about the police, and, in
short, misconducted themselves. It was very un-
fortunate, in all respects, as the sequel shows, as
it gave the defendant ground to say that from
the very first he had been ill-used by persons who
professed to be interested on behalf of the family.


‘ They came down,’ he might say, ‘ to molest me;
they conducted themselves in a most improper and
unbecoming manner, and, assuming them to be
representatives of the family, and to have come
on their behalf, I have a right to assume that they
are all opposed to me.’ If Mr. Gosford had acted
differently, then the inference arising from th
defendant keeping aloof from the family and no
seeing any member of it would have been infinitcl
stronger than it is. Having said this, however, i
may occur to yoxi that the defendant, assumin
him to be Roger Tichborne, might have said, ‘ I d
not want to see Mr. Cullington or Mr. Plowden
Mr. Gosford I will be very happy to see, to renew
old recollections and recall old associations.’ I
may be, however, that from anger and indignation
he would decline to see Mr. Gosford as well a
those who accompanied him. Declining to se
them, he wrote a note to Mr. Gosford, stating tha
he did not want any one to know where he wa
staying with his family, and adding that he hac
posted a letter for him to the care of Mr. Culling
ton in Cannon-street. That letter, if it was written
was never received.
Now, what is the defendant’s own explanation
of not having seen Mr. Gosford ? It was no'
merely that he was angry at the intrusion on his
privacy, but he gives another reason in his exa-
mination, and says that he had seen Sir Charles
Clifford on his way to England, and that he in-
formed him that Mr. Gosford had sworn that
Roger Tichborne was dead, and he said, ‘ I coulc
not make out how any one could swear that I was
dead when I was not. That is the reason,’ he
adds, ‘ I did not go to see him. I was determiner
not to see him until I saw my mother.’ Well
that explanation is not as satisfactory to my mine
as if he had said he was angry at the time, anc
therefore declined to see Mr. Gosford. It after-
wards occurred to Mr. Gosford, mind, that if he
went down by himself the defendant would see
him, and he accordingly saw Mr. Holmes, who
arranged that the interview should be had.
Mr. Gosford has given us an account of the inter-
view, and the conversation which passed between
them is certainly very important, because, a 3 I
have already pointed out, the knowledge or the
ignorance of the defendant at the earlier stages
of his history are far more important than what
he knew or did not know later on. Here is the
account Mr. Gosford gives of it:—
‘ The defendant came into the room, and Mr.
Holmes stood just inside the door. The defendant
appeared to be very nervous, and stood twisting
his cap about in his hand. I don’t think he spoke
for a few moments. He looked scarified, and I
was astonished, from his appearance, at hiscoming
forward as Roger Tichborne. At last he came
forward and said, “ How do you do, Mr. Gosford ?”
and offered his hand. I don’t know whether I
took it or not; perhaps I did. I said, “ I don’t
know you,” and shortly afterwards I commenced
the conversation by making some remarks about
Tichborne. I think I said, “ You will remember
your old days at Tichborne, I dare say.” I for-
get exactly what was the next question, but soon
afterwards I said, “ How is it you have not been
to see the Seymours ?” He replied, “ You mean
mamma’s relations.” That struck me as peculiar,
because Roger Tichborne always used the word
Then I asked him if he had seen Mrs.
Towneley, and he said, “ I don’t remember Mrs.
Towneley.” I am sure that he had never heard
uhe name before. Then we got into a further con-
versation, and I think Mrs. Holmes helped him a
little. Then I asked him why he had not been t
see Lady Doughty, and he said that he had no
been. Then he told me that he had been down t
Alresford and seen Mr. Hopkins and Mr. Lips
combe, and that they had recognised him, as ha<
also old Etheridge. I then asked him whether h
remembered the names of two pet dogs whic
formerly belonged to Roger Tichborne, and he dii
not remember.’
Now, gentlemen, if you believe this accoun
which Mr. Gosford gives of the interview it wii
be most important, because you will recollect tha
his remembrance long afterwards of the name
of those two dogs, Spring and Pie-crust, inducec
several peopleto recognise him as being RogerTich
borne. Well, Mr. Gosford proceeded to press a
to a certain accident which occurred to Sir Roger
He and Roger were out one day riding. The;
were hastening across country to get home in
time for dinner, Sir Edward being always de
sirous that his guests should be punctual at the
dinner-hour. They got their horses rather out o
breath; and, as they were going up a steep hill
they both jumped off and breathed their horses
while they walked to the top of the hill. Roger
was getting into his saddle again, when he toucher
his horse’s flank with one of his long spurs, anc
the horse bolted. He was still clinging to the
saddle, and could not control the horse, which
went right at agate and dashed it down, throwing
his rider. Mr. Gosford picked him up, and fount
that no limbs were broken. The defendant had
not the slightest remembrance of this accident
though Mr. Gosford led him as nearly as possible
up to it, without telling him exactly what it was
Nor could he remember another circumstance —
that about his horse running away in the hunting
field, having been frightened by Roger’s hat
falling off, and about his throwing himself off in
order to get clear of the horse.
Gosford then asks him about Upton ; and here
again is an important point, if you place reliance
on Mr. Gosford’s statement, because the ignorance
here shown with reference to Upton stands in
striking contrast with the knowledge the de-
fendant afterwards manifested to a witness who
was entirely converted to his side by the know-
ledge the defendant exhibited. Gosford asks
him if he remembered Upton, and lie says, ‘I
don’t know much about it.’ He is then asked if
he remembers the island, and the story of the
poacher came to Mr. Gosford’s mind. The de-
fendant did not remember the island, and Gosford
says, ‘ I do not believe lie had ever heard about
the island. His answer gave me that impression.’
That, however, is a mere impression. Nor could
the defendant remember the particular circum-
stance which occurred on the island, though Mr.
Gosford led him up to it. Mr. Gosford next puts
what is a very crucial question. Mr. Slaughter,
who was dead at this time, was, as we know, the
confidential solicitor of Roger Tichborne. He
drew his will, and was a party to its execution.
‘ Do you remember Mr. Slaughter ? ’ asked Mr.
Gosford. The defendant seemed to hesitate, and
then said ‘I do net remember Slaughter.’ Next
ho was asked who made his will. The defendant
again hesitated, and Mr. Holmes made some ex-
planation, or gave a look at him, or something of
the kind, and then the defendant replied, ‘ Oh,
Hopkins, of course!’ Now, gentlemen, we know
very well that Mr. Hopkins did not make the
will; it was Mr. Slaughter who made it. Roger
Tichborne wished to make his will without the
knowledge of his father. He knew that Mr.


Hopkins was in the confidence of the Tichborne
family, and Mr. Hopkins Roger himself did not
like. I gather that from a passage on this point
in a letter to Roger from Lady Doughty, in which
she said she was amused to hear that he had
travelled in the same carriage with Mr. Dunn,
adding, ‘ I know your love for the firm of Dunn
and Hopkins.’ Of course that was said ironically,
and she meant the reverse of what she said. It
is difficult to suppose, if Mr. Gosford is right in
the conversation, that Roger Tichborne could
have made such a mistake, but that a person who
was not Roger Tichborne might have fallen into
the error I can well understand, because, having
been to Alresford, he would have learnt from
Rous that Hopkins had been the family at-
torney.
Then Mr. Gosford lays a little snare for him,
He says, ‘Do you remember Mr. Cullington?’
and the defendant said, ‘ Yes.’ This was a trap,
and he fell into it, because Roger Tichborne never
had known Mr. Cullington, as the partnership
between him and Mr. Slaughter did not take
place until after Roger Tichborne had left. Then
Mr. Gosford asks him about Moore, and when
Moore left him, and his answer was, ‘ He left me
at Montevideo.’ Now, that was not the case,
because Moore left Roger Tichborne at Santiago.
Then Mr. Gosford says he asked him, ‘ How did
you get to . Montevideo ?’ and he replied, ‘ By
ship.’ What made him ask the question was,
he says, to see if he would say anything about
crossing the Pampas, because there was a very re-
markable ride, to which Roger Tichborne would
have alluded. Then Mr. Gosford was asked,
‘ Was any reference made by you to anything
sent over to you?—Yes. I asked him if he re-
membered sending me a box from South Ame-
rica, end he distinctly said ho did not.’ Roger
had, as wo know, sent home the boots and
leathers in which he had crossed the mountains
and a number of curiosities besides. Then, he
said, he asked him whether he remembered leav
ing a horse, and he knew nothing at all about it.
Now I think there must be an inaccuracy here,
and my reason for saying that is this—whether
the defendant be Roger Tichborne or not, he knew
from some source or other that Roger had left a
horse with Mr. Gosford, because he mentions the
fact in his letter to Lady Tichborne, which is not
forthcoming, but in referring to the horse he
mentions it as ‘Plenipo.’ Roger Tichborne did
leave a horse with Gosford to take care of till he
returned, but that horse was never called
‘ Plenipo.’ So you see we have here one of
those curious combinations of knowledge and
want of knowledge which so frequently occur in
this case. Well, the time having come to leave
by the train, the defendant purposing to go to
town, they went to the station, and got into the
same carriage. The conversation flagged at first.
Mr. Gosford tells us:—
* He askedmehow Percival was. Isaid, “ Who”?
as I could not think at the moment who be meant.
He replied “ Percival Radcliffe.” This struck mo
very much, as I had never heard any of the family
call him anything but Percy.’
We know that Roger Tichborne and Mr. Radcliffe
never met but once, and that was in 1848, when
Roger was at Burton Constable, and Mr. Radcliffe
and Roger played in some private theatricals.
How then, it may bo asked, did he know the name
in connection with the Tichborne family. That I
think may be explained by his having seen the
baronetage at Sydney, for he would find thex-e that
the only daughter of Sir E. Doughty had married
Percival Itadcliffe, the eldest son of the baronet of
that name. As he had only seen Mr. Radcliffe
once, and that so long ago as 1848, he could
scarcely have felt any particular interest in that
gentleman’s health. Then follow some remark-
able answers, if the account Mr. Gosford gives us
of the conversation be accurate:—
‘ I said, “ Do you remember being quartered in
this country?” and he replied, “No.” I said,
“Have you forgot being at Canterbury?” He
said, “ No; but I forgot for the moment that
Canterbury was in Kent.” I then asked him about
Ireland, and where he was quartered, and he said,
“In Dublin.” I said “ Where else ?” and alter
thinking awhile he said, “ The Curragh of Kildare ”
I recollected at the moment that in Roger’s time
the Curragh Camp had not been formed.’
In reference to that the learned counsel for the
defendant said that the Carabineers might have
been exercised there. So they might if they had
•been quartered near enough, but we know that
the Carabiueers were never stationed at New-
bridge, which is the military station nearest to
the Curragh.
The examination of Mr. Gosford goes on, and
the next question is important, because it refers
to the accident at Cahir, by his knowledge of
which some of the Carabineers recognised him.
‘ I asked him if he remembered the name of the
colonel, and he did not. I did remember the name—
Jackson. I asked him if he remembered anything
happening on an occasion when his charger ran
away, but he remembered nothing of it He
asked me,’ says Mr. Gosford, ‘if I remembered
the grey pony his uncle used to drive. I said I
did not remember. You spoke of the cats that
had been mentioned to you by another person ?
Yes, Bogle told me he talked much to him on the
voyage, and he frequently mentioned my name,
and remembered the incident of worrying Ethe-
ridge’s cats, and also about the grey pony. Well,
Bogle’s statement made a groat impression on my
mind. He told us that ho had had no conversa-
tion with the defendant about anything on the
voyage home; but, if Mr. Gosford is right, Bogle
cannot have told us the truth; and that while
coming all the way from Sydney to Panama,
several thousand miles, staying at Panama a
month, going from Panama to New York, staying
at New York, and coming from New York to
England, Bogle and the defendant should not have
conversed about Tichborne and former times,
strikes me as being singularly improbable.’ Then
the witness is further asked, ‘ Do you remember
anything being said about leave-taking bofore he
went abroad?—Yes, and that was another thing
that struck me. He said, ‘Do you remember
coming over with me to Tichborne to take leave of
my uncle and aunt ?’ I was very much struck
with it, and cannot help being struck with it now,
because, having carefully perused his letter, I
know very well he did not go. I remember the
letter to Gosford to this effect— * My aum nas
pressed me to go and see my uncle, but I won’t go
to Tichborne. She is going to take my cousin
away to Wardourin order to avoid me, and, under
these circumstances, I won’t go.’ He did not go,
and never took leave of his dying uncle, and I have
already cited it as a bad trait in Roger’s cha-
racter. He obstinately refused to go and say
good-by to the uncle who had been so kind to
him, though he well knew he would never see him
again. Then Mr. Gosford says it was fully on his
memory that he did not go, but he did not con-


Itradict the defendant, as he wished to hear all
had to say.
He farther asked if Mr. Gosford rememberer
going to see him on board at Southampton. 1
witness contradicted him on that, and he adc
that the defendant’s language was 4 such as
would hear among workmen, using such expi
sions as “ I heerd,” and so on; the mode of expi
sion was altogether that of a person of very ]
station.’
That is Mr. Gosford’s account of what passer
ind for the reasons I have pointed out, the ev
fence is of importance if you can place perf
reliance upon it. But we aro bound to hear wha
me defendant had to say with reference to t
ion versa tion. He was cross-examined about
n anticipation of Mr. Gosford being called, and ]
ihall read you what he says:—
( ‘ Did Mr. Gosford subsequently come down ■
Iravesend just as you were about to start 1
mndon and your luggage was packed ? Y
Mr. and Mrs. Holmes there ?—They we
Vas there an interview between Mr. Holmes an
Ir. Gosford? I believe there was. Did IV
folmes bring you to the rooms where Mr. Gosforc
•as ?—He came and said Mr. Gosford was dow
iairs—had I any objection to go and see him
sard “Certainly not,* and went down. Yo
lid you began the conversation ?—No, don’t sa
said so. When I got to the room Mr. Gosforc
>se from his chair and held out his hand. (Th
laimant was about to describe the interview
he Solicitor-General.—Did you not put out you
md, and did not Mr. Gosford, after rising u
b down again and say, “I am sorry the recog
tion is not yet on my side; but sit down, an
obably our recollections may help us out ? ;
ost solemnly swear that was not so Did yo
lk about Tichborne ?—We did. Did you sa
u had been there, and Mr. Hopkins and Di
)ss recognized you?—No ; how could I? I hac'
t spoken to them. Did Mr. Gosford ask you i
u remembered your horse running away ?—H
1 not, that I remember. Did he ask how it wa
n had not called on your relatives ?—He die
t. Why you did not call on the Seymour family
No. Nor on Mrs. Towneley ?—He did not men-
n her name. Why you had not been to see
dy Doughty ?-He did not ask. Any conver
ion about Upton ?-Yes, I think he mentioned
ton. About the island at Upton ?—He nevei
ntioned it. Did he say, “ Why, can’t you
lember a particular thing that happened at the
nd ? ”—No, he did not; I don’t think he spoke
the island at all. Did he speak of Slaughter ?
fes, I think so. Did he mention Cullington ?
tainly not; but I had ascertained in London
Slaughter was dead, and I should have gone
set to see Slaughter if he had been alive, but
knowing Mr. Cullington I did not go to him.
i would have gone to Slaughter? Certainly I
ild. Your old friend, the attorney?—Yes; ho
a friend and a gentleman. How did you
rtain that Mr. Slaughter was dead and Cul-
ton was his successor ? Roug told me that.
Jo you recollect Mi. Gosford asking if you re-
lbered a horse you had left with him, and did
reply 44 No ” ?—When he spoke about the horse
raembered I said “ Yes,” and I said, 44 If I don’t
3 back for seven years you are not to part with
-those were my last words to Mr. Gosford.
he speak about the will ?-He did, and I said,
■lung of the will, “ I cannot understand how
one can go and swear that a man was dead
was ahve. Did he ask you if you could re-
member who made the will ?—Ho did not. Did
e press you and say, “Surely you remember who
who made it ? and did you say, “ Oh, I suppose
Hopkins . No, I did not. He asked me several
questions about the contents of the will, which I
answered, and he asked me who proved it. I said,
Why, don c you know who proved it ?” and he
said he did not. I went next day to Doctors’-
commons and found, to my great surprise, that
Gosford himself had proved it. Do you mean to
swear that, Gosiord told you he did not know who
proved your will ?-I mean to say and swear that
Gosiord told me he did not know who had proved
m .y Gut your will?—I mean by that my
wl. (Qiesta repeated as to who made the will.)
Ihe Claimant swore that Hopkins’s name was not
mentioned in reference to the will. Do you recol-
lect saying anything about Etheridge and the cat
to Mr. Gosford ?-Etheridge and the cat were not
mentioned to Mr. Gosford. Did he ask you the
names of your dogs ?—I think he did not. Could
you tell hnn ?—Of course I could; but I have no re-
collection of the question being asked, or the whole
conversation of three hours and a half. Did you
give him a description of any of your dogs ? Yes ■
, hi , m . a description of a little white-hair
bitch I had just before I went away, but not one
of those you have mentioned, for I never thought
of this one until your mentioning the dogs just
brought it to my mind. Did you say “ You re-
member the grey pony my uncle used to drive ?”
iNo, I don t remember my uncle driving a grov
pony. The grey pony I asked about was Alfred’s
—one Mr. Seymour gave him. I asked him what
had become of it. Did you persist in saying there
was a grey pony your uncle used to drive, and
did he say there might have been, but he did not
100 °il» Ct “ ? ~ No - y°u say, “ How is Per-
cival? —Who do you mean ? No, certainly not.
Did you say, “ Well, he is quite well?”—No I
never knew any one of that name. I know Mr
Eadcliffe’s name is Percival, but I did not know
it then.
Do you recollect Canterbury being mentioned,
and he asking you if you remembered being
quartered in the county ?—What county ? Why,
Kent. Did he say, “ You remember Canter-
i 7 ’ ™ 1 d i d y° u sa y “Yes,” and did he
reply, Why, then, surely you know Canterbury
is in Kent?”—Oh, no. Did he ask you where
you were quartered in Ireland, and did you say
“ Well, 1 was a good deal at Dublin”?—l dare say
I did. Did he ask you “ Whereabouts,” and did you
say, “ The Curragh, Kildare” ?—No. Did he press
you about it without getting any other places but
Dublin and the Curragh from you ?—I have no
recollection of Ireland being mentioned at all.
Did be ask the name of your colonel ?—No : I
could have told him, of course, if he had. Did he
ask you at all about your life in the army ?—No,
I think not. Did he ask you about a horse run-
ning away ?—At Tichborne? No, in Ireland ?
e never mentioned it. Did you say you could
not 1 ecollect ?—I did not. Did you speak of your
mother several times, saying you were going to
I ails to see her?—l believe so. And constantly
speak of her as “ mamma” ?—I can’t say; I used
frequently to call her “mamma,” sometimes
“ mother.” Used you to call her “ mamma” before
leaving England?—Yes, in s[leaking to her, but
not in writing. Did you speak of her to Mr.
Gosford ?—No doubt. Did you ever call her
“mamma” to him?—l don’t know. Did he ask
you how you found funds for living abroad ?—He
did not. And did you say nothing, but did Mr


Holmes reply, “ When abroad Sir Roger Tich-
borne lived ontke proceeds of his commission” ?
No, I will take my oath that Mr. Holmes never
spoke one word in that railway carriage from
beginning to end, but sat there listening to us
talking. Did you say that when travelling abroad
you lived on the proceeds of your commission ?
I don’t understand what you are talking of.
Question repeated.—l might have done so, for we
were talking all the way up.
‘ Did you say “ You recollect me going over to
Tichborne to take leave of my uncle and aunt” ?
and did he say he did not ?—No. And did you
say, “ Oh, you must recollect, surely, because that
maa from Winchester was there who used to
come to clean the pictures”?—No, I did not. I
don’t remember any man at Winchester who used
to come to clean the pictures. Did you writo
from London to Lady Tichborne next day on
account of your interview with Mr. Gosford ?
No, I don’t remember doing so. I know there
was one letter I wrote to my mother, which she
never received. Did Gosford assent to the things
yon told him?—Undoubtedly; there was no
dispute between us on any point. He was per-
fectly cognizant of all I said to him. Did Mr.
Gosford say, “ Do you remember who made your
will”?—Wo .spoke about the will. Did he ask
you who made it ? —No, he did not. Did he
press you about it, and say, “ Surely, you recollect
who made your will”? and did you say “Oh, Mr.
Hopkins, of course” ? —No, I did not. Nothing of
the sort?—No; he asked me several questions
about the contents of the will, which I answered,
and then I asked him who had proved my will,
and he said he did not know. I said, “ What,
do you mean to tell me that you, as executor to
the will, do not know who proved it” ? and he said
he did not; and next day, at Doctor’s-commons I
went with Mr. Holmes and another gentleman,
and to my great surprise I found it was Mr. Gos-
ford himself who had proved it. He said he did
not know who proved the will?—Yes, those were
his words. I will swear Mr. Hopkins’s name was
not mentioned in connexion with the will.’
Such is the defendant’s account of the interview,
and you see that the two versions are irreconcila-
ble the one with -the other. Either must be
wrong. If Mr. Holmes had been put into the
box he would have been able to say who spoke the
truth in this conflict of evidence betwen the de-
fendant and Mr. Gosford.
Gentlemen, some strong, some cruel observa-
tions have been made about Mr. Gosford, who
certainly stands in a difficult and somewhat
painful position. He was steward of tho estate.
Great trust was reposed inhim. He had a loose way
of keeping the accounts. He entered into specu-
lation, or upon expenditure, in agricultural mat-
ters, which proved unfortunate. He did not keep
separate accounts at the bank, but placed the
rents reecived to his own account. His credit
was suddenly stopped. He had previously been
allowed to overdraw his account, and was unaable
to meet his engagements. It is a painful posi-
tion to find himself placed in, not only because
he owes the trustees a large sum of money which
lie cannot pay, but because the method of dealing
with the money he received for his employers
was irregular and improper. But when the
learned counsel for the defendant asked you to look
upon Mr. Gosford as a felon, and further suggest-
ed that he had given false evidence beeause his
testimony had been brought upon the considera-
tion of his not being prosecuted by those to whom
lie was indebted, I cannot help feeling that you
must have shared in the indignation the just,
the honest indignation—which I know was felt
upon the Bench, and, I doubt not, was also, and
naturally, felt by every right-minded person,
at charges so utterly unworthy a 3 coming from a
gentleman of the bar.
Mr. Gosford may have been mistaken as to the
identity of the defendant. He came away from
that interview at Gravesend with the convic-
tion that the defendant was not Roger Tichborne*
and whether tbftt conviction was light or not, it
is for you, upon a review of the wtiole circum-
stances of the case, to form your judgment. But
to suppose that he was influenced by considera-
tions so base, so wicked, as the motives which
have been suggested, and to suppose that he deli-
berately came here to swear falsely, is, I cannot
help thinking, a very unjust and improper accu-
sation to be brought against a man with reference
to whom one thing is at least perfectly clear
namely, that it was his interest, if possible, to
find Roger Tichborne in the person who had come
home. Gosford was in difficulties. He owed
money which he could not pay. He knew perfectly
well that if ever he should be in a position to pay,
the trustees under the settlements of the will
would be bound to force him to pay. It would be
their duty to do so. But if Roger Tichborno
came back, the estates would bo his, the trust
would cease, and if there was any debt due for
the estate it would be a debt due to him—due to
his old and confidential friend, who had trusted
him with every secret of his heart, and who had
been upon terms of such unreserved intimicy and
friendship with him. Gosford might under such
circumstances naturally say, ‘lf I find R.oger
Tichborne and acknowledge him, I shall obtain an
absolute and unconditional release from my liabi-
lities, or at all events such facilities as will render
the terms of payment easy.’ In all probability
that would have been the case, and he would have
been restored to the honourable I will not say
the lucrative, position, he had held, and to em-
ployment, the reeeipts of which would be suffi-
cient to maintain him. That that was the feeling
of his poor wife is shown by the letter which was
put in; the rest of the correspondence, was un-
fortunately objected to —it was not strictly evi-
dence —or we should have got to the bottom of
this domestic confidence. Well, having. heard
from him after the first interview he had with the
defendant, Mrs. Gosford writes in reply :-
‘ Tanylan, Monday.
‘My dearest Hal, —I was, indeed, thankful to
get your letter last night by George, when be
returned from meeting the evening train, which
I Bent him to as well as the morning one.. Our
post never came in until the middle of dinner,
and then seeing no letter worried me much,
dreading accidents with the wild weather and the
stoppages in all directions. You have not yet
told me a single thing induces me to believe this
Sir Roger an impostor, but it is most trying not
to be able to settie the point one way or the
other. Why did you not go’alono to Gravesend?
I can quite fancy Sir Roger wishing for some
time to keep quiet and prevent a lot of inquisi-
tive people from bothering him, who would only
haunt him out of curiosity. He has a great deal
to inquire about, and from being so long com-
pletely out of the world of England feels at a loss
in many ways. It is just like that Oullington
sticking his nose into everything. I cannot think
so badly of poor old Bogle. You sec you have


Eol d r d r r , °r “ ind that 14 can ’t be Sir
lief—instead °of hoi' at evar^*biu 8 ™der this be-
tion eonalW ofba , la,!Cla S both sides of theques-
posted ,or lon S°“ the letter he saib be
loiyou at Cannon-street H The wriHntr
» dmdedly like his in the note you sent if!?
recollection of Rogeri, ‘XLtarittng ‘wt‘‘tall
that they were very different indeed
would daTuvh a vo^°i yOU AT 0t £ hink the defendant
-«»d I«obTigel®S'foSs'Sl 10 Z
namenso importance it would been to the
“ “5; Jff.H ranged hiX:
dant of’Roier +1 the lntlmate friend and confi-
as- 'v£zr? * Pts
to T riiy f T"i;f’
‘ 3 iichborne a letter dated the Qth nf
ar flsrust?—
pre?ente“by b oi“™l.Sr’7 lM “ ’>“•*»»■' «°
vou oh t,l ircumstances from coming to see
I will not JonZl ,T l*?} “«”•<“ »««, and
o T iS “H-SF -
from pi® * , ,» he came down »Q the train
Sith Sm “®? d laSt night ' 1 bad a long talk
~ . . * ne seemed to deny everything* T
££?£-- {*• Ho say he d° r noSeXj
to tjpiuF° Wn *? vK 6 coac b from london with me
about different a *° D “ conv ersation with him
«o«M ess & stzn z
under what circumstances Moore came to lea™
from JZfT' re T mber > Mama - 1 write to Mm
n'o™ vZd A
When thov u S6emg me at graves end.
them uutif i h “i° ID ’ because 1 did not wish to see
Oh do mm U i seen y° u fbey were very angry
1
»T.Sefand
MamT t 0 EQgland ' So do come at one.’
‘I f ld not receive an answer to the telegrams
w-it hT LT yolk - • H ° piug 1 Will have to
TJZ’Jt" see " s )r “.-iT?,c„r r e r
Now, there are 22 printed line? ,!, that letter
-nd it contains nine small *i’s.’ seven mis-spellings’
ei o ht mistakes in grammar, and five nsunpa tw
La a d C v 3 T Wi S SmaH initkl letters ‘ letter presses
it r ! cbbornfito come over to England. P Why
dnfen l k i b n Ve bcen written ° n the 9th and the
defendant have started on the 10th I do not
know. Lady Tichborne, if she had heard from
r- ®owker of the defendant’s visit to Alresford
might have thought it odd that if he were able to
go there he had not come to Paris, and the defen
wls anxfnn«W th ® , old P lac . e - Lady Tichborne
IWOl W 0t S hr y expecting him in Paris, and on the
TivU staits -. Now, he was recognised by Lady
Jshan^allToir^f 1 ? 1 at aD irit «-view to which
s “ al l call your attention presently
,ln T i U nf befol '°i We co , m6to tbat ’ let us consider the
state of mind m which Lady Tichborne was be-
cause a great deal has of course been made of her
acknowledgment of the defendant as her long-lost
o o , n^°fe C:Ul , no^ Uarrel witb tbe Earned counsel
f d h- fe ? d ?« t tba * the head an,l
would f o?cni attle ' + Th ° f co ° nition by bis mother
a bostof who
tailed to lecognise the defendant. If you want to
express what you think of the change which has
sW.-i| Ce -ki % person ’ s appearance in the
s longest possible form you would resort to the
wTbT S f y , lng ’ ?.° is 80 changed his own mother
hi Jh\ d +l°* kn^ W llm '’ You cannot estimate too
sufh amatte 01 IV + Wl l icl1 a motheiJ s vision on
such a matter ought to have with you. But, as I
said the other day, there is no rule so universal as
is°whe ther w°r 1 som c exception, and the question
is whethei we do not find an exception hero.
~ wbde 1 f d mit to the full the weight and
the authority which a mother’s recognition of her
rjf *° bave ’ let me say that lam not to
Ww ed -m y i dle d eclamation about a mother’s
nstmet. That is not the feeling which the lower
fnr ll +f S - haV i!-m 0r tbeir y° un - or human mothers
for their children. Instinct means somethin"
which is independent of the judgment; some im-
pulse which is stronger than the judgment ortho
wiii, something which sways the mind irresist-
£ v!; iu a cblld was separated from its mother at
its birth or shortly afterwards, do you think that
xf 20 years afterwards she chanced to see the
woubl ° r th ,° u y ° UDS woman in a crowd she
would be moved by an irresistible impulse to
throw her arms round his or her neck with all the
feelings of a mother ? If a child were brought up
anoTheTcn 7 y +° Ut f by an uncle or grandfather in
be better abl t n ry + f ° r ye ? n3 ’ would nottbat relative
be bettei able to speak as to identity than the
Tv w COU d - b ° \ U is not in consequence of
any naturel impulse, independent of judgment
and knowledge, that a mother would be better
able to recognize her child than anybody else. It
is rrom the habit of watching the particular indi-
vidual; trom being more familiarized with its
any life, wita everything that pertains to per-
sonal identity—the form, the features, she ges-
tures—than anybody else can be that a father or
mother is best able to speak as to the identity of
a child. But if we find that in a particular in-
stance there has been some such strange bias as
that we cannot rely on the judgment of the


parent, or that there has been a l*ng separation,
then we cannot allow the conviction that every
other fact and circumstance would naturally tend
to engender in our minds to be overruled and
overwhelmed by the simple fact of a mother
having said that a particular individual was the
able number of years. We ought to listen with all
son from whom she had been parted for aconsider-
due respect to the opinion of the mother ; we
ought to take it as a circumstance calculated to
weigh strongly in the one scale, but we must not
leave out of sight the circumstances that weigh in
the other. It is a most important circumstance
in the case, but it is not a conclusive one. If it
were conclusive, what was the need for this pro-
tractivo inquiry ?
Now, were there not several things which ought
to have made Lady Tichborne hesitate before she
accepted the defendant as her son, even if the
defendant had had the outward and visible ap-
pearance of the son she had lost? There were
circumstances which ought to have made her
pause and hesitate, and certainly not to have
decided before she asked in the words of the
Patriarch, ‘ Are thou my very son ? ’ Long before
she had seen him, and with all these startling
difficulties standing in the way, she declared that
he was her son, and accepted him as such. She
knew the defendant said he had had St. Yitus’s
danoe, and that her son Roger never had. She
knew that he had said he was never an officer in
the Carbineers, but that he had enlisted as a
private in a regiment which had no existence.
She knew he had said he knew his grandfather,
whom, she said, Roger could never have known.
These were circumstances which ought to have
made her pause. But that is not all. When
asked in Australia to give his proof of his identity,
he mentions the brown mark on hi 3 side, of which
she had never heard, and which she had never
seen, and he referred to the Brighton card case as
a fact within her knowledge. Now, had the
Brighton card case any existence ? If it had not,
you cannot have a more striking proof of Lady
Tichborne’s determination not to be d'iven by
any obstacle, be it what it might, from the point
she so anxiously sought to establish. Is there
any reality in it, or is it a myth from beginning to
end ? Knowing that the defendant had given it
as a proof of his identity, Mr. Giffard, his counsel,
naturally examined him about it, and the ac-
count the defendant gave about it was that he
was cheated at cards of 1,50(Y, of which he paid
500 1., by two men named Broome, whom he had
not seen before, and a man named Robins; that
another person, named Eccleston, of St. Martin’s-
lane, was present at the time, that it occurred at
the Bedford Hotel, Brighton, and that the fact
was generally known in his circle.
Thus far there is no mention of the Brighton
races. The affair, he said, was hushed up so far
as the public was concerned, but was known in
the family. On cross-examination he fixes the
time as about September or October, 1852, or it
might, he said, be August, but that it was during
his three months’ leave, which we know did not
begin until the 28th of October. He was asked
had he ever lost 1 ,5001. on any other occasion, and
he said he had within the last eight or ten
months, at his Club, at play, but not at cards,
oxccpt on the occasion he spoke of at Brighton.
He was then pressed to state where he had lost
the money, and he said it was at the Bedford
Hotel, Brighton, in a sitting-room into which one
of the Broomes invited him, He said he knew
both the Broomes.
Well, some interval passed between the exa-
mination-in-chief and the cross-examination, and
there are some discrepancies in his statements.
In the examination-in-chief he said the men were
two strangers whom he had never known before;
but in the cross-examination he says he knew
them both. Being farther asked which of the
Broomes it was who invited him into the sitting-
room, he says he thinks it was Harry. And here
Mr. Serjeant Ballantine interpoged, fearing, I
suppose, that the defendant would contradict
himself, and says ‘he believes it to be Harry.'
Then the defendant says he believes Harry
was staying at the Bedford; ho did not
know whether Johnny was staying there or
not. He did not think Eccleston or Robbins was
staying there. He thinks he was at Brighton
only three days altogether. He could not say
how much of those three days he spent with
Johnny and Harry Broome. He met them each
day. He thought that Eccleston and Robbins
did not join them until the third day. He met
the Broomes after breakfast, and walked about
with them. He went with them to the races—
the autumn races. It must be remarked that
there are no races at Brighton except once a year.
The defendant goes on to say that this was not
his first acquaintance with the Broomes. Ha
knew Harry before, but he did not think he had
ever seen Johnny until then. He says, ‘I had
been in Harry’s house ; I had never been in
Johnny’s house. I lost 1,500£.; I had something
like 40£. about me. I went to Brighton from
Canterbury. I think I was a night in London,
having gone from Canterbury to London, and
then on to Brighton.’ He says there was no public
notice taken of the matter, and nothing about it
in the newspapers. It never became what law-
yers call * a case in court.’ He says, ‘ I swear
upon my solemn oath I know nothing about a
well-known card case at Brighton for which two
men, Sladen and James, were tried.’ It appears,
then, gentlemen, that this card case in which the
defendant says he was concerned occurred at the
Brighton races of 1852, that he went over to
Brighton from Canterbury, that he lost 1,5001. to
the Broomes, one of whom he had known before,
that he had been in Harry Broome’s house, but
never in the house of Johnny—an important;
fact when you come to deal with the evidence
with respect to this Brighton card case. 1852
was the only year in which Roger Tichborne
could possibly have gone from Canterbury to the
Brighton racesr
Now, in 1851, there was a card-swindling tran-
saction, which had acquired not a little notoriety.
These two Broomes were notorious pugilists, and
John was an accomplished villain. This John,
with two persons named James and Sladen, got
a person named Hamp, the son of a clergyman,
to play with them, and they won 1,500/> from
him. The thing became known, and the three
men—John Broome, James, and Sladen—were
taken up and committed, but were let out on bail
to come up and take their trial at the next
Assizes at Lewes, which would be in the spring of
1852. When the time came, Mr. Hamp failed to
appear, so that no bill was presented to the grand
jury. The consequence was that Mr. Hamp’s re-
cognizances were estreated, and these recogni-
zances being considerable, he thought better about
the matter, and made, 1 suppose, application to a


•Judge in chambers to have the recognizances en-
larged upon condition of his coming forward at
the n ax t Assizes to prefer a bill of indictment.
f SSI £ 3S Sladcn and James surren-
dered, but John Broome forfeited his recogni-
sances, and absconded. Warrants were imme-
diately issued against him, but he was nowhere to
i * nd T J , a .T S „ aild Sladen w ere tried before
the late Lord Chief Justice Jervis, and convicted
in the last week of July, 1352. The Brighton
races were held upon the 4th, sth, and 6th of
August in that year, 1852.
ujl o ™’ C i U -l (1 Ro ?er have gone to those races, did
° ’ ar J 11 so > it possible under such circum-
uances he could have been the victim of a card-
in which John Broome took
M Vin!w^ e t a latter f rom Roger Tichborne to
l *- C T° 3 f° 7< on the 3rd of August in that
E’f 1U f W i hlCh , tells him chat thinks he
“ * C et leaye lf hc applied for it, but he won’t
apply because he knows that his father is at Tich-
borne, and he would want him to go there if he got
whvY-^n 9 d °frl ot r 3h t 0 Gxplain to his fatl ' er
why he did not like to go to Tichborne. Now
P T fectly clear >that he could at that
l>®l, hardl y have gone from Canterbury to
fil u ‘V nd 3 v; nt fhree days there, coming up
to London from Canterbury, and staying there for
SnwV’r L f w . rote ’, as 1 have told you, on the
drd to Grosford, and we find him on the 7th
Prhthf & t 0 mot her. Now, if he lost 1,5007. at
Scour ATi 1 WaS 0bH ° ed ’ acc °rding to his own
account, to have recourse to his mother’s assist-
th° m ® ans of P ayic S we should expect
Fu? tW™ • retC r’A CG tllc sub j ect in this letter,
world fc 1 ? “?* . the Obtest intimation in the
world that he lost a shilling there. What he
Jivei about is this. His mother having con-
? 0 d tbe o wdd n< ? tlon coming to Canterbury
her Sm if hl “’ h ® w L l ' ltes earnestly to dissuade
ba from it, saying that, as his father was in Eng-
land, if she were to come to Canterbury, and his
anothci W r ?J lng in . one place ’ an d she in
had W + fc J° Uld SIVG na ? t 0 rc “ a rh. Now, if he
fendanti m ° My ’ Tl’ acoord mg to the de-
have writtlrf^’, WaDtf L d ber assistan co, would he
all buTin “f^ er n °. t onlynot referring to it at
all, but m the strongest possible terms seeking to
dissuade her from coming to this country ?° It
letter t To as f hl 3 Wy improbable that between the
o o h f ., t R G ° aford m t he 3rd and tllis letter to his
fflother E°£Gr could have been at Brighton and
t Vi 3 money - lint there is a still stronger
difficulty. John Broome had absconded, and the
lingtiton police officers had warrants for his an-
if r ,f hel iu-° n V , but acoor <iing to the defendant’s
stoiy this John Broome, who had forfeited his
recogmzances and absconded, was everyday walk-
ing about the racecourse, where the police officers
neces s ß y have seen him. -Can you, as
" l™ 1 men, think it is in the slightest degree
CrcmWo that J i ohn Uroomo would, under such
urcumstances, have been walking about the
fir? in raC !, C ° n l Se ’ and wcmld bay e been taking
iffeico f°m aCt * he , . sftmo description of criminal
been trin f l 7? 1C 1 hIS *7° companions had just
been S t 03 ’ and for which ho would Lave
t)e ® n tried, had he not absconded ?
fJu, i her ° is a stiU farther difficulty in the de-
ftv him Ti!IC! 1C m T y ’ h 0 say *> was found
funds nndnr\ S h f', But his mother had no
the monev C ° ntro1 ’ and no “cans of rising
own “narate n a 6 m ° nCy 7 bioh she ha d for her
hnt „ amounted to only 1007. a year;
but 1007. a year will not pay 5007., at leant not
ifor five years. She could not have raised
money without the concurrence of her husba
Her fortune not being settled upon her for
separate use sue could not touch a farthin" of i
without her husband’s consent. But with Bo
lie a borne the case was very different TTo
i.ir to 20,0001. w ».l J S SX, S.ne
lenders he could as easily have borrowed 500/.
1 could borrow 51. There was, therefore, no re
son whatever why he should have required 1
mother’s assistance. H
Now, gentlemen, looking at all these circu
stances, wliat conclusion do you arrive at ? Is th
story about the Brighton card case a reality or
delusion ? Is it an entire invention ? If the concl
non you arrive at is this—that this Brighton ca
:ase is merely an amusing story; that the defen
int, having heard of it as one of those thin
vinch had made a great sensation at the tim°
adapted it to his own particular case; if this 1
mur conviction, what are you to think of th
nother, who, instead of saying, ‘ It is quite rid
ulous to talk of the Brighton card case—it didri
lappen to Roger at all,’says. ‘Oh! well, we won
ay anything at all about it ?’ But if she did say
It never did happen, and never could have hap
ened, there would have been an end of the de
mdants case, inasmuch as he founded one of th
loofs of his identity on this transaction.
Lut then there are two witnesses called on th
art of the defendant. One of them, Mr. J. Tay
t, says that he had a bet with John Broome i
34 JV tbat be called at his place, the Rising Sun
l Air-street; that he was taken into a back par
ur where there were three or four gentlemen
•mkmg champagne; that one of them, not stout
it tan-sized, was pointed out to him as Mr
ciiborne; that he saw the same party two o
ree days after in the same parlour drinkinr
ampagne; and he fixes the date by savin'* i
is about the time of the Metropolitan Spring
eetmg Jt might have been April, but he thinks
was May. Well, at that time Roger Tich-
rne was at Tichborne studying for his examina-
m, and when Lady Tichborne writes to him in
2 month of August she refers to his having been
;ht months there. Of course, it is possible that
might have run up to London for two or three
ps and gone to Johnny Broome’s. But then you
i asked to suppose that ho was acquainted with
“n Broome and had some reason for being there;
b the defendant distinctly stated that he never
s at John Broome’s house, and what then bc-
nes of this story? Then there is another wit-
S ’ Burnell, who says that he was stand-
within 4ft. or sft. of the bar in Johnny
lomes house when a young gentleman drove
amd, coimng in, told Johnny Broome that if
didnt give back the money he had swindled
i out of, he would take proceedings against him.
inny replied that he would see the others who
e with him at the time, and that he would put
calle d tbe young gentleman Cap-
i lichborne. This was in the autumn of 1850.
! young man was, according to the witness, very
k, about 20 or 21 years old, about sft. 9in. in
>ht, and with broadish shoulders. His eye-
ivs were dark and rather heavy. He had got
iry peculiar walk, his right knee seeming to
d inwards.
ut we know very well that at this time Roger
lborne was at Cahir, and he could hardly have
l called ‘ Captain,’ for he was not even lieu-
nt until some time after. 4 But,’ says the
ned counsel for the defendant, ‘I don’t oar 9


about dates. I have a sovereign contempt for
pates. If it didn’t happen in 1852, then it hap-
pened in 1851; and if it didn’t happen in 1851, it
happened in 1850; and if not in 1850, it happened
in 1849.’ There never was anything so magnani-
mous as this contempt of circumstances, time, and
place. It is the old story of the Wolf and the
Lamb. ‘ You reviled me last year, you wicked
lamb,’ said the wolf. ‘ That could not be,’ says
the lamb, ‘for I was not born then.’ ‘Then it
must have been your father,’ retorted the wolf.
< Oh, no,’ said the lamb, ‘ for my father was at that
time dead. He was killed by the butcher.’ ‘ Well,
then,’ said the wolf, ‘if it was not then, it must
have been at some other time.’ And so says the
learned counsel for the defendant. We know
that the Brighton races, in 1851, were on the 6th,
7th, and Bth of August. Roger came to town in
the month of July on leave to see the Exhibition,
and he got back to Clonmel, where he was then
stationed, on the 13th of July, and it is not likely
that he obtained leave immediately again. So he
certainly was not at the Brighton races that year.
So again, if we go back to 1850, the races were on
the 7th, Bth, and 9th of August, and we have got
his letters from Cahir, which show that he cot no
leave at that time. But, further, the defendant
says he went to Brighton from Canterbury.
What, then, is your opinion of this Brighton card
case, which affects not only the truth of the de-
fendant’s statement, but also the opinion you will
form of Lady Tichbome’s judgment in deciding the
question whether the man who presented himself
as her son was her son at all ? So much for the
Brighton card case as an element in this history. If
you consider there is no reality in it, but that the
defendant for some reason or other adopted the
story as his own, it not only militates against him,
but must shake all confidence in Lady Tichbornc’s
recognition.
But besides the difficulties connected with the
brown mark and the Brighton card case, which
certainly might have startled Lady Tichborne,
she had received advice which ought still further
to have caused her to hesitate before making up
her mind that this person was her son. She was
in the hands, as regards legal business, of a man
in whom she might place implicit trust, Mr.
Bowker, one of those sound-judging, conscientious
members of the profession, in whose keeping the
interests and honour of families and clients are
always safe. When she first heard about the
defendant, she placed herself in his hands. She
tells him of the letters she had received from Mr.
Cubitt, and that she has reason to believe that
her loDg lost son has been found. She tells him
she had written to Cubitt that she was willing to
send him 40/., but would not send more until
she knew more of the business. She says :
‘ I have asked Mr. Cullington to forward 40/.
to Sydney, but he has no correspondent at Sydney.
He said I must address myself in London. Would
you be so kind as to forward them to Mr. Cubitt,
News Agency, 11, Rridgcs-street, Sydney, Austra-
lia ? I would send yo this last letter, but lam
afraid to send it to you by post, and will show it
to you when I go to London in three weeks hence,
or a month certainly. When you read Mr. C.’s
letter you would not doubt that my son Sir Roger
is still in existence, and in my present affliction
it would be a great consolation if my eldest son
came back.’
Mr. Bowker, in reply, writes thus on the 3rd of
March:—
‘ Dear Lady Tichborne,—l hare considered the
statement respecting your eldest son. I will, of
course, remit the 40<?. to an agent in Sydney, but
before doing so I should very much like to see
Mr. Cubitt’s letters. If you were to send them to
me in a registered letter, in the same way as you
forwarded the check, they will no doubt come safe.
I cannot help thinking it is a plan to get money.
Still, I would not advise you to refrain from
sending the 40/., if it would give you any satis-
faction. There is not, as I understand, any
possible reason or motive for your son concealing
himself if he be alive, while there is every in-
ducement for him to make himself known—viz ,
a very handsome fortune in possession, and a very
large addition to it in a few years. Under these
circumstances, concealment seems incredible.
Still, as I have said, I do not dissuade you from
remitting the 40 1., although I consider it will be
lost. We must hope the little child yet unborn
may prove to be a son, and that it may live to
prove a blessing to an ancient and honourable
family.’
* Lady Tichbome writes to him again and en-
closes one of Cubitt’s letters. This is her letter :
* 16 March, 1866.
‘My dear Mr. Bowker, —I received your second
kind letter this morning, and I hasten to answer
it to say that 1 am much obliged to you for your
first letter, and I would have answered it imme-
diately had I not been waiting for this letter
which I now send to you. I was expecting it, and
I thought it was better to wait to be able to for-
ward it to you at once; the other letters are all
summed up in that one. You already know, I
think, that Roger belongs to a regiment of Militia
of that colony. It appears that he has lived on
his pay. When I know how little ho cared
for money, I am not surprised that ho lived so
long away from his own inheritance, especially
when I consider that he had never limited the
time of his absence, and never mentioned any-
thing of the probability of his return.’
Now, judging from his correspondence, I should
say that no man cared more for money. Ho was
extremely careful in his expenditure, he did not
run into debt, and he was always considering
about this fund and that fund, this money and
that money. We are quite as competent to form
a judgment on that matter a 3 Lady Tichborne.
Then the letter proceeds thus: —
‘ As for what that letter mentions of a nervous
affection, Roger never had any when with ns; ho
was nearly two years in the Carbineers, and very
much liked by bis colonel. I think it is possible
I may have another letter on the Ist of next
month. You see that they will not get on without
money, and I cannot bear the idea of losing, per-
haps, the chance of seeing my dearly beloved
son again for the sake of a little money. I, there-
fore, will thank you to have the kindness to ad-
vance 40/., and to forward it to Sydney. I told
Mr. Cubitt in my last letter to him that I would
not let him have any more till I had some proof
more positive that ho had found my dear son.
Still, I think it is better to venture, and the
sooner you send the 40/. the better it will be. I also
think that the money for his ransom ought to be
paid out of the estates when he has got them
back to him; but you will, of course, see about it.
I, however, have a presentiment that we are going
to see my dear son again. I think it is better to
wait to mention it till after Lady Tichborne’s con-
finement, as perhaps it might do her harm; but,
however-, I always heard my boloved Alfred speak
on that subject in a very reasonable and honest


manner, and I have no doubt that it will not meet
with any difficulty on her side.—l remain, very
sincerely, yours, H. F. Tichborne.’
In answer to that Mr. Bowker wrote to Lady
Tichborne on the 26th of March, the following
letter:—
‘ Dear Lady Tichborne, —I duly received your
letter of the 16th inst., and was making inquiries
with the intention of remitting the 40/. to some
agent at Sydney, with a discretionary power to
pay it over to Mr. Cubitt or not, according to cir-
cumstances. I have not, however, done so, in
consequence of the two extraordinary letters en
closed. With respect to that which purports to
come from your long-lost son, the first thing
which strikes me is the manner of the contents,
which is totally unlike the letter of an educated
gentleman. The handwriting is altogether dif-
ferent from the late Sir Alfred’s. The jump from
Cubitt’s modest request of a remittance of 40/. to
the large sum of 400/. will not escape your ob-
servation. If the writer were really your son,
why did he not relate to you the story of the
escape from shipwreck, his subsequent wanderings,
and the reason of his concealment for so many
years, with every earthly inducement to make
himself known ?
‘ There is not a line in the letter which is not
open to observation. As regards the other letter
from Mr. Gibbes, I happen to know the old firm
of Faulkner and Gregory, to whom the writer re-
fers, very well. I have shown it to one of the
partners of the present firm; and I send also a
copy of a letter from him. lam afraid the whole
business is an impudent attempt at extortion. If
you have any doubt on the subject I will compare
the signature to the letter with your son’s original
signature to his will.’
On the 27th of March, Mr. Bowker received
this letter in reply from Lady Tichborne:—
‘My dear Mr. Bowker, —I have just received
your letter, and I hasten to answer it. I think
you did right about the money. Still, I cannot
say that this business is only meant to gain money;
if you consider the position he puts himself in
should he assume a name that does not belong to
him, and the character of honesty that ho bears
would, it seems, defend him from that accusation.
However, I think it right not to send any money,
as, if he is really Sir Roger he will find people to
advance him the 400/. he requires.’
She seems to have thought the bankers and
moneyed people out there would not require any-
thing but his bare assertion, but would at once
advance the money. That shows a very indifferent
notion of the hold which bankers have of money
in Australia, which is quite as hard as that of
bankers here. They do not advance money on a
person’s bare assertion. It was only after the re-
presentations of Cubitt and Gibbes, after the de-
fendant had been recognised by Bogle, and after
Mr. Turvillo had interposed, that the bankers
made up their mind to advance the money. Then
the letter goes on, and we get a touch of womanly
feeling:—
‘As he has lived among savages and soldiers
these last 12 years, it is possible he should have for-
gotten English, or at least that he should not write
as correctly as one could wish. I did not wish
Lady Tichborne to here of that business till after
her confinement. I hope, if your brother has
mentioned it to her, that it will not do her any
Jarm. I had a letter from her last night, and
she fortunately says she is going on very v;ell.
One thing, however, that seems like Roger is to
I have sent his letter to Tichbome, as he only
knows Tichbome, and does not know Mr. Culling-
ton, where the other letters were sent. Of course,
I cannot say anything certain, only that doubts
are not a certainty. Times will let us know more
about it.—l remain, my dear Mr. Bowker, yours
truly. . ‘ H. F. Tichborne.’
At that time, says Mr. Bowker, ‘ she was under
the impression that if she recognized her son he
would take possession of his estates as a matter of
course. I told her that was not so, and that the
identity of the Claimant would have to be dis-
tinctly proved, but that there would be no great
difficulty about that, as there was so very large
a family, and so many connexions to whom Roger
was known. She had a photograph, which she
showed me; it was badly executed; it was a fat,
stout man; but she said she recognized it as that
of her son by the lower part of the face and the
chin, and also by the smallness of the hands.
The figure was one standing, and I have never
seen it since. She said she was prepared to swear
it was her son in any court of justice whatever,
I was rather startled, and said, ‘ What! my dear
lady, swear to a man before you’ve seen hixn!’
However, she persisted in her statement. I said,
Of course, if you recognize him, it will have
?reat weight with me, and I will, if I am satisfied
myself as to his identity, be happy to take all
'he necessary proceedings on his behalf.’ He
laid he should like to ask him a few questions.
She said he would never submit to it. Pie re-
died that, whether he liked it or not ho would be
impelled to answer a great many questions
tefore he got the estates. She was about going
o Paris, and she tolls Mr. Bowker that her son
rould be far safer there than in London.
Then we have Mr. Danby Seymour remonstrat-
□g with her, when she tells him she is prepared
o swear that the defendant is her son without hav-
ig seen him. He says, ‘As I considered her
pinions mere delusions I did not combat them
only said,‘Don’t send him any more money
aan is absolutely necessary to bring him home.
lr. Seymour also told her that the expression
aout ‘ the blessed Maria,’ was very unlike any-
ling that Roger would have used. To that she
iplied ‘that Roger had lived for a long time
nong the Irish, and that is the way the Irish
iople speak.’ I don’t know whether that is the
.se or not, but one thing is certain, that though
oger lived a long time among the Irish, and wo
a number of his letters from different
aces in Ireland, he never made any reference
the ‘ blessed Maria.’ Mr. Danby Seymour also
ys that he never heard of Roger Richborne
ing victimized in any card case or gambling
unsaction.
The testimony of Mr. Alfred Seymour is to the
mo effect. He was in Paris in December,
(30, and Lady Tichborne tells him she had
; rived a letter and photograph of tlio defend-
t, and promised to show them to him, but she
vays put off doing so. And when the defendant
s in London, Mr. Alfred Seymour says he urged
r very frequently to let him see him, but she
rer would. So he never saw the defendant
til the end of July.
iVell, gentlemen, here are two men of the
rid, men of honour and character, upon whom
1 might expect a sister to throw herself for
dee and assistance in a matter of this kind
ere a man is coming forward to assert that he
the heir to the Tichborne name and estates,
the midst of the difficulties which I hava


pointed out in the correspondence from Australia,
you would have expected that she would have
leant on them for help in so critical a conjunc-
ture. Why is it that she does not do so ? Was
it that she was afraid of the troublesome monitors
who would come between her and the son she
hoped to find, and cast a dark shadow over what
was to her the bright prospect of seeing that long
lost son again. The one idea—the one thougnt—
that had taken possession of her mind from th
time she had heard the ship had gone down, wa
that her son would 'one day be restored to hei
She had clung to that hope with a sort of font
desperation. When other people smiled anc
sneered at a hope so visionary and absurd, sh
clung to it with desperate tenacity, as a mar
would cling to, a plank in a shipwreck as his onl'
hope of reaching the shore. Now there was i
prospect of that long - cherished hope beinj
realised. There came an account from Australi;
that her son was found, and was coming back to
be the staff and support of her declining years
She listened with greedy eagerness to this story
and almost with a conviction of its truth, though
the circumstances were such as ought to have
engendered suspicion in her mind. And now
with this bright prospect before her, when people
came and said ‘You must not believe all this—ii
is a delusion, and your hope if you cherish it for
a while must in the end terminate in disappoint-
ment ’ —when people spoke thus she looked upon
them as coming between her and the realisatioE
of that happiness which for years had been her
fond and constant hope. And like anybody
whose conduct depends upon his own will and
determination, not upon conviction founded upon
reason and reflection, she would not admit any-
thing which could tend to detract from the con-
fident belief she had that the Claimant was her
son, or turn her eyes from any light that might
be shed on the subject of the inquiry. She
believed as people believe that which they desire
to believe, shutting out from consideration every-
thing which could tend to produce a different
result.
. I cannot help thinking that in this she might be
right after all. That you are to judge of from the
whole case. But that she entered upon that in-
quiry with a preconceived notion and bias, and
looked at the thing only in one light, I think is
clear. Far be it from me to say that, if she had
an honest suspicion or disbelief of the identity of
the Claimant, she would have acted dishonestly
for.the sake of bringing about the success ot his
claim. I do not say it for a moment, nor do I
believe it. No such position was taken on the
part of the prosecution. That she was insane, or
insane to the extent of having a monomaniacal
delusion on the subject of her son, I do not believe.
But she had come to have what the old Abbe
called ‘ a fixed idea ’ —une tete malade ; and al-
though I think her opinion is entitled on this
point to the most careful and respectful considera-
i~ 0 S ‘^ y B^e was placed in circumstances in
which her judgment may bo as much onen to cri-
ticism as the judgment of anybody else.' She had
staked the happiness of her life upon this one hope.
But it was more than that. It was not that there
was merely the yearning of maternal love; there
was more—there was the vanity of the woman
nnxed up with the hope of seeing her son. She
had been looked upon as half crazy by people who
could not take the same view. She had been re-
proved by her husband for talking about her son
as if he were still alive. She hail been laughed at
by other people for entertaining a belief so utterly
irrational under all the circumstances of the case.
But now, if he came back, there would be not only
the mother’s joy at his restoration to her' font
maternal embrace, but there would be the trium 1
she would have when she could say, ‘ Here is tle
crazy woman you all talked about. She was rig
after all, and you were wrong. Here he is, ant
with triumphant exaltation I take him by the hanc.
and bring him back as heir to the titles and estate
But imagine her feelings if, after entertaining tl s
hope, it turned out after all to be nothing mo - e
than. a wicked and iniquitous imposture. The di i-
appointment and despair would be as deep as tile
joy of the mother if it turned out to be her lon j-
lost son. . Therefore Lady Tichborne was not in
position in which, unless other circumstances
to show that her judgment was right, that judg-
ment ought to be received as above question. ! ;
ought, I admit, to be received with respect as the
opinipQ of a mother, but not without the vigilan;
criticism which you ought to apply to the jud
ment of anybody else who would say that tie
defendant was the real Roger Tichborne. Yo
know all the circumstances of his story fro
beginning to end, whereas many of those wl o
came forward to support the case of the defendan
knew nothing of the difficulties by which it :.s
surrounded.
Well, when the arrival of the defendant wa
expected, Lady Tichborne writes to Mr. Bowke
to say that she had beard that her son was coming
by the Celia, and asking him to make inquiries o
the subject. On the 27th of December he replie
that he had ascertained from the captain that he •
son had gone to an hotel, and that he had left
note for him there. That note, having been sen ;
to Forde’s Hotel, probably reached the defendant,
but he takes no notice of it. Mr. Bowker calls a
the hotel on the 29th, and sees young Butts, th
defendant’s secretary, and was told by him tha;
Sir Roger Tichborne was going to Paris. But tha;
was untrue, for at that time he certainly had n
idea of going to Paris. Mr. Bowker writes t
Lady Tichborne that he had not seen her son, bu ;
that he was informed he had gone over to Paris
and that he would go over himself. He accord
ingly leaves by the mail train on the 30th o;
December, and arrives in Paris on the 31st, am
there ho waits for three days, during which’’timo
Roger Tichborne was most anxiously expected
but he did not come, nor were there any tidings
of him. Mr. Bowker, in the meantime was intro-
duced to the Abb6 Salis, whom Lady Tichborne
asked to swear to her son. To this the Abbe re-
plied that he would do so if he recognised him
but not otherwise. On the 3rd of January Mr
Bowker left Paris, and Lady Tichborne arrange tl
with him that he should return when her son
arrived. On his arrival in London, Mr. Bowker
writes to Lady Tichborne that her son and Bogle
had gone down to Alresford, and that Bogle denied
he was there. Mr. Bowker writes on the Bth that
Mr. Gosford, hearing that the defendant was at
Gravesend, went down with some other gentlemen
to see him, and the defendant met him on tho
stair, but would not speak to him, but went and
shut himself up in his room, and he added that
Mr. Gosford did not believe the man to be her son.
Lady Tichborne was exceedingly angry with Mr,
Gosford.
Mr. Bowker went over to Paris at the instance
of Lady Tichborne, and while conversing with her
two letters were brought in, one from the de-
fendant announcing his intended arrival that day.
* X


When she had got those letters she turned to Mr.
Bowker, who had gone to Paris by her express
invitation, and said to him that her son was
coming with his own solicitors, and that she
would not like to introduce him to her son. Mr.
Bowker understood her, and said, ‘I suppose,
Lady Tichborne, you do not further require my
services ? ’ and she said that was so. Thus you see,
gentlemen, the solicitor whom she had herself
employed, and whose assistance would have been
most valuable to her, she discarded at the very
moment when his services would have been most
useful. I cannot help thinking that she was glad
to get rid of anybody who might exercise an inde-
pendent judgment in the matter, and stand be-
tween her and her most cherished hopes.
When the defendant makes up his mind some-
what tardily to go over to Palis to see his mother
he requests the company of Mr. Leet, a friend
whom he had casually picked up, and of Mr.
Holmes, his attorney. They arrived in the Rue
St. Honore late in the evening. The defendant
does not go to see his mother that night because
he was tired with the fatigue of the journey.
One would naturally suppose, however, that the
first thing he would do in the morning would
be to hasten to the anxious mother who was
longing to behold her son. She sends her servant,
a man named Coyne, to the hotel t 6 fetch her
son, and there he sees Mr. Leet, who calls out
Mr. Holmes. Then Mr. Holmes goes into the
defendant’s room, and brings out word that the
defendant was not well, that he had been sea-
sick, and had not yet recovered. Coyne takes
back the message, and he shall tell you in his
own words what ensued. He was asked:—
‘Do you see the defendant ?—Yes. Do you
remember his coming over to Paris ?—Yes. Do
you remember being sent to see him ?—Yes. Who
sent you ?—Lady Tichborne. She told me ho and
Mr. Holmes and Mr. Leet had arrived there the
previous night, and that I was to go and fetch
them. I went to the hotel, and the French porter
pointed out to me where they were, and I knocked
and Mr. Leet was the first man I saw there. Did
you deliver Lady Tichbome’s message?—Yes; I
said I was come from the Dowager Lady Tich-
borne for Sir Roger. He asked me if I’d know
him if I saw him. I said no, I never saw him
before. He said he’d go and see Mi - . Holmes, and
he went; and as he opened the door Mr. Holmes
was just getting out of bed. Mr. Holmes told mo
they all said in England he was not the right
man, and he had a hard job to get him away, as
he was watched by detectives. He then went into
the room where the Claimant slept and came out
with the answer that he was sea-sick and was not
well, and I went back with the message to Lady
Tichborne, who told me to go back and demand to
see him. I did so, and Mr. Holmes went into
the bedroom again, and the Claimant came out
into the dining-room with his head down and sat
down; and he “ teared ” (sic) a little, and I said I
was glad he had come home, and all that sort of
thing, and he thanked me, and told me to go back
and tell his mamma he was not able to go and
see her.
‘ I went back to Lady .Tichborne, who told me
to take a cab and bring him, or to ask them to
come to see her, and to get a decided answer. I
went back and found all three of them eating
their breakfact, and when they finished the
Claimant went into the dining-room, and Holmes
and Leet came out and locked the Claimant in-
side, and then Holmes and Leet went with me to
the Place de la Madeleine, where Lady Tich-
borne was, and I showed them in. They closed
the parlour door slowly behind them, but I was
close to the door, and I heard Lady Tichborne
say,“ Do you think he will get the property?” and
one of them answered, “As sure as you are sit-
ting in that chair.” They went away, and in the
afternoon I went with her to the hotel, and
showed her up to the room where the Claimant
was. I went in myself, and saw the Claimant.
Lady Tichborne walked in first, and I and Mr.
Holmes walked in afterwards. He was lying on,
the bed with his clothes on. He was lying with
his face towards the wall. She stood over him
and kissed him, and he stopped so, with his face
to the wall. She said, “He looks like his father,,
and his ears look like his uncle’s.” As
soon as she said that she turned round
and told me to take his clothes off, as
he was nearly stifled. I managed to turn him
over and took his coat off. He told me to put
some coals on the fire. Mr. Holmes said, “ You
witness that; you hear how she has identified
him ?” and I said, “So do you.” Did he say any-
thing ?—No. Did he remain lying on the bed ?'
—Yes.’
Coyne’s Irish brogue was so rich and his manner
was so odd that it was difficult to preserve one’s-
gravity, especially as to all this was added the ex-
ceedingly ludicrous character of the scene he de-
scribed. It is exceedingly unfortunate that at
this critical juncture, as on other important oc-
casions, the defendant is ill just when it is most
desirable that he should be well. At all events,,
this is a strange meeting of a mother and her son
under the peculiar circumstances in which they
were placed. You would suppose that, if there
remained in him one spark of filial feeling or one
particle of energy or power to move, the presence
of the mother he had not seen for so many years
would have given him strength sufficient to enable
him to rise and throw himself into her arms. On
the contx-ary, we know that he breakfasted, went
to lie down on his bed with his face turned to the
wall, making no sign of emotion when his mother
came to embrace him, and saying nothing at all.
The whole thing sounds like one of the drollest
stories of Smollett or Paul de Kock. A son meets
a mother after so many years’ absence and goes to-
bed with his clothes on; and the only observation
made by the mother is, ‘ Ah! his face is like his
father’s and his ears are like his uncle’s.’ It was-
certainly a strange sort of meeting, and the more
so as it was all in the presence of the Irish servant,
of Mr. Holmes, and of Mr. Leet. It is only right
that you should have also placed before you the de-
fendant’s account of the interview. He is asked:—
‘ Did you see your mother the same night you
arrived or not ?—Not the same night ? How
came that to pass ?—lt was late. When did you
see her ?—The next morning. Did you go to see
her or did she go to see you ?—She came to see
me. How was that ?—I was unwell. About what
time of the day was it that she saw you ?—I have
no idea what hour. What was the matter with
you ? Were you veiy unwell, or what ?—I was
very unwell indeed. Just tell me, so far as you
can remember, what passed when your mother
came; did she l'ccognize you at once or not ? The-
Lord Chief Justice.—Describe the scene as nearly
as you can, if you will be kind enough, clearly,
distinctly, and slowly.—l do not know that lam
really able to do that, my lord. Do you mean
you do not know that you are able to describe
what occurred ? Not when my mother first en-


tcred the room. Tell ns in your own way yonr
account of what occurred at that interview.—My
mother was standing alongside the bed when I
was laying on it. I was laying on the bed and my
mother was standing alongside of it. Mr. Giffard.
—As nearly as you remember tell us what hap-
pened.—l am not aware that anything happened.
I was attended by medical men. Well, did you
speak to her, or did she speak to you ?—I could
not say who spoke first. We did speak. We con-
versed for a long while. I remember that. Can
you tell me whether she recognized you at once or
after a time, or what ? I cannot say. I do not
wish to answer a question that I do not know of.
There were others in the room who will be able
to give a better account than me. Who else was
in the room ?—Mr. Holmes was in the room, and
Mr. Leet. I am not sure if Dr. Shrimpton was
there or not. I know that Sir Joseph Oliffe was
sent for afterwards, and I believe Dr. Shrimpton
was present at the time. Were either you or
your mother affected at the interview ?—Yes; I
believe we were both. Were you engaged in con-
versation with her for some time ?—Yes. Did
she in words express a doubt about your being
her son ?—Ob, not the slightest. How long did
that interview last ?—Till late in the evening, I
think. Were the gentlemen you mention present
during the whole of the interview, or only during
the first part ?—They were there during the day.
They were in her company during the day, but
whether they went out a little while ?—I suppose
they did, but I do not remember it distinctly.’
That does not much differ from the account
given by Coyne, but if Coyne’s account were in-
correct there were other persons present who
might have been called to contradict him. There
were good reasons why they did not call Holmes,
but they might have called Mr. Leet. What reason
did the defendant give for taking the attorney
and Mr. Leet was a question naturally put to the
defendant, and he replied, ‘ To protect himbut
it is difficult to know from whom he required pro-
tection in Paris. There were in Paris persons
quite competent to form a judgment whether he
was Roger or not. There were still alive M.
Chatillon, the Abbe Salis, M. d’Aranza, M de
Brimont, and Pere Lefevre.
The only person allowed to see him was M.
Chatillon, and he says that Lady Tichborne came
to him and said that she wanted him to come
at once and recognize her son, who had just come
back. She would not wait for him to take his
dejeuner, but carried him off at once. When he
got to the hotel he took the very sensible pre-
caution of suggesting to her not to mention his
name, but the moment they reached the apart-
ment where the defendant was she said, ‘ Sir
Roger, M. Chatillon.’ He on the first impulse
of the moment said, ‘ My dear Roger, I am very
happy to see you after your long absence,’ but after
looking at him he stepped back three paces, and
said, ‘My lady, this is not your son.’ She said,
‘ You do not embrace Roger.’ ‘ No, my lady, it
is not him.’ He says, ‘ There were there the law-
yer, Mr. Holmes, and the interpreter. She told
me he did not speak French any longer. I re-
peated, “It is not Roger.” ’ Then he had some
breakfast, and afterwards put questions to the de-
fendant in French through the interpreter. He
asked, ‘ With whom did you breakfast and dine
the last day you were ait Paris ?’ We know, if the
evidence is to be relied on, that he breakfasted
with M. Chatillon and dined at his father’s house.
The defendant said he did not know. Then M.
Chatillon asked, what chain he had on when
leaving, and he said, ‘lt was gold.’ We know he
took a silver chain with him. He also said he did
not remember the trips to Normandy and Britanny.
Lady Tichborne said, ‘ Chatillon, yon must not
ask him any more. He has seen so many things
that he no longer remembers anything.’ That is
the convenient view she adopted. ‘ All this time,’
says M. Chatillon, ‘ he had his head hidden in his
pocket-handkerchief. He was hiding his face in
order that I might not see him. After that ho
got up and left the room, and I saw him no more.’
This was on the Monday. It was arranged that
M. Chatillon should lunch with them again on the
Thursday, but the meeting was put off. He called
a second time at the hotel, but Mr. Holmes said
the defendant was ill, and could not be seen, and
M. Chatillon had notan opportunity of anothor in-
terview. In cross-examination the witness says:—
‘He said, “ I should have recognized you any-
where,” but it was after my name was told him.’
‘ Do you remember Lady Tichborne saying, “Do
you recognize him —‘ She asked me, and I said,
“ No, it is not your son.” ’ ‘ Did not you say, “ I
must search, I must recollect, I must think ” T ‘ I
said, “ From now to Thursday I might pershaps
remember something.” ’ * Did Lady Tichborne
then say, “ Surely you can say whether you recog-
nize my son or not ” ? ’ —‘ No she did not.’
Then he is asked about an important matter.
You know that when they went to Pornic, Roger,
after bathing in the sea, had a fall, which seriously
hurt him at the time. In this conversation the de-
fendant said he did not remember the trip to Pornic.
M. Chatillon expressed surprise, mentioned the
fall and the effect it produced, representing it as
causing a sort of indentation in the head, and
describing it by squeezing his hat together and
making a sort of vacant space like the mark madt
in Roger’s head. M. Chatillon says the effect of
the accident was to cause, not a cut, but simply
an impression on the substance of the head, and
that afterwards, when the effects of the blow had
ceased, this appearance ceased also. But when
Chatillon spoke of this blow the defendant said
he had a scar at the back of his head. They
searched for the scar then and there, but could
not find it; but the defendant subsequently said
it was found the next day by a hairdresser. How
that scar was produced is another important
question. The defendant gives a wholly different
account of the interview with M. Chatillon. At
the end of his cross-examination, however, he
admits that he knew Chatillon was sent for, and
he does not deny that he was announced to him
by name. In the course of the cross-examination
the defendant gets into a wrangle with the Soli-
citor-General, the defendant alleging that the
Solicitor-General was endeavouring to get him to
perjure himself. Mr. Sergeant Ballantine for
once seems to have been ashamed of his client,
and begs him to confine himself to answering
questions, though the defendant declines to follow
his counsel’s advice.
Then there was M. do Brimont, who lived in
the Place de la Madeleine, and who was a con-
nexion of the family. He asked to see the photo-
graph ef the defendant, but Lady Tichborne said
her son was much altered, and would not show it.
She wished that M. de Brimont should testify to
the identity of the defendant with Roger, but h :
declined to do so until he had satisfied himself on
the point. Thereupon she said ho had no right
to investigate the matter in the way he desired,
and she asked him if he wished to please her to
Tf Q


speak to the identity of the defendant with Roger
Tichborne. The Abbe Salis was asked to go and
see Roger at his hotel, but he declined to do so,
as he felt sure he was not Roger Tichborne, be-
cause if he were, he felt sure he would have come
to see him without delay. Besides the Abbe had
heard the opinion of M. Chatillon. He also says
that Lady Tichborne held out to him the prospect
of reward if he would come and acknowledge her
son. The learned counsel goes the length of
terming the Abbe an ‘ infamous priest,’ although
he certainly looked like one of those Frenchmen
of the old school whom we are all inclined more
or less to respect. Why should the learned coun-
sel call him infamous, and employ the word in
connexion with his calling ? The fact that a man
professes a religion different from our own is no
reason why he should be abused, and I do not
know why the Abbe Salis should be styled ‘ an
infamous priest ’ by the learned counsel merely
because the defendant did not like his evidence.
I cannot but regret that opprobrious and offensive
terms should have been thus recklessly bandied
about. Such language does not tend to the eluci-
dation of the truth nor to the proper administra-
tion of justice ; neither is it consistent with that
delicacy of feeling that characterizes the English
Bar, and which I have never seen so thoroughly
disregarded as it has been in this caset I under-
stood the meaning of the Abbe to be that, as he
had long been the means of distributing the
charity of Lady Tichborne, if he could gratify
Iher in this respect she would entrust him with
resh pecuniary assistance to bestow that aid, the
bestowal of which was agreeable to them both.
Now, one of the difficulties which stood in the
«vay of Lady Tichborne being satisfied that the
Claimant was her son was the reference which he
had made or the message which he had sent to his
supposed grandfather. In her letter she says,
‘Roger never knew his grandfather because his
grandfather was dead before I was married to his
father.’ Well, one wants some explanation of this,
and accordingly he was asked about it in his
cross-examination, and he swears that his mother
was mistaken. He says, * I knew Mr. Seymour at
Knoyle very well, and if he was my mother’s
father he must have been my grandfather.’ Then
the Attorney-General for a long time pressed the
defendant as to whether he had sent a message to
his grandfather, without, however, obtaining any
result except a protest that he was endeavouring
to bewilder him, upon which the Lord Chief
Justice, instead of rebuking him, simply said,
‘ Attend to the question, and endeavour to answer
it.’ Ultimately he is asked this important ques-
tion, which bears not only upon the question, but
also upon the identity of Roger Tichborne. We
know very well that Roger Tichborne never did
speak of Mr. Seymour as his grandfather. He was
asked, ‘ Do you mean to say on your oath that your
relationship with Mr. Seymour was so recognized
that you called him your grandfather ?’ and he
answered, ‘ Most undoubtedly I did. In speaking
to him I don’t think I ever addressed him as my
grandfather, but in speaking of him to any one I
think I did.’ Then he is asked, ‘ Don’t you know
perfectly well that the relationship between your
mother and the Seymours was carefully sup-
presssd ?’ and the defendant said, ‘ You are wish-
ing to expose it to the public court.’
It is quite clear, however, that the defendant
himself introduced the question of Mr. Seymour
being his grandfather. The Solicitor-General
entered upon the cross-examination under the
supposition that he must mean the paternal
grandfather. That is what Lady Tichborne
thought, because she knew perfectly well that the
relationship between the grandfather and grand-
son was never recognised. We have the evidence
of the Seymour family, who all agree upon that;
and we have the correspondence in which the
Seymours are referred to again and again; and
what is more striking still is that Roger, in his
own letter to his mother, does not speak of Mr.
Seymour as her father or his grandfather, but uni-
formly as Mr. Seymour.
A Juror.—Did not Mr. Seymour die in 1849?
The Lord Chief Justice. —He died on the 27th
of November, 1848.
A Juror.—And was the message supposed to be
sent to a person who was dead ?
The Lord Chief Justice.— Oh, yes, there is
that further difficulty as to the message. The
Solicitor-General endeavoured to elicit the fact
that the message was addressed directly to the
grandfather, and that it was not a message which
merely referred to him. Of course, as Mr. Sey-
mour had died in 1848, it could not have really
been addressed directly to him. Having returned
to Paris, which he did before the end of January,
the defendant, at that time having taken a house
at Croydon, begins a correspondence which is of
considerable importance in this case. Here is a
letter to which I must beg to call your careful at-
tention. There is no date, but there is no doubt
it was written immediately after his return from
Paris:—
‘ 3, Sydenham-road, Croydon.
‘ Dear Rouse, —I only received your letter last
night, as it was 9 o’clock last night before we re-
turned from Paris. I have been very ill for several
days in Paris, and could not come here. I have
seen all those anonymous paragraphs in the papers,
but have thought them below my notice, as I
know the public will soon be convinced of the
truth. You know I expected to find in Gosford a
friend, but when I arrived in London from your
place I found that, instead of the people in Rio
proving my death, it was no other than Gosford
and Slaughter, who proved that I was dead, and
died on the 26th of April, 1854, and by so doing
have deprived my father and mother out of any of
the Doughty estate. They have been doing a very
nice thing, but, however, I have taken such pro-
ceedings against them and others that some of
them will be astonished by and by. I shall be
compelled to eject all tenants at Tichborne unless
they promise to pay their rent to me. Mama will
be here on Sunday. She is going to stay with me
till this business is over. There are a great many
people against me. They even employed a solicitor
in Paris to watch my movements. I believe Moore
is in Scotland. When he came home from Valpa-
raiso he told Mama I owed him 507.1 got paid, but I
shall have the pleasure of letting him know what
I owed him. I have been proceeding very slowly,
but very surely. Hoping you and your family are
well, I remain yours sincerely,
* R. C. Tichborne, Bart.’
Observe the phrase, ‘ by so doing they have de-
prived my father and mother out of any of the
Doughty estates.’ Why, more prodigious non-
sense was never penned by mortal man. The
interest of his father in the Doughty estate was
wholly independent of Roger Tichborne and of
Roger Tichbome’s will. The estate Sir James
took in the Doughty property was unalterably
fixed by the settlement of 1852, under which he
took an estate in remainder on the decease of Sir


Edward Doughty, on whose death he became pos-
sessed of an estate for life. While that life lasted
the son could do nothing with the property ex-
cept dispose of his reversionary interest in i
Ihe defendant says in the letter I have just reac
to you,— ‘ There are a great many people agains
me. They even employed a solicitor in Paris
watch my movements.’ Now, the only solicit
he_ could mean was Mr. Bowker, and certain
this was a most unworthy assertion as regarc
Mr. Bowker, who went to Paris, not in order
watch the Claimant, but as the established so
citor of Lady Tichborne, and at her express d
sire. Indeed, Mr. Bowker did not stay in Pan
for when he found Lady Tichborne did not wan
him any more away he went. The letter
signed, ‘ It. C. Tichborne, Bart.’ Observation ha
been made upon that, because no man would sif
his name in that way any more than a peer wou
put after his surname duke, marquis, earl, or vi
count. At the same time that must not
pressed too strongly, because a man who wen
away from England early in life, and had spen
ten or twelve years in the woods of Australi
might not know what was the custom in th
country. In this remarkable letter of twenty lines
there are no less than fifteen small ‘ i’s,’ five o
them at the beginning of sentences. Only, yov
must not attach great importance to that, whic
in an Englishman would bear the character of
total want of education, because the French d
wiite the nominative case of the first persona
pronoun with a small letter, though not at th
beginning of sentences. But Roger Tichborn
never wrote ‘i ’ in the letters we have seen, anc
i er .]^° re ’ * s a romal 'kable circumstance tha
the defendant should write the pronoun with i
small letter to this extent. There are only tw
huge Is’ in the whole of the letter, and ther
aie seven misspellings, four mistakes of grammai
and six small initials where there should bt
capitals.
He went back after this letter to Alresford
and became acquainted with Mr. Baigent, a mai
well acquainted with the history of the family
Mr. Baigent advised him not to keep aloof from
his family, and that is the natural course whicl
a man might be expected to follow. It must
have struck you as strange that after he had been
o 1 ans and seen his mother he did not write to
his aunt, Lady Doughty, and to Mr. Gosford, his
confidential friend. It was clear there was no
longei any necessity for concealment.
e suggestion made by the learned counsel foi
e defendant is that the persons to whom he
would naturally have resorted were leagued and
combined together against him, and from the
‘ be controversy a most unjust and un-
y attempt has been made to represent all
those. persons as engaged in a vast and wicked
conspn acy to represent him as an impostor seek-
in t° establish a false claim, whereas thev knew
all the while that he was the true man. Now let
us consider the character of the parties against
whom this charge has been preferred. The coun-
sel for the defendant spoke of the Tichborne
family as if it consisted of persons who, in
possession of these estates, were endeavouring to
keep them from the man who they knew was
the rightful owner. I reminded the learned coun-
sel that the assumption was wholly unfounded •
that the only persons in possession of the estates’
were the trustees for the infant son of Sir Alfred
Tichborne ; that the other members of the family
were not in possession, and that, therefore, it was
unjust to bring such a charge against the
When I first made those remarks, the learner
counsel for the defendant appeared to yield, anc
yet in his second speech he used the very sam
language and resorted to the very same misrepi
sentation. Still they may have had an interest
the estates that possibly may have had the effee
of inducing them to refuse to acknowledge a m
whom they otherwise might have acknowledger
As regards the Seymour family, however, it is
possible to make any such suggestion, because the;
had no interest under either the settlements o
Roger Tichborne’s will. No state circumstauc
which could possibly arise would in any way affec
their position.
‘Ah, but,’says the learned counsel, ‘ nevertli
less there was a sinister motive no doubt oper
ting in their minds.’ It certainly baffled nr
ingenuity to know what it could be. ‘Oh,’say
he, ‘ Roger Tichborne made a will by which 1
disposed of his reversionary interest in th
Doughty estates, and omitted to put any of tl
Seymours in for any of the remainders. This tli
gusted them with Roger and made them capabl
when he came back, of the inconceivable baseness
of leaguing themselves against him, although the;
knew him to be the right man.’ That imputatio
is deliberately cast upon two gentlemen whos
honour and character have stood to the presen
moment unimpeached, and upon two ladies—Mr
Bouverie and Lady Rawlinson —whose conduc
and character are above all reproach. You, gen
tlemen, must not allow the defendant to be pre
judiced by representations of this kind, which
believe arose out of the disposition of his counse
to see everything in the blackest and darkcs
light, and to impute corrupt and wicked motive
to persons whose character ought to have pro
tected them against such unworthy and abomin
able imputations.
A Juror.—lt often occurred to me, my lon
that the abuse was measured by the importance o
the witnesses.
The Loud Chief Justice.—l do not wish t
stand between Mr. Kenealy and that observation
which seems to be a just one. I can only hope
that the example set by the learned counsel wil
not be followed by the Bar of England. As the
matter at present stands, if the defendant be no*
Roger Tichborne the estates would go to the son
of Sir Alfred Tichborne; but supposing that Sir
Alfred’s son should not grow up to manhood, or
should not marry and leave issue, the estates
would then go to James Dormer, the cousin. 1
do not know whether he has any children or not.
Mr. Chapman Bahbeb.—He has barred the
entail, my lord.
The Loud Chief Justice.—Then what I was
about to say will have no effect at all. By the
settlement of 1854 the ultimate remainder was to
the heir of the settlor, and in that case the
daughters of Sir Henry Tichborne would be co-
heiresses and would take their share of the
estate.
Mr. Chapman Barbeh.—Sir Henry Tichborne
devised it to Lady Tichborne for life and to Mr.
Dormer in tail. They have barred the entail.
The Loud Chief Justice.—ln that case they
are in just the same position as the Seymours,
hrom what motive, then, are we to suppose that
they have entered into a vile and detestable con-
spiracy, the purposes of which are to be carried
out by deliberate perjury ? These persons are
not the scum of the earth, but persons whose
characters have hitherto stood without reproach.


Nevertheless, you are told that these people are
waging an iniquitous warfare against the defend-
ant for the purpose of keeping him out of the
estates to which they know him to be entitled.
It is really painful to find accusations thus scat-
tered broadcast against persons of irreproachable
character. There was nothing to warrant such
imputations, and the counsel for the defendant
did not wait to inquire whether there was any
foundation for them. If he had applied to Mr.
Chapman Barber, who knows the title to these
estates, he would have learnt that there was no
ground for statements about collaterals being in
possession and fighting against the defendant. If
the learned counsel had taken the trouble to in-
quire into the facts, I imagine that even he, who
deals in wholesale accusations, would have hesi-
tated to make so frightful a charge.
In the neighbourhood of Tichborne there lived
Colonel Greenwood and his wife, who was Roger
Tichbome’s first cousin. Mr. Baigent pressed the
defendant to go to their residence at Brookwood,
but instead of doing so he sent the following
letter, which has acquired great fame as the
Cousing Kate letter’:—
‘ Alresford, 3 d Feby 1867.
‘My dear cousing Kate, —I am very sorry iam
not able to come and see you before i go. my
head is so bad that iam not fit to come. Mr.
Baijent is very much annoyed about it. but i
am coming here to spend a fue day at the end of
the week and i shall then have the pleasure of
meeting you again, you will excuse me for not
coming, has it will only be a fue day before I am
with you. I have an invitation from Mr. Hopkins
to spend a fue day (sic) with him so i shall be
down about Thursday, give my regard to Cousing
Willian and G I shall soon be down again and
have the pleasure of a hunt with my old friend
George.
‘ With my best regards my dear cousin to you
and your family
‘ I remain your affectionate
(sic) cousin R. C. Tichbobne.
‘ I have to meet Mamma to morrow at dover
and our address will be Essex lodge thornton
heath Graydon (Croydon).’
It so happens that the last letter Roger Tich-
borne ever wrote before leaving England was aiso
addressed to Mrs. Greenwood, and it is fair that
the two letters should be placed in juxtaposition
for the purpose of comparison. On the 6th of
December, 1852, Roger Tichborne wrote as
follows:
‘ Upton-liouse,
‘ Poole,
‘ My dear Cousin, ‘ Dorset.
* I shall not, I am sorry to say, be able to go
and spend a day or two at Brookwood, as you had
the kindness to invite me the last time had tbe
pleasure of seeing you. I shall be obliged to go
to Paris at the beginning of next week, where I
shall remain, in all probability, till about a week
or ten days before I embark for South America.
‘My time is in consequence so much taken up
with one thing or other that it will be, I regret
to say, impossible for me to leave Upton this
week.
‘ I should feel much obliged if, when you have
a moment to spare, you favoured me with a letter.
Though I shall be far away, it will always give
me much pleasure during my wanderings in South
America to hear from you or Colonel Greenwood.
‘ I certainly will answer your letters (though
you must excuse my bad handwriting) and give
you an account, if you feel any interest in it, what
kind of sport I get at the top of the Andes and in
the middle of the forest of South America.
‘Pray remember me very kindly to Colonel
Greenwood and
‘ Believe me, my dear Cousin,
‘ Your affectionate Cousin,
‘ 6 December, 1852.’ ‘ R. C. Tichbobne.
It is for you, gentlemen, to judge whether
these two letters could have been written by the
same hand.
And now comes this letter addressed by the
defendant to Mr. Danby Seymour:—
‘ Alfresod 10 Feb 1867 _
‘ My dear Uncle, —You will excuse me notcomi-
cating with you before. I have been so shamefully
treated since I have arrived in England that I did
not whose where my frinds. I am staying with
my old frinds Mr. Hopkins for a fue day and if
you could come down I would so much like to see
you. I am very glad to hear you are a member
for Poole. I suppose you remember the time they
wanted me to stand for it. Hoping my dear
Uncle to see you before long and renew that old
friendship that once existed between us again,
‘ I remain your Affectionate Nephew,
‘ R. C. D. Tichbobne.
‘ I expect Mamma to arrive every day (turn
over) Mamma is going to with and my wife at
Essex Lodge.
‘ Thornton heath
‘ Croydon
‘Nr London.’
Mr. Danby Seymour says he never heard of
Roger Tichborne being asked to stand for Poole,
and, indeed, it is hardly possible he could have
been. There were already two Liberal candidates,
and to ask him to come forward as a third Liberal
candidate would have been to ask him to weaken
his uncle’s chance of success, and to frustrate the
very object for which, as we know, he went down
to Poole. The defendant gives a very curious ex-
planation of the matter. He says he was asked to
come forward not at the general election, but at
some intermediate election, and he adds that he
declines to do so on the ground of his intending to
go abroad. It is an undoubted fact that there
were only two elections for Poole —namely, in 1850
and in 1852—during the time when Roger arrived
at man’s estate. It is true that one witness said
he remembered some persons going out at his sug-
gestion to see Roger Tichborne, and he would give
us to understand that the purpose of the expedi-
tion to Upton was to induce him to come forward
as a candidate. It is difficult, however, to recon-
cile this statement with the fact of Roger having
gone to Poole in order to assist Mr. Danby Sey-
mour. fhe letter which I have just read led to
the defendant having an interview with Mr. Sey-
mour, the circumstances of which we will consider
to-morrow.
Tenth Day. Thursday, February 12, 1874.
Gentlemen, I had finished yesterday the obser-
vations I had to make on the subject of tbe letter
which was addressed by the defendant to Mr.
Danby Seymour upon bis return from Paris. The
effect of that letter was that Mr. Danby Seymour
determined to go down to Aires ford and call at
Mr. Hopkins’s to see the defendant. Now, you
remember that on the occasion of his first visit to
Alresford the defendant did not call upon or put
himself into communication with Mr. Hopkins,


but preparatory to his second visit he writes him
a letter, one passage in which has been made the
subject of so much comment by the learned
counsel for the defendant. The letter runs
thus:—
‘ 1 st February, 1867.
‘ My dear friend,—You will, no doubt, think it
strange that 1 did not call on you when at Aires-
ford. I should have done so with pleasure had I
not been under a promise to mama not to converse
with anybody I know until I had seen her. I now
know her reasons, and am very glad I keeped my
promise. I suppose you have heard how I have
been served by Gosforth and others since I have
been away. I should not have gone to Allresford,
only I thought nobody would know me, has I have
grown so stout, so I thought I would have a quite
look round. I know you and Dr. Lipscombe are
old friends, so perhaps you will kindly tell him
'the reason I did not call on him. Likewise if
mama does not send for me to meet her, most
likely I will come down with Mr. Holmes to-
morrow. Hoping, my dear Hopkins, that old
friendship that once existed between us may
again be renewed, and I may again have the
pleasure of having your advice how to act.’
Now, upon that I cannot help saying that when
I look at Roger Tichborne’s letters I find, not
only that he never resorted to Mr. Hopkins for
advice, but when he heard that Mr. Hopkins
upon one occasion said he was acting as his ad-
viser, he makes the observation that it was the
first time that he was aware that Mr. Hopkins
was his adviser; and you remember Lady
Doughty, in writing to Roger, said, ‘I know
your affection for the firm of Dunn and Hopkins,’
meaning, of course, the reverse. Then comes
this passage:—
.‘I suppose you remember having heard of a
Miss Bellew in Ireland. Rumour only. Hoping
to have the pleasure of meeting you before long, I
remain, yours, faithfully,
‘R. C. D. Tichiiorne.’
There are, I observe, 14 printed lines, in which
there are two large < IV and 16 small ‘i’s.’ Now,
that allusion to Miss Bellew is supposed to have
been put forward as a sort of proof. It is said there
might have been something that happened with
repect to this Miss Bellew of which Mr. Hopkins
was cognizant. It is natural to ask what that
was. Lord Bellew was asked if anything had
happened between Roger Tichborne and either of
Ins sisters. We know nothing of the sort. Nor
is there any trace of it in Roger Tichbome’s
letters. All that he says is that when at Dublin he
used to go over to spend a day, or not more than
one, or at the outside two days at a time, at the
seat of the late Lord Bellew. It was intimated
that some reference might be intended to a
matrimonial arrangement between Roger Tich-
borne and Miss Bellew. Lord Bellew laughed at
the idea of anything having occurred which was
likely to end in a marriage. The defendant’s
counsel, who put this forward as an explicable
mystery, seems to have forgotten what we cannot
forget, that the man supposed to be a party to all
this, and who actually wrote the passage, was sit-
ting in front of him, and why did he not put the
question to him, instead of to Lord Bellew ? But
the defendant’s counsel, instead of doing this,
leaves the matter in this mysterious way. He
says he does not know what it was and Lord
Bellhw will not tell him.
We do not know at the present day what the
■circumstances were that induced Mr. Hopkins to
take up the case of the defendant with the warmth
which he certainly did. I don’t know whether it
was that he believed in the identity of the defen-
dant—l mean judging the defendant from his
personal appearance. But if not he must have
taken a favourable view of the case, from the
knowledge which the defendant manifested, I
suppose, with reference to the circumstances of
the family, and, above all, of the property. We
do know that the defendant and Mr. Holmes paid
a visit to Doctors’-commons to see Roger Tich-
borne’s will, and I think there cannot be very
much doubt that Holmes—who knew very well
what he was about—took care to have a copy of
the will, which he could have on paying for it.
Then again, Rous, with whom at this time the
defendant was in close association, knew every-
thing connected with the family settlements, and
I dare say that at that time the defendant knew
a great deal about the affairs of the family and
about the settlements. These circumstances and
this show of knowledge would be calculated to
make a deep impression upon Mr. Hopkins. But
if the defendant at the time had shown the la-
mentable ignorance which he subsequently showed
in his cross-examination in the Court of Common
Pleas, and Mr. Hopkins had been cognisant of it,
and still continued to believe in the defendant,
you would have had to ask yourselves whether,under
such circumstances, his opinion would have been
worth much. For certainly, at the time of the
trial, the defendant made some of the most ter-
rible hashes that it is possible to conceive. It may
be that the defendant, if he be Roger Tichborne,
had forgotten all he had known about the pro-
perty. It may be, on the other hand, that the
defendant had learnt a lesson as to it in 1867, and
that it had passed out of his memory before the
trial in the Common Pleas. That is entirely for
you. But, however it may be, certain it is that
Mr. Hopkins—and the defendant is entitled to
the full benefit of the fact—took up the cause of
the defendant with zeal, indeed with an amount
of vehemence which struck many persons, and
which went beyond the ordinary course of a legal
adviser, and what strict legal decorum would
allow.
A Juror inquired the date of Mr. Hopkins’s
death.
Mr. Hawkins said it occurred in October, 1868.
The Lokd Chief Justice. —Well, gentlemen,
Mr. Danby Seymour went to Alresford accom-
panied by Mr. Burdon, who had been in the ser-
vice of Mr. Tichborne until after he came to
reside in this country as Sir James Tichborne,
and who knew Roger Tichborne well, having
frequently attended on him and seen him during
his last visit to Paris. They went to the Swan
Hotel, but found that the defendant was not
there. Mr. Seymour, looking out of the window,
saw Mr. Hopkins going down the street with the
defendant, who he did not recognize, and went
after them, along with Burdon. According to
Mr. Seymour’s evidence, Mr. Hopkins, when he
came up to them, said, introducing them, ‘ This is
Sir Roger Tichborne ; Mr. Danby Seymour.’ Now,
this was a strange proceeding on the part of Mr.
Hopkins, and, I can’t help thinking, not altogether
a loyal one, because if the defendant had been
Roger Tichborne he would have known Mr.
Danby Seymour as well as any one could. This
struck Mr. Seymour, but he said nothing what-
ever about it. Then he says they went into Mr.
Hopkins’s house together, and ‘ I said to the
defendant, “ If you are Roger Tichborne you will


know this gentleman,” turning to Burdon. The
defendant looked at him, and after a short time
said, “ That is my uncle Nangle.” If that is what
he said he could not have made a more unfor-
tunate shot, because Mr. Nangle was about 70
years of age, while Burdon was only between 30
and 40. The defendant explains it in this way.
He says, ‘ I did not say my uncle Nangle, but one
of the Nangles.’ I may say that is, I think, the
more probable by reason of the difference in the
ages of the two. Burdon, however, in his evi-
dence, says the same thing as Mr. Seymour. Let
us take, however, the view which the defendant
put forward, and assume that there may have
been some mistake as to what he said, and that
he said ‘ One of the Nangles, or one of the sons
of my uncle Nangle/ Roger Tichborne knew the
Nangles from the time they were boys together in
Paris, and must also have known William Bur -
don, who was in his father’s service so long. The
presumption is altogether favourable to the theory
that Roger should have known this, and could
not have mistaken Burdon for one of his cousins.
Well, Mr. Seymour says he made up his mind to
ask the defendant one or two questions. He first
addressed him in French, and the defendant’s
answer was that he could not speak in French.
He said he had forgotten it. Mr. Seymour was
surprised at that because he had nearly always
talked French with Roger Tichborne. The con-
versation then turned upon the Bella. The de-
fendant was asked how he was saved from ship-
wreck. His reply was that a ship called the
Osprey saved him, the captain’s name being Lewis
Owen or Owen Lewis, and that several sailors
were saved with him. He was asked their names.
He said he did not know their names, as they
generally went by nicknames. It is odd that some
time afterwards, when one of the owners of the
Bella wrote to Mr. Hopkins for the names of the
men who were picked up with the defendant—
he having a relation on board—the defendant
gave Mr. Hopkins four or six names, and a nick-
name, ‘ Yorkie,’ but, according to the evidence, he
could not tell the names of any of the crew who
he said were saved with him.
Mr. Seymour goes on to say he expressed sur-
prise at the fact that the defendant had not come
to see his sisters—the real Roger Tichborne having
been intimate with them. In the course of this
interview a circumstance happened which appears
to me the most important part of it. Burdon,
who, according to the evidence, was in the room
sitting at the table, produced an envelope which
had been addressed to himself, and asked the de-
fendant if he knew the writing. The defendant
looked at the writing for some time, and then
said, ‘ I do not know it.’ Mr. Hopkins looked at
it and exclaimed, ‘ Good God, that is your father’s
handwriting—not know your father’s hand-
writing ?’ The envelope had been addressed to
Burdon by Sir James Tichborne. If that be so,
it is eertainly a strange thing for a man not to
know the handwriting of his own father, with
whom he had frquently been in correspondence.
Mr. Seymour put another question to test the
identity of the defendant. You will remember
that when Roger Tichborne was a boy the old
general, Count Mandevillc, one of his father’s
most intimate friends, made a present of a breast-
pin to Roger, who wore the pin in remembrance
of so kind a friend, and wrote about it from
Stonyhurst. In reference to this Mr. Seymour
says that his answer was he did not remember
any such person.
Mr. Seymour says he made up his mind tha
the defendant was not Roger Tichborne, anc
said: —‘ I cannot recognise you in any way. I saic
so positively, but I spoke politely. I invited him
to come and see my sisters, and I told him they
were willing to recognise him if they could, anc
invited him, through me, to call on them. He saic
he wonld.'and it was arranged that he should cal
the next day at Upper Grosvenor-street.’ Mr
Seymour, on returning to town, wrote to th
Greenwoods and made arrangements with othe
members of the family to be present at the in
terview. The defendant, however, did not keep
his engagement. There is one more incident at this
interview to which I should draw your attention
A helmet was produced which had been worn b;
Koger Tichborne in the Carabineers, and had been
left by him at Tichborne House. Colonel Lushing
ton, who then occupied the family residence at the
time, believing the defendant to be Roger Tich
borne, sent it to Mr. Hopkins. Mr. Seymoui
says : —‘ After we had luncheon, the defendan
went aside to the other room and produced
helmet, which he said was his when in the Carabi
neers. He put it on, but it seemed to be too smal
for him—he could barely get it on.’ When Mr
Seymour was cross-examined about this meeting
he said that he expressed to the defendant as
decidedly as he could that he did not recognise
him as Roger, and that nothing was said which
could be by any possibility construed into a dif-
ferent meaning. And in answer to Mr. Hawkins,
on re-examination, he says decidedly that there
was nothing in his manner or language which
implied that she recognised the defendant.
Then comes the evidence of Burdon, who, you
will remember, was brought up at Upton, sent to
school by Sir Edward Doughty, and in 1845 was
taken into his service. After Sir Edward’s death
he went into the service of Sir James, and he
therefore knew Roger Tichborne well. He says
Mr. Seymour followed Mr. Hopkins in Alresford,
touching him on the shoulder, and said, * Good
morning, Mr. Hopkins.’ Mr. Hopkins said,* Good
morning, Mr. Seymour,’ adding, ‘Sir Roger Charles
Tichborne, Mr. Seymour.’ And then he says,
4 That man’s face,’ pointing to the defendant,
4 turned as red as the sun.’ He held out his hand,
and Mr. Seymour said, 4 1 cannot recognise you as
Sir Roger Charles Tichborne.’ When they got to
Mr. Hopkins’s house Mr. Seymour said to the de-
fendant, 4 You know this gentleman ?’ The defen-
dant made answer, 4 1 don’t know him. I think
he is my uncle Nangle.’ The witness bears out Mr.
Seymour’s statement in that respect. Then Mr.
Seymour asked him several questions about the
shipwreck, and defendant said he had been lost
in the Bella, was picked up by the Osprey, and
taken to Melbourne, and had knocked about in
different parts of the country. Mr. Seymour
spoke to him in French, and said, 4 Parlez-vous
Francjais ?’ The witness says the answer was in
English, but it was an evasion of the question.
Then Burdon says Mr. Seymour asked the de-
fendant why he had not called upon his friends
and relatives, but that the defendant declined to
answer further questions unless his legal adviser
was present. Next he states a thing which cer-
tainly is a little startling, and perhaps it may
not meet with ready belief. He says, as they
were going away, Mr. Hopkins said, 4 For God’s
sake, don’t mention anything of this painful
affair, for my honour is at stake.’ It certainly
seems very strange that he should have thought
it necessary to make such an observation.


oil, gentlemen, the defendant is cross-ex-
amined as to this interview, and it is right that I
should read what he stated in reference to it, as
there is a direct conflict of testimony between him
and the two witnesses, Mr. Seymour and Burdon,
to whose evidence I have just directed your at-
tention :
‘ Did you see Mr. Seymour very soon after writ-
ing the letter of 1867 ?—I believe I did, while I
was at Mr. Hopkins’s at Alresford. We met for
the first time at the door of Mr. Hopkins’s house.
Did he say, “ How do you do ? Do you remember
me ?”—No ;he said, “ Who am I?” Did not Mr.
Hopkins say it was Mr. Seymour ?—No. It was I
who said so. I said it was Henry Seymour. Did
he say, “If that’s Roger Tichbome he will know
the person with meand did you say, “ Why,
that’s my uncle Nangle ?”—No. I said, “ He looks
like one of the Nangles.” Mr. Nangle is about
70?—There are two or three sons who are young.
but did you say your “Uncle Nangle”?
—No.. [The Claimant requested to be allowed to
give his own account of the meeting with Mr.
Seymour, He said, “ Mr. Seymour came in, anc
some one was with him. Mr. Hopkins said
“ Who is this ?” and Mr. Seymour replied that i ;
was one of Sir James’s old servants, whereupon ]
said, “Why, it’s Burdonand, though I lad seen
him a few days before, he looked so different alto
gether that I did not at first recognise him. Mr
Seymour had got him “ togged out,” and brought
him down in a first-class carriage.] Did Mr.
Seymour ask to go into the room and have some
talk ?—No, he would not go into any room with-
out Burdon, and Mr. Hopkins said he did not
allow servants to enter his rooms, and that if he
could not go into the room without Burdon he
should sap no more. Burdon never came into the
room; he went into the library; nor did Mr.
Hopkins propose to withdraw. Did they all sit
down ?—Yes. Did Mr. Seymour speak to you in
French ?—Yes. Did you say you did not under-
stand it?—No, but I answered him in English.
But you did understand?—Yes. What did he
say?—l cannot remember. How long did the
conversation in French last?—lf you timed it by
a stop-watch, about 40 seconds; there were only
two or three words spoken in French, and then we
both talked English during the rest of the inter-
view. I told him I could not speak French. The
Lord Chief Justice.—Can you speak French at all ?
—No.
DL] Mr. Henry Seymour ask for an account of
the shipwreck, and did you give him one ?—No.
I never spoke about the shipwreck. I was only in
the room five minutes. He said he could not stay
in the room without Burdon, so I said, cbaffingly,
that being so, I would go into the garden and
smoke a cigar. Did Burdon put an envelope on
the table and ask you if you knew the writing?—
No, lie did not. And you could not tell, and Mr.
Hopkins said, “ This is your father’s handwriting,
Sir Roger ?”—No. Were you asked to take some
refreshment in another room, and did you say that
you should prefer Burdon remaining?—Nothing
of the sort. Was it a long conversation ?—No. I
was in the presence of Mr. Seymour about five
minutes in the dining-room, and no more. He did
not ask about your visits to and amusements at
Knoyle ?—No. And did he not ask if the prin-
cipal amusements there were fishing and shooting?
—He did not Was a helmet produced and tried
on ?—Not while Mr. Seymour was there. Was it
not brought and tried on, and did not Mr. Sey-
mour say it did not seem to fit very well ?—No;
Mr. Hopkins did not put any helmet on ray head
in Mr. Seymour's presence on that or any other
occasion. Did Mr. Hopkins bring it, saying it was
Roger’s helmet when he was in the Carabineers ?
—lt was never produced at all. Did Mr. Seymour
ask why you had not been to see your aunt ?
No. Did he say he did not believe you were Roger
Tichborne, but that if you had anything to say be-
was quite ready to receive you at 39, Grosvenor
street ?—Just so, but not to me ; it was said to
Mr. Hopkins.
‘ Was a large bundle of Roger C. Tichborne’s
letters produced ?—Not a letter of any description
"Was a quantity of the real Roger Tichborne’s ?
lam the real Roger Ticbborne. I believe I saw-
one of my own letters at Mr. Hopkins, not a num
ber. Were there underline marks drawing atten
tion to particular words in those letters?—l saw
no letters, I tell you. No letters, papers, or docu-
ments of any kind were produced by Mr. Hopkins
in Mr. Seymour’s presence, and the only occasion
on which Mr. Hopkins showed me a letter was-
when one day he tested me with it. Did Mr
Seymour go away saying he disbelieved you ?—]
was smoking in the fgarden when he left. When
Mr. Seymour parted from you did he treat you as
if you were his nephew ?—Seeing that he woulc
not remain in the room with me unless Burdon
was present, I don’t think that he did. Did he
throughout the interview treat you as if you were
not his nephew?—Yes, he did certainly. Why,
did he not say he did not believe you to be Sir
Roger, but if you cbose to call at 39, Grosvenor-
street he would listen to anything you had to say ?
—Mr. Hopkins told me Mr. Seymour had very
much altered his mind, but I suppose it was agreed
on between Mr. Seymour and him that there
was to be a meeting at 39, Grosvenor-street. and
that he had very much altered his mind. The
Solicitor-General.—Why, did not Mr. Seymour, in
going away say he did not believe you were Sir
Roger?—l take my solemn oath and positively
swear I was in the garden when Mr. Seymour went
away; if lam speaking falsely there are the ser-
vants of the house. Why did you not afterwards
go to call on your uncle Seymour ?—I can’t say.
Just tell me, you had no quarrels with any mem-
bers of your family, had you ? Your father was
dead. There was your mother. You had no
quarrel with anybody else at that time, had you ?
—No; who said anything about a quarrel ?—No-
body. lam asking.
‘ You had no quarrel with any member of your
family. You were coming back to your family,
with many members of whom you had not quar-
relled, after thirteen years ? Yes. I suppose
there were a number of your old friends up and
the country, people at Alresford ? No doubt.
Why did you not find out where some of your
family or friends lived, and, instead of going and
seeing Mr. Rous and Mr. Holmes and making a
secret of it, go straight to them and say, “ Here
am I”?—Because I was instructed not to do so by
my mother, and in such a way that I could not
be off misunderstanding her—that is to say, I
could not misunderstand her. You mean by
letter?—By letter. Yes. Well, but you had
revealed yourself; you had so far broken your
mother’s injunction. With whom ?—With Mr.
Rous and Mr. Bowker. It merely mentioned
members of my family. It distinctly mentioned
members of my family. Why should you not
have gone to your two uncles, with whom you
had not had a word of difference —Henry and
Alfred Seymour?—How was I to know they


■anight not have been the very persons? \V
tud you not go and say “ Here am I. If you ha
any doubt ask me any questions that jou anc
know. Do not let there be any mystery. Pu
me to any catechism you like ” ?—You could su
gest a hundred different ways, and say why die
not do tnat. I did that which my mother wisliec
me to do.’
Here we have a set of contradictions whic
cannot arise from lack of memory. There mus
be false s wealing on the one side or on the othe
It is for you to say which is the true version
what occurred. Now, of the importance of th
interview there cannot be any doubt. No on
was better qualified to judge of the identity o
the defendant than Mr. Seymour, but he wen
away, as he states, with a disbelief in his identit'
At that interview the defendant made the doub
mistake—if you believe the witnesses—firstly,
eheving that Burdon was one of his cousins, anc
secondly, of not knowing Burdon, whom, unle
■his memory failed him, Roger Tichborne woul
have known very well. Again, there was th
circumstance of his not knowing one of his oldes
mentis, General Mandreville, and of his bein
altogether ignorant of his father’s handwriting.
Now, there was a letter written by the defen
<lant to Lady Tichborne describing that interview
Iho letter commences, ‘My dear Mamma,’ an
the day of the month, the month of the year, an
the year are indicated by figures, in the case
"he month by the figure 2. Now, Roger Tichborn
never dates his letters in this way. He generall
dates them at the end of the letters, and write
the name of the month. That circumstance ma
have some little weight, but I don’t attach muc
impomnee t° it, for this reason, that in the cours
ot time habits change. A man may well be sui
posed to adopt one form at one period of his life
and another at another. The letter is as fol
.lows:—
t . r ‘ Croydon , 15,2, 67.
my dear Mamma.—l arrived here from Aires
lord night before last, so that I can come & mee
you when you arrive at dover. My dear Mamma
i iiave meet with many friends at Alresford tha
now me well And have receved (sic) a very
wekome reception from them the Alresford
chinch Bells rung very merrily when I arrive
I receved a visit from Col. Lushington at Mr
Hopkins. He lunch with us at Hopkins the
next day with Mrs. Lushington, Hopkins and
myself, & then returned with them to Tichborne
1 pointed out to the Colonel the picture that be-
long to me. the Col. found my helmet and put it
on. it fit me now as well as ever, of course the
Col is perfectly satisfied and has acted very
kindly and told me he would give up the house 1
at any time wanted it, and invited me to go and
stay with him and take my wife there with me,
butlcannot well do that at present, poor old
Stubbs and Noble knew mo as soon as they see
Likewise a great many more about there the
iichbornc bells rang for two days, and in fact I
could not have been receved more kindly. I
have receved a very kind letter from Mr. Scott.
I have seen Mr. Seymore (sic), but he had been
so poisoned by Cullington and Gosford that at
hist he would not own me. Mr. Hopkins very
Kindly had a long talk with him, and so did
■ • of cause (sic) he soon altered his mind a little;
ie brought W. Burrau (sic) there with him,
but has Mr. Holmes had found out that William
had been tampered with I would not allow him
mmy company, nor would Mr. Hopkins. Cul-
lington had told Uncle Henry that I was a clien
of Mr. Hopkins, and a great many more things tha
Henry did not know falsewood. Mr. Hopkins i
living independent, and has only acted as a frienc
to me. there is a great many things I wish t
speak to you about as soon as you come. lam
now waiting for your telegram to come and mee
you at dover, my wife and child are quite wo]
and very anxious to see you. They send thei
love to you my dear mama.
‘ I remain your
(sic) ‘affectionate son,
* R. C. D. Tichborne.’
He speaks in this letter of a picture, but it ma;
be that he intended to speak of pictures an
omitted to add the ‘ s.’ You will remember, how
ever, that Bogle had been to Tichborne House t
look at the pictures, and it is a fair inference tha
he made a report with reference to them to th
defendant. I observe that the defendant spell
the word ‘ course,’ ‘ cause,’ and that is his invari
able practice. Again, he says in the letter tha
the conversation with Mr. Seymour was a long one
while in his cross-examination he says it onl;
lasted five minutes. It is worthy of observation
too, that Roger Tichborne never spoke of Mr. Sey
mour as ‘ Uncle Henry.’ In this letter there are
a great many mistakes in grammar and spelling
and no less than ten in the use of capital letters
Now, let us hear what the defendant says in the
Common Pleas with reference to that letter:—
‘ The Attorney-General.—ls it true you had
long talk with Mr. Seymour ?—No. What do yoi
mean by saying in the letter, “ Mr. Hopkins had
long talk with him, and so had I”?—I didn’t mean
to say I had a long talk with him. Mr. Hopkins
had. And you say “of course he altered his mine
a little”?—So Mr. Hopkins told me, that he
altered his mind when he left. He did not teli
you he altered his mind in consequence of youi
talk ?—No. Mr. Hopkins told me his mind was
very much altered when he went away. Did he
say when he went away that he did not believe
you to be Sir Roger, but that if you chose to call
at 39, Grosvenor-street, he would see you again ?
Mr. Hopkins told me he made an appointment for
me to see Mr. Seymour at Grosvenor-street, and it
was agreed that there was to be a meeting there.
Did tho meeting come off?—No: I think not.
You know it did not?—Yes. The Attorney-
General.—l ask you this—whether Mr. Seymour
did not say to yourself that he did not believe you
were Roger Charles Tichborne, but that if you
chose to go to Grosvenor-street and talk to him he
would be quite ready to see you; and whether
you yourself did not appoint five o’clock the next
day, and accompany Mr. Seymour and Burdon to
Mr. Hopkin’s door ?—l’ll take my positive oath
and solemnly swear I was in the garden when Mr.
Seymour went away. If I am speaking falsely it
is easy to prove it by Mr. Hopkins’s servants.’
He denies having made any appointment to
meet members of the family for the next day. Mr.
Holmes wrote to Mr. Seymour to state that as his
client Sir Roger Tichborne had gone to Dover to
meet his mother, they would not be able to call
on him. The defendant in his cross-examination
complained of the conduct towards him of Mr.
Seymour, and gives that as a reason for not call-
ing to see him and other members of the family.
A further meeting was arranged at Mr. Seymour’s
house, and the appointment not having been kept,
Messrs. Dobiuson and Geare, who were solicitors
to the trustees, wrote to Mr. Holmes the follow-
ing very proper letter: —


* 57, Lincoln's-inn-Fields, Feb. 22, 1867.
‘ Dear Sir, —In our letter to you of the 7th of
•January last we stated that your client, whom
you designate as Sir Roger Tich borne, would
doubtless be received by the Tichborne family
■with open arms upon bis identity with the eldest
son of the late Sir James Tichborne being esta-
blished.
‘ln the instance of Mr. Danby Seymour only
has your client been allowed to have an inter-
view with any member of the Tichborne family
other than the Dowager Lady Tichborne, and then
an appointment was made for a renewed inter-
view on the following day, whieh was not kept by
yonr client; and, again, another appointment
was made for the day succeeding, which in like
manner proved fruitless. Thus your client has
held himself not only aloof, but in secret, from all
whom he claims as his relatives, except the
Dowager Lady Tichborne.
‘ It would seem to any candid mind that the
issue is a very simple one.
‘lt is not a question of remote or intricat
pedigree, but of mere personal identity, the time
being of the most recent date.
‘ When Mr. Roger Charles Tichborne left thi
country he was 24 years of age; he had lived on
the most intimate and affectionate and familia
intercourse with numerous friends and relatives
there are scores of persons now living who coulc
identify him to a certainty. The great majority
of his relatives have no pecuniary interest in the
issue whether he be dead or living; they are
persons of position and honour; irrespective o: ;
mere fortune, far above all possibility of being
influenced by any other than honourable motives
There is not, and there cannot be, any reason why
members of such a family should not only readily
but eagerly acknowledge the identity of a relative
long supposed to be lost, and himself the repre-
sentative and head of a family of distinction anc
fortune.
‘ To our minds it seems an imperative duty to
try every means of preventing litigation when
litigation ought not to exist; if you feel youi
client’s claims to be well founded, you will not
hesitate in permitting him to meet the relatives
and friends with whom Mr. R. C. Tichborne lived
and associated from early youth to the time of
his leaving this country. We require such a
meeting on behalf of those whom wo represent,
and it is a necessity, as we conceive, that your
client submit to such requirement. He may sur-
I'ound himself with every protection and aid you
think necessary on his behalf—counsel, solicitor,
aD -n ". ien<^8 ’ choosing time and place; but if he
atill, after this offer, refuses to meet those who
are best able to form an opinion of his preten-
sions, he must expect to have them dealt with as
groundless and wholly unworthy of credit. We
hope, however, you will avail yourself of our sug-
gestion and make arrangements for an early meet-
ing. We are, dear Sir, yours truly,
‘ Dobinson and Gf.are.
John Holmes, Esq., solicitor, 25, Poultry.’
A Veil, Mr. Holmes might have replied that he
'declined to advise his client to see his relations,
as they had conceived a prejudice against him,
and that as they were likely to treat him as
though he was an impostor, an interview would
not be likely to lead to any satisfactory result.
He, however, preferred to adopt a high and lofty
tone, and said in his reply:—
* You appear to ignore the fact that Sir Roger
Tichborne has been already identified by those
with whom he lived and associated from earl
youth until he left England, and who could no
possibly be mistaken as to his identity, and b
those who have no personal interest one way o
the other. As you have overlooked the importan
fact, allow me to remind you that upon his retur
to this country he went to Paris, and in the firs
instance visited his mother, and that she instantl
recognised him ; that Mr. Hopkins, of Alresfori
who acted as solicitor for Sir Roger and his fathei
has most unreservedly identified him, and writtei
to Lord Arundell and Mr. Danby Seymour In
forming them of the fact. Mr. Baigent, of Win
Chester, an old friend of the family, and many o
the tenants, servants, and friends to whom my
client was well known in youth, have also identi
fied him. Surely, after this abundant proof tha'
my client is Sir Roger, it is idle to talk of any
further identification being required. And I ma;
reasonably ask who it is the “ Tichborne family
would suggest as being better qualified than the
mother of Sir Roger to identify my client ? On
his part I insist that his identify has been alread;
fully and sufficiently established.’
Twice he mentioned the ‘ Tichborne family ’ in
inverted commas, and stated that since his ar
rival in England they had hunted his client
caused his footsteps to be traced, and broken in
upon his privacy. ‘ Is there,’ he said, ‘ theslightesi
ground for palliating such conduct, which was
even pursued after he had placed himself under
my direction, or doubting the object they had in
view ?’ And he adds that he had submitted these
letters to Sir Roger and Lady Tichborne, that they
were indignant at the course which had been pur-
sued, and that his client would hold those respon-
sible who had adopted it.
It was, however, arranged that Mr. and Mrs
Radcliffe should have an interview with the de-
fendant at his house in Croydon, and they went
there on the Bth of March, accompanied by Mrs.
Townley. Mr. Radcliffe and Mrs. Townley went
went in, leaving Mrs. Radcliffe in a cab at the
gate. They were shown into a back drawing-room,
and after a little time the defendant came in.
Mr. Radcliffe having been announced, he jumped
to the conclusion that the lady was his wife, and,
going up to her, said, ‘ How do you do, Kattie ?’
Mr. Radcliffe, in the course of his evidence, said
he asked the defendant where they had last met,
and he replied that they had never met before,
whereas we know that they did meet once, and
played together in private theatricals. Sirs.
Townley then, he said, observed that there was
another cousin outside, and Sir. Radcliffe having
brought in his wife, the defendant either bowed
or shook her by the hand, saying, ‘ How are you,
Lucy ?’ or ‘ Sirs. Townley.’ They then conversed
upon different subjects, Sirs. Townley being re-
garded by the defendant as Sirs. Radcliffe, and
Sirs. Radcliffe as Sirs. Townley.
Now, is it possible to think that a man after 12
years’ absence could forget the features of the
woman to whom he had been passionately at-
tached, and, a fortiori, if anything such as the de-
fendant alleges had occurred between them ?
Would he mistake for her a lady unlike her in
features, and her senior in years ? It is, there-
fore, a question of serious importance whether the
mistake was made, and, if so, whether it was made
under circumstances which afforded to the de-
fendant a fair opportunity of seeing the two
cousins. Now, upon that point the evidence is not
altogether uniform. It is not quite clear whether
the ladies had their veils down or not, or, if so,


do not a“? e nn„ UMenaMeB ' The ladies
thinks he? te,F P t jat P° lnt - Mrs. Townley
she wore a thin Zh !?'' I '', M u rs ' said
difficulty in seeine her f, Vt3l {'r that t . here was no
‘ That I nulled f ? e through it. She adds,
e cy» ur o e ; T?f er 1 e 2
bo»Sn*S^ d „“, M ™-
*-1» Sr “.I'lris: m * tle<l
which i s L °bT nS™ Jus tice.-That is a fact
features do not Z! UD . lm P° rta nt. Even if
memory, the tones ofThl I “ pre “ ed u P on the
you have listened tbe Volce ?f one to whom
would not be likelvto he 1 on S feelings of affection
appear, however to h, b mis . fcak ® n - There would
■is to tbe i’ to be some doubt and ambimiitv
seeing feces U of t t 1 Wh l iC S- the defendant bad of
there is tbe ae j the ladles > and if you think
it. Mr RadcliffA Dd vff t K S^° uld have the benefit of
confused: there tZ matt f s were becoming
imbroglio; the ladies ange , r , of getting into an
have discovered to be 7r° SOOn > he bought,
were, and he told WL ° really
which the defendant rep led ‘ “lBtake n -to
you are Mrs. Townie,, P , oh . I perceive now
are Kattie.’ Mrs Tow’, ( M,s - Eadcliffe)
that she then put some 7 in her lienee
asked him whafher Zh,' lll6^ 1 ? 11 ®* 0 him ‘ «he
called, and he said ‘a! m La dy Tichborne, was
was wrong, as her’ That ’ sh e said,
Aunt Tichborne Sbe ti " ad always been called
sisters were and he « I fwi. aßked him who her
and Kattie’ Greenwood ’ Dormer )
'V ashingtou Hibbert lie u* ° f bei slster > Mrs.
asked him about h7«’visit tT* no , thing - Sh e
Koger went in 1847 o r IS4S 1, ?° which
lected the house and be S ’ ?nd whether he recol-
butwe know /t is fn tb Said il Was near Bath ;
Lancashire. Mrs Townefe no , rtb ° f Ea g la nd, in
this answer savs ‘Do“ 1 y ’ bei , ng sur P rise d at
near Bath ? ’ t q ’ +hi« b‘ V ° U Say tbat Tow neley is
sure of that.’ Then ‘ 0h ! lam
tion, the defendant ® t™ 6 farthe r conversa-
secret about it, I hate S* the make iln ?
of the sailors who wei-etw be captain and some
say the sailors of the BellaK tZ didn ’ t
were saved with me ’ Thin • the sallors who
3 e^ d a 7 rh tm T in
£aE& 2£L?¥ cT F
sr„sr j-vK
TliowL W ot“ ra h h. dropped it.
and he spoke inTsZ’of VT’ ln English .
Mr '
tT^_.cc„„ 011 . „ c
roroU«t“ I l nr tSeV a S-|‘ Tho "’ 7011 *> "«•
»»treoogpi" th " 1 “ t .„? ,<l 7 T »7. “No, Ido
we are all so altered*’? sZ rec ° gnise “e—
-kind. Did Mrs Rad Miff d nothl ng of the
did we last m t S e?’?-N? toyou, M7hen
not recollect it w QO • • D J d you say u Do you
-I did n „, 01 ’ :,V“ J»»* I left Hoglni ?»
—I did not. Did she 00 t 16 Edward was so ill”?
her house, and did you U T emembere d
you say, Xo, I only recollect
liis wheelcbaiAi^^r 6 V° ny b * cb ust “d to draw
said S ucb a Cg~^ha l t “ft 1 liever
No, nothing likf that w N ° thlng llke that P-
to the time when Vjf there no Elusion as
7 h t e h n i„ j r D s. 11 tst? ‘r
none. Are you certain P-Ouite cert a in T) 7°’
say anythin? ahont ' Dld you
Edward N 0 n 2 n th !, nesB of y° ar uncle
C~) ™h£rgSb£;
Z uir^tf d ' “ n rJ° ?»» i™\ZZ
few sindf? 1 «■“*" “
not Mrs Radcliffh my great surprise, it was
, 9 ' ttadcliffe, and it was Mrs, Townlev I
meanfbvTir a “ d asked Mr - Ra dcliffe he
SP&'fSV?? W;,S Mrs - ttadcliffe. He
' , Nadchffe is outside in a cab,” and he
Did it occur to you, without intending anyrude-
ness to Lady Ticbborne-the object beingto test
k ?7 ou W 0 1: e ’ a nd the question being whether you
knew—that IS T J? Ur^ 0l \?L n ’ who “Eady Tichborne
absent 9 T)n lo k ! ) °rne might be better
ana -*r i think it would occur to you to
see your mother insulted by a fellow like that in
Did Mr* Radcliff 866 Y d °°u- Blammedin ter face ?
had nnt ~*adcliffe ask you this question—why you
had not been to Lady Doughty P-No he did not
“ Now tr-s 8 M " Kadc!iffe Said to mewml;
ow, neie is your cousin who knew vou and
ab °i U l°i d times ’ y° u kri ow” I’said,
and win h n PPened between her a nd me is sacred,
ana will never come to you.”’
’ R^/rff 611 ’ tbat is Positively contradicted
fL M t R i d a lff f ,and Ideclare > if 1 were the de-
fendant, I should not know which alternative I
would prefer-that of being guilty of per-
you7 think T g SUCh langUage - Wkat do
you think of a man who, if he ever had
illicit relations with a lady, would be bound
by every feeling of honour to protect her re-
putation against the world, but, above all to
take care that, as far as he was concerned not a
hint should ever reach her husband of what had
passed-what do you think of such a man usin?
inTYhf 0 - he r UBband wbich necessarily and
unavoidably implied that he had relations with
b V ady b f foF t ber marriage which must engender
in her husband feelings that must destroy all the
consistent lit.VT' 0 ?If "-.Tnythitg
for keeping if ■ lei Honour, there wasno necessity
which could «) but lf tbere was anything
in her then + bak ® the confidence of her husband
ntss a mtttn 0 USe BU ? h language implies a bnse-
feelin? bt &n abseDCe ° f every honourable
compared 3SS? h v T ght to be animated,
tf the fl. ’ Wltb the single exce Ption
nothin? in Y a f I , DSt Lady Eadcliffe—there is
notiling in the whole case so bad.
defemLrf ithreSP < e r Ctto Sir I>er cival Eadcliife, the
defendant says, I never spoke to the fellow at
nen++ « W ’, lU c ™ss-examination you would ex-
pect to find sparks of the mind of a gentleman
and man of education and honour breaking out
hero „„,1 there. You w0,,1,1 f, ail „ mm X??.


fied with the story he had told. But here, if you
look at the way in which in various instances
something breaks out, you will, I think, be of
opinion that it is very inconsistent with the
character which the learned counsel for the d
fendant claimed for his client. When ama
speaking of a gentleman of equal rank with him
self, and entitled, whatever his rank, to be spoke
of in terms of respect and courtesy, because S r
Percival KadclifFe disbelieves him, and when
comes forward and charges his wife with want o 1
chastity, denounces him as an impostor and
liar—though he never used that term—when h
calls such a person * a fellow,’ and says hte woulc
have inflicted personal chastisement upon him
were it not for the ladies, I ask you whether it:
consistent with the character the learned counse
claims for him ? The great point which the de
fendant puts forward in his own justification is
that the conduct of Sir Percival Radcliffe to wares
his mother excited him so much that he was no ;
answerable for what he did, nor competent t
enter into conversation with the ladies.
But Sir Percival denies the defendant’s versio
altogether. What Sir Percival says was that they
went for the purpose of testing the defendant,
and seeing whether, from his personal appearanc
and his answers to their questions, they coulc
draw an inference satisfactory to themselves as t
his being Roger Tichborne. When the defendant
came into the room, which, as you know, com
municated with the next room by folding doors
he left the door open, and it was perfectly
possible that some one might be in the nex;
room, and that Lady Tichborne might make her
appearance, give her assistance to the defendant
and thus defeat the object they had in view. S(
when Sir Percival saw the door open he went anc
closed it, but he altogether denies that Lady
Tichborne was coming into the room. The cross
examination of the defendant then proceeds :
‘ Did you tell him you had got the captain anc
several of the sailors who were saved with yor
in the Bella ?—No, I did not. You think not ?
I did not. That you had been recognized by
many of your brother-officers ?—No, I did not
- . . Did Mr. Radcliffe ask you to relate some
of your adventures in South America ?—He did
and I refused to do it. Did you give any reason
—Yes; I told him his conduct too much agitated
me to speak on such subjects. Did you not tel!
him you were advised by your lawyers to hold
your tongue on these subjects, and at a future
time you would satisfy him ?—I did not tell him
anything of the kind.’
Well, gentlemen, this forms one of the im-
portant chapters in the history of this case. If
y°? bring your minds to the belief that the
defendant had full opportunity of distinguishing
between the two cousins and of seeing their faces,
and was still under the delusion that one cousin
was the other, I do not know any circumstance in
the case which to my mind would be more adverse
to the defendant. Ido not believe that Roger
could, so longas memory held its own, have for-
gotten the lineaments of Kate Doughty, or the
voice which once, when it fell upon his ears, no
doubt made his whole frame thrill with emotion.
Can you entertain a doubt that he retained a fond
remembrance of her when separated from her by
the wide ocean? You must judge between the
three witnesses and the defendant.
At this time, the day after tho interview, we
have this letter from the defendant to Sir Talbot
Constable:—
‘My dear Talbot, —With great pleasure I re-
ceived your kind letter last night. I atn very sorry
to hear that you have been ill. I have not been
very well myself for this last 10 days. I had
Kadclliffe and. Katty and Lucy Towneley here t
see me yesterday. The meeting was not so agree
able as I should have wished it, because the
would not see mamma.’
Here there is no complaint of rudeness, but simpl
that ‘ they would not see mamma.’ Then th
letter proceeds:—
‘Yon must know how I must have felt, bu
what could Ido ? If I had not seen them they
would have gone and said I was freighten to show
myself, and it was my solicitor wish for me no
to deny myself. I wish, my dear Talbot, you
would come and spend a few days with me. Mv
house is not very large, but we will find plent : r
of room for you. I expect to be able to go to
Upton before long. Colonel Lushington, who live
at Tichborne, has been so kind to me that
really can’t turn him out. He offered to give uj
"the house to me the first time I went to Alresford
when every one seemed against me. But since
my brother-officers have been to see me everybody
seems to change. How they all want to be my
friends! But I say no I don’t want them. What
right had they to write such things about me as
they did '? They reply that they ware told it was
not me; but they had no right to judge before
they see me. They all say they are sorryfor what
been done. But that does not alter the impres-
sions that those scandalious paragraphs have made
on the minds of the public against me. I have
already entered actions against some of them, and
they do not seem to like it. I hope, my dear
Talbot, to have many a good hunt with you yet. I
hope you will remember me to your father, who I
hope to have the pleasure of seeing before long.
Of course I have seen a great many things since I
have been away that we can talk of when we
meet. Mamma tells me that you are now mar-
ried, so we shall both have the pleasure of intro-
ducing one others wifes. I must now conclude,
for you know that I am not very fond of writing.
Mamma is very thankful for your kind letter. °I
am sorry to hear that you have given up smoking.
For my part I have given up buying retail, for I
have to buy wholesale now. But the Doctors
have put me on short allowance. They only allow
me 20 a day now. But I take care to get the
largest Cigars I can. This is the longest letter I
have wrote these two years, so I shall now say
good bye for the present.
‘ I remain, Dr Constable, yours truly,
• ‘ R. C. D. Tichborne.
Then comes a letter to Rous which, as regards
spelling and grammar, is a literary curiosity;
but I will not trouble you by reading it. In all'
these letters there are a great many mistakes of
grammar and spelling which cannot fail to raise a
smile. As far as I am concerned, however it
would be a kindly and good-humoured smile. You
are not likely to sneer at a man who has not had
the same educational advantages as yourself. You
may smile at the mistakes of a man educated at a
village school, but you do not sneer at him for
them. The remark I have to make is this. You
find many mistakes of grammar, spelling, and
composition in Roger’s letters ; but they convey
to my mind, the idea that they are the mistakes’
of a man who has imperfectly harnt the language
which was not the language of his childhood.
But the mistakes in the defendant's letters seem
to be mistakes arising from an original want of


education, or an education in a particularly humble
sphere of life. They are mistakes arising from a
totally defective and imperfect education. If you
compare those letters of the defendant with the
letters of Roger Tichborne, whether in point of
spelling, grammar, or style and the flow of style—
if the two sets of correspondence were placed in
juxtaposition as having been written by the same
man, you would say at once, ‘ It is quite impos-
sible.’ The suggestion in explanation is that the
life led by the defendant in Australia during a
number of years and the sort of persons with
whom he associated are sufficient to account for
it all—that he adopted their language, their style,
and their spelling.
The result of the interview with the defendant
was not the same in the mind of all the persons.
Mrs. Townley was perfectly satisfied that it was
not Roger Tichborne, and Sir Percival appears to
have been of very much the same way of think-
ing. But, not having had the same intimate
knowledge of Roger, never having met him but
once at Mrs. Washington Hibbert’s, in the begin-
ning of 1847 or 1848, he did not think himself
warranted in coming at once to a conclusion.
Lady Radcliffe seems to have been unwilling to
decide without some further inquiry. It struck
her there was something about the voice and
accent of tho man which reminded her of Roger
Tichborne. She says she was struck by the French
sort of voice in which he spoke; but when I asked
her whether she meant the voice or accent she
could not say, and she added she was a bad judge
of voices. Then Mr, Hawkins says, ‘ You heard
him in court and you had a full opportunity of
hearing him speak for a long time. Was his accent
the same as you heard before ?’ Lady Radcliffe’s
answer is, 4 No, quite different.’ And she adds,
‘ In court at the time you mention I was convinced
he was not Roger Tichborne because he knew
nothing and could answer nothing. . . . There
was nothing in the least like Roger Charles Tich-
borne when I saw him in court.’ However, she
did not wish after the first interview to come to
any decision. And therefore Sir Percival writes
the following letter to Mr. Holmes with a view
to obtain another meeting with the defendant: —
‘ March 8.
4 Dear Sir,—Mrs. Townley, Mrs. Radcliffe, and
myself went down to see your client. We regret
to say that we do not feel satisfied with our inter-
view. We should require some further conversa-
tion before we could really be quite certain that
he is Roger Tichborne. We tried to inspire con-
fidence, but apparently failed. Unfortunately,
the train compelled us to curtail our visit, and
therefore, for all parties, it would be much more
satisfactory if he could meet us at our hotel.
‘ J. P. Radcliffe.’
Next day Sir. Holmes replies: —
‘ London , 9th March, 1867.
4 Dear Sir, —I am glad that you and Rad-
cliffe and Sirs. Townley saw Sir Roger Tichborne
yesterday. The more he sees of his relations Ihe
sooner, I am convinced, will a satisfactory ending
be put to these doubts and uncertainties. But
he tells me that it was most painful to him you
declining to see his mamma.’
There again the terms of the complaint are that
4 they declined to see bis mamma,’
4 1 am sure that personally he will be happy to
meet you.—Yours, 4 John Holmes.’
The result was that an appointment was made
for a meeting between the defendant, his aunt,
Lady Dcughty, Lady Radcliffe, and Sir Percival,
at the house of Mr. Holmes. Accordingly, S
Percival and Mrs. Townley (but not Lad
Doughty) and Mrs. and Miss Nangle went dow
on the day appointed. Lady Eadcliffe had a
engagement in town which kept her longer tha
she expected, and when she got to the railwa
station she found that the train had left, so sh
was not at the meeting. When they got to Mi
Holmes’ house they were received by Mrs. Holmes
and Sir Percival started for the residence of th
defendant in order to fetch him. Then Sir Pei
cival tells us what passed as they were going t
Mr. Holmes's house. He says the defendant triec
to enter into conversation with him, and the firs
thing he said was, ‘ Have we ever met before
Sir Percival replied, ‘ Why, you told me you hac
never met me.’ Then the defendant went cn to
speak about Burton Constable, and said he knew
Sir Percival there, at Paris, and other places. He
said I gave Talbot Constable a black horse, which
I bought from a farmer named Blandford. Then
says Sir Percival, ‘ On a sudden it occurred to me
that I gave a horse to Talbot Constable, ant
bought a horse from Blandford, but the horse 1
gave to Talbot Constable was not the horse ]
bought from the farmer, but another.’ In the
course of the conversation, Sir Percival told the
defendant that he was going to see * his aunt.’
Mrs. Nangle’s account of what happened at the
meeting is that she was sitting in a comer of the
room when the defendant entered, that she gol
up, took up her veil, went to the window, and
stood so that the light fell on her face, and
then asked him whether he knew her but got no
answer. Mrs. Townley says, ‘He did not know
my aunt, Mrs. Nangle, or Miss Nangle. She pi t
up her face to the light and said, “ Now say who
I am.” He appeared very much confused.’ Sir
Percival’s acconnt is this, —‘I said first of all,'“To
you know that lady ?” (Mrs. Nangle), not in an
offensive tone, but just as I speak now. He made
no answer at all. Mrs. Nangle threw her veil up,,
came and stood in front of him, and said “ Do you
know me now?” I do not know what he said.
Miss Nangle then stood up and said, “Do ycu
know me?” Then Mrs. Nangle said, “Speak 1o
him in French.” He seemed quite puzzled, like
a person who had never seen them before.’ That
lively young lady, Miss Nangle, describes the
scene very graphically. She says, ‘ When he en-
tered the room he looked very much afraid. He
looked round him, especially at my mother. My
first feeling was surprise, my next a sort of uncon-
trollable inclination to laughter, because it was s o
ridiculous, five persons in the room, not saying a
word, but looking at each other. Then Mr. Ead-
cliffe came forward and in a most courteous
manner said, “Do you know this lady ?” The
defendant said, “ There are so many veils.” Then
Mrs. Nangle asked, “Do you know me?” He
said, “ I don’t know, I don't know,” in a frightened
way. He could not make any sort of guess as to
who Mrs. Nangle was. Then I went over, threw
up my veil, and said, “Tell me who I am.” He
kept backing and said, “ I don’t know, I don’t
know.” Yes, he seemed afraid of me.’ She is
asked, ‘ Were you advancing towards him ?’ ‘ Oh.
no,’she replies, ‘I was standing near him. My
mother, in a whisper to me, said, “ Speak French
to him;” so I said, in French, “Do you spe, k
French?” He said, “ Out,Madame” in a most
atrocious accent. I continued to speak to him
in French, but he did not answer a word. He
looked frightened.’ Then Mrs. Townley told him
that he was an impostor. Then we are told that


he advanced in a menacing way towards Mr. Rad-
cliffe, bat as Mr. Radcliffe remained quiet the
defendant did not strike him. The defendant’s
account of the matter is this: —
4 1 was told by Mr. Radcliffe when I was going
there that I was going to see Lady Doughty and
my cousin Katharine. When I got there I found
a person crouched down in the chair, trying to
make herself as low as she could, and very thickly
veiled. Mr. Radcliffe said, “ Who is the person
in the chair ?” I said, “ How can I tell when I
cannot see her face ?” She raised her veil at my
request, and I said, “ How dare you tell me that
I came here to meet Kate Doughty ?” I never
looked at the person at all, but got very angiy.
I never looked at Miss Nangle at all. If you ask
me whether it was my Aunt Nangle I do not
know. I cannot speak as to Miss Nangle, for I
did not take notice of her, seeing it was not my
Cousin Katharine, though, of course, she is my
Cousin Katharine, but not the other Miss Doughty
as represented.’
Then he is asked,
4 You say you said it was Mrs. Nangle ?—I have
heard so since. When she put up her veil, did
you then see it was your Aunt Nangle ?—No I
did not, and I tell you I did not know who it was,
for when I saw I was imposed on I never looked.
You must have looked to know it was not Lady
Doughty ?—Certainly. Did you look to see who
it was ? No.' Was she at all like a person you
had seen ?—I tell you I do not know. You say
you did not pay attention to Miss Nangle ?—No,
I did not.’
The result is that the defendant admits that
he did not recognize Mrs. Nangle, but he accounts
for it by saying that he expected to see Lady
Doughty. Whether this was a stratagem or not
on Sir Percival’s part I do not know, but it is
quite certain that having taken Mrs. Nangle to
Mrs. Holmes’s instead of Lady Doughty, whom
the defendant expected to see, Sir Percival did
not undeceive him. Sir Percival says, ‘I told
him he was going to see his aunt. I purposely
omitted the name of Lady Doughty. I am quite
positive I purposely said “ his aunt ” without giving
the name.’ The defendant, on the other hand,
says, 4 He told me distinctly I was going to see
Lady Doughty.’ I must say, it would have been
better if there had been no concealment about
the matter at all. If it was a stratagem, my ob-
servation is so much the stronger. Not that it
was necessary to tell him who his aunt was. It
would have been quite sufficient if Sir Percival
had said, 4 Lady Doughty cannot come down, but
I have brought another lady, and when you
see her you can tell me who she is. If you tell
me, it will be satisfactory. If you don’t, it will
have the opposite effect.’ I confess I have a dis-
like of stratagems of this kind. But still the
question arises, should he have known Mrs.
Nangle, for she was his aunt by blood, and Lady
Doughty was his aunt by marriage ? He had
known Mrs. Nangle before he knew Lady Doughty.
He knew her in Paris, and he saw her as often,
■and, therefore, was as familiar with her personal
appearance as with that of Lady Doughty.
Sir Percival sends an account of the impres-
sion made on the minds of himself and his
party by this meeting in the following letter to
Mr. Holmes: —
‘ 12th March, 1867.
‘Dear Sir,- —We had an interview with your
client, and are all thoroughly convinced that he
is not Roger Tichborne, and this not onls be-
cause we failed to recognize him as Roger Tich-
borne, but because be evidently did not recognize
bis nearest relations.—Yours, &c.,
‘ J. P. Radcliffe.’
Mr. Holmes in reply writes this strong letter: —
‘ 1 3th March, 1867-
‘ Dear Sir, —Tbe way in wbicb you and the
three ladies who were with you yesterday behaved
for the very few moments Sir Roger Tichborne
condescended to see you was an entire breach of
the arrangement. My wife was surprised that
neither of the ladies favoured her with their
names.—Yours, J. Holmes.’
It is to be regretted that this interview was
not held according to the strictest rules of regu-
larity, and also that Mr. Holmes, from the
beginning, should have declined to be present at
it. It would have been much better for the de -
fendant if he had a person with him who could,
support or contradict the account he has given of
the interview. Perhaps the defendant thought
he was not as fairly dealt with as he ought to
have been. In the early part of the same month
the defendant wrote the following letter to Mr.
Hopkins:—
‘ March 3,1867.
‘My dear Friend Hopkins,—l receved your
letter the other day. I should have answered it
before if I had not been so ill. i got out a little
while yesterday for the first time since Thursday,
but to-day it snowing so hard that I cannot go
out at all. I hope i shall soon be able to come
down, as I feel almost dead shut up in the House
so long, I received a letter from Bulpit and Hall
this morning telling me he had placed five
hundred to my credit at Alresford this very much
supprise me has i did not expect or want it. But
I suppose by that the Winchesters are beginning
to feel uncomforable. I hope you will forgive
me for not writing offener. I have not forgot the
Vermouth for Mrs. Hopkins. I will bring it
down with me when I come remember me kindly
to Mrs. Hopkins. I hope she enjoying good
health. Mamma begs to be remembered. I
think Mamma will come down to Winchester
soon. M’Cann, my old valet, has been with me
this day, he is going home to-morrow. There are
several of my brother officers are to call on me
this week. Carter, my old groom, got discharged for
coming to see me so i employed him myself again.
He got a letter yesterday when in London praying
that he should not have anythink to do with me,
has so many would be ruined by it. Carter says
he told them that,if they where all to be hung he
would not tell a lie for them.
‘ I hope my dear friend to soon have the pleasure
of seeing you, 4 truly yours
4 R. C. D. Tichboune.’
And now comes a letter in the month of April
which is certainly of very great importance, be-
cause it may furnish us with a clue to some of
the knowledge exhibited by the defendant with
regard to important circumstances in Roger
Tichborne’s career. On the 20th of April he
writes:—
‘My dear Mamma, —I have seen the Doctor.
He says lam a great deal better. I hope my dear
mamma you have found some of the letters.’
What letters was he hoping his mother should
find some of? There were many letters, as yout
know, written by Roger with reference to things
which happened to him in his excursions and wan-
derings in South America, and upon this subject-
the defendant always exhibited a considerable
amount of knowledge. Was that knowledge


i >found in those letters or was it derived from his
«wu memory ? No explanation is given of it.
-The defendant’s mouth is shut on the subject, so
we must not press it against him. But there were
some letters at this time in the month of April,
when he was about to take the initiatory steps in
iis litigation which the defendant desired that
his mother should find ; of course, that he might
have the opportunity of seeing their contents.
Here is a letter to Lady Tichborne, of which I
shall read a portion :
‘ Essex-lodge, 29th April.
‘My dear Mamma, —I have sent Carter up to
London, as he will call and leave you this note.
I have gent both horses to be sold. My reason
for doing so is if known they would be seized for
Cubitt’s bill. The sheriff’s officer was down here
on Saturday night late. They thought the house
rad furniture belonged to me. I sent for Mr.
Holmes, and he came and sent them away. He
showed them the recept you received from Miss
Laurance. When they had seen the recept was
n your name they went away You see
nama dear if I hire horses when I want them
ihey can’t take them away. I hope my dear
nama you are better than you were. I am a great
leal better now that it busted. I am my dear
nama your affectionate son, B. C. D. Tichisornk.’
Now in 10 lines of this letter we have no fewer
ban 10 mistakes, and the occurrence of the ‘ Dear
lamina ’no less than six times. This repetition
f ‘ Dear Mamma ’ is highly characteristic of the
efendant, and the entire absence is no less cha-
tcteristic of the letters of Roger Tichborne. He
l ways says ‘My dear Mother.’ Some persons
itroduce ‘ My dear Father ’ or ‘ My dear Mother ’
masionally in the course of a letter, but Roo-er
ever does.
The learned counsel for the defendant turns to
le letters of his cousin Miss Doughty, and shows
lat Roger introduces some similar expressions of
fection several times in the course of his letters
i her. But then it must be said that his feelings
ere very much interested in that case. But in
s letters to his mother nothing of the kind
curs. But here in 17 lines there are no fewer
an seven 4 mammas,’ and you may take it that
e number of 4 dear mammas ’ is about one to
ery three lines. This letter is from the defen-
nt to the Dowager Lady Tichborne :
‘Mat/ 11, 1867.
My dear Mamma,—l did not write Because I
is not very well, and could not spare Carter. I
t sorry to say, mamma, that Mary is very unwell
(lay. . • • I saw Mr. Holmes last night; he
rs he will be ready to file bills on Tuesday,
it he wants 5007. before he can file them. I
ve got about 307., mamma dear, but that you
i, mamma dear, is not sufficient. . . . Next
esday is Mary Birthday, and Mr. Lang Father
coming to dine with us, so do try and come,
.ma dear. You know, Mamma dear, it of great
portance that these gentlemans come to see me.
3ause it gets all over Hampshire, hoping to
eive a few lines from you, I remain your affec-
nate son,
4 R. C. D. Tichhorne.’
)n the 22nd of May he writes the following
;er:—
4 2, IVellesley-villas, IVellesley-ro.id,
'Mat/ 22,1867.
My dear Mamma,—l spoke to Mr. Holmes
ut you agoing to call on him to-day. And he
s he will not be at home. This is the Derby
, and they have all gone to the races. It was
very kind of you to send me the oranges and the
sparrowgrass. Mary and the baby pass a very
good night, and are quite well, as also little Agnes,
seems to be very fond of the baby, as she crys to
go and see it every time she go upstairs. I re-
ceived a letter from Talbot constable yesterday.
I hope he does not come until I am well, it makes
me so ill to be talking so much. lam not very
well to day, so I am keeping my bed, and I do not
intend to get up, the Dr. as not been to day yet.
He told me yesterday to go to bed and put a
poltice on. But i did not put it on until last
night when I went to bed, so I think that make
me worse to day. But I will soon be all right,
Mama dear. It only a little inflamed and will soon
go away if I keep quite. Will you, my dear Mama,
answer talbot letter for me. I don’t lick the way
he writes.. I think he been tampered with by the
other parties. We must be very careful, my dear
Mama, now my Case is so strong. If he was to
come up to be God-father to my son and then say
he did not know me it would injure my case very
much. I will leave all to you, my dear Mama,
only be careful. Mary and little Agnes join me,
my dear Mama, in kind love to you.
‘ Your affectionate son,
‘ R. C. D. Tichbokne.
‘ Lady James Tichborne.’
On the 27th he writes as follows :
~, , „ ‘27 May, 1867.
My dear Mama, —I think it will be best to give
Mr. l'ucker the 50 per cent, on condition that he
pays the money the day after the bill will be
filed ... I must get some ware (sic) for I
have not a pound in the world. I am sorry that
I shall cause you so much anxiety about my affair.
Had I have known it (sic) before I left Australia
I would have never wrote or come home to cause
you so much truble, and to have been such a drag
on your purse; however I hope to be able to
repay you all back again and see you happy and
comfortable at Upton. I registeerd (sic) the boy
this morning under the name of Roger Joseph
Doughty according as I think you desired it.
And I remain, my dear Mama, your affectionate
®° n > • ‘R. C. D. Tichbokne.’
On the 31st of May, 1867, he wrote ns follows :
‘My dear Mama, —You will think it very
strange that I did not write to you yesterday, but
I gave Bogle and Carter leave to go and see’ the
races, and several persons called, that the day
passed away before I knew it was gone. My dear
Mama, Mr. Tucker called to see me last night, but
did not stay long. He was saying that he was
coming down on Saturday with you to have baby
christened. You must remember, my dear Mama,
that Mr. Tucker is a Protestant, and cannot be a
sponsor. Besides, my dear Mama, he is not so
respectable as I should wish, and another think,
my dear Mama, it would be wrong to make Talbot
godfather until I see him, suppose when he came
he did not remember me, and I know Radcliffe
has been continually writing to him about me.
Had you told him that that Mr. Radcliffe had
been continually writing to you about him. No.
It would be very serious and injure my case very
much. My dear mama, the case is settled, so do
not worrut youself about that. I hope, mama
dear, you will come on Saturday to see me,
although I should like to leave the christening
for some time yet. There is nothing to fear, as
they are both so healthy. Mr. Baigent is here
and lam so glad, as I was so lonely before; he
beg to be remembered to you, my dear mama.
Do not forget to let me know who that Captain


Barstow was. Mary and Baby and little Agnes
are quite well, and joins me in love to you, my
dear mama, I have not said anything to Mary
about the christening, but I have very strong
reasons for not having it done on Saturday, which
I cannot commit to paper, But wh I will tell you
all about when we are alone. God bless you, my
dear mama.
‘ From yr affectionate Son,
R. C. D. Tichborne.’
The next month, June, begins with a letter on
the 2nd to Lady Tichborne, in which the defend-
ant acknowledges the receipt of a cheque for 18£.
He refers to the book on Paris, written by some
fellow who thinks nobody has been there but him,
and advises her not to be at the trouble of reading
it. On June 12th he says he expects to be in
London next day, and if so will call upon her.
He refers to Captain Lichfield having called the
day before, and mentions the annoyance of the
captain because he would not see him, and he in-
timates that there were others waiting outside,
including Mr. Bowker. Some inquiry was made
as to who he could have meant by Captain Lich-
field, and one idea was that Captain Strickland, a
naval officer, was meant. Now, if this was Captain
Strickland, it is a curious thing that the defend
ant should write of him as Captain Lichfield. On
the 27th of June the defendant addresses the fol-
lowing letter to Lady Tichborne: —
“ My dear Mamma, —I arrived quite safe back
again, as I hope you did; when I got here I seen
Mr. Holmes, he has seen Mr. Norris and Tucker
today. I believe the matter remains much about
the same. I tell you what I wish you to do. my
dear Mamma that is, has Guardian to Roger
Joseph, to engage Mr. Norris for him in this
suit for Thursday, and if Mr. Norris declines let
me know at Rous. Swan Inn. Alresford. Of
course I will pay all expences. Mr. Bulpett was in
town today and seen Mr. Holmes and sent me a
letter to say that on Monday he will place fifty
pound to my credit. I have told Mary to send
your letter on to me. and have left a anvelope
address to myself for that purpose. I am obliged
to start from here by the ten oclock train as there
is no other train from Waterloo station that calls
at Farnbrough but the eleven oclock train. I will
write to you on Saturday night so that you get
it on Monday morning, and be sure to write me in
return. It is not necessary for me to come back
oil Wednesday, so most likely I shall stop for some
time. Be very careful what you say, my dear
Mamma. Now that the Bill is filed to any body
that calls on you. Mary and Roger are quite well,
as I hope, my dear Mama, yourself and dear
little Agnes is. The people at Victoria station
showed me great attension tonight when I went
back. God Bless you, my dear Mama, and dear
little Agnes.—Ever your affectionate son,
‘ R. C. D. Tichborne.’
After writing this letter the defendant went
down again to Alresford, and on this occasion
began one of those ‘ progresses’—as I may almost
term them—which he from this time made in
those parts of the country where there were any
Carabineers to be found. At Sandhurst there
were several old Carabineers, and among them
one Cairns, a very intelligent man, whose assist-
ance seems to have been obtained by the defend-
ant and used on one or two important occasions.
Carter was at this time in the defendant’s service
as a groom, and M’Cann, who had formerly acted
as Roger Tichborne’s military servant for a con-
siderable time, was also taken into the service of
the defendant for nothing at all—he waa an old
man, quite worn out, and he died not long ago.
Of course he could give the defendant very im-
portant information. Now, Carter was sent to
Sandhurst and supplied with money, and no
doubt those men who were at Sandhurst were
prepared by Carter for the reception of the
defendant. Well, the defendant goes down to
Sandhurst, and is. acknowledged by these men.
On the 30th of June the defendant writes to
Lady Tichborne as follows:
‘ Swan Hotel, Alresford, Hants, June 30,1867.
‘My dear Mamma,—We arrived here quite
safe last night after having been at Sandhurst,
where we have been very suxessful in getting
more witness, having met Sargt. Cairns and his
wife, who knew me directly they seen me. I have
only seen Mr. Hopkins and Dr. Lipscombe at
present, to-day being Sunday lam having a
rest. I receved your letter this morning with
the Cheque for ten pound. Of cause, my dear
Mama, you have no need to send me the Cheque
for twenty this week, as I will pay the Bills out
of what money I got. Mr. and Mrs. Hopkins
begs to be kindly remembered, has also the Dr.
To-morrow is to be our busy day. We have six
person coming from Sandhurst who I seen
yesterday and about thirty that live in this
neighbourhood. I hope, my dear Mama, you will
write and let me know how you are and dear
little Agues. I think I shall stay down here for
two or three months. I am going to meet
Captain Haywood, to-morrow one of my Brothers
officers. Ho staying here with Mr. Sumnor and
he is agoing to call on me to-morrow morning. I
will let you know the result of the interview to
morrow night. Colonel Lushington has come
back. But I have not seen him yet. But I shall
to morrow, dont forget to write, my dear Mama,
as lam very anxious to hear from you. It a
lovely day here. The Sun is so worm and beauti-
ful. I have no more to say at present, my dear
Mama, except to thank your for your letter and
the Cheque.
‘ ever your affectionate son,
‘ R. C. D. Tichborne.’
There is a reference in this last letter to the
defendant being about to see a brother officer of
the Carabineers, who at this time became Major
Hey wood, and a somewhat strange proceeding was
taken. Major Heywood was staying somewhere
in the neighbourhood, and it was desirable that he
should see the Claimant, and if possible identity
him, as his former brother-officer. Of course
it was desirable that Major Heywood should pro-
nounce an opinion for himself without a bias
being produced by any foregone conclusion. But
this Sergeant-Major Cairns, an intelligent, quick
fellow, who knew all about the regiment, and wha
was therefore a useful auxiliary, was fetched from
Sandhurst by Rous at the instance of Mr. Holmes,
and placed in such a position at Alresford as.
to have an oppoitunity of talking to Major Hey-
wood before he saw the defendant. Cairns was.
afterwards used for a similar purpose with re-
gard to another officer who was called as a witness
—Major Norbury. In cross-examination Cairns,
is asked:—
‘ Did the defendant ask you to assist in looking
up the military witnesses ?—No. Nothing of the
kind passed between you?— Nothing. Have you
been asked, or have you not? Yes, Mr. Holmes
asked mo. Before I ask you about Mr. Holmes
let me ask you, did you go to Alresford? —Yes.
You had seen him and recognised him at Sand-
L


hurst ? —Yes. Then why did you go to Alresford ?
—Mr. Rouse came for me. Mr. Holmes sent him.
Whit for?—To see Major Hey wood. You were
a witness at the last trial?—Yes. What was
said to you about examining Major Hey wood ?—I
said I should like to see him on account of his
having been captain in my troop. What did you
send to him for ?—Because I wanted to see him
on account of his being my old officer. I want to
know what was passing in your mind at that
time ? —Nothing. When did you see Mr. Holmes ?
—On the 29th of June. How long was it since
you had seen Major Hey wood before ?—Seven or
eight years. Mr. Holmes told me to call upon
him.’
Rous is sent to fetch him from Sandhurst, and
he goes to Alresford in consequence, as he says,
of his having expressed a desire to see an officer
whom he had formerly known in the regiment.
I don’t mean to say that he did not express such
a desire, but inasmuch as he did not say anything
to Major Heywood on his own account, and as his
whole conversation had reference to Roger Tich-
borne, I interpret his meaning to be that when he
was told that Major Heywood was going to see
the defendant he said * Let me see Major Heywood
first.’ Then he is asked:—
‘Did you ask Major Heywood if he remembered
the twitching of the eyes ?—I don’t remember, but
I think not. I will not say if I mentioned it or
not. Did you tell the Major how it was you had
recognized him?—l think not. How long were
you with him ?—We walked up the street together
for 100 yards, and then I came back with him to
the Swan.’
It is obvious that he had nothing to say to the
Major on his own account, for he talked about
nobody but Roger Tichborne, and was no doubt
preparing the Major’s mind for seeing the defen-
dant. Being at Alresford, and having before, as
he says, recognized the defendant, he is asked
whether he had any conversation after this with
the defendant. He says he had, and the defen-
dant asked him about officers and men, and several
things in the regiment. What, gentleman, was
the purpose of this conversation as to persons
who had been officers and soldiers in the regi-
ment ? Was it to enable the defendant to obtain
knowledge of matters which he, if he were Roger
Tichborne, had forgotten, or which he, if he be
mot Roger, had no means of knowing? Then
there is a letter of the 2nd of July to the Dowager
Lady Tichborne:—
‘ 2 July , 67, Swan Hotel, Alresford, Hants.
‘ My dear mama, —I read your kind letter this
morning, and I am delighted to hear Mr. Norris
is going to act for my son. We have succeeded
first class since we been here, and met Major
Haywood here yesterday. He called upon me
and Mr. Sumner, the Bishop of Winchester’s son.
He was one of my brother officers, but he recog-
nized me at once, and made an affidavit at once.
I likewise was very successful at Sandhurst, has I
met there who I had not seen before. I had
them all down here, and they had their milatory
clothes on, and I think they though I was going
going to take the town. I hope, my dear mama,
that you and Agnes are quite well. You will see
Mr. Holmes. I have told him to call upon you,
but will write again to-morrow. I have seen Mr.
Stubbs, who remembered me perfectly well, and
begs kindly to be remembered to you, and also to
Mr. Hopkins, and to several others more. I am
going again to Mr. Gilbert Onslow at Tichborne
at four o’clock this afternoon and Mr. Shelly.
Mr. Benson called yesterday and left his card.
Mr. Bishop and Mr. Longs called'yesterday. Col.
Lushington and Mr. Brodie, and several other
persons. Mrs. Bnlpett has just called, so I must
say goodbye, my dear mama, for present.
‘ Ever your affectionate son,
‘ ROGER C. D. TICHJiORNE.’
The ‘ Mr. Gilbert Onslow’ mentioned in this
letter is obviously meant for Mr. Guilford Onslow.
In a letter written on the 4th of July the defen-
dant says:— ‘ It cost me very near all my 50 1. at
Alresford this trip.’ How could he have spent
50 1. during a stay of only two or three days at an
hotel? Unless he expended money in treating
persons for giving or obtaining information in his
favour, I cannot see how a stay of a few days at
the S wan should cost him 50 1. There was a letter,
gentlemen, written by the defendant after the in-
terview with Mr. Danby Seymour, and in it the
name of Mr. Seymour was spelt ‘ Seymore.’ There
are also two letters from the defendant to Lady
Tichborne, dated respectively February 12 and
February 15. One of them is in the following
terms:—
‘ Alresford, Feb. 12,1867.
‘My dear Mamma, —I received thi3 morning the
letter you sent to Mr. Holmes, and I am very sorry
to hear the sea is so rough, has I know you cannot
be comfortable where you are. lam staying a
few days with Mr. Hopkins, who has been very
kind to me, has also Mr. Baigent, my door Mamma
it no use for any of them to deny me now has I
have seen so many that know me. Mr. Stubbs
and Mr. Huggins called on me yesterday and re-
membered me well has also Col. Lushington, of
cause ho did not know me before but he was so
convince by some questions he ask me that they
rung the Tichborne bells yesterday in honour of
my arrival. I forgot to menshion that himself
and Mrs. Lushington lunches with us to-day. I
have wrote to uncle Seymore, as also Mr. Hopkins,
but we have not receved an answer yet, but prapas
he will come here to-day. I should have wrote
before, my dear Mamma but I have expected you
in England every day. I shall leave here to-
morrow night for Croydon, so has to come and
meet you. Gosford came here on last Saturday.
He did not know I was here, he says he came to
see Mr. Hopkins, but Mr. H. would ave him be -
cause he wrote such a lot of falsehoods to him
about me. Gosford is quite willing to believe iam
myself now has he has told a great many people
about here that he must have been mistaken.
He pretends to be very angry with Cullington for
writing what he did to my friend hopkins, and
say he did not ortherise him to do so. He came
here on account of some very severe letters Mr.
Hopkins wrote to Cullington about his Conduct
to me, but Mr. Hopkins refuse to see him on ac-
count of his Blackard Conduct to me. He left he
to go home again, but came to Tichborne Chaple
from Winchester on Sunday, thinking he would
see me, but i did not go. Cousin Katty would
very much like to see me, but Col. W. will not
let her come he is afraid she will be called on has
a witness. It does not matter has I have a hun-
dred witness here, if I want them. I hope my
dear Mamma you are better in health than you
where. I shall come and meet you. as soon as I
get back, if you have not arrived. I have a great
many things to tell you when I see you. Dr.
Conor has just be in to see me again, he is very
kind, and, in fact, so are all tho people about
here.
‘ Hoping, my dear Mamma, soon to be with you


and enjoy many happy days in your company, I
remain, my dear Mamma, your affectionate son,
‘ROGER C. Tichborne.
‘ the name of the house at Croydon is Essex
Lodge, thornton heath.
‘Dowager Lady Tichborne, Hotel Dessin,
Calais, France.’
To my mind the most important part of these
letters is that in both he spells the name of Sey-
mour * Seymore.’ Roger Tichborne kuew how to
write that name just as well as his own, and this
is therefore a most formidable point in the case.
The learned counsel for the defendant said that in
the reign of Charles I. a member of this same
family took it into his head to sign his name Sey-
more, and did so sign it, as if that could in any
degree affect this case. Roger Tichborne had read
a little history, but his researches were not so re-
condite as those of the learned counsel, and he
would hardly Know anything of this Seymour in
the reign of Charles I. signing his name in this
■eccentric manner.
It was about this time that that remarkable
correspondence arose between the defendant and
Captain Polhill Turner. The defendant had a
circular drawn up. It was prepared, no doubt, in
the attorney’s office, and although addressed to
various officers it is evidently a circular. This is
the form of it: —
‘ sth July , 1867.
‘ My dear Polhill, —No doubt you have seen in
the papers of my return to England after long ab-
scence. I intend to see all my old brother officers.
Will it be convenient for you to see me if I call
upon you some day next week ? If so, I will do
myself the pleasure of making a journey for the
purpose.—Yours faithfully,
‘ R. C. D. Tichborne.’
Captain Polhill Turner, who resided near Bedford,
thereupon invites him to lunch with him. On the
9th of July the defendant writes: —
‘ Dear Polhil, —I have much pleasure in accept-
ing your kind invitation for Wednesday next.
Thanks for your letter. You will find me much
stouter than I was in the Carabineers. —Yours
faithfully,
‘ R. C. D. Tichborne.’
Instead, however, of going down, he sends this
telegram:—
‘ I am suddenly obliged to go into Hampshire
this morning, to see most important witnesses who
are going away. Excuse, therefore for not being
with you to-day as arranged. I will write to you
by this post.’
He accordingly writes to him on the 10 th of Jilly,—
‘ Dear Polhill, —I intended doing myself the
pleasure of calling on you to day, but my solicitor
found it necessary I should start for Hampshire
to see some friends who were about taking a
journey, and it is very important to my case that
I should see them. I hope it will not be long
before Tichborne and yourself meet. Yours
truly, * R. C. D. Tichborne.’
However, it appears from another letter that the
acceptance of the invitation was altogether de-
lusive, and that he did not intend to go to lunch
with Captain Polhill Turner at all. Captain
Turner, I may remark, had been captain of the
troop to which Roger Tichborne was transferred,
and, therefore, he would be a very likely person
to recognize him. On the 10th of July he writes
to Lady Tichborne :
‘ My dear Mamma, —I saw Mr. Holmes has soon
as I got back from the station. I told him I did
not entend to go to lunch with Polhill, at Bedford,
at all. I told him what I thought, and he was
quite satified. He had received a letter from
Alresford saying Mr. and Mrs. Marks were about
leaving for Spithead, and wished to see me again,
as it was necessary before signing their affidavids
so I start by the 11.40 train from Waterloo. I
shall only be away a few days. lam going to
write to Mr. Scott and the two Miss Onslows, as
I wish to get their affidavit before I come back. I
told you I would not go to Bedford, and I am not
agoing to. I hope, my dear mamma, you will
write and let me know what is going on. I will
call on Mr. Norris. Agnes, Roger Joseph, and
Mary are quite well, and joins me in love to you,
my dear mamma. I hope Joseph comes before I
start, but I write this in case not. God bless
you my dear mamma. Mr. Leith called before
bed-time, and stayed a few minutes. He wish to
be remembered to you.
‘ Your very very affectionate son,
“ R. C. D. Tichborne.’
This letter is read to the defendant in his cross-
examination, and he is asked why he had accepted
the invitation, when it is apparent he did not
intend to go. His answer is— ‘ My mother did not
wish me to do it. I think she had an objection
to my going.’ He says when he wrote the letter
he intended to go to visit Captain Polhill-Turner,
but subsequently he made an excuse by saying
that he wanted to go to Hampshire. When ques-
tioned about it long afterwards the defendant
says he might have had some reason for it at the
time, but that at so long a distance of time he
cannot explain it.
Now, we come to the end of July, when it was
necessary for the defendant to take his initiatory
steps in this legislation. The first step was an
application to the Court of Chancery, and it
became necessary to file an affidavit stating the
particulars connected with himself from the
time of Roger Tichborne’s leaving England till the
time of the defendant’s return. Accordingly, ho
stated those facts shortly in an affidavit. On his
filing this affidavit the opposite party were en-
titled to cross-examine upon it, and Mr. Roupell
was appointed to take the evidence. And here
the question presents itself, What were the sources
of information which the defendant was at that time
possessed of to enable him, independently of his
own mind and memory, to answer tin questions
which were put to him ? As one view of this case
is that he is not Roger Tichborne, we have to see
whether we can explain and account for the
knowledge which, if he be not Roger, he would
ostensibly, and only ostensibly, present.
Lady Tichborne had been living witli with him
for some time, and although she had now left
Croydon, he was in constant communication with
her. Nowit would be quite inconsistent, [think,
with truth and justice, and certainly with the
views I have already expressed, to suggest that
Lady Tichborne would have lent herself to what
she believed to be a fraud. But she started with
assuming and believing that any ignorance the
Claimant might possibly display was not to be set
down against him, because she believed that his
memory had become impaired ; that his brain had
become more or less disordered by all In had gone
through; and that, when he could not state things
which Roger Tichborne might have bee expected
to state, it was to be ascribed to the loss of
memory, and when he statod things which Ro ,cr
Tichborne could not have stated, it vas to bo
pfit down to the disordered state of hi- intellect.
Well, that being so, she would naturallv seek to
i, 2


lielp him, and instead of being startled by incon-
sistencies and contradictions, which would have
startled anbody else, she came to his assistance.
Besides that, he had several other sources from
which he might derive information. He had
brought Bogle over with him, who knew every-
thing that had happened in the Tichborne family.
Again, there was Mr. Baigent. who had become the
defendant’s active ally, and who apparently was
not particularly scrupulous as to the means to be
used for promoting his claim. For this was the
gentleman who went about the country taking
notes of what the Carabineers and other people
who were brought into the presence of the defen-
dant had said, and then comparing them together
and issuing these affidavits so as to prepare the
minds of witnesses for accepting the defendant as
the true man. And that is not all by any means,
for we find that the statements taken from the lips
of different witnesses, and afterwards moulded in
the form of affidavits, were in several instances
most materially expanded, enlarged, and improved
under the skilful manipulation of Mr. Baigent.
Well, no one knew more about the family than Mr.
Baigent, who had been engaged in writing a history
of Hampshire, and who was by profession an anti-
quarian and archaeologist. Then there was M’Cann,
whom he took into his establishment—l won’t say
into his service—and who could give him informa-
tion about the military life of Roger Tichborne of
the utmost importance. Carter and M’Cann knew
all about his military life. Carter had been in
Roger Tich borne’s service, and virtually in his
regiment, for the whole period of Roger Tich-
borne’s life in England. These three persons—
Carter, Bogle, and M’Cann—were persons whom
it was not necessary for him to take into his ser-
vice, and he must have known, if the matter ever
came to trial, they would be called as witnesses.
It is a most improper thing, when you are going
to call a man as a witness, not to leave him in-
dependent of you as far as possible. I don’t mean
to say if a man is your servant that yot are to dis-
charge him if you want him to become a witness ;
but when persons come forward in your behalf as
witnesses, the last thing you should think of doing
is to take those persons into your house and make
them dependent upon your bounty. The defendant
may not possibly have been aware of the fact that
it would be likely to prejudice him hereafter, but
how Mr. Holmes could have passed the fact over I
don’t know. Mr. Holmes ought to have said to
him, ‘ Don’t do that on any account, because it
will be said that you have taken them into your
establishment for the purpose of obtaining in-
formation fiom them.’ I don’t know whether Mr.
Holmes had his reasons for not advising his client
against taking so objectionable a course. You
will see whether those people were not made
valuable for bis purpose ; but don’t let it be sup-
posed that I mean to say that Carter, M’Cann, or
Bogle wer leagued with him in a conspiracy—
that is to say, if it shall appear to you that he has
committed fraud. It is wholly unnecessaiy to
believe anything of the kind. But yet they
might very i usily be made available for his pur-
pose, if his purpose was a dishonest one; because
a clever man would not have the slightest diffi-
calty in extracting from these people in the course
of an app; ivntly casual conversation any infor-
mation that they possessed. It would be the
easiest thing in the world, .and the men from
whom the information would be obtained be per-
fectly unconscious of their being made tools of.
Now, b sides the persons I have mentioned,
there is another, Miss Braine, who not only comes
forward very willingly as a witness for the de-
fendant, but who had been staying in his house
for months at a time. Miss Braine is a singularly
intelligent person, who in the course of the 12
months she spent at Tichborne with the Doughty
family you may depend upon it acquired a great
deal of information about the Doughty family
and the Tichborne family. You will have to con-
sider by-and-by when we come to her evidence
whether the course she pursued does not fairly
lead to the conclusion that she may have afforded
to the defendant such information and assistance
as she thought he required.
Passing by the persons by whom the defendant
was surrounded, let us see what documentary evi-
dence he possessed. There was the life of Roger
Tichborne at Paris. About that there were no
documents which the defendant could obtain.
Then there was the life of Roger Tichborne at
Stonyhurst. Does he do anything to prepare
himself for that? "Well, his attorney takes very
good care to get a list of the Jesuit Fathers who
were at Stonyhurst in Roger’s time, so that if any
questions are asked about them it may be forth-
coming as a source of information. Did that list
come into the hands of the defendant ? Well,
there was a tremendous struggle upon that point
in the defendant’s cross-examination. The de-
fandant positively denied having ever seen it. He
denied all knowledge of its having been supplied.
I should here remind you that Mr. Anthony Nor-
ris was Lady Tichborne’s solicitor. The defendant
is asked:—
‘ Do you mean to swear that Mr. Holmes, your
attorney, did not send to Mr. Norris, the Dowa-
ger’s attorney, a list of the Jesuit fathers ?—That
is a great scandal on Mr. Norris and a great im-
putation on Mr. Holmes. If such a thing had ex-
isted, I did not think Mr. Holmes would have
allowed me to see it. Do you mean to swear that
you never read it?—Do you think if I had had
such a paper as you are speaking of, I should go a
fortnight afterwards to be examined and know
nothing about it ? —Will you swear you did not
see it ?—I will not swear, but if I did I have no
knowledge of it.’
The defendant is much pressed on this point,
and after a while Mr. Serjeant Ballantine admits
that Mr. Holmes did get this list from Mr. Norris,
and the defendant is further pressed as to whether
he had not read it before his examination by Mr.
Roupell. He persists in saying that lie does not
know what has become of it and has no remem-
brance of having seen it. It appeared, however,
that this list of the Jesuit fathers did reach the
hands of the defendant and we must suppose that
it was not procured without some purpose.
Whether he made use of it is a totally different
matter, but it must have been obtained either for
refreshing his memory, if he were really Roger
Tichborne, or, if he were not, for supplying to him
information which he had never before possessed.
So much for Stonyhurst.
As regards Roger’s life in the Army, papers were
procured—which fact was, of course, unknown to
the various officers and soldiers—from the Horse
Guards, at the instance of the defendant, one
giving an account of all matters connected with
the service of Roger Tichborne individually ; and
a second and more elaborate one, with details and
particulars relating to the movements of the regi-
ment during the time it was in Ireland and after-
wards at Canterbury. These documents mentioned
the names of officers, the pine s w.e.iv the regim.ut


was stationed, and various other particulars. Of
course, if a man studied these papers they would
afford a rich mine of information of which to
make use, and when he met one of the officers or
soldiers he might then be possessed of a number
of details which would be very valuable. It is
not absolutely necessary, however, because these
papers were obtained by the defendant’s advisers,
to come to the conclusion that this was done dis-
honestly, and because he was not Sir Roger Tich-
borne. It does not prove that the possession of
these papers necessarily implied dishonesty. Some
of us who might be going to be examined in a
court of justice respecting events that happened
long ago might wish to refresh our memories as to
certain points, and if we had kept diaries we
should seek to renew our recollection so that we
might be able to give satisfactory answers. I can
quite understand that a man might get such do-
cuments for the purpose of using them quite
honestly and legitimately. At the same time,
such information might be used dishonestly, not
for the purpose of recalliug forgotten events, but
in order to supply knowledge which had never
been possessed.
Besides these papers, there were the letters of
Roger Tichborne to his father and mother, many
of which have been kept and produced before us,
and which give a copious account of Roger’s pro-
ceedings, and there are also the letters to Lady
Doughty; and the defendant has stated in another
part of the cross-examination that he sent a copy
of his journal—the same which he sent to Mrs.
Seymour—to his mother. Now, where is that ex-
tract ? Lady Tichborne would have been quite
as likely to keep that as any of the other letters
he sent from South America —in fact, more likely,
because it contained all the details. Lady Tich-
borne died on the 12th of March, 1868, and, by a
subsequent order of the Court of Chancery, the
defendant gave up the papers and documents
which were in his possession until the issue was
determined. All the papers and documents were
in his possession from the time of Lady Tichbome’s
death up till June, when they were deposited in
the Court of Chancery: and during that time he
had the opportunity of reading the letters. It is
probable that he did read them —I don’t say that
he did; I only say that he had the opportunity.
Again, it is certain that Roger Tichborne kept a
diary. Mr. Gosford, in whose office Roger used to
sit and read and write, says he knew he kept a
diary because he had repeatedly heard him say,
referring to circumstances which had occurred, ‘ I
will put that down in my diary.’ Lady Radcliffe
is asked whether he kept a journal, and she said
she knew he did, because she had frequently
heard him say, ‘ I will enter that in my diary
and then she had in her possession a scrap of
paper, in the undoubted writing of Roger Tich-
borne, on which he had written, ‘ I must try to
enter that in my journal,’ which conclusively
proves that he kept a diary. Now, the defendant
agrees that Roger Tichborne did keep a diary, for
in his cross-examination he was asked: —
‘We heard that latterly you kept a diary ?
You heard I kept a diary: where? You men-
tioned that in South America you kept a diary ?
Yes, very likely. I want to know when you be-
gan to keep a diary ?—I think the diary I spoke
of was in my last trip to South America, but. I did
keep a diary previous to that. When did it be-
gin?—That is hard, but I dare say I can. Did
you keep one at Stonyhurst ?—No, I do not think
so. Are you sure ? —No, lam not sure. I believe
towards the latter part I did. Then did you keep
tt intermittingly, and then in 1852 begin to keep
it regularly ?—Yes. And what did you do with
your diaries ?—I am sure Ido not know what be-
came of them. Did you leave them behind when
you went away?—l do not know. I have not the
slightest idea what became of them.’
Afterwards he said the books in which the
diary was kept were not left with Lady Tich-
borne, but stated that, to the best of his belief,
they were left with Mr. Gosford, who, however,
denies that they were ever left with him at all.
The question is, what became of them ? It is ex-
tremely unlikely that he took them with him to
South America; and if he didnot he would in all
probability leave them in tho care of his parents,
who would naturally preserve them as memorials
of their son. If these documents came into the
possession of Lady Tichborne after her husband’s
death, there is nothing irrational in supposing
that they found their way into the hands of the
defendant. If, gentlemen, you think this is likely
to have happened, you will find in the circum-
stance a solution of more than one difficulty over
which at the present moment a mystery hangs,
and which we have not, through the evidence, the
means of explaining and throwing light upon.
After all, however, this is only a possibility, and I
cannot say the conclusion is one at which you
must necessarily arrive. I only submit the pos-
sibility to your consideration as being capable of
affording a solution of many difficulties in this
case.
Eleventh Day. Friday, February 13, 1874.
Gentlemen of the Jury,—l mentioned to you
yesterday the different sources of information
from which it occurred to me as possible that the
defendant had obtained some assistance. Whether
he did use those opportunities for the purpose of
preparing for his examination in Court, whether
he had recourse to such information, is of course
matter of speculation. He himself denies that he
had made any preparation for his examination,
but then he is met by his letter of the 28 th of
July, which would lead to a different conclusion.
He says:—
‘ July 28, 1867-
I My dear Mamma, —I was surprised to hear
that you was at Mr. Norris’s. If I had known it I
should have been there to (sic). I shall be in
London all day to-morrow preparing for my ex-
amination on Tuesday; so I am afraid, my dear
Mamma, I shall not see you until Wednesday. It
appears that Elizaberth (sic) did not write the
letter as May says. But I have letter and she
wrote me to you, so we can compare them and
see the childrens are all quite well as I hopo my
dear Mamma you are.—Your affectionate son,
* R. C. D. Tichborne.’
The spelling of ‘ Elizaberth’is remarkable. Ho
spells it in the same way in the blank he himself
filled in in his affidavit, and it will not be an un-
important fact for your consideration when we
come to the Arthur Orton case, which we are now
fast approaching.
Well, he was cross-examined at the Law Insti-
tution. At this stage Ido not intend to go into
the answer he gave on that occasion, because all
that will more properly find a place when we
come to that part of the inquiry which relates to
the tests applied to the defendant to try liis know-
ledge or ignorance of the life of Roger Tichborne.


His cross-examination was held on the 30th and
31st of July, 1867, when he presented himself for
the first time in public, and it was the first time
the members of the Tichborne family whom he
had not sought, and who had not sought him, had
an opportunity of seeing him. There were pre-
sent besides Mr. and Mrs. Radcliffe and Mr. Danby
Seymour, who had seen him before, Lady Doughty,
Mrs. Greenwood, Colonel Greenwood, Mrs. Hib-
bert, Mr. Alfred S vmour, and four of the officers
who were in the Carabineers with Roger Tich-
borne, and all these persons say that the defend-
ant did not recognise them.
Now, of course, very much depends upon the
meaning which is attached to the word “ recog-
nize.” If it means recognizing by any of the
usual outward signs, there appears to be no doubt
on the matter. The defendant knows perfectly
well that the members of the Tichborne and Sey-
mour families looked upon him as an impostor,
and I can very well understand the reluctance of
a man under such circumstances to expose him-
self in a public room to a rebuff, which would
probably have been the case if he had walked up
to Lady Doughty or any one of them and offered
to shake hands. Dr. Kenealy put it that the
defendant was a proud man, and that, knowing
the feelings by which the family were animated,
he treated them with contempt, and would not
stoop to seek for their recognition of him. But I
should be quite willing to accept an explanation
for the absence of any outward recognition on
lower grounds—namely, that he would not expose
himself to the mortification of meeting with a
rebuff in the presence of the persons who were
assembled there. But there is another form of
recognition, and one which may apply to this
case. You may go into a room full of people and
meet a man with whom you are perfectly
acquainted, but with whom you may not be upon
speaking terms. But in such a case, if your eyes
met you would be mutually certain that a recog-
nition had occurred. There is a look of the face
and an expression of the eyes in such a case which
cannot be misunderstood.
Several of these witnesses say they looked at
the defendant, and he looked at them, but there
did not pass across his face the slightest sign of
recognition. Mr. Alfred Seymour, whom he had
not seen since his return to Eugland, says that he
went into the room before the examination
began, and was there ten minutes looking at the
defendant. His impression was that the defend-
ant had not the most distant idea of who he was,
and if there were a failure of recognition I should
say it was a circumstance which should be taken
into account. With regard to the officers, per-
haps the remarks I made in the defendant's favour
do not so strongly apply, because at that time he
did not know whether they were friends or foes.
He had full opportunity of recognizing them. Even
after the examinatien, when he was going down-
stairs to hand Lady Tichborne to her carriage,
and passed the officers on the stairs—the four of
them—Colonel (now General) Jones, Major
Phillips, Captain Fraser, and Captain Polhill
Turner, he did not recognize them. His explana-
tion is, that he.knew them at that time to be his
enemies. Then they said they followed him
downstairs, and when he was leading Lady
Tichborne to the carrage they passed him and
looked him in the face, but there was no recog-
nition. It may be, however, that they were mis-
taken, and that he knew them and did not wish
to speak to them.
Well, I pass on from that examination for the
preseat and come to the correspondence. On the
sth of September, 1837, he wrote to Lady Tich-
borne, telling her he had seen Mr. Cooke, who had
been in Australia for many years and had not
written to his friends, and he was going over to
Clonmel to see his family. Now, Mr. Cooke
knew that the defendant was the claimant of the
Tichborne Baronetcy and estates, and he was
acquainted with the Kelletts, the Sankeys, and
others whom Roger Tichborne knew in Ireland.
He saw the defendant on his return, and might
have learnt facts from him which he afterwards
surprised Captain Sankey by informing him of
He says in the same letter that Mr. Harwood was
pressing for the money due to him, and adds, ‘ i
must give him a bill a thousand for 1507. It
really A-normous, but it cannot be helped. It
will play the duce with me until i am in proses-
sion.’ Then he goes on:—
‘My dear Mamma, —I hope you will write me a
long letter every day. My dear Mamma, I see
they still are agoing to try the Bella plan. Mr.
Holmes got a letter from one spy yesterday. He
had seen the men who says they were saved from
the Bella. He asked them how it was they got
wrecked at Cape Hatteras when the boat was
picked up near Rio. Ho said that was easy ex-
plained; that a heavy sea struck the ship two-
days after they left Rio and swept the boat away.
He forgot, my dear Mamma, that a part of
the ship was picked up as well as the boat. All I
can say, my dear Mamma, is that I hope God in
His great mercy will forgive those wicked people
that has persuaded these poor sailors to perjure
themselves for a few pounds. I mention this, my
dear Mamma, for I know that person is above the
ordinary class of life and one who ought to know
better.
‘ Since writing the above a gentleman has called
on me who I knew in Melbourne. This gentle-
man says that I was pointed out to him in Mel-
bourne has the son of Sir James Tichborne.
‘ Your affectionate son,
‘ R. C. D. Tichhorne.’
‘ Perjure themselves for a few pounds.’ L
wonder to whom that would most appropriately
apply ? He speaks of a spy, but I cannot gather
from the letter whether he means a spy of Mr.
Holmes’s or of the other side. Then he wrote to-
Rous, saying,—
‘ I am sorry to hear your business has been so-
bad of late. I am afraid that tne interest you
have takeu in my behalf has done you harm, but
depend upon it I shall not let you lose by that.
An-other month or two will put an end to all my
troubles in this world, whatever they may be in
the next. They cannot be worse than in this.’
On the 14th ha wrote to Rous a letter which was-
certainly conceived in an evil spirit:—
‘My dear Rous, —I suppose yon know that
another of my enemies, Captain Strickland, is-
dead, at Stonyhurst. He called on me just before
he went, and because I was not in he abused
me most shamefully. So they will all go one day.’'
From that letter we learn a fact which we
otherwise should not have known—namely, that
Walter Strickland, the friend of Roger’s boy-
hood, his most affectionate correspondent to the
last, who was on familiar terms with his family,,
had declared himself against the defendant. The
defendant soon afterwards writes to Lady Tich-
borne as follows:
‘ Alretford r Sept. 23,1867.
‘My dear Mamma, —I am staying down here
shooting with Mr. Bulpet. I hope, my dear
mama, you will not stay in Paris. I have been.


out shooting every day. My dear mama, I think
it would be as well if I took a House down here.
Itching Abys (sic) is to let, and I think it would
suit me so much better than Croydon. I find I
could live for half the money here, and Inching
Abys (sic) is so secluded—no neighbours to annoy
us. Mr. Hoping (Hopkins) is a goin (sic) to try
and rise (sic) some money for me—and I have
been to dine with him, and we talked the matters
over. I hope my dear mamma, you have arrived
quite safe. And I also hope, my dear Mamma, it
will not be long before I shsil have the pleasure
of seeing you again. If you do not like to come
to England, I will come over and see you for a
few days. I forgot to menshun I receved the
cheque. Many thanks, my dear mama. I have
sent it away for to pay the bills as I am a week
behind with them. My friends here are still very
kind to me. Every one almost places theii shoot-
ing at my disposal. I hope, my dear Mamma,
soon to have another letter from you. I am agoin
to call on Mr. Scott to morrow. Now, my dear
Mamma, all I have to say is God bless you, and I
hope our Holy Mother will take care of you no
more at present from your affectionate son,
‘ R. C. D. TICHBOIiNK.’
Now, Itchen Abbas was a well known place.
It was called after the river which runs through
Tichborne. Every one in the neighbourhood—
almost every Hampshire man —would know it,
and yet the defendant calls it Itching Abys. In
his next letter the ‘Abbas’ remains, but the
‘ltching’becomes‘lnchin:’ —
‘ Alresford, Sept. 24,180/.
‘ My dear Mamma,—l have just receved your
kind letter. I think my dear Mama you will find
several letters at Abba Salis waiting for you. 1
mentioned in one of my letters that I was about
to take “Inchin Abbas”—l have now taken it.
And it will serve my cause a great deal As all the
gentry will call upon me. I hope my dear mama
you will not be angry with me for not waiting tor
your advice. ... I call to-day on Mr. Onslow
who receved me very kindly I have been out
several days shooting with Mr. Bulpet and I find
it has done me a great deal of good Besides the
exercise is making me a great deal thiner I have
been over Itchin Abbas to-day Mama and it is a
beautiful place I hope my dear Mamma you will
come and stay a few days with me when you come
to England Do not stay long my dear Mamma in
paris (sit). I know my dear mama you will be ill
if you do please to remember me to Abbe Salis
Hoping dear mama you will write to me as soon
as possible—Carter has just come from London
no more my dear mamma except God Bless you,
and I hope he will watch over you. Good bye my
dear mama for the present.
‘ I remain your affectionate Son
‘ R. C. D. Tichbohnu.’
Next came Lady Tichbome’s letter of the 26th of
September, in which she strongly objects to the
idea of his going to reside in Hampshire: —
‘ Paris , Sept. 26, 1867.
‘ My dearest Roger,—l am very sorry I did not
hear from you this morning. I expected to have
a letter from you. I am quite unhappy about it.
I hope you received my letter with the check for
157. I wished you to come over to me, and that
was sent for your travelling expenses ; but now I
think you had better not come, as I mean to return
to England at the beginning of next week, and it
closes next Monday—at least, they say so. I regret
my having taken the apartments for a fortnight,
as the air does not agree with me at all, it is so
sharp and keen. The Champs Elysees are full of
English, who take the open bracing air, but it
does not suit me at all. The Rue Montaigne is in
the Champs Elysees, or open into it; therefore I
think you had better not come this year, as I will
join you almost immediately: but I do not like a
house in Hampshire, my dearest Roger, as we
should be at so great distance one from the other;
you know that I am your best friend, and I think
it is better that I should be near you. Your house
has nothing to do with what you receive every
week time. I pay it besides the 201. ; therefore
your house has nothing to do with the 20 1. All
what glitters is not gold, my dear Roger; and you
must not believe that all those protestations of
friendship are true, since nobody will lend you
money. I hear many things here coming straight
from England, and you would think as I do, that
if we are not on good terms your enemies will take
advantage of it.
‘ I have just had your letter, dated the 24th.. I
am very sorry to find that you have taken Itchins
■house so far from me, and it is a gx-eat pity you
value Mr. Hopkins’ society more than mine; and
I feel very much that, notwithstanding all that I
do for you, that you have taken that house away
from me. I believe, however, that Mr. Hopkins
is not your friend so much as I am, as ho refused
to assist you with money when I asked him to
lend you some; and Ido not think that Mr. Bul-
pett is so much your friend as I have always been
to you. I beg you to break it off, and not to take
Itchin by all means. I cannot think how you can
hurt me to that degree. It is a cruel thing to me
to consider that I have given you so many proofs
of my affection, and that you prefer Mr. Hopkins
and Mr. Bulpett’s society to mine. I wish you
to break it off immediately, and not to go and live
at Itchin if you wish to show yourself ungrateful
to me ; it will also have a very bad effect in the
world your beiug on bad terms with me, as I can-
not help feeling very much the preference you
give to your friends over me, and I have always
been your best friend. lam about the only one
now, or at least I am the sincerest, but I beg of
you to break it off at any price, and to give up the
thought of going to live at Itchin, if you care for
me, which is, I am afraid, of very little oonse-
quence to you; and if there is another person
about it you must let that person have it, and you
have only to tell Mr. Hopkins, your friend, to ar-
range it for you, or to Mr. Holmes. But I should
think Mr. Hopkins, being on the spot, is more
likely to do it for you, as you must not live at
Itchin at any price. When the last word between
you and I is repeated, it will go over to your ad-
versaries; and when they know that we disagree,
of course they will be very glad. I am going back
to London immediately, and cannot send you the
‘SOI. you ask me for. I have sent you 15 1. yester-
day, and I am going to send you the 201. to pay
your weekly bills. I cannot do more.. Remember
to let that other person have Itchin who wishes
to have it, and give up the thought of living at
Itchin, away from your only sincere friend,
4 H. F. Tichborne.
‘ Your adversaries will take it as a proof against
your identity your despising my society, and pre-
ferring your Alresford friends, but you must get
rid of Itchin at any price.’
She puts the lending of money as the test of
friendship, and as one which had tried the faith
of Mr. Hopkins in his client. Now, from what we
know of the character of Roger, of his self-will
and determination to have his own way, do you


I think he would not have flown in his mother’s
face had he received such a letter from her?
Would he not have said, ‘ This is my business. I
know my own affairs.’ Ido not say that Rog
in the defendant’s position, would do that,
would have been fatal to him had his moth
ceased to be his friend, and therefore we canno
apply the test of what Roger would have do
under independent circumstances. On the 27
of September the defendant wrote to Lac
Tichborne:—
*My dear Mama, —I received your very kinc
Letter. lam very sorry my dear Mama that I c
not wait for your advice about the House
Hampshire. But you must have receive a lett
from me In which I mentions that I had alreac
taken Itchen Abbas I am very sorry my dea
Mama to have done anything that you do not a
prove of. But you see my dear Mamma I be
ilready it before receving you kind letter I a
ilso sorry I cannot come over to Paris. I shall no
jo to Itchen Abbas now until I hear from yov
'■gain. lam very much annoyed my dear Mam
;o think I have done anything contrary to you
wishes. But what can Ido now. I cannot bra]
ny word. It would be the talk of Hampshir
for it got all over Hampshire that I am going •
ive there I shall feel very miserable until I hea
rom you again For God knows my dear Mama
muld not do anything to offend you if I know i
hope my dear Mama that I shall soon see you :
was not to be here my dear Mama when remov
ig: I should lose half the little things I have
wish my dear Mama you had let me know
bout going to paris before and I should hav
rrange things accordingly. Bogle is very il
ou know my dear mama how miserable I fee
irough not being able to comply’with your wishe
nd. more so as I wished very much to see pari
jain. I think my dear mama I know an offic
lat. will advance me the five thousand pounc
; will through Mr. Hopkins the same office tha
3 rose the 37 thousand pound from. My dea
lama it now post time so I must say God Bles
m, and good bye from your affectionate am
doved son ‘ R. C. D. Tichborne ’
* Now, there are in the oourse of 30 lines no
wer then 14 ‘dear Mamas ’ —certainly a con
terable sprinkling of that mode of address
r ell, upon the paragraph in that letter which
ferred to the 37,0007. the learned counsel foi
e defendant founded this singular argument,
ith the desire of disparaging Mr. Holmes, who
is, no doubt, long since ceased to be the lega
wiser, of the defendant—that by the 27th ol
ptember, 1867, not nine months from the time
at the defendant had arrived in this country
,0007. had been swallowed up. ‘No wonder,’
id the learned counsel, ‘ that when Mr. Holmes
d sucked the orange dry he cast the peel away.’
by, it is perfectly absurd and impossible. If it
ire true, then Mr. Holmes would be a villain,
10 ought to be driven out of the profession,
t it was not until after we had interrupted the
■rned counsel and intimated that an inquiry
ist be made into the truth of such an accusa-
n, and, as I am reminded by my learned
ither, after the adjournment for luncheon, that
3 learned counsel came back into court and was
npelled to admit that his client had told him
it what he had said was entirely wrong, and
it the 37,0007. referred to was the money raised
1850, when the family settlements were made.
Vow, just imagine the recklessness of a gentle-
n, a member of the bar, who, without making
inquiry of his own client, makes a charge of this
kind against a professional gentleman of having
misappropriated 37,0007., and of having a bill of
costs for 5,0007. yet remaining unpaid! This is
sample of the many instances in which character
has been calumniated—l can use no mile er
phrase—in the course ot defence. And for into
fering with the learned counsel in the use of su
accusations we have been charged with invadi
and interfering with the liberties and privileg
of the Bai\
Well, gentlemen, on the 30th September t ie
defendant writes to Lady Tichborne stating that
he has has not taken ltchen Abbas, and con
plaining that she should have written to K r.
Holmes on the subject. He had, he said, take
his wife to see Tichborne, adding, “ She was
anxious to see it I would have had no pease if '
had not brought her. ... lam beginning ;o
get very tired of so much worrit . . 01,
how much happier it would have been for me it
I had remained in Australia.’ Well, the defen
dant is asked in his cross-examination the pert
nent question whether he, as a Hampshire ma
did not know ltchen, and he said he did. ‘Ho
then came you to spell it Itching T to which h
replied, ‘ There is no accounting for my spelling
and he gives no further explanation.
On the Ist of October the defendant wrote t
Lady Tichborne stating that he and his wife hac
arrived at Alresford,- and that the bells rung ‘
merry peel ’on their arrival. Next comes alette
which the defendant wrote to Colonel, no\
General Custance :
‘ Dear Colonel Custance, —Having to go t
Bath, I thought I would take the opportunity o
calling hereto see you and Captain Pinkey.
was sorry to say I find you both live a long way
from here. My engagement from Bath compel
me to be there early, and I must start by the firs ;
train in the morning. I shall be back on Satur
day about ten a.m., and shall be glad if you car
spare time to drive over to see me, as I have to
start on Saturday afternoon for Poole, and .
should very much like to see you both. I have
wrote to ask Captain Pinkey to come over. Dear
Colonel Custance, I hope I shall have the plea-
sure of seeing you on Saturday.—l remain, yours
truly, ‘ It. C. Tichborne.’
I call attention to that letter as showing that at
this time he was on his way to Bath, which will
not be unimportant when you come to consider
what he said about Roger Tichborne’s visit to
Bath in the year 1849. Then he returns to the
Swan, and writes to Lady Tichborne
‘Swan Hotel, Alresford, Oct. 13, 1867.
‘My dear Mamma,— I am afraid you will never
forgive me for not writing so long. I have been
travelling every day this week, and have not had
one day at one place. I have not received a letter
from you since I wrote to you last. I told them
to send my letters to Poole, as I expected to be
there . yesterday ; but Colonel Custance and
Captain Pinkney keep me so long I could not get
away. I forgot to mention they made an affidavit,
so I start on Tuesday morning for Poole. I hope
my dear mamma you have got better of your
cough and cold. I have not heard from my wife
or children since I left Croydon. I feel very anx-
ious my dear mamma to hear from you. I was
at Winchester yesterday afternoon. I stayed at
the George for about two hours. Mrs. Wright
begs to be remembered to you, she is a very nice
person. There are many things, my dear mamma,
I wish to speak to you about, so I hope I shall


sion Lave the great pleasure of seeing you
England. It’s reported about 'Winchester tha
you refused to pay a quarter’s rent of Itchi
Abbays for me. Of course, its some of Bowker
tricks. I will make a Bowker of him before '
have done with him. God bless you, my dea
mamma, and our Holy Mother protect you.—From
your affectionate sod, ‘ R C. D. Tichborne.’
The defendant had succeeded in securing th
adhesion of several persons to his cause, and h
writes to Lady Tichborne to that efFect:—
‘ Loudon Hotel, Poole, 14 th Oct.
‘My dear Mamma.—l have only just receivec
your kind letter, with the cheque enclosed. M;
dear mamma, you will think it ungrateful of m
not writing before, but I did not know ware yoi
would be. I wrote to you last last night from
Alresford, to your address in Paris. I was travel
ling all last week, and you know yourself, my dea
mamma, how awkward it is to write when you are
not stationary. I have been very successful in nr
tour. I have seen Colonel Custance and Capt
Pinkney. They have each made an affidavit, anc
Col. Custance a very strong one. A very strange
thing happened when I arrived here. I got ou
of the train, and an old man looked at me anc
walk up and said, “ How do, Sir Roger.’ He knew
me in a minute, and nobody knew I was coming
For I even wrote to Mr. Holmes and told him that!
was n® a going to Poole until Wednesday. I hope
my de ir mamma, you have got better of your cold
and be very careful not to sleep in damp sheets
agsiin. I hope to be very successful here, and then
my dear mamma, I shall be on my way to see you
I hope, my dear mamma, you will go and see my
dear children, And let me know how they are. 1
have not heard from them since I left Croydon. ]
hope, my dear mamma, you have arrived safe, and
that you will write to me at once, so that I know
ware to send my letters to you. I will send this
to Croydon, and write to Bogle to forward it to
you. I will come to see you, my dear mamma, has
soon as I know you have arrived. Hoping, my
dear mamma, yon are well, and that I shall soon
hear from you, I remain, my dear mamma, your
affectionate son, ‘ R. C. D. Tichborne.’
In 24 lines we have no less than nine ‘ My dear
mamma’s.’ Then comes a letter to Mr. Rous,
dated the 20th of October, 1867, to this effect
‘ other side has been very busy with
another pair of sisters. One of them has been to
see Mr. Holmes; they have been three days at
them, and are quite sure of success. Only there
is this difference. The brother is dark, and very
much marked with the smallpox--very much
about the face. I wonder who lamto be next.’
Ihat is the defendant’s description of Arthur
Orton. What is the account of witness after wit-
ness called on the part of the defendant ? They
say, what a great many witnesses do not say, that
Arthur . Orton was marked with the smallpox ;
but all agree that, if marked at all, be was only
glightly marked. Therefore, the description which
the defendant gives in this letter is incorrect.
The defendant speaks of him as dark, the wit-
nesses as fair. Another important observation
is that the defendant here gives a description of
Arthur Orton’s face, and if anybody could give a
description of Arthur Orton the defendant could
give it much better than the witnesses, for he had
seen him as late as 1865, at the time he was
making the Wagga-Wagga will; but he does not
say a single word of the scar. The scar was in-
troduced for the first time by the defendant’s wit-
nessses. The letter goes on :
‘ But they are still very sure lam him. I won-
der who lam to be next. The man they think I
am is still living in Wagga Wagga under an as-
sumed name. They say I was born in Waping, 1 am
glad they have found a Respectable part of Lon-
don for me. I never remember having been there;
But Mr. Mr. Holmes tell me it is a very respeot-
able part of London.’
On the 23rd he writes to Mr. Rous. In this
letter he supposes Mr. Rous has seen a certain
paragraph in an Australian paper, which he says
is very nice, and he thinks it is the work of Mac
kenzie, who had been sent out to hunt up the
case there. Then he adds that some 600 copies o'
the paper have been bought up in London—all
that they could find—in order to prevent the para
graph getting about. OnthelOthof Novewbei
he write*’:—
‘2, Wellesley Villa , Nov. 10,1807.
‘My dear Mamma, —I have just returned from
Brighton. lam very sorry I was not at home
when you came yesterday. But it is so necessary
that I should get all the witnesses I can. I saw
Col. Sawyer at Brighton yesterday, and he was
very glad to see me. I do not wish you, my deal
mamma, to tell any one that I have seen him yet,
for I have not yet got his affidavit. He was out
hunting, and will sign to-morrow.
‘ I have not been long home or I should have
come up to see you to-night. I am going to
Caterham to-morrow. I have now altered my
mind. I think 1 will come to London. Many of
the children are all quite well.—Hoping, my dear
mamma, that you are the same, &c.
‘ R. C. D. Tichborne.’
He writes again to Mr. Rous on the 9th of Decem-
ber, saying that he has had spasms very bad, and
that letter, gentlemen, carries the correspondence
down to the end of the year 1867.
We come now to the year 1868. He wrote on
the 21st of January to Rous, stating that he was
going to Colchester with Holmes, and afterwards
he and Holmes were to go to Ireland by them-
selves, adding ‘Do not let any one know we are
going to Ireland on any account.’ In the course of
this letter he says, referring to a letter he had had
that his correspondent ‘ must have been drunk
because he could not spell neighbourhood.’ lam
afraid I shall have to show—if that be a test —
that the defendant must have been drunk also,
for having, a little further on, to use the word
neighbourhood, he himself spells it wrong. He
next writts to his mother from Colchester, and
tells her that he has got four affidavits of men of
the 6th Dragoons, that the poor fellows were very
glad to see him, and that their affidavits were
‘ very strong.’ In that letter is a passage which I
am ashamed to read in open court, but I must do
so. Things will happen in trials which we would
very much prefer not alluding to, but to which
allusion must necessarily be made. You will judge
for yourselves whether a man possessed of a deli-
cate mind such as Roger Tichborne’s undoubtedly
was, would have written such a passage as this to
a woman—a lady—his mother: —
‘ I have just sent Mr. Rous to get me a pill, for
I have not been to stool since the day before I
left Croydon.’
Now, in the first place, his indisposition was not
serious, and there was no need to mention it at
all; but even if it had been that certainly was not
a subject to be introduced into a letter. The
learned counsel for the defendant said this was in
perfect keeping with Roger Tichborne’s character,
for he had quite as coarse a mind, and was capable


of using language quite as coarse, for, said, he,
when Lady Doughty and his mother wrote to ask
whether he was ill, he wrote back that it was
nothing serious. ‘ My stomach was out of order.’
To my mind there is just the whole difference
between the two phrases. The one conveys no
offensive or coarse idea, the other is shocking.
Well, the gentleman to whom he refers in this
letter was Captain Fraser, who had been in the
Carabineers so long. He was regimental sergeant-
major at the time Roger joined, and superintended
his drill. After meritorious service he obtained
his commission, and became captain of a troop in
the regiment and quartermaster. He knew Roger
Tichborne perfectly, and had been remarkable for
his kindness to him when the young officers made
a fool of him by playing those practical jokes,
which I hope are now entirely discontinued. Cap-
tain Fraser’s residence being at Yarmouth, the
defendant writes to him thus :
4 Yarmouth, Jan. 30,1868.
* Dear Fraser, —As I was at Colchester I thought
I would run down thus far to see you. I have
sent my friend Mr. Rous with the note, so that
you can say if you have any objection to come and
see me and have an hour conversation and judge
for yourself if I am myself or not. My friend
will show you Sherston affidavit and you will see
by that that he did not know me at first till he
conversed with me a little while. Hoping that I
shall have the pleasure of seeing you before I
start, —I remain, dear Fraser, truly yours,
4 R. C. D. Tichbokne.’
That letter was not only accompanied by the
affidavit, but by the Castro correspondence, to
which I shall shortly have to call your attention.
Captain Fraser says that at first he objected to go,
as he had seen the defendant at the Law Institute,
and satisfied himself that he was not Roger Tich-
borne. He said to Rous that he did not like to go,
and tell the man he was a liar. His wife, how-
ever, said it would be more satisfactory that he
should speak to the defendant, and he then said
he would go. He arrived at the hotel at about'
II o’clock, sent up his card, and was directed to
walk up stairs by the waiter, who opened the
door. Captain Fraser’s evidence is to this effect.
He found the defendant standing just inside the
door, and the defendant said, 4 Flow do you do,
Captain Fraser?’ To that Captain Fraser said,
‘I don’t know you.’ They sat down and con-
versed, Rous anil Baigent, who were there, asking
him questions. He found that some things about
the regiment the defendant knew very well, and
he said to him, 4 There are a good many circum-
stances which, if you are Roger Tichborne, you
can tell me, which nobody else knows.’ But he
says the defendant could tell him nothing of the
kind. Then Captain Fraser says he remarked,
4 If you can tell me the affair that occurred at
Canterbury, I will try to believe you are Tich-
borne.’ He goes on, — 4 1 said, 44 Do you remember
coming to my room at the time you were there ? ”
He said 44 No.” 44 Do you r emember John Irwin ?”
He said, 44 Who is he ? ” I said, 44 My good fellow,
that is just what I told you before. You know
nothing about the regiment.’” Then Captain
Fraser explains that Irwin was mess waiter for
about a quarter of a century, was well liked by
the officers, and that no one could be in the regi-
ment without knowing he was mess waiter. He
states that he fancied he saw a slight likeness in
the defendant to Roger Tichborne on the side of
the face; but the defendant was much better
looking, and his hair was much lighter and in-
dined to curl. On his leaving, the defendant
asked him to shake hands, and Captain Fraser
says he replied, ‘I have no objection to shake
hands with you, but not as Roger Tichborne.’ A
long cross-examination of Captain Fraser ensued
with a view to extract an admission that he saw
a likeness in the defendant, and it comes to this
be thought he saw what he calls a slight likeness,
not in the eyes, but in the length of the jaw from
the chin upwards behind the ear. The defendant s
account in his cross-examination is that Captain
Fraser said nothing about shaking hands, and
* passed some remarks ’ about his stoutness, saying
he could not recognise him by his size. The cross-
examination of the defendant proceeded thus:
‘ Did he say that if you could remember one
thing that began at the mess and ended in his
own room he would try and believe you were
Roger Tichborne, and would sign an affidavit in
your favour?—He said nothing about “try and
believe” at all; those are words nicely put in. He
asked me if I could recollect several things, and I
told him all I knew. There was one thing cer-
tainly I could not recollect.’
On the 30th of January he writes to Holmes on
the subject of this interview :
‘ I wrote to Fraser, and Rous took it to him this
morning. He (Fraser) came to see me abouteleven
o’clock. He would not make an affidavit. He
.-ays he recognises me by the upper part of the
face and also from my conversation, and if I can
remember anything in his room before I left he
will swear to me anywhere.’
Captain Frajer is asked whether that statement
is true, and he says no such words ever passed.
The letter goes on :
‘He left me in the most friendly manner pos-
sible, and has promised to come and spend a few
days with me at Croydon. Ho is quite convinced,
only he has told Eowker he did not know me. He
sorry he has done so.’
Captain Fraser is asked, —‘ Is there any truth
at all in that ?’ and he replied, ‘ None whatever,
except that I told Rous I fancied I saw a slight
likeness at the side of the face. The rest of the
conversation is totally untrue.’ The defendant
himself admitted that he had not been able to
state to Captain Fraser his recollection of the par-
ticular circumstance he bad asked about. But
on the 2nd of February he writes this letter to
Captain Fraser: —
‘ Kin (fa Arms Hotel, Bolton, Feb. 2nd, 1868.
‘Dear Fraser, —I have been thinking ever since
to try and find or bring to my memory about what
we were speaking. Do you mean the time I gave
you a silver snuffbox ? If so, I remember that
very well. I should like to hear from you if it is
so. I have seen Mather, the trumpeter, and also
Barry, Colonel Hay’s servant. They are both at
Leeds. You remember Mather. I have no doubt
he was as much a Frenchman then as I was, but
he now speaks English very well; they have both
made very strong affidavits for me. Hoping, deau
Fraser, I shall have the pleasure of receiving a
line from you, I remain, truly yours,
* R. C. D. Tichborne.
‘Address, 2, Wellesley-villas, Wellesley-road,
Croydon, Surrey.’ . ,
The defendant was cross-examined on the sub-
ject of that letter as follows :
‘ Did you give him a silver snuffbox ?—I did.
When was that?—At Canterbury. Do you re-
member the circumstance? —I certa'nly cannot
tell you the day and the hour. Neither do I ex-
pect the day and the hour. The circumstance is


what I ask you, not the day or the hour. What
were the circumstances of the silver snuff-box ?
I do not know that there any circumstances about
it. You merely gave it to him without anything
particular to fix it?—To the best of my recol-
lection I handed it to him to take a pinch of
snuff; he put it in his pocket, and I told him he
might keep it. That is how it came about ?—Yes.
No more about it than that ?—No; there was no
more about it than that. Was it an old snuff-
box of yours?—Yes, it was pretty old. Had you
bought it or had it been given to you, or how
oame you by it?—l bought it. Did you have it
any length of time?—Yes, I bad it sometime.
Did you buy it in France or England ?—I bought
it in Englaud, to the best of my recollection. I
really cannot tell you where—in Piccadilly, I
think. It was an old box when I bought it. He
put into his pocket, and there was an end of it ?
Yes. Do you remember whether the snuff box
had any mark upon it ? Had it the Tichborno
crest upon it or your initials ? Should you know
it if you saw it again ?—I should. Has it got the
Tichborne crest ?—I think it has my initials on it.’
Certainly, to take a pinch of a man’s snuff and
then to pocket his silver snuff-box would have
been a very cool proceding indeed, and the gene-
rosity of the man who would allow it to be done
would be just as surprising. Then the defendant
is asked, ‘ What is the Tichborne motto’ ? and he
replied, ‘ Puyna pro patria? ‘What does that
mean’? he is asked, and he said, ‘To fight for the
country. It is slightly altered. I have to fight
for myself nowand that is not a bad answer at
all. Now, what is Captain Fraser’s account as to
the snuff-box. The learned counsel says :
* Tell me the history of it.—l was not at mess
that evening, but sat in my own room. My room
was on the same passage as the mess-room was,
and he came rushing into my room in his usual
way. I said, “ What is the matter now, Tich ?”
and he told me that the young fellows had been
bothering him the whole night at dinner, and I
said, “ Why do you not take my advice ? I said,
‘ Sit down.’ ” He was threatening to report it the
next day, as no superior officer was present at mess.
I said, “ Sit down.” I opened the door and called
out for John Irwin and the mess waiter. He came
up in mess dress. I said, “ John, bring a bottle of
champagne.'’ He went and brought it, end I made
Tichborne sit down, and he drank the bottle of
champagne, and after the champagne was drunk,
I called out “ John” again and made him bring a
bottle of port. After that he thanked me for the
trouble I had had with him at his drills and for
the kindnesses I had shown him in the regiment.
He then went upstairs—he was not sleeping in
his own room, he was expecting daily to be
gazetted, and he slept in a brother officer’s room
over my head. He came back and said, ‘ ! I will
make you this handsome present.” They were
the words he used, and asked me to keep it in
remembrance of him. I looked at him and did not
know whether I should take it or turn him out,
but I took it.’
It was a wooden snuffbox, he adds, and after-
wards, when he was in India, the lid got warped
with the heat and he threw it away. Tichborne
was not, he said, drunk at the time, and he added
that he never saw him under the influence of
drink. Captain Fraser says that the thing was
done seriously, and does not think that it was
meant as a joke. It is curious to observe the con-
duct of the defendant under the circumstances.
How did he know that the snuffbox had been
given by Roger Tichborne to Captain Fraser? If
he had said that he remembered the snuff-box
and the circumstances attendant upon its presen-
tation at the interview, it would have appeared to
be strong evidence in his favour if Captain Fraser
was right in saying that he did not mention it to
anybody. But it may have happened that Fraser
had mentioned the circumstance in the regiment
and had forgotten doing so. He may have said to
some one or more of his brother officers, * Look at
this foolish boy, Tich'oorne; he came into my room
last night, and after we had drunk a couple of
bottles of wine he made me a present of this
wooden snuffbox as a handsome present.’ It may
have got out in that way, and the defendant may
have heard something of it, although he had got
hold of the wrong story. But there is another
solution of it. Roger Tichborne kept a diary, and
it contained entries of his military life. The defen-
dant would take care to arm himself with that
particular sourco of information; and if in 'the
diary he found a simple entry, ‘ Give Fraser my
old snuffbox,’ without any description as to whe-
ther it was wood or silver, the defendant’s natural,
conclusion would be that it was silver, and he
would probably say, “ There is no harm in my
firing a shot. If it was not the snuffbox to which
he referred when he asked me, ‘ Did I remember
a particular circumstance as occurring in bis room,’
no harm will be done, but if it was it will be some-
thing very much in my favour.” It is a fact for
your consideration that, whether as the result of
recollection after thinking over the question he
had been asked or not, he did state that a snuff
box had been given, although he failed to remem-
ber that it was not silver, but wood. Then
comes a letter without precise date to Lady Tich-
borne :
‘ 2, Wellcslev-villas , Wellesley-road, Croydon ,
‘ Fib., 1868.
‘ My dear Mamma, —I have just received your
kind letter with the cheque many thanks, my dear
Mamma.
‘ I am quite of your opinion as regards our
Visitor, but still her affidavit is very usefull to ■
suport your own, and I must act politely to her
till I get her affidavit.’
Who is this of whom the defendant speaks thus,
but the ever faithful Mis 3 Braine ? It shows that
though she had devoted herself to bis service,
neither the defendant nor Lady Tichborne had
the idea of Miss Braine as the paragon of her sex
which the defendant’s counsel asserted she was.
They would have been very glad to get rid of Miss •
Braine—for I don’t know anyone else who at that
time could have been a visitor at the defendant’s
—if they did not think that her affidavit would
have been very useful, and they had not got it yet.
‘ I must act politely to her till I get her affidavit.’
Then the letter proceeds :
‘ I have not seen Mr. Holmes since you loft.
Mr. Hingston and me had a talk after you went.
I showed him Holmes Bill. He was much sur-
prised at his charges, and said if he had known
Mr. Holmes intended to charge me when he asked
any questions about me he would not have done
so. He also remarked that he had done a deal of
writing for me, but he done so as a friend, he said
he thought Holmes had made the Bill only to-
show the other side that he acted with no par-
tiality towards me. It very good but I can’t
digest it. Hoping my dear Mamma that you did
not catch cold from the long drive you took yester-
day.—l remain your affectionate son
‘ R. C. D. Tichborne.’
‘ Mary Agnes and Roger are quite well, and send
their kind love to you, my dear Mamma. I re-


icered a very nice letter from Rous to day in an-
™£. to one 1 wlote wli en almost mad on Saturday
nignt. ‘R. C. D T ’
in'ttHa w° W 2"“ \ letter > which is remarkable
with LTlvV^k 11 the - first in his corres pondenco
ith Lady Tichborne in which a reference occurs
to the suggestion that he was Arthur Orton. The
letter is as follows:
Wellesley-vilfas, Wellesley-road, Croy-
don, February 19, 1868.
Jly dear Mamma.—l am triad to sav I am
“aTLSIhatY ! )Ut i 8 SUch a miserable
aay neie that I cannot go out. When I wrote to
I ' ol ‘ ye ! ai ' cla y 1 had not seen the report of my case
in Tne runes, in fact, I did not know of it tUI some
that was here last night told me of it.
° send for Mr. Holmes last night to
,ortnSt nt f maU ? hat WaS here ’ but 1 had «0 op
»oi tumty of speaking to him, for he left with the
rS„ f G, M lX“h,r ™ here “ S ■»”"
It appears that the other side are trying to
o k n hat lam not myself but a person
amed Horton. This person that came happened
be a schoolfellor of this Horton, and in corns!
f business mentioned it to Bloxham and told
loxham that Detective Witcher hTd beento
mi three times. He told Bloxham he could
rear to this person Horton where ever he seen
un, so I tmd Bloxham to bring him here and let
in see if I was his old Schoolfeller
As soon as ho saw me He said I have never seen
p&itaT 16 Hor4”“ y U
41 then sent for Mr. Holmes and he told
l 'asui me He h toM L M ieS w h ? y haV ° told him was
.aatul. He told Mr. Holmes that the person
3 other side told him I was a Sailor and
1 been been a Sailar all his life. He said this
•son had marks on his hands that would
er disapear, from pulling ropes, he looks
7aSr W ° Uld BWear that 1 bad “^er
Thrs Gentieman is named Page and is a very rich
o. He owner of ninety Vessels on the river
rhis wiiTt or °!, the s ui lth Western Railwas - ’
inis will be a heavy blow for the other side
uZtl ‘XT TT 0 brok< > d “™’
lwonder wao they will try to make me next
Now my dear mamma I have wrote y™ a lon-
-3r and have nothing further to say except that
Holmes told me last night that the Rev Mr*
s;, w rdS c j?r te
s me in my dear Mama in our kind Love to
—Your affectionate son,
„ i T ‘B. C. D. Tichbobnk.
James Tichborne, Howlett’s
Hotel, Mauchester-street, Man-
chester-square, N.W.’
ViT\ ia u & letter , from the defendant to
, in which he says that Mr. Cooke who had
hJhas° Irekntl, had C ° me back > an ’ (1 he a dds
he has every reason to believe that his case
Th »
es and I have sent you a few of the affi-
ter" "war I
® defen <iant was very anxious to get Major
Kci et to come forward in support of his case, and
f tbl * P« r P°«e he had recourse to a practice which
seems to have been uniformly resorted to whenever
f®™* “ communication with persons he desired
to make use of. Whenever a person was got to
lecogmse the defendant and Bagent and Rous
were present they took down the man’s name,
booked him at once, drew up an affidavit as fast
® *cey could put pen to paper, stated everything
n the strongest possible way, and we know from
;he evidence of witnesses that they sometimes did
7 « -T blch Was put into theh ' mouths,
-hese affidavits were printed—there was an
bundance of them—and the affidavits of A and
> were sent to C. C, partly persuaded by the
ffidavits he had already seen, says, ‘Oh' these
ersons say he is the man. He must be the man';’
f tfj lS i r US , pr< i par n ed for ready acceptance
f the defendant. Then the affidavits of A, B
Q , C al n e sent to D, and so it goes on progress-
ely. Ihen the Castro correspondence and other
ipers are printed and circulated in like manner
Aow, I. must say—and in this I speak the sen-
ments of my learned brothers also-this course
pioceeding was most discreditable to Mr.
olmes and the defendant’s professional advisers
id is one which I hope will never be resorted to
am. Ihe system of endeavouring to induce a
tness to adopt a recognition which was not the
suit of his own unbiassed opinion, but of the
inions of others, instead of allowing him to form
own independently of all other considerations,
i system altogether unknown to us in the course
business in preparing for a trial. That system
me of a most discreditable character; it is a
Wh C i\r to w ? rofesBlo J lal man who sanctions it,
ch Mr. Holmes undoubtedly did, and I hope it
1 never be employed again, or if it should be
ployed, then I trust that it will be denounced
1 reprobated as I take this opportunity of de-
ncing and reprobating it now
, hen , is a letter from the defendant to
ts of the 4th of March, in which he speaks of
tiingston, as having lent him so much monev
having been introduced to Mr. Hingston I
t know what sort of a man he is, but he ap-
•s to have been a gentleman in the habit of
iing money, and having no objection to taking
adant interest on it. Then there is another
* co Ro, » s >. ln whl °h he speaks of his appre-
uons of being arrested for debt. He says he
ecled to keep out of the way at present, that
i is arrested he will declare insolvency, ‘as I
lot in procession (sic).’ He says he could
age perhaps to pay the 200/. od (sic), but it
d b ,® of f 0 use for, if he did he should have
iy the other debts also, and he speaks of
aS + CVldCnt y t. playin ° him false, as he told
some time ago that the bills were all right
oes on to bid Rous if he sees any of his
ds to tell them he seems as if he were in a
surrounded with fire—wherever lie goes he
into it. Then he speaks of anotSe/of his
Is as also playing him false, and he says, ‘ls
his dreadful to find every one I trust selling
at a fair Then comes this letter
ly Tichborne :
‘ Croydon, March 7,1868.
Y dear Mama, —I had the waggonette to start
rst thing, but could not on account of the
3a. There are also some suspicious fellows
,so I don’t want to go out. I should like
y dear mamma to come down and brine
3tter with you that I showed you last
e had a very miserable night thinkin ° of


that letter as I did not know if I had lost it or
not. Now I remember I left it on your table.
4 Hoping soon to see you, your affect, son,
‘ R. C. D. Tichbobne.’
He now goes over to Boulogne to be out of the
way, and on arriving there writes to Lady Tich-
borne:—
4 Boulogne, March 8,1868.
‘ My dear Mama, —I have great pleasure in
letting you know I arrived safe. I have told
Bogle my dear mama to send you two letters that
I left with him to show Mr Hingston one is the
letter you saw the other is a letter from Mr.
Holmes giving up the case. 4 Your affect, son,
4 R. C. D. Tichbobne.’
On the 12th of March Lady Tichborne died
suddenly. She was sitting in her arm chair in
her appartment when some one went in and
found her dead. On the 14th of April he writes
a letter to Rous in which he says they had heard
nothing better ‘from the swindling side.’ He
goes on to say, ‘Colonel George found his lies
were no good. He thought he would turn away
Mr. Onslow from me.’ Is that the way in which
he speaks of Colonel George Gieenwood, who had
been so kind to Roger and befriended him so
much at the time when he was going to pass
his examination ? There is no doubt that Roger
always spoke of Colonel George Greenwood in
the most respectful manner. Would Roger have
spoken of him in this disrespectful way, 4 He
found his lies were no good ?’ Then he says he
had been seeing Orton’s two sisters. 4 They gave
Mr. Holmes two strong affidavits exposing much
that was done at the other side.’ And now comes
a letter to Rous of the 20th of April, which is of
the most vital importance :
4 April 20,1868.
4 Dear Rous, — .... I shall be glad when
I get out of this, for we are miserable here. They
are going to apply on Thursday for a receiver. We
have received another letter from Senor Don Pedro
Castro of much importance, inasmuch as they have
offered him a bribe. He has sent part of my hair
lock in the letter ; you shall have a copy. Francis
is here helping me all he can. Mr. Baigent’s
kind regards.—Truly yours,
4 R. C. D. Tichbobne.’
If, as the language imports, this is an acknow-
ledgment that the hair which was sent home was
the defendant’s hair, either the hair cut off by an
old lady from Arthur Orton when a boy or the
hair of Roger Tichborne when a young man—if, I
say, that hair is to be taken as the defendant’s,
then for the reason which I shall point out to you
by and by it is in my opinion conclusive of the
case. The defendant, though in that letter he
says it was his hair, and though he gratefully ac-
knowledges it as his hair, in the answer he writes
to Don Pedro Castro denies afterwards that it was
his hair. That denial must be taken into account.
You will, by and by, gentlemen, have fo consider
whether it is the defendant's hair or not; but it
is an element —an important element—in the case
that there is this acknowledgment in terms.
N»w we are getting on in 1868, and it having
been stated by the defendant, both in his affidavit
and in his examination before Mr. Roupell that he
had passed some days at Mellipilla, and that he
had there made the acquaintance of Senor Castro,
whose name he afterwards assumed, inquiries
were naturally made in that quarter as to whether
Roger Tichborne had ever been there, or, if he had,
whether some other young Englishman had not
been there, and, if he had, who he was. and above
ah whether he was a person named Arthur Orton.
Certain facts having come to the knowledge of the
legal advisers of the family, they applied for a
commission to be sent out to Chili. The issue of
the commission was opposed by the defendant, and
he made an affidavit that the application was made
for purposes of vexation and delay. Well, the
application for the commission to Chili was
granted, and a similar application fora commission
to Australia was also made and acceded to. Upon
the ground that the presence of the defendant
was essentially necessary in both places, and that
it was necessary that he should go to Chili in the
first place to be identified by the witnesses, and as
he could not be in both places at the same time,
application was made for the postponement of the
Australian commission. For that purpose the
defendant makes this affidavit: —
‘I, Sir Roger Charles Ticbborne, say I have
made the necessary arrangements for proceeding
immediately to Chili and Australia, to be present
upon the examination of witnesses there under
the commissions issued in this action, and I dis-
tinctly swear that it is my positive intention to
carry out such arrangements, and after the exe-
cution of the commission in Chili to proceed
direct from thence to Australia for the like
purpose.’
And Mr. Holmes joined in the affidavit. Well,
that application seemed perfectly reasonable, and
Mr. Justice Hannen, then a Judge of this Court,
made an order that, upon the defendant under-
taking to present himself for the purpose of exe-
cuting the commission in Chili and Australia, the
execution of the commission for examining wit-
nesses in Australia should be suspended. On the
9th of September Mr. Hall, Mr. Stephens, and the
defendant embarked on board the Oneida, and on
the 3rd of October they arrived at Rio. Accord-
ing to the account of Mr. Hall and Mr. Stephens,
they were all, including the defendant, to go
round to Chili by the Straits of Magellan, and
passages on board a steamer were taken for that
purpose; but the defendant afterwards said he
could not go by sea, but would go overland across
the mountains, letting Mr. Hall and Mr. Stephens
proceed by sea. They accordingly went by
steamer, and he set out by land; but when he got
to Cordova, a place half-way between Rio and
Mendoza, he stopped there for some time, and
t'hen turned back to Rio. He makes no communi-
cation on the subject to Mr. Hall or Mr. Ste-
phens, but quietly takes a passage by the next
steamer that was starting for England, and returns
home, to the astonishment of Mr. Holmes. Mean-
while Mr. Holmes, altogether unaware that he was
coming back, applies for a further postponement
cf the execution of the Australian commission,
and makes this affidavit:—
4 The only question to be decided in this action
relates to the plaintiff’s identity, and I have al-
ways held and expressed a strong opinion that he
was bound in the interest of justice to,go abroad
and personally present himself to the witnesses
who might be called upon either side to give evi-
dence under the commissions both to Chili and
Australia. Since the departure of the plaintiff
and my clerk I have received letters to the effect
that the plaintiff had not arrived, but that he was
travelling and would shortly join.’
4 Now, what inference are you to draw from this,
account of the conduct of the defendant ? What
can you ascribe it to except to a desire not to
meet the witnesses out there, who might still re-
member the appearance of Arthur Orton, and who-
might say that, inst ad of being a person whom
they l.ad known as R->gcr Tlol.bcrn , he y,as thr


person they had known as Arthur Orton ? That
would appear to be by no means an unfair infer-
ence to draw. The Australian commission was
postponed on this very ground, that this person
should be present when the witnesses in Chili
were examined in order to be identified by them.
Of course, when he was examined in court upon
the matter, the learned counsel for the then
'Claimant opened the way for an explanation.
The defendant stated that he had been suffering
.from erysipelas when he embarked at Southamp-
ton, and that while proceeding on his journey
from Lisbon to Rio he was not very well. Then
the defendant says:—
‘ We all went to Rio, and from Rio to Monte-
video. It was arranged at Rio that we should go
to Buenos Ayre3, and then take the overland route
from Buenos Ayres. Butin consequence of some-
thing they went a different route by the Straits
of Magellan. They went to Valparaiso. I continued
my original route to Buenos Ayres. When I got
to Buenos Ayres I was not well and had to remain
on board some days. I made arrangements to go
on, and went about 1,100 miles of the journey to
Cordova. There I stopped, and returned to Eng-
land.’
According to the defendant, then, they were all
to go by land, and it was not he but Mr. Stephens
and Mr. Hall who departed from the original
design. He says he left it open to them to pro-
ceed by land or by sea, as they pleased, but he
persevered in the plan of going by land, to which
they all had at first agreed. As to the statement
of the defendant that he went about 1,100 miles
of the overland journey, that seems to be a gross
exaggeration. Roger Tichborne, who went the
whole of the route on horseback, says that the
distance between Mendoza and Rio is 1,200 miles,
or 400 leagues. I do not believe it is 1,200 miles,
because I do not think that a foreign league is
equal to three of our miles, but that it is closer to
2| of our miles. If you look at the map you will
find that Cordova is not much more than half way
from Rio, and that would reduce the defendant’s
journey§ to 600 miles. The defendant is cross-
examined on the subject of his return without
going on to Chili.
‘ Did you know Mr. Stephens and Mr. Hall
were going to Valparaiso to execute the commis-
sion ?—Of course I knew that. Did you know
you had parted from them in the full under-
standing that you would present yourself at Chili
to be confronted with the witnesses ?—Certainly,
I did —at least, I do not know. Of course I in-
tended to go overland. Did you part with them
on the full understanding and expectation of
meeting them again in Chili—that you would
present yourself in Chili to be confronted with
the witnesses ?—Certainly I did. There is no
doubt about that ?—There is no doubt whatever
about it. When you turned back from Cordova,
and that* understanding and expectation could
not be fulfilled, did you write to Mr. Stephens to
tell him'!'—l do not think I did. Why not? —If
you ask me why, I do not say I did not; I only
tell you I do not think I did. I have no recollec-
tion of having done so. Cannot you tell mo
whether you wrote to your attorney and counsel
who were going on to Valparaiso to execute the
commission ?—No, I do not think I did. Cannot
you tell me for certain whether you did or not ?
No, I cannot for certain. What is your belief ?
My belief is I did not at Buenos Ayres. At Cor-
dova—when you turned back from Cordova—did
you write to them at all when you turned back ?
You mean overland ?—No, I do not. I do not
say over land or over sea.—Bat you say did I
write to them when I turned back from Cordova ?
What was the use of my writing when I was
going back myself ? The post was stopped over
the mountains, so the only way the letter could
be conveyed was by the Straits of Magellan, and,
therefore, if I wrote at all it would be from
Buenos Ayres, and not from Cordova.’
But upon this it is to be remarked that the
defendant tells us elsewhere that there were
three diligences going over the mountains, and if
the diligences could go over the mountains the
post could also go over them. Then the cross-
examination proceeds:—
‘ Did you write to Mr. Stephens or Mr. Hall to
let them know the undertaking and expectation
upon which they had proceeded to Valparaiso
would not be fulfilled ?—Oh, dear no! I was not
so formal as that. Eh ? —No, I never took so
much trouble as to write and tell them that. I
do not think I did tell them. Did you write to
them at all ?—Yes, I wrote to Mr. Stephens from
Cordova, when I first got there. From Cordova?
—Yes. After you turned back is my question ?
After I turned back I do not think I did write to
them. Not at all? Why not?—l tell you I did
not think I did: what more do you want ? Why
not ?—I suppose you will find a letter directly, or
something to prove I did—is that it ? Why
not ?—Why not ? I keep telling you I did not.
What more do you want?’
Later on there comes a most startling state-
ment ; it is that he left England without any
intention of going to South America at all. He
says it was his intention to return from Lisbon,
and that he was only prevented from doing so by
illness; aud, secondly, he says he could not get
his luggage. When asked to explain this extra-
ordinary statement, he says he was at the house
of Mr. Marks, that Mr. Scott came in and break-
fasted with them, and that they both urged him
not to leave England at all. He promised them
he would come back from Lisbon. He says he
does not think he let Mr. Holmes know of that
intention, or Mr. Hall or Mr. Stevens. He says it
was very much against the wishes of his friends
that he consented to go at all, and that he got
two medical certificates from Dr. Lipscombe and
Dr. Covey stating that it was not safe for him to
go. Then the Solicitor-General says, ‘ You swore
that it was necessary, and you allowed it to be
sworn in the affidavit, that counsel had advised
you that it was necessary and proper that you
should go. That was on the 3rd of September,
aod on the 9th you started. When did the illness
supervene? Was it between the 3rd and the
9th ?’ The answer to the question is, * Oh! no ;
I had been ill a long time previously.’ Then he
says he did not know whether it was between the
3rd and the 9th that he obtained the medical
certificates. He did not know when he got them,
but he thought they might be forthcoming. And
when this question is put, ‘ Did you obtain the
certificates after you had distinctly sworn it was
your intention to go?’ he answers, ‘I dyl go,
didn’t I, part of the way ?’ as if by going part of
the way he had fulfilled his undertaking of going
to Chili! Then he says he thinks it was not
between the 3rd and 9th that he obtained the
certificates, but previously. When asked whether
the friends that advised him not to go were aware
that he had made an affidavit that it was neces-
sary for him to go, he says he really does not
know. He says he thought the affidavit was
‘ a mere formal document,' but afterwards he
desives to withdraw that expression. He states


that he intended to come back from Lisbon; and
now he was about to be met by a most startling
contradiction —a contradiction under his own
hand. He says he intended to come back from
Lisbon, but could not leave the vessel, and con-
sequently was carried on to Rio. Upon this they
put the following letter into his hand: —
‘ Slip Oneida, near Lisbon, Sept. 12, 1863, at sea.
* Dear Rous, —So far we have had most lovely
weather, and I have been very well. The eyiesi-
plas (sic ) has quite disappeared. Stevens and
Hall are both quite well, in fact every one on
board. She a very fine ship, and every comfort
that’s required. I will write again from Rio, and
lot you know the remainder of the journey.’
So that this illness for which he had obtained the
certificate of two medical gentlemen that it was
not safe for him to leave England had fortunately
for him quite disappeared when he <jot to Lisbon,
the effects of the lovely weather and the sea air
being too much for it. In fact, not only himself,
but Stevens and Hall, and every one on board
were quite well. And so far from intending to
return from Lisbon he promises that he would
write again from Rio and let Rous know about
the remainder of tho voyage. Then the letter
proceeds:—
‘ I did not like Holmes getting me to sign that
will at Southampton, as I dont know what is in
it. he told me it was the same as the other, but
if so why not have let the other remained the
same. The more I think of it the worse my
thoughts are about it. I will send a codicel
desiring my old will and cedicol to stand. I
hope Holmes will not take any mean advantage
in my absence. I dont know how I could have
been such a fool to sign a will without first leading
it, but the fact is that man has the power of fas-
sinating me like a black snake.
‘ Yours, ‘R. C. D.Tichborne.’
Being cross-examined by the Solicitor-General
about his not coming back from Lisbon, he
says he believes his legs were bad; he believes
Mr. Scott had a letter stating the reasons
why he did not come back. He says his luggage
was down below, and he could not get at it. At first
he is too ill to leave the ship, but when the letter
to Rous is produced the reason is that a portion
of his luggage is below and he cannot get at
it. Then tho Solicitor-General calls his attention
to the passage about writing from Rio, and he
swears he made inquiry about his luggage, but he
could not say whether it was before he wrote the
letter to Rous or not.
And now one word on the subject of the will
which Holmes induced him to make—at least the
defendant says, ‘ Holmes induced mo to make the
will,’ and I confess I believe him, and I cannot
help adding that it is a most disgraceful transac-
tion. Holmes was his solicitor, who was bound to
protect him against anything that could interfere
with his interests, and who would be abundantly
repaid.for anything he did by the costs he would
be entitled to charge, or if he made any advances
of money by the terms he might stipulate for.
Mr. Holmes, therefore, had no business to take
advantage of this man’s doubtful position to in-
duce him to make a testamentary disposition in
his favour which was beyond the just and legiti-
mate reward of his professional services. What
does the defendant do ? He makes a series of be-
quests, which are as followsßaigent— -that is,
Francis Baigent, who was so active in assisting
him—is to get 500£. Leet, who introduced Holmes
and accompanied the party to Baris, is for that
service to have 500 1. Adams, the solicitor at
Alrasford, who assists in getting the affidavits, is
to have, in addition to his professional remunera-
tion, 2)0 l. John Holmes is to have 1,0902.; but
that is a very small portion of what John Holmes
is to get. Upton, with all the land around is to
be John Holmes’s for life. John Holmes is to be
one of the executors of the will, and to get 5002.
more on that account; and, lastly, Holmes is to
have the sole management of the estates, with a
salary of 1,0002. per annum. I don’t wonder the
defendant should write as he did and blame him-
self for his folly in having executed such a will;
and having read it I cannot help thinking that
Holmes may have had a power of fascinating the
poor defendant—whether like a black snake or
not is a different thing. I cannot understand a
gentleman belonging to the honourable profession
of which Mr. Holmes is a member abusing the
confidence of his client and the opportunities
which that confidence gave him to get his client
to make so disreputable and scandalous a will.
Well, the defendant comes back from Chili,
having omitted to face the witnesses to be ex-
amined under the Chili Commission. Then Holmes
feels that this is subterfuge, which would be very
much against the case, and he would have nothing
more to say to it. From that moment the defen-
dant felt that he had great cause to be aggrieved,
and loudly complained. Well, after all that
Holmes had done, the affidavit system, the will
that he had made, and everything else, the defen-
dant might, perhaps, have said of him as Richard
said of Buckingham:—
“ Hath he so long held out with me untir’d,
And stops he now for breath
Then Rous, who had accompanied the defendant
throughout the country, turns round, and hands
over his letters to the opposite party. I don’t
wonder that the defendant should have said of
such a man, ‘ What a pretty friend he was !’
Well, without stopping to inquire whether Rous
was actuated by a love of justice or abandoned
his former friend from a less reputable motive, we
may nevertheless be of opinion that the abandon-
ment of the defendant by Rous may have been instru-
mental in bringing about a knowledge of the truth.
On the return of the defendant, Mr. Holmes,
having as I said just now, given him up, a meeting
of his friends was held at Alresford, which Mr.
Holmes attended. The question that arose was,
whether the return of the defendant without
having gone to Chili was sufficient to induce
those gentlemen who up to that time had been
supporting him to abandon his cause. Mr.
Holmes produced the evidence which had been
taken before the Chili Commission, and that evi-
dence was read to the meeting.
I can only express my great regret that that
evidence was not admissible in the present trial,
and that we have not had more evidence from
Chili in the shape of witnesses produced before us.
If such witnesses could speak as to the identity of
the defendant one way or the other, it was very
desirable that they should be brought before us.
Why we have not had more of these here I can-
not say. If their absence has arisen from any
ill-judged parsimony on the part of her Majesty’s
Government which instituted this prosecution,
the circumstance is much to be regretted; and if
it has arisen from any other and- to us unknown
ground, that is, in the interests of justice, equally
to be regretted. Were the witnesses able to
throw any light upon this part of the case ? Wo
had one called before us. There was, indeed, a
second, but the state of his mind was such that he
was unfit to be examined, and his evidence would
very likely have been of little use. What I say


of the witnesses examined under the Chili Com
mission I say also of those examined under th
Australian Commission —it was most essential t
ttie interests of justice that they should be brough
forward. The Chilian witnesses ought to hav
been brought forward in this trial. I can onl;
say that when the State undertakes a prosecution
there ought to be no difficulty about the pro
duction of witnesses, although it may be ex
pensive to bring them over to this country
If the Government takes up a prosecutio
it ought to conduct it in a way calculated to in
3ure the accomplishment of the ends of justice
I cannot help expressing my unbounded surpris
and dissatisfaction that the many witnesses who
as I know from the evidence I have perused, coulc
have given important testimony throwing ligh
upon this inquiry should not have been produced
Well, gentlemen, the defendant attended th
meeting to which I have just referred; and, in
addition to the evidence taken before the Chil:
Commission, Mr. Holmes —I presume for the pur
pose of vindicating his own conduct in abandoning
the defendant’s case—produced the letters which
the defendant had written to the Orton sisters
with whom Mr. Holmes had been in communica
tion. The defendant meets these letters by an
emphatic assei'tion that they were forgeries. This
assertion produced an impression on the friends
assembled, and they arrived at a modified resolu
tion with regard to the defendant. There is no
doubt, however, that the letters were really
written by him. In his cross-examination he is
asked from whom the letters produced by Holmes
had come, and he says he does not know whether
they had come from Mrs. Tredgett or Mrs. Jury
He then admits they were in his handwriting
though he had before stated they were not at the
meeting of his friends. It appears that the friends
were not undeceived until the defendant made
these admissions. One of them, Mr. Scott, we
know, came into the witness-box under the im-
pression that the defendant had stated the truth
in saying that the letters were forgeries. Mr.
Scott is now, unfortunately, dead. It is quite
certain that upon some of the defendant’s friends
the disclosure of fraud or falsehood had no effect.
There are people who think, provided your end is
fair and reasonable, there is no baseness that you
may not stoop to; and they do not think any
worse of a man because there are blots on his
escutcheon. These falsehoods must not, however,
operate unduly to the prejudice of the defendant,
with this qualification. A case sought to be sup-
ported by means of that description, must be
taken prima facie to be bad and dishonest. The
distrust which fraud and deception engender may
well have arisen when, after this solemn and
public denial, the defendant was compelled to
own the letters were in his own handwriting.
Before I pass away to the question whether the
defendant is Arthur Orton or not, it is necessary,
in order to complete the series of facts necessary
to elucidate that question, that I should put
before you what passed between this Orton family
and the defendant. You will remember that the
first thing he did on arriving in this country was
to go down to Wapping and open communications
with them. He corresponded with them under a
false name; and then, having got all he wanted,
dropped them, and put them on a false scent by
telling them to write to him at Liverpool, and
took no further notice of them. Things remained
in this state till the latter part of 1867, when, in
the action of ejectment, the family started the
theory that he was Arthur Orton and not il.'g.r
Tichborne. Then the defendant’s relations wit]
the Orton family were renewed, and from tha
timo he was in communication with Chavle
Orton and the Orton sisters, and was in the habi'
of supplying them with money. In his cross
examination he was asked:—
‘ How soon after those letters did you commu
nicate with Orton’s sisters ?—Not for a long time
after; I believe it was about twelve months after
Had you communications with them between ?
Yes, I had. Did you pay them money?—Yes; ]
let them have some money. I think I let them
have some money before they made their affi
davits. Was there a brother of Arthur Orton
called Charles ?—Yes. Had you given him
money ?—I had ; yes. Before he made any state
ment ?—Yes, I believe it was. How did you sene
the money to them? Did you give it to them
with your own hands ?—No ; I never saw them
until I saw them in the presence of my attorney
How did you send the money to them ?—By
letter. Do you mean by cheque?—Yes; some
was by cheque, I think, and some was in notes
Did Charles Orton correspond with you under
the name of Brand?—Yes; I believe he did in
the latter part. About when ?—I think it was in
the beginning of 1868. On what bank did you
draw in paying the brothers and sisters of Arthur
Orton ?—lt was the brother I spoke of. I die
not send the sisters any cheques, I think ? Are
you sure ?—Yes ; lam pretty sure of that. How
did you pay them ? —I think I generally sent
them notes. A bank-note?—Yes. With letters?
—Yes, I daresay there was letters. You paid
Charles Orton by cheque ?—I know I sent him
one ; Ido not know that I sent him more. Can-
not you tell me on whom it was drawn? —No.
Had you an acknowledgment of the money so
sent ?—No. I think I sent money to one sister-
and to the brother. To Mrs. Tredgett and to
Mrs. Captain Jury. Have you got any of the
letters that Charles Orton sent to you under the
name of Brand ? —No, I have not. What has be-
come of them ?—I have destroyed them. Will you
swear that? —Yes. (Letter read.) “No. 1, Melon-
grounds, Martin-road, Peckham, Surrey.—To Lady
R. C. D. Tichborne. Madame, —I have taken the
liberty of writing to you to ask you if Sir R. C. D.
Tichborne left any letters or message for a party
of the name of Brand before he went away. If he
as I should feel much obliged if you would for-
ward them to the above address as I think it tis-
strange that he did not answer the two letters
that I wrote to him before he went. Please to
burn this as soon as you have read it.” Had you
some letters before from Charles Orton under the
name of Brand?—Yes, several. What allowance,
had you been making him?—Well, for two or
three months I allowed him hi. a month I think.
What did you allow any other of the relations of
Charles Orton ?—I did not make any allowance.
Whenever they wrote to me and wanted any—
were in distress, I used to send them some. Had
Mrs. Tredgett any other means of subsistence
besides what you allowed her ?—I really cannot,
say. Ido not know anything about her affairs.
You say you sent money to her when in distress.
What did it come to?—Well, I never sent her
more than hi. at a time. How often do you think
you sent her ?—l suppose I sent the two of
them in all between 30L and 40 1. Whom do you
mean?—The brother and sister. You mean to
swear you have never given the others any money
at all—the other two sisters? —I swear that
positively. Y< s. Never a farthing?—Never one
farthing to my Knowledge. T..at I s year.’


Dqrlng the absence of the defendant when he
left England in order, as was understood, to join
the Chili Commission, Charles Orton wrote a
letter to the defendant’s wife :
‘ Melon Grounds, Bermondsey.
‘ My Lady,—l have taken the liberty of writing
to you to ask if Sir Roger, before he went abroad,
left anything for anybody named Brand. If he
did, I should be glad if you would forward it to
this address.—l remain, &c., Charles Brand.’
It appears from a letter of the 11th of July
that one of the sisters had made affidavits in
favour of the defendant. This letter is written
by the defendant to Mrs. Jury, the wife of Captain
Jury, and is in the following terms :
‘ Alresford, July 11,1868.
‘ Dear Madam, —I have just receved your letter,
and hasten to reply to the same. I received a
letter from your husband, Captain Jury ; but not
knowing his writing, I did not know if it was a
trick of my enemies or not, therefore did not
answer it. I have not heard from your brother
Arthur since; but I have advts. for him in the
Australian paper. I had an interview with Cap-
tain Angell and your brother Charles the other
day at my solicitor’s office in presents of Colonel
Lushington and Mr. Holmes. It appears the
solicitors of the other side got Captain Angell to
make an affidavid before he left England on his
last trip, stating that my photograph was the
photo, of your brother Arthur. However, since
he has seen me he is convinced to the contrary,
and is going to make an affidavid, as also your
brother Charles, in my favour. I have send you
by book-post a portion of my affidavids which con-
tain them of your sister.’
On the 15th he writes to Mrs. Jury, making an
appointment to meet her at his solicitors’. In his
cross-examination he states that he received a
good many letters from Mrs. Jury and Mrs. Tred-
gett, between the end of 1866 and July 1868, but
that he destroyed all the letters he received from
them up to the time of his going to South America.
He is asked : ‘ Why did you destroy them ?’ and
he replies, ‘ I was not aware they would be of any
use.’ ‘ Did you think the letters of Charles Or-
ton and his sisters of no importance? None
whatever.’ That is an important part of the
case. The defendant was in the habit of supply-
ing these persons with money, and the contents
of their letters to him would probably enable any
one to judge whether the correspondence was
carried on on the footing of the defendant being
Roger Tichborne or on the footing of his being
the brother of these people. One would have
thought that if he carried on the correspondence
in the character of Roger Tichborne he would
have kept the letters in order to show that the in-
tercourse between them was of a perfectly inno-
cent kind ; but, instead of preserving the letters,
the defendant tells us he deliberately and pur-
posely destroyed them.
■Well, the defendant puts himself in commu-
nication with this Orton family, and obtains from
them the information he requires. After getting
all he can out of them, he drops them for about
twelve months. Then he takes them up again,
and gives them pecuniary assistance. Afterwards
he goes away to Cbili; but he forgets to make
any provision for Charles Orton, who, on dis-
covering this, betrays him. This is, I think, an
important chapter in the history of this case. The
question naturally presents itself If Roger
Tichborne wanted information about the Orton
family, why should he have shrouded himself in
mystery and secrecy? Looking at the matter
with reference to the Arthur Orton part of the
case, does not this secrecy tend to show that the
correspondence was carried on and the pecuniary
aid given because it was necessary to keep
Charles Orton and the sisters quiet? If they
knew he was their brother and came forward to
say so, that might seriously damage and endanger
the defendant’s case. At all events, the cor-
respondence staggered Mr. Holmes, and was one
of the circumstances which led to his giving up
the defendant’s case, as appears from a letter
written by Mr. Holmes to Mr. Rous on the 13th
of October. In this letter Mr. Holmes mentions
that Charles Orton had made an affidavit to the
effect that the defendant was his brother. Charles
Orton said that he had destroyed all the writings
he received from the defendant, except two scraps,
which he handed over to Mr. Bowker, relating to
the lending of money. These are the facts con-
nected with the intercourse of the defendant with
the Orton family.
And now it is necessary to enter on one of
the main issues in this case—ls the defendant
Arthur Orton, or is he not ? The evidence bear-
ing on. that question consists of two parts. First,
there is the evidence of the persons who speak to
the identity of the defendant with Arthur Orton,
either affirmatively or negatively ; and, secondly,
there are the various facts established, and for the
most part clearly established, by other evidence,
and which we have to take into account before we
can decide on which side lies the truth. I will
very briefly run through the evidence of the wit-
nesses.
Of course the most important witness called to
speak to the identity of the defendant with Arthur
Orton was Mary Ann Loder, his sweetheart. She
says she walked with him every day,, and knew
his voice perfectly. She says he had light hair
when he came home from South America, and
that the hair which came from South America is
of the same colour as Arthur Orton’s hair was at
the time. She speaks of his nervous affection,
and the strong family likeness both to the father
and mother. Well, of course, like everybody else,
she is not infallible ; but a woman who has been
on terms of such intimacy with a man is not
likely to lose the recollection of his features. It
is hard to believe that Miss Loder lias come here to
state what is untrue. The learned counsel for
the defence says that she had a dislike to Arthur
Orton because he threw her over and played false
to her, and therefore she comes forward and says
that the defendant is Arthur Orton to spite him.
I cannot call that argument. I can quite un-
derstand that if Roger Tichborne had kept com-
pany with her and she desired to spite him that
she should come forward and say that he was not
Roger Tichborne; but why Miss Loder, who never
had any relations with Roger Tichborne, should
say that the defendant is Arthur Orton, if he is
not, I cannot understand. Then the learned
counsel made an attack upon her character,
which signally failed, and which I think was very
much out of place.
Mary Ann Cockburn, who was upon intimate
terms with the Orton family, and who was pre-
sent at the death-bed of both old Mr. and Mrs.
Orton, speaks of his having had St. Vitus’s dance,
and says that he was not pock-marked. She never
saw him wear earrings, and when she went to the
Bankruptcy Court, where the defendant was to
be examined, she says that she knew him in a
moment. She remembers that his hair was light
M


and straight, and that his hands were rather
small. Then she says he went by the name of
‘ Bullocky OrtoD.’ Goole, a lighterman, who
lives nearly opposite to where the Orton family
resided, says that he recognised the defendant;
but as he has not seen him since he was 14 years
of age, his testimony necessarily has less weight
and cogency than that of people were ac-
quainted with him until a later date. Is ext there
is a Mr. Whitbread, who knew the family and
Arthur Orton from the time that he was five
years of age, and until the time he left England
in the Middleton. He says that Arthur Orton
had a twitch, and that the defendant had the
same kind of a twitch of the eyebrows. He re-
members the St. Vitus’s dance, and speaks of the
voice of the defendant being so much like that
old George Orton, that he would have known
him even by his voice. Then he tells a strange
story of his being at a pigeon-match at Ilford,
where the defendant shirked and avoided him.
He says that he was notin-kneed, but had a kind
of in-kneed walk, which was common to his father
and to his brother Thomas.
Mrs. Aitcheson, another witness, knew Arthur
Orton before he was sent to sea, and remembers
him having the small-pox. It was upon him some
three weeks or a month, but left no marks.
East also speaks of his having had the St. Vitus’s
dance. So does Mrs. Church, who says besides that,
on hearing the defendant speak at the Cambridge-
hall, she immediately recognised his voice. I
have a distrust of people who, unless they for-
merly had almost constant intercourse ■with a
person, come forward and, after the lapse of 20
years, say that they recollect a voice. I here are
voices which leave an impression upon you, and
which you do not easily forget; and when you
had been in the habit of constantly hearing it, I
quite agree you can recognise a person as easily
by the voice as any other test. But, on the other
hand, if it has only been a casual intercourse, I
think it very suspicious when people say I per-
fectly recollect the voice.’ Then Mr. Hallam, a
builder, knew him as a boy. After he returned
from America he says he was a big, stout boy,
half as heavy again as lads of his age generally
were. He was called ‘Fatty,’ or ‘Bullocky Orton,
but he never saw him about in the neighbour-
hood, and had only heard him speak to his school-
mates. I cannot say that he is a witness of
much importance. Then there is Sarah Gill, who
lived all her life in Wapping, and had seen Arthur
Orton often in his father’s shop. She has a re-
collection of his voice, but she can only speak of
the tone at the time he was 14 years old.
Then there is Frederick Cronin, who was fre-
quently in communication with Arthur Orton,
whom he saw in bis father’s shop, assisting in his
business, from 1842 to 1848. There is another
Cronin, named Charles, who left his father s and
went to school in the country till 1844. When he
returned lie knew Arthur Orton and played with
him. He remembered his going to sea, and says
that he was called 4 Bullocky he was not pock-
marked. The importance of these two witnesses
is that they were living in the immediate neigh-
bourhood, and they were persons whom the de-
fendant inquired after at the Globe. Therefore
the Cronins were perfectly well known to him ; he
recollected their names, and it appears that there
was such an intimacy between them as would
leave an impression of what sort of a person Arthur
Orton was. Then there is Gosheron, the sailmaker,
who was a schoolfellow of Arthur Orton, who knew
him both before and after he went to sea. He
never saw any pitting with the small-pox, and
never saw any earrings, and he says also that he
does not remember the St. Yitus s dance. Down-
ley also remembers Orton as a boy. Charlotte
Smith, daughter of Mr. Gosheron, saw Arthur two
or three times a day, both before and after he went
to sea. Mrs. Lawes, sister of Captain Jury, went
to school with the Orton children, and used to
spend three evenings a week with the Orton
family. But, then, this was before Arthur Orton
first went to sea. She says he went to sea on
account of the St. Vitus's dance, which used to
draw up the side of his face. There were no marks
of small-pox. He had had small-pox, but it left
no marks. He never wore earrings, but they were
worn by the brother who went to sea. She des-
cribes him as a fat boy ; he was called ‘ Bullocky ;
and inasmuch as all the family had a little incli-
nation to high shoulders they called them the
‘ buffalo’ breed.
A witness named Henry Allen, who was cook on
board the Middleton on the voyage out, when
Arthur Orton went to Hobart Town, says that
Orton shipped on board that vessel as butcher.
Arthur Orton was in charge of two Shetland
ponies. This witness recognised the defendant
sitting before him as the man who went out with
him in the Middleton. He did not notice that
his ears were pierced. He did notice that he had
rather a twitch in one eye, but which eye he did
not know. It is not an uncommon thing for sailors
to wear earrings, says this witness, who adds that
he slept in the third berth from Orton’s, and in
the same compartment; that he would be about
18 years of age, was strong, and though witness
saw his arms bare he never observed, any mark
upon either of them. Thomas W illiam Wallis,
saddler, at Wapping, says he used to do business
with George Orton, and frequently went to his
shop. He speaks of a twitching of Arthur Orton’s
limbs and eyes. He remembers his coming back
from sea wearing a sailor’s costume, after which
he returned to sea again. He never saw him pock-
marked, and never saw him with earrings. He
also says that Arthur Orton was wonderfully like-
his father in the face and very much like his build,
being stout, fat, big, and very likely to turn into
a stout man. He identifies the defendant as
Arthur OrtoD. Collins, carver and gilder, who
had the premises over the stable where the Shet-
land ponies used to be kept, saw Arthur with
them sometimes, and is sure the defendant is he.
George Green, baker, in the High-street, saw
Arthur Orton from his childhood until 1852, and
says Arthur had a certain movement in his eye.
He speaks of Arthur serving in his father’s shop —
a fact which will be material by and by. Shortly
after Arthur came back from sea he came to the
shop. Does not remember any marks of small-
pox nor his wearing earrings. Told the defendant,
in 1870, when with Mr. Moojen, that he was
Arthur Orton; is positive he is the man..
Walter Wheeler, apprenticed to a smith, next
door to the Ortons, said Arthur used to come into
his master’s shop. They were together almost
daily for four years until Arthur went to sea.
After his return, the first thing he did was to come
to the shop to see witness. There were scales in
the shop and he weighed Arthur and found he
was 13$ stone, being then 17 years of age. Koger
Tichborne, we know, did not weigh 10 stone.
This witness never saw any pock marks whatever,
never saw earrings, has no doubt about the voice ;
in 186 G recognised the defendant in a moment.


Hannah Johnson has lived at Wapping all her life,
knew the Ortons as long as she can remember, re-
members Arthur, and his asking her to walk out
with him; told him, though only as a ruse, that
he had a sweetheart already. She recognises the
defendant as Arthur Orton. Several other wit-
nesses recognise him. Charles Lawrence, formerly
playmate of Arthur, and apprenticed to a sail-
maker in Wapping, saw Arthur daily; he was a
stout, brawny lad, dressed in a butcher’s frock ;
remembers the twitching, and says he was not
marked with smallpox. But then I think he only
knew Arthur up to the time of his going to sea,
at the age of fourteen; and it is very doubtful
whether his having the smallpox did not occur
after he came back. He identifies the defendant.
The master of a lighter remembers Arthur well,
says the defendant is he, and adds that ‘ when he
laughed he laughed all over his face.’ That is a
graphic description. I daresay you have seen the
defendant] smile; you must form your own
judgment whether he does so. This witness says,
‘ No one who knew the Orton family could have
doubt about them ; they were an awkward-made
lot.’
William Willoughby has lived in Wapping all
his life; knew all the Ortons; remembers that
Arthur had a nervous affection. Saw the defend-
ant at Mr. Moojen’s, and said, ‘lf you are Arthur
Orton, you must know Mr. Willoughby.’ The de-
fendant smiled and witness said, ‘You are the
image of your sister Margaret.’ We have not had
Margaret here. It would have been more satisfac-
tory if we had ; but I am not sure whether that is
not the sister who died. Mr. Smith, a master brick-
layer at Wapping, says Arthur was nicknamed
‘ bullocky,’ and remembers his going to sea. He
swears that his ears were not pierced. He says
there is not the least doubt that this defendant is
Arthur Orton. Thomas Halsted knew Arthur
perfectly well, and says the mother of Arthur told
him that he had had St. Vitus’s dance. The evi-
dence of Mr. Brown is important, because it fixes
the fact of his having had St. Vitus’s dance. He
says he attended Arthur for the disease popularly
known by that name soon after the great fire at
Wapping, by which the complaint was occasioned.
He was a gross, fat boy, with light hair, and was
in-kneed. In cross-examination he says he could
fix 1851 as the last time he saw him. He dis-
tinctly remembers he was not pock-marked. Now,
he is an important witness, because he establishes
beyond reasonable doubt that Arthur Orton had
the St. Vitus’s dance and he speaks of his being
rather in -kneed, rather more in one knee than
another. That is an important circumstance,
because the mass of the Wapping witnesses des-
cribe Arthur Orton in that particular in almost
the same terms as the Carabineers describe Roger
Tichborne. Henry Angell describes Arthur Orton
and says that when he first returned from sea he
was a smart lad—smart at throwing the lasso. He
believes the defendant to be Arthur Orton.
That evidence is met by a strong body of
evidence on the other side, and when you come to
the witnesses for the defence you will see that
Arthur Orton is sought to be distinguished from
the defendant in several important particulars.
First, with regard to his feet and hands ; and
secondly, with regard to certain marks which were
upon Arthur Orton, and the mark relied upon is
a scar on the face. There were called for the
prosecution 50 witnesses to show that the defen-
dant is Arthur Orton, and throughout the whole
of their examination no suggestion was made of
the scar. The defendant on three occasions gives
his recollection of Arthur Orton. In his affidavit
and in the letters he describes Arthur Orton as
being known to him, but he says nothing about
the scar on the face, nor is it mentioned in the
whole course of the cross-examination of this
body of witnesses, although questions are put
about the pock-marks. The learned counsel for
the defendant does not ask any of the witnesses
for the prosecution about a scar, and it is not
until some of the witnesses for the defence have
been got rid of that a witness springs up and says,
‘ I remember his having an accident which left a
scar, and that scar must have been indelible.’
When I come to the Australian witnesses I shall
speak of the scar on the countenance of Arthur
Orton which scar other witnesses never saw.
The first witness called for the defence was Mr.
Page. He knew Orton up to 14. He was a
remarkably fat boy, and had high cheek-bones.
He had rather light eyes. He was ungainly built.
He remembered seeing him in the Exhibition
year, 1851. He had large hands and feet. Then
he said there was not the slightest resemblance
-between the defendant and the Arthur Orton he
knew. Arthur Orton’s hair was lighter by
several shades than the defendant’s. His hair
was very light—as light as the hair shown to him,
which was the hair that came from South
America. His eyes were light blue, cheek-bones
high; his face was tolerably well covered with
fat. He was a remarkably fat boy, in-kneed. In
this the witnesses for the defence concur with the
witnesses for the prosecution. He was slightly
in-kneed. He walked as if knock-kneed, the
right leg being loose. This evidence reads veTy
much like that of the Carabineers with regard to
the defendant’s walk. He had a remarkably
enlarged foot, continued the witness, a wonder-
fully large foot, with a low instep, and a kind of
dragging in his feet behind him. He had St.
Yitus’s dance. When the boys saw Arthur Orton,
they said, ‘ Here he comes,’ and that would at
once bring on the fit. He was marked with small-
pox at one time, but the witness was not certain
that the mark remained on the face afterwards.
He wore earrings, but he could not prove who had
pierced his ears. You know the importance of
that, gentlemen, is that the defendant exhibited
his ears, and there was no proof that they had
been pierced.
A witness named Salloway, a sailmaker, said he
knew Arthur Orton, and played with him at games.
He was clumsily built; he had large hands ; his
hair was light—silvery white, like flaxen— ‘ like
yours, my lord,’ said the witness. He noticed
but very little change in him. He went away in
1848, and the witness did not see him again till
1851. One peculiarity of the Orton family was a
projecting upper jaw, showing large teeth in front.
That peculiarity existed in Arthur Orton. Finriis,
the lighterman, went to school with him and knew
him well. He had a deep scar across the inside of
his left hand. They were once upset in a boat
and were in danger of being drowned. They came
to a vessel at anchor, and he was able to grasp the
sponson piece and hold on, by which both were
saved. If he had not had large hands he could
not have held on ; the witness could not grasp it.
His face had no resemblance to the defendant.
Godhart knew Arthur Orton, and had many op-
portunities of seeing him frequently. After he
came from sea the first time he was an awkward
shaped fellow in every way. He had a twitching
which appeared to be spasmodic in his features,


but not so bad as it had been earlier. He had the
name of ‘ Slobbery Orton. ’ Both hands and feet
were large. He was called ‘ Bullocky’ from his
awkward manner. He was inclined to be a very
large man, and weighed 13st. 61b. at 17 years o
age. Was quite the reverse of bright. Appearec
thick-headed and mischievous. When he returnee
from sea he had a low-toned voice, which becam
husky after he had spoken three or four words,
if he had an affection of the throat. If he walkec
quick or ran his knees turned in. Arthur wa
more like Mrs. Tredgett than Mrs. Jury. H
right leg as he walked went in a little, as if h
had not strength; but it was not what is callec
‘knock-kneed,’because when he was standing 1
would not be observed. This agrees in a remark
able manner with much of the evidence as t
Roger Tichborne. One might think that the wit
nesses had agreed in the very words they woulc
use.
John Whyler, a retired fishmonger, rememberec
Arthur Orton before he went to sea. He says h
had blue eyes and light hair, but he never noticec
that he was knock-kneed. Weston, the boot anc
shoemaker of Wapping, says he saw Arthur fre
quently, and that he had large feet. He mention
his being thrown from a pony in the Commercial
road, and that on his being taken up he was fount
to be cut on the left cheek, the wound reaching uj
to the eye. This witness says the defendant is
not like Arthur Orton, who was a gruff-speaking
man, and that his hair was light brown ; he recol-
lected Charles and Arthur of the Orton family.
Three or four days after the accident the witness
saw him again. What is the view suggested ? Thai
all evidence relating to the earrings and to pock-
marks applied to the other brother. This is one oi
the witnesses who attended the meeting at Creigh-
ton’s, and what I am about to say applies not only
to that meeting, but to others which were held in
different parts of the country.
We know that for months a system of agitation
was kept up, pending these proceedings. At these
meetings inflammatory speeches were made for the
purpose of exciting a storm of popular passion, if
possible, and we know that this systematic agita-
tion was not unsuccessful. Witnesses were invit-
ed to attend these meetings, or, if not invited, did
attend them, and were naturally carried away by
the excitement which prevailed, especially when
it was found that anybody who had anything to
say in favour of the defendant was received with
enthusiasm and universal applause. By that
means witnesses were drawn into the vortex of
this popular excitement, and the natural conse-
quence of that has been either that they were in-
duced to come forward with statements exagger-
ated and unreal, or that they were induced t
colour facts to which they were able to speak s
as to make them very useful for the cause whicl
they were intended to serve. We find that gen
tlernen of station were not unwilling to lend them
selves to an agitation of this kind, and to go abou
the country making violent speeches, attacking
every one who did not happen to be on the side o
the defendant—acting, as it were, at these public
meetings, where the defendant was exhibited fo;
money, as the showman of the exhibition, ant
doing everything they could to create a storm ol
public prejudice and passion which would carry
everything before it, and prevent you, when you
came to the discharge of your duties, from bringing
to bear upon them that calm judgment which is
necessary for arriving at a clear conviction, or pos-
sibly to operate on your minds for the purpose oi
making you shrink from discharging your duties,
lest you should incur popular disapprobation. ]
am quite sure, however, that it will produce no
such effect upon your minds, but I must warn
you against receiving with unreserved confidence
the statements of witnesses who have been oper-
ated upon in this manner.
You, I am sure, are 12 honest men who will
not be influenced by any other consideration than
the d esire conscientiously to discharge your solemn
and important duty; but the danger is that the
witnesses have, unconsciously to themselves, been
subjected to the influence of popular prejudice,
and so come forward to give their evidence with-
out that solemn regard for the truth which ought
to prevail when a man enters the witness-box. I
deeply regret that this thing was allowed to go on.
It was allowed partly because during a consider-
able portion of the time this public scandal was
going on, this Court was not sitting, and partly
because we could not help feeling that when a man
has the powerful machinery of the Government
brought to bear upon his case, and is not in wealthy
circumstances, it would be hard to debar him from
appealing for the means of carrying on his defence.
Therefore, there was no interference at first, but
the scandal became so great that it made us
regret we had ever allowed it. If similar circum-
stances should ever again arise, I trust that what
was done at the meetings I have referred to will be
considered, not to establish a precedent, but to
furnish a warning. It has had a most mischievous
effect, exciting public passions to an extent that
has never been known before in regard to any case
which has been brought before a court of justice.
I trust that the practice will never be allowed to
come into existence again, but that, if such a state
of things should occur, it will be put down with a
strong and unhesitating hand.
Twelfth Day, Monday , February 16, 1874.
Gentlemen, when we broke up on Friday I was
calling your attention to the evidence of the
defendant on the subject of his identity or non-
identity with Arthur Orton, and this is a part
of the case which certainly deserves serious atten-
tion, because the defendant has brought before
you a very strong body of evidence—the evidence
of numerous, many of them respectable, wit-
nesses, most of whom had an opportunity of
knowing Arthur Orton, and are, therefore, com-
petent to form an opinion, as far as opinion goes,
as to whether the defendant is or is not Arthur
Orton. The evidence of such a body of witnesses
is deserving of respect, and of respectful conside-
ration, because though there may be a few open
to exception, it would be idle to suppose that the
bulk of those witnesses are not perfectly honest in
the judgment they have formed and in the opinion
they have expressed. It may be, perhaps, that
they were a little influenced on account of the
species of agitation which was got up in Wapping
and elsewhere, and that the enthusiasm which
was created may have induced some of those wit-
nesses to go further perhaps than if they had not
been subject to that excitement they would have
done. But, as I have said, they are entitled
to respectful consideration at your hands.
Ido not propose—it would be useless—to go


through them seriatim. We may take it that
there are certain things as to which they all agree.
They all agree that Arthur Orton, when a young
man, was a great, big, heavy, hulking fellow —
that his hands and feet were large, and dispro-
portionate to his general form. They all agree
that he had high cheek-bones, and that he had a
heavy brow and large eyebrows. These are the
general characteristics they all assign to him.
Then, again, a great many of them agree. in
saying that he was in-kneed; and in connexion
with that I observe that those of them who speak
in the greatest detail in reference to that subject
seem to think that he was in-kneed more from
weakness than from actual conformation of the
limbs, and when he was walking that fact parti-
cularly showed itself—a matter by no means un-
important when we come to look at the evidence
of the Carabineers with reference to Roger Tich-
borne. They agree almost on the same facts and
use almost the same language. The defendant's
witnesses then agree on these points, and their
numbers make them a formidable body. There
are some of them who speak as to certain facts
which would if proved distinguish Arthur Orton
most undoubtedly from the defendant; and the
evidence of these witnesses must be gone into —
we cannot deal with it in the mass.
I must call your attention to what the wit-
nesses say as to three things—first, it is said that
Arthur Orton had some peculiar marks, which
the defendant had not; next, that the defendant
has marks which Arthur Orton had not; and,
thirdly, that Arthur Orton’s ears were pierced
for earrings, while the defendant's have not been,
and that Orton wore small wires in his ears.
That was a thing, it was urged, not unlikely
to occur in the case of Arthur Orton, as sailors
occasionally wear earrings ; and if it is a fact that
Arthur Orton’s ears were pierced, and that the
defendant has no such marks, it will be a strong
circumstance to distinguish him from Arthur
Orton.
Let us see then what the witnesses say, and
first as to the scar upon the cheek. The first wit-
ness who spoke as to the scar was Richard Henry
Moore, assistant of Dr. Miller. He says that
Arthur Orton having been thrown from a pony,
he was brought to Dr. Miller’s place, with a cut
across the face, and witness dressed the wound,
which was on the left cheek, with diachlyon
plaster, and saw it again at the end of a week,
and that it would leave an indelible scar. Another
man named Weston says that he actually saw the
accident. He recollected Arthur Orton, who was
riding one pony and leading another when he was
thrown, receiving a cut on the left cheek, and he
saw him taken into Dr. Miller’s. The accident
was witnessed by several other persons, and they
saw also the cut on the face. There are other
persons who said they saw the mark from time to
time, but their evidence is of such a character
that you must, when we come to it, give it your
very careful consideration. A witness named Hay-
wood, a bootmaker at Wapping, says he knew
Arthur Orton from a boy, and that he certainly
had the mark of a cut across the cheek, but does
not recollect whether it was on the right or left
cheek. This witness speaks to a fact which may
be material to a distinct part of the case. He
says that he was present when a boy threw an
oyster shell, which struck Arthur Orton obliquely
—as an oyster shell would fly through the air—on
the back of the head and cut it to such an extent
that the blood flowed. Whether that cut left the
scar which we have heard of as existing on the
back of the head of the defendant you will have
to judge by and by. Now, the strange part of this
evidence is this—that Weston, the man who saw
the accident, fixes it in the autumn of 1851 or
1852. Mr. Moore, who dressed the wound, fixes
it distinctly in the month of September of 1852 ;
but this witness, Haywood, says that the mark
was there before Arthur Orton went to sea in
1848. William Myers, the next witness, says that
Arthur Orton had a cut on the left cheek, and
that he saw several pieces of sticking plaster over
it. He says that this was when he was twelve or
thirteen years old, and that must have been in
1847 or 1848. That also is entirely irreconcilable
with the evidence of Weston and Moore. Bruns-
den, another witness, says that Arthur Orton had
a scar on his cheek when he left England, but
adds that when he came back he did not notice
the scar. Thomas King said that to the best of
his recollection Orton had a scar on the side of
his cheek when he came home from sea after his
first voyage. He saw it between the first and
second voyage, so that his evidence concurs with
fhat of Weston. Then George Champion, who
knew the Ortons well, swears to a mark or scar
on the left cheek of Arthur, but does not fix any
date.
All this evidence is certainly open to the obser-
vation that the defendant has three times given a
description of Arthur Orton—in his affidavit of
1868, where he says he was ‘ slightly pitted ;’ in
his letter to Rous, in which he says he was
‘ deeply pitted and in his examination at the
trial that he was ‘pitted with the smallpox,’and
in none of these cases did he make the slightest
reference to a scar. Another thing which struck
me forcibly in respect to the scar was that every
one of the witnesses called by the prosecution
from Wapping was allowed to leave the box with-
out the learned counsel for the defendant putting
one question relative to it, leading to the suppo-
sition that it was not till late in the case —indeed,
until Weston and Moore came forward and spoke
about it—that the learned counsel had heard of
this scar. In consequence of this the prosecution
very properly in a rebutting case recalled several
of the most material of their witnesses, who had
spoken to the identity of Arthur Orton. Among
these were Miss Loder and Mrs. Johnson : with
the latter he had proposed to keep company, and
with the former he did keep company, as her
lover. Now one would certainly think that a
young woman keeping company with a man, with
a view of becoming his wife, seeing him con-
stantly, and walking out with him, would know if
he had a scar on his face or not; and both of
these witnesses positively swear that he had no
scar. There being this conflict of evidence we
shall by and by, when we come to look at the
facts which affect the question of identity, pro-
bably find on which side the scale ought to in-
cline —facts to which I shall presently call your
attention, and very important you will find them
to be. .
Then as to the marks of the smallpox there is
a similar conflict of testimony. If Arthur Orton
was marked with smallpox the defendant can-
not be Arthur Orton. The witness Page says
his business lies among the shipping ; that he
knew the Ortons, and saw Arthur daily ; spoke
to him many times, and that, too, down to the
beginning of 1852, just before Arthur Orton went
abroad. He says he remembers his being marked
with red spots, but that proves nothing, because


although the smallpox might not he sufficiently
Bevere to leave pit marks upon the face, yet i
might leave red marks during the time of th
patient’s convalescence. This witness, while h
remembers Arthur being marked with red spots
cannot say for certain whether the pock-mark
remained. Joseph Williams, who was appren
ticed to an engineer in Shadwell, and had to pas
Orton’s shop on the way to his work daily, bathec
with Arthur and his brother about a dozen time
before Arthur went to America. ‘ I remember,
he says, ‘ his having the smallpox, and could see
the marks of it when he was bathing.’ Anothe
witness, who knew Arthur up to 1853 very well
and used to see him three or four times a day, says
‘I am under the impression that he was slightly
marked with pock-marks.’ Then Henry Steer
formerly barman at the White Swan in Ratcliffe
used to see him once or twice a week before he
went away in 1852, and says, ‘he was scarrec
with the smallpox. He had several scars, but ’
did not notice them when he came back in 1851.
This witness was a good deal with Arthur Orton
during that year; went with him three or four
times to the Exhibition, and was with him on
Sunday excursions ; and it certainly looks from
his evidence as if the smallpox had disappeared
by that time. James Cockshot, formerly in the
employ of the Steam Tug Company, whose offices
were opposite to old Orton’s shop, knew Arthur
intimately from the time he was four years ole
until the year 1851. His statement is, ‘ Arthur
was pitted with the smallpox a very little. He
had five or six slight spots on his face.’ Joseph
Manning, who saw Arthur last in 1847, and
bathed with him three or four times, says, ‘ I saw
a mark on his hand from a cut. I did not see a
brown mark on his body. He explained that he
had cut himself from fright. A knife had slipped
through his fingers when he was falling in the
shop, and he said, “There is a scar which I shall
carry to my grave.”’ Dr. Weston, who knew
him, says that he had smallpox on the right side
of the nose, * just down the bridge of the nose. He
was very slightly marked.’ The next witness,
Pells, the lighterman, knew Arthur Orton until
1852, had business with him, and remembers his
going to sea. He says Arthur ‘ was slightly
pitted with the smallpox,’and that it was be-
tween 1846 and 1847 he first noticed the marks.
We have not, and I wish we had, the exact date
when Arthur had the smallpox. Champion,
the shipmaster, says Arthur Orton was roughly
marked in some way or other. Pouncet says he
had freckle marks, but not smallpox marks.
Collingridge swore that Arthur was pitted on the
upper part of the face, especially above tbe
mouth. Thomas King says Arthur Orton was
slightly marked with smallpox.
Then there are a good many witnesses who
were asked the question whether Arthur Orton
was marked with the smallpox and who did not
remark anything of the kind. William Willes,
who know Arthur Orton, never noticed it. Chris-
topher Dix never noticed any mark on his face
at all. Abraham Bush knew him nine years be-
fore he went to sea, and never saw any mark.
Eliza Spenuithorne says she never noticed any
marks on his face. Elizabeth Lancaster says the
same thing. So it comes to this, that of all of these
witnesses for the defence, fifty-eight in number,
there are but five who speak as to smallpox marks
at all, and seven as to the scar. Then again,
there are three or four witnesses who say they
never saw any scar. Billing says he knew Arthur
Orton up to 1852, and he never saw a wound upon
the face. Grady never saw any scar upon his face,
and Markham says he never saw it. It seems
strange that seven witnesses only should speak to
the scar, and five only to the marks from small-
pox. If the marks were only slight it is possible
that people might not have observed them. But
here again it is strange that the woman to whom
he paid his addresses should not have noticed
them.
There are two witnesses who spoke to a bite
of a pony, which would be likely to leave a per-
manent mark. Edward Wakeling says he knew
Arthur Orton in 1851, and attended him for this
bite of the pony. He says he was brought to the
shop in which he was assistant, and in the ab-
sence of the principal, who is now dead, and who,
as the witnesses asserted, attended Arthur Orton
for the wound for a month—in his absence, seeing
the wound, which he described as a large hole,
sloughing, he cauterised it, and that undoubtedly
the wound would leave a permanent scar. He
added that he had examined the defendant's arm,
and that he has no such mark. Well, if the fact
of which the witness speaks could be relied upon
it would be conclusive in reference to the question
whether the defendant is or is not Arthur Orton.
But Mr. Wakeling is about as unsatisfactory a
witness as we could wish to see, or not to see, in
a court of justice. He was the gentleman who
had burnt the day-book and a quantity of other
books, the Bible amongst them ; who did not
know what had become of his wife, who had been
in receipt of relief from the parish. In short, he
gave an account of himself so extraordinary as
hardly to make him a credible witness in your
estimation.
A Juror.—Did not Mr. Wakeling say he only
did it with caustic ?
The Lord Chief Justice.— With nitrate of
silver. lam not sufficiently acquainted with
medical science to be able to say whether cauter-
ising with nitrate of silver would or would not
leave an indelible scar. However, we have had
no evidence to contradict his statement. There
are two or three other witnesses who prove that
Arthur Orton was bitten by a pony, but then
their description of the bite and its consequences
falls altogether short of that of Mr. Wakeling,
and would be consistent with the bite causing
inconvenience for a time, but healing very soon.
The witness Haywood remembers that Arthur
Orton was bitten by a pony on the left arm above
the elbow. He saw a red mark right round the
flesh where the teeth went, and says that the
flesh was torn and pinched up, but that he saw
no blood. This accident happened in 1846. Now,
that is a very different thing to a sloughing wound
and the application of cautery to it. It is possible
that the. teeth of a horse in such a case might
cause a pinching up of the skin, and a soreness for
a day or two, which would afterwards disappear
and leave no mark behind.
I now come to the evidence aB to Arthur Orton
not having a brown mark on his side. Now the
defendant has a congenital mark on his side, and
if Arthur Orton had none it follows as a necessary
consequence that he cannot be Arthur Orton.
But can we altogether rely upon the statements of
those witnesses ? Not that I am supposing that
they did not intend to tell the truth, but may
they not be mistaken ? There are two or three
witnesses who say that they bathed with Arthur
Orton, and noticed no brown mark on his side.
But it may have been there and they not have


seen it. When a dozen boys are bathing together
and running about, one boy might have such a
mark and the others not notice it. Mr. Jarvis is
a more important witness in this matter. He is
son of Mr. Jarvis, of Bridport, to whom Mrs.
Orton brought Arthur when a boy. He tells us
that when Arthur Orton was staying at Bridport
he slept with him; that he has seen him undressed;
that he has bathed with him many times ; but
that he never saw any brown mark at all. Now,
if that be so, the defendant cannot be Arthur
Orton. These are the principal things in reference
to marks to which I have to call your attention..
There are one or two circumstances which will
be important in another view of this case. All
the witnesses for the defence agree with the pro-
secution that Arthur Orton had St. Vitus’s dance.
You may consider that as established beyond all
question. Again, there is evidence of the fact of
Arthur Orton being in-kneed, and when I come
to another part of the case I shall have to compare
the personal appealance of Arthur Orton with
that of the detendant and with that of Roger
Tichborne. We will take the three in juxtaposi-
tion, for the description of the Wapping witnesses
of Arthur Orton on the subject of his being in-
kneed agrees with that given by the Carabineers
of Roger Tichborne; and then we shall see how
far they agree or disagree with the personal ap-
pearance of the defendant. Another matter for
consideration is the way in which the St. Vitus’s
dance attacked Arthur Orton, first of all produc-
ing effects in the limbs and afterwards in the
face, leaving a twitching which included the eyes
and eyebrows. That, again, is a matter which
we shall have to deal with when we come to con-
sider the three personages in this case viz.
Arthur Orton, the defendant, and Roger Tich-
borne. You may, however, take it for granted
that there is a strong body of evidence on the part
•of the defendant to prove that he is not Arthur
Orton. His witnesses are—l won’t say all of
them, but most of them—respectable people, who
gave their evidence in a way which entitled them
to respect; and, if I except Miss Loder,. they
appear to be as competent to form an opinion as
the witnesses for the prosecution; and then,
secondly, they say that Arthur Orton had those
distinctive marks which the defendant has not.
And from this conflict of testimony, if it rested
there, in a criminal case, where the prosecution
have to make out an affirmative and to show you
that the defendant is Arthur Orton, it would be
•extremely difficult to say that there was not great
doubt hanging over the case. But we have to
assist us in this inquiry facts which may be suffi-
cient to turn the scale.
Now, we know that Arthur Orton, in the year
1848, being then 14 years of age, left England in
the bark Ocean for Valparaiso, and that he arrived
there in the summer of 1848. We know that he
remained on board the ship until June 1849, the
vessel being engaged in making coasting voyages
in those seas, and that in June 1849 he deserted
from the ship. We know also that not long after
that he made his appearance at Melipilla. Now,
then, we have as a positive certainty, as a fact not
in controversy at all, that the defendant was at
Melipilla. He tells us so himself, and that it
was from his residence at Melipilla and his inti-
macy with a person named Castro, that he was led
to assume the name of Tomas Castro. We have
that proved beyond doubt. It is an undoubted
fact that Arthur Orton was at Melipilla. In his
original affidavit in Chancery the defendant stated
as follows, speaking of his arrival in Australia,
and his receiving an offer of employment from Mr.
Foster, of Gippsland :
‘ For family reasons I assumed the name of To-
mas Castro (after that of a friend named Don
Tomas Castro, whose acquaintance I had made
at Melipilla, in Chili).’
And, in re-examination by his counsel, before
Mr. Roupell, at the Law Institution :
* I had, before I changed my name to Castro,
known intimately a person so named. His Chris-
tian name was “Tomas.” I had known him in
Melipilla, which is about 50 or 60 miles from Val-
paraiso. I was his guest for a while at Melipilla,
which is in Chili. There are no hotels in Meli-
pilla, and he kindly invited me to stay with him,
which I did for about three weeks.’
Now, was Roger Tichborne there ? Because, if
Arthur Orton was there and Roger Tichborne was
not there, although it does not necessarily follow
that the defendant is Arthur Orton, we are ad-
vancing very far towards that conclusion. .1 have
already mooted this subject when following the
track of Roger Tichborne in South America ; and
I called your attention to Roger Tichborne’s let-
ters, which show one thing as quite certain, and
another thing as very probable. Throughout the
whole of his letters, however minute the details
of his travels, there is no mention of Melipilla.
In the second place, it is not certain, but still pro-
bable, that according to what would appear to be
the proper construction of his account of his re-
turn journey from Santiago to Valparaiso, lie could
not have stopped, and did not stop, at Melipilla.
You remember the account he gives of having left
Santiago, in order to be in time for the sailing of
the Pauline, and that when he arrived ‘there’ he
found the vessel would not sail for some time. I
have asked you already the true interpretation of
these words—whether they did not mean to imply
that when he arrived at the place where the ship
was, namely, at Valparaiso, he found that she
would not be ready to sail for some time. It
stands, therefore, thus : That in the whole of the
correspondence of Roger Tichborne there is not
only no mention of Melipilla, but there is an ac-
count given of himself by which we should. infer
that he never stayed at Melipilla at all, and that
the statement that Roger Tichborne was ever at
Melipilla rests entirely upon the unsupported as-
sertion of the defendant. If, under these circum-
stances, you find that the original account given
by the defendant is wholly inconsistent with pos-
sibility and with the unquestioned facts, the ques-
tion arises whether you can attach any importance
whatever to the statement he so makes.
I showed you on a former occasion that if Roger
Tichborne had gone to Melipilla, it could only
have been on his return journey from Santiago.
His first intention was to go on to Peru m the
Pauline; but he found that she would not be
ready to sail for some time, and he determined to
make an excursion to Santiago. He went to San-
tiago, and stayed there for three or four days.
Then he came back to Valparaiso, expecting to
find the vessel ready to start, but it was not ready
for some time afterwards. He went in the vessel
northwards to Arica, thence to Peru, and after-
wards to Guayaquilla, and ascended the river of
that name. He came back to Lima, and returned
by steam to Valparaiso. There he arrived on his
return from the north on the 12th of December
1853. On the 16th of March following he writes :
‘ I remained a few days at Valparaiso. As soon
as I was able, I left for Santiago, where I was


obliged to remain some time to make all the pre-
parations necessary to cross the Cordilleras. I
was able to leave the town on the 11th of January.
. . . .We reached Mendoza The distance be-
tween Santiago and Mendoza is 78 leagues. We
were eight days performing the journey. I re-
mained a week at Mendoza. I left for Bueno
Ayres, which we reached on the 13th of February
after having performed a journey of 400 league
on horseback. I shall go in a few days to Monte
video, on my way to Brazil.’
On his first going to Santiago, he took but two
days to do it. The second journey he performei
on horseback in an almost incredibly short space
of time, and he could not have on either occasion
stopped at Melipilla. If he stopped there at all, 1
must have been on the second return journey to
Valparaiso.
If the defendant had at first given that account
it would not have been open to all the objections
which apply to the account he did give. When
the defendant was first examined on the subject,
he was wholly ignorant of the fact—or, if he was
Sir Roger Tichborne, had forgotten it—that Roger
had made two journeys to Santiago. That clearly
results from the examination I am going to reac
to you. He knew of but one journey, and he pul
the visit to Melipilla as being made on the way
from Valparaiso to Santiago. He is examined by
Mr. Chapman Barber :
‘How long did you stay at Valparaiso?—Five
weeks. Where did you go to from Valparaiso ?
To Callao. Did you go to Lima?—Yes. Where
did you go to then ?—lnto the interior shooting.
Where then?—To Valparaiso, and from there to
Cassablanca. Where is that ? —A short distance
from Valparaiso. From there where did you go ?
Observe the answer—
‘ I suppose you don’t want me to give you the
name of every small town I went to ?—No. Well,
I went from there to Santiago.’
You see he traced his journey first to Valpa-
raiso, then to Lima, and then from Valparaiso to
Santiago, Mendoza, and Buenos Ayres, and so it
stood; but in his cross-examination the defendant
said, upon being asked how he came to adopt the
name of Castro, that he took it at Melipilla. Mr.
Serjeant Ballantine, with the view of making this
part of the case more clear, asked him in re-ex-
amination :
‘You stated, in cross-examination, that you
took the name of Castro. Had you known any
one of that name?—Yes. And been intimate
with him ?—Yes, very. What is his Christian
name?—Thomas. Where did you meet him?—
At Melipilla. Where is that?—About twenty-
three leagues from Valparaiso. Had you seen
much of him ?—I stayed with him for a while at
Melipilla. How long?—About three weeks.’
And so the examination stood. But when the
examiner came to read the requisitions, he saw
these words : ‘ From thence I went to Santiago,
and from thence to Mendoza.’ The defendant
interposes, and says,—‘l beg your pardon, but I
wish you to take notice that the counsel said he
did not require me to give the names of all the
towns I went through ; and, therefore, I omitted
Melipilla.’ It is a curious thing that Mr. Barber
did not ask him anything specific beyond this, —
* Where did you go to next ?’ To which the de-
fendant answers, ‘ When I started from Valpa-
raiso, I went to Caso Blanca.’ Then comes the
question, ‘ Where did you go to next ?’ to which
the defendant should have answered, ‘ Melipilla,’
but he avoided Melipilla,—that is, to use a sport-
iDg phrase, he ‘shied’ at it, -when he came to
Melipilla, and turning round said, ‘ I suppose you.
don’t want me to mention every small town ?’
"Whereupon the defendant omits Melipilla. When
the examiner comes to look over the requisitions
he finds that the acquiescence of Mr. Barber in
the course of the examination was the result of
the suggestion of the defendant and not of any
direction on the part of the learned counsel. The
deposition was then amended and these words in-
serted :
‘I stayed about five weeks at Valparaiso the
first time I was there ; from thence I went to
Callao, from Callao to Lima, thence into the inte-
rior, went back to Valparaiso, then to Casa Blanca,
a short distance from Valparaiso. I went to Santi-
ago vid Melapilla, thence to Mendoza, from Men-
doza to Santa Fe, thence to Buenos Ayres, thence
to Montevideo, and thence to Rio.’
So that it is perfectly plain that there was but
one journey from Valparaiso to Santiago in his
mind, and that it was upon that journey he went
vid Melipilla to Santiago, whereas we know that
it was only upon the return from Santiago to Val-
paraiso on the second occasion that Roger Tich-
borne could by any physical possibility have
stayed at Melipilla at all.
At this time the defendant had no means of
knowing this except through the letter of Roger
Tichborne to his mother, in which mention is
made of his going back from Santiago to Valpa-
raiso. But Moore, who was present at the exa-
mination, was the servant who accompanied
Roger Tichborne on his way from Valparaiso to
Santiago upon the first visit, and who knew that
Roger Tichborne did not upon that journey stay
at Melipilla, and who knew also that upon the
second journey to Santiago, Roger could not have
stayed at Melipilla. Accordingly, when the de-
fendant is examined on the point, he puts it as
the thing would have been if Roger had really
gone to Melipilla— that is, he puts Melipilla on,
the return journey from Santiago to Valparaiso,
when Roger Tichborne went on the excursion
consequent upon the Pauline not being ready to
sail. That is a very striking discrepancy, and it
was one which of course was referred to in the
defendant’s cross-examination in the Court of
Common Pleas. He is asked :
‘How long were you at Melipilla?—The car-
riages went on to Valparaiso. The first night the
carriages were put into the yard at the back of
Castro’s place. How long had you intended to
stay at Melipilla ?—A few days. How long did
you, in fact, stay in the neighbourhood without
going back to Valparaiso ?—Over a fortnight. I
cannot say exactly how long. How came you to
do that ?—Because the ship did not sail as soon as
was expected.’
Then he is asked how he knew that, and he says
he had a letter from the captain of the Pauline in
reply to one he had wiitten inquiring when that
vessel would sail. The discrepancies being pointed
out to him between his original statement and
that he then made, he said that the shorthand
writer had put down the words ‘ journey to,’ in-
stead of ‘ journey from’ Santiago; but he is here
met with the notes of the examiner, who did not
write shorthand, and whose note concurred with
that of the shorthand writer. But. the statement
of the defendant was also inconsistent with the
fact that Roger Tichborne could not have stopped
at all at Melipilla on that occasion, or that even
if he could—he would be able in two or three
weeks, and three weeks as the outside limit —he


could have become intimate with the number of
persons with whom the defendant undoubtedly
became acquainted, as appears by the Castro cor-
that Arthur Orton was at Meli-
pilla there can be no doubt. He deserted Horn
his ship in June 1849, and joined the Jessie "hi'
ler at Valparaiso a year and seven months after,
in February 1851. What became of him in the
meanwhile ? A witness named Cotton said he saw
a person named Orton during that interval herd-
ing sheep in California, 4,000 miles to the north.
You remember that more than one member of the
Orton family has disappeared; of the history of
one named Robert we have had no account, and
that is matter of regret. That Arthur Orton was
at Melipilla during some portion of the interval
we hear from the evidence of Dona Clara Hay ley,
the wife of an English medical man. She swears
that a sailor-boy of about 16 years of age came to
them with a pitiful story of ill-treatment by the
captain of his ship, that he was taken into her
husband’s house, that he told them his father was
a butcher to the Queen in London, and that
name was Arthur Orton. He said he had
sisters —Maria Anna, Marguritta Anna, Matilda
Anna, and that he also named Elizabeth. I un-
derstand that there is no Spanish form of the
name of Elizabeth. Mr. Moriarty, who is, I hear
from the Master, a Spanish scholar, will, perhaps,
inform us how that is. . . ,
Mr. Mobiaety. lsabel, my lord, is Spanish,
for Elizabeth.
The Lokd Chief Justice.— O ! Dona Hayley
thinks he mentioned Elizabeth, and he. said one
sister was dead and that three were living. She
states further that he was at Melipilla for about
a year and a half, and that she saw. a mark on his
arm—two letters —which she made inquiry about,
and he said they were A. 0., the initials of his
name. She tells us that Orton got intimate with
the Castros and others, and was kindly and hos-
pitably treated, and that Dona Ahumada cut off
a lock of his hair. In that she is supported by an
admission of the defendant, which, however, he
afterwards withdrew. Her evidence is open to
this difficulty unquestionably, that she puts the
date at an impossible time. She was married,
she said, in 1847, and this residence of Arthur
Orton was five or six years after her marriage,
whereas we know it must have been before Febru-
ary 1851. She is no doubt open to that observa-
tion as to a serious discrepancy in the dates.
Notwithstanding that, however, a person may,
after all those years, be mistaken as to a date,
and a date may not be of the essence of the in-
quiry as it so often is. It is not so always, and if
she is right as to the main facts of her narrative
it would not be important that she should fix the
date. There is one part of her statement, if you
believe it, by which we may correct the error in
the date. She says most positively there never
was an English visitor in her house with the ex-
ception of Arthur Orton; and she goes on to say,
touching the very essence of this inquiry, that
the defendant is the Arthur Orton who resided at
her house in Melipilla.
She may be dishonest or she may be mistaken.
Is she dishonest ? The learned counsel for the de-
fendant makes the same observation upon her that
he did upon Mrs. M’Alister—namely, that she re-
ceived 1000 dols. or 2501. That is, no doubt, a
large sum to give a witness ; but we must remem-
ber she came from and had to return, to South
America, and you can understand a witness say-
ing, * I -will not leave my husband and family and
go to England on a matter which does not concern
me unless you pay me handsomely for doing so.
She could not he compelled to come. She was be-
yond the jurisdiction of the Court, and you are at
the mercy of witnesses so circumstanced. But
you have the means of checking her evidence, for
both she and Mrs. M'Alister were examined by
commission for the last trial, and though their
evidence given before the commission could not
be read in this case by the prosecution, it could
be used on cross-examination for the purpose or
contradicting her if she could be contradicted.
Now, is she mistaken ? She is strongly supported
by the fact that the defendant was intimate with
the Castros by the admission as to the cutting of
the lock of hair by Dona Ahumada, and by still
stronger evidence —that of the Castro correspond-
ence. She may, however, be mistaken as to the
identity of the defendant after so many years
during which probably the name or features of
Arthur Orton were not present to her mind, and
very likely she comes here with a preconceived
opinion and a foregone conclusion on the subject.
There is one fact that must not be lost sight o
namely, that the defendant was called upon to
face Dona Haley and the other Chilian witnesses,
and he did not do so. Whether his explanation
of that fact be satisfactory it is for you to say. It
it be not it is a strong fact in confirmation of a
witness who comes here to speak of the history ot
Arthur Orton’s residence in Melipilla* for the de-
fendant might have presented himself not only
before her, but before the other witnesses, who 1
cannot but believe if there were a public prose-
cutor who had the uncontrolled direction and
management of this case would undoubtedly have
been called. He had an opportunity of confront-
ing those witnesses, and he did not do so.
Now, we have letters which throw light upon
this part of the case. When under examination
before Mr. Roupell, the defendant explained why
he had taken the name of Castro. The attention
of the defendants in the Chancery suit was ot
course at once directed to Melipilla, and they pro-
ceeded to make inquiries there. Probably the de-
fendant concluded, or heard, that such inquiries
would be made, and whether with a view to get
from the people at Melipilla a recognition of the
fact that he had formerly been staying there, or
to anticipate the movement of the opposite party,
I do not know, but whatever the object he sat
down and wrote a remarkable letter to Doniomas
Castro. You have the letter before you. He first
wrote a draft of it—that was translated into
Spanish and forwarded, and the Spanish letter was
translated back into very different English from
that in which the original draft was written. 1
have got the original draft before me. It runs
thus : 'Aug. 28, 1867.
‘Dear Tomas Castro,— I suppose 1 am about
the last person in the world you would expect to
receive a letter from. But the fact is I have jus
returned to England —that is to say last Hecr.
and I have neglected to write to my friends for
some years. I have grown very stout; nearly so
as Raymond Ozago. I found when I arrived in
England my property was and is in the possession
of my relations, who dispute my title. Those all
beautiful estates that 1 used to tell you of are
kept from me until I prove that I am the same
person I was 13 years ago. Please remember me
to Don Juan Halley, the English doctor, and to
Clara Jesus. Myrespects to DonaNatila Salmento,


or, as I used to teach you to call her, Mrs. Casi
Please remember me also to Don Eamon Alcal
Dona Hermentrude, and my old companion, as ]
used to call him, Lemmeter Metildo, and also
Jose Maria Penniger and his brothers. Wou
you show this letter to them and ask them all
write a few lines to me, and also, if not too muc'
trouble, to my solicitor, Mr. John Holmes. I
very hard for me to be kept out of my estates,
I must, therefore, beg you to help me all you c
Eeally I am forgetting one old friend altogeth
I mean Mr. Toro, Don Jose, your wife's siste
husband, of Cangomod, and a rather strai
thing I have to tell you—that is to say, I toe
and made use of your name, and was only knot
m Australia by the name of Castro for the ’
I was there. I also said I belonged
<Jnli ; they might have known better than tha
I assure you I did not disgrace your name in fea
li^ 10rse f naris hip- i I hope you will give my agen
all the information you can when he calls, and
possible see Don Carlos Anselmo, of Yalparais
he will explain to you any think you do not unde
stand. Hoping, my dear Friend, wife and frien
and self are quite well, I remain truly yours,
, ‘R. C. D. Tichboene.’
Well, that letter brought an answer, not fro
Thomas Castro, because he had become insane, bu
irom his son, Pedro Castro. This is the letter:
t . ‘ Melipilla, -Oct. 27.
Dear Sir,—l acknowledge the receipt of you
esteemed favour, dated the 28th of August
the current year, in default of my father, Do
Ihomas Castro, who, since you left Chili, un
happily lost his reason, and is now in the Casa c
Orates of Santiago.
My mother, Dona Natalia Sarmiento de Castr
{Mrs. Castro, as you call her), has not been livin
tor the last 14 months or so ; my godfather, Do
Ramon Azocar, whom you name Osaza, and Do
Ramon Alcalde, all three died of a natural death
Rut Dona Maria Lagos, widow of my said goc
father, remember you.
‘I showed your letter to Don Juan Hayley
the English doctor, and to his wife, Dona Clar
-Nones. The former retains no recollection ol
you. It is true that owing to intemperance hi
memory is gone; the latter does, and is ready to
declare so. Dona Jesus Nories, sister of Dona
Clara, is dead.
‘Don Jose Maria Berenguel is not so called
his name is Don Francisco Berenquel; he is esta-
blished in Santiago; and Don Jose Miguel Valdi-
vieso, to whom you give the title of brother of
the latter, is at the present time Regidor of the
municipality of Melipilla.
‘ Directly he read your letter he went into an
account as to who you were, of your stay in this
place, &c., expressing great pleasure at hearing
from you.
Your friend Don Jose Maria Toro, whom you
call Mr. Toro, is also established in Santiago.
Don I edro Pablo, his brother, still resides in
Concumen.
‘ Dona Francesca Ahumada, the mother of the
Ayocares, retains a lock of your hair. I recall
this fact to your attention in case of your being
able to turn it to any account.
As I cannot myself go to Valparaiso, owing to
various circumstances, I have written to Don
Carlos Anselmo telling him, in default of my
rather, that I was ready to furnish the data which
you desire at my said father’s hand.
1 must advise you that the other side, through
le instrumentality of Don Cevero Barra, has
been hunting up data respecting your stay in this
did not choose to give the names of
the English firm in Valparaiso who had instructed
him.
The defendant answers this letter on the Ist of
January 1868, in the following terms :
... . , ‘January 1, 1868.
My esteemed Don Pedro,—On the 18th of
last month I received your letter of the 29th of
October last, and regret to hear of the malady of
your father. I did not remember you when I
wrote to your father, but I now remember you
very well, as well as your brother Don Thomas
and your sister Dona Natalia. I wish you to beg
Dona Francesca Ahumada to send me a small
portion of the lock of my hair which she has
kept. Be good enough to remember me to all my
friends.—Yours, &c., R. C. D. Tichborne.’
To this letter Don Pedro Castro sends the fol-
lowing reply : '‘Melipilla, Feb. 28, 1868.
Esteemed Sir, I have in my possession your
favour of the Ist of January of the current year,
which you have been good enough to write to me
in reply to mine of the 29th of October last year.
An agent has come over to Melipilla on behalf of
your opponent. His name is Cevero Barra. His
first step was to seek out your certificate of bap-
tism, because some one told him you had been
baptised there by the priest Don Fernando Bar-
rales. He could not, however, find it, but I know
he had interviews with that gentleman, with
Dona Clara Norris de Hayley, and Dona Fran-
cesca Ahumada. He afterwards called on me, in
order that I should show him and give him copies
of the letters you had written to me, telling me
that he had instructions to place at my disposal a
money remittance, and offer me a berth in Val-
paraiso. He did not attain his object. On the
occasion of another journey which he made to
Melipilla, I, having recently received the first
letter from you intended for my father, and be-
lieving him your agent, showed him the said
letter. Barra endeavoured to make out that you
were an impostor—that Mr. Arthur Horton, who
was staying here, was the son of a London
butcher, whose father had sent him to sea in
order that he might, by means of sea voyages,
cure himself of a disease in the head called San
\ ito ; that in the year 1853 he returned to Eng-
land, whence he came back to America; that Sir
0. D. Tichborne, finding himself in the year
1852 in a certain part of England in command
of his regiment, threw ifc up, and likewise came
over to America; that after travelling about he
embarked at Rio Janeiro on his return to Eng-
land on board a vessel that was wrecked before
reaching her destination ; that on board this ves-
sel there happened to be Mr. Arthur, likewise
shipped as a passenger; that he made his ac-
quaintance and got possession of his papers, and
that Mr. Arthur then went to Australia to await
there the death of Sir Roger C. D. Tichborne’s
father, in order to present himself in England
and claim the inheritance. Bring all this to the
knowledge of your worthy defender. This story
of your being the son of a butcher (carnicero) in
London springs from the fact, probably, of your
wishing to say that your father was Chancellor
( canciller ) of the Queen, and that, being ignorant
of Spanish, you having scarcely then begun to
speak it, having recently arrived here, you said
he was a butcher (carnicero). I shall be very
pleased to possess your portrait. I send you a
quarter of the lock of hair which the Senora
Ahumada has of yours.’


You will see, gentlemen, that these are the
letters of a man who was greatly delighted at the
prospect of the approaching triumph of Sir R.
Tichborne. On the receipt of that letter the
defendant writes back as follows :
‘ April 29, 1868.
‘My dear Friend, —I received your letter of the
29th of February. I was not surprised to learn
that the agents of the other side had called upon
you, as they are capable of anything base or under-
hand. I have received the hair all safe ; a thou-
sand thanks. Give also my sincere thanks and
respects to the Seiiora de Ahumada, and tell her
she has done me a great service by preserving this
lock of hair.’
And now comes an instance of the affidavit sys-
tem, to which I have already called j our atten-
tion :
‘ I have affidavits from more than 100 persons.
Among them are seven of my brother-officers two
colonels, two majors, three captains —more than
twenty petty officers, all the Tichborne tenants,
and a good many of the gentry of the country
round. I trust, my dear friend, that you will not_
allow the falsehoods of Don Cevero Berra to have
any effect upon you ; the truth must, and in the
end will, come out. When I was at Melipilla, I
wrote a letter to Dona Toro, the wife of Jose
Maria Toro, to inquire for particulars of the house
of Don Benscuta Lopes; if you could obtain that
letter for me you would do me a great service.
The lady to whom I refer gave me letters of in-
troduction for Buenos Ayres. With kind remem-
brances to all my old friends, I remain, yours
affectionately, it. C. D. Tichborne.’
Mr. Holmes writes to Don Pedro Castro by the
same mail: ‘ May 1, 1868.
‘ Dear Sir,—l am obliged to you for your letter
of the 29th February last. Sir JEtoger is writing to
you, and will send you a photograph of himself.
The lock of hair which you have enclosed to him
is of considerable importance, because it is identi-
cal with his hair at the present moment. ’
Now if that be true, we have the lock of hair,
and it is very much lighter than the defendant’s
hair at the present time, and, therefore, if Holmes
compared it with the defendant’s hair and found
it was identically the same, the defendant’s hair
must by some contrivance or other have acquired
a deeper dye since. It may be, however, that
Holmes made that assertion unscrupulously, for
the purpose of influencing the people out there
and making them satisfied with the identity of
the defendant as Roger Tichborne, that they might
write to him to that effect, or, in the event of any
persons going out to receive evidence, they might
be predisposed to receive the defendant as Roger
Tichborne. Now what follows is most important:
‘ You mention that Don Barra, the agent of the
adverse party, has endeavoured to produce the
impression that Sir Roger was the same person as
Orton. I cannot clearly make out whether you
yourself personally knew Orton. Be so good as to
inform me particularly whether you really knew
him, or whether his name was not first mentioned
to you by Barra. It is really of importance that
you should inform me precisely on that point.
The opposing party here have been making in-
quiries after a person named Orton; but I have
the clearest evidence that they are distinct per-
sons, and that Orton is now in Western Australia;
and I have sent for him to come over to Engla-nd.
The endeavour to confound him with Orton is a
piece of chicane. I send you copies of the affida-
vits.’
So it appears that up to this time Holmes did
not know that Arthur Orton had been ever in
Melipilla. He hears that Don Barra was asserting
that the Englishman who had been out there was
no other than Arthur Orton, of the High-street,
Wapping. But Holmes says, ‘ What can this man
mean ? Was there such a person as Arthur Orton
out there ? Be good enough to say in your next
letter whether there was.’ Now comes the ans-
wer ; and to that answer I call your most serious
attention. If Arthur Orton had been known out
there as one man and Roger Tichborne as another,
when Roger writes and says, ‘ I am the English-
man whom you remember at Melipilla formerly,’
and Holmes writes and says, ‘ You tell us they are
making inquiries about Arthur Orton; they say
that my client is Arthur Orton, the son of a
butcher. Be good enough to state whether you
really know such a man,’ what would be the ans-
wer you would expect ? The answer would cer-
tainly be, ‘ We did know two Englishmen, Arthur
Orton and your client, but there can be no con-
founding the two, for they went by distinct a,nd
separate names.’ That would be the answer which
a person would naturally make to such an inquiry.
Now you will see the answer to Holmes’ inquiry.
It is this: . ,
‘ Melipilla, July 15, 1868.
‘ Dear Sir, —In reply, I have to inform you that
Don Cevero Baira is the person who has endea-
voured to sho w that Sir Roger was an impostor—
that he had assumed that name in the place of his
tiue Christian and surname of Arthur Orton,
having borrowed the same in order to usurp the
inheritance, and that he is the son of a butcher,
and not of a nobleman belonging to the English
aristocracy. No one has known here that very
Arthur Orton, and although Sir Roger bore that
Christian and surname, he himself communicated
to Don Jose Miguel Valdivieso, and to other per-
sons, that they were not his own —that he belonged
to the English aristocracy, and that in England he
had played with the Queen’s children. lam glad
Sir R. Tichborne’s cause is going on favourably.—
Yours, &c., P- Castro.
Now that is a distinct recognition on the part
of Don Pedro Castro that he made inquiries, and
that Holmes’ client bore the Christian name and
surname of Arthur Orton and not of Roger Tich-
borne. Wbat is here said is in accordance with
the statement of Dona Hayley —that the only
Englishman who was ever there was one single
individual. That letter recognised that he bore
the name of Arthur Oiton, and has no mention
to make, and no report to give, that any one was
there under the name of Roger Tichborne. Unless
we can suppose that Roger. Tichborne, while he
was there, assumed the Christian name and sur-
name of Arthur Orton, for which no imaginable
motive can be assigned —and we do not know that
Roger Tichborne ever heard of the name of Arthur
Orton —how can we reconcile the statement made
in that answer to Holmes’ specific inquiry with
the facts, except by coming to the conclusion that
there was but one Englishman out there ?
What is the result? There is but one issue.
If we look to Roger’s own letters, and to the fact
that the only Englishman out there went by the
name of Arthur Orton, we must come to the con-
clusion that Roger Tichborne was never there,
and that the defendant was. It is not conclusive
to show that the defendant is Arthur Orton ; but
then, as I have more than once said, it would
take us a long way indeed towards that conclu-
sion ; and then, when you look at the other cir-


cumstances, you must consider whether the co
elusion thus partially arrived at does not becon
conviction. That first letter of the defendan
to Thomas Castro shows that the writer had n
merous acquaintances in Melipilla, that his a
quaintance had advanced to a considerable degr
of intimacy, sufficient to impress upon his m
mory the names of no fewer than 13, 14, or !
persons, and that he had been visiting at the
houses; and then comes the very material fac
that Roger could only have been there, if there a
all, for a period of two or three weeks. Wou
such a period suffice for the purpose of makin
those acquaintances and contracting that degree o
intimacy? But there is not, as I have shown, th
alternative of Roger Ticliborne having been ther
for a period of three weeks and Arthur Orton
year and a half; and, as my brother Mellor re
minds me, if Roger Tichborne had been at Mel
pilla for a year and a half, would not his nam
.have become known ?
And now comes the question of the lock of hail
Did Dona Ahumada cut off a lock of hair from
the defendant’s head ? If she did, and if the ha:
sent home is that hair, the case is at an end.
(Two different portions of hair wei’e here hande*
to the Lord Chief Justice.)
Now, if that was cut off from the head of th
defendant, and the defendant is Roger Tichborne
it could not have been cut off earlier than 1853
because Roger was not at Melipilla, if he was ther
at all, until 1853. But here is the hair of the un
doubted Roger Tichborne, cut off by his mothe
from his head in 1852, and endorsed by her own
hand, ‘Roger’s hair, 1852.’ Now, that hair (the
hair sent home from South America) might in pro
cess of time have become of this (the darker) co
lour; but hair of this colour (Roger's) never coulc
in process of time have become like that (the
lighter-coloured hair). I take it as perfectly provec
that hair in the mass looks darker, and that hair
when oiled will for the time have a darker ap
pearance.. But I pass that by, and I come back to
the position that if this hair (the hair sent home
from South America) was ever cut off from the
head of the defendant, he cannot be Roger Tich-
borne. As years advance, the hair of a boy or a
youth gets darker, until it assumes its regular co-
lour. But the hair cut off from Roger Tichborne’s
head in 1852 could not have become that (the
lighter) colour in 1853. Now, that is as clear as
the sun shines. The Master reminds me that we
have another lock of hair which was given to Lady
Radcliffe in 1853. If that light hair is the hair
sent home by Dona Ahumada, it could not have
been the hair of Roger Tichborne.
(The different portions of hair were at this point
handed to the jury for inspection.)
Now, gentlemen, comes the question, did Dona
Ahumada cut off a lock of the defendant’s hair ?
If she cut off a lock of the defendant’s hair, there
is not only the circumstance that the dark hair
could not have become hair of a light colour ; but
there is this additional circumstance, that the
man from whose head it was cut off must have
been longer at Melipilla than two or three weeks.
And then there will arise some question about age ;
for it i 3 a very different thing to cut off a lock of
hair from the head of a young lad and from the
head of a young man who has been an officer in
the army. A lady does not say to one whom she
has seen only two or three times in a fortnight,
Let me cut off a bit of your hair and keep it.’ It
presupposes a degree of intimacy to do that. But
we can readily suppose that the hair was cut from
the head of a person who had been staying in the
place for a year and a half.
If we are to judge by the correspondence of
Holmes and the defendant with Pedro Castro and
Kous, there is the clearest possible evidence that
Dona Ahumada did cut off this hair, and that th
hair is the defendant's. But then the defendan
boldly asserts that there was no hair cut off hi
head at all. It is right that circumstance shoult
be brought before you, because this is one of th
crucial points of the case. It is a crisis in th
case. If that hair was cut off the head of the de
fendant, he cannot be Roger Tichborne. But i
the defendant can repel the notion that any hai
was cut off, or that the hair sent home was no
the hair, then the whole conclusion falls to th
ground. It was admitted by Serjeant Ballantine
the defendant’s counsel at the former trial, tha
the lock of hair produced was the hair received b;
Mr. Holmes. The defendant is cross-examined 01
the subject thus:
‘ls that the hair? —No, I doubt it is the same
hair. I received it from Mr. Holmes. I gave
him authority to open my letters. He said to
me, “Do you remember a lady in Chili cutting
lock of your hair off?” I said, “No, Ido not.’
He said, “O, nonsense.” I said, “Certainly not.’
He said, “Do you not think somebody cut a lock
of your hair off?” I was not certain whether any
one had done so or not. I could not say, and the
letter I wrote back was a letter I believe partly
dictated by Mr. Holmes, and so there it is. Was
not this true—“My friend, I wish you to beg
Dona Prancesca Ahumada to send me a small
portion of the lock of my hair which she has
kept?”—Yes, I think you will find that was the
part dictated by Mr. Holmes. Do you mean to
say that Dona Francesca Ahumada did not cut
off a lock of your hair ?—I have no recollection of
ever knowing her. You have no recollection of
ever knowing her ?—No, nor her name either. Do
you mean to say that she did not cut a lock of
your hair off?—Yes; I mean to say she never cut
a lock of my hair off. Then, why did you say
that you wished to beg Dona Francesca Ahumada
you a small portion of the lock of your
hair which she has kept?—Because I was per-
suaded by Mr. Holmes that somebody must have
cut a lock of my hair off. You believing that it
had never been cut off at all ?—I could not say.
For what purpose did you want the lock of hair
that Dona Francesca Ahumada had kept, and that
she was to send home—for what purpose?—Why.
to have a look at it. And what did you mean by
giving your sincere thanks and respects to the
Seftora de Ahumada, and telling her that she had
done you a great service by preserving that lock of
hair? —I was not to know whether it was my hair or
not: any one might have cut a lock of my hair off
unbeknown to me. Did you believe it to be your
hair? —When I saw it. When you wrote that
letter to the Senora, you sent back that message?—
Probably, for from the letter I had from Castro I
thought it was my hair. Did you think it was
yours?—There is no doubt’ at the time I did
think it was mine. Do you now think it is yours?
—No, because I have read the evidence and find it
was not mine. You find that it was cut from the
head of Arthur Orton, do you not?—Yes, I do.
. . . What did Mr. Holmes mean by saying it
was of importance because it was identically the
same as his hair at that moment? —There is no
doubt he believed it was my hair. Did you say a
word to lead him to doubt it?—Yes, I told him
that no one had ever cut a lock of hair from my


head. Why did you write as you did?—l was
advised to write that letter. And when you
wrote your thanks for the hair, he knew that no
hair had been cut off?—Yes. Now, attend to this.
On the 20th of April 1868, you wrote to Rous,
“ We have received a letter from Don Castro of
much importance, as he has sent part of my hair.
When you wrote that did you doubt that it was
your hair?—No, I do not think at that time I
doubted it. I thought it probable that some one
might have cut a lock of hair off. I did not re-
member it.’ , ,
Well, gentlemen, it is to be remarked that when
Don Pedro Castro mentioned the lock of hair, the
defendant at once responded with avidity to the
suggestion that he should send him a portion of
it, and on having received it, he sends his grate-
ful thanks to Don Pedro Castro and to Dona
Ahumada for the service they had done him in
sending it. He also writes to Rous, ‘ I have
received another important letter from Castro, in
which they send a lock of my hair.’ But then he
says he wrote the letter thanking Don Pedro
Castro for the lock of hair at Holmes’ dictation.
But he does not dispute that Holmes compared-
the lock of hair with his own, and that it was
like it. It will be for you, gentlemen, to form
your judgment from all the circumstances of the
The defendant calls two witnesses to prove that
they knew Roger Tichborne when he was in Chili,
that they recollect him, and that the defendant is
Roger Tichborne. One of those witnesses is a
Mr. Bingley, who says that he saw Roger Tich-
borne when he was at Santiago on both occasions
residing at the English hotel. He did not make
Roger’s acquaintance, but he used to dine at the
■table cThdte, and he says that he saw Roger Tich-
borne there, and that the defendant is positively
Roger Tichborne. He wrote to the defendant’s
counsel on the subject, and the result was that
the defendant went down to Edgbaston to see him.
He did not recognise the defendant at first, but
upon the defendant saying ‘ Tich,’ Mr. Bingley
said ‘ Tichborne,’ and ‘ when the light was favour-
able I saw,’ says Mr. Bingley, ‘ there was no doubt
about his identity. He was the gentleman I had
seen at Santiago of the name of Tichborne.’ But
in cross-examination, when he was shown the
daguerreotype of Roger Tichborne taken in Chili,
he was not able to recognise it, nor was he able to
give a description of any single feature of Roger
Tichborne’s face. His recollection of the man,
he says, was a recollection of the general cast of
countenance by which he recognised him. Then
he had a conversation with the defendant,
and he asked him, ‘Do you recollect Mr.
So-and-So?’ and the defendant said he did.
But if you ask a person whether he remembers A.,
8., or C. nothing is easier than for that person to
say that he does, whereas the proper course
would be to ask him to tell you the names of
some persons out there. He asked the defendant
whether he knew a Mr. Sherriff. _ The defendant s
memory, he says, seemed defective, but when he
told him that Mr. Sherriff was engraver to the
Mint, then he said, ‘ O, yes, I recollect him very
well.’ He remembered Mr. Helsby, the photo-
grapher, but then his name had come up as a
photographer on the trial. He also remembered
a person named Carl, a German, a great linguist,
and that is so much in his favour. Then he
remembered Appleby and others. Where he could
have got Appleby’s name, unless from his own
unaided memory—except it was from Moore, who
at that time was brought into connexion with him
—I cannot say. It is in the defendant’s favour
that he did remember those persons, and it would
go to show that he had been at Santiago. Then
he was asked whether he remembered the square,
the cathedral, and the dismantled fort on the
hill, from which a gun was fired in the evening,
and he did. The defendant himself asked Mr,
Bingley about a building with a peculiar kind of
round roof, and Mr. Bingley told him that was
the observatory. Then he told the witness about
various places which he had been in, such as
Lima, Arica, &c., hut Mr. Hawkins suggested that
all this knowledge about Santiago, its walks, hill,
and so on, might have been acquired from any
gazetteer. Then this observation occurs to me.
Inasmuch as Arthur Orton remained on board the
Ocean for twelve months after he got out to Chili,
it is not at all impossible that vessel should have
made a voyage to Arica and put into port there.
The other witness is the sister of Mr. Helsby, the
photographer, who says she saw the defendant in
the street, and was struck at once by his manner
of walking, one knee bending in, and she believes
the defendant is Roger Tichborne. She says _ she
remembers that he went out shooting at Santiago
and brought home a dingo. That is the whole of
the evidence adduced on the part of the defen-
dant with respect to South America.
But then the defendant’s counsel asks how can
this be other than Roger Tichborne, seeing the
knowledge he displays of Roger Tichborne ? No
doubt it is perfectly true that he does show con-
siderable knowledge of Roger Tichborne, and
does follow his footsteps in his wanderings in
South America. This would be very wonderful
did we not know that the letters of Roger Tich-
borne to his father and mother have been pre-
served —we have got them here—and those letters
give an account of the proceedings of Roger Tich-
borne step by step through the whole of his wan-
derings. Therefore there would have been no
difficulty in the defendant procuring his know-
ledge from those letters. He had full and ample
means of consulting them, and of course, if he
wanted to make up a story, he would consult
them. But then, says the learned counsel,
‘There is one important statement which he
could not have derived from any such source,
and that is about the mule accident.’ That is
perfectly true; the letters from Roger Tichborne
to his father and mother do not contain the nar-
rative of that accident. But then you have it set
out in the journal, an extract from which he
sends to Mrs. Seymour and Lady Doughty, and in
a letter to his mother he writes to say, ‘ I have not
time to send you now an extract from my journal,
but I will as soon as I have time.’ Therefore it is
natural to conclude that he did so. Moreover, it
is my duty to point out that in his account of the
accident to the mule the defendant makes two
serious mistakes. The accident to the mule hap-
pened in crossing the first chain of the Andes ;
the defendant represents it as having occurred
in the second. Roger expressly says, the mule
having fallen some 50ft. or 60ft., ‘we all three’
went down to where the mule was—that is, Roger,
the servant, and the guide. But the defendant
says, ‘ The guide and I went down. Jules Barras
refused to go down [he was a witness against him],
and he and I had words about it.’
But that is not all. There are two or three
very serious mistakes with reference to Roger’s
life in South America. In the first place, the de-
fendant says that when he arrived at Valparaiso


ihe was informed of the death of his uncle bv let
tera from Gosford and his father • but 1
letter he received there was from fJdylwjS
ecause, writing to Gosford in 1854, Roger °com ’
in°H s r Jin te - t 0 Mr ' Slau gfcte*about the alteration
m his will, m consequence of Everard Arundell
mSakesSuhafepoiitedTOl tbdef"? ‘t°
cr does - w^aarisss
sssaSS
f «S to”“
wer in heaven as Mediator ’ This ei lrgll i as
*is h quite e poss'iMe^that < Arth^ir^o m t an ,^a tholio!
High t® know that the k rton was wily
o« ter* ‘rfr*’ th » rf ‘A. if A«h“
:k more to m/likino thantho^r’** 1 ' 1* is
pel I used to go to ot “ ."'i* 1 ™ °‘ ‘f •
We shall be very hannv to ?!„,/ 16y Wo , ud
must be baptised/ PPy * receive y° u > b ut
TOe" I T,T! h ' “ k l 1 0" *»* met an in.
rvation, but it'itVfaet'tL'f T* 1 your
thetbUot * Jo:irfl j . the JeaaieMUler to 'go
°i.lh d M 0t A m ‘iVn ° f A«hnr, bS
*• 'rt‘ *' h * *&£
£ Orta™L” s °ii b V bal , i V?,‘ he
tted. But when K Jo ! ep £ M - Thi s is
nr Orton again The rv/ to k° n don be was
d his purple knd fhe n/ ge ° f religion had
fcly dropped Nothing name Was c™se-
toT
ritten • Mark • r o ,o " rd ' ! he
h».en t,“* mW in S,“. h ° lic
Christian name Well who a° !l Wlr ° r ‘
*&^&££Se&
nets about tT y earn as one of initia-
or, and that would° Wer of * b f eVir Bi» as a
- Tichborne C ?, nt for his writing
ome. May the blessed Maria have
though no T b< i S as * ro Otters imply,
Orton had been baptised °i *q 6 *bat Arthur
Dona Hayley was »!in„ + ln '^ out b America, and
when I intemospd° ho ° Sa / some thing about it
W» h„ P d ’ because it was only hearsnv
J 2 sS,“LSff tho Arth » r o/ta ™ r 'a,
the AS,OrtTeSJ*d:r„T d 'A Ul '
the Arthur Orton of Smith a fc b . ere ’ because
be the Arthur Orton of r ust rtr er w is alleged *»
sees
w that' J-ShSoSon
dleton. It is not nool agam ln th e Mid-
cumstances of hi. £f j ,sa !7 to dwell on the cir-
exception— namely that time ’ witb one
South AmericTas well ao - h- r hl f. return fl 'om
he left EnXnAri hlSe^ rl / erda y« before
business, assisted in hi«i f fu gage< ? ln bis father’s
carry meat to velds nlt * Sh °g’ ? nd used *°
Arthur Orton went out to HoW
the evidence of t Mary Anne-but also through
iiigpsar
of the butchers as ® lau Sbterman to one
ment with Mr ?“ theygot bim emp%-
s£T”?“ a “^ l =
fiL” Next"" ■il" k / t „ WhiC > “
stance of his borrowing Ul. from Mrs Jur/wh*" 1 "
by mistake, she gave him a 51. instead of all note’
He gave her bis promissory note which hL te ‘
due on the 25th of August but wh£h became
realised in consequence of Arthur nev^ r
ing and leaving Hobart Town alto She bsc ?? d ;
from that time until she was ° h ,,i 80 * hat
had never seen him. She pops so f oUrt Jury
the defendant is the man ®T?J i? ** to Say that
she saw him frequentlv • a,, WaS a ' connection ;
ter of introducS Ser Stm T* With alet '
time ago, and I alwava s , lfc 13 a very J° n g
unless something has ocr^ -° fident %
upon the mind, or unless there 1* str ° ngly
cumstances in the case / ere are fact - s and cir-
sight of him in 2t . Sbe lost
of him, upon evidence 8 s, il nd *]“ ? ext we bear
a witness who savs he n ° re t b an doubtful, is from
which occupied him nnw UP i° n a fonclng contract,
months, at Mr Tohnso , a "!®L°f ayear and nine
savs the. J °hnsons, Newburn Park He
assto?kkeepLVurinvth ie t dArt n l,r ° rton aerv^
this Arthur n!t™ g tbe t , lme he was there; that
ing for the e»tahlh.h VaS * b j babit of slaughter-
the ‘ butcher ’ n® 11 ’ &nd tbat be was called
dressing heoe j°“ one occasion he saw him
h n j: ] as f> and struck by the way in which
be did his work, said, ‘You dress that like a trades


man.’ Thereupon Orton said he knew his bus
ness, and had been butcher on board ship, and tha'
he had been engaged at Hobart Town by Mr. John
son. The witness says he went away to Boisdale
eight or nine miles off, which is the Boisdale w
have heard so much about in the course of this in
quiry, and afterwards saw the same man at Dargo
He says he stayed at Dargo two or three months
That is clearly a mistake, because Arthur Orto
was there upwards of twelve months. Next th
witness saw him breaking horses at Sale about th
year 1858.
Mrs. M‘Allister takes up the story, and tells u
she was living with her husband in Avondale, o
the other side of Newburn Park. At that tim
her brother was employed as manager for Mr
Johnson, and one day she went to Newburn Par
with her husband, and saw her brother drivin
cattle. With him was a man who afterwards
when she and her husband were transferred t
Boisdale Station, came there, and whom she knew
as Arthur Orton. Now, was the defendant a
Newburn Park ? He denies it positively, anc
also denies ever having been in the service of Mr
Johnson. In cross-examination, he said : ‘ I do
not know any butcher named Hop wood. ’ He wa
asked, ‘ Were you with him in the service of Mr
Johnson a year and nine months ?’ and he replied
‘ I never was in Mr. Johnson’s employ. ’ ‘ Did yor
leave Mr. Johnson’s to go into Mr. Foster’s em
ploy at Boisdale?’ ‘I did not.’ There we have
Hopwood and Mrs. M‘Allis ter in direct contradic
tion.
I almost fear to stop and inquire how many
witnesses we have by this time who must have
committed perjury if the defendant has not; i
is a very formidable number. But, unfortu
nately, a book is produced, called The Rivals
which Mrs. M‘Allister says she lent to Arthur
Orton when he was at the station, and inside the
cover there is—in what I cannot but think is un-
mistakably the handwriting of the defendant—
‘Mr. Johnson, Newburn Park, Gippesland.’ If
that is in his handwriting—and you must judge
by inspection of it—it seems as if he knew more
of Mr. J ohnson, of Newburn Park, in Gippesland,
than he has thought proper to tell in the court.
We have the Boisdale books containing the ac-
counts with Arthur Orton from December 15,
1856, to October 1858. There can be no doubt
that Arthur Orton was there during that time.
The name of Castro never appears in these books,
and if we come to the conclusion that lloger
Tichborne went in the name of Castro, he was
not there. The defendant certainly, according to
the evidence before us, was there ; it is equally
certain that Arthur Orton was there. The defen-
dant having said he was there as Castro, and
Roger Tichborne never having been there as
Arthur Orton, we must come to the conclusion
that he was there as Arthur Orton. If it be
said that the defendant was there, not as Castro,
but under some other name, it is a name of
which we have no trace. We know from the
evidence of Mrs. M‘Allis ter that this book called
The Rivals was one of a collection which was kept
for the amusement of the labourers when their
work was over. She lent it to Arthur Orton, and
when it was returned to her she found this writ-
ing on the fly-leaf :
‘ This day i have receved a letter from Donald
Mac Donald With the Seal Broken I Arthur Or-
ere ma^e a vow on this Book Although not
a Bible It bear a cross That has i am a man of Bone
Bloud and flesh. That i will find out the man if
possible, that broke the said seal, and that
will punish him accordingly to the laws of my
countrie. Sined Arthur Orton.
‘ 11 March, 1858. Dargo.’
In this document there are peculiarities of spell
ing and punctuation. The word ‘received’ is al
ways spelt without an i in the defendant’s letters
and so it is here. The letters m, i, 1, b, are in the
handwriting of the defendant most marked, and
may say unmistakable. The letter i I have never
seen formed in so remarkable a way before, anc
there is besides the peculiarity of a full stop being
used for a comma. I find in this note the same
letters, which I confess I cannot distinguish from
the handwriting of the defendant, with which ]
am now so familiar. His m’s are peculiar. His
l’s are remarkably like broken-down z’s, and his
w's are like the extended wings of a bird. When
you have examined the handwriting you may be
able to judge whether it is the handwriting of the
defendant or not. lam merely now speaking in a
general way, and shall ask you by and by to com
pare the handwriting of the defendant with that
_on the flyleaf of The Rivals, and if you think the
letter was written by the same hand, then the de-
fendant becomes inseparable from Arthur Orton.
There is another and a singular incident to-
which I must call your attention—namely, that
the first service of Arthur Orton was at Boisdale,
thence he was transferred to Dargo, and after-
wards came back to Boisdale for a few months.
Now, the defendant, except that he enlarges the
time, makes his service follow in exactly the same
sequence. That is another circumstance which
tends rather to show that he is Arthur Orton. It
is by no means conclusive, but it is one of the in-
cidents in the case which deserve consideration.
Then another fact follows. Arthur Orton was
originally in his father’s shop, and after he was
sent to sea he came back and again entered his
father’s service. What do we find the defendant
doing in Australia ? He takes service as a butcher,
and then as a stock-keeper. He settles at Tumut
as a butcher, and fails ; subsequently he goes to
Wagga Wagga, and becomes an assistant and fore-
man to Mr. Higgins. He leaves that employment
and sets up again as a butcher, fails again, and
goes back to Mr. Higgins’s employment once more.
It is very unlikely that Roger Tichborne should
take to a business for which he had no peculiar apti-
tude, and of which he could have known nothing.
Mr. Ilopwood and Mr. Petit Smith both told us
of the workmanlike manner in which the defend-
ant cut up meat, and both complimented him
upon it. To Mr. Petit Smith he replied, ‘lt would
be very strange if I could not do it. I was brought
up in the business.’ Then he gives details of the
Kings, of Newgate-market, and other matters.
Of course Roger Tichborne could have known no-
thing of those matters. If you believe Mr. Petit
Smith you have a version perfectly consistent with
the defendant being Arthur Orton, though any-
thing but consistent with his being Roger Tich-
borne.
Then we have a witness named Redmond, who
says that after Arthur Orton left Boisdale he came
to a place called ‘Nowhere Else,’ and acted as
hut-keeper. He says that the defendant is the
same Arthur Orton, and states that he spoke about
Wapping and St. Katharine’s Docks, described
his father as a butcher, and spoke of South
America, Melipilla, and Valparaiso. The witness
farther states that he was fond of talking about
prize-fighters, said that he knew the Broomes, and


was also fond of talking about bush-ranging. He
speaks of a curious incident-two troopers coming
to the station and Arthur keeping out of the way
until they had gone, because he might kave found
some difficulty in accounting for a horse he had.
Now the question is whether Arthur Orton could
have been acting in the capacity of hut-keeper at
this place, and at the time stated by thewitness.
The importance of the witness is that he distinct y
says the defendant is the Arthur Orton he met
a/this place. There is, further, the confirmation
from Mr. Hopwood, who says that in 1854 he was
employed at a station not far from Wagga Wagga,
and that on one occasion, when he was having a
holiday at Wagga Wagga, he saw the defendant
in his shop, when he said Hallo, Arthur, is that
vou ’’ and the defendant made a sign to him not
to call him by that name, giving as a reasen that
he had abandoned it in consequence of some mat-
ters in connection with a horse. , .
Now we come to the year 1855. the begin-
ning of that year we have the fact of the defend-
ant’s marriage, which is one of those things win
it is important to consider. The person whom he
married was suited to the state and condition of
Arthur Orton, but I have pointed to the improba-
bility of Roger Tichborne marrying any one so
much beneath him, in case he ever intended to
resume his station in the world. But that is not
the only thing. We have the defendant stating as
his age* the exact age Arthur Orton would have
been if he had been the person actually married.
This fact must be taken into account m determin-
ing the question whether the defendant is Arthur
Orton or not. Again, we have the defendant al-
lowing the marriage to be solemnised by a Dissent-
ing minister in a private house. Is that more con-
sistent or less consistent with his being Arthur
Orton than with his being Roger Tichborne ?
Then in that same year we come to the Bich-
ardson letter, and the question is whether you
can see in that letter anything consistent with
the position of Roger Tichborne or consistent
with the position of Arthur Orton. I pointed out
that I could see nothing to account for Roger
Tichborne having written that letter, which the
defendant was constrained to admit was a tissue
of falsehoods. Could Roger Tichborne have found
any motive for inquiring about old Orton and
the rest of his family? But how does the mat-
ter apply to Arthur Orton ? I could see a very
sood reason why Arthur Orton, if he intended to
come forward as Roger Tichborne might very
weTl have said to himself-* Well if I have been
known in Australia as Arthur Orton, there may
be those who will be able to identify me as Arthur
Orton. What if such a thing should be smggested
in England ? Would it be likely that they would
goto the old place and inquire if I am Arthur
Orton? Before I take any decided step. is it
not necessary that I should ascertain if the old
people are there and what has become of the rest
of the family ?’ I don’t say that was what did
occur to the mind of the writer, but it certainly
may have occurred, and that is the only solution
I can find, for no other has been suggested, why
the letter should have been written. It
me, in considering the question whether the de-
fendant is Arthur Orton or not, that the Richard-
son letter will be found quite in keeping with the
position of Arthur Orton, and wholly inconsistent
and out of keeping with the position of Roger
Tichborne. There is this striking circumstance,
that whereas the man who r caused that letter to
be written could write perfectly well, he not only
does not write the letter, but he does not even
sign it. He gets it written by a schoolmaster.
Of course, that letter would be shown to people
at his father’s. Therefore we can see what the
motive would be in getting the letter written by
somebody else. ... ~
We next come to the intercourse with Mr.
Gibbes, to which I have already fully drawn your
attention in the Roger Tichborne case, but of
which there are two or three points very material
to the inquiry we are now upon ; for, if there are
any statements made by the defendant to Mr.
Gibbes which point to Arthur Orton, which are
wholly inconsistent with their being made by
Roger Tichborne, they would, of course, become
of importance. First, a statement is made about
St. Vitus’s dance. How do you explain that.
Roger never had St. Vitus’s dance. Arthur Or-
ton, we know, had it; so much so that he was
sent to sea in order that he might be cured of it.
The defendant however, might have St. Vitus s
dance and yet not be Arthur Orton. Then there
is the case of the Wagga Wagga will. What shall
we say about the names of Jarvis and Alleyn, the
executors ? From what memory did those names
sprint? You have heard the defendant s explan-
ation of that, and you have also heard the theory of
his learned counsel. What other conclusion can you
arrive at but that the man who was making that
will was Arthur Orton, and not Roger Tichborne?
Then, the defendant is called upon, in making a
declaration, to state in what vessel he left Eng-
land, and at what time ; and instead of stating
the vessel in which and the time at which Roger
Tichborne left, he states the vessel m which Ar-
thur Orton sailed, the name of which could not
be known to Roger Tichborne. . ,
So the matter stands on the Australian part ot
the case, subject always to any alteration that
may be made by the evidence adduced on the
part of the defendant; and he calls a body of evi-
dence to show that Arthur Orton and he are two
distinct persons. Several witnesses say that Arthur
Orton’s appearance does not coincide with the ap-
pearance of the defendant. There are some who
say they had seen Arthur Orton and the defen-
dant passing by the name of Castro at one and
the same time, in which case they cannot be one
and the same individual; but then, of these wit-
nesses, there are many who differ from what
others have said. Two different descriptions are
given of Arthur Orton. It is difficult to reconcile
the two. One set of witnesses say he was marked
by a scar; others not. There are also strange
difficulties as to the time, which require your
most careful consideration. All these matters re-
quire somewhat careful analysis and examination ,
and, no doubt, this part of the defendant s case
is entitled to full consideration, because if he
can show you that Castro and Orton were two
separate persons living at the same time, the
fact rebuts all inferences drawn from other cir-
cumstances. In judging of that testnnony, we
must first see what account the defendant has
given of his intercourse with Arthur Orton. In
his affidavit made in 1868, he says :
‘ I knew Arthur Orton. He was the son of a
butcher in Wapping. I first became acquainted
with him in Gippsland about the year 1855, when
I was at the Dargo Station. He entered the em-
ploy of Mr. Foster after I did. His face was
pitted with the smallpox. After I left Gipps-
land I did not see him again for some yearn We
were both employed by Robert Higgins, at Wagga
Wagga, in the year 1865.’


The defendant was cross-examined as follows
respecting Arthur Orton :
‘ Tell me the dates and places at which you
have met Arthur Orton ?—I think it was the lat-
ter end of 1855 I first met him at Boisdale. The
when I left Dargo he went up and succeeded m
there. I met him a fortnight afterwards a;
Dargo. I met him off and on for 18 months
1856-1857. Then in 1858 I saw him at Stratforc,
on the Avon river, in Gippsland. He was wit i
me constantly up to the latter end of 1859—aero
the country. We crossed over into the “Ovens
district, Victoria, at the end of 1859. Then Ime
him at a place called Borce, on the Murrumbidge
river, at the end of 1861 or the beginning of 1862
and then he went up with me to Wagga Wagga
Then I saw him some months afterwards—in 186
—and we went to Gundaquin. I did not see him
again, I think, until 1866 at Wagga Wagga.
saw him twice there in the course of that year
The last time I saw him was on the Ist of Jun
1866, at Wagga Wagga. What did you talc
about?—l can’t remember, and if I did 1 don’-;
think I should tell you. What name was h
going by ?—Alfred Smith. Have you ever com
municated with him since ?—No, I have not
Never? —No. Directly or indirectly?—l hav
written to him. Where did you direct to ?—A ;
Wagga Wagga, to the care of a friend. Who wa
the friend?—Joseph Robins ; he knew him well.
When did he come to Wagga Wagga ?—I think
about 1863 or 1564 ; I asked him to have the let
ter forwarded to Arthur Orton. Do you know
why Arthur Orton went by the name of Alfrec
Smith? —Yes. Why?—l suppose because he hac
done something not conformable to the law. Wha ;
sort of thing had he done that did not conform to
the law?—l don’t see why I should answer; ]
was not there when he did it. . . . Did you stay
from 1853 to 1855 in Van Diemen’s Land?—
was never there in my life. Did you leave Ho-
bart-town for Port Albert in 1855 on your way
to Mr. Johnston in Newburn Park?—l did not.
Were you in Mr. Johnston’s service as Arthur Or-
ton? —No; I never went under the name of Or-
ton. Were you engaged at Boisdale by Mr. Fos-
ter in December 1856 ?—No. Were you at Denil-
quin in 1860, and did you there change your name
to Castro ?—No.’
Ultimately, after a long cross-examination, he
says he last saw Arthur Orton at the end of 1866
at Wagga Wagga, about the time he made his
will, and that Arthur Orton went back to Albury,
the place of his then residence. Now, the dates
which he gives as to his having seen Arthur Orton
and to the Arthur Orton change of name are only
important so far as they serve to control the evi-
dence of the different witnesses who came forward
for the purpose of proving that Castro and Orton
were two separate and distinct individuals.
I will now briefly call your attention to what
the witnesses for the defence say, for it is but just
and fair to the defendant that his witnesses should
be fairly heard. Many of his witnesses profess to
have seen the two persons together, and to be able,
therefore, to speak conclusively as to their not
being the same. The first witness is Barclay, who
says he went to Australia in 1849, arrived in Mel-
f *iUro * n 1850, proceeded to Bendigo at the end
or 1802, and remained there for 8 years. Accord-
i ° s'®.statement, in the latter part of the year
«03, while he was at Bendigo he saw a man
named Arthur Orton, a loose-made fellow, about
tit'if j ‘ having the appearance of a sailor.
He had coarse features; there was nothing on his
face, and he was not marked with the smallpox. On
the latter point we have heard the strangest con-
tradictions, for whereas witnesses are called from
Wapping to say he had the smallpox, this witness
asserts that he was a smooth-faced man. The
witness goes on to say that Arthur Orton wore ea
rings, had rather high cheek-bones, and was of
coarse appearance. Witness being a butcher anc
having a stand in the market sold it to his tw
men, and Arthur Orton took a share with them
This occurred at the beginning of 1854. The wi ;-
ness says he saw Arthur Orton there butcherin *
onjmd off for two months. He fixes the date i 1
1853 or 1854. Now Arthur Orton arrived at Ho
bart-town in 1853, and if we are to believe the ev -
dence of Mr. Hawkes and Mrs. Mina Jury he die
not leave that place until the autumn of 1855
Therefore, if this witness is speaking the truth
he must be alluding to some other person. There
is a letter from Arthur Orton to his sister in Lon
don, dated from Hobart-town in March 1854, anc,
therefore, he could not possibly have been in Ben
digo at that time. Then the witness says this ma
had no pock-marks, and that there was nothing o
.his face.
The next witness is a man named Woodgate
He saw a person named Arthur Orton in Decern
ber 1856, when he brought down a mob of cattle
He had large hands and feet and high cheek-bones
Afterwards he saw him at a public-house in th
evening. He saw him again at Carningham Dig
gings in November 1858, cutting up at a store be
longing to Muir. The witness entered Muir’s ser
vice, and afterwards Mr. Muir lost his horse, the
horse and Orton disappearing together. Witness
tried to trace the horse, but after searching for
two days in the bush he failed to find either the
defendant or the horse. Then, having this know
ledge of Orton, he takes upon himself to say tha'i
the defendant is not Orton, or that if he is he is
very much altered. He saw him six months ago
at the Manchester Music-hall, when he had an in-
terview with him ; and he is satisfied he is not the
man. Orton’s hair was much lighter; he w T as a
big-boned man, neither over-fat nor over-thin ; he
was a big muscular man. He saw him at Carning-
ham, where he was well-known. Sometimes he
was called Arthur, and sometimes Orton. That
was in July 1856, the witness says. Arthur
Orton had left Hobart Town in August 1855, and
he did not go into service at Boisdale until Decem-
ber 1856. You must consider whether what this
man states can be correct.
The next witness, George Jones, says he was in
Australia at the end of September or the begin-
ning of October 1854, and was employed as car-
penter by Mr. William Forster at Boisdale in No-
vember 1856, for a month. He became acquainted
with Castro. He identified him as the defendant.
He also became acquainted with Arthur Orton.
Both were in the employment of Forster at the
same time. That statement is involved in great
difficulties, for this reason—the defendant’s ac-
count is that he, being at Boisdale, went to
Dargo, and while he was at Dargo Arthur Orton
was taken into employment at Boisdale; and
when he came down once on a visit he found
Arthur Orton there. Then he says when he
finally quitted Dargo, Arthur Orton was trans-
ferred to Dargo and succeeded him there. But
according to this man, they were both at Boisdale
at the same time. The truth of that story must
be tested by whether you believe that Castro was
there at all. Now, if the books of Mrs. M‘Abater
satisfy you that he was never there at all as
N


Castro, you cannot believe a man who says he saw
Orton and Castro there as different persons, more
especially as his story does not agree with that of
the defendant, who states that he, as Castro, and
Orton were never there together. Then he says
that in 1858 Castro was selling horses at Sale.
That agrees with the account given of himself by
the defendant—that after he left Forsters and
his suit had terminated, he did take to horse
dealing ; and it is perfectly possible the witness
did buy a horse of him. , ,
When the witness saw the defendant in England
he asked him whether he recollected him, and ob-
tained a reply in the negative. He then said, ‘ I
was the carpenter at Boisdale.’ The defendant
replied, ‘ If so you are the party to whom I sold a
horse—or rather a gray mare.’ The witness said
that was perfectly right—it was a gray mare.
After leaving Sale he went to Kilmore, where the
witness says he knew Orton in the service of Mr.
M'Manus, a butcher, and he describes hitn as a man
of large features, largehandsandfeet, and light hair,
andthat there was no resemblance between hitnand
Castro. He saw the defendant at a public meet-
ing here in 1872, and knew him at once as Castro,
and not as Orton. Upon that he wrote to Serjeant
Ballantine, and told him that he had so recognised
the defendant. This witness was asked whether
Mr. Forster was a married man, and he replied,
‘ I suppose he was, because I saw his wife after-
wards with him at Sale. While I was at Boisdale
I never saw her.’ That would tend rather to shake
his statement about the date, for Mrs. Forster
tells us that she was absent for a time, but that
she went away in the month of January or
February 1857, and did not come back till the end
of that year or the beginning of the next. There-
fore the man could not have been employed at
Boisdale till 1857, at which time Arthur Orton
was undoubtedly at Dargo, and so was the de-
fendant according to his own account. Another
statement by the same witness is that, upon
leaving Boisdale he went to Stratford-on-Avon,
to which place these two men came half-a-dozen
times, riding on horseback, as if they had come
from some station, and that he saw them in
an hotel and in the billiard rooms. Stratford-on-
Avon is not so far from Boisdale but that men
employed at the latter place might go there, but
it is difficult to see how the two could have been
there together, because, according to defendant’s
account, at that time one was employed at Bois-
dale and the other at Dargo. The witness further
says that early in 1859 he saw Orton at Reedy
Creek, and that is perfectly possible.
The next witness is a man of the name of
Trevitt, who became acquainted with Orton at
Avoca in March 1856, where he was a hanger-on
to a settler who had a flock of sheep. Witness
agreed to slaughter them at a shilling a head, and
Arthur Orton, the butcher, who was with the
settler, agreed to share. He helped to slaughter
half-a-dozen, but would do no more. At night
they had a conversation around the camp fire, and
this man told him his father was a large butcher
at Wapping. and was named Orton. And then he
states a thiug which may be very characteristic of
Orton. He says that the settler, when the sheep
were slaughtered and sold, made him a present of
a portable ' shop, and gave Orton his tent. But
then, says the witness, ‘When I went next day
to take possession of the shop, Orton said I
Bhould not have it. I took up a tomahawk to
knock the poles down and said I would have it,
and he came behind me and felled me to the floor
with a blow at the back of the ear.’ The witness
jives a description of this Orton. He says he was
about sft. lOin. in height; had a scar across the
cheek; large cheek bones; large ears ; a large
nose ; and small wires in his ears; feet and hands
large ; turned one foot out and had a slovenly
way of walking. The witness adds that he was
called Big Arthur, and that he used to talk about
different salesmen in Newgate-market. He says
there is no resemblance whatever between Orton
and the defendant, except that they were about
the same height. March 1856 is by no means an
impossible date for meeting Arthur Orton, but
then the description does not seem to tally with
that given by the other Australian witnesses. I
have just said that March 1856 is not an impos-
sible date, but my learned brother (Mr. Justice
Lush) corrects me. If Mr. Hopwood is right in
saying that Arthur Orton was a year and nine
months in the service of Mr. Johnston, he would
at that date have been still in Mr. Johnston’s em-
ployment, inasmuch as he did not leave Hobart
Town till August 1855.
Then there is a witness of the name of Hayden,
who arrived in Australia on August 4, 1804. This
witness, who became acquainted with Arthur
Orton at the end of that year, describes him in
detail, and says that he was a bony, rough fellow.
If this witness speaks the truth, and is speaking
of the same man as we are, then it is very difficult
to suppose that Arthur Orton could have left
Hobart Town, have gone to Melbourne, done
business there, and gone back again-—but it is not
impossible. This witness distinguishes between
Orton and Castro by saying that he met Castro at
the Omaho diggings in 1858 or 1859, and that he
saw him again in 1860.
Then there comes a Mrs. Hiscock, who tells a
very strange story. She seems to have been
an itinerant store-keeper. She says that in Sep-
tember 1858 she stopped one night and encamped
at a place called the Black Forest, between Ben-
digo and Melbourne. She says that two men
came up and asked her to give them a panikin of
tea. One of the men of the party called her Mrs.
Hiscock, upon which the defendant said, ‘ Are
you the wife of Hiscock, a bootmaker, of No. 70
Hay market.’ It seems to me a very strange
thing that because anybody heard the name of
‘ Hiscock ’ mentioned, he should think that His-
cock of the Haymarket had transferred himself
and all his belongings to the wilds of Australia.
The witness says she replied, ‘ Yes,’ upon which
the defendant said, *O, I remember him very
well; he would not let me leave my coat one night
when I was going to the opera.’ The two men
passed the night there, and on her saying, ‘ I
shall tell my husband I have seen a gentleman
who knew him. "What name shall I say ?’ he
replied, ‘ Roger.’ The two men had nothing with
them, and went away the next morning towards
Melbourne. She read the report of the trial, and
consequently called upon Mr. Hendricks. After-
wards she saw the defendant and recognised him.
Now, Mr. Hiscock is alive, and might have been
called, and to make this evidence complete we
certainly do want Mr. Hiscock. If Mr. Hiscock
had come and repeated this story, and so identi-
fied Roger, it would have been a matter of greater
importance than this conversation between the two
vagrants in the bush.
In the defendant’s case there are many circum-
stances pointing adversely to him. The strength
of his case lies in the multitude of his witnesses
and the evidence they have given, and I should


not be doing justice to the defendant if I did not
go minute y through that evidence in order that
your recoJection of it may be strong and fresh,
In a criminal «„i r , x... T
to briS to vo,!r LH,® * hlS I „ thi , nk it right
adduced on the defendaSbe^iaff 1 tl9 eVldence
Thirteenth Day, Wednesday , February 18, 1874.
Gentlemen, —There are still some of those A
tralian witnesses whose evidence I have to c
with, and I will state the substance of it as briei
as possible. The next in the list is William Crei
ton, now a travelling agent, and his evidence is
this effect. He arrived in Melbourne in Augusi
1854, and soon afterwards became acquainted w
Arthur Orton about t wo miles from Melbourne
place called Collington Flat, where he was
gaged as a slaughterman. He saw Orton one
week for three or four months, and says he was
rough bony fellow. There was nothing particu
about his face, except that he had high chee
bones. He never noticed a mark or scar upon
8 f a ® e * fbe difficulty about the evidence
that at the end of 1854—if you can trust the Ta
mania,n evidence—Arthur Orton could not ha
been in the neighbourhood, as he was at Hoba
f owa ‘ witness distinguishes Arthur Ort
from Castro, whom he says he saw in 1858 or 18
“jb® employment of Mr. Foster; but if Mr
M Allister be right, no person of the name of Ca
tro was ever in the employment of Mr. Foste
'ru oll °^ er hand, Arthur Orton was.
J hen came Janes, the sly grog-seller. He tel
us that he met Arthur Orton at Priors’ Dean
the end of 1856, but afterwards corrects that stat
ment, and says it was in June of that year F
says he was associated with the ‘King of the Bus]
rangers’ and other men who lived on plunder B
describes Arthur Orton as having high cheek
bones, light hair, large hands and feet; and say
that in the same year, four or five months after
wards, he saw him at Reedy Creek, and that h
saw Castro—defendant —with him at the sam
+W S s lowlD o. if his evidence is trustworthy
that the two men are separate and distinct indi
viduals. He first saw Castro at Castle maine, li
says, at the latter end of 1854, coming with Orton
from the bush. It has, however, been shown tha
. , /io^° n was at Hob art Town at the latter
end of 1854; and therefore he could not be com
ing from the bush at that time, or associated with
?o a ,T°V r Th . en be says be saw both of them in
18.)5, at Geelong. That, again, does not tally with
the evidence of the defendant himself. The wit-
ne3s says next that he saw them at Bendigo at
the end of 1858, and that they were regular bush-
rangers. He associated with these people, and
once rode with Orton and Castro to a place seven-
teen miles from Castlemaine, when Orton said of
the horse he was riding, ‘ This brute cannot jump
■naif as well as those ponies I used to ride at Wap-
Pmg. The witness describes Arthur Orton as
naving a rolling walk, and as walking with one
foot a little wider out than the other! He had
nlarJ s s on his face, and his ears were
n/° r eamn « B ! and witness tells the story
andnn+tv u ! e<l I take tbe of the gum-tree
ha t^ e . stein through the holes in his ears. I
menta °ut discrepancies in this man’s state-
to coLnii 1 re * er ® nc ® t 0 ‘fates, and you will have
his evident lether ’ consi( lering his association,
r 18 worthy of your attention.
to Australia tlle next witness > who went out
lB^ a “ a F iner > sa y s be was at Mel-
Arthur Ortn' B P ea^s to having seen
Arthur Orton and Castro at the digging! He
Is a description of Arthur Orton, who hesavs
slightly pock-marked, and that there waJ a
on his face. Then he is asked what Orton
Castro were doing, and he says thev were
■ Dg th»f Cattle ’ he th j? ks on their own account.
, that « impossible, because at that time
ie defend / 1 S employ ’ and > according
ie defendant s own account, he was in service
argo He gives you an account of a circum-
ie which would certainly impress Orton upon
mmd. He says that there was a street dis-
ince, m which Arthur Orton took part; and
i he went out to see what it was, Orton struck
with a she, and that the mark remained yet
f A°l Flr !? he says that this was in Decem-
md then afterwards puts it as happening in
her or the beginning of November.
mh! h 2v Mr ‘ Woolnough, who says that in
mber 1859 he was at Reedy Creek, and that
ar Orton was in the employ of a butcher
. He describes him, and says that he has a
+ le n fcloD ° f llis havin » P o ck-marks on
ose, but he says nothing about the scar on
ice. He noticed no nervous movement of the
ows, and no twitching,
m there is a person name! Dyke, who landed
lbourne, and in 1852 went to Wagga Wagga
: he rented billiard-rooms. Whin he had
;here eight or nine months the barman, he
pointed out a person named Tom, whom he
rards found to be Castro, and that the man
iMr Higgins’s employment. He describes
sfendant correctly, and he also says that
was a man named Orton who used to come
3 Wagga Wagga with cattle. He first came
seven months after the witness had been
and he saw the two men-Orton and Castro
ther m the billiard-room, and afterwards
racecourse. He distinguishes the two men,
lys that Ortons voice was rougher than
s, and that his hair was lighter; that he
ominent features, high cheek-bones, upper
itruding, bony, and thinner than Castro •
at he was splay-footed, and threw out his
He saw him shepherding horses before that
’ th ® Bendigo diggings, and he says he was
quainted with the man. He saw him again
next season; and by loans and losses at
8 became indebted to him to the
of 61., for which he gave his lOU. He
it Orton paid him the 'M. in 1864 at Wagga
The difficulty as to this evidence is that
v Orton in 1863 or the beginning of 1864
ga Wagga, as Orton ; but according to the
ut Orton had ceased to bear the name in
hen he took the name of Alfred Smith
comes a witness named Ward, who went
Lustralia m the year 1857, and saw Orton
y Creek m the employ of Mr. Johnson,
nbes him as a square-built man, sinewy,
; fleshy, big-boned, and slightly marked
allj i qco rh f ! ast time he savv him was in
er 1863, and he remembers the date be-
was two days after his own birthday ’ He
had a conversation with Orton about the
3f ? r a !tv at Harr y. which had just occurred.
3. M Allister told us that Ballarat Harry
■dered at the time Orton was in their ser-


vice and that he refused to stay at Dargo as it
was’so lonely ; so that if she be right the witness
must be or Orton must have told him that
Which was not true. He was asked about Orton
changing his name to Smith, and says it was not so.
r chert Oardner, who was next called, was, in
gSTSt.*"H?w.“
ticed that Castro’s hands were white that he had
„ sipenvlook about the eyes, and was not like yr
ton in the face. He first saw Orton at the diggings
at Castlemaine in 1857 ; but that date is impos-
sible, Arthur Orton, in 1857, veas either
at Another 6 witnessf °named Pole, is the only one
who speaks of having seen Orton after {he defen -
ant left Australia. He says he me * him at the
Gap, on the Bendigo-road, at the end of Aove
ber or the beginning of December 1866; and de-
scribes him as a full-made man, with prominent
features upper lip projecting, and with hair a
shade lighter than his own, which was of a me
brown ° This witness says Orton had a scar down
the left cheek, from the cheek bone to the upper
part of the mouth. He gives a remarkable amount
of his journey with Arthur Orton, which is hardly
one to repeat. You will remember tha,t he said
they assisted each other in disencumbering them-
selves from certain unpleasant parasites, which
are hard to dislodge when once they getP + o ®T r thur
They had but one comb, which belonged to Arthur
Ort-on and bad ‘A. O.’ written upon it. They
were on what he called the ‘Wallaby Track,
which was wandering about as two vagrants, try-
ing to pick up a job,’ or, as one might suppose,
nick in c up anything that came in their way. I
we believe this witness, of course Arthur Orton
was present in the flesh after the defendant had
left Australia. You remember his demeanour m
the witness-box, and his credibility is a question
for you That concludes the Australian evidence.
certainly does seem very much to point to
two descriptions of person as regards Orton. In
the one alternative there would be an end of the
case against the defendant as to his being Arth
Orton. It is clear that both descriptions could
not point to the same man. Some mention a
man 1 with a scar and with pock-marks, and,
a .rain, a person is spoken of without scar or pock-
marks. It is clear that they cannot speak of the
same person Whether there was in Australia a
second Orton I do not know. What is to me very
unsatisfactory is the fact that the career of t
other Orton who went from this
hpen traced. One witness speaks of the mjusuauy
large hands and feet of Arthur Orton probably
too large to be identified with the
of the defendant. Are we quite sure that they are
sneaking of Arthur Orton, and that they are not
sneakinl of one of his brothers ? We know that
another brother went to XsewiG
heard of, and there is a possibility that these wit
nesses are confounding Arthur Orton with another
Orton. I do not say that it is so, but the thing
is possible. I cannot help thinking that what
has-been said as to the size of Arthur Orton s feet
is an exaggeration. You remember the produc-
tion of what was said to be his last bythe
shoemaker from Wapping, and that it was subse-
quently shown that pieces had been added on,
which is not usual, but that they were fastened
on by rivets, which were of recent introduction
Australia there is one other cir-
cumstance to which I wish to call your attention,
and that is the entry in the pocket-book which
belonged to the defendant, and was found
after S he left Wagga Wagga, and in which there
are entries unmistakably in his own hfum
writing. There is an entry which gives the land-
ing Tichborne as at Hobart Town as
distinguished from Melbourne. Row we know
that Arthur Orton did land at Hobart Town, and
the entry creates the suspicion that it was the in-
tention of the defendant originally to
Roger Tichborne as having landed at Hobart
Town and not at Melbourne. The entry runs
‘La Bella. R. C. Tichborne arrived at Hobart
Town 4 Feb. 1854’-the date at which the de-
fendant represents his landing at Melbourne.
-\Tas the intention such as I have suggested . I
so it points strongly indeed to Arthur Orton m
landed at Hobart Town, and as having
had at the commencement, when was Prepanng
his statement as to the manner in which he hat
been saved, an intention of representing that he
had landed at Hobart Town. innf)/
A Juror.-Was there not a reward of 1000/.
offered for Arthur Orton ? , T
The Lobd Chief Justice.— There was, and I
am coming to that fact. There is also in the
nocket-book the address of Miss Loder, of which
Ro° , er Tichborne could only have known on t
supposition that Arthur Orton had _ given it
toMm with a view to his making inquiries after
h6 Now we quit Australia and accompany the de-
fendanteto this counti y. We have first> i-emark-
able circumstances that when in the liver he 1
quired of the pilot, the witness John Bromley did
he know a pilot named Fergusson.Bromley saidhe
i +nrA nr fhrpe i I mean,’ said tli© defendant,
?re’r™»o“ the Piloi of the Dundee bouts.'
SS hneTSeVnr 3£j
to bjaU that 'S“fSet '"id' 1
S3 thldeieSntTo wipW
extraordina y „.. n i .pined v Can you reconcile
Jiatwiththe Possibility of the defendant being
RogerTichborne? We find him so interested m
the B Orton family that he must go down in hot
iioatp late on the night of his arrival to ascertain
SSfiSfiS oflhe Ortons. As 1 hovealready
pointed out to you, Boger Tichborne might hmre
undertaken the task of ascertaining what had be
come of them, and in that case even if he had
the most ardent and zealous friendship for Arthur
Orton, the next morning would have amply suf
ficed to make the inquiry. But it “ t -
We have the cofiversation, as related by Mrs.
we nave i-ue , j the course of
Jackson and Mrs. iairneaa, ovViihited
which if you credit their testimony, he exhibited
the most familiar acquaintance with theloca y
Atsssmis
whether you can reconcile that with the eory
that he is Roger Tichborne. other wav’ Is
But then how does it stand the other way . is
it consistent with tho ohsisc , uBe j an
The »»»■*ri'ht .“m. pluusible
argumen w , D you SU pp o se that Arthur
OrtofcouS have been so" insane as to go down to


a place where he would be certain to be known as
Arthur Orton, if he was about fraudulently to
assume the character of another man ?’ Well, the
experience of courts of justice tells us that m
are every day convicted of crime by reason o ;
some act which a sounder judgment would ha
told them to avoid rather than to do, but whici,
nevertheless, for some reason or other, they ha
committed, and which leads to the discovery o 1
that which otherwise, in all probability, wou
have remained concealed or unknown. But is it
outrageous a proposition, after all, that Arth
Orton should have so acted? He goes down la ;e
at night, and very likely his sole intention was ;o
reconnoitre and see whether old George Orton
shop was still in existence. He finds the hou
shut up, and with every appearance of being u
inhabited. Well, what more natural than for him
to go into the nearest publichouse, and see if le
could not pick up some information about t
people he was interested in ? He goes into tle
nearest publichouse, he is well wrapped up, anc
the chances are that after twelve or fourtei
years’ absence, he having gone away when he w
eighteen or nineteen, he would not be known,
can see nothing extravagant in his getting in io
conversation with the two women, the only pe
sons he found there, in the way we have heart.
But the learned -counsel for the defendant was
not satisfied with his own suggestion. He took
bolder course, and asked you to disbelieve thos}
witnesses.. I have already called your attentior.
to that evidence, and it is for you to say whethe
they told the truth. All I can say is that if yoi.
believe their statements, I confess I do not se
my way to any but one conclusion.
But it does not rest there. We know wha i
took place the next day. The defendant founc
that Mary Anne Orton was married, and that a
unmarried sister lived with her, and he puts him
self in communication with those sisters under
fictitious form. He had received a card from
Mr. Stephens whom he met on his way home t
this country, and he wrote a letter which pur
ported to.be presented by Mr. Stephens, but wa
really written and presented by himself. It i
dated from Wagga Wagga, but was certainly
written in this country after his arrival, for he
had met Mr. Stephens for the first time on the
voyage from New York to England. The letter
was as follows:
‘ Wagga Wagga, N.S. W., June 3, ’66.
My dear and beloved Sister, —It many years
now since i heard from any of you. I have nevei
heard a word from anyone I knew since 1854.
But my friend Mr. Stephens is about starting for
England and he has promised to find you all out
& write and let me know all about you. Ido not
intend to say much because he can tell you all
about me. Hoping my dear sister you will make
him welcome has he is a dear friend of mine So
good bye
‘ Akthdr Orton.
*■)(•
• *
v letter is unmistakably in the defendant’s
nanawriting, and it contains, after the signature,
tne hieroglyph— perhaps that is not what I should
r~. “.-which the undoubted Arthur Orton in-
i paced after his name - His letter to
did he get r it ? d *° his sisters contain it. Where
'i a ma, tter of notoriety among persons
• ii ?, or commercial transactions with the
inhabitants of Spanish countries that each indi-
vidual appends to his name a special flourish or
arabesque, which is called in Spanish a ‘ rubrica,’
and without which the signature is not considered
complete. In the Dictionary of the Spanish Aca-
demy the ‘rubrica’ is defined ‘as the special and
distinctive mark which each person, after having
signed and written his name, places at the end of
the same with a dash of his pen.’ It is translated
into Latin, ‘ Chirographus subscriptioni additus .’
To rubricate—‘rubricar’—is thus defined— ‘ To
sign a, paper already written without putting the
Christian or surname of the person who subscribes
it, but merely his rfibrica.’ This use of a con-
ventional mark or cipher as the equivalent of a
Christian and surname is not known out of Spanish
countries.. But in France a somewhat similar
effect is given to the flourish called the ‘ parafe’—
equivalent to our initialing. The peculiarity of
the Spanish ‘rubrica’ or cipher is that a higher
degree of importance is attached to it than to the
written names. Thus the names may be omitted,
but the ‘rubrica,’ if added by sign manual, will
constitute a valid signature. lam told that a
banker in Spain or the Spanish dominions will
not pay a cheque on the signature of the person
without the secret sign or ‘ rubrica,’ and that he
will pay if the signature be omitted, but if the
‘ rubrica’ be marked correctly.
Now, there is no doubt that Arthur Orton in
South America acquired and assumed the habit of
using that mark. We see it in his letters to Miss
Loder and to his sisters. He did not use it to
those who would not have understood the sign.
We do not find it in any of his letters to the
Dowager or to Mr. Gibbes or Mr. Cubitt. It may,
however, be said that from his intimate acquaint-
ance and association with Arthur Orton, Boger
Tichborne knew that Orton had been in the habit
of using the sign and therefore adopted it. That
suggestion you will consider. But we have further
all this concealment. We know what he did to
prevent the fact that he had gone down to Wap-
ping from transpiring. He not only did not at
any time let any one know of this till the Orton
case was sprung upon him, but instead of then
openly acknowledging what had taken place, he
denied that he had ever been to Wapping. It is
impossible to suppose that, having gone down
there under such circumstances, he should have
forgotten it within 12 months. We know that he
took Charles Orton and the sisters, or, at all
events, one of the sisters, into his pay. After a
time, when pressed, he told those with whom he
was in communication that his object was to ascer-
tain about the family, in order to afford informa-
tion to Arthur Orton and render assistance to
those of the family who might need it. At another
time he said he went there for the purpose of
ascertaining whether Arthur Orton had arrived
before him. The latter statement can hardly have
been true ; it is not consistent with another state-
ment of the defendant—that he wanted to get in-
formation in order to send it to Arthur Orton.
He gives pecuniary assistance to these parties for
about 12 months. The first thing he stated with
reference to Arthur Orton was that, so far from
having arrived or being expected to arrive, he was
living at Wagga Wagga under an assumed name.
It would have been satisfactory if the correspond-
ence with this Orton family had been produced.
It has, however, all been destroyed. Why ? Was
it in order that the relations oetween one and
another of these parties should not be known?
There is a circumstance connected with this
part of the case which it is impossible to pass


over. With reference to almost every part of the
Arthur Orton case—every part except that which,
relates to Australia-there are people still hving
who could have thrown much light upon it. There
are a brother and two sisters of Arthur s living. I
could not expect either side to call the brother
Charles : I could not expect the prosecution to
call him, because he had proved to be a traitor to
the defendant, for as soon as the supply of money
bv the defendant was discontinued he went to the
opposite side. It would have been plainly incon-
sistent with the proper conduct of the prosecution
to present such a man as a witness and to ask a
iury to believe him.
But there are the two sisters. They could have
told you whether Arthur Orton had a brown mark
or not. They were much older than he, and one
cannot but suppose that if, as a child, he had a
brown mark on his body, they would have known
it. It seems to me impossible that they could not
have known Arthur Orton. Again, they must
have known if he had the smallpox, and when he
had it, if ever. They must have known, above
all, whether he had any wound that left a scar on
his face. They could have told a variety of things
which would have placed this matter beyond
doubt either one way or the other. Why were
these sisters not called ? The prosecuting counsel
could not call those who were in the pay of the
defendant, and who had made affidavits in his
favour. Why were they not called by the defend-
ant? The learned counsel for the defendant said,
‘ I won’t call them, because I believe they have
been in communication with the other side. But
that is a mere suggestion, for which there does not
appear a shadow of foundation. It is possible that
they may have told a false story for the money
they received, and that, had they been called,
they might have spoken to that which would
have brought more weight and more power than
all the evidence that has been produced on the
subject. There may be a better reason for their
not being called to be found in the fact that they
had told their story to Mr. Holmes, and when Mr.
Holmes abandoned the cause of the defendant he
may have been supposed to have told the other
side all he knew. But then, said the learned
counsel for the defendant — 4 If I had called those
witnesses, and they had expressed the least doubt
that the defendant was not their brother, it would
be fatal to my case.’ Well, I should not assume
that they would have done so after the affidavits
they had made. I should rather assume he would
have thought they would say, ‘We have no doubt
he is not our brother Arthur Orton, and we can
give you facts to prove it.’ H.they had_ saidso,
and had given the facts to establish what th y
said, it would have been of more weight and more
force than all the evidence of all the witnesses the
defendant has produced from Wapping. But they
were not called, and the inference is that there was
some good and sufficient reason for not calling them.
The last point which occurs to me as requiring
your grave consideration on this part of the case
is this—that from the day the defendant left
Australia Arthur Orton has entirely disappeared.
Mr. Spofforth adopted a singularly imprudent
course, I cannot help thinking, of offering aor
1,000?., to be divided between him and Arthur
Orton, if Arthur Orton should be forthcoming. I
say imprudent, because I cannot suppose that Mi.
Spofforth could have intended that anything so
wicked should follow as that we should have a
fictitious Arthur Orton coming forward. To offer
500?. to Gator if he could find Arthur Orton, and
500?. to Arthur Orton if he should be forthcom-
ing, would, however, he not unlikely to be attend-
ed with the consequence to which I have just
alluded, but which Mr. Spofforth could not have
intended. Cator, the baker, of Wagga Wagga,
had gone back to Wagga Wagga, and you may de-
pend upon it, if Arthur Orton could have beenf ound
within anything like a practicable distance of
Wagga Wagga, Cator would not have lost sight
of the 500?. But no Arthur Orton could be found,
and whether he may have departed thence and
gone elsewhere I am sure I do not know. We
have it proved that Arthur Orton was not heard
of in Australia till a given period, and that was
the period when the defendant first arrived m
that country ; and Arthur Orton has never been
heard of since the defendant left Australia, ex-
cept by the one single witness to whose evidence I
have drawn your attention. , ~,
I said this was the last of this part of the case,
but there is another thing to which I ought to call
your attention. Donna Clara Hayley told us in
her evidence that she saw on the arm of the young
sailor lad who came to her husband’s house two
letters worked in blue, a thing she had never seen
before. She asked the lad what it meant, and he
told her they were the initials of his name, A.l».
Mrs. Mina jury told us that she saw Arthur Or-
ton one day in Hobart Town, when in the employ-
ment of a butcher there, coming up the street in
great haste with his arms bare, and that she then
saw the same marks. The concurrent testimony
of those two witnesses coming from different parts
of the world appears to prove that Orton had such
a mark on his arm. The two sisters could have
told us whether or not that was the fact, bup-
pose it was there, is there any corresponding mark
on the defendant’s arm? There is a mark there—
you, gentlemen, have seen it; I have not—and
vou will judge whether it corresponds with the
mark spoken of by Donna Hayley and Mrs. Mina
Jury. One remarkable fact connected with it la
that the defendant cannot tell us how that mark
came upon his arm. Such a mark could only be
produced by a burn, a scald, a boil, or from cauteri-
sation of the skin to get rid of an otherwise in-
delible mark. No such mark from any of those
causes could have come without the knowledge of
the defendant-he could not have had burn or
boil or scald without knowing it. He cannot, how-
ever tell us from what time he first saw it he
cannot connect it with any circumstance of his life,
except one. He says he had his arm broken in the
bush, that it was very tightly bandaged, and that
it may have been from that. He can suggest no-
thing else ; and the eminent surgeon who was
called on his behalf, Sir W. Fergusson, did sa,y
that such a thing was possible. But even that is
a matter of supposition—for the defendant doe&
not say, as a matter of fact, it was so produced.
Do you think this mark corresponds with that
spoken of by the two witnesses? This is a circum-
stance which is deserving of being taken into
C 'Well, gentlemen, those are all the facts relating
to the Arthur Orton case which occur to my mind.
Taking the affirmative evidence of the prosecution
and the negative evidence of the defendant s wit-
nesses, and*looking at it all by the light which all
this mass of facts is calculated to throw on the
case, you will say in your judgment whether he is
Arthur Orton or whether he is not. Of course, if
he be Arthur Orton he cannot be Roger Tichborne.
The converse of the proposition, however, does not
follow. He may not be Arthur Orton, and still


may not be Roger Tichborne. It has been assume!
by the learned counsel for the defendant that the
prosecution were bound not only to show nega
tively that the defendant was not Roger Tichborne
but affirmatively who he was, but that proposi
tion cannot be sustained. On one part of the case
all they were bound to do was to show that he was
not Roger Tichborne. It is your province, am
yours alone, to say whether they have or have no
done so.
And now, to revert to the question, is the defen
dant Roger Tichborne? Gentlemen, when we
desire to ascertain the identity of a person we
would naturally turn in the first place to the
members of his own family. There has in this
case been a violent attempt made to create
violent prejudice against the Tichborne family, as
knowing perfectly well that the defendant is the
man he represents himself to be, but combining
to keep him out of his rights, and against the Sey
mours, as acting from motives of a base and mean
character. Now, as regards the Tichborne family,
it is quite plain from the settlements that they
have no pecuniary interest in the matter, with the
single exception of Lady Radcliffe, whose secofit
son, in the event of Roger Tichborne’s will holding
good and the infant heir dying unmarried, or
having married, leaving no son, will become en-
titled to a considerable portion of the property.
The other members of the family have no interest
in it of any sort or kind. The only interest they
have is to uphold the honour of the family, and
if they believe that an impostor is endeavouring
to deprive their kinsman of his right, to prevent
his succeeding and to protect the rightful heir.
They may be mistaken—that is for you to say —but
that they are acting under an honest belief is clear
and plain, and could not be gainsaid by any per-
son forming a right-minded judgment.
Now, as regards the Seymours’ pecuniary in-
terest in the result of this case, they have none ;
but, although they have not the honour of their
own family to uphold, they have an interest in
protecting their undoubted kinsman if they be-
lieve him to be unjustly assailed. Whether they
be right or wrong as to the identity of the defen-
dant, any one who was not a fool or a fanatic, or
a combination of both, would have given them
credit for acting disinterestedly and honestly.
Instead of that, however, public meetings have
been held throughout the country, and popular
passion has been stimulated by harangues of an
inflammatory nature, and they have been held up
to obloquy and reproach as seeking to keep an
honest man out of his inheritance. You remem-
ber the scene that occurred when Mr. Alfred Sey-
mour went to take leave of the dead body of his
sister. ‘Alfred Seymour,’ said the defendant, ‘you
are a d d liar, and you are seeking to keep me
out of my rights.’ Would not Roger Tichborne,
who had been brought up among and accustomed
to the society of gentlemen—ask yourselves would
not he, if placed in that position, have said,
* Well, my uncle is against me; he does not
believe in me ; but he was once kind to me; I
have known him for years, and I know he would
not act as he is doing from any other than an
honest motive. I am, therefore, bound to treat
him with decent respect.’
Gentlemen, one of the things you will have to
consider in the case is the conduct of the de-
fendant after his arrival in this country, and see
whether you can recognise in it the conduct you
would have expected from Roger Tichborne;
and that is why, in going through the corres-
pondence, I endeavoured, as far as possible, to
familiarise you with the character and feelings
and inward sentiments of Roger Tichborne. I
should just mention here the witnesses who have
been called who were acquainted with Eoger
Tichborne’s earliest days —M.Chatillon, who was
his tutor; M. D’Aranza, who was a familiar
friend of the family ; the Abbe Salis, who lived
in the same house with him ; the Pfere Lefevre,
who was the confessor of Roger Tichborne; his
relations, the De Erimonts ; and the old servanl
who was 14 years in the house, and saw Roger
Tichborne from the time he was in his nurse’s
arms up to his advanced boyhood. There was
also Burdon, who was his father’s valet until the
time Roger left this country. All these witnesses
declared their conviction that the defendant was
not Roger Tichborne. Then we have a number
of witnesses who knew him at Stonyhurst, in-
cluding Mr. Mannock, Sir J. Lawson, Humphreys,
who was a servant, and Father Rigby, and Father
Etheridge. We have also a number of members of
the family. We have Mrs. Nangle and two of
her children, who were his playmates at Paris,
and knew him up to the time he left this country,
and also her daughter. We have his five cousins,
the daughters of Sir Henry Joseph Tichborne ;
and we have several friends, including Mr. Tal-
bot, Mr. Thornton, Mr. Hey sham, and Mr. Fitz-
gerald, all of whom were acquainted with him.
Then we have the greater portion of his brother
officers, no less than ten of them, and several of
the Carabineers, non-commissioned officers and
privates, all of whom state their belief that the
defendant is not Roger Tichborne. I need not
say that this is a very strong body of evidence.
I shall now call your attention to the descrip-
tion they give of him, and it is for you to com-
pare these statements with those which have
been made on the opposite side. You will have
to give due weight to the evidence on both sides,
and you will then have to decide the important
question whether the facts of the case which have
been placed before you, and also the knowledge
of the facts of the life of Roger Tichborne dis-
played by the defendant, or the ignorance of that
life exhibited by him, leads you to the conclusion
that the balance must incline one way or the
other as to the defendant being Roger Tichborne.
Let me call your attention to the account given
of Roger Tichborne by the different members of
his family, which you will have to contrast with
the account given by witnesses on the other side.
Mr. Dafiby Seymour, in cross-examination, stated
distinctly bis opinion that the defendant was not
Roger Tichborne. He says Roger’s hands were
bony, but not particularly small. He describes
Roger as walking in a slouching sort of way, and
as being in-kneed, but not so much so as to say he
was in-kneed. That sounds like a contradiction ;
but I think I understand what he meant —it seems
to imply that there was a certain degree of ‘ in-
kneedness,’ if I may so say, but not much to speak
of. Mr. Danby Seymour does not go into any
general description of Roger, but Mr. Alfred Sey-
mour does. He says Roger was exceedingly slight-
built, with a very expressive face, and an exceed-
ingly narrow chest. This witness says Roger had
no twitch, and he says that Roger had no mal-
formation of the thumb. All these witnesses, in-
cluding Mrs. Bouverie, deny that the defendant is
Roger Tichborne. Mrs. Bouverie describes his hair
as being rather thin, and says that if there had
been any peculiarity in the formation of the thumb
she must have observed it, as she used to play


chess with him at Knoyle. Several of these wit-
nesses speak to his having had a thin, bony hand,
which would show the knuckles..
Mrs. Nangle describes himasbeingslightlymade,
shoulders low, straight, lanky, dark brown hair,
long bony fingers, and bony prominent knuckles.
There was no twitching about his eyes. The de-
fendant had not the slightest resemblance to Roger
Tichborne. Then Miss Nangle follows with a simi-
lar description, adding that Roger Tichborne was
excessively like his mother, but not like the Tich-
bornes. Major Nangle describes him in like terms,
and says he was very slim, very delicate, long neck,
drooping shoulders, careworn expression of coun-
tenance, and voice very soft and melodious. Cap;
tain Nangle makes similar statements, and. in
cross-examination says that Roger was a slim,
smoke-dried individual; he seemed very pale from
excessive smoking. Lady Dormer gives a very good
account of him. He was a slight man, about sft.
Bin. in height, with sloping shoulders, more like
a Frenchman than an Englishman, with a very
ugly nose and very open nostrils. She observed no
twitching whatever. The ‘twitching’ has been
made a great point of by the defendant, but all
these witnesses say that Roger Tichborne had no
twitch—that he merely, they say, elevated his
eyebrows when animated in conversation.
Mrs. Greenwood, who knew him well, because
of his frequent visits to Brook wood, says Roger
was very slight, narrow-chested, with falling
shoulders, long and narrow in every way—long
nose, not in the least aquiline ; long thin fingers ;
bony knuckles, very strongly developed; a wiry-
looking person. He looked, she said, as if he
were hung on wires ; a very loose-made person.
Then with reference to the twitch, she says, ‘ He
had a manner of raising his eyebrows when talking
earnestly, but nothing more than any one else. ’
And she adds, ‘ I never remarked that he had
any peculiarity of the thumb. I never even heard
of it.’ She is asked about the twitch, when she
said that she had never noticed any constant
movement of the eyebrows, but he used to raise
them up when in conversation. Mrs. Towneley
is another of the cousins, and she speaks more
strongly as to the formation of his knees. She
says that he always struck her as being rather
knock-kneed. His legs were very thin and ap-
peared to be weak. She never noticed any twitch
or movement of the eyebrows. The eyes of the
defendant were quite different from those of
Roger Tichborne, which were blue, with long,
dark eyebrows. Mrs. Washington Hibbert speaks
of Roger as having sloping shoulders, black hair,
gray-blue eye 3, looking darker because of the
dark eyelashes, and she added that the hair of
the defendant was darker than when she saw
him at the last trial. Whether by using certain
compounds you could make your hair darker for
a time I do not know. You will form your
opinion as to whether the defendant has done
so. Then she says, ‘ It is quite ludicrous and
absurd that the defendant could be taken for
Roger Tichborne.’
Lastly, we have Mrs. Higgins, who knew Roger
from the time he first came over to England, and
who says he was then almost a Frenchman. That
lady gave her evidence with perfect propriety and
fairness, but she was cross-examined in a manner
I very much regret. She was asked questions
with regard to her second marriage, and there
seemed to be a desire to say everything offensive
of the late Mr. Higgins. It appears that Mr.
Higgins took an active part in investigating
the defendant’s claims, and he denounced his
pretensions as unfounded. That seems to have
inspired the defendant and his advisers with a
peculiar animosity towards Mr. Higgins, which was
displayed in more ways than one by the defend-
ant’s counsel. But Mrs. Higgins might have
been spared any questions about her second mar-
riage ; there was nothing in the slightest degree
that called for anything of the sort. The de-
fendant’s counsel says, ‘I am sorry to have to
ask you whether the second marriage was ap-
proved by the family?’ To this Mrs. Higgins
answers, ‘ I was married from my mother’s
house.’ Then she is asked, ‘ Did Roger approve
the marriage ?’ To which the answer is, ‘Yes ;
I never heard him express any opinion about it.’
Then she is asked, ‘ Mr. Higgins was a newspaper
writer, was he not ?’ To this she answers, ‘He
wrote occasionally articles in the newspapers.’
Now, why should that have been gone into ex-
cept for the purpose of annoyance? It was done
partly to annoy her and partly to show a dislike
of Mr. Higgins. But I cannot allow conduct of
that kind, conduct of an offensive character on
the part of the defendent’s counsel, for which I
cannot see any possible object but to give pain,
to pass unnoticed, and I must say that I do
regret that such a course should have been pur-
sued.
Then we come to another class of witnesses,
not members of the family, and among them I do
not know any whose opinion is entitled to greater
weight than that of Colonel Greenwood, who knew
Roger from the time he first came to England.
Colonel Greenwood describes him as a thin young
man, with narrow face, sallow complexion, dark,
straight hair, and sloping shoulders. He says he
weighed Roger in 1847, when Roger was 18 years
of age, and his weight was then Bst. 121 b. He
says the defendant is not Roger. Then Mr. Mans-
field, a connection of the family, who met Roger
early in 1849 at Captain Washington Hibbert’s,
gives a curious account of him. He says when he
first saw Roger he looked like a wild animal newly
caught. His countenance wore a mixed expression
of surprise and alarm. At first sight Roger Tich-
borne’s appearance, he says, was not prepossess-
ing, ‘ but I liked him afterwards, and he became
very much improved.’ Then Mr. Fitzgerald, an-
other friend of the family, who met Roger at
Tichborne in the summer of 1849, describes him
as a lean, slightly-made man, not well set up,
who walked loosely, but he never observed that
he was in-kneed.
Next we have Miss Weld, who was staying at
Tichborne, and spoke to the tattoo marks particu-
larly. When asked whether the defendant was
Roger Tichborne, she says there is not the slight-
est resemblance between them. In cross-exami-
nation she is asked to give particulars, and she
says she did not remember the colour of his eyes,
but that his hair was a very dark brown, almost
black. And being asked whether she ever knew
a Tichborne who had dark hair, she says that
Miss Nangle was dark-haired, and she was a Tich-
borne. The next is Mrs. Whitbread, who was
twice a visitor at Tichborne. She says Roger
Tichborne was a very interesting person, melan-
choly-looking. She remembered his eyes very
well. He had dreamy blue eyes, with a great
deal of expression in them —an expression you
could not easily forget. His face was long and
thin. The hair was light. She is asked if she
noticed any twitch of the eyebrows, and her reply
is that there was a slight movement of the eye-


brows sometimes, when he was a little animatec
but she could not call it a twitch. His move
ments were languid. She thought his hands wer
very bony. His manner was very courteous ; h
was very amiable, and always a gentleman. H
spoke a mixture of French and English.
Then comes Mr. Gosford, who says that Roge
had no deformity or peculiarity about the legs
but he had a peculiar walk—that he turned hi
toes out and jerked his legs as he walked. H
had not the walk of a soldier. Mr. Gosford say
he had seen Roger Tichborne walk, run, jump
and dance scores of times. In cross-examinatio
he says there was nothing at all about his leg
that attracted notice except the turning out o
his toes; and as to the twitch, he says Roger hac
nothing of the kind, and one of the first thing
he remarked upon was the absurdity of thos
persons who stated that Roger had a twitch
When animated Roger might raise his eyebrow
just as he himself might do, nothing more. Roge
Pad a peculiar way of sitting with his head hang
ing down on one side, like a person thinking, anc
his face had a peculiarly pensive expression, lik
the photograph that was handed to him. Bein|
asked as to whether Roger gesticulated Mr. Gos
ford said he had a good deal of movement, spoke
very rapidly, and clipped his words. He had
habit of gesticulating, but not so much as many
foreigners. He described Roger’s woice as i
it seemed not to extend to the throat; there
was no depth of tone in it. It seemed to come
just from his mouth, no deeper. Mr. Gosforc
says, ‘Most certainly the defendant is not Roger
Tichborne, I am as certain of that as I am of mi
own existence.’ But it was not merely from the
personal appearance of the defendant that Mr
Gosford was prepared to say he was not Roger
Tichborne. He was about to go into various cir
cumstances which it would be quite right thal
the jury should take into account, whereas a wit-
ness is not allowed to do so, because all he is
asked about is matter of opinion founded on the
personal appearance of the individual.
Then there is Mrs. Gosford, who says that no-
thing could be more dissimilar than the appear-
ance of the defendant and Roger Tichborne. Hair
and shape of the face were quite different. She
was decidedly of opinion that the defendant could
not be Roger Tichborne. Next came Burton, an
old servant of Sir James Tichborne. He says
that Roger’s legs were perfectly straight. He
had seen Roger stripped on many occasions, and
he had never observed that he was in-kneed.
Being asked with regard to the twitch he says
he never saw Roger move his eyebrows in his life;
if he did he must have seen it.
Now, gentlemen, there are no fewer than seven
witnesses from Stonyhurst who all agree that the
defendant is not Roger Tichborne, and I may
summarise their evidence. They are all agreed
that Roger’s hair was brown. One witness says it
was of a dark brown, and one that it was of a light
brown colour; but all say it was thin, and that a
lock used to fall over his forehead—what we call
a forelock. They are also agreed that in figure he
was thin, slight, bony, narrow-chested, and of a
pale, sallow complexion. With regard to the
knees, one witness says he could not in any way
be said to be in-kneed. The rest say nothing about
it. But there is one of those witnesses, Mr.
Scott, the infirmarian at Stonyhurst, who knew
Roger all the time he was there, and his evidence
is deserving of more attention. He distinctly
says the lobes of Roger Tichborne’s ears were not
detached from the side of the face, and that, gen-
tlemen, is an important point for your considera-
tion. He says, ‘I am quite sure as to the fact. I
noticed it several times, so as to speak with a full
knowledge.’ He says, ‘ His hands were bony, but
I never observed anything about his thumbs. He
seemed very weak on his legs when he walked, hi
legs seeming to give way a little from want o
strength. His legs were very straight, but in
walking he bent his knee.’ This passage seems to
me deserving of particular attention, when com
pared with the evidence given by witnesses wit!
regard to Arthur Orton. ‘ His legs were very
straight,’ says Mr. Scott, ‘ but in walking he ben
his knee as if from weakness. When standing up
I never saw any defect, but in motion I noticec
that which would arise from the weakness of his
legs I think. His voice was a small, weak voice
exactly like a Frenchman’s. If I had not known
his name I should have thought he was a French
man. The defendant is not the Roger Tichborne
I knew at Stonyhurst; certainly not.’ Then the
Rev. Mr. Bird says he saw a good deal of the de
fendant, and he certainly is not Roger Tichborne
He says after what he heard he tried to see some
resemblance, but could not. Then comes Lore
Belle w, who speaks of Roger’s personal appearance
as slight, angular-looking, with dark brown, veiy
straight hair, which hung over his forehead, anc
which he was in the habit of throwing back, with
narrow chest and voice not in the slightest like
that of the defendant. Roger, he says, was nol
in-kneed, but he had the appearance rather oi
being knock-kneed, because he turned out his
toes.
And now I come to the description given ol
Roger Tichborne by the military witnesses, and
especially the officers with whom he was in the
regiment for a period of some three and a half
years. The first witness, I think, was Captain
Fraser, who at the time Roger joined the Carabi-
neers was regimental sergeant-major, and had the
arrangement of the drills. He speaks to matters
that will become important by and by when we
test the military knowledge of the defendant, and
see whether it comes up to what might fairly be
expected from Roger Tichborne. He says that
Roger’s want of knowledge of English caused him
many times to be laughed at when he ought not to
have been. At first he did not understand the
military terms applied to the instruction, but sub-
sequently he understood them thoroughly. Cap-
tain Fraser says, ‘ His personal appearance was
not very nice. He was a young fellow, very thin
indeed, and not at all appropriate to the service.
He was what we should call a “weed,” a weedy
young fellow. He had no chest at all. He drooped
in his shoulders. The colour of his hair was a
dirty brown, with no inclination to curl. His
complexion was sallow. He had no twitch of the
eye. I ought to know him well. He was in my
hands three or four hours every day during five
months. He walked perfectly straight. I always
fancied that he was weak in the limbs. He had
no legs, no thighs, no calves to his legs ; but he
was perfectly straight in his limbs, if you under-
stand me. He always appeared to me to be weak.’
This witness says Roger Tichborne was a constant
friend of his while he was in the regiment.
The next witness was Colonel Bickerstaffe, who
was adjutant of the regiment when Roger Tich-
borne joined. He says he was on most intimate
terms with Roger. He describes him as slight,
with very sloping shoulders, narrow chested, with
pigeon breast, and suffering a good deal from


Isthma, which gave a crinkled look to his face.
[is hair was dark, and perfectly straight. He
ever noticed any peculiarity about Roger s legs,
’’here was no twitching of the eyes, not in the
lightest, and he never saw any peculiarity in his
humbs. He had always the habit of kicking
.gainst his sabretache when he walked. He had
een him lift his eyebrows when surprised, but it
vas no twitching. Roger knew his dull perfectly
n theory, but when he came to put it in practice lie
-new nothing about it. W itness could not teach
lim the word of command. That arose fiom Ins
vant of English and his inability to express him-
;elf in the language. At Portobello Roger s rooms
vere nearly opposite to those of the witness, and
Eto»er used to come into witness's room every
ivening, and there witness used to teach him his
Irill by means of little bits of cards, Colonel
Bickerstaffe ascribes Roger’s forgetting the word
if command when he got on horseback to the
lifficulties he found in managing his horse, ot
which he had no hold, and never could acquire a
cavalry seat. ‘His whole time,’ says Colonel
Bickerstaffe, ‘ was taken up in trying to manage
his horse, and what with that and his broken Eng-
lish, although he knew his drill, the moment he
got on his horse he was a most inefficient, clumsy,
and bad officer.’
Then comes Major Foster, who was a young
officer in the regiment when Roger joined, and to
whom Roger was handed over to be introduced to
the other officers. Major Foster tells us one fact
which would lead us to think that Roger Tichborne
was not likely to develop into a big. man. He
says Roger was so thin about the waist and hips
that they were not sufficient to hold his sword up,
and were it not for the hooks he had attached to
his jacket the sword would never have stayed up.
Roger, he says, had a weeping eye and a woe-be-
gone look. He never noticed anything about
Roger's thumb. Roger was very much of a French-
man, but a perfect gentleman, and Major Foster
never saw anything that would lead him to think
that he was fond of low society. He used to speak
very imperfect English—translating hrench into
it. For instance, speaking to a lady, he used to
say, ‘ Will you profit by the fine time to make a
promenade?’ Wffiile Major hoster knew him
Roger studied his duties most conscientiously. His
brother officers attributed his backwardness to his
defective education. Major Foster says that on
one occasion he said to Roger, ‘ How could you
pass an examination ? It must have been a perfect
farce. “Not at all,” said Roger, “it was very
difficult.” ’ Then he asked, ‘ What questions did
they ask you?’ Roger said they asked him who
Charles Y. was, and ‘he told me, says Major Fos-
ter, ‘ several things in the life of Charles V.
about the battle of Pavia, and other matters which
I never knew before.’
Then Major Jocelyn, who wascaptain ot the troop
to which Roger belonged when he first joined the
regiment, describes him as of asallow, unwholesome
looking complexion, very slight, narrow chested,
and what we should term ‘a weed of a man. Roger
had a sinewy, narrow hand, with long fingers, and
Major Jocelyn never saw any peculiarity about his
thumbs, none whatever. As to his walk, he said
Roger was, as would be said of a horse, a bad
goer.’ He says,—‘We used to have a drill called
“mid-day stables,” which necessitated our being
in the stables longer than the duty to be done
actually required. During such times I used to
sit upon a stable bucket, and he used to lie upon
some straw at my feet, and I used to try to teach
himEnglish.’ Nowupon that the learned counsel for
the defendant made some very telling remarks, and
sought to represent it as the kind of life these
officers always led. He pictured one officer sitting
on a bucket, and the other lying like a dog at his
feet. The real fact being that it was superfluous
time which was at their disposal, which was util-
ised in this manner, and then converted by extra-
vagant assertion into ‘ Roger lying like a dog at
his feet.’ . , ... tt„
Captain Polhill Turner is the next witness. He
was captain of the troop to which Roger belonged,
and was with him at Clonmel. Captain Polhill
Turner says that Roger and he were thrown very
much together. Captain Polhill Turner went to
Waterford with his troop in 1851, and Roger was
left behind at Clonmel, where he was attached to
the in-coming troop, but he followed Captain Tur-
ner to Waterford in the October of that year.
Captain Turner describes Roger as remarkably
thin, slight and angular, with a narrow forehead,
and the lower part of the face very long a very
long iaw,’ he says, ‘ which came round to a sharp
point at the end of the chin.’ His complexion
was exceedingly sallow and dirty looking, which
made his hair look very dark. His walk was very
singular, he shuffled his legs very much about.
‘His eyebrows,’ he says, ‘went up very often when
he was in conversation and became animated. He
did not remember anything peculiar about Roger s
thumbs, and he must often have noticed them, as
they used to spend a good deal of time together ot
an evening playing at ecarte. Captain 1 olhill tur-
ner married one of the daughters of Sir Henry
Winston Barrow, who had a residence near \Y ater-
ford, and he introduced Roger to the family.
Roger frequently visited at the house. When at
Waterford Roger was taken with one of those
seizures which are not satisfactorily explained,
and was bled for it. The question is whether
there are marks of the bleeding on the person of
the defendant. Captain Turner says that Roger
knew his drill fairly well; but he spoke with a
French accent, which was a decided impediment,
as the men did not understand what he said and
used to laugh at him. He used to say ‘ve for we,
‘ vil' for ‘will.’ ‘ Vil you do this ? for W ill you
Another important witness is Captain Handers,
who raid, ‘ I had a better opportunity of seeing
Roger Tichborne than any other officer. He fre-
quently questioned me on military points, know-
ing I was adjutant so long. I was constantly
about the barrack yard, and. used to take great
interest in Roger Tichborne. He made piogress
in his military knowledge, but he was not sharp,
and laboured under the difficulty of not bemg
able to understand the language thoroughly. He
was able to command a troop in the field tolerably
well, and was familiar with the word of com-
mand.’ Then in cross-examination he said, that
it was a very great disadvantage to him not to be
able to express himself immediately; that did not
arise from his want of knowledge, but Horn is
inability readily to express himself in Eng is . o
made great progress, was by no means an ignorant
man, and was very gentlematdike in his manneis.
Then he goes on to state that which must show
that this young man was not the idle character
which the counsel for the defendant sought to re-
present. He said, ‘He was fond of reading, but
I don't know what books he read. He was very
fond of history, and we have had some. conversa-
tion about it. The impression on my mind is that
he never read novels and light literature, as ho


never talked about them. I thought he was a
great reader, as he spent most of his mornings in
reading and smoking.’ Captain Manders is no
doubt mistaken in saj ing Koger never read novels.
There are novels of a high class which it would be
useful and interesting to read. But, at all events,
his evidence shows this, though Koger might have
read light novels, he had a taste for a more serious
kind of literature. He also says that Roger had
a taste for antiquities, and as Ireland is full of
old ruins, Roger was very fond of visiting them.
And there is this important statement made by
Captain Manders, that he never saw Roger Tich-
borne drunk, though he had ample opportunities
of seeing him if he had been, and he never per-
ceived in him any tendency to low society. With
regard to society in Dublin, he says hisimpression
is that Roger mixed with the best.
And now comes an important piece of evidence
—important because it is a matter upon which
the defendant was examined, and upon which he
manifested what would be a very singular ignor-
ance on the part of an officer. Captain Manders
tells us that a squadron is composed of two troops,
and that nobody in a regiment who knows any-
thing about it would call a troop a squadron or a
squadron a troop. With regard to the twitching,
Captain Manders says he had observed the motion
of Roger’s eyebrows. When Roger got warm in
conversation, Captain Manders remarked that the
skin of the left eyebrow used to move a little.
That was when Roger felt a difficulty in speaking.
Now, gentlemen, that is a matter worthy of con-
sideration. Here is a young man who thinks in
French and finds a difficulty in expressing himself
in English, and in such a case Captain Manders
observed that he used to lift the skin of the left
eyebrow a little. "We know many persons who
look down and wrinkle the brow under the in-
fluence of mental exertion, while others throw
the forehead upwards as if to catch something in
the air. And so, perhaps, there was something
similar in the case of Roger Tichborne. But it is
not at all impossible that persons exaggerated to
themselves what they had observed of the move-
ment of this young man’s brow when he was under
the influence of some mental emotion, and found
a difficulty in giving expression to his thoughts.
In cross-examination Captain Manders is asked
his opinion whether the defendant is not Roger
Tichborne, and his answer is that he had tried to
argue against himself and see whether he could
trace anything in the voice of the defendant like
Roger Tichborne’s, but it was quite different.
* I am decidedly of opinion,’ he says, ‘the defend-
ant is not Roger Tichborne.’
Then comes Colonel Jones, who also describes
Roger Tichborne’s personal appearance and speaks
to his having had to pass an examination for his
lieutenancy, which examination was held at Cahir.
This is an important fact, because the defendant
said he had to go to Dublin for the examination.
The defendant had also said that he used to get
Major Phillips to let him off his drill by giving
him a bottle of brandy. That is a reflection on
Major Phillips, who is now dead. With regard, to
that point Colonel Jones says that Major Phillips
was a sober man, and he never knew him to be
fond of spirits or brandy.
Then we have the evidence of Major Botte, who
joined the regiment in Cahir, and who says he
never noticed any such peculiarity in Roger’s
thumb as there is in the defendant’s. It is with
respect to this witness that Captain Polhill-Turner
says that he left him one evening in Roger’s room,
that soon after he heard a great disturbance, and,
going out of his own room to see what it was about,
he found a file of guards in the passage, and itoger
in a state of great excitement, saying he was about
to put Botte under arrest. Upon this, said Oap-
tain Polhill-Turner, ‘ I said, “ I will put you under
arrest. Consider yourself as under arrest in your
room till morning. This was a matter about which
the defendant had been asked. Such is the evi*
dence of the officers. .
We have next a man named John Irwin, son of
old Irwin, the head mess waiter. This man used
to assist his father in waiting on the officers at
me«s, and he swears the defendant is not in the
least like Roger Tichborne. He says he never
noticed any twitching in Roger’s face, that he had
a shuffling walk, that he could not be called a.
knock-kneed man, though when walking bis knee
inclined inwardly, but when he stood still there
was no such inclination. He never saw any pecu-
liarityin Roger Tichborne like that of the defend-
ant’s thumb. Then there are other witnesses—
Shepherd, Lockwood, Parker, Peachey—all ot
whom saw a great deal of Roger, and who all de-
clare that the defendant is not Roger Tichborne.
Then we have Major Kellett, who lived within
a mile of Clonmel, and married a daughter ot the
Rev. Mr. Moreton, father of Captain JVloreton, in
whose troop Roger was ultimately placed. He says
he has a perfect recollection of the personal ap-
pearance of Roger Tichborne, whom he did not
think well-shaped or well calculated to be a good
soldier, especially in a mental point of view. Roger,
he says, was thin, with a narrow chest, and his
legs particularly thin. ‘When in hunting dress
and tops,’ he adds, ‘his boots were miles too big
for his calves. Ido not recognise the defendant
as any one I know. He is not the Roger Tichboine
I knew.’ The defendant, when asked about the
Rev. Mr. Moreton, said that he was a very bigoted
man. But Captain Kellett says that he was not
at all bigoted. He says that Roger used to visit
at the Rev. Mr. Moreton's house, and that he
used to have discussions about religion with Mr.
Moreton, and that while each stood up tor his
own, they conducted the controversy in a gooa-
humoured way. He says that Roger used to hold
his own, and was not wanting in facility ot ex-
pression, but the clergyman, as being more of a
theologian, was more master of the field. Captain
Kellett says he dined at the mess frequently and.
Roger dined at his house, and he never saw Roger
take more wine than gentlemen are in the habit
of taking ; he never saw him the worse for liquor
on any of those occasions. , ,
There is another gentleman who, though not
immediately connected with the Carabineers, was
thrown into close contact with Roger Tichborne.
I allude to Captain Villiers Morton, the brother
of the Captain Morton in whose troop Roger was
lieutenant. He was in Ireland with him on the
second occasion of the regiment being at Dublin.
He says of Roger Tichborne: ‘He looked up to
my brother, and I think he was put into my bro-
ther's troop in order that he might make a soldier
of him, if possible.’ This witness is questioned as
to his recollection of Roger Tichborne, whom he
describes as a thin fine young man, of the height
of about sft. Bin. He says his voice was a soft
low voice. ‘He walked peculiarly,’ adds the wit-
ness, ‘but not awkwardly.’ The defendant was
asked in his examination about Captain Morton’s
charger, and in reply he said he had a remarkable
horse, which was roach-backed. Accordingly,
Captain Morton was asked, ‘ You remember your


brother’s charger?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Had he a roach
backed horse ?’ ‘ Never; he bought a horse whic
might be called roach-backed, but he bought it a
York in 1853, after Roger Tichborne had left th
regiment.’ Subsequently the witness fixed th
date as 1852.
A Juror. —It is clear that he bought the hors
at York, because I saw it in York myself.
The Lord Chief Justice.— Then you will know
whether it was a roach-backed horse or not.
The Juror.—l really cannot say.
The Lord Chief Justice. This gentleman
speaks also to a remarkable conversation whic
took place between the defendant and Captain
Polhill Turner in his presence on one of the occa
sions when the defendant was going out of cour
on the former trial, in May 1871. He was asked
‘ On the rising of the Court, did you and Cap
tain Turner speak to him ?—Captain Turner spok
to him, and so did Major Kellett. Defendan
spoke to Major Kellett and said, “ I know you.’
Major Kellett said, “I suppose you do ; who am
I ?” when the defendant said, “ You are Captain
Betty.” Captain Polhill Turner was there at the
time, and he asked him, “Who am I?” and the
defendant, after looking at him for some time
said, “ I don’t know.” ’
It is certainly very remarkable that there should
have been such an exhibition of ignorance respect
ing persons with whom, one would suppose, Rogei
Tichborne would be familiar. Then the witness
is asked about the peculiarity of the thumb, anc
he says, ‘ I saw a great deal of him, but I never
observed any peculiarity about the thumb. The
voice is very unlike Roger Tichborne’s, and hac
no accent.’
Another witness, Jeremiah Haly, used to keep
the racquet-ground at Clonmel, and he says, ‘ I
think his knees turned in a little. He was not
what is called “ in-kneed,” but his knees were a
little loose. He had a narrow chest.’ In re-ex-
amination, he says that he has seen many better-
shaped officers, and goes on—‘lf he were standing
upright, he would seem inclined to fall in at the
knees. ’
These are the witnesses for the prosecution who
speak generally as to the personal appearance of
Roger Tichborne. There are two or three wit-
nesses who go beyond the mere recollection of that
appearance, who have had interviews with the de-
fendant, and who lay before you what passed at
these interviews, for the purpose of showing that
the defendant failed to remember things which
Roger Tichborne must have remembered. One of
these has already come under your notice, and
that is the conversation with Captain Fraser about
the present made by Roger Tichborne, and the
significant letter written by the defendant. Then
you have the account of what really happened, so
that you are enabled to see whether the defendant
has any real knowledge of that transaction, or
whether he has gained it from some extraneous
source.
Mr. M'Evoy is another of the officers of the
Carabineers, and he was induced to go and see the
defendant at Croydon. He was acquainted with
Major Seedinan, who was walking with Mr. Holmes
on one occasion, when they met Mr. M‘Evoy. He
was introduced to Mr. Holmes, when he said he
should like to see the gentleman who called him-
self Sir Roger Tichborne. Upon that Mr. Holmes
said he would make arrangements for a meeting.
Mr. M'Evoy says, ‘I expressed a desire to see Ro-
ger Tichborne again,’ when Mr. Holmes said, ‘lt
was a ldng time since I had seen him, and no doubt
he was very much altered.’ Two days after that,
he gets a remarkable letter from a gentleman who
has. mixed himself up in these proceedings—Mr.
Guildford Onslow —who has made the identity of
the defendant a matter for speculation and bet-
ting. But men who bet on such matters should
be careful how they endeavour to influence the
events to which their bets relate. Mr. Onslow in
his letter says :
‘ Oblige me by going to Essex Lodge, and call
ingon your old friend Sir Roger Tichborne, who
is living there, and let me know what you think
about him. I have got 600£. on his being the
man. Mind, and do not be misled by first appear-
ances, as he is so altered.’
If Mr. M‘Evoy had gone and seen the defend-
ant, and had come to the conclusion that he was
the. Sir Roger Tichborne he had known in the Ca-
rabineers, of course he would have been asked to
be a witness for the defendant.
With regard to this betting, if you make a
thing the subject of a bet, you must keep your
hands clear of anything that would affect the
result; and when I look at this letter, and also at
the part taken by Mr. Guildford Onslow to excite
to the utmost of his ability a storm of popular
passion on the subject of this affair, I must say
that it would have been much better if that gen-
tleman had had no pecuniary interest in the
result which he was so anxious to bring about.
However,. so it is, and I can partly understand
the motives which induced Mr. Guildford
Onslow to do so many things which I think pro-
priety and decency ought to have induced him to
abstain from. As I have said on more than one
occasion., these popular meetings tend consider-
ably to interfere with the administration of jus-
tice, and gentlemen who have a pecuniary interest
in the result should be the last to endeavour to
foment popular passion and prejudice on such a
subject as this.
The defendant writes on the Ist of April
1867. to Mr. M'Evoy, stating that he had called
at his club on the Friday before, and was unable
to see him. He had seen Mr. Holmes, and asks
Mr. M'Evoy to come and dine at Croydon with
him on Wednesday evening, concluding the letter
with, ‘ I remain, my dear Ned, yours truly,
R. C. D. Tichborne.’ Mr. M'Evoy was called,
and when asked whether he was spoken to as
‘ Ned,’ replies that he might have been called so
once or twice, but he was generally addressed as
‘Mac.’ He is next asked with reference to his
visit to the defendant, and he says :
‘ When I arrived at the house I was shown into
a room, on the first floor. I remained there for
some time. I heard rather loud discussions, and
one of the voices I thought reminded me once or
twice of Roger Tichborne’s in accent and every-
thing. This lasted for about two or three
minutes. After the conversation the door was
opened, and I had a long conversation with the
defendant. As soon as he came into the room he
walked slowly towards me, and directly I saw
him I felt perfectly certain that he was not Roger
Tichborne. I went towards him, however, and
held out my hand, and said, “It is a long time
since we met.” I was taken quite aback. He
shook hands with me, and said, “Yes ; it is a long
time,” and then asked me to sit down. I sat
down, and we had a long conversation on various
matters. I put several questions to test his re-
collection if he were Roger. One of the first
things I asked him was when he was in the
regiment, and he replied that he got his dis-


I large, or was discharged, at Canterbury. I
lought whether it was not time to cut short
ay further conversation; but Mr. Holmes
aving asked me to examine him very particu-
irlv, I continued the conversation. I thought
o officer would ever think of talking of being
discharged” on his retirement.’
The witness also asked him some questions re-
pecting the Bellew family, but in his replies lie_
onfounded Lord Bellew’s residence with that of
Mr. Bellew in a different part of Ireland. The
fitness endeavoured to test him in French, but
ie seemed to have no knowledge of it, and he
aid something about having been kicked by a
torse, ‘by which,’[says the witness, I thought
te wished me to infer that his French had been
licked down his throat.’ After some time the
lefendant broke out with the Marseillaise, and
he witness thinks he used two or three french
vords. ‘ The great shout he made at the word
narchons might possibly have been pronounced
n the voice of Roger.’ But he adds, I never
leard Roger Tichborne sing that song. Alter a
rliile Lady Tichborne made her appearance, and,
learing her speak, Mr. M‘Evoy found it was her
mice which he had heard on the other side of the
olding doors, and which he thought like that of
:toger Tichborne. The witness says defendant s
lair was very much lighter than Roger s, and he
iffirmed that the defendant’s hair now is a
rreat deal darker than when he first saw him.
Be was sure from the first that the defendant was
lot Roger Tichborne, and denied that at this
nterview he' expressed any opinion beyond what
his manner might be supposed to imply.
The next witness is Brand, the gamekeeper,
who received the following letter from the de-
fendant: ‘ Feb. 6, 1867.
‘Brand,—lt is a long time since you see me ;
therefore I suppose you have almost forgotten
me. I should like to see you again; and there-
fore if you can find time to come to Croydon 1 will
pay your expenses. —Yours, &c.,
v y * ‘R. C. Tichborne, Bart.’
In consequence of this letter Brand, on the
22d of March, went down with Moore. Bogle
opened the door, and after a while came back and
said Sir Roger was not at home. Brand said he
had come a long way, and could not go back with-
out seeing him, and accordingly went into the
town for a couple of hours. While there he met
Bogle, and had a long conversation with him.
When he went back to the house he was admitted
and saw the defendant. They had a conversation
about Roger Tichborne’s guns and his dogs Spring
and Piecrust; and the defendant asked what had
become of the dogs. Brand told him that they
had been sent to Upton, and that Mr. Gosford had
the charge of them. The defendant also asked the
witness whether he recollected riding his. uncle s
pony up the park. Witness said he did, and
asked the defendant what pony he was speaking
of. He went out of the room, and. on coming
back said the pony’s name was Louisa. Brand
said the defendant asked him what had become of
the single-barrelled gun which had been given, to
him by his uncle Edward. Sir Edward, according
to the witness, never had a gun in his life, but
still that is no reason why he should not have
made a present of one to Roger. Then comes a
more important matter than either of the fore-
going. Brand said to the defendant, ‘ Where was
I living at the time you were living at Tichborne-
park?’ His reply was, ‘Down at the Yerrals,
among the trees.’ ‘ That,’ adds the witness, ‘ was
not correct, as I lived in a cottage in the village,
near the church.’ He says Roger saw him in his
cottage almost daily, and sometimes a dozen times
a day. The Yerrals was not purchased until after
Sir James came to the property in 1858 or 1859,
when of course Roger Tichborne could not have
known it. He adds that he lived in the garden-
er’s cottage when he first went to Tichborne, and
in two or three other cottages afterwards. He
saw the defendant every day for six weeks during
the last trial while he was being examined and
cross-examined, and says decidedly he is not Roger
Tichborne. . _
On cross-examination he admits that Roger
had a twitching of the nerve in the left corner of
the eye when he was excited. As to the ponies
he says there was a brown and a gray or white
one, but Sir Edward never used the iatter. That
becomes material when we come, to the state-
ments of the defendant on the subject. The wit-
ness afterwards goes to see the defendant, and
tells us ‘ The defendant said if I would stick to
him he would stick to me, and I should never
want so long as I lived.’ I said, ‘ I am very much
obliged to you for your offer. I never wanted yet,
and I hope I never shall; but as to swearing you
are Roger Tichborne, I will see you first.
In cross-examination an imputation was made in
reference to a debt which the witness owed to .a
Mrs. Cooke. He wrote to her, ‘lf you will wait
you shall be paid all that I owe you as soon as 1
can. Mr. Bowker has promised to pay me what
is due to me shortly. There has been a deal to
do about the Tichborne affair. I was quite cer-
tain that it was Sir Roger at first. I received a
letter from Sir Roger last Wednesday. You need
not be surprised to see me at Alresford after a bit
again.’ He says that when he wrote that letter
he had not seen the defendant nor formed a judg-
ment as to his identity. But this letter was made
the foundation of a very violent attack upon Mr.
Bowker. It turned out that when he left his
place as gamekeeper at Tichborne on the death of
Sir Alfred, who died insolvent, some money was
owing to him, and Mr. Bowker had told the man
he should soon be in a position to settle all the
outstanding accounts. From this it was sought
to be inferred that Mr. Bowker was going to bribe
Brand to say the defendant was not Sir Roger
when he knew he was.
There is another witness who speaks to con-
versations with the defendant, and that is Colonel
Greenwood, who says that on one occasion, when
he was in the train, Colonel Lushington suggested
that he should go into the same carriage as the
defendant. He went in, and the defendant spoke
first, saying, ‘ You don’t seem to recognise me.
Colonel Greenwood replied, ‘Not in the slightest.
They sat silent a few minutes, and Colonel Green-
wood asked, ‘ Is it by your wish that I am here .’
The defendant answered, ‘ No, but I do not ob-
ject.’ When the train stopped, Colonel Green-
wood walked out and joined his own party, the
Misses Higgins, whom he was escorting .up to
town. At another station Colonel Lushington
came to him again, and pressed him very much to
return, as the Claimant was anxious to give him
an opportunity of cross-questioning him. So he
returned to the carriage in which the defendant
was travelling.
Colonel Lushington suggested to Colonel Green-
wood and the defendant that if they knew each
other as well as he supposed, there would be
something which they could both recollect; and


the defendant asked Colonel Greenwood whet
he remembered hiding his coat one night in
hedge on the way to London. The colonel saic
* The first part of that is correct, but I was no
going to London.’ He told the story correct
It seems that a lady named Legge was taken i
and was supposed to be dying. She wished
see a relative, but in those days there was
telegraph or means of communication. Colone
Greenwood made up his mind that he could wa
all the way to Kingston, and he put his overcoa
in a hedge, and it was afterwards found by one o
the labourers and taken home. The defendan
had got hold of the story, but he did not kn
its details. This happened in 1850, when Hog
Tichborne was in Ireland, so that it could on
have been known to him at second hand, and
also it had come to the knowledge of the defe
dant at second hand. It is for you to say ho
much importance you think attaches to it.
There is another thing that Roger Tichbor
would perhaps have recollected better. M
Doughty had a favourite mare called Rowen
and Colonel Greenwood had taught her to ric
for it is well known that Colonel Greenwood w
one of the first horsemen of the age. The defe
dant said that the colour of the mare was gra’
whereas the only gray mare was one that IVI
Gosford had, and which was used as an ext
horse when one was wanted. The third part o
the conversation between Colonel Greenwood anc
the defendant related to what occurred when t]
colonel accompanied Roger Tichborne to Sane
hurst on his examination. They went to Sane
hurst the night before the examination, anc
wished to put up at the Duke of York hotel, bu
they could not get accommodation there, and th
result was that they had to go to a small publi
house near the station called the Tumble-dow
Dick. There they met Mr. Danby Seymour, who
when he found Colonel Greenwood had charge o
Roger, merely dined with them and then wen
back. The next morning they took breakfast a
the hotel in Sandhurst. The defendant, how
ever, said they slept at Sandhurst, and whe
Colonel Greenwood remarked that they did no
sleep there, the defendant said, ‘O, you are a]
lucling to the Tumble-down Dick.’ In short, th
defendant exactly reversed the facts which oc
curred. The question is whether you attach very
much importance to such a mistake being mad
so long afterwards. There is one other subjec
which Colonel Greenwood tested him upon
When Ro2;er Tichborne was at Tichborne in 1841
Colonel Greenwood gave him his first hunting
coat; but when the question was put to the de
fendant, he said it was Mr. Marks who gave it
him, which was certainly a mistake. Now those
are the witnesses, besides Major Fraser and Mr.
Gosford, who have told you of the mistakes which
the defendant made, and they constitute the evi-
dence on that part of the case.
Now we come to the evidence for the defence.
I pass by the mother for the present, and go on to
Mr. Biddulph, the only other relation of Roger
Tichborne who has recognised the defendant. Mr.
Biddulph had only one opportunity in the course
of his life of becoming acquainted with Roger
Tichborne, and that was on the occasion of the
visit of the latter to Bath in 1849, shortly after he
left Stonyhurst. Mr. Biddulph was at that time
staying with his mother and sisters at Bath, and,
as a relation of the family, he of course made the
acquaintance of Roger, and he says that during
that period they were very intimate. It appears
that Mr. Biddulph frequently visited the hote
where Roger was staying. On one occasion the
lunched together, and afterwards, instead of goin
into the smoking-room, they went to Roger’
bed-room, where the latter produced two death’
head pipes, which they smoked. Well, when M
Biddulph went to see the defendant in July 1867
he did not at first recognise him, but says that 1
had only a vague impression that he was like th
Tichborne family. He said that he ‘ was impressec
with his likeness to the Tichborne family,’ (
rather to those whom he had known. With r
gard to the defendant’s voice he said, ‘ I coul
fancy at times it was Alfred speaking.’ He say
I asked him when I first met him, and he saic
at Bath. I said, “You were staying with you
uncle Robert,” and he said, “I was about stayin
with him, but I was staying at an hotel. At th
White something nearest to the market-place.
He stayed at the White Lion.’ The witness askec
him whether he remembered his mother and sis
ter, and the defendant said he did, and that h
used to walk with them. Then he says he askec
“ Do you remember me having lunched with yoi
at the hotel ?” and he said he did not. I said, ‘ ‘Anc
that we afterwards for some reason or other smokec
in your bedroom? Had you any peculiar pipe?” anc
to that he replied, “Yes ; I had two death’s-heac
pipes. The death’s-head pipes made more im
pression than anything else.’ Then he further say
that on another occasion he became godfather to
the defendant’s son while he was staying at Aires
ford. After the christening the defendant and he
took a ride round the park, when they came to i
path. Mr. Biddulph said, ‘That is the road we
took when I rode with Kate Doughty to Brook-
lands.’ ‘No,’said the defendant, ‘it is further
on,’ and when they got further on he said, ‘ That
is the road you took, and you passed the Lover’s
Seat.’ He was right. With regard to the peculiar
twitch he was asked these questions :
‘ Did you say you did not recollect Roger Tich-
borne having a twitch ?—I don’t remember Roger
Tichborne having a twitch so much as the other
members of the family. Was it when you went
down to Croydon to see the defendant that you
remembered Roger Tichborne having a twitch in
the eye?—l don’t think he had.’
The evidence is very deserving of consideration.
If the defendant, without acquiring knowledge
from others, recollected that, as far back as 1849,
when he was staying at Bath, he was staying at
an hotel there, and recollected the particular hotel
he stayed at, though he did not remember whether
it was the White Hart, the White Lamb, or the
" * ll^ e Lion ;if he recollected that the hotel was
at the corner of the market-place, it strongly
goes to show that the man who recollected such
circumstances must be Roger Tichborne. But that
statement becomes somewhat shaken when we see
the cross-examination. It seems, before this meet-
ing with the defendant, Mr. Biddulph, a client of
Mr. Norris, the dowager’s attorney, hadgoneto dine
at Mr. Norris’s, and there had mot a Mr. Tucker, a
gentleman engaged in raising money for the defen-
dant, though Air. Biddulph says the fact was not
known to him at the time. At this dinner party
there was a good deal of conversation as to the
possibility. of Mr. Biddulph recognising Roger
Tichborne in the defendant. He said he had some
questions by which he should be able to test him,
and he was asked as to what occurred at Bath!
On this subjeot he is asked in his examination :
‘ln the course of your conversation, did they
make inquiries as to where you had seen Roger


Tichborne ?—I think so. That is to say, in what
room, and in what house?—l believe so. I have
no doubt of it. I can only give the general tenor
of what was said. Did they inquire as to what
room it was in?—l cannot answer. I have not t
least recollection whether they did or not. W
it the White Lion?—lt may have been. Do yon
remember that they asked you how they amusec
themselves with Roger Tichborne ?-No. Yo
won't undertake to say you did not tell them?—
should be sorry to undertake to say what I hac
forgotten. Did you say you smoked with him
—I have said so. Did you say it was a pipe wr
a death's head ?—I rather think I did not. W:
you swear?—No, I won’t,’
I then tried to sum up what he had deposed:
‘ Did I not understand you to say that you die
not mention the death’s head, but that you d
mention that there was something peculiar abou
the pipes?—l very likely did say I knew somethin
about smoking certain pipes that I could test him
by; but I did not mention the death’s heads.’
Then Mr. Hawkins asked him whether it was th
death's-head pipes which made him identify th
defendant as Roger Tichborne, and he replied tha
he went there with the impression that he wa
coached by Bogle, and had had access to Roge
Tichborne’s diaries, and if he had had the nam
of the hotel quite correct he should have though
so; but when he said it was a White—something
near the marketplace, and knew about the pipes
and answered questions correctly about his uncles
and aunts, he. then changed his mind. It is quit
clear that this witness, Mr. Biddulph, would no
have taken upon himself to say the defendant wa
Roger Tichborne if it had not been fortheconver
sation, inasmuch as he admits he had not sufficien
recollection of Roger Tichborne as to be able t
speak to his identity.
Now, if the witness mentioned the name of the
hotel at the dinner at Mr. Norris’s, can we be sur
that the defendant was not informed what hote
it was and where it was situated? Mr. Norris wai
the Dowager Lady Tichborne’s attorney, who ob
tained the list of the Jesuit Fathers at Stonyhurst
and Mr. lucker was a money-lender who had in-
terested himself on behalf of the defendant. These
gentlemen might have told the defendant in the
most innocent way what Mr. Biddulph was going
to question him about. They might very natu-
rally have said, ‘He is a relation of the family,
who remembers having met you at Bath when you
were staying at the White Lion, and he is going to
test you about some death's-head pipes. ’ Of course,
if they believed they had got hold of the real man,
they would not scruple to tell him that a gentle-
man was coming to test him. I only put this hy-
pothetically, but supposing the defendant not to
be the true, genuine man, what would be more
easy than to say, ‘Bogle, what was the name of the
hotel I stayed at at Bath?’ Bogle would not dream
that the question was asked with a view to the
furtherance of a fraudulent intention, but would
think it was put in order to revive his recol-
lection. Mr. Biddulph would not say that he
did not mention the hotel at the dinner. He may
have done so, but even if he did he said nothing
about its being near the marketplace. Still, some
one else might have informed the defendant where
it was situated.
Such an explanation will not apply, however,
to the crucial point—namely, the death’s-head
pipes u *7 es _ s Mr. Biddulph was incautious enough
to let out before Norris and Tucker the very char-
acter of the pipes as to which he was going to in-
terrogate the defendant. Bat suppose Roger Tich
borne’s pipes had been sent to Upton with hi
other things, and the defendant had seen them
there, that circumstance would at once supply-
solution of the difficulty. Ido not say it was so
bar be it from me to make such an assertion; bu
if you now and then meet with a startling diffi
culty you ought to endeavour to find a solution
other circumstances. We know that Roger Tich
borne’s things were sent to Upton in two large
boxes. They may have been preserved, and if th
death’s-head pipes were among them, a person there
might suggest the answer to be given to a ques
tion concerning a pipe of peculiar form. Mr. Bid
dulph was induced to make an affidavit on the 13th
of June in favour of the defendant, and in this
affidavit he is made to state his belief that he came
upon the defendant unawares on his visit to Croy
doD, and that the defendant could not have pre
pared himself to answer the questions. Yet in
his cross-examination, Mr. Biddulph admits that
this was not so. Now, if we find affidavits s<
framed as not to present the exact facts it may be
inferred that the gentlemen who drew them uj
•frould not be over-scrupulous about furnishing
the defendant with the information required ir
order to answer questions in a satisfactory manner.
W ell, these are the only materials which Mr.
Biddulph had for forming his opinion. Ido not
mean to quarrel with the honesty of his convic-
tion. He is a gentleman of character and position,
and I am quite sure that he would not do anything
he thought wrong.. But I cannot help thinking
that he made up his mind in a very firm and de-
termined way. His adopting the defendant at
once against all the rest of the family except his
mother, expressing a strong opinion in his favour,
going down and standing godfather to the defen-
dant’s son, upon no other ground except his re-
membering the hotel and the death’s-head pipes,
does strike me as a very singular thing.
Then there are several tenants upon the Tich-
borne estate and a good many workpeople who
have been examined in the defendant’s favour,
and we will travel over their evidence as rapidly
as is consistent with its due consideration. The
first of these is Henry Welsh, a bricklayer, who
knew Roger from the year 1845, and remembers
him when a boy taking up his hammer and chop-
ping lead off the roof of the chapel at Tichborne.
When Welsh saw the defendant in 1867 he asked
him whether he remembered this incident, and he
said ‘ O, yes ; I remember chopping the lead off
to make bullets.’ Well, that is a thing which
Roger might remember, and which the defendant
would not be likely to invent, and, therefore, it
is a striking circumstance. The witness is asked
whether he had mentioned this to any one, so
that it. might come to the defendant’s knowledge.
Now, if the question was put by Welsh to the
defendant in a simple interrogatory form, and
answered correctly and off-hand by the defendant,
it. would be a striking fact in his favour. But the
witness made an affidavit, for whenever a witness
in any way identified the defendant they imme-
diately made him swear an affidavit, which was
used for catching the next person. In his affi-
davit Welsh is made to say, ‘ I remember Roger,
and particularly recollect his forehead and a par-
ticular gait with his right leg and foot.’ lam
quite sure that that is not the man’s language.
He goes on, ‘ I afterwards saw him at the Swan
at Alresford. and recognised him. I recollect that
on one occasion while I was at work the plaintiff
took my hammer and cut the lead away. I asked


him if he remembered cutting the lead from off
the roof, and he said, “ Yes."’ ’ So that you see
instead of his telling the witness of the circum-
stance, the witness asks him if he remembers it.
This affidavit is also remarkable as showing the
way in which these affidavits are concocted. It
goes on: ‘He said he knew my wife, who was
formerly Mrs. Norris, who was house carpenter at
Tichborne, and he went to her for nails.’ She
says that she remembered his coming to her house
for brass-headed screws and nails frequently, and
the husband says scores of times ; but she on an-
other occasion said that she could not answer for
more than twice. .
Then there is Mrs. Noble, who recognises the
defendant. She says he had the Tichborne walk
and the Tichborne back. Her husband, Mr. Noble,
also speaks to the walk, which he describes as
very like that of Sir James Tichborne. Then Lilly-
white spoke about having seen Roger Tichborne
grubbing up the old moor with an axe which he
took to be mended ; and on his bringing it back
Roger gave him the change, which amounted to
Is. 6 d. This is a circumstance likely to be remem-
bered by a simple rustic, and it may have been
mentioned by him at the village alehouse when
he heard that Roger Tichborne was coming back
to England, and in this way possibly the fact may
have come to the defendant’s knowledge. Ido
not say that it was so : but it is our duty to sift
evidence of this kind in order to ascertain what
it is worth.
Fourteenth Day, Thursday , February 19, 1874.
Gentlemen of the Jury.—We were dealing yes-
terday with the Hampshire [witnesses - old
tenants, servants, and others who have lived in
the neighbourhood of Tichborne, and who have
given evidence in favour of the defendant, and
yesterday I closed with the evidence of Henry
Noble. I now come to that of Thomas Lilly-
white, who spoke in reference to the grubbing up
of the old oak moor. He says he remembers
that when Roger Tichborne was cutting the
roots of the tree, the axe with which he was
working broke, and he desired this young man,
as he was then, to take the axe to the smith s to
get it repaired, and he gave him 2s. 6d. to pay
the smith. He did so ; the charge was a shilling,
and Mr. Roger, he says, told him to keep the
Is. dd. change. That, no doubt, is a circumstance
which was likely to create an impression on the
young fellow’s mind. He says that when he
heard that the defendant had come to Alresford,
he went to see him. He did see him, and he says
that the defendant is Roger Tichborne.
The next witness is James Morley, who was in
the service of Sir Henry, and afterwards in that
of Sir James Tichborne, as butler. He afterwards
set up in business on his own account, but con-
tinued to call at Tichborne House, and used to
bottle wine for the family. He knew Roger
Tichborne from his childhood. In October 1847,
he received an invitation to go and see the de-
fendant at Alresford, and he went. At first, he
says, he thought he was not the man, but after a,
bit he began to recognise the upper part of his
face Like many of the other witnesses—and this
is remarkable—he does not spea,k of the de-
fendant’s likeness to Roger, but of his likeness to
some member of the Tichborne family, particu-
larly to his uncle Sir Henry. It is extremely
difficult, ingoing through the evidence of this
witness, to ascertain what part the defendant
took in the conversation, and what part the wit-
ness took, and, of course, that makes all the
diflerence in the world. If the'answer is suggested
by the question—such as ‘Doyou remember such
(and such an occurrence ?’ naming it—it is very
different from a question which leaves the person
interrogated altogether to his own memory. The
witness said they sat down, and had a talk about
the family estate at Westhead. The defendant
asked him if he recollected when the estate there
was cut in two. The defendant said he did, and
his father disapproved of it. The witness then
observed that he heard Sir James (then Mr.
James) say he did not like the estate to be cut in
two. The learned counsel then asked what
passed between the witness and the defendant,
and he says :
‘ He asked me if I recollected when the new
inn was built, and there was no right of way to
it. Then I told him, and he mentioned the name
of the man who built it. I mentioned that Sir
Henry stopped the way to the inn ; and the party
was obliged to come to his terms for making a
road to it. I asked him about the sale of the
property in Tichborne Street. I said it fetched
18,000?., and he said it was only 16,000?., and was
worth twice as much. He also said it was sold
to provide portions for Sir Henry Joseph’s
children.’
We do not know whether that was so or not;
but all these were matters about which Roger
Tichborne could personally know nothing. They
all occurred before his arrival in England. Sir
Henry Joseph, in whose baronetcy these trans-
actions occurred, died before Roger was ever in
England. Then comes an extraordinary dialogue
about Alresford Old Pond. The witness says :
* I asked him when it was that the family sold
that piece of water, and he asked me what piece
of water I meant. I did it to try him. I said
“Alresford Old Pond,” and he replied, “That
never belonged to us.” I said, “ How was it
then that my ancestors had the keeping of it for
so many years ? I have one of their guns as a
heirloom.” He then said, “ The property never
belonged to us ; but we had fishing and swan
rights over it.” That was correct. I did myself
believe it once belonged to the Tichbornes, and
most people thought so ; but when I was talking
to him I knew that they had only the fishing and
swan rights over it.’
Well, no doubt the possession of this know-'
ledge by the defendant was very striking; but it
must be taken into account that as Roger TichJ
borne could know nothing of it personally, and'
could only have learnt it from statements made
to him, so may the defendant have learnt it from
the same sources of information. Mr. Baigent
was in close association with him at Alresford,
and as he knew the whole history of the family
and wrote it, he was very likely to mention this
fact. Rous, with whom he had been in conver-
sation, would also have been able to give him the
information, having been a clerk of Mr. Hopkins.
The witness says he recognised the defendant by
his appearance, but not by his voice. He is
asked whether he made an affidavit, and he says
it did, and that it was read over to him. The


affidavit is produced, and in it he is made to say,
* The more I looked at him, the more I was con-
vinced. The eyes, eyebrows, and general ex-
pression of face, and his voice are unmistakable.’
Yet the witness told us he did not recognise him
by the voice. That is the way these affidavits
were got up. Like many other witnesses, this
man, instead of finding a likeness to Roger Tich-
borne, is struck by a resemblance in the defendant
to some member of the family.
The next witness is Elizabeth Stubbs. She says
that Roger Tichborne used to come over and
shoot on her husband’s farm and visit their house.
When the defendant was at Alresford, in October,
there was a sale at a neighbour’s, and the defend-
ant came to Mrs. Stubbs’ house after the sale to
lunch. When he came in he saw a picture oppo-
site the door, and said, ‘ That is not the old family
picture.’ She told him to look round, and having
done so the defendant remarked that she had got
the picture done up. The portrait was one of the
witness’s great-great-grandfather, and was pecu-
liar from the old style of dress, and she was struck
by the defendant appearing to recall the old. pic-
ture. It must be borne in mind that the picture
was very well known about the neighbourhood,
and that the defendant had seen her husband,
who might have said something about it. That
may be the case. Or it may be that the defendant
recollected what he had before seen. Dr. Kenealy
put a question as to the defendant’s identity in
this form, ‘ls there anything about this gentle-
man that reminds you of any of his relations?’
steering clear of asking her, was he like Roger.
The witness replied that he was like Sir Henry
Tichborne about the shoulders, and countenance
also.
William Paul, a blacksmith, is the next witness,
and he gives evidence from which we may plainly
see that some persons connected with this case
have not been over-scrupulous as to the manner
in which they have endeavoured to ascertain what
the witnesses were likely to say. This man Paul
says that one day, when a boy, he was out in the
Hassocks, which are clumps of trees on Tichborne
Downs, birds-nesting, when he was seen by Rogei
Tichborne, who had his dog and gun with him,
and who was attended by Mansbridge, a game-
keeper. Mansbridge was about to beat the boy
for being in the trees, but Roger interfered, and
the matter ended by Roger giving him a piece of
money. Paul also tells a story of Roger Tichborne
on another occasion, knocking a basin of soup out
of his hands in the kitchen at Tichborne House,
and being reproved by Miss Doughty for so doing.
Well, Paul sees the defendant at Alresford, out
fishing ; and sees him a second time, but still he
was not, he said, to be convince 1, until he had had
an interview with him. Paul accordingly sees Mr.
Guildford Onslow, and tells him he would like
to see the Claimant, and ask him a few questions.
Mr. Onslow outs with his pocket-book, asks Paul
the subject of the questions, and writes them
down. It was, he states, ‘Whether Sir Roger
could recollect seeing a boy in a certain place in
Tichborne-park, and giving him money, and what
money it was?’ Mr. Onslow then asked him what
place, but witness says that he would not say
where it was. Arrangements are subsequently
made, and the witness comes to town and sees Mr.
Onslow, who tells him that Sir Roger remembered
seeing a boy in Tichborne-park, and giving him
some money. Then Mr. Onslow asked him to tell
him more about it, but Paul said, ‘ No. I should
•like to see the gentleman.’ Ultimately the wit-
ness sees the defendant, Lord Rivers and Mr
Guildford Onslow being present—a rustic in th
hands of gentlemen very much cleverer than him
self. He is asked :
‘ Did you have a conversation with the defend
ant ? Yes. AY as that the first time you talkec
with him since he came back ?—Yes. How long
did the conversation last ’—About half an hour
Did you recognise him? —Yes, from what he
recollected and showed me while in the presence
of Lord Rivers. What did he show you ’—The
place where I used to see him in Tichborne-park.
b rom his features and voice I knew he was tht
man.’
Then there is Henry Powell, Roger’s old music-
master, who used to be an inhabitant of Alresford,
and frequently went there from Winchester’
where he now resides. He went to the Swan,
and had a conversation with the defendant as
follows :
As soon as I got into the room the Claimant
came up and said, “ This is Powell.” I said,
“Yes, it is,” and he said, “How are you?” I
then said, “lam very well, thank you ; but you
have the advantage of me but after looking at
him for a second or two I said, “ Unless it is Roger
Tichborne; but you have got very stout.” He re-
plied, “And you have got stouter also, and have
cultivated a moustache.” I said to him, “Do
you ever practise now ?” and he said, “ No, I
cannot,” pointing to his mouth, where two front
teeth were broken. He told me that a horse had
kicked him—knocked out two of his teeth, and
injured his nose in Australia.’
No doubt that is a very remarkable circum-
stance, unless the defendant had been told by
some one at the hotel that it was Powell the
music-master. He does not know where the de-
fendant came from, beyond the fact that ho got
out of his trap. Whether he was told that it was
Powell we have no means of knowing. He is
asked about his recognition of the defendant as
Roger Tichborne, and he says he recognised him
after looking at him awhile ; he recognised his
features, and especially his forehead ; and then
he is asked about the hair, and he says that the
defendant’s hair might perhaps be a shade lighter
than Roger’s, but it was brushed in the same
style as formerly. Then he is asked about his
walk, and he says that, as far as he could recol-
lect the style of Roger’s walk, it was the same.
In cross-examination he is asked about Roger’s
voice, when he said the only difference he could
detect was that Roger used to have a French
accent, which the defendant had not. The de-
fendant’s voice might be a little coarser. He also
thought that the defendant might be an inch
taller than Roger. The fact of the defendant
knowing this witness at once, unless you believe
that some one had told him that it was Powell, is
strong evidence in favour of the defendant.
Then comes William Mansfield, who was for-
merly under-keeper at Tichborne. He heard of
the defendant’s arrival at Alresford, and went to
see him at the Swan. He says he knew him
at once to be Roger Tichborne. Then, as to his
recollection of Roger, he says that he was a tall,
thin young man, with dark hair. The defendant
asked him if he recollected what they had ever
been doing together, and he says :
‘I said I could. He asked me then if I could
recollect his shooting the gun off my shoulder
and I said I could. He then asked me if I could
recollect the time when he used to play the
French horn, and I said, “Yes.” He asked me if
0


I could recollect his dogs, and I said I could. He
asked me what the dogs’ names were, and I told
him I could tell him, but he said he could tell
them'himself; they were “Piecrust,” “Spring,”
and “ Bess.” But at first he could not recollect
“Piecrust.” A gentleman suggested that I should
mention two wrong names and the right one, and
that the defendant should choose from them.
“ Piecrust” was one of the three, and when that
name was mentioned the defendant said, “That
is the name.” ’
Now it is worthy of remark that the questions
are put by the defendant; the topics are sug-
gested by him and not by the witness, and when
he asks the question, and just as the witness is
about to answer it, the defendant does so himself.
It is as though the questions were selected, owing
to the defendant’s knowledge of the answers. It
is strange, too, that Roger Tichborne should not
know the name of a favourite dog which he had
had for years; I can understand a person hearing
the name of a dog for the purpose of making use
of his knowledge of it, but forgetting it, and then
recollecting it again when he hears it mentioned.
The next witness, Edward Pirn, says he saw
Roger Tichborne twice before he left England.
On the first occasion Roger was planting some
trees, and on the other he was out shooting, and
witness was employed to ‘ beat’ for him. On the
latter occasion Roger gave him some tobacco to
fill his pipe. That is all he knows about him, but
he says the defendant is the man.
Mary Ann Byles says she used to see Roger
about; and when the defendant came on the
platform at a meeting in Southampton, in June
1872, she recognised him at once. She recognised
him not by his resemblance to Roger Tichborne,
but because he was so much like his uncle, Sir
Henry Joseph, in everything but the hair and
eyes. The defendant resembled Sir Henry Joseph,
she said, in his sitting, in his manner, his shoul-
ders particularly, and his nose, as well as in his
general appearance. She admits she never spoke
to Roger Tichborne in her life, but she says she
has not the slightest doubt that the defendant is
the man. Roger’s hair, she adds, was not quite
so dark as the defendant's.
John Ryas, a carter at Southampton, speaks of
having had some words with Roger,’2o or 30 years
ago, about a dog that went ranging in a clover
field. He recognised the defendant at the South-
ampton meeting, not as Roger Tichborne, but be-
cause he had the Tichborne face. The defendant’s
features resembled those of the old gentleman
who used to be at the house when the witness
took up oatmeal in his cart, and who was called
‘master’ by the servants. He did not know
whether that old gentleman was Roger’s father or
uncle.
Charlotte Grant, the next witness, was in the
service of the Tichborne family from 1846 to 1852.
After she left she went to her father’s at Poole,
where she again saw Roger. She did not see the
defendant until the trial began. She asked him
one question, namely, if he recollected a likeness
that was being prepared while he was at Poole,
that he should have taken abroad. That was the
likeness of Miss Doughty. He answered that he
did not have it—that it was not prepared ; and
that, she says, was true, owing to the illness of the
photographer.
A Juror.—Was the Chili daguerreotype shown
to her ?
The Lord Chief Justice.—l think not.
The Juror. —Nor to Mrs. Byles either, I think.
The Lord Chief Justice.—lt was not. The
witness swears that in her opinion the defendant
is Roger Tichborne. She used, she said, to attend
on Miss Doughty, and said she saw Miss Braia
correcting Roger’s letters. On cross-examination
she said she saw Miss Brain correcting the letters,
more than half-a-dozen times with her own pen.
She used to say ‘ This is wrong, Roger,’ or ‘That
is wrong, Roger,’ and then make the correction.
This she saw when she used to take Miss Brain’s
luncheon to the school-room, and she is positive
Miss Brain called him Roger.
The next witness was Thomas Parker, a farmer,
who used to see Roger in the hunting field, and
he says that Roger was at his house several times.
He says he sold him a brown horse for 50?., and
was paid by a cheque from Mr. Gosford. He saw
the defendant, and recognised him by his likeness
to his uncle, Sir Henry. On that occasion he
questioned him about the purchase of the horse,
and the defendant remembered its colour, and
also its name, Louisa, which it had before he sold
it, and which was retained by Roger. On cross-
examination it was elicited that he probably men-
tioned about the brown horse first, and he added
that Lillywhite had charge of the horse.
The next witness was Thomas Muston, who
was a groom at Upton, and was afterwards in the
service of Roger. He says he saw the defendant
at the Waterloo Hotel in the presence of Mr.
Spofforth, and asked him to describe his horses.
The defendant said he had a bay which he bought
in Hants ; Muston, upon that, remarked, ‘ I think
you did not buy that horse yourself, Sir Edward
gave it to you as a present.’ He replied, ‘You
are quite wrong there, I bought it and paid for it
with my own money. I bought another horse
from a dealer named Cox, in London, and a third
at Maidstone Barracks from an officer there.’ As
regards the two last, that was perfectly correct,
for we know by Roger’s letters that he did buy
horses in London and at Maidstone; but with
regard to the horse bought in Hants, I think there
must be a mistake as to Roger's paying for it with
his own money, because Parker, from whom the
horse was bought, says he was paid by Mr. Gos-
ford, Sir Edward’s agent, with a cheque. It
seems, therefore, more probable that it was a
present from Sir Edward to his nephew on his
leaving college, and that Muston was right. The
witness says he was present when the horse was
tried, and that he understood it was a present
from Sir Edward. He asked the defendant if he
had any dogs, and to describe their colour. The
defendant said he had one white dog, Piecrust,
and another which he described as a half-bred
deerhound. The witness says :
‘ I asked him if he recollected where he bought
it, and he did not recollect at first. He said he
knew it was somewhere near the Mews in Mount-
street. Then shortly afterwards he said, “I recol-
lect when I went to buy the dog you took me
through a shop into aback yard behind the shop.”
That was correct. I asked him how much he had
given for the dog, and he said he thought about
4?. or 4?. 10s. That last sum was correct—4?. 10s.
This was in 1849. He asked me how old I was,
and I said 43 or 44; and I think he told me I was
the same age as himself within a month.’
Then the witness is asked whether he told
Carter or M'Cann where the dogs or the horses
were bought, and he replies that he is not aware
that he did so. It is certainly very remarkable
that the defendant should have described the
precise spot where he bought the dog, and one


does not see any solution of it except upon the
hypothesis of its being a genuine recollection of
the real Roger. M‘Cann must have heard about
the horses, and I do not think so much about
that or about the price of the dog being men-
tioned, because in all probability Roger’s papers
were not destroyed, and there may have been a
receipt for the money among them : _ but the
description of the locality is certainly very
striking. The witness says Roger twitched his
eyebrows. In answer to further questions the
defendant, he says, told him he remembered that
the first time he dined with the Carabineers he
wore a frock coat which was found to have a slit
under the arm, and that he had on Wellington
boots and leather breeches. The defendant asked
witness if he recollected the practical joke of the
candles being put on the floor and the shirts being
put in the coal-box, and witness said he did. He
describes Roger as having very broad shoulders, and
being pretty full in the face, although his clothes
had to be padded to make him a good shape. Then
he tells us what is certainly an untruth. He
says he was not dismissed from Roger's service,
but gave his master warning 4l discharged,
myself.’ Now, we know from Roger’s letter to
Lady Doughty that there had been frequent com-
plaints about this man, and in the end that Roger
reluctantly discharged him. The witness gives
an account of the jokes played by the officers, and
admits that he did not mention them at the last
trial; but explains that by saying he was not
asked. The photograph is shown him, and he
says it is not a good likeness; but it appears
that on the former trial he said it was good, and
after that he admits it to be a very fair like-
ness, which any one who had known Roger would
recognise. He is cross-examined as to having seen
Father Guy before he was examined, and it
appears that Father Guy had a conversation with
him about Roger Tichborne and the defendant.
He says he did not tell him about the horses, but
he cannot say whether the dogs may not have
been mentioned.
The next witness is Bailey, an innkeeper at
Ropley, who knew Roger when he was a boy, and
when he called at his house. He says that when
Roger was a little boy he took him out on his
uncle’s horse Cock Robin, about which a good
deal was said at the last trial, and he added that
he had no doubt the defendant was Roger
Tichborne.
Gentlemen, I now come to a witness with whose
evidence I really do not know whether I should
take up your time. He is, however, called for the
defence, and I cannot, therefore, pass him over.
I allude to Charles Lewis, the draper’s assistant at
Alresford. Before Roger Tichborne went into the
Army this witness tells us he made his acquaint-
ance and they became companions. That intimacy,
he says, was a close one. Roger used to come out to
meet him at night, without the knowledge of the fa-
mily, and they used, he states, to go about together
pursuing immoral practices ; they used to get the
clergyman’s servant maids to go out on the Downs
with them; they frequented low publichouses, and
altogether led a very irregular life. His story is
this : On one occasion they were out late on Tich-
borne Downs and a question arose as to their going
to some publichouse. They had a dispute and
Roger struck him over the head. This man, hav-
ing a stick in his hand with a piece of iron at the
end of it, made a thrust at Roger and wounded
him in the left arm, and he puts the wound about
the place where the defendant’s arm is marked.
The wound bled freely, and, finding this to be
the case, he started off to Alresford, leaving Roger
on the Downs, and got some diachylon plaster,
and on his return he took a scissors from his
pocket, cut the plaster, and bound up the wound
with it, wrapping the arm round with Roger’s
handkerchief. He fixes the time that this occurred
as being in the Spring of 1848. He is positive, he
says, of that from the fact that he broke his arm
in the month of August following. He could not
tell whether that wound left a scar and had not
examined the defendant’s arm.
Now, in the first place, taking the iron-pointed
end of the stick and thrusting it into Roger Tich-
borne’s arm, then leaving him standing or sitting
on the Downs wounded while the witness went
to get the sticking plaster, is by itself a very
strange story indeed. But what is fatal to it is,
that the man fixes a date, and fixes it by a circum-
stance. He says it was late in the Spring of
1848 that it happened, and that he is certain of
the date because he broke his arm three or four
months after the time in question. Now, Roger
Tichborne was at Stonyhurst in 1848, and there
was no vacation in the Spring, and therefore he
could not have been at Tichborne at the time that
this man has stated. Ido not think that he is a
man upon whose testimony very much reliance
can be placed. Lewis says that upon one occasion
he and Roger went to a publichouse kept by ‘ Old
Chick, ’ and he took upon himself to say how many
glasses of grog they had, and what they paid for
them to a fraction. He gave us a detailed state-
ment of a conversation which he had with the de-
fendant on this subject, said that the latter re-
membered all that had occurred, and, referring to
the grog and cigars, added, ‘I have never paid you
for them from that day to this. It is my turn to
stand treat.’
The story is altogether a very strange one and
told by a very strange witness. He was asked
whether he ever saw Miss Doughty and Roger at
the Lovers’ Seat, and he said that he did. He
hastened up there on seeing Roger and a lady, as,
he said, 4 1 thought he had taken one of my girls.’
On cross-examination he is asked what he did pay
for the grog and cigars, and his reply was 9s. 2 hd.
4 Did the defendant remember the amount?’ and
he said, 4 Yes ;he said it was over 3s. You saw
Roger afterwards?—Yes. Why did you not ask
him for the amount?—Because Miss Doughty
was with him. O, your delicacy prevented you,
did it?’ To which he replied, ‘Yes, I am very
delicate.’ There is a happy irony in this question,
4 Did you, among other things, ask him how many
lumps of sugar there were in the grog?’ and with
perfect candour he answers, 4 1 do not think I could
tell myself.’ He tellsyou of roaming over the Downs
with loose women, going with Roger Tichborne, not
to one, but to several publichouses, and, after all
these years, he remembers the number of glasses
of grog they had on one occasion, and the precise
amount —to a halfpenny—that was paid. Ido not
think you will attach very much weight or impor-
tance to his testimony. He is contradicted by Lady
Radcliffe, who said Roger used not to go out after
dinner, but went, like other people, to the drawing-
room. This man, however,sayshe used to clinrbover
the wall to meet him. You will judge for yourselves
whether what was said as to the wound on the
arm was or was not meant to get rid of the infer-
i ence that would arise from Dona Hay ley’s evi-
. dence as to the mark on Arthur Orton’s arm, and
; to lead to the inference that having a mark where
, he was said to be wounded he must be Roger


Tichborne. So much for the Hampshire wit-
nesses.
We now come to the witnesses from Poole, and
the first of them is Martha Legge, the laundress.
She knew Roger Tichborne during his stay at
Upton in the latter part of 1852. At that time she
was the laundress, and she says that on one occa-
sion there was a bill for washing amounting to
16s. or 17s. They wanted to pay her, and Roger
Tichborne produced a sovereign and asked Moore,
the butler, for change, but Moore, having none,
said, ‘What shall we do?’ Roger said, ‘Give the
laundress the sovereign and, turning to her, said,
‘ You need not bring back the change, for you
have done the linen so nicely.’ She says she re-
cognised the defendant by his eyebrows and the
upper part of his face. She often talked to him in
the pantry. Whenever she came to the house
she had a gossip with either Mr. Roger or Moore.
She was asked whether she was not at that time
known as the pretty laundress from Bath, and she
says she was. ‘ And you used to have a gossip
with Mr. Roger?’ ‘Yes,’ she replied, ‘but never
alone. Moore was always there, or else Tom.’
She speaks of having found a dog whistle in the
grounds, and she gave it to Mr. Roger, saying,
‘You gave me a sovereign last week ; I give you a
whistle this week,’ and that he thanked her, say-
ing he had lost it.’
On hearing of the defendant being at Poole she
called at the hotel to see him, but found he was
engaged. She called later in the day and saw him.
She mentioned her name—Legge—and he did not
know it and could not, as she had married a
second time. Then she mentioned the name of
her first husband, and he knew, and said, ‘ You
are my old laundress,’ and told her her first hus-
band was an old man, old enough to be her father,
which she said was true. Then she asked him did
he remember the colour of his fancy shirts, and
he said some blue, some pink, some purple, and
that he had pocket handkerchiefs with dogs’ heads
and glass beads in the corners, and that, she said,
was correct. He did not recollect about the sove
reign, but did about the dog whistle. She askec
him did he remember sending her white trousers
muddy up to the waist to wash ? He replied tha ;
he did more than once, as whenever he could no ;
get his boat close to land he used to walk ashore
Now, his recognition of her—if he had not been
told before she came that she had called and woulc
call again—is a striking fact, as is also his des
cription of the fancy linen which she said was no'*
then very much in vogue. It may be that being
left behind, the shirts and so forth were handec
over with his other property to Lady Tichborne,
and were preserved by her. That is, however,
only speculation. It may be that Carter was about
and knew her. That we do not know. If he
knew her to be the old laundress from genuine
recollection, it will be for you to say whether you
can reconcile the fact with any other supposition
than that he is Roger Tichborne. The witness
Bays, ‘ When he smiled there was something like
what I used to see in former days. I recognised
him first by the smile, secondly by his knowing me
as his own laundress, and thirdly by his telling me
I about my old husband.’
Then comes George Bromley, who knew Sir
Edward Doughty and young Roger when visiting
at Upton. He says that in 1852, when Roger was
staying at Upton, witness chased a crippled wild
goose which Roger had shot. They both claimed
it, and Roger sent a boy to take it from him. Wit-
ness, however, would not give it up, but Roger
eventually came up and secured it. This witness
says he saw the defendant, and knew him by his
likeness to the Doughty family. Sir Edward had
rather thick eyebrows, and the forehead of the £
fendant was like Sir Edward’s. "Witness says
saw the defendant at Poole, in 1867, with IV
Rous and Mr. Holmes, and he asked Rous w
that Sir Roger. Rous said, ‘ What made you as
Witness replied, ‘ I believe that is Sir Roger Tic
borne.’ Whereupon Rous said to the defendan
‘ Some one seems to recognise you.’ Then the c
fendant said, ‘You have the advantage of m
What is your name ?’ Witness replied, ‘ Bromle;
the son of William Bromley.’ The defendant sa:
‘ He used to do my work.’ Then Mr. Holmes saic
he should like to see witness next day at t
London Hotel. He called next day, and asked t
defendant whether he recollected about caulki
the black canoe and other matters. The inciden
about the goose happened in 1852. Witness talkec
about it to several people. It was in Octoh
1867 that he saw the defendant at Poole. I
heard before that the defendant was there. Ha
ing heard Roger Tichborne’s voice, when witne
came to see about the boats, he knew it again
Roger was a boy when he came about the boal
and witness was at the time a boy also.
Now, gentlemen, what the witness says abou
Roger wanting his father and himself to go anc
caulk the boats at Upton, and that this was
his younger days, appears to me impossible. W
know the time Roger spent at Upton. It com
have been only in 1848 or 1851. We know from
Lady Dormer’s evidence that in 1848 Roger Tic!
borne, having left Stonyhurst, did visit her upo
one or two occasions. But when Lady Dorme
was in the witness-box she was cross-examined b;
the defendant’s counsel, with the view of showin
that she must have had but an imperfect reco!
lection of Roger Tichborne, because his visits liac
been for only one or two days. Now it is not like!
that on a visit of two or three days Roger woulc
have had a boat, and that he would require t
have it caulked. Lady Dormer being pressed whe
ther she was sure that Roger stayed more thai
one or two days, said he never stayed more than
a week—it might have been a day or two less o
more. It is not to be supposed that at that time
he would have a boat. In 1851, Roger was there
on a visit for a few days, but the witness does no
say it was then, but when Roger and he were
boys. Then we must go back to 1838, when
Roger was there in the summer. But he was ai
that time only a boy of nine years old, and it is
not likely that a boy of that age would have i
boat, and would be trusted to manage it himself.
The defendant had another witness or two at
Poole. There was an old lady, Miss Jones, who
says that being one day up at Lady Dormer’s her
mantle caught in the catch, and Roger very kindly
disengaged it. She wanted a rose and Roger cut
it for her and gave her one or two more. She de-
scribes Roger as very thin, but says his eyes were
the same as now. With regard to the movement
of his eyebrows, she noticed one day that Roger
as she thought winked at a young lady, at which
she was rather shocked; at all events he moved
his eyebrows as if he did. His hair was, perhaps,
a shade or two lighter than it is now. There was
a sort of lazy look about him. She attended a
meeting at Southampton, where the defendant’s
friends assembled, and recognised him after a
short time. ‘ I watched him,’ she adds ; ‘ I quite
forgot where I was ; I called out something aloud,
and then was very much ashamed of myself. I


spoke to him that evening, and recognised h
voice. I observed the lazy look about the eye
He certainly was the old Roger Tichborne.’
Then there is the evidence of a man namec
Hewett, who was formerly footman to Mrs. Ho]
kinson, at Bath. We know that Mrs. Hopkinso
used to go every year to Knoyle and spend par'
of the summer there ; the rest of the year sh
lived at Bath. This witness recollects that Roge
had small hands, and that he resembled Sir Jame
Tichborne in his walk. Sir James walked with
sort of spring when he started off. He speaks als
to Roger Tichborne having fancy shirts of a par
ticular pattern, some striped and some with birc
or dogs, or something of that kind, on them. B
heard the defendant was at Swansea, and he de
sired to see him. So he went to see him afte
having had a conversation with Mr. Crooke. H
says, upon calling at the hotel where the defenc
ant was, he asked whether he could see Mr. On
slow. He did not send up his name, because Mr
Onslow would not know it. Mr. Onslow cam
down-stairs and asked him what he knew abou
Sir Roger Tichborne. Then Mr. Onslow wern
up-stairs, and he remained on the stairs after Mr
Onslow went up for about two minutes. Mr
Onslow asked the witness what he knew abou
the Seymour family, and witness told him. Mr
Onslow asked if he thought he should know Si
Roger if he saw him, and the witness said h
thought he should unless he was very muc]
changed. When the witness went into the room
he found there Sir Roger, Mr. Whalley, Mr
Crooke, and Mr. Onslow. He did not recognise
the defendant immediately—notuntilhe had been
in the room for some time. He was told he woulc
find Sir Roger in the room. He looked for him
and found that he had become exceedingly stout
Then we come to the questions which are im
portant as showing knowledge on the part of the
defendant. ‘ I asked him,’ says the witness
‘ whether he remembered the colour of his grand
father's (that is Mr. Seymour’s) favourite hunters.
He described them correctly ; he said he recol-
lected one was a brown mare with white legs, the
other was a horse. He could not recollect their
names. The horse's name was ‘Phantom,’ the
mare’s ‘ Lady Betty. ’ The defendant also recol-
lected the colour of the pointers—one black and
white, the other liver and white—but could not
remember their names. Roger Tichborne used to
go out every year, when he was at Knoyle, shoot-
ing with the keeper and the dogs. Well, gentle-
men, it appears that the defendant recollected the
colour of the dogs, though he could not recall their
names ; and when we remember his defective
memory we cannot feel surprised that he should
not have recollected the names of the dogs. Now,
one would expect that Roger would have remem-
bered shooting and sporting with the dogs. If
the defendant is Roger it is quite natural that he
should have remembered it. But there is this dif-
ficulty—that this man when he was cross-ex-
amined before about what occurred when he was
at Knoyle declared most positively that he never
had a day's shooting there in his life. Yet at the
interview with this witness he not only recollects
that he used to go out shooting at Knoyle, but he
also recollects the colour of the dogs with which
he went out to shoot. Then there occurred a far-
ther conversation ; they spoke about a butler of
the Seymour family, named Thompson, who after-
wards took a house in St. James’s-place, and it
was there that Roger always stopped when he
was in London. Witness said, ‘ I asked him about
the colour of Thompson's hair, and he said it was
“gingery.” I asked him if he knew whether
there was any defect in limb or otherwise in the
man, and he said he was blind in the right eye ;
he told me also that Thompson shot from the
left shoulder. That struck me very forcibly ; i
struck me he must be the man. Mr. Onslow wa
there all the time.’ The defendant also told him
about the butler's cottage at Knoyle, and said i
was there that he and his uncle Alfred (he callec
him ‘ my uncle’) used to go to smoke.
Well, gentlemen, the defendant recollects abou
the butler and his eye, about his shooting from
the left shoulder, and about the cottage. Ques
tions on all those points were asked him at th
late trial upon cross-examination, and he did no
remember anything about them. I shall have to
call your attention hereafter to that part of the
cross-examination. I should say it was quite pos
sible for a man to have forgotten a great many o:
those things. But here the memory is perfect
the knowledge is exhibited. What has occurrec
_in the meantime between the former trial anc
this interview with the witness? The whole case
of the defendant in the former trial was brought
out, and in that way attention must have been
called to the points in which the defendant in
this trial had failed to show the necessary know
ledge. The defendant failed to show the know
ledge which might have been expected from Roger
Tichborne. But at a later period he knows thal
Thompson was the butler; he is quite aware oi
what becomes of Thompson, and he remembers
that it was in a room of Thompson's cottage that
his uncle Alfred and he used to smoke. All thal
is known to him. If we could be satisfied that al'
this was genuine recollection on the part of the
defendant, that would have been evidence in his
favour of a most cogent character. But so fai
from its being in his favour to have told this wit-
ness what he did, it would have been far more in
his favour if he said he did not recollect.
And now we come to the evidence of Miss
Braine, upon whom the heavy ordnance of the
counsel for the prosecution has been directed
much more in my opinion than the importance of
her testimony called for. Miss Braine, as we
know, was governess over Miss Doughty from
November 1849, to November 1850, and she was
at Tichborne on the sth January 1850, when Roger
came of age. That was the only occasion she ever
saw Roger, and the period of his stay at Tichborne
at the time was from nine to ten days. It was
only when Mr. Tichborne was in the dining-room
that Miss Braine had an opportunity of meeting
him. She described him as slightly built, of mid-
dle height—that is, she said, ‘ under six feet
sallow complexion, with long straight hair, brown
in colour, his eyes peculiar, so that she felt she
should know them again. ‘I am not sure,’ says
the witness, ‘ that I could be certain of the
colour; but I remember the expression. It is
the expression of his eyes I remember; I remem-
ber them so perfectly. I cannot say whether I
ever before saw eyes of that expression.’ His
eyebrows, she says, were thick. She had a per-
fect recollection of his forehead, but cannot des-
cribe it. When I asked her to describe it, she
says, with an ingenuousness which is perfectly
charming, ‘ Well, my lord, I would have to look
at him now if I were to describe it.’ She said
she only saw him during that visit, which lasted
ten days. She never saw him again. She saw
him daily, at lunch or dinner or in the even-
ing, in the drawing-room, when he was there


She remembered his voice and his lazy way
of speaking a way of dropping his words
out of his mouth as if he was too lazy to
deliver them properly. She could not, she said,
describe his voice, or say whether it was harsh or
soft, thick or clear. After this visit, she said,
she lost sight of him. She heard of the loss of
the Bella, and first heard of the return of the de-
fendant some time in 1867. She then received a
letter of invitation, signed ‘ Roger Charles Tich-
borne,’ simply saying he had heard she had said
she should know him, and asking her to go and
see him. She wrote to say she would come, but
he did not know the day she was coming, and, in-
deed, she did not go until a fortnight afterwards.
She went in January 1868. She went on to say :
‘He wrote first in 1867, I cannot say when. I
think at the end of the year. It was some time
afterwards before I went; it was in January 1868.
I went to Wellesley-villas, Croydon, and was
shown into a room, where I waited for him. He
came in almost immediately. My first impres-
sion was one of extreme surprise at his size—a
strong contrast to his former figure. I said,
“Don’t speak; sit down, and let me look at
you.” He laughed, and I said, after a few se-
conds, “ Well, the eyes and brows are like
Roger's ; but the nose is not.” Then he men-
tioned a fall he had had in Australia from a
horse. He asked if I had not heard of it. I said
“ No,” and then he described it. I observed a
scar between his eyebrows, and spoke of it, say-
ing, “ I don't remember it.” Then he took up a
knife lying on the table. I said the hands are
like Roger’s, and he gave a very natural laugh
and said, “ Whose should they be like ?” ’
She examined his features very carefully, and
noticed the same articulation as in Roger, though
slightly altered on account of his teeth. Roger,
she said did not speak English well, and had a
strong French accent. She did not remember
noticing this at first, but she did, in subsequent
conversations, notice it frequently ; not in whole
sentences, but in words here and there. I asked,
‘ What words ?’ She said, ‘ Well, the word
“mountainous” he pronounced “ mountayn-
yous.’” 1 said, ‘A Frenchman would not pro-
nounce it like that.’ The witness said :
‘Well, it seemed to me that he carried the
French pronunciation into the word. I asked
him whether he remembered the ball. I don’t
remember his answer, but he evidently remem-
bered it. I asked, “Do you remember my getting
up to go into your room and locking the door upon
you ?” and he said he remembered the candle being
blown out. It was the night of the servants’ ball,
and Moore, the old butler, came to me and said,
“ Mr. Roger has had wine enough ; try if you can't
get him to bed before you go yourselves.” I
don’t remember what followed, which was to the
effect that it would be better not to leave him
up ; but in consequence of this I told Moore to
tell him I wanted to speak to him, and he came
out of the hall, and I asked him to go into his
room. He was holding his candle so unsteadily
that I blew it out, and then locked the door. No
one ever knew that. I never mentioned it to any
one until afeer he came home. Of course the but-
ler was cognisant of it, but he was a very old
butler, and I don’t think he would mention it in
the house. There was something said about it
next day. I don’t remember what Roger said.’
Well, gentlemen, if this was an incident known
only to Roger and Miss Braine, and the defendant
recollected it, no doubt it would be a striking
thing in his favour. But do you suppose that this
story was not perfectly well known about the
house at Tichborne within a very few hours after
it occurred ? It does seem a curious combination
of circumstances. Here is a young officer dancing
away at this tenants’ and servants’ ball, and
taking a little more punch than is good for him.
The old butler, when the rest of the family were
gone to bed, thinks it well to get Roger to bed too,
before he should go further. He does not know
exactly how to do it, so he says to the governess,
‘ How shall we get Mr. Roger to bed ?’ Then Miss
Braine says, ‘ Tell him to come up, and he will
find me at his bedroom door.’ So the butler says,
‘ Miss Braine has gone up to your bedroom. ’ That
was something like a challenge. He would be
ashamed not to go. What would they have said
in the regiment if he did not ? Then he goes
up speculating, I dare say, upon what Miss
Braine wanted. He finds her at the bedroom
door, and thinks she is going in first; but, instead
of that, she lets him pass in, then blows out the
candle, locks the door, and goes away, leaving him
desponding in the dark. Do you suppose the
butler did not speak of that ? It is contrary to
all our experience of the habits of domestics to
imagine that all that would not be told in the
housekeeper’s room next day. We cannot suppose
that Bogle was not aware of it, or that, having
been aware of it, old Bogle woidd keep his tongue
in his cheek about a matter which during all the
time Miss Braine was at Tichborne was the most
curious incident that had occurred. The defen-
dant in that way may have got to know about the
blowing out of the candle.
Then Miss Braine speaks of Roger’s personal
peculiarities. We know what other witnesses
for the defence have said about his hands. She
is asked whether they were not bony. She re-
plies, ‘ I never investigated the bones. I conclude
there were bones in them.’ Rather a flippant
answer. Then Mr. Hawkins says, ‘You know
what I mean.’ And here again we have an
equally flippant answer, ‘ And you know what I
mean. They were not bony. The- knuckles ap-
peared to me to be dimpled. The knuckles of
one hand. I believe the knuckles of both were;
but I only noticed one—the right hand.’ The
members of the family speak of Roger’s hands as
bony, with prominent knuckles ; but this lady
says he had dimpled hands. She says she re-
membered the peculiar expression of Roger’s eyes,
which she describes as an expression of ‘ melan-
choly and surprise.’ At one moment, she said, he
would look very melancholy, and then he would
look surprised when there was nothing to be sur-
prised at. As to the habit of raising the eyebrows,
she only noticed it occasionally. She did not
think it was constant. Her evidence was read,
in which she stated it was a constant habit, and
she explained that she meant that one would not
be with him half-an-hour without observing it.
Upon this I asked, ‘ Is what you now call “occa-
sionally” what you then called “constantly?”’
‘ Yes, my Lord ; that was my first experience as
a witness ; I am more careful now.’
Asked as to the first visit to the defendant,
the witness said that before he spoke she knew
him by the eyes and forehead, not as a distinct
recognition, but as a recollection which came back
to her. She was astonished at his size, and yet
there was something of Roger about him. The
hair was the same. She missed, indeed, at first
the habit of jerking the head back, but she did
not look particularly for it. Her examination


was read, in which she said she watched for it
and did not see the old jerking habit. Next day
she saw it, and said, ‘ That’s what I’ve been look-
ing for.’ But she did not observe the falling lock
of hair which Roger had, and which he jerked
back, until on the second day of her first visit.
Then the French pronunciation is brought up
again. People who want to say ‘mountainous,’
say ‘ mountaynyous,’ and that, according to Miss
Braine, is a French mode of pronouncing it. I
confess it does not appear so to me. Then she is
asked whether she can trace back ‘ worrit’ to its
French origin. She said she had answeredit was
purely colonial, she should have said it was
purely vulgar. She thinks she can trace a mix-
ture of the French education of Roger where the
defendant uses ie, the double vowel, where we
should use a single vowel, and she says she thinks
she could give an example of French translation
into English. NodoubtßogerTichbornehad plenty
of it, but I am not aware that we found any trace of
it in the letters of the defendant, and that is one
of the differences upon which I will touch by and
by. But Miss Braine gives an instance, it is ‘ I
will tell you for why,’ which she says is the
French Je vous dirai pour quoi. ‘ But,’ I said,
* don’t you know ‘‘for why” is a vulgarism, and
that pour quoi means “for what,” not “ for why?”’
Well, gentlemen, I really don’t know that
on account of the evidence of Miss Braine
it was worth while for the prosecution to say
anything offensive to her. It comes to very
little. She saw Roger on one occasion a few times
at Tichborne; she noticed some peculiarities in
him, and thought the defendant was Roger. I
don’t know that her evidence was likely to carry
much weight or authority with it. But she has
been held up by the learned counsel for the de-
fendant in terms of the highest eulogy and lauda-
tion as a perfect paragon of her sex —her virtues
everything great and noble. All this is done with
the view of making you attach weight to her evi-
dence, which otherwise, perhaps, you would not
consider it entitled to. I cannot say, holding the
scale evenly between the two parties, that either
of them has been right. This is the only instance
in this trial in which Mr. Hawkins, whose conduct
of the case has been so able, has departed from
the strictest possible lines of propriety. I think
he did go too far in his attack on Miss Braine.
But, on the other hand, nothing could be more
inflated or extravagant than the sort of eulogy
which the learned counsel for the defendant pro-
nounced upon Miss Braine.
Certainly her conduct is open to remark, be-
cause it does appear to exhibit to wards the defend-
ant a degree of partisanship and indiscriminate
zeal which leads us to think that her statements
must be received with some grains of allowance.
She was governess of Miss Doughty and professed
to have the greatest regard for one who had been
her pupil and always treated her with the greatest
possible respect. She knew that the defendant
was about to open a charge against that pupil
affecting her character and honour, that he was
prepared to say that while in his uncle’s house he
had abused that uncle’s confidence and seduced
his daughter to whom he was ostensibly paying
honourable addresses. She knew he was about
to proclaim that, and had already communicated
it to the persons in his confidence. And, notwith-
standing that, she becomes an associate ot his, an
inmate of his house, and enjoys his hospitality for
months. And when she has ceased to be an in-
mate of his house, when the whole story is out,
and the thing is done, it makes no alteration in
her relations with the defendant. She endeavoured
to represent when here that she had only become
an inmate of his house for the protection of his
wife and family, to afford them the advantage of
her society while the defendant was absent. . I
cannot help believing that to be an entire mis-
representation, because in a letter to his mother,
in 1808, there is reference to a lady visitor, of
whom he, as well as his mother, is most anxious
to get rid ; but he cannot until he gets her affi-
davit. If that lady visitor was not Miss Braine,
I should like to know who it was. As far as my
judgment goes, the reference is to Miss Braine.
But at all events, whether the defendant was
absent or not, I cannot see how her conduct in
this respect can be said to have been consistent
with female delicacy, or the feelings which ought
to animate a woman who is told that her pupil
has been seduced by the man to whose house she
is invited. If she does not believe the statement
she must know that he is a vile and abominable
slanderer ; and if she does believe it she must also
believe that he is a man who has been guilty of
seduction under the very worst form. in which
seduction can present itself —a seduction which
brings dishonour on his own family, and which
could have been consistent only with the grossest
abuse of the confidence placed in him. If Miss
Braine believed one or other of these two al-
ternatives she ought to have said ‘ I will no longer
consort with that man.’ And yet, according to
her own account, she used, after the whole story
was proclaimed to the world, to go and sit by his
bedside while he was ill, and read and write for
him. I think after that, looking at all the cir-
cumstances, it was hardly consistent with truth
or anything like reason for the learned counsel to
hold her up as a paragon of her sex, as a minister-
ing angel.
I do not say that these things ought to detract
from Miss Braine’s evidence. It was a matter of
taste, delicacy, and good feeling whether she
ought to have gone and associated with the de-
fendant ; but it does not affect her credibility to
the extent that you won’t receive her evidence at
all. She seeks to account for her conduct in this
way. She says, * I could not but feel that what he
said of my pupil ought to have made me shun the
man. I ought not to have gone to his house, still
less have sat by his bedside and comforted him;
but then he was an oppressed and persecuted
man.’ I can understand her saying ‘lt is true
the man’s conduct may have been abominable, it
may have been infamous, but truth and justice are
superior to all other considerations. In a court of
justice I will speak the truth in order that justice
may be accomplished: and though I may abhor
the man, bis character, and conduct, yet so far as
his claim is just, and he asks for no more than the
rights to which he is entitled, if my testimony,
speaking according to the truth, can avail any-
thing he shall have the benefit of it. If Miss
Braine had said, ‘ Though he proclaimed he had
seduced my pupil, and I shuddered at it, still I
was prepared to say what I should have said nil-
der other different circumstances, and to go into
the witness-box and tell the truth,’ I should have
appreciated her conduct and applauded it. But
when the learned counsel says, after these things
were brought to her knowledge, the fact of her
still clinging to him is a circumstance that calls
for praise from all high-minded and honourable
men, I for one protest against it. But still the
evidence of Miss Braine must be taken for what it


is worth. She is a person of considerable power
of observation, and did observe Roger Tichborne
and her judgment whether the defendant is th
man or not is entitled to some consideration.
Next we have the evidence of Mr. Bulpei
which, with respect to this part of the case, as th
question of the sealed packet does not enter int
it, is not very important, because up to the tim
that Roger left England he was not brought muc
into connection with him. He had merely see
him in the hunting field, and, therefore, I don
think it worth while to trouble you with what h
said. Then there is the evidence of Lady Bur
roughs, who once danced with Roger at a bal
Counsel for the defendant used to say, ‘ I have go'
no lords or colonels among my company,’ anc
therefore, I was surprised when he got a lady t
come forward with a handle to her name. But
lady who had only danced once with a youn
officer 20 years ago could be no competent witnes
in the case. I don’t call your attention to th
evidence of Lady Katherine Wheble, Lord Howth’
daughter, because we have had so many witnesse
much better able to speak to the question.
But there is another very important set of wit
nesses—those from the Carabineer regiment—wh
were called for the defendant, and first amon B
them is Colonel Norbury. This gentleman re
ceives a letter from the defendant, to which Colo
nel Norbury replies, saying that he intended to
call on him. Then the defendant writes to than]
him and say that the Colonel would find him much
stouter than he was in the Carabineers. It appear
that Holmes thereupon thought it expedient to sene
for Cairns, the sergeant-major, from Sandhurst
in order that Cairns might have a talk with Colo
nel Norbury before the latter saw the defendant
Colonel Norbury seems to have made up his mine
to test the defendant fait ly before he recognisee
him; and he says he was a long time in the de
fendant’s company before he made up his mind.
One thing he recognised him by was his voice
but he could not say whether he recognised hitr
first by his voice or his features. Colonel Norbury
said, ‘ I think the expression I used was “I shoulc
not have known you : but come, sit down, and lei
me ask you some questions.” ’ And accordingly
he asked him about the personal appearance oi
some of the officers—‘ What sort of a person was
so and so ; was he tall or short?’ His great ob-
ject, he says, was to put his questions in such a
way that the defendant could not get information
from him. He could not recollect that the de-
fendant gave any wrong answers. He asked the
defendant did he remember where, in Portobello
barracks when he joined, the officers’ quarters
were? And he answered quite right. Then Colo-
nel Norbury asked him about something which he
always wore—he might have said day and night.
The defendant said, ‘O! you mean my sacred
heart. ’ ‘ That,’ said Colonel Norbury, ‘ was what I
was referring to. I have seen it on him when he was
nearly undressed. It was something like a locket.’
The witness next asked him about the different
quarters of the regiment, and the defendant
answered correctly, as he did also in respect to
the quarters of the officers. The fact of the de-
fendant saying that a troop was quartered at
Clonmel seemed to be of importance to Colonel
Norbury, because he had himself forgotten the
circumstance ; but I imagine he would not have
attached so much importance to it if he had
known that the defendant had had the statement
from the Horse Guards. Then the witness asks
him questions which certainly show that the de-
fendant had a good recollection of what occurred
in Dublin : ‘ I asked him what he used to give us
at his rooms when he came to Dublin, and he re-
plied after a little thought, “Punch.” We used
to call it French punch, and I said, “How did
you make it ?” He described the process correctly.
It was very simple. He used to get a bottle of
brandy and pour it in a bowl. Then he used to
let it burn till a considerable portion of the spirit
was consumed, and the remainder was the punch.’
This is undoubtedly a striking circumstance, foi
I do not see how anybody could have been likely
to put it into the defendant’s head. ‘ln the
course of the conversation,’ says Colonel Norbury,
‘ I asked him to come over to my house the next
day.. I said to him, “ You remember my wife in
Dublin ?” and he said, “No I don’t; you were not
married in Dublin.” I said, “ No, I was not
married at Dublin, but I thought you might have
remembered the lady I did marry. ” ’
The witness went on: ‘He told me a great
number of things himself without being ques-
tioned, but they did not make much impression
upon me. The impression he made upon my mind
was in consequence of the answers to the ques-
tions which I put to him. He charged me with
being one of the persons who put the donkey into
his bed, but I have no recollection on that sub-
ject.’ Then he is asked, ‘What was the impres-
sion in your mind as to who he was ?’ * I had no
doubt in my own mind that he was Eoger Charles
Tichborne.’ ‘ln what way did he bring back to
your recollection Eoger Charles Tichborne —in his
person or appearance ?’ The witness replied, ‘ I
looked at him for a long time, and found there
was a great similarity in his features and the ex-
pression of his countenance, though there was a
great difference in his figure and his bulk. There
was a peculiarity about the brow of Eoger Tich-
borne. What it was Ido not exactly remember,
but I know there was a peculiarity. I can re-
member it now, because it has been brought to my
recollection by hearing other people talk about
it.’ Then the witness says he is colourblind, and
consequently cannot speak to the colour of the
hair. After he had recognised the defendant as
the right man he conversed with him familiarly,
and he says, ‘ His manner reminded me strongly
of Eoger Tichborne then, and I considered his
voice was like Eoger Tichhorne’s.’
In reply to Mr. Kenealy, the witness said Eoger
spoke with a strong French accent. The witness
fancied he noticed in the defendant’s speech a
trace, but hardly a trace, of the foreign accent—
‘There was the slightest possible trace,’ he says.
He is asked, * However slight, it was there, you
think?’ and he answered, ‘ Yes, certainly, though
notin more than two or three words.’ The de-
fendant told the witness he had forgotten French,
or so much of it that he spoke it badly, and was
advised, on that account, not to speak in French
at all. The defendant’s memory was tested on
several points. One was about the trick which
the witness knew Eoger Tichborne had of sticking
pins in the calf of the leg. The witness referred
to the trick, but without mentioning the word
pin. The defendant did not recollect the inci-
dent, neither he nor the witness mentioning the
word ‘pin.’ He was next asked about a trick
they used to play on Eoger Tichborne when they
were going into the country in marching order.
The answer of the defendant was that they used
to make his horse jump and fidget about. What
the witness alluded to was a trick played upon
Eoger Tichborne in this way: One man got on


one side and took away the crupper, while another,
on the opposite side, lifted off his valise, and
Roger reached the barracks minus crupper and
valise. ‘The defendant,’ said the witness, ‘did
not mention that, and I did not mention it
either.’
There can be no doubt that Colonel Norbur
has given us a perfectly truthful account of wha
passed, and that his belief in the identity as re
suiting from that interview is perfectly hones
and genuine ; but that an attempt had been mac
to lead him to take a favourable view of the de
fendant before he saw him cannot, I think, b
doubted, from the fact that Mr. Holmes sen'
Cairns so to arrange matters that Cairns migh
have a conversation with the colonel before h
saw the defendant. Cairns, in his cross-examina
tion, admits that he went to Malvern with th
defendant. Carter was there also. Cairns write
to Mr. Rous from Malvern, stating that he hac
brought Major Norbury back to have an interview
with Roger, and that the interview was still goin
on while he wrote this letter. In another lette
he says he is proud to say that the interview hac
been highly satisfactory, and adds that Mr
Holmes’s chief clerk had been at Malvern th
previous evening to take Major Norbury’s ser
vant’s affidavit, which was first-class. No doub
Colonel Norbury and Steptoe, who was an ole
friend of Cairns, had had conversations with th
latter, and were well plied with affidavits before
they saw the defendant; at the same timeColone
Norbury was a very competent witness, am
showed great prudence in the questions he pu
and the way in which he put them. The answers
given by the defendant exhibited knowledge
which the real Roger Tichborne would have pos
sessed. Whether this was a genuine result o
the defendant’s memory without extraneous in
formation will be an important matter for you to
consider.
The next witness is Captain Cunliffe ; he joinec
the Cai-abineers in 1850 at Cahir after Rogei
Tichborne had become a lieutenant, that is to say,
after the 22d of November. He became very inti-
mate with Roger Tichborne, of whom he gives a
description. He says Roger had a thorough know-
ledge of the French language, but admitted there
was no trace of the Fi’ench accent in the defend-
ant. He says he recognised the defendant when
he saw him, but it turns out he did not see him
until the adjournment of the Court on the very
day the witness was examined. This gentleman is
the only one of Roger Tichborne’s brother officers
who says that he indulged in wine or stimulants
to such an extent as to show it. The others all
say that they never saw him drunk. This witness
says he was in the habit of takmg so much wine
at dinner that he got into a ‘soaked’ state,
though he never saw the least ti-ace of it the next
day. Captain Cunliffe is, however, a very com-
petent witness, having been intimate with Roger
Tichborne, i-eading the same books, and knowing
him well, although it does not appear that he had
any conversation with the defendant or saw him
befoi-e the day he was examined, and in that
respect his evidence cannot have the same weight
as that of Colonel Norbury.
Now I come to the rank and file ; the non-com-
missioned officers and privates of the Carabineers.
1 am bound to say, however, that I miss the
names of persons to which the defendant refers in
his correspondence as having made affidavits on
his behalf before the former trial. I must say
that, because it was asserted by the learned coun-
sel for the defendant that no one had fallen o'
from him with the single exception of Colone
Custance. But besides Colonel Custance, Captai
Shurston is not here, Colonel Sawyer is not here
and they all made affidavits in favour of the de
fendant, and some were examined on the forme
occasion. They, of course, heard or read the ex
amination and cross-examination of the defendani
at the former trial, and they are not here now.
The Foreman.—ls Major Heywood alive, my
lord?
The Lord Chief Jdstice.—l believe so. At al
events I have not heard that he is dead. Ther
are two or three other gentlemen who were before
in favour of the defendant, but whom we have no
seen. There is Sir Talbot Constable. What is the
explanation of his absence ? The learned counst
for the defendant says the prosecution would have
insulted him in some way, but Mr. Hawkins
repudiated that in the strongest manner, anc
I believe in the perfect sincerity of that repudia
tion. Then there is Mr. and Mrs. Marx. It does
not necessarily follow that their absence shoulc
tell strongly against the defendant, but the
learned counsel had no right to say that no one
had fallen off from him.
However, there was a strong body of evidence
from the non-commissioned officers and privates
of the Carabineers. I think there were altogether
fifty-eight in number. They all agree in certain
main things, and I should be abusing your pa-
tience and wasting your time if I went seriatim,
one by one, into the evidence of all these wit-
nesses upon the points on which they are all
agreed. Therefore I shall take them en masse
as regards those general points, and only call
attention especially to those witnesses who speak
to facts and conversations by which the knowledge
or ignorance of the defendant may be tested.
They are all agreed that he was a slim, slight
man; that he was about sft. Bin. or sft. Din. in
height; they are all agreed as to the colour of his
hair, and they are also all agreed—with certain
differences of expression—as to the twitch about
his brows. Then they are all agreed that he had a
sallow complexion and brown hair, and the pre-
ponderance of their testimony is in favour of dark
brown hair. They are agreed also that it was not
curly, but lank and straight; and they are pretty
well agreed as to his voice. It was a soft, mild
voice. One says it was ‘ more like a lady's than a
man’s another that it was a ‘ mild, clear voice,
and weak ;’ and a third that it was ‘ neither coarse
nor soft.’ But one man said it was coarse, and
made the inconsistent observation that it was
‘ coarse, like a woman’s.’ That was the first time
I ever heard the expression. Then with regard to
his hands and feet, they are agreed that they were
small; two say ‘ very small.’ As to his hair, one
man named Batcliff says it was lighter than it is
now ; but they all agree that it was brown and
much like the defendant’s. With respect to the
twitching, one witness says it was in the eyebrows
and was noticeable in talking ; another that it was
when he was excited, another in speaking, another
says it was in the right eye, another in the fore-
head, and one witness never saw it at all. All of
them agree that the eyebrows were large. With
respect to the accent, they all agree that he had
a French accent and spoke English imperfectly,
though one witness says he improved before he
left. Then, whereas we have been told by the wit-
nesses for the prosecution, that Koger had sloping
shoulders and a narrow chest, we have a large
divergence in the witnesses on the other side, who


say that Roger Ticliborne had broad shoulders, o
square shoulders, or wide shoulders. The sam
witnesses speak of his having a fair manly chest
in contradistinction to the allegation on the othe
side that it was narrow. These witnesses mak
Roger Tichborne a much larger man than do th
witnesses for the prosecution. All these fifty
eight witnesses agree in their conviction that th
defendant is Roger Tichborne.
The first of these witnesses, to whose evidenc
I shall call your attention, is a man of the nam
of Patrick Parry, who was formerly servant to
Major Hay, of the Carabineers. He was in the
habit of occasionally attending as mess waiter, so
that he had full opportunity of seeing Roge
Tichborne when he was dining at the mess. He
saw the defendant at the Queen’s Hotel, at Leeds
in 1868, and recognised the voice and the twitch
ing. They got into conversation when the wit
ness asked the defendant, ‘ Who commanded the
regiment when Roger Tichborne was in it ?’ He
answered, ‘Colonel Jackson,’and he spoke also
of Major Hay and Sergeant-Major DickinsoD. He
was asked the names of the adjutant, the pay
master, the riding-master, and the superintendenl
f of the riding-school, and he answered correctly
but those were all facts he had obtained at the
Horse Guards. H e was asked who were Roge]
Tichborne's servants, and he said M Cann and
Clarke, and that the latter was killed by being
thrown from one of his horses. We have had it
admitted that all the regiment knew of the acci-
dent to Clarke, but the witness says he did not
recognise the defendant so much from what he
knew as from his features and voice.
Sergeant-Major Hamilton gave some evidence
of importance, but began by a mistake. He said
that Roger Tichborne first joined Captain Mor-
ton s I! troop at Portobello in 1849 ; but we know
that he joined the F troop, under Captain
Jocelyn, and did not join Captain Morton’s troop
till he had his lieutenancy. This witness saw the
defendant at Liverpool in 1868, after having re-
ceived two letters from Baigent. He was shown
into a room and found there John Lessware and
his wife and the defendant. He did not recognise
him at first, because he was so stout, but the
voice brought Roger back to his recollection,
though stronger than it was before he left Eng-
land. He asked the defendant whether he re-
membered anything happening when he returned
from chapel, and he said that he did—that he had
fined a man for being drunk. In cross-examina-
tion, he said he recognised the defendant s voice,
and was more impressed by it than by what the
defendant told him.
Frederick Mather, the interpreter at the
London, Chatham, and Dover Railway Com-
pany’s Station at Doves, said he was born in
France and knew Roger Tichborne very well
while in the Carabineers. He saw the defendant
at Leeds, in February 1868, and says : ‘ A gen-
tleman came to me and asked me whether I had
been in the Carabineers. I said I had, and he
asked me to name the officers. I did so, men-
tioning the name of Roger Tichborne. He asked
mo whether I could identify Roger Tichborne,
and I said I thought I could. I went to a room
where three gentlemen were, and at first I could
not identify him, he had grown so stout. I spoke
to him in French, but he said, “Speak in Eng-
lish, so that these gentlemen can understand
what you say,” and then he said, “ I have nearly
forgotten French.” I asked him whether he could
remember any circumstance occurring while I
was in the regiment, and then he brought to my
mind a circumstance which did occur, but which
I had entirely forgotten. He said I had been
reported, for having a dirty sword. After five
minutes’ conversation with the defendant I re-
cognised him by the eyes and the upper part of
his face. He spoke better English than he used
to do, and had altered a good deal. I asked the
defendant to read in order that I might ascertaii
whether I could identify the voice and tone,
did identify his voice with a slight difference.
In cross-examination, he says : ‘ When I went
to see the defendant, I went into the wrong
room, and then into the right one, where there
were two or three persons besides the defendant
I said I had come to identify Roger Tichborne
or something to that effect. The defendant rose
and I addressed him in French, and he answerec
in English. Our conversation was in French in
former times.’ This witness not only speaks to
the defendant about things that had happenec
to Roger Tichborne, but be says that the de-
fendant recollected about his being in trouble on
account of his having a dirty sword. Another
point is that the French accent was observable in
the defendant’s speech and in certain parts of his
composition? Was that genuine? Did he assume
an accent that did not belong to him for the pur-
pose of inducing these men to believe in him
You must judge for yourselves, gentlemen, whe-
ther you think it was put on, or whether it was the
true intonation of the man’s voice.
Another witness was Mr. M‘Eleney, son of the
trumpet-major of the regiment when Roger Tich-
borne was in it. He says the defendant answered
his questions correctly as to his having been
taught the French horn by the witness’s father,
and other matters which, with a personal likeness
that he traced, satisfied him that he was the true
man.
Then there was Carrol, who knew Roger in the
regiment, and was in the same troop, and the
defendant stated correctly the position of the
various quarters of the men in Cahir barracks ;
and what struck him most was, that he said that
there was a white horse in a particular stable —
the only white horse in the regiment. The wit-
ness explains that there was a gray horse be-
longing to the trumpeter. This is evidence of
very good memory, but one would expect that
an equal amount of memory would be shown by
the defendant as to other matters.
Martin Burke, who was in the same troop as
Roger Tichborne in 1851, recognises the defendant
by his gait, the twitching of his eyebrows, and
his answers to .questions. He saw the defendant
in 1868, and asked him about an occurrence when
he was marching with the men to church at Cahir,
and defendant said he remembered that two men
got drunk, and one, Larking, had seven days.
He described the horse he rode at the riding
school, and told the witness that the riding
masters cracked many a bottle at his expense.
The witness did not recognise the defendant until
he began to speak about these incidents, and did
not believe him to be the man until he put these
questions, and he went more by the answers than
anything else. He states that every man in the
regiment knew about the two men getting drunk
at Cahir and being punished. Then he gets into
a difficulty because the defendant spoke of finding
a man named Robinson asleep at his post. It ap-
pears that Robinson was found asleep at his post
at Norwich, where Roger Tichborne’s regiment
never was ; and the witness says he thinks Robin-


son was found asleep twice; but we have no
other proof on that point.
Now I come to Walter Moody, who was sta-
tioned at Colchester when the defendant went
there. He was one of four who were requested to
go up and see the defendant. He says he was
shown into a room, when a gentleman came in
and said he knew him, and in a few minutes he
replied that the gentleman’s name must be Tich-
borne. Moody asked the defendant whether he
remembered anything which occurred at Cahir
barracks on Christmas-day. The defendant con-
sidered for nearly ten minutes, and then he said
that two men got drunk, and he had to march
them off. He mentioned the name of one, but
the other he could not remember for half an
hour. The names were Larking and Fenton. The
witness went on to say : ‘ I asked him the number
of my own horse, and, after a little hesitation, he
replied, “ G 23.” ’ It is certainly a most remark-
able circumstance if the defendant remembered
that from 1852 to 1868. I should think very few
officers in her Majesty’s service have so retentive
a memory. * I found,’ says the witness, ‘ that the
number was correct.’ The defendant also said
that the horse was a bay horse ; and he was cor-
rect also in that particular. He mentioned an-
other horse, a black mare, which he said belonged
to Hind, and though he gave two or three num-
bers for it, he got the right one at last. It seems
marvellous that he should have remembered so
much. This witness said he was more astonished
by the defendant knowing the number of his
horse than about the black mare. No doubt
while an officer is in the regiment it would be his
duty to know the number of each soldier in his
troop ; but it is certainly curious that he should
remember the number after so many years.
Another man, named William Kobinson, went
to see the defendant at the Three Cups, Colches-
ter, in 1868. As soon as he went into the room,
the defendant spoke to him by name, saying,
‘ You are Wiiliam Kobinson,’ and told him that he
had to take care of a sick horse in the regiment.
He asked where it was put, and the defendant
replied, ‘ In the gun-shed,’ adding that it was a
chestnut 17g hands high. The witness continued,
‘ I recognised him as Koger Tichborne, but it was
half-an-hour before I did so, because he had
grown so stout.’ He adds that the defendant
talked like a Frenchman, but not so much as
when he was in the regiment.
Then there is Lessware, the old trumpet-major,
who says he saw the defendant at the Victoria-
hall, Liverpool, in 1868. He did not recognise the
defendant at first, but identified him after ten
minutes’ conversation by his forehead, mouth,
nose, and peculiar twitching of the right eye.
Witness asked the defendant, ‘ Do you remember
the dress I used to wear ?’ and the answer was,
‘Yes; white facings, scarlet jacket, and gold
lace.’ The witness next asked him whether he
recollected what happened to the barrack-master
at Clonmel. He replied, ‘ Yes; his hat and wig
blew off, and a young girl ran out and picked
them up and put them on his head again. The
barrack-master was so pleased that he married the
girl. On their coming home from the wedding the
men turned out, and taking the horses from the
carriage drew it in with ropes.’ The witness then
asks him what were the pamphlets that had post-
ages to pay on them. The defendant replies that
they were French pamphlets sent to him by his
mother.. The witness next asked if he recollected
where his letters were sent when he was absent
from Cahir. ‘ Tlie answer,’ says the witness, ‘was
correct, though I forget now what it was.’ The
old man was postman to the regiment, and distri-
buted the letters to the different officers. He
found no trace of a foreign accent. He says that
when he went into the room the defendant was
alone and at once recognised him, saying, ‘ You
are Trumpet-major Lesswareand when his wife
came the defendant also recognised her in like
manner.
Another man named Koine speaks of an inci-
dent on board the steamer coming from Dublin to
Herne Bay. Some of the baggage took fire, and
when he told Koger Tichborne that it was close to
the ammunition, he exclaimed, ‘O, mein Gott,
we will be blowed up !’ but that was not the ex-
clamation of a Frenchman. The defendant, on
hearing bis name, said, ‘ I remember you had an-
other name ; were you not nicknamed “ Alonzo
the Brave? ” The defendant was going some-
where, and the interview was cut short; but
another was agreed upon, and the witness went
the next day to Harley-lodge. He says he recog-
nised the defendant’s voice, which had got a
little stronger, and he had lost the foreign accent,
with the exception of a little twang. The witness
says he saw Mr. Holmes, and stated several
transactions he had with him in his ‘ capers
through life.’ By that he explains he meant the
defendant coming to the stables and saying the
saddles were dirty, when he did not know a dirty
one from a clean one. Certainly, if the defendant
had not seen him before, and when witness sa-
luted him and suddenly pulled him up lie recol-
lected the nickname by which he passed in the
regiment, it is a very striking fact.
William Davis, who was in the Carabineers in
1849, and was drilled with Koger Tichborne, saw
the defendant at the Waterloo Hotel in Novem-
ber 1871. He did not recognise the defendant at
first, and said he was not Koger Tichborne ; but
subsequently he recognised the twinkle of the eye
and the voice, although it was ‘ stronger and hus-
kier.’ He says : ‘ I asked him, “ Who pulled the
donkey out of your bed?” and he said, “William
Davis.” I said, “ You are either Koger Tichborne
or the Devil.” ’ The defendant, he says, recol-
lected the witness having two or three days’ extra
drill for rubbing his horse’s legs down with an oil
rag in order to make them shine. Think what an
effort of memory this was after twenty years. He
also remembered about the sale of a fighting-cock.
Sergeant Brittlebank saw the defendant in
1872, and feels convinced that the defendant was
Koger Tichborne, though there was a great change,
alluding to the unusual stoutness. Then the wit-
ness asked him if he knew Lyons in the regiment,
and he replied, ‘ Yes ; Sergeant-Major Lyons.’
Then the defendant asked the witness whether he
remembered a stable taking lire at Fermoy, and
some of the horses being burnt. That he could not
have known personally, as Koger Tichborne never
was at Fermoy; but of course it would be the
same thing if he exhibited a knowledge of mat-
ters which occurred in the regiment a long time
ago. It appears, however, that Carter had called
on the witness to make inquiries before he saw
the defendant, and it is possible that Carter may
have obtained something from the witness which
he mentioned to the defendant before the witness
saw him. This is only a matter of inference, but
there stands the fact that the defendant had that
conversation with the witness and exhibited a re-
markable knowledge of what happened in the
regiment a long time before.


Fifteenth Day, Friday , February 20, 1874.
Gentlemen, —Before I proceed with the sum-
ming up of the evidence I think it right to say
that I have received a letter from Mr. Guildford
Unslow, in which he asks me in justice to him to
correct a statement which I am reported to have
made—namely, that Mr. Guildford Onslow ad-
vanced the sum of 3000/. to the Claimant, in con-
sideration of a sum of 6000/. to be paid when he
came to his estates. He says that is not the
case; that the real fact is that another person
advanced this sum on his own conditions to the
me ® t , the expenses of the Commis-
sions to Chili and Australia, he being security for
the sum of 10001. only. Now, if I have been re-
ported to have said that Mr. Guildford Onslow
advanced the sum of 3000*. it has been a mistake.
1 never said so. It was his steward who advanced
the money, as appears by the defendant’s schedule.
1 never said he advanced 3000/. I certainly did
suppose Mr. Guildford Onslow had security for
the money he advanced, and it appears that the
security only amounts to 1000/. Then he says,
the sole and only reason that induced me to
attend meetings was in consequence of the late
Government refusing to answer questions which I
put m the House of Commons. The only alter-
native was the public platform to enable me to
fulfil my promise to the Dowager Lady Tichborne
not to abandon the cause of her son.’ That may
On J°' . 1 w Dot at all doubt Mr - Guildford
S ff , s statement, but it does not make the
!"P~ test , difference in my opinion as to the pro-
priety of creating a storm of popular prejudice
fc \ re ® p< : ct *° a case which was pending in a
couit of justice. Then Mr. Guildford Onslow
goes on to make some observations in reference to
the photographs of the grotto, but with that I
will deal when I come to the question of the re-
W rl ch subsiste d between Roger Tichborne
s<?m!w SS would be premature to do
, 1 tbmk ,«ght; to say so much, as I
be sorry that any observation I was sup-
posed to have made should be thought by Mr
> ml. I ford Onslow to do him injustice. My brother
Lush points out to me the evidence of the defend-
UnilHf j e n re i° e to T tbe advance made by Mr.
»<<£ d onslow - It is as follows :
Guildford Onslow, Esq.. M P RonW
Hants, 3200;.” What does that represent?—That
represents iOOO;. of 5000?. “3200/.” You got
■innn? r * tba ‘h d ? you mean ? — 1 gave him a bill
of 3000/. for the 1000/. The Lord Chief Justice.
muA & ave yo ?.’ or y° u Save him?—l gave him.
•won/H* oeral - You gave him a bill for
3200/ for the 1000/. If I recollect this right, Mr.
Guildford Onslow and Mr. Guildford Onslow’s
steward, Mr. Harwood, have between them got
bills for 0200/. ?—I do not think Mr. Guildford
Unslow has got anything to do with it. I think
it is all for-his agent. All for his agent ?—Yes.
n iJf 6^ has gone in f or 6200/. ?- Yes. Mr.
Gmldford Onslow s agent ?-One of the bills is in
Mr Onslow s name, because Mr. Harwood did not
wish to take the whole on himself. So Mr. Guild-
tord Onslow took it ?-There is some arrangement,
if V, IUIt ® cer lain Mr. Onslow has no interest in
200/ tv, . - lc T has 110 interest in it?—Except
sold von ha L 1S i° r horS r ea 1 bou B bt of him. He
sola you seme horses for 200/. ?—He sold me a
horsesfor 200/. 200/. ?-Or 100/. and something
else. Ido not know what the other 100/. was I
am sure. There is an arrangement, as you under-
stand between Mr. Guildford Onslow and his
agent?—l think so. As I understand, Mr. Guild-
rord Onslow took it in his own name for 3200/ ?
Yes.’
It was upon that evidence that I based mv
observations.
n now, gentlemen, I come to the remaining
Carabineers who gave evidence in favour of the
defendant. The witness Cheetham said he iden-
tified him by his appearance and his walk, and by
the answers to the questions put to him. Broad-
hurst and Fox gave similar testimony. William
Burrows only saw the defendant a day or two
before he was examined, and says he last saw
Koger Tichborne in 1852. He knew the defendant
to be Roger by his walk directly. He saw him at
1 oet s Corner, and said he would put to him a
question which nobody could know anythin"
about but himself and Sir Roger. It was—‘Do
you recollect promising to give me a sovereign ?»
He replied, 4 1 recollect giving you oneto which
the witness responded, 4 You never did ; and you
acted in a very ungentlemanly manner about it.’
The incident to which the witness referred was
somewhat remarkable, and his evidence is most
materially shaken by the pertinacious manner in
which he adhered to statements he makes with
reference to Sir James Tichborne, who, he says,
told him to go to his son and ask him for a sove-
reign. This, he says, occurred at the railway
station at Cahir, to which he had accompanied
Sir James. He positively asserts that Sir James
went away by himself, and that his son did not
go with him. We know by the letters of Sir
James and of Roger that they went to Dublin
together. This, therefore, must be looked upon
as a, very doubtful witness. He is the last of the
military, witnesses who spoke of conversations
and reminiscences of Roger Tichborne.
Then we have the evidence of David Martin, a
professional pedestrian. He says he knew Roger
Tichborne at Canterbury, and saw the defendant
at the Waterloo Hotel. He states that Ro»er
Tichborne was in a match run by him ; that °he
took a fancy to his racing shoes, for which he
gave lnm half-a-sovereign. He identifies the de-
fendant as Roger Tichborne. He also tells a
story about Roger, being at the Fleur-de-Lis
tavern, and two ladies coming in, and that Roger
was twitching, and they were offended, thinking
he was winking at them, until the witness inter-
posed and explained.
Then we come to Henry Godsmark, who first
saw ehe defendant in this court on the sth of
June 1873, and who, with a view to test his
recollection, had brought with him a photograph
of his uncle, who was a horsedealer, and who
bought horses for the Gth Dragoon Guards in
1852. lour photographs were placed before the
defendant, who passed the first three, and then,
takmg up the fourth, said, ‘This is Godsmark.’
1 he witness asked the defendant if he knew him,
and he answered, ‘ Yes, he supplied us with
horses.’ Now this man died in 1865, and there-
fore the. defendant could not have seen the par-
ticular individual. But it is quite possible that
he may have heard that Godsmark bought horses
for the Carabineers on their being remounted


when tlie order for India was countermanded
and, as you will see by the photograph, Godsmar
has a particular appearance—he had an affectio
of the eye, which gave him the appearance o
being a one-eyed man ; in addition to which h
was dressed in the style which it was probabl
would be adopted by a horse-dealer, so that if th
defendant had heard that Godsmark was a one
eyed man and a horse-dealer,there could not beany
mistake about which of the photographs was his
William Wilby recollects Roger Tichborne a
Canterbury, and says of his walk, ‘lt was on
leg over the other more than anything. Ther
was a peculiar weakness of the knee-caps; th
legs seemed as if not strong enough to carry hi
body.’ That, I observe, is a description of ver
much the same kind of weakness as many of the
witnesses called for the defence from Wapping
gave of Arthur Orton’s peculiar walk. The wit
ness went on to say that on one occasion, durin;
the summer of 1850, he was at a place about eigh
miles from Canterbury, and went into an inn
when Roger Tichborne, with Dr Adams and Dr
Moore, of the Carabineers, came in and drank
his (witness’s) brandy and water. He said they*
must replace it and they did. Afterwards he sav
them in a dog-cart driving tandem, and they askec
him to help them as they were up to a little
game. They tied a rope to a gipsy’s stall anc
drove on, dragging over the stall into the grass,
and breaking all the man’s goods. The witness
asked the defendant about this, and he said he
remembered about throwing over a stall, adding
that he was asked so many questions that it was
impossible for him to recollect everything. That
is a striking circumstance for your consideration.
We now come to another witness, George Green-
wood, the regimental tailor of the Carabineers,
of whose evidence so much has been made. He
says that he knew Tichborne when he was in the
regiment, and was in the habit of supplying him
with clothes. He says :
‘ I measured him first when he joined, when
he measured inches across the chest, and
when I measured him again he was 37 inches
across the chest and 29 inches round the waist. We
always find that the waist of a soldier decreases
while the chest increases. I have talked to him
occasionally and have a recollection of him. His
hair was dark, and I cannot see any difference
between the hair now and what it was then. I
particularly remember his eyebrows, because the
French messman had the same. He used to have
a little raising of the eyebrows when he spoke.
His legs would appear as if they were dispropor-
tionate to the other parts of his body, and both
hips and legs were small. I could not say which leg
it was, but one had an inclination to bend in. His
voice was rather mild and he had a French accent
rather strong when he joined, but less to a great
extent when he left.’
That is a point on which there is great discrep-
ancy between the witnesses. He goes on to say:
‘ I received a letter from Mr. Holmes, through
my son, asking me if I measured Eoger. In con-
sequence of that I saw the defendant, but did not
recognise him the moment I saw him. He asked
me to take.a chair and sit down. I spoke to him
about the difference in his nose, and he explained
that it was the result of an accident. I saw the
expression in the defendant’s face which I
n.ul observed in Roger Tichborne, and I noticed
tne peculiarity in his walk. I thought the voice
appeared to be about the same. I did not find
■any trace of foreign accent. I said I had brought
my ledger with me to see if he recollected what
articles of clothing I had made for him. He
thought that was a severe test, after so many
years had passed, and he asked what kind of gar-
ments I was going to ask him about. I replied
that I should exclude regimentals. In answer to
a question I put, the defendant said I had made
a monkey-jacket for him, and which he had for
many years. I think he said it was a blue monkey
jacket. I said I was not aware I had made it
He then added that I had made for him a scarle
hunting coat, with “ H.H.” buttons. I then re
ferred to my ledger, where I found the entr
“Furnishing a scarlet hunting coat, Sept. 13
1852; 18 buttons, ditto.” I also found the entry
“Furnishing blue pilot coat, lined with flannel
stitched at the side, Oct. 1852.” The defendan'
could not see what was in the ledger. I said ]
had made another coat of a peculiar type. It was
some few moments before he gave me an answer.
He then said, “You made me that light drab
driving coat, the same as you made for Captain
Hayward.” I am under the impression he de-
scribed something about the stitching; and I saic
that was correct.’
Referring to Roger, the witness says he had
the _ habit of raising his eyebrows when he
was in the act of speaking, as if he had not con-
fidence to look at you. Both legs, he added, were
inclined to be weak, and he was in-kneed a little.
Then questions are put in cross-examination re-
specting the correspondence with Mr. Holmes, but
I do not think it shows anything more than the
kind of communication which would pass between
a professional man who requires certain informa-
tion and the person who can give it. Mr. Holmes
did tell him that he was not to be surprised to find
the defendant very stout, and when witness saw
him he was not prepared to see him so stout. Now,
the evidence as to the coats is striking, but there
is one fact which may throw a good deal of light
upon it. ‘ Six months beforo the last trial,’ says
the witness, ‘ I saw the defendant, and he showed
me a pair of regimental trousers and an old jacket.
I do not recollect whether he told me they had
been taken care of while he had been away, and
given to him when he came back.’ We have this
fact—that Mr. Greenwood wanted to measure the
length of the regimental trousers, in order to as-
certain whether they agreed with the size of the
defendant—the length of his leg—and we have
been told the trousers were used for that purpose.
Now, where did the trousers and regimental jacket
come from? If the defendant produced these
articles, Roger Tichborne must have left them be-
hind him somewhere. We know from a letter he
wrote to Mr. Gosford that he desired his things
to be sent to Upton, in order that he should have
them on his return from the farewell visit to Paris.
Now, one of the coats was made in the latter part
of 1852; and, therefore, it would have been worn
very little; and if the old jacket and trousers were
kept it seems to stand to reason that the other
articles of dress, the ‘H.H.’ hunting coat and driv-
ing coat, if they were among the things Roger did
not wish to take to South America, would be left
behind, either in the care of Lady Tichborne or in
that of some other person, who would probably
give them up to her when it was found that Roger
Tichborne was no more. Then the same things
might be handed over to the defendant by Lady
Tichborne; or, if she did not do that, he would
have no difficulty in finding them, supposing they
were left behind. In that way he may have pos-
sessed himself of the means of answering the ques-


tions put to him by the witness. Again, the bills
and receipts, which a prudent man of business like
Roger Tichborne would preserve, may have fallen
into the hands of the defendant, and these would
furnish him with some of the information he re-
quired. He would naturally look at them to see,
knowing that Greenwood was coming, what articles
he had made for him. I do not, therefore, think
there is the same in this evidence as to the coats
that there is in some of the other matters I have
brought under your notice. But there is no doubt
one circumstance that is striking—l do not think
he could have learned it from the possession of the
articles of dress in question, or from any bill or
receipt—and that is the mention of a similar sort
of coat having been made for Captain Hayward.
That certainly would appear to be genuine recol-
lection, if the account sent in did not mention ‘simi-
lar to that made for Captain Hayward,’ of which
we have no knowledge, or if a servant who knew
the fact did not inform him of it. Of that, how-
ever, we have no evidence, and it is certainly thus
far a striking fact in his favour.
Then we have Captain Sankey, who did not be-
long to the Carabineers. He was uncle of Captain
Morton, and knew Roger Tichborne very well. In
the year 1870 he was in London, and hearing that
the defendant was at the Waterloo Hotel, he went
to see him there. On seeing him he says it struck
him at once that he was Tichborne. The defen-
dant said when he entered, ‘You are Captain
Kellett,’ to which the reply was ‘I am not.’
‘ Then,’ said the Claimant, ‘ you are Captain San-
key.’ Now he had been expecting both of them,
and as we know that there could be no mistaking
the part of her Majesty’s dominions Captain San-
key came from, it was easy to guess that if he
was not Captain Kellett he was Captain Sankey.
They had a conversation, in the course of which
Captain Sankey asked him if he remembered the
horse Captain Morton had, and he replied ‘ O yes
—a devil to ride —a hollow-backed, roach-backed
horse’ —using both words, Captain Sankey says,
and describing its colour accurately. Now, it
could not be hollow-backed and roach-backed, for
one is exactly the opposite of the other. In the
Court of Common Pleas the defendant said it was
a roach-backed horse. When the witness was
leaving the room, the defendant said, ‘By-the-by,
Captain Sankey, are your sisters married ?’ That
astonished the witness, because after so many
years he did not expect he would remember his
sisters at all. He then mentioned a number of
families who lived in the neighbourhood of Cahir,
whose names were known to the witness. This
knowledge, confirmed by his personal recollection,
led, he says, to his recognition unhesitatingly of
the defendant. Roger had a melancholy face, and
it struck him that the defendant had the same.
His walk was the walk of Roger, but the voice
was gruffer a good deal.
There are two or three things in this which are
striking. First, there is the knowledge of that
particular horse, but are we quite sure that they
are speaking of the same horse ? A hollow-backed
horse is one thing, and a roach-backed horse is
just the reverse; and we find that the defendant,
in his cross-examination, states that it was a
roach-backed horse, which belonged to Captain
Morton ; but Captain Sankey could never have
seen it, for the horses were sold in Ireland when
the Carabineers were dismounted, and when the
orders for India were recalled, they had to pur-
chase others, and the roach-backed horse was
bought at York in 1852, and never was in Ireland
at all. As regards the defendant’s recollection o:
people resident at and in the neighbourhood 01
Cahir there is this observation to be made. This
conversation was held after there had been a great
deal of intercourse between the defendant and a
gentleman named Cook, whose relations lived in
the neighbourhood of Clonmel, and we find from
a letter written by the defendant that that gentle-
man was staying with him at Croydon for some
weeks before and after his visit to Ireland.
Nothing could be more natural than that he
should talk of the people he had seen, and
the families in that neighbourhood. That might
revive the recollection of Roger, or, on the
other hand, it would give valuable information to
the defendant if he were not Roger.
There remains a witness, whose evidence I
should have read before but that I had not the
note of it before me, and which I will refer to now,
as it ought not to bo passed over. I refer to Mr.
Store Smith, who was connected by marriage with
Captain Manders of the Carabineers. He visited
his relative at Cahir, and was introduced to Roger
Tichborne on account of his smoking habits. Cap-
tain Manders objected to Mr. Smith smoking in
his rooms, but said, ‘ I will introduce you to a
gentleman who will let you smoke to any extent.’
He was introduced to Roger, and a very strong
intimacy appears to have sprung up between the
two young men. Mr. Store Smith says that he
went in and out of Tichborne's rooms whenever
he pleased, and generally sat with him about four
hours a day. He tells us of his having taught
him (Mr. Smith) some French songs which Roger
used to sing, and of a singular habit he had of
catching flies and putting them in a comatose
condition. He wrote to the defendant after he had
made his claims, offering to see him, but obtained
a reply that the evidence was so overwhelmingly
complete that no more was required. In the
year 1870 he saw a letter in The Times as to some
part of the proceedings signed ‘ Baxter, Rose, and
Norton,’ and not knowing that Mr. Holmes had
ceased to be the attorney of the Claimant, he took
them to be the attorneys of the other side, and
communicated to them the fact by letter that he
had known Roger Tichborne well. He received a
letter from Mr. Spofforth in reply, informing him
that they were engaged for the Claimant, and re-
questing that he would meet the defendant at
their office on a particular day. He went, and
saw Mr. Spofforth and Mr. Baigent. Mr. Spof-
forth asked him a number of questions as to his
knowledge of Roger Tichborne, and his ways and
habits, and some of the questions he declined
to answer. He waited for two hours, but the de-
fendant did not come, and Mr. Spofforth told him
he had just learnt that Sir Roger had had another
engagement, but would see Mr. Store Smith at 3
o’clock at the "Waterloo Hotel. I shall read to
you the evidence of what took place at that inter-
view :
‘Will you tell me now what occurred when you
got to the Waterloo Hotel?—l was shown into a
drawing-room on the ground floor to the right of
the entrance-passage ; there I remained 20 min-
utes, without anybody coming to mo. Then Mr.
Spofforth came into the room very, profuse of
apologies, and said that the reason of the delay
had been that he had been unable to find his four
or five men over 20 stone. They were all, unfor-
tunately, engaged, or hands could not be laid on
them, but he had succeeded in finding one very
big man, and he would now take me into the
room where I should find two very big men, I


was to look at them, and say which was my old
friend. Upon that he led me across the lobby
past the entrance-hall to a room that corresponds
to the one I had been in on the left of the en-
trance-passage of the Waterloo Hotel. There I
saw the person who had been in the office in the
morning, who I have since found out was Mr.
Baigent. Sitting in a chair was 1 a tall man six feet
high, very thin, with black hair slightly grizzled,
and with whiskers, about some 55 years of age ;
opposite was the Claimant, whose back was
turned to me, who 'was smoking a big cigar.
Mr. Spofforth said, “ Now, sir.” I said “ That is
not him.” He said, “Why not?” I said, “Because
the thing is ridiculous ; he is several inches taller,
and old enough to be his father. That is not him
at all.” The tall gentleman rose up and walked
straight out of the room. Mr. Spofforth then
pointed to the gentleman who had his side turned
to me, smoking a cigar. He said, “ What do you
say to this?”—l said, “Well, I will not say Roger
Tichborne might not have become this person,”
laying very great stress on that. Mr. Spofforth
said, “ May I trouble you to retire into the room
that I took you from ?” and I retired into the
room from which I had been led.
‘ In a few minutes, Mr. Spofforth rejoined me,
and he came in and said, “ You do not recognise
your old friend?” I said, “Not in the least.” He
said, “ Is there nothing that struck you ?” I said,
“Nothing; I never saw anybody who is so dis-
similar in my life.” Mr. Spofforth said, “ That is
very odd ; he does not recognise you.” I said,
“Well, Mr. Spofforth, it is odd, because I have
altered less than anybody could alter in the same
number of years.” “He does not know you,” he
said. He said, “Are you sure there is nothing
that reminds you of him?” I said, “Nothing; but,
as I told you this morning, that would not make
me recognise him, if I had the opportunity of
hearing his voice and talking to him.” He said
he would go back and see him, and see if he would
see me again. He left me, and came back in two
or three minutes, and said, “ I am happy to tell
you that Sir Roger will see you. Will you come
with me ?” I then went that way. . . . For about
a minute I was silent, and could only see the side
of the defendant, and then I said, “ So you do not
recollect seeing me.” He turned round slowly, and
said, “No.” I then said. “Are you sure you do
not ?” Then lie said, “ Where was it that you said
you met me ?” I said “At Cahir.” “ When?” he
asked. I said, “From the middle of May to about
the 15th of June 1850.” He said, “Was it not
at Clonmel ?” I said, “No, it was not at Clonmel.”
He said, “Were you never at Clonmel?” I said,
“Yes, I was, I had a day’s trip there.” He said,
“You did not see me at Clonmel ?” I said, “ Cer-
tainly not, you were never there during the whole
month I was with you.” Then he got up slowly
and threw open a door which led to a bedroom,
and closed it behind him, and came out again in
two minutes, sat down in his chair, and said, “ I
see you were right, I was at Cahir at that time.”
I then asked him if he did not recollect a nephew
of Captain Manders coming to stay a month there,
and doing his smoking in his room and his teach-
ing him songs and conversing with him from day
to day. I may say that throughout the whole of
the interview I was much more frequently an-
swered by another question than having an an-
swer to my own.
* think it was at that point that the Claimant
said to mo, “ If you were in my rooms in the way
you say youwere, who were my servants?” I said, “I
do not know who they were.” “You do notknow?”
he said. I said, “ I remember Slanders’ servants; I
never bothered my head about Roger Tichborne’s.”
“No, ” he said, “you cannot tell me who my servants
were.” I said, “No, I cannot.” He said, “ If you
had seen me in my rooms in the way you say, you
would have known my servants.” I said, “ I never
bothered my head about that.” He said, “No,
because you were never in my rooms in your life.”
I said, “I do not think I was, but I unquestiona-
bly _ was in Roger Tichborne’s,” to which the
Claimant replied, “ It is like your imperance to
sit there and say that to me” (drawing himself up).
I rose to go, and said to Mr. Spofforth, “It appears
lam the impostor.” Mr. Spofforth said, “Sit down.
I did not introduce you two old fiiends and gen-
tlemen to quarrel. If you will sit down and be
cool, and suggest other topics and other things,
no doubt a chord will be struck and Sir Roger
will revive, and we shall get along very nicely.”
‘ Upon that I endeavoured to strike chords. I
mentioned the fly matter. I told the Claimant
that if he remembered nothing at all about it I
should not be at all surprised. Still, it was one of
'those tricks and habits that he did scores of times
that he might remember. I led up to it. I said
he smoked at them—everything but tell him. I
said, “Do you recollect anything about it?” After
a pause he said he did. He said “Did I used to
stick pins in them?” “No,” I said, “you did not.”
..... I asked him if he remembered the park at
Cahir. He said he did not. Then Mr. Spofforth
said “You mentioned the park this morning, Mr.
Smith.” “Yes, I did,” I said; “I never dreamed
but what he would have remembered the park. I
said I should ask him two or three questions. He
said, “You mentioned the name; what was it?” I
said to Mr. Spofforth, “Sir Roger ought to tell
you,” but he did not. He said, “You called it
Gian something.” I held my tongue. Ho said,
“I think you called it Glanhell.” I said, “I did
not. As Sir Roger cannot tell you, I will; I called
it Glengall.” Then the Claimant woke up and
said, “O, Glengall-park, the seat of the Earl of
Roscommon.” I said “The seat of Fiddlesticks.”
To which he said, “I must have been thinking of
something else.” I said, “I should think you
were.’”
Ultimately Mr. Smith said to Mr. Spofforth
that it was mere waste of time to stay longer—
that the man was not his friend Roger Tichborne,
and that they had never met b fore; and so the
interview terminated. On the 7th of March 1852,
Mr. Spofforth wrote to Mr. Store Smith as fol-
lows :
‘6 Victoria-street , Westminster Abbey, S.W.,
March 7, 1872.
Dear Sir, —The plaintiff stated to me before I
left the room after your departure that he sup-
posed you alluded to a habit he used to have of
eating flies. I desired afterwards to ask you if
this was the true account, and for that purpose
spoke to your friend Mr. Fowler, but somehow the
communication was never made. I should be glad
to receive your account of it.—Yours faithfully,
‘M. Spofforth.’
‘I have, of course, ceased to be the plaintiff’s
legal adviser, I only write to you out of courtesy.
‘Mr. J. Store Smith, Shepbridge Ironworks,
Chesterfield.’
Mr. Store Smith replied:
‘March 9, 1872.
‘Dear Sir,—The real Roger, when I used to sit
smoking with him, was very fond of catching
house-flies in the usual manner, and placing one or


more of them under a tumbler glass, and then,
drawing the tumbler to the edge of the table, he
went upon his knees and puffed great volumes of
smoke into it until it was as opaque almost as if
filled with milk, and the fly was rendered insen-
sible. He then tried all manner of experiments;
now jerking up the tumbler an inch or so on one
side, and at each jerk some of the smoke was ex-
pelled, and air took its place. This would be re-
peated until the atmosphere in the glass was
sufficiently diluted to revive the fly, which would
-commence kicking, and then Roger would either
blow more in and stupefy it again or jerk it clear
•and let the fly go This was what I alluded
to, and you must remember I led up to it very
closely. I said, “Roger Tichborne had a habit of
catching flies and amusing himself with them.
Ho you remember anything about this,Mr. Orton?”
Castro, after a few moments’pause, replied, “Did
I stick pins in ’em?” What he afterwards told
you, I shall hear to-morrow.—Yours truly,
‘Mr. M. Spofforth. J. Store Smith.’
Well, Mr. Store Smith is asked whether Roger
had a habit of eating flies, and he said ‘No.’ That
is a singular mistake to have made, and you must
judge whether the defendant was wanting in the
answers to the various questions which Mr. Store
Smith put to him, as to matters which Roger
would be reasonably expected to know. Then
the Claimant was cross-examined with reference
to this interview with Mr. Store Smith, and sub-
stantially he denies part of the conversation. He
is asked :
‘Did you ever know Store Smith?—l met him
a few weeks ago. That was the first time I had
ever met him to my knowledge. To the best of
my belief I did not know him when in England
before. I certainly had not known him for years,
and well. I think he does not state that himself.’
He has come to see me since my return, and saw
me in the presence of Mr. Spofforth and Mr. Bai-
gent. I believe he wrote to my attorneys, Messrs.
Baxter, Rose, and Norton. I don’t think I saw
the letter. Before your interview with him, had
he been in the house some time ?—I cannot say.
lam under the impression that I was in the room
from the beginning. Our interview was at the
Waterloo Hotel. I don’t recollect what occurred
that day very well, so cannot say if any other
gentlemen except those mentioned were there.
Did Mr. Store Smith say, “ Why, that cannot be
Sir Roger? he is too old and too tall, and has no-
thing in common with him ?”—No. And upon
that, did the other gentlemen get up and walk
out of the room?—lf you say so, I won’t dispute,
but I have no remembrance of it. Did Mr. Spof-
forth then say, “Now, then, look at this gentle-
man,” pointing to you?—He might have done.
Did Mr. Store Smith then say, “ I cannot swear
that Roger Tichborne might not have developed
into this gentleman,” and did Mr. Spofforth tell
Mr. Store Smith and you to go into another
room ? —Mr. Spofforth was in the room at the
•time.
‘ I he Solicitor-General asked a number of ques-
tions as to what Mr. Store Smith said at that in-
terview, and the replies of the Claimant were
nhiefly denials that such things ever were said, or
allegations that if said they were falsehoods. The
( laimant said, I believe there was some con-
versation about Cahir and Clonmel, but I must
acknowledge that my memory seems to have
tailed me at this time. Were you asked how you
amused yourself with flies, and did you say “Yes
d used to stick pins in them?”—Yes, I may have
said -thjit. Did he ask you to draw a plan of
Latur barracks, showing roughly the position of
my rooms and those of Manders and Phillips ”
and did you say, “I’m not going to do that: I’ve
done it again and again, and to the best of my be-
lief I never set eyes on you before ?”—Yes, I mav
have said that, for I believed he was nothing but
a spy. Mr. Culleton was seen within forty yards
of him when he entered the house, and if I had
known that he had come down accompanied by
Culleton I should not have allowed him to come
m I never said, “ Manders would say anything
and sent you here to be a spy.” I have the high-
est respect for Mr. Manders, and am quite certain
he would not do any such thing. I don't believe
that Mr. Spofforth tried to smooth matters over
or that anything was said about Mrs. Manders.’
Mrs. Eraser might have been mentioned. Did Mr.
Store Smith get up and say, “It is waste of time;
1 am quite certain I never saw this person before?”
--JNo; but as regards that, I don’t think he ever
had.
Then two young women, whose names I forget
at the moment, were examined. They were daugh-
ters of the gatekeeper of Lord Glengall’s park, in
winch the officers used to walk or ride daily.
Mr. Hawkins.—Their names were Woodman
and Pierce, my lord.
The Lord Chief J ustice.— Yes. They speak of
an altercation which occurred near the gate-lodge
between Koger and another officer, and say that
Koger had always a melancholy dejected appear-
anC« ?,? ?, sed *® smoke at the lodge and take
!u U j T lth , tlle ? r father, and they are convinced
the defendant is the same man. You remember
however-if you believe Mr. Store Smith—that
he knew nothing of Glengall-park, and, when re-
minded of it, said it was the property of the Earl
of Koscommon, there being no such person in ex-
istence.
I have now gone through the witnesses who
are alive, and who, at one side and the other,
speak of the identity or non-identity from the
personal appearance of the defendant. To the
living we are bound to add the dead, and fore-
most of these, of course, comes the Dowager Lady
Tichborne. With regard to the frame of mind
in which Lady Tichborne approached this subject
1 have already spoken, but there is still one ob-
servation to make, and it is by no means an un-
important one. I have not yet directed your
attention to the question of handwriting. It was
one of the tests by which the defendant called
upon Lady tichborne to recognise him as her son
and of course no mother would fail to recollect
the handwriting of her son, with whom she had
been m correspondence up to the time he at-
tained! the age of twenty-four years. If you find
by and by that the handwritings of the defendant
and of Koger Tichborne are so dissimilar that it
is impossible to believe that they are the hand-
writing of the same man, except upon some hypo-
thesis which can scarcely have been present to
the mind of Lady Tichborne, it is a fact which
you will take into consideration in determining
how far her judgment in his favour is to be relied
upom I lie observation applies more strongly to
"tr. Hopkins, family solicitor, who espoused
the.defendant’s cause—not professionally, but as
a friend—with a degree of zeal, and sometimes
vehemence, which we could hardly have exjiected
in one of his age and position. He had had let-
ters from Koger and also from the defendant, so
that the handwriting of each was before him. Mr
Hopkins might have had an unerring test.' He


was thoroughly acquainted with all that had
been done with reference to the Tichborne and
Doughty properties, and I should suppose that
the first test which the family solicitor would
apply would be to ask whether the person who
claimed to be Roger Tichborne, and who must
have known about the disposition of the property,
possessed the knowledge which would have been
expected. You will see when I come to the Up-
ton part of the case what the defendant’s know-
ledge is, or, at all events, was ; and if you find he
was in a state of the blankest ignorance, then Mr.
Hopkins’ recognition of him is in this dilemma—
either the defendant had at that time acquired a
knowledge of the disposition of the family pro-
perty, and so satisfied Mr. Hopkins, and if he
did, the inference is to be drawn that he only
learned the matter for a moment and afterwards
forgot it, or if he had no more knowledge than
was exhibited by him at the late trial, then Mr.
Hopkins’ recognition is not of much value. There
are many other persons who might have been
called as witnesses, but were not called.
But there is one witness, now among the dead,
who must be ranked on the other side, and of
whom I must say a few words, and that is Lady
Doughty. Lady Doughty for years was a second
Tv rt° Roger Tichborne, and in the last years
u 1S • e T thi* s country he was more with her
than with his own mother. If there was any one
who must be familiar with the personal appear-
ance and all those things which go to make up
the sum and substance of Roger’s personality, it
was Lady Doughty. Perhaps I should not be
justified in putting her on the same level as his
mother, yet the difference as regards the latter
part of Roger’s life could not be great. Lady
Doughty, when she knew she was in the presence
of death, testified to her conviction that the de-
fendant was not Roger Tichborne. We have
Lady Doughty’s oath twice. She was examined
on the former trial, and examined on this. Not
that she could be brought into court, for she was
within a few hours of death, but we have her
testimony then taken, and it is entitled to the
greatest weight and respect.
Such are the witnesses on the one side and the
other But there is this further consideration,
to which of those two sets of witnesses is the
gieatest credit due, not in respect of the honesty
of their intention, but as regards their opportunity
ot knowledge ? You have on the one side, as re-
gards the family, Lady Tichborne and Mr. Bid-
aulph, who say the defendant is the man. All
ii e i.n tller members of the Tichborne family and
•HI the members of the Seymour family are on the
opposite side, and deny that the defendant is
t'Oger Tichborne. But, again, the defendant has
on his side a number of the old servants of the
tamily—old family servants, but not in the same
position as Bourdon and Gossein. He has also
lab ?^ rers and tenants about the place. Now,
which set of witnesses is most likely to have been
~ acquainted with Roger Tichborne? Rela-
10ns like Lady Doughty, and like his cousin,
re ations with whom he was in constant and
amiiiar intercourse day after day, and hour after
oui ; hvmg with them, associating with them;
, L ersons °ut of doors, servants in the kitchen,
i ourers on the farm, tenants in the neighbour-
itti ■ ’ P eo P'e who only saw him from time to time ?
witnesses, all equally honest and
KIJ SlD , C ! re ’, was most likely to be well in-
+l,o+ i ’ an . ® form a correct judgment? I think
8 a P ol ut not altogether to be overlooked.
I Then, when we come to the military witnesses,
we find again a marked difference between those
on the one side and. the other. No fewer than
12 officers of the regiment have testified to their
conviction that the defendant is not Roger Tich-
borne.. Of non-commissioned officers and privates
there is not a very large number—l 4 1 think, in
addition to the officers; and besides, there are
Captain Moreton and Major Kellett, who were ac-
quainted with Roger in Ireland, and are convinced
that the defendant is not Roger. On the other
hand, he has two officers of the Carabineers,
Colonel Norbury and Captain Cunliffe, and he
has a long list of non-commissioned officers and
privates of the same regiment, who say the de-
fendant is Roger Tichborne.
Here, again, which are most likely to form a
correct and accurate judgment of the defendant ?
The learned counsel for the defendant boasted
that he had no colonels or superior officers on his
side, but that he had non-commissioned officers
and privates. So he has. And he says they are
much more likely, standing before their officer
and receiving from him the word of command, to
lave a distinct recollection of his personal ap-
pearance than his brother officers. Is that so?
\mong those brother officers is one who, when
loger Tichborne joined, was regimental sergeant-
najor and drilled him. These officers, in addition
10 seeing him in the barrack-yard or on parade,
>r when the regiment was out, were in daily
amiliar intercourse with Roger Tichborne in the
’fficers’ room and at the regimental mess, and
.mong them was Captain Polhill Turner, with
vhom Roger was at Clonmel, and with whom he
ised to play at ecarte every evening. Is the posi-
ion of the learned counsel for the defendant
ight? Are soldiers more likely to have an ac-
urate remembrance of Roger Tichborne than his
rother officers ? It is necessary to form a judg-
ient as to all those things when you are consider-
lg the evidence. The defendant has the advan-
ce of numbers undoubtedly, but the maxim
bat witnesses should be weighed, not numbered,
i one which has existed from the earliest time,
ad is one of the elementary principles in judicial
roceedings. I believe those men to be as honest,
id as much disposed to speak the truth, accord-
ig to their conviction, as the highest gentleman
lat came into that box. But one must weigh
lem and consider how far their numbers ought
1 prevail over what might be thought superior
telligence and opportunities of observation.
Then there is one other point to which I would
.11 your attention, and that is whether on the
idenco there may not be such a similarity be-
reen Arthur Orton, whom the defendant is
presented to be, and Roger Tichborne, in one
two most important particulars, that these
m, though speaking according to their opinion
d conviction, may be mistaken ? Ido not say
is so. That is a question for you to exercise
ur unbiassed judgment upon. But I will, before
onclude, call your attention to certain portions
the evidence with respect to Arthur Orton and
th respect to Roger Tichborne, in order that
i may see whether there may not have
ih a resemblance as to lead to an honest b lief
a real identity, which, nevertheless, does e not
st. And here my learned brother rem.nds
that among the servants who are ranked u’pon
i side of the defendant is Bogle, but I have
3ady dwelt upon those points which may fairly
se with respect to the weight of his evidence,
ave no doubt he is a very important witness."
* P


Few persons knew Roger better, and his judgmen
unless you may see reason to doubt it, ought 1
weigh in the scale in favour of the defendant.
A Juror.—lt was remarkable that so few of th
soldiers could recognise the photograph of Roge
The Loud Chief Justice. —Perhaps the solu
tion of which I have been referring to is this,
may be when you come to look at the evidenc
with regard to one or two peculiarities of Arthu
Orton, on the one side, and Roger Tichborne, on th
other, that you may come to the conclusion tha
there is some resemblance between the two, whic
a little exaggeration—and it is very easy to exagger
ate to oneself what we are disposed to believe
may convert into identity. We are all so subjec
to delusions; the human mind is so apt to per
suade itself into a belief of that which it desires
that if there be a likeness between A and B, anc
we want to make out the identity of the one wit
the other, it is very easy to exaggerate the resem
blance in particular points and persuade ourselve
of that which we desire to believe. It may be i
that way that those witnesses of the Carabineer
have exaggerated a certain degree of resemblance
just as it is possible that those who only see ir
the defendant an impostor would persuade them
selves that there is not the likeness which,
point of fact, there is. For I cannot help believ
ing, whether the defendant is or is not Roge
Tichborne, that there must have been man;
points of resemblance between the two. I can
not suppose that honest people would come for
ward and say, ‘ That is Roger Tichborne,’ unles
there was some great likeness between the
defendant and Roger Tichborne. It is impossible
I do not think that even the members of the
family would for a moment have entered into
communication with the defendant if they die
not hesitate as to whether there was not, at al
events, some degree of likeness which called for
further examination. If, for instance, one was
fair and the other dark, if one was of middle
height and the other 6ft. high, they would noi
have hesitated for a moment in declaring thal
this was not the man.
I pass now from the question of identity of per-
son as based on the opinion of witnesses to a
question which is of quite equal or of greater im-
portance, and that is, how far there is not out-
ward identity or resemblance, but inward identity
of mind, and that can only be ascertained by
testing the knowledge of the defendant upon
points as to which we must assume Roger Tich-
borne possessed knowledge. That investigation
presents itself in two forms ; in the first place, in
the shape of which we have had it hitherto—
namely, as regards conversations which the de-
fendant voluntarily entered into with persons
who desired to ascertain whether he was the true
Roger Tichborne. He himself challenged recog-
nition upon the ground that he was able to bring
to the recollection of those whose recognition he
desired instances of knowledge of things which
Roger Tichborne alone could have. He com-
menced his litigation in that way by his affidavit,
stating circumstances known to Roger Tichborne
with the view of satisfying persons that he was
Roger Tichborne. But all that we have had out
before, and the case is complete on that head.
But there is another form quite as interesting
and important, and that is the test applied to
him upon his cross-examination, to try his know-
ledge of the life of Roger Tichborne. I divided
that life before into several epochs—his life in
Paris, his life at Stony hurst, his life in the Army,
and his life in South America. Hi 3 life in South
America I have exhausted in inquiring into the
Orton case, so I shall not have to go into it again.
Ijut now I must ask you to follow the statements
of the defendant with respect to Roger’s life in
Paris.
. know that Roger was bom and brought U]
m Paris, and that he lived there until 1845
when he was between 16 and 17 years of age
Now what are the things which would impress
themselves upon the mind and memory of a bo’
grown up to the period of adult life ? There woulc
be relations and acquaintances and friends witl
whom he was in the habit of associating. He
would recollect all or some of them. He woulc
recollect the residence of his parents, where he re
membered himself first, where afterwards. He
would recollect any school to which he went, the
tutors who instructed him, any one to whom hii
religious education was confided. He would recol
lect the servants who had remained for many
years in the service of his parents, probably the
excursions he had made with his parents from time
totime, especiallyifthose excursions were attendee
with particular circumstances. He would recol-
lect his playmates and the boys with whom he
had been in the habit of associating. With re-
spect to all these matters the defendant’s know-
ledge was very properly tested upon various par-
ticulars, and I will just briefly call your attention
to what he said, in order that you may see whether
there was displayed such an amount of knowledge
as would lead you to believe he was or was not the
person he represented himself to be.
And, first, as to relations and friends. He was
examined on that point in his preliminary ex-
amination before Mr. Roupell, and I must say he
appears at that time to have been totally at a
loss. It is important to contrast what he said at
the preliminary examination with what he said
at subsequent examinations, when, finding to
what points the preliminary examination had
been directed, he had an opportunity of filling up
the voids in his knowledge. When asked by Mr.
Chapman Barber whether he could mention any
person in Paris except his father and mother
with whom he used to have any conversation, he
answers ‘Yes, I could tell you of hundreds.’ ‘Tell
me of some,’ says Mr. Chapman Barber. The
answer of the defendant is, ‘ I cannot remember ;*
and when pressed again and again he gives the
same answer—* I cannot remember.’ At last he
mentions the name of Mr. Turville. Now, we
cannot have forgotten the letter written by Mr.
I urville from Australia, in which he says he can-
not speak to the identity of the defendant, because
he never saw him in his life. The defendant is
asked, ‘What was Mr. Turville?’ and he says,
A friend of my father’s.’ When asked to name
any houses in Paris at which he visited, he
answers, ‘ I visited at plenty of houses there. I
cannot name any. I don't remember just now.’
Then he is asked as to his playmates, and again
he answers, *I do not remember. I don’t remem-
ber the name of any one of my playmates. I can-
not remember the name of one.’
Well, let us pause for a moment. The defen-
dant is asked whether he remembers the name of
any one he knew at Paris as acquaintances,
friends, or relations, or could name any boy who
had been his associate or playmate. Now, there
were several persons who were on terms of inti-
macy with Mr. and Mrs. James Tichborne—there
was the Abbe Salis, who lived below them in the
same house; there was M. D’Aranza, and there


■was M. de Mandeville, who were constantly about
the house ; and there were the two young Nangles;
for, though Mrs. Janies Tichborne could not bear
Mrs. Nangle, the latter had two sons who were
constantly associated with Roger, and used to
play at shuttlecock and other games with him.
Then there was Mrs. Nangle herself, with her
two daughters, and there was Mr. Talbot Con-
stable, who afterwards stood godfather to the de-
fendant’s boy, for Mr. Talbot Constable in his
boyhood resided at Paris. The defendant, when
pressed, knows none of them. But a day or two
■elapsed, and he comes to be examined by Mr. Ser-
jeant Ballantine, and then he remembers two per-
sons, Mr. lalbot Constable and a Spanish gentle-
man, a friend of his father’s. Lady Tichborne
was present at the examination at which the de-
fendant could not remember any of the names •
so probably she said to him afterwards, ‘ My dear
Roger, how could you have forgotten the names
■of your father’s old friends ? Don’t you remember
So-and-so and So-and-so?’ which would account
tor the difference of knowledge exhibited by the
defendant at the first examination and at that
which was held two or three days afterwards.
Then, when he comes to be examined about his
relations, he says that ‘ Baron Bremont’ was an
uncle of h;s mother’s, and that he had two sons,
Charles and Edward, and two daughters. But
with regard to this it is to be observed that there
was no Baron Bremont, but there was a Vicomte
de Brimont (not Bremont); and, what was a
greater mistake, Vicomte de Brimont was not re-
lated to Roger’s mother’s family at all, but was a
distant relative of his father. When asked as to
the spelling, the defendant says he believes the
name was spelt both ways. And then Serjeant
Ballantine says, ‘You stated that Vicomte de
Brimont was uncle to your mother. Can you
swear that the De Brimonts were any relations
whatever of your mother, and that they were not
relatmns of Sir James Tichborne ?’ The answer
rne * have never gone into their pedigree.’
Then he says, Ido not think it is true he was my
uncle by the mother’s side. We always called
him uncle. But I don’t find in Roger’s letters
any place in which Vicomte de Brimont is called
his uncle. Baigent was present when the defen-
dant made this mistake, and it is very likely he
said. How could you have said he was a relation
<m the mother's side? Why, it was on the father’s
side that he was related to you.’ That might ac-
j * or “*e change that may be observed in
“defenclant’s knowledge on this subject.
Ihen as to the Nangle family, we know that
their intimacy with Mr. James Tichborne was
very close, and they were constantly coming to the
house. The defendant entirely forgot that there
5-V? daughter. It is said in explanation
imat this lady had gone into a convent, but that
was.not until long after Roger Tichborne had left
aris. Major Nangle was very intimate with
, Ser, and yet the defendant knew
hln J\ The defendant was asked as to the
find MlS ’ an B le w i | 'h respect to his father
, h P r ’ an d he says there were disagreeable
„ . °tween liis fattier and mother on her ac-
at , - , In the defendant is right, and Mrs.
Nangle herself admits it. She says she never
“ f/ 1 /, ‘ldarrel with Mr. or Mrs. Tichborne,
i , 8 ? y as not the cause of any disagree-
~ between them. But then she says,
for nil tli erne had a great dislike for me and
Sl thl t , ludeer1 ’ f » r me more than
the est. And afterwards she says, ‘ I used
to go walking with my brother on Sundays, and
she could not bear to see me at the house.’ I
think it results, therefore, from Mrs. Nangle’s
own evidence th<it she was the cause of bickerings
between the husband and wife, not through her
fault, for Mr. Tichborne exonerates her from any
fault whatever, but because the jealous nature
of Lady Tichborne could not bear her husband’s
relations.
then did the defendant become acquainted
with these bickerings? It is easily explained. Mrs.
N angle came and had an interview with the de-
fendant and denounced him. That would be made
known to Lady Tichborne, who would, of course,
be disposed to speak in disparaging terms of Mrs.
ft angle as having been the cause of bickerings be-
tween her and her husband. The mistake of the
defendant in supposing the De Brimont family to
Mve'been related to Lady Tichborne is natural,
and it is quite possible that Roger might have
fallen into the same mistake, knowing that the
family was a French one and that his mother was
a t rench woman ; but then there is the fact that
hB fails to recollect anything about the Nangles,
who were his relations, playmates, and associates,
and who lived in Paris all the time he was there.
Then he is asked about the servants. You could
not expect any one to recollect all the servants
that may have passed through a family from the
period of his boyhood. But suppose there had
been an old servant who had been in the family
from the time you had been a baby in arms until
you were a grown-up youth, you would not be likely
to forget him. Well, there was just such a man,
M. Gossein, who had been in Mr. James Tich-
borne’s service from 1830 to 1844, and the defend-
ant is asked whether he knew him. He says ‘ I
fancy the name sounds familiar, but I cannot re-
member who he was.’ Then he is asked, 1 Was
Gossein for many years confidential servant to Sir
James Tichborne? Did he remain his confidential
valet from 1829 to 1845?’ Now this is not quite
accurate, because it was not from 1829 to 1845
but from 1830 to 1844, that Gossein was in Mr.
Tichborne’s service, but it was sufficiently accurate
to make the answer.of the defendant an incorrect
answer, for he replies to the whole question by
this sweeping assertion—*l say it is false.’ Then
he is asked, ‘ Do I understand you to say that you
don t know M. Gossein, who was in your father’s
service for 20 years?’ That, again, is a mistake,
lo tins the defendant answers, *.No, I do not know
him at all. ’ So there we have total ignorance on
the part of the defendant. Then there is the other
old family servant, William Burdon. Having met
him at Croydon before the examination to which
I am referring, the defendant knew that he had
been in his father’s service; but when he saw Bur-
don at Croydon he did not know anything about
him, and mistook him for one of the Nangles.
The next thing we should expect him to know
would be the names of his masters. At a great
public school we should hardly expect a boy to re-
member the names of all the masters, but he would
be expected to recollect the names of his own par-
ticular masters. And that observation becomes
much stronger when you are dealing with the case
of a boy who was educated at home, and had only
single masters, by whom his education was con-
ducted. If those single masters were with him
for a long period it would be impossible he should
forget who they were, Roger’s masters were first
M. Chatillon, who remained until Roger was 11
years old; then there was another for a few weeks *
then there was the Abbe Salis, also for a few


weeks; then M. Jolivault. But between the time
of M. Chatillon’s leaving and M. Jolivault’s com-
ing the experiment of sending him to school was
tried. Mr. James Tichborne was anxious to send
Roger to school in England, but the mother woixld
not hear of it, and finally they compromised the
matter. They agreed he should be sent to a French
school, where his mother would have constant ac-
cess to him, and accordingly he was intrusted to
the care of M. Dupanloup, who at that time kept
a school near Paris. But the mother used to go
and say that Roger should not be subjected to the
usual discipline of the school, so M. Dupanloup
said, ‘ Then take him away,’ and he was taken
away. Well, you would expect a boy to remem-
ber a tutor who was either permanently residing
in the house or coming every day. The defendant
recollects Chatillon. He saw Chatillon in Paris,
and he knew he was his tutor ; but he totally for-
gets that he ever had any other tutor at aIL That
strikes me as somewhat strange. Then with re-
spect to M. Dupanloup’s school, he is positive he
never entered it. In answer to the Solicitor-
General, he says, ‘ I never went to school at all
until I came to Stonyhurst. I am sure I never
went to school to M. Dupanloup. I say it is
false.’
Now, gentlemen, there is no earthly doubt that
Roger Tichborne did go to the school of M. Dupan-
loup, and that he was taken away in consequence
of the interference of his mother. It was known
to the Abbe Salis, to the Nangles, to M. Gossein—
in fact, to all the Paris witnesses ; and unless all
these witnesses are in a conspiracy to tell you this
is a fact which, in truth, had no existence, it is
one of those things which is beyond the possi-
bility of doubt. Now consider what going to
school first is. Here is a boy who comes from the
quiet of home, from his mother’s apron strings,
and he suddenly plunges into anew world, a new
phase of existence. He finds himself cast among
a number of boys, new faces, new companions,
and, for a time at least, he cannot find his place
among them. Do you think he would ever for-
get it? That is a matter upon which you must
exercise your own common sense.
We now come back to the tutors. Jolivault was
Roger’s tutor for three or four years, and a very
bad tutor he proved. Roger’s father speaks of him
as ‘that scoundrel Jolivault’who took him round
to billiard-rooms and cafes instead of instructing
him. When asked who Jolivault was, the defend-
ant says he was a boy whom Chatillon, when they
were going out to walk, used to take as Roger’s
companion. Now, which would you expect a man
to forget, the tutor whom he had earliest, or the
tutor whom he had latest ? Do you think the re-
collection of the first would merge in that of the
second, or the recollection of the second would be
lost in that of the first? And especially when the
second was a person with whom the associations
had been more pleasant, because he had taken the
boy about to various places of public resort. The
learned counsel for the defendant says, 1 His recol-
lection of Paris is gone. He had so many pain-
ful recollections of Paris life that by an act of
the will which the mind is capable of performing
he is determined to exclude the remembrance of
Paris from his memory, and he has succeeded in
doing so.’ I must say I am not satisfied with the
theory of the learned counsel on that point. It
seems to me to belong to what I call the region of
nebulous metaphysics. Painful reminiscences do
not admit of being blotted out and obliterated in
that easy way. I believe it is just the reverse.
The intensity of the emotions which particular
events have excited in the mind will baffle all
exertions of the will to suppress their memory
while the memory is alive. Mr. Chapman Barber
asked the defendant as to the name of any book
that he had read with Chatillon, and he says,
‘ I do not remember the name of one book I read
with Chatillon. I left Paris in 1845. I did not
begin Latin and Greek until I went to Stonyhurst.
He taught me no Latin nor Greek, but only read-
ing, and grammar, and geography. _ French geo-
graphy; not a regular course of Latin. I cannot
remember the name of one book, I read so many.
I did not get above simple division.’
Another thing you would expect a man to recol-
lect would be the names of the streets in which
he resided with his parents up to the age of 16or 17-
Try it by yourselves, gentlemen, and see whether
you recollect the places you lived in with your
parents. Now, Mr. and Mrs. James Tichborne
resided, from 1829 to 1839, in the Rue de la
Ferme ; from 1839 to 1845 in the Rue St. Honore ;
from 1845 to 1851, in the Rue Castiglione, and in
that year they removed to the Rue des Pyramides.
When asked in cross-examination before Mr. Rou-
pell where he resided in Paris, when he first re-
membered, his answer is in the Rue du Madeleine,
instead of the Rue de la Madeleine,whereas Roger
Tichborne never lived there at all. But why did
the defendant give this answer? The only explana-
tion I can suggest is that he found Lady Tichborne
living there when he went over to Paris to see
her. Then he is asked whether the family resided
in the same house all the time they lived in Paris,
and he says they did not, but he does not remem-
ber the exact places where they did reside. He
is asked, where was the last place he resided in
before he left Paris, and he says the Rue St. Hon-
ore, near the Louvre, to the best of his remem-
brance, but he will not be certain. But that was
all wrong, because it was not in the Rue St.
Honore, but in the Rue Castiglione. Lady Tich-
borne was present at this examination, and must
have been aware of the defendant’s mistakes, and
probably as her opinion was that the mistakes made
by the defendant were all due to his shattered
memory, no doubt she would tell him he had
made mistakes. And, accordingly, in 1871,when
he was examined, he was better prepared.
Then he speaks of the Rue de Ferme, instead of
de la Ferme —a mistake which a Frenchman would
not fall into, but which may be explained by the
circumstance of the defendant having forgotten
his French. Then he is asked as to the Rue des
Pyramides, which he is asked to spell, and after
much pressing spells it Pyramide. Here, again,
there is a very serious mistake for a Frenchman
to make. It is written in the plural. It is ‘ the
street of the Pyramids’—-a street built at the time
when the Egyptian campaign was a matter of
great interest to the French people, and when the
bulletins of the great Napoleon had stirred their
hearts so much. There is nothing ifi the whole
range of military bulletins so stirring as when
Napoleon reminds his soldiers how many centuries
were looking down upon them from the Pyramids.
It is the street not of the Pyramid, but of the
Pyramids, and the mistake which the defendant
made could be made only by a man who knew no-
thing about it or had forgotten all his French.
The statement of the defendant that he had M.
Chatillon for a tutor when living in the Rue des
Pyramides was a very serious and, as many thought,
a fatal mistake. The Rue St. Honore was the
street in which his father and mother last lived


in Paris prior to his going to South America—the
street where he was in the habit of going to see
them at the time he was in the Army in 1851 and
1852. It was the place where he saw them last
and took a final leave of them on his departure
for South America, and it was the street in which
they had lived since the year 1845, there being a
period of seven or eight years since Chatillon had
ever been tutor. M. Chatillon ceased to be tutor
in 1840 and Roger did not go away till 1852.
Therefore there is a long interval to be accounted
for. The defendant, on being examined as to the
statement he had made before Mr. Roupell,
said :
‘ I spoke from the impression which was then
in my mind when I stated that my first recollec-
tion was of my residing in the Rue de la Made-
leine. I cannot swear to either the Rue de la
Madeleine or the Rue de la Ferme as the place.
I think it is safer not to swear to any single resi-
dence my father and mother had in Paris.’
He would not swear to any single residence —he
would not swear to anything. He said that at one
time his parents lived in the Rue St. Honore, op-
posite the Louvre, near the Hotel de Louvre,
which they could see from the windows. It is per-
fect nonsense to talk about having seen the Hotel
de Louvre before 1845, because it was not built till
after the accession of the late Emperor Napoleon.
He also swore that his father and mother lived at
one time in the Rue des Pyramides, where Cha-
tillon came to give him instruction. These asser-
tions he swears to positively ; and then the Attor-
ney-General, not being satisfied with his positive
statements, worries him about them over and over
again, until he swears he will not swear to that
which he has already distinctly sworn to. He was
then asked about the Rue de la Ferme, which he
said was in the outskirts of Paris, and there was a
long cross-examination as to which side of the Seine
it was situated. He also saidhelivedat one period
in the Rue de la Madeleine, in which his parents
never resided at all. He is right, however, in
saying that his first residence in Paris was in the
Rue de la Ferme, because he was born in it, and
that circumstance would be conveyed to anybody’s
mind who read the certificate of baptism which
was procured from Paris. He is right as to the
Rue des Pyramides being one of the residences of
his parents, but utterly wrong in saying M. Cha-
tillon came to him there. He is right as to the
Rue St. Honore being one of the streets, but wrong
in saying it was the last place where his parents
resided, or that it was opposite or near the Hotel
de Louvre, because at that time the Hotel de
Louvre was not built, and the site was not visible
from the house they inhabited, No. 364, at the
opposite end of the street.
Two suggestions were made which, I cannot
help thinking, were dishonest. The first was that
there were two residences in the Rue St. Honore,
when, in point of fact, there was only one; and
the second that there was an older Hotel de Louvre,
somewhere in the neighbourhood, and that was
the hotel to which he referred. The whole body
of the Paris evidence tends to show that the Tich-
bornes never had but one residence in the Rue St.
Honore, and whoever suggested that they had a
second residence in that street, in my opinion
suggested what he knew to be a wicked, down-
right, premeditated, deliberate lie. There has
not been the slightest attempt in the evidence
to show that the Tichbornes had a second resi-
dence in the Rue St. Honore. I am quite sure
my Brother Ballantine would not lend himself to
a deliberate falsehood, but I have no hesitation in
saying that it is plain to demonstration that this
was a fraudulent device to get out of the difficulty
and impose upon the Court, because no one who
attends to the questions of the Attorney-General
and the answers of the defendant can entertain
the remotest shadow of a doubt that counsel, wit-
ness, Judge, and jury had the big H6tel de Louvre
as it stands now in their minds at the time of the
cross-examination.
Upon the present occasion we have had the
second hotel in like manner attempted to be
brought forward, but no evidence of it has been
given and all the evidence tends to negative the
possibility of its existence. And there were
blocks of houses which prevented the hotel being
seen. Gossein said the family were still in the
Hue St. Honor 6 when he left. The windows of
his room looked into the street, and from there the
Hotel de Louvre could not have been seen. The
Hotel de Louvre was built during the last Empire.
The defendant’s counsel suggested that what the
defendant meant was that from the top of the
house the Hotel de Louvre could be seen. That
is not what the defendant said, for he said that
you could see the hotel from the windows of the
house. Mr. Alfred Seymour, who has been
familiar with Paris since 1839, is asked : * From
that house can the Louvre be seen at all ?—No.
Was there any Hotel de Louvre at that time to
your knowledge in existence? —No.’ It is the
more remarkable that any mistake should be made
in such a matter, because this was the last Paris
residence of the parents of Roger Tichborne, and
he left it at a time when his memory was fully
developed and when his recollections might be
supposed to be thoroughly trustworthy.
I have been speaking of the recollections of the
defendant as to his secular education, and now let
us see what his recollections are with regard to
his religious education. Pere Lefevre says, he
prepared Roger Tichborne for his first communion,
imparting to him the elementary knowledge of
matters of religion ; but when the time came for
tho first communion, to which in the Roman
Catholic Church great importance is attached, in-
asmuch as he lived at some distance, he com-
mitted Roger to the charge of Pere le Humbert,
who was vicar of the Church of the Assump-
tion in the Rue St. Honore. The first commu-
nion, as we were informed by the Abbe Salis, is
usually received between the age of 11 and 13,
and is rarely deferred beyond the latter age. The
defendant, however, says that Roger Tichborne
received his first communion when he was between
9 and 10 years old. It is an event likely to make
an impression on the mind of a boy and to be
remembered in after life. It was the Pere Lefevre
in the first place, and the Pere le Humbert in the
second, who prepared him. The defendant is
asked who prepared him, and he does not remem-
ber. Then he is asked where the ceremony took
place, and he thinks it was at the Church de la
Madeleine, whereas in reality it was at the
Church of the Assumption, in the Rue St.
Honore. Next he is asked what was the form of
preparation, and he says, ‘ the ordinary prepara-
tion.’ He is asked what books he read, and he
says The Garden of the Soul. Now, The Garden
of the Soul is a Catholic book containing prayers
and devotional exercises. Now, there is a French
edition of that book, but it is printed in the
English language. Lady Tichborne probably had
the work in her possession, and the defendant,
perhaps, saw it and drew the inference that it


■would be used in France, but as the Fren
ecclesiastics who prepared Roger Tichborne c
not know English, it is clear defendant must
wrong on that point.
Then there comes the question as to the p
sents made to him. On the occasion of his fi:
communion we know that he had given to h
certainly a breast-pin, and some of the witness
have said a gold watch. The Solicitor-Genera!
asHs him whether any present was made to hi
on the occasion of his first communion, and
answers, ‘ Yes ; it was a piece of red cloth cut of
one of the late Cardinal’s dresses.’ He adds, 4 j
came to me fixed on paper, with some writing u
on it.’ 4 Was it a sort of relic ?’ asks the Solicito
General. ‘ Yes.’ ‘And was he a canonised Ca
dinal and Saint? —‘Yes, I expect he was.’ 1
this relic was hanging up in the defendant’s hou
it is sent for and produced, when it turns out
be part, not of the dress of a Cardinal, but of th
blanket of St. Charles Borromeo, Archbishop o:
Milan in the latter part of the lfith century. C
the back is a paper thus inscribed :
‘This belongs to Roger Tichborne. Red clot
cut off fi om the blanket of Saint Charles Borrome
and given to me in the Convent at Milan, in th
chamber where Saint Charles Borromee used
make his spiritual retreats, as havin'? been usee
by that Saint. 15 July 1843.’
This relic must have been given to him late
than the date of Roger Tichborne’s first commi
nion, for he would then have been 144, years o
age. In reexamination, it was suggested that thi
piece of the blanket was given to him on the oc
casion of his confirmation, but the defendant sai
he could not recollect whether it was given to him
on the occasion of his first communion or on th
occasion of his confirmation. Then he was askec
when, and where, and by what Bishop he wa
confirmed, and he was unable to say. The At
tomey-Gcneral afterwards pressed him and asked
him again when it was given, and he said he could
neither tell when, where, nor by whom the relic
was given. He is next asked whether he had any
other relic, and he said that he had not, and it ap
pears he had no knowledge or no recollection o]
the breast-pin or the watch.
Then comes the question with regard to Father
.Lefevre, who was much attached to him, and to
whom he always came on the occasion of his saint’s
da J\ In short, he never failed to call upon him
on tha„ day. He is borne out in that respect by
Mrs. IS angle. I ather Lefevre says Roger was in-
trusted to him from the beginning as his confessor,
for several years. Huger used to take great in-
terest in a story which Pere Lefevre used to tell
nim. It was a remarkable story. Here Lefevre,
at that time a young man, had perfectly white
hair. It had been originally of a dark colour, but
when in Spain he dreamt that he saw his father
murdered, and on awaking he found that the
mental agony and terror he had gone through had
changed his hair to a pure and perfect white.
This story much interested the boy, and Pere
Lefevre says he told it to him over and over again.
Consequently the circumstance would be likely to
remain in the boy’s recollection. Shortly before
his departure for South America Roger Tichborne
went to see the Pere Lefevre, and confided to him
the secret of his attachment to his cousin ; and
the evidence of Pere Lefevre when we come to
tnat part of the case will not be unimportant.
ie defendant says the Abbe Salis was his con-
a"d ignores M. Lefevre. 4 Should you
be suipnsed, he is asked, ‘to find that M. Le-
Ifevre, of which you say you have no recollection,
was the person who prepared Roger Charles Tich-
borne for his first communion, and was his con-
fessor until he left Europe ?’ To which the de-
fendant answers, ‘lt was not so.’ Then he says
the Abbe Salis was his mother’s confessor and his
own :
You confessed to him ?—Yes, I knew him very
he your regular confessor ?—'Yes.
When did you last confess?—Not since I left
i ans in 1845. Was he Mrs. James Tichborne’s
confessor ?—Yes. Did you confess to the Abbe
balls .—I believe. I did. Surely you must know ?
—You have no right to ask me. Ido not ask you
what you confessed, but whether you confessed ?
—I shall not answer. Did you confess to any one
else ?—Yes, to lots of priests. Name one.—l will
name one ; Father Tilt, because he is dead. Why
because he is dead?—Do you think I want to
bring gentlemen here to be harpooned at by you
:or half an hour ? It is bad enough for me. But
v !?y because he is dead ?—Because he cannot be
1,-. Why, then, did you mention the Abbe
sails. Because I had to mention him about
’ther matters. Well, you said “ lots of Priests ?”
-Well, I have lived since 1845. To whom did
mu confess in Paris besides the Abbe Salis ?—I do
lot remember.’
The defendant was much pressed on this point,
rnt would only answer that he did not recollect,
iie result is that the defendant is wrong in two-
m port ant points. He is wrong in saying that the
Lbbe Salis ever was his confessor, if the Abbe
alls is to be believed, for he swears that he was
onfessor neither to Roger nor to Mrs. Tichborne.
he second error is in saying that he never con-
issed to the Pere Lefevie, if we can rely upon
mi and the other brench witnesses who agree in
lying he was.known to be confessor to Roger
ichborne during the time of his residence in
ans. Here, again, the whole thing turns upon
hether you think that the religious instruction
i preparation for a first communion or the cere-
lony itself is likely to make a lasting impression,
till more, would not the fact of your confessing
' a person, making him the depository of your
cret thoughts, and possibly secret sins—at all
r ents of ordinary failings and the deviation from
Le strict line of religious duty into which all are
ore or less liable to fall—would not relations so-
cred and important, be likely to fix in one’s me-
ory the recollection of the individual ? The ab-
nce of knowledge on the part of the defendant
a strong element in the consideration of the
Lestion whether the defendant is Roger Tich-
rne or not. He is further asked whether there-
is any priest to whom he used to complain of
e conduct of Lady Tichborne. He said he might,
ve done so to Pere Alexis Lefevre. That is
ange, because before he had ignored it. The
fendant says he complained, but he cannot tell
whom he complained. He says he was kept in
>cks till he was eleven or twelve years of age,
d°f that he complained. He does not remem-
r whether he complained of anything else.
Now comes a thing which every friend of the
endant must deeply regret, and which was in-
ided as an insult. to the Solicitor-General. The
:endant says, ‘ You appear to be very innocent-,
isideririg that your brother is a Jesuit. You
st know.’ To which the Solicitor-General
kes this dignified reply, ‘ I only answer for my
s. Ido not know that lam to be subject to
9 kind of thing; not that I have not the high-
love and veneration for my brother.’ Inde-


pendently of this being intended as an insult, I
cannot help being struck with this, as coming
from a man who professes to be—and is, I pre-
sume, if his account be true —a Roman Catholic.
It is not all Roman Catholics who care for Jesuits,
but I think it would hardly be consistent with the
views of a Roman Catholic to attempt to insult a
man by suggesting to him that his brother was a
Jesuit priest.
The defendant’s story about his being when
a boy dressed in a certain kind of frock and de-
voted to the Order of the Blue, does at first sight
strike one as being very absurd ; but it came
out that sometimes children are devoted to the
Blessed Virgin, and wear for a certain time a dress
consisting of a white sort of tunic, having more or
less the appearance of a frock, with a blue border.
Therefore the defendant may possibly be right in
saying he was devoted to the Virgin in this way.
Mrs. Nangle, however, thinks that Roger Tich-
borne was not so devoted, although his brother
Alfred undoubtedly was.
"Well, now we know that Roger Tichborne cor-
responded with the Abbe Salis. The defendant
is asked whether he ever corresponded with any
clergyman after he left France, from 1845 to
1853. He says he believes he did, but he cannot
recollect with whom it was. There appears to be
a great deal of forgetfulness as to the person with
whom he had this correspondence, not only as
regards name, but as regards identity also. The
only person to whom Roger was in the habit of
writing was. the Abbe Salis, and you must ask
yourselves whether Roger Tichborne could have
forgotten who was the clergyman to whom these
letters were addressed.
There is one more subject which we will consider
to-day. It .appears that Mr. James Tichborne
was in the habit of making an annual excursion
either to the sea-side or to some other place of
public resort. One of the very earliest of these
excursions was made in 1839, when Roger Tich-
borne was just 10 years old, to a place, Pornic, in
Brittany. M. Chatillon accompanied the father
and Roger to that place. They went to bathe in
the sea at Pornic, and then the accident happened
of which we have heard. They had done bathing,
and Roger was waiting for M. Chatillon to finish
dressing, when a ship sailed into the harbour at
a considerable rate. Roger ran up to the top of
a bit of rock to look at the ship, but somehow or
other he slipped and fell. Chatillon picked him
up insensible and carried him to the house of a
lady who lived near the spot. For some time be
remained insensible, but he afterwards recovered,
and on the occasion of his recovery, which occurred
on the festival of the Assumption, the father sent
to the church at Pornic a handsome present of
vestments for the officiating priest, prayershaving
been offered up there for the recovery of the boy.
Chatillon said although Roger fell against a jut-
ting rock no mark was left, because he did not
cut bis head at all. The fall oidy caused a tem-
porary depression, and the head afterwards be-
came all right again. Moreover, the injury was
not at the back of the head, but near the fore-
head.
The defendant on first being examined about
the incident made one or two different statements.
The subject appears to have been brought up on
the occasion when Chatillon visited Lady Tich-
borne at Paris with a view of recognising defend-
ant. M. Chatillon put some questions to him,
and was struck very much by the difference of his
appearance. He asked him whether he remem-
bered what occurred ia Brittany, but the defend-
ant recollected nothing about it. M. Chatillon
then mentioned what had happened at Pornic.
Thereupon the defendant said he had a scar on
the back of his head to correspond with what oc-
curred on the occasion of his fall. Mr. Holmes
and Mr. Leete, who were present, proceeded to
look for the scar, but on that occasion they could
not find it, though the defendant says a hair-
dresser afterwards discovered a scar on the scalp.
After 1840 the father made a similar excursion
every year, taking Roger with him. One year
they went to the Pyrenees, in 1842 to Germany,
in 1843 to Brittany, and in 1844 to Normandy.
There is no doubt that on the last occasion Mr.
James Tichborne, with his sons Roger and Alfred,
and the nurse, went by steamer to Jersey and
visited the island ; and on a previous occasion, in
1840, when Chatillon was with them, they all
went to Guernsey. Thus Roger would have been
twice in the Channel Islands. On the last occa-
sion, in 1844, he wrote a letter to his mother, in
which he says :
‘ Dear Mother,—l am sorry to hear you are un-
well, but in three weeks from this time we shall
return, and then we shall see you. We went to
Jersey in the steamboat, and were there three
days, looking at things on the island. Belle Tete,
papa, and myself are quite well.’
No doubt Belle Tete meant Alfred, because we
know he was of the party, and had a very pretty
head of hair. I now call your attention to what
he said at his first examination by Mr. Chapman
Barber, and you will see what he then knew, and
what further knowledge he exhibited on the sub-
sequent examination. He is asked—
‘ Do you remember going a tour in the south of
France ?—Yes. Where did you go ?—I do not re-
member the places—l cannot recollect a single
place or anything which I saw. Do you remember
any particular circumstance which occurred in
that tour ?—I do not. Was anybody with you be-
sides your tutor ?—I do not know whether there
was or not. Did you stay at hotels or private
lodgings ?—I do not remember where we sleeped.
Can you recollect a single thing you saw in that
town ?—I cannot.’
The strange part of the matter is that when he
comes to be re-examined by Mr. Serjeant Ballan-
tine his recollection is revived. Whether the
Dowager, who was present, had been struck by
his answers, and said, ‘ How is it you do not re-
collect the accident at Pornic, when you struck
the back of your head ?’ we do not know. That
may have been the case. In reply to Mr. Serjeant
Ballantine he says he now knows that he went
with M. Chatillon to a place which sounds like
Ponic or Ponnic, and fell on the rocks and cut his
head. Up to this time there is no mention of the
father, but on the examination in chief in 1871
the narrative becomes a great deal amplified, and
he speaks then of going with his tutor and his
father to Ponic. I should tell you that the proper
spelling of the name is Pornic. He says he had a
fall from the rocks and received a cut on the back
of the head, and that the mark is there still. His
father was present, but the defendant says he
does not remember telling his father. It is a
curious thing that the defendant should recollect
the tour in the South of France, the tour in Brit-
tany, and the accident at Pornic, while the ex-
cursions to Germany, Normandy, and the Channel
Islands are entirely forgotten.
Again, his account of the accident at Pornic is
somewhat confused. He says they were bathing


no lake within twenty miksTf
says that from Pornic he went with his father to
the sea-coast, as if he thought Pornic was an in?
land town, instead of being, as it is a seaport and
a bathing place. It must be admitted that a bov
ten years of age might perhaps mistake a recess of
the sea for a lake, but what strikes one wifh our
prise is his total forgetfulness of every excursion
on the occasion of his first examination and th?n
the recollection of this particular excursion with
the incident attached to it, after he hTd had S
opjiortunity of refreshing his recollection or eet
tmg information on the subject in the meantime.'
have f alS ° f ° me T. ba * surprising that he should
and the^f 611 all aboi jf *h e excursion to Jersey
S S t& Ht nee M , Belle Tbte -’ who was no
tier, b 18 brother Alfred. In his cross-examina-
person 6 f Sayi n- Bel may have been some
could nfu™ 'v, 8 with him ; but it is obvious it
t u D bave been a stranger. Well, gentlemen,
Jevard through the different heads with
oWV th ° memory of R °g er Tichborne,
TS„hi anybody representing himself to be Roger
? lgbt be tr , ied and tested, and you
von HF ’ SU ° b educ t t° the result of those tests as
J 7 Up ° n considera tion deem proper.
Sixteenth Day, Monday , February 23, 1874.
Gentlemen of the Jury, -I am about to call your
attention to the statements made by the defend-
ant on the occasion of his examination and cross-
Tiebhn atl ° n + f ference to the ]ife of Roger
life- b rnd e + a bp S fi° n f yhU K S - t ~I th . e second P eriod of his
t?™* Sub]ect ls the circumstances
under which Roger was placed there. Now we
know perfectly well that in consequence of his
mother resisting the proposal to place Roger at a
father took opportunity
afforded hy his visit to this country to attend the
funeral of Sir Henry to leave him at school. Now
as to the circumstances under which he was intro-
duced there-who took him to Stonyhurst. That
I take it, is a fair test, Roger being then 16 or 17
age ‘ He would be likely 3 to remember
or bt h f r tuto WaS ta i ken t 0 Ston yhurst by his father
rby a, tutor, or by some other person. The de-
ienaant says he was accompanied by Mr Brindle
a priest at Poole. Here L what he says in his
cross-examination : ‘ I went to Stonyhurst with
I l' +n ly father remained at Upton.
Totbp h* J h V nk t u e , re r ls an y d °ubt about that.
be . s * of m y bell ef I did not go to Stonyhurst
thitew S ‘k J I™? 8 T lchborne - 1 hav e stated to
the best of my belief. I am on my oath, and need
not repeat I swear it. lam absolutely certain.’ Now
there can be no doubt whatever that it was his fa-
ther who brought Roger to Stonyhurst. We know
fpHpJ r Hr th Q ee ° rf ° Ur sources - there is the
June M iB ym ° Ur 1° ° ld l lrs - Hopkinson, dated
June JO, 1845, in which he says, ‘Mr. James
mnr^n rDe wk • Roger went to Stonyhurst this
morning, both m very good spirits.’ The letter
mpnt eai H to - hlm l b l lt sticks to his first state-
and he relied: 86 handwritin S R i* in,
‘lt is Henry Seymour’s—Henry Danby Sev-
mour s ; that is my belief. Would it surprise you
to find it 13 not Henry Danby Seymour’s, but
7 ou J s ?—No. Would it surprise you
to find the letter says that “ Mr. James Tichborne
and Rog . er went this morning to Stonyhurst?”
does not imply he went all the way with
g.ifs'on iS trUG enough - The examination
said' WnJrl remained at Upton,” is what you
r WouM it surprise you to find written ‘‘ Mr
to ' S e tonvh b °f n r. a r nd Eoger went this morning
j Stonyhurst? —I am certain my father re-
r- da * T [ pt °“’ a i ld Father Brindle went with
W frpS° nyhUrSt ' won’t swear it. lam speak-
& mel , n f ° ry ’. Ibave not tak en the trouble
cerS F f r> P - ID n dateS or an J’ th mg else. lam
tain lather Brindle went with me, so far as mv
memory serves me, and my father did not!’ Y
There is not only Mr. Seymour’s letter, but Mrs.
-Bouverie s diary, which records the fact of Mr
Tichborne s return after he had left his son Roger
at Stonyhurst ‘happy and well,’ and there is
further the evidence of his mother’s kinsman, De
Brimont, who was sent for on Roger’s arrival at
the college, and of Mr. Waterton, and Father
Mann, who all tell us that Mr. James Tichborne
brought Roger.
The defendant is next asked to whom he was
nrst introduced, and he said the rector, to whom
he gave the name of Father Venables, but after-
wards he corrected that statement, and said it
was Father Walmsley; but that was wrong, as
at that time bather Walmsley was not rector, but
arro ' v ’ as we learnt from the evidence of
M , ~e Brimont. Father Walmsley was not rector
until two years after that time. However, that
may be a mere mistake of the memory.
Then we come to the introduction of Roger
Tichborne to Stonyhurst life. When this was put
t° the defendant, he said he did not remember it
and he had no recollection of De Brimont, his own
relative, being there at the time. According to
the regulations in force at Stonyhurst it seems
that it a father came with a pupil it was usual for
the rector to go round the institution with him to
show the place. Roger was taken all over the
institution. He mentions in one of his letters that
it was by the superior; if by that he meant the
rector, he was mistaken ; but probably when he
wrote to his mother he did not know one officer
from another. The defendant was asked, and said
he had no recollection of being brought round at
f ll , , name , of Waterton was pointedly put
before the defendant, but he did not recollect either
the nephew or the uncle. So much for his intro-
duction at Stonyhurst.
. A?? 11 } W Call attention to things which would
be likely to remain in the memory of a man in
a - lfe - In the first place, I apprehend that a
person would recollect the class he belonged to,
and probably something about the number of the
class, and the general habits of his class-fellows,
the defendant is quite right in saying he was
placed m the class of Philosophers; but to account
tor his statement that he was placed at a cottage
instead of in the class at once, his learned counsel
bad to try to make out at first that it was for the
purpose of preparation for the class of Philoso-
phers. The evidence, however, establishes beyond
doubt that he was admitted to that class in the
first instance. He says there were two classes
at Stonyhurst—-one the Philosophers and the other
the Laity. On being asked whether there were
not more than two classes or divisions, he said he
did not recollect. To the class of Philosophers he


said he belonged himself,adding this extraordinary
statement— ‘ the Laity were studying for the
Church.’ ‘The Laity were studying for the
Church?’ asked the Solicitor-General; and t
reply was, * They were. ’ ‘ The Laity ?’ said Lo
Chief Justice Bovill. ‘Yes; the Laity and t
students were one and the same thing. ’ ‘And thi
were preparing for Holy Orders ?’ ‘ The most par'
of them,’ replied the defendant. Then he
pressed again as to the number of classes at Ston;
hurst, and he could not tell of more than tw
He was cross-examined by the Solicitor-General
this point:
‘ You were asked if there were different sets o
scholars—were there two classes of scholars ?—Ye
there were two sets of scholars, and only tw
The name of one was the Philosophers. We
the other the Laity ?—I don’t know. I understooc
the Laity were studying for the Church ?—I mea
by the Laity and the students that they were tl
same. The most part were young men studyin
for Holy Orders. There were two classes—tl
Philosophers, to whom I belonged, and the laii
preparing for the Church. Were there any othe
classes?—l don’t recollect whether there was o
not. I can’t remember the names of the division
Can you tell me what were the divisions of th
school—were there different classes and forms?
I don’t recollect. Were they all in one class ?—!
don’t speak of a class. Were they divided int
classes ?—Of course, they were in different classes
What were the names of the forms?—l know
what you mean, but I have not sufficient languag
to explain myself. A Harrow boy or an Eton bo;
would remember the forms.-—I don't recoiled
Can you give me the name of one class—on
division ?—I don’t remember one. Have you for
gotten, or did you never know?—Of course !
knew. So I should suppose. Have you reall;
forgotten the name of every class ?—Yes ; that i
what I mean to say.’
Now we know, in point of fact, that there were
seven classes ; and, if Mr. Store Smith speaks
correctly when he says he used to talk with Sir
Roger Tichborne at Cahir about Stonyhurst
ltoger Tichborne at that time not only well knew
who were the Philosophers, but could also tell al
about the classes. 1 should not, however, be
struck with the fact that after many years a man
should have forgotten this. It is quite possible
he might do so ; but the difficulty in this part of
the case is to account for how Sir Roger could
have fallen into the error of calling the Philoso-
phers the Laity. We know that the greater part
of the students at Stonyhurst were not intended
for the Church, and I should have thought that
the word laity would have carried to his mind the
exactly opposite meaning. Then comes the ques-
tion w’hether a man would totally forget the
number of the class he was in ; that is, the pro-
portion it bore to the entire number of students
You might not recollect the exact number, but
you would not mistake 10 or 12, or 20, for four
times that number. The defendant, in his ex-
amination before Mr. Roupell, was asked :
‘ What was the number of students at the time
.you were there ?—I can’t say. I don't know. I
know how many there were in my class, but I
could not speak to one or two. It might have
been 150. I don’t know.’
Now we know that the number of the Philoso-
phers’ class in which he was never exceeded 20,
and scarcely ever was over 14. He was asked
how many Philosophers were there and he said,
I think there were some 80 or 90. Was that
in addition to the number you formerly gave ?
That number includes everything. Do you mean
that there were 80 or 90 Philosophers in all during
the whole time you were at Stonyhurst ? —Whe
I was speaking I meant that there were general
that number there. Will you swear that durin
the whole of the three years you say you were a
Stonyhurst there were more than 48 Philosophe
in all ?—lf you have got it on record do you thin
I am going to swear it? Will you swear tha
there were more than 48 in all ?—No, I won’t. ]
will not swear anything about it. Will yo
swear that there were more than 28 Philosophe
in all?—There were more than that.’
Now it seems difficult to suppose that a ma
who was in a distinct class—separated from th
rest of the establishment —which never numberet
more than 14 or 15, should afterwards say tha
the number was 80 or 90 instead. It would make
vast difference to him whether he was in daily asso
ciation with 80 or 90 men, or with 15 or 20. Th
Solicitor-General again and again presses him o
the subject, but he still adheres to his statemen
Another point which we should naturally sup
pose would remain in a man’s memory in after
time is the residence. If you were to ask a Cam
bridge or Oxford man whether he lived in colleg
or out, he would be able to tell you at once ; ant
if he lived in college, he could tell you where hi
rooms were ; if out, in what street were his lodg
ings. Would he not recollect in what part of th
college his sleeping room was—in what court o
quadrangle—on what side of the court or quad
rangle ? Why, if he were put blindfolded int
the court or quadrangle, would you not expec
him almost to find his way to the rooms he hac
formerly occupied at college ? He is cross-ex
amined upon the subject, and he says that for the
first 15 or 18 months he resided not in the college
or seminary, but in a cottage. It was, he says
the second cottage of the two that stood at the
end of the college building.
‘ Were they within the walls,’ he is asked ; anc
he replied, ‘Yes- Are the gates of the college
beyond them?—You are trying,’ he said, ‘to puz-
zle and confuse me. What is it you want to
know ? Are the cottages within the walls of the
college ?—I tell you they adjoin the college. Lord
Chief Justice Bovill. —Are they in the college
grounds?. —They are. The Solicitor-General.—
Who resided in the cottage besides yourself?—
The lay brothers and sometimes one of the
farmers. Did any other young gentlemen from
the college ?—I do not remember. I think not.
lam not quite certain. Where did you go then ?
—Where did I go when? When you left the
cottage?—l went into the college. Whereabouts
were your rooms ?—They were in the left wing at
the back of the quadrangle—over on the Philoso-
phers’ side.’
. Then follows an examination as to what a quad-
rangle is:
‘ls there more than one quadrangle?—What do
you mean by a quadrangle—l meant a staircase
on that side of the house. Do you mean to say
you do not know the meaning of a quadrangle?—
I mean to say that I am explaining to you where
it was, and you won’t understand it. Do you
really mean to say you do not know what a quad-
rangle means? You, a Stonyhurst man, can’t tell
me what is a quadrangle ?—lt is a part of the
building, of course. So is a doorpost. You were
at Stonyhurst three years; surely you know what
a quadrangle is ?—I am not going to answer you
such an impudent question. The Chief Justice. —


But you asked the Solicitor-General what a quad-
rangle was first.—No, my lord; the Solicitor-
General mentioned it first. The question is
whether you know what a quadrangle is.—lt is
that part that goes round. What do you say
about round ? Can you tell me what you mean
by a quadrangle?—No, Ido not. Ido not know
what you mean by it. Will you tell me what you
mean by it?—l have already answered the ques
tion. What do you mean by a quadrangle ?
have told you that I mean a part of the buildin 0
that was on the left wing. What sort of a thin:
was a quadrangle?—What do you mean? It is
really shameful for you to go on in this way. I have
told you before that it was part of the building
What sort of a thing was it? What is it made
of?—I decline to answer your question.’
And so they come to no conclusion. Then the
Solicitor-General asks him a question which is o 1
no small importance:
‘Did you ever go to the seminary at Stony
hurst?—To what? To the seminary?—Do you
mean the cemetery?—No, the seminary. Do you
mean the separate buildings away from the col
lege ?—I don't know the place myself; but do
you know the seminary?—ldo not remember a
place of that name. And as far as you know you
never went there?—No. Was there any other
place where you lived at Stonyhurst besides the
college and this indescribable quadrangle?—l
think not.’
Now, gentlemen, let us pause for a moment
and recollect where the philosophers did live. We
know that Roger Tichborne went to Stonyhurst
on the Ist of July 1845. At that time, as the
evidence shows, the philosophers were lodged in
the college itself, in a particular part over the
class, fencing, and music rooms. Before their re-
turn from the August vacation the authorities
had resolved to shift the quarters of the philoso-
phers. There is a detached building within the
grounds of the college called the seminary, which
is a considerable edifice, but containing only two
storeys. In the lower storey were the assembly
rooms of the philosophers, the library, the dining-
room, and offices connected with the establish-
ment, and the upper storey was divided into 32
rooms, each philosopher having his own room.
To that building the philosophers were trans-
ferred, the divinity students, who had occupied
it before, being removed into the quarters which
the philosophers had occupied before in the col-
lege. From the beginning of October 1845, until
October 1848, at which time Roger Tichborne
left, the philosophers continued to occupy the
seminary; but in October 1848, as the entries in
the college books show, and after Roger left, the
philosophers went back to the college and the
divinity students went back to the seminary.
Therefore, with the exception of the first month,
throughout the whole time Roger was there, the
philosophers resided in the seminary. When the
philosophers went there it was proposed by the
authorities to change the name to St. Mary’s
Hall, and that was done so far as the books and
official documents are concerned, but in common
parlance the old name of the seminary, as was
natural, continued to attach to it. One is there-
fore surprised to find that Roger Tichborne—as-
suming the defendant to be Roger—could so en-
tirely have forgotten the name of the seminary as
the place where he lived ; and that when that
name was suggested to him he should have asked,
Do you mean the cemetery?’ However, so it is.
Well, the next point to consider is the possi-
bility of Roger Ticliborne having lived in a cot
tage at Stonyhurst at all. A great deal of time
was consumed in trying to ascertain where thi
cottage was, and evidence was brought before
you for the purpose of showing that on the site
to which the defendant had pointed there were
only two—one occupied by the gardener, and the
other used by the miller. Then the learner
counsel for the defendant would have it for some
time that there must have been some other cot
tages ; and when the ground plans were brough
from Stonyhurst he contended that there were
more. That, however, was abandoned after
time, but then he said there was a cottage on the
other side of the college. It turned out to be
cottage occupied by the music-master, and tha
had to be given up. Next the learned counse
said it must have been one of the cottages at the
back of the seminary, and we had a great deal o:
cross-examination as to whether these were such
places as a philosopher might have lived in. Now
these young men paid 100 f. a year each, anc
were, of course, entitled to decent accommoda-
tion, speaking relatively, and it appeared that
the cottages in question were labourers’ cottages.
Besides that, there was this additional difficulty
It was agreed on all hands that it would have
been inconsistent with the discipline of the col-
lege that a young lad of 16 or 17 should not be
within the walls of the college at night, and to
meet all these difficulties it was argued that the
defendant had mistaken the seminary for a cot-
tage, as it was comparatively insignificant when
looked at by the side of this magnificent acade-
mical building. Well, when we have a building
which will accommodate 32 people on one floor,
and which has such large rooms on the lower
floor, it strikes one as odd that it should occur to
anybody to call it a cottage.
At last I thought the cottage theory was given
up ; but at the end of the case came a young wo-
man who was 13 years of age at the time Roger
went away, but who said she remembered him very
well, and among other things she told us of a cot-
tage we had not heard of before. It was on the
other side of the college garden, and occupied by
a woman who made confectionery for the estab-
lishment. Mrs. Coates told us that when she
went to buy confectionery, which she used to sell
again, she had seen Roger at this cottage, and she
took it into her head that he was stopping at that
time at the cottage. On that assumption the learn-
ed counsel asked you to believe that for 15 or IS
months Roger Tichborne was living in the cot-
tage. The question is why Roger Tichborne should
be thus segregated from the rest of the philoso-
phers. The authorities say that such a thing
would be wholly inconsistent with their rules,
and that it would only be possible if a boy were
taken with some infectious disease, which would
render his immediate removal necessary. But no
case of the kind was ever known there. There is
not a case recorded of removal from the seminary
to the cottage in consequence of a disorder.
Again, this account places Roger in the cottage
at the very commencement of residence. But the
learned counsel for the defendant says that Roger
was a man of loose habits, that he had been stay-
ing in town before ho went down, that he con-
tracted some contagious disease, and that when
Roger went to Stonyhurst this was known. One
would have supposed that in that case his father
would have kept him in town; or that if the father
did not know of it, and brought him to the col-
lege, the authorities there, when they became


aware of the fact, would, instead of placing him
in a cottage, have sent him home. ‘But,’ said
the learned counsel, ‘no, the Fathers had com-
passion on his youth, and treated his frailty with
indulgence, especially as he was connected with
the Arundells, apo werful Homan Catholic family,
and so they determined to pass it over, and sent
the lad to live at the cottage until he got well, and
his residence there lasted from 15 to 18 months.’
He certainly was well enough to go home for the
first vacation, and I should have thought he would
have remained there until he was cured. But no;
he returns and again takes up his residence at the
cottage. What foundation is there for all this?
If there were foundation in the evidence I should
most gladly lay it before you; but I have been un-
able to find any. It is one of the most gratuitous
assumptions I ever heard of. The defendant as-
signed as a cause of his leaving Stony hurst that he
had contracted a complaint and was turned away
in consequence, but he never said or suggested
that there was anything the matter with him
when he went there. So far as I can see, it is thq
purest fabrication and invention on the part of the
learned counsel that can possibly be conceived.
Except his suggestion, there is not a shadow of
foundation for it, and, more than that, the Stony-
hurst witnesses tell us that, with the exception of
the first month, Koger Tichborne always resided
at the seminary, and the whole body of them, in-
cluding the Infirmarian, are allowed to leave the
witness-box without a question being asked them
on cross-examination with reference to this com-
plaint, which, if it hail existed, they must have
known of. I cannot help thinking that it was a
gratuitous piece of invention.
There is a strong body of evidence to show that
Roger never lived at a cottage, and that he did
live at the seminary. But even supposing you
do adopt this wild and extravagant theory as
to the 15 or 18 months’ disorder, of which nobody
ever heard, and of which not a tittle of evidence
was advanced, the difficulty remains that the
defendant stated that when he left the cottage he
went to live at the college, upon one side of the
quadrangle, which, strange to say, he describes as
opposite to the place where the philosophers
really did live while in the college. But the philo
sopliers never did live in the college during the
time that Koger Tichborne was at Stonyhurst,
save during the first month ; and, if he went to
live in the cottage, he must have afterwards
returned to the seminary. And yet, when the
defendant is asked if lie ever lived in the seminary,
he does not even remember the name, but thinks
it is the cemetery that is alluded to. Upon these
facts, which I cannot alter, you must form your
opinion whether such knowledge as has been dis-
played by the defendant is consistent with the
knowledge Koger Tichborne must have had during
his residence at Stonyhurst. So that it stands
thus—there was no cottage except the confection-
ery cottage in which a philosopher could have
lived ; and it would have been wholly inconsistent
with the discipline of Stonyhurst that a young
man should live at other than the proper quarters
assigned to the philosophers without there existed
some powerful cause for a departure from the
usual discipline, and no such cause is shown to have
existed. If you cannot believe either that the
defendant lived in the college or in the cottage,
then the further question is whether you think
Koger Tichborne could have fallen into so strange
a confusion as the defendant has done.
Now, another thing connected with his resi-
dence at Stonyhurst relates to the body of the
philosophers at large. We know from the evi-
dence that each philosopher had his separate
room, which was at once his bed and sitting room
when he was disposed to be alone or to study.
There was a common room down-stairs, but each
manhad his own separate room, and, so far as the
evidence goes, in no instance did two philosophers
ever occupy the same room. In his cross-examina-
tion the defendant is asked :
‘ How many gentlemen were there in your time?
—l7O or 180—from 150 to 180, more or less. There
were 80 to 90 of them philosophers. The philo-
sophers lived in a separate part of the building,
over to the right of the college in a similar part
to me. You were a philosopher ; did you live
separate from them—you lived to the left?—
There you are trying to catch me again. They
lived separate from me. I lived in a quadrangle
to the left and the philosophers in a quadrangle
to the right, to the best of my memory ; I won’t
swear it. I will pledge my oath that such is my
memory. Do you distrust your memory ?—lt is
not always to be relied on, I think. I will pledge
myself that the class to which I belonged lived as
I have said. I will not swear it. To the right of
the building?—l never said to the right. Now,
I ask you again, will you swear that the philoso-
phers lived in the college buildings—you to the
left and they to the right?—No, I never implied
that at all. Where did the philosophers live ?
To the left side of the building. Did the philoso-
phers live in dormitories 'Yes. Did they sleep
more than one together ?—Yes. The dormitories
were on a different floor. The philosophers had
sitting rooms ; not all. I had a separate sitting-
room to myself and a sleeping-room. The 80 or
90 philosophers had not, I think, separate rooms
as a general rule. They generally sat in a body.
There was one sitting-room on the first floor. A
great many sat there—l 7 or 18 or 20 together.
The majority had not separate sleeping-rooms.
From 12 to 20 slept together. I have no doubt
about it.’
We know that the outside number of the body
of the philosophers did not exceed from IS to 20
while .Roger Tichborne was there, and yet the
defendant says that number slept in one room.
Now, what I cannot help supposing is this—that
the defendant in these statements has confounded
the students with the philosophers, and that
either from the recollection of Huger Ticliborne,
or from some information which he has derived,
he has learnt that the number of students being
between 150 and 180, and thought that those
students had dormitories, as is the case some-
times in large institutions of this sort, and that
in those dormitories a considerable number of
students slept. He has lost sight of the fact that
the philosophers had separate rooms to them-
selves, and that the whole number of the philoso-
phers did not exceed the number that he was
putting into a single dormitory. That is a serious
matter certainly, and it is for you to say whether
you think these mistakes arise from defective
memory or from want of original knowledge.
The next thing one would probably expect a
young man to remember is the localities connected
with the institution. We had a pictorial repre-
sentation of Stonyhurst before us. He was asked
what sort of building it was—a large building.
When asked as to what detached buildings there
were he makes no mention of the seminary, but
speaks only of the church. Then he is asked as
to the playground, which a young man of 17 or


18 who took daily recreation in it would not be
likely to forget. The place where the natural ac-
tivity of youth found itself scope, where cricket
and football were played, would, one would thin r,
remain upon the memory. Some of the assoi
tions connected with the playground are very plea-
sant to recall. The Attorney-General asks ■ ie
defendant:
‘Are there any playgrounds?—Yes. Wh
kind are they ?—There is the lawn and ground n
front. Is that a playground ?—No. lam ask:
you about the playgrounds. What kind are the’
—There is a large extent of ground at the bac c.
What name has it ?—I don’t remember any na e
for it. ’
The Attorney-General, with no doubt som
pleasant recollection floating about his mind, sa ,
There are the School Fields at Eton and t ie
Play Fields at Winchester; had these grounc s
any name ?’ and he replied, ‘No.’ So far he w
not wrong, but he was wrong in the locality. T ie
playgrounds were not at the back of the colle e
—they were at the side ; and he was also wro: •
in stating, as he did, that they extended down ■
the Ribble, as some fields intervened between t e
playgrounds and the river. Then he is asked
there were any branch establishments immec -
ately connected with Stonyhurst which supplie
it with pupils from time to time, and he said lie
did not remember that there were any. He s
asked, ‘ Where is Hurst-green ?’ and he said
did not remember. Now, we know that subs
quently the defendant told the music master wh
was examined that he knew Hurst-green well, anc
mentioned old Betty, who used to live theri.
Then he is asked, ‘ Where is the Hodder ?’ an
hedid not know. We know that it is an estab
lishment where boys too young to be admitted in
to the classes of the college are prepared for ac -
mission, and where novices remain for two year
before they are admitted to Holy Orders. Th
defendant is asked:
Where is Hodder ?—-It is an establishmen ;
on the banks of the Hodder, where they go tc
retreat. There is a building there where th
athers go to retreat, and it is about a quarter o :
a mile from Stonyhurst. When did they go intc
retreat ? I have no recollection. You don’t know
for certain ?—I don’t know for certain. I have
that impression. Did you ever hear that tha;
was where they went ?—I must have heard it
How long does the retreat last?—l can’t tell you
Is it somewhere between a week and a month ?
That is about it. What was done at Hodder dur-
ing the other eleven months of the year ?—I don’t
know. Should you be surprised to find,’ said the
Attorney-General with his usual formula, ‘ that
Hodder was a place which was filled with a class
called novices, who were there for two years?—
No ; it does not surprise me in the least.’
So much for the branch establishments, and
now I come to the still more important topic of
the studies. It is not likely that a young man of
1 fi to 20 would forget the course of studies he pur-
sued.. On this subject the defendant’s recollec-
tion is probed during his cross-examination :
Did you attend lectures? I believe so.
Where ? -In the lecture-hall. Whereabouts was
the lecture-hall ?—lt was in the centre of the col-
lege. Did you go to the lectures in the lecture-
hall, or did the lecturers come to you in the cot-
tage ? Of course I went to the hall. They did
not come to me—asking me such an insulting
question. You know you might have had private
lectures—had you any?—l don’t recollect. Did
your tutors ever come to your place to teach y
in your own room ?—Yes, at spare times, to reac
to me ; not in the regular college hours. Did yo
tutors come to you to give you lectures, or did yo
attend them at the lecture-hall?—Now you see
to put lectures in a different light to what I said
The lectures were given in the lecture-hall. We
private lessons ever given you in your rooms ?
Yes at the first onset—yes. Who taught you
the first onset” as you say ’-Father Seed an
Father Hetheridge. They both of them di
What did Father Seed teach you?—The rue
ments of the English language ; we will say th
English language. What else ?—English spellin
and English grammar, and arithmetic. Wha
sort of arithmetic had you learnt in France
v ery little indeed ; nothing more than divisio
and subtraction, and so on. WEat system hac
you learnt ? lam not aware what system. The'
taught the same sort of system at Stonyhurst a
I had learnt in France. I cannot remember wha
else I learnt ancient history, and I believe I reac
modern history. What history—some one book
—There are so many different books. I ask fo
one just a little book. Cannot you help me t
one book ?—I cannot recollect just at the mo
ment. Mrs. Markham or Mangnall, or what ?
I cannot remember. What history ?—The history
of the different nations of the Old World. Th
whole world—France and Spain, Australia, dif
ferent nations, and so on?—I don't think I men
tioned that; you don’t call Australia a nation
What history did you read—modern history?—!
cannot tell. You say you went through the or
(Unary course, and Father Seed and Father He
theridge instructed you. What was the course as
you pursued it ? —I don’t understand what yoi
mean. What was your college course?—You
mean during the whole time ? Lectures in He
brew, Latin, and Greek. lam afraid I can’t teal
y° u in Hebrew. Can you read Hebrew?—Not a
word. Is there any difference—physical difference
—m the reading of Hebrew? Did you learn the
Hebrew alphabet ?—I do not recollect whether I
learnt the Hebrew alphabet or not. Did you ever
read a phrase of Hebrew? I don’t know; I
studied it for some time. What is the first letter
of the Hebrew alphabet ?—I don’t know.’
Now, I can well understand those who have
learnt the elements of Hebrew forgetting all
about them ; but even those who have not done
so must surely know that Hebrew is read from
right to left, and not as other languages are from
left to right. The defendant says he studied He-
brew for some time, and yet he forgets all about
that striking fact which is known to many who
could not tell one Hebrew letter from another,
xhe cross-examination goes on :
‘ Which way is Hebrew read ?—I have no recol-
lection of it. I don’t remember that it is read
wT/ Ight , *° an< l n °t from left to right.
What mathematics did you learn? —I don’t re-
niember. You learned Greek? —Some portion of
tj l , y° u g° as far as the Greek alphabet
I robably I did ; but I don’t remember. Did you
ever read a phrase of the New Testament in
Greek.—Not a whole phrase, but I understood
some of it. _ Could you read Greek at that time ?
Yes, I think I could make out a sentence. Does
any single Greek word linger in your memory ?
Not a word. 1 don’t think I ever thought of it.
Did you get as far as the article? Could not you
give me “and” in Greek? —No, I have lost it en-
tirely. Did you get better on in Latin ? —I be-
lieve I got further in Latin. Did you learn the


Latin alphabet?—Of course I did. Could you
read Latin? —Yes. Could you read a line now?
—No ; I could not. Did you do any Virgil , any
Ccesar f —l don’t recollect. Do you know whether
Ccesar is written in prose or verse ?—I don’t recol-
lect. Is Ccesar Latin or Greek ?—I should think it
was Greek. What do you say to Virgil l —l have no
recollection of Virgil. What is Virgil —ageneral, or
statesman, or what ?—I have no re collection. Was
he a Greek or a Latin writer ?—I don't recollect.
Did he write verses or prose ?—I don’t recollect.
Did you ever see it before (handing a book to
the witness) ?—I don’t want to look at it at all.
Did you ever see it before—what is it like? Is
it Greek or Latin? —It looks to me like Greek.’
Now one pauses here to consider this strange
evidence. We know that Roger Tichborne was
not a good scholar; but he read Ccesar, and
passed a creditable examination in the first book
of Virgil. Would he not have known, if he were
reading Virgil, whether he had a Latin or a Greek
book before him ? Would he not have known—
not being like Moliere, who was very much sur-
prised when he was told that he had been speak-
ing prose all his life—would he not know whether
he was reading prose or poetry ? Would he have
said, if asked whether Csesar was a Latin writer
or a Greek, ‘ I should think he was Greek ?’ Would
he not have known the difference between Latin
and Greek type ? Would not a person who had once
learnedalittleFrenchandtranslated,sayFenelon’s
Telemaque, even if he could not now translate a sin-
gle sentence, know the difference between French
and German type ? Then the defendant, if he
be Roger Tichborne, had read Ccesar, and, at all
events, the first book of Virgil, and said he
knew sufficient Greek when at school to be able
to make out a sentence. He must have been
perfectly aware that Virgil was Latin, and not
Greek, and of the wide distinction between the
Latin and Greek characters, and yet when a Virgil
is put into his hand, he says, ‘ It looks to me like
Greek. ’
Next he is asked about the menstruum, or
monthly examination of the students. This ex-
amination was not applicable to the philosophers,
and I don’t think much can be made of it as a test,
for it was not at this, but at a special examination
that Roger translated some Ccesar.
Then the defendant is asked, ‘ Is Virgil Latin
or Greek, is it prose or verse?’ The answer is, ‘I
have no recollection.’ The Attorney-General
then says, ‘Did you ever hear of Virgil? Who is
he ? A general, a statesman, or what ?’ To this
the defendant replies, ‘I told you just now I have
no recollection. I never thought about it from
that day to this, I am sure.’ And he adds, ‘I
don’t know whether he was a Greek or a Latin
writer. I don’t recollect whether he wrote verse
or prose.’ ‘Just look at that book,’ says the
Attorney-General, handing the defendant a Virgil,
‘ and say whether you have ever seen it before.’
The defendant answers, ‘ I do not know, I could
not say that I ever saw it before.’ The Lord
Chief Justice asks, ‘ Is it Greek, Latin, or He-
brew ?’ ‘ It appears to me,’ answers the defendant,
‘to be Greek.’ And then he adds, ‘I told you
before I could not tell Greek from Latin.’ Well,
gentlemen, I don’t know whether Roger Tichborne
ever read Greek, but I’m sure he knew who Vir-
gil was and what he wrote, because we know that
from the entry in the memorandum of books which
he bought or intended to buy. But if the defend-
ant ever learned Latin at all, I should have
thought the very opening of the book and the
very first word that caught his eye would have at
once told him it was in the Latin language, and
that if ever he saw a Greek word in his life he
would have known that it was not Greek.
The Attorney-General next takes the defendant
to another branch of study—mathematics—and
cross-examines him thus:
‘ You learned mathematics, you say ?—Yes.
What did you learn ? —I have no recollection. Is
it the same thing as chymistry ?—My memory does
not serve me. Chymistry is a science by itself.
Then, what is mathematics ?—I have no recollec-
tion. What book have you ever read in mathe-
matics ? My memory does not serve me. What
is it—written in Greek, or Latin, or what?—l
don’t recollect. Did you ever read Euclid ? Has
that anything to do with mathematics ?—I don’t
recollect; I think not. Has algebra anything to
do with mathematics ?—I have no recollection.
Have you read Euclid f— l believe I did, but don’t
recollect. Did you ever hear of the Asses’
Bridge ? —I don’t recollect. Did you ever try to
get over it ?—I don’t recollect it. Did you ever
try to cross the Asses’ Bridge ?—I have no recol-
lection of it. Did anybody try his best to help
you over the Asses’ Bridge ? Did you make gal-
lant efforts, as many of us have done, to get over
it ?—I have no recollection. Do you remember
whereabouts it is—how far from Stonyhurst ?—I
will not put up with all your insolence. Do you
know it better by its Latin name, “Eons Asin-
orumV —No.’
Now let us consider for a moment what was
Roger Tichborne’s position with reference to that
science. We know that one of the Fathers at
Stonyhurst tells us that he took him through the
first book of Euclid to the end ; that was in the
second year that Roger Tichborne was at Stony-
hurst. After that the learned Father left, and
whether Roger went on with mathematics during
the last years he was at Stonyhurst we have no
evidence to show. But if he had been studying
Euclid there, and had got to the end of the first
book, he would probably, for the year or two that
he remained there afterwards, have gone on with
his mathematical studies. This, at all events,we do
know—that when Roger Tichborne had received
the promise of his commission from the Horse
Guards, being aware that mathematics would
form one of the subjects of examination, he took
to reading mathematics diligently. Mr. Gosford
tells us Roger used to come and sit at one end of
the desk in his office and work out his problems
there ; and if he thought the matter would have
come to this, Mr. Gosford says he would have pre-
served the papers, and they would have shown how
this young man worked at his mathematics. And
not only did he work in this way, but he went to
Mr. Moberley at Owslebury and read mathematics
with him. Well, he was not examined in mathe-
matics, in which probably he would have passed
at once ; but in arithmetic, and in that he failed.
Upon this he went up to London, and got such
certificates as induced the authorities at the Horse
Guards to dispense with a second examination.
He afterwards expected another examination, and
he writes to say that if he had been examined in
the six books of Euclid he believes he would have
failed, which shows he knew perfectly well the
number of books which the great geometrician
wrote.
Now it is likely that if Roger Tichborne were
asked to do a particular proposition—the Asses’
Bridge for instance—he would have failed. But
if Roger Tichborne had forgotten every problem


iin Euclid, is it likely'he would also have forgotten
what mathematics were about ? He might have
given a very vague and imperfect answer, he might
have said it was about lines, and angles, and tri-
angles, and quadrangles, but could he ever have
failed to know what the thing was about ? But
that’s not all, for the defendant forgot the very
name of Euclid. Could Roger Tichborne have
forgotten it, after all the hard work he had given
to the subject ? Moreover, Roger Tichborne’s ac-
quaintance with mathematics was not confined to
Euclid merely. He was quite aware of the analy-
tical department of mathematical science, because
in his memorandum we find the names of some
books of the highest class in analytical mathe-
matics there enumerated among the works he in-
tended to purchase. That shows he was ac-
quainted with the outlines of mathematical science
ind knew what the range of it was. It is a ques-
;ion for you, gentlemen, whether this knowledge
vas likely to be so obliterated from the mind of
?toger Tichborne that he should have forgotten it
o completely. You may, perhaps, adopt the
heory of the learned counsel—that his memory
s gone ; that is for you to consider, but I call
our attention to the fact that Roger Tichborne
ertainly knew what mathematics were.
Then the defendant is asked what chymistry is
bout, to which he answers, ‘lt is about chymis-
?y, of course.’ On being pressed, he says,
Chymistry is about different herbs and different
oisons, and the mixture of medicines.’ Well
mtlemen, I wish I had more time and opportu-
ity for the study of a science which I think one
the noblest that man is acquainted with. But
ask you, could any one who ever knew anything
(out it make such an answer ? ‘Do you mean/
ys the Attorney-General, ‘ that chymistry is
out the things which are made up in the chy-
ist’s shop?’ The defendant replies, ‘Well, it
about the things that are there made up. ’ Then
3 Attorney-General says, ‘ Is it your opinion
at chymistry deals with what is given and taken
physic?’ The defendant’s answer is, ‘Most
doubtedly.’ Then the defendant is asked about
ilosophy. natural or moral, but he has no recol-
tion. He is next asked, ‘Do you know what
ysiology is ?’ To this he says, ‘ You mean the
‘■rent features. ’ When the question is repeat-
he answers, ‘ Yes, it is the formation of the
id.’ ‘O! that's phrenology,’ says the Attor-
r-General. Then the defendant is asked, ‘Do
i know what metaphysics are?’ The answer is
don’t know what you are alluding to. I told
i just now I don’t recollect what it means.’
11,1 don’t believe Roger Tichborne did attend
:ures on metaphysics, and, therefore, I am not
igether surprised that the defendant, whether
;er Tichborne or not, was not prepared to ans-
what metaphysics were. I remember the
orney-General makes much the same observa-
.. I recollect also that he then gave a defini-
of metaphysics, but not as his own. He said
aphysicswere defined to consist in one fellow
ing what he did not understand to another fel-
who did not understand him. And certainly
a of the metaphysics we have heard in the
se of this case did seem to me to savour very
h of that.
1 much for the studies, but connected with
studies were some letters, and to this point
defendant s attention was called. It seems
ave been the habit at Stonyhurst to prefix
in letters to all the exercises and to every
and to append certain others. The letters
I prefixed were A.M.D.G., and the defendant is
asked what those letters mean. He says he can-
not remember. He is pressed whether they were
not prefixed to every exercise and every book, and
whether they were not to be seen in every room.
His answer is, ‘ I cannot say; I have not given it
a thought what they mean.’ ‘Do you mean to
say, asks the Attorney-General, ‘ that you, a
btonyhurst boy, do not remember what A. M.D.G.
means . ‘ I mean to say,’ is the answer, ‘ that it
does not flash across my mind. Ido not believe
they are printed on every book.’ ‘ Well,’ says the
Attorney-General, ‘ does not A.M.D.G. mean Ad
majorem Dei gloriam V The defendant answers
Yes there is no doubt of it.’ ‘ What does that
mean asks the Attorney-General. ‘ You a
Stonyhurst boy, must surely know.’ Then the
defendant knowing that in Spanish Dios means
God and <//ma glory, says that Deus means God and
Ojona glory ; but the meaning of ad and majorem
he does not remember. The words mean ‘To the
fc glor #° f (^ r 1, ’ ,T here ’ a g a in, though a man
might have forgotten his Latin and not have been
able to construe a single passage, if he was in the
habit of prefixing to all his exercises and to every-
thing written and done at Stonyhurst those four
letters, he might have forgotten possibly what the
letters stood for, but when they were brought
back to his mind-would he have forgotten, do you
think, the meaning of the whole thing taken to-
gether? Roger Tichborne must have known what
they stood for and their meaning. Is it a matter
he would have been likely to forget ?
Then we come to three letters always appended
at the bottom as the others were placed at the
top. They are ‘L.D.S.’ The Attorney-General
asks the defendant what they stand for, and he
says he forgets now. Being asked whether he ever
knew, he replies, ‘Most undoubtedly.’ Then he is
a sked d° they stand for Laus Deo semper, and
what does that mean ? Here again are two words,
Deo and semper, which have corresponding words
m Spanish, Dios and sempre ; but the other, laus
has not, so when the defendant is pressed to say
w , hat Y'ms Deo semper means, he says, ‘ The laws
of God for ever.’ It is for you to judge, gentle-
men, whether that would be likely to be the ex-
tent of Roger Tichborne’s knowledge, but it is the
extent of the knowledge displayed by the defend-
ant as the result of the studies pursued at Stonv-
hurst. J
I think the test applied is a fair and legitimate
one m order to see whether there remained any
trace of the studies through which Roger passed.
If the test applied had been such as the counsel
for the defendant seemed to imply in his cross-
examination of the Stonyhurst witnesses, it would
have been an unfair and improper test. If the
? e , e ndant had had the Commentaries of Caesar put
“° h “ ha ?t’ a . ld had been asked to construe a
wnofl * u aVlng opened the work f °r years, it
b ll a an unfair teBt ‘ If th ® Greek
testament had been put into his hand, and he had
been asked t° read it or a word of it, the test
would not have been fair. It was not a fair test
a , was a PPlied to the Stonyhurst witnesses by
tlie learned counsel for the defendant, in all the
consciousness of great learning, which he undoubt-
edly possesses, in order to expose their want of
Knowledge of matters in which they had been in-
structed at Stonyhurst. There is no analogy in
the cases. Of those who learn Latin and Greek at
sc 1001, I fear the greater number, amid business
and pursuits of life, neglect those languages. The
more the pity, I think ; for those who know what


literature is as a recreation and source of refresh-
ment to the mind when you are worn with toil
will know that you find, as it were, new life and
vigour in turning to the great works of great
authors. And no one who knows what a source of
satisfaction and delight it is to turn to the glorious
works of the human intellect in whatever lan-
guage they may have been written ought to ne-
glect to keep alive whatever learning he may once
have acquired ; but we know that amid the active
pursuits of life men do neglect to do so, and there-
fore the test which the learned counsel for the
■defendant applied was most unfair. But that test
was not applied to the defendant. He was not
asked to construe a passage in Latin or Greek or
to do a problem in mathematics; he was not asked
whether he knew the laws of chymistry or the
laws which govern the phj sical world, but it was
simply said, 4 You attended lectures on these sub-
jects ; do you know what they are ?’ You, gentle-
men, will have to ask yourselves whether a man
who attended a course of lectures, however imper-
fectly, would have so thoroughly forgotten the
whole subject that it would have been so com-
pletely wiped out from his memory as to leave
behind no trace at all.
Now I pass to the recollection of the defendant
with respect to Roger Tichborne’s contemporaries
at Stonyhurst. We find in the evidence brought
before us that there were a great many in the
same class with the defendant among 4 the philo-
sophers’ whose names have been recorded. In the
■first place there were Vicomte de Brimont, three
Berkeleys, two Knights, Mapother (an irishman),
Segar, two Deasys, Kennedy, Plunkett (an Irish-
man), Mannock, and others. Then among the
scholars were his cousins, the present Lord Arun-
dell and Everard Arundell, with whom Roger
Tichborne used to walk on Sunday mornings. One
would suppose that the defendant would recol-
lect some of those, and his knowledge is tested
with regard to them in his examination before
Mr. Roupell. He does not remember any parti-
cular person who was in his class, but he says,
4 0, of course I remember the names of some
of the students.’ Then he is asked the names of
some of the students, and he says, 4 1 don’t re-
member.’ Serjeant Ballantine does not like that,
so he says, ‘Pray, try and remember.’ Then the
defendant says, 4 1 remember Petre or Arundell.
They were in the College.’ ‘Do you remember
whether it is the present Lord Petre or Lord
Arundell, or not ?’ His answer is, 4 No, I don’t.
I have had no opportunity of seeing them since I
was in England. I have been too busy.’ The
present Lord Petre became Lord Petre before
Roger Tichborne went abroad, and I presume if
he had been at Stonyhurst, as he belongs to one
■of the old noble Roman Catholic families of this
country, Roger Tichborne, being a Roman Catholic
himself, would have been aware of his accession
to the title.
But the unfortunate part of the matter is that
Lord Petre never was there, while Roger Tich-
borne was there, nor anybody named Petre. The
defendant speaks of Arundell in the singular, but
Roger Tichborne knew there were two—the pre-
sent Lord Arundell and Everard, who afterwards
became a priest. Would Roger Tichborne have
forgotten that fact? He knew that Everard
Arundell had become a Jesuit priest, because in
one of his letters written home from South
America, thinking that his directions would be
sufficient for the purpose, he desires that the
name of Everard Arundell should be struck out
of his will. The defendant gives the name of
Clough, which was that of a priest at Stonyhurst
at the time ; but strangely enough he pronounces
it ‘Clo.’ As if to account for the defendant
calling it Clo, some of the Stonyhurst witnesses
were asked by the learned counsel for the defence
whether the boys were not in the habit of calling
this gentleman ‘ Old Clo’,’ but they all repudiated
such a thing. In his cross-examination, the de-
fendant’s attention is directed to the evidence he
gave before Mr. Roupell, and he is asked which
of the Arundells he means, and he says Everard.
But Roger Tichborne must have known that both
John and Everard Arundell were there. When
asked whether there was a person named Petre
at Stonyhurst, he says that to the best of his
belief there was. That he swears. Another wit-
ness declares there was not, and we can find no
trace of him.
The defendant mentioned only one Mr. Ber-
keley. He says, ‘I don’t know the Christian
name of Mr. Berkeley.’ But there were three
Berkeleys at Stonyhurst at the time, one of whom
died in 1847, and that is one of the things the
defendant would have been expected to remember.
He is asked about Humphrey, who was an
attendant upon the Philosophers. He says he
does not remember; the name is familiar, but he
thinks it was when he left Stonyhurst that the
name became familiar. Then he is asked, ‘Do
you recollect a person named Humphrey, who
was sometimes called Arundell, a servant there V
His answer is, 4 No, I don’t recollect.’ The name
of Waterton is put to him ; the Rev. Father
Water ton having been Prefect of the Philosophers
when Roger Tichborne joined. But he does not
remember, though the name is brought to his
notice in that of Mr. Waterton, who used to be
called 4 Long Tom.’
And here we come to another head under
which it is fair to test the memory of the de-
fendant, and that is as to the masters. Though
where there is a rapid succession of masters you
will forget names, still some of them will
linger in the memory. No one can carry back
his memory without remembering, not only the
persons, but the names of the masters by whom
he was educated. At the preliminary exami-
nation the defendant is asked under whose care
he was, and he says he is not aware he was under
any particular person’s care. He does not re-
member the name of the Principal or of the
Latin master. But upon the re-examination he
says, 4 1 don’t recollect the names of the priests.
I remembered them the other day, but at present
I cannot.’ ‘Then,’ says Serjeant Ballantine, ‘I
will give you an opportunity of doing so to-
morrow.’ That was very suggestive, especially
if the learned Serjeant had known that thfe de-
fendant’s advisers had got a list of the Fathers at
Stonyhurst. It suggests this,— 4 1 will ask the
question to-morrow, take care how you answer
it.’ I don’t say that was the intention of the
intimation, but it was very likely to have that
effect.
The defendant remembers two brothers named
Cooper, but whether scholars or priests he could
not say. In the examination-in-chief he gives
the names of Fathers Walmsley, Seed, Mann, but
there is no mention of Etheridge or Clough. He
thinks there was no Seminary Superior, and no
head master of 4 the Philosophers.’ He was asked
whether a gentleman named Norris was not the
Superior, and he says, ‘No. It was Father
■VValmsley.’ The question asked was not accu


rate, because it could not be answered by ‘Yes’
or ‘ No.’ Father Norris was Superior within a
month of the time that Roger Tichborne went
there. Father Walmsley was not there at the
time. The person who was Superior when
Roger Tichborne went to Stonyhurst was Father
Barrow. Father Norris was made Rector in
1845, and in 1846 Father Walmsley succeeded.
He says he knew Mr. Bird, but does' not know
what he did. He was asked about a person named
Pater, whether he was a boy or a man, and he
cannot say. Then the Solicitor-General, employing
the usual form, says,— 1 Would you be surprised
to hear that Bird was one of the persons whose
lectures Roger attended, and that Pater was
another, the latter having taught him English
and Latin?’ The defendant says he won’t swear
that Father Clough was living at Stonyhurst
when he went there, but he thinks he was. In
that the defendant is right, for Father Clough
did reside at Stonyhurst during that portion of
1845 that Roger Tichborne was there ; he then
left and did not come back until Roger was
gone, when he returned and became Rector.
Then the defendant states that some of the
tutors used to come and teach him in his own
private room in the cottage. Father Seed and
Father Etheridge used. He is quite certain about
Father Seed, and he believes Father Etheridge.
‘ Father Seed,’ he says, ‘ taught me the rudiments
of the English language, spelling, grammar, and
arithmetic. Up to the time I went to Stonyhurst
I hardly knew any arithmetic at all, except divi-
sion and subtraction. I am not aware there are
two systems for learning arithmetic.’ Now, you
recollect the argument of the learned counsel that
because certain sums in a book were done by the
foreign system that identified the defendant with
Roger Tichborne. But the arithmetic of Stony-
hurst is an English arithmetic, and one cannot
see how the French arithmetic, which the defend-
ant says he never had, could have been used for
teaching him there. Being asked whether Father
Seed was not the whole time Roger Tichborne
was at Stonyhurst Professor of Greek, he says he
cannot recollect. Then the cross-examination
proceeds thus :
‘ Upon your oath, did Father Seed teach you a
single syllable of a single thing? Was he not the
whole time that you were at Stonyhurst Professor
of Greek? —No, I do not think he was all the
time. Will you swear to one single fragment of
a single subject that Father Seed ever taught
you ?—He did teach me; but I do not recollect
what it was. What sort of a man was he—tall,
or dark, or light ? —He was a light man. He was
older than me ten years. Will you swear he ever
taught you anything?—Yes, I will. I don’t re-
member what.’
We have the Rev. Maurice Mann, Professor of
Latin and Greek, who says that finding Roger
Tichborne could not speak English enough,; and
he himself could not speak French enough, Roger
was handed over to Pater to teach him Latin, and
so Pater remained tutor to Roger both in Latin
and English all the time. Father Bird says Roger
Tichborne attended a course of lectures in chy-
mistry, and that he remembers him perfectly
well. Father Etheridge gave him religious in-
struction, but never any lessons as a student for
educational purposes. Father Etheridge was from
1845 to 1846 Professor of Logic and Moral Philo-
sophy, and it is certainly very unlikely that Roger
Tichborne, who at that time could not speak Eng-
lish, would have been sent to attend those lec-
tures. He says that neither he nor Father Seed
ever went to a cottage to teach Roger Tichborne.
Then as for Father Seed teaching Roger Tich-
borne, I cannot find a trace of his teaching any-
thing until 1847 or 1848, when he became Prefect
of the Philosophers. The defendant has not any
knowledge of a Prefect of Philosophers, but it
appears from the College books that such an
officer was appointed annually. It is also quite
clear that there was a Superior of the Seminary,
but that officer does not appear to have been
known to the defendant. As to the teachers,
Pater, who taught him Latin, is unknown to him;
Mann, who taught him arithmetic, is unknown to
him. Bird gave lectures on chymistry and he is
unknown to the defendant. Seed is said to have
given him instruction. But Seed is not called,
and, as far as I can make out from the books,
Seed never taught anything until he was Prefect
of Philosophers.
The next subject connected with College you
would expect a man to have some recollection of
in after years is that which always interests the
schoolboy or student, and that is the time of vaca-
tion. We know from the evidence of the Stony-
hurst witnesses that there was one long vacation
which commenced for the Philosophers on the Ist
of August and terminated on the Ist of October,
while for the students it began some day in the
first week of August and lasted six weeks. There
were two other vacations, but not vacations in
the ordinary sense, because the pupils did not
leave the place, but amused themselves by getting
up plays and such matters within the institution
itself. Upon this matter the defendant was sub-
jected to cross-examination by the Attorney-
General :
‘ What were the vacations ? —There were three
vacations, if I remember right. When were
they? —One about March, I think ; the second at
Midsummer; and the third towards the latter
part of the year. The philosophers stayed away
for the vacations. I don’t know what the stu-
dents did. Do you mean to say that you don’t
remember that the boys at Stonyhurst kept these
vacations ?—I believe some of them did and some
did not. I have no distinct recollection of what
did occur. I have told you what I did myself,
and I cannot answer for others ; I don’t suppose
there was much difference. I’ve told you all I
know. I don’t know what classes they kept, or
what vacations the students had at all. Do you
mean to say the students, as a rule, kept three
vacations in a year ? —I believe some of them did;
I don’t know. Did you live so separately from
the students that you don’t know ?—I don’t say
that; I simply say I don’t remember. I dare say
I must have known. I have no remembrance whe-
ther the majority went and came as I did. Some
of them did, I believe. lam under that impres-
sion. The philosophers’ vacation generally lasted
about six weeks. The midsummer vacation began
somewhere about June or July. My own summer
holidays began at midsummer—about Midsummer
Day.’
The Attorney-General is not satisfied, so he says,
‘ May I take it within a week or fortnight of that
time?’ Well, that gives the defendant an oppor-
tunity of changing, so he replies:
‘ I won’t confine myself to dates at all. It was
within a fortnight before or a fortnight after, to
the best of my recollection. What do you want
me to state it for ? Do you want me to state
what I don’t recollect? I don’t recollect what
month it was in ; I think it was later on. (The


question was repeated.) Do you recollect when
your summer holidays began within a month ?—I
think the holidays began in April, August, and
December. The August would be considered the
Midsummer holidays. I think it was the begin-
ning of August. lam not positive about it. I
have no distinct|recollection. My reason for say
ing now it was about August is I have tried t
recollect. I have no distinct recollection.’
In other schools the summer holidays do gener
ally begin at midsummer, but at the great publi
schools Eton for example—they are generall;
from the end of July to the beginning of Septem
ber. So the defendant fixes the summer holiday
at midsummer, but the Attorney-General goes a
him again and presses him further about it. O
course when this pressure was put on him, believ
ing he had got wrong, the defendant says, ‘My
answer to your question is, I don’t recollect.’ Now
having no distinct recollection on this point is no
satisfactory, because Roger Tichborne used to
spend his vacations partly at Tichborne and partb
at Knoyle, and his favourite amusement during
the vacation was shooting. But if the vacation
had begun in June and lasted for two months
that would not carry him into the shooting season
Therefore when the vacation did begin is a fac
which I should have thought Roger would have
remembered. The defendant says, ‘ I think the
summer vacation lasted about six weeks.’ Anc
now comes this strange statement, —‘ I know ii
was six weeks in winter.’ The fact is there was
no such vacation in winter ; it is purely imaginary
Then he is asked, ‘How many weeks did the vaca-
tion last in summer?’ The answer is. ‘I think
three weeks;’ so that he puts the length of the
vacation as six weeks in winter and three weeks
in the summer —the fact being that the summer
vacation lasted two months and the winter vaca-
tion only ten days, in which the students stayed
in the place, unless when those who were philoso-
phers got special leave. Then he is asked about
the Easter holidays, but both the questioner and
the witness seem not to have been aware of the
fact that at Christmas and Easter the vacation
was, properly speaking, no vacation at all.
It would seem that on the subject of the vaca-
tions the defendant’s mind was in a strange state
of confusion. He thought the Summer vacation
was at Midsummer instead of in August, and that
the Long Vacation was at Christmas instead of in
the Summer; but on these points he sets himself
right by the obvious cooperation of the cross-
examination. Again, be appeared to be utterly
unaware that at the Christmas holidays the stu-
dents were not allowed to leave the establishment,
but that their vacation consisted in a relaxation
or cessation of their studies. He is equally out
as to the half-holidays, and says that they were
on Wednesday and Saturday afternoons, which is
usually the case at public schools, whereas at
Stonyhurst they were on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
Then there were one or two particular events
which happened while Roger Tichborne was
at College. First of all there was the smoking.
Soger it appears was very much addicted to
smoking. The defendant is asked about this,
and he says he did smoke a great deal, wherever
and whenever he could get an opportunity. On
being asked whether smoking was against the
rules, he said : ‘ They let us smoke.’ ‘lt was per-
mitted ?—Yes.’ ‘Smoking was allowed at Stony-
hurst?—lt was.’ ‘Do you really mean that? —
Yes, I do.’ The witnesses told us, however, that
the young men were in the habit of smoking a
great deal and screening themselves from observa-
tion behind some high hedges while they were en-
joying this forbidden pleasure. When the author-
ities discovered this they caused the hedges to be
cut down quite low, and after that Huger Charles
Tichborne and others made a cabin to smoke in
in a wood near the College. Father Rigby soon
found out the cabin and had it cut down, where
upon the smokers took refuge in an old flue which
was covered with ivy. The defendant on being
questioned admitted that he did smoke a giea ;
deal, but he had no remembrance whatever o '
these circumstances.
Then there is the death of John Berkeley. He
was a Philosopher, and was very popular at Stony
hurst. An abscess formed iUeif in his side. He
neglected it, and when at last it got very bad
medical advice was called in, but it was too late
for the abscess struck inward and he died. The
death of this young gentleman produced a good dea
of excitpment among his brother students. Thi
was in January 1847, and after his death there
was performed in the church of the institution
the most impressive of all the lites of the Roman
Catholic Church—a solemn requiem mass for th
deceased, which ever} body, high or low, connectec
with Stonyhurst, attended. The body was after
wards taken away to be buried in the family vault
Now, Roger Tichborne lodged in the next room to
this young man, and, like the othec.iDmates of the
College, he was seen going in and out. anxiously
inquiring after the health of his friend. An
event of this kind was surely calculated to pro
duce a considerable sensation in the community
and to leave a permanent impression on the minds
of the students. The defendant is asked whethei
he remembers any one of his friends dying at
Stonyhurst. He replies that he thinks one or
two of the Fathers died, and when asked as to any
young gentleman dying, sa.\s he has some remem-
brance of somebody dying in 1847 —which, by the
way, is the correct date—but he thinks he was not
a friend and he cannot tell his name.
The last event out of the ordinary course of
Roger Tichborne's College life is his taking a part
in a play called The Castle of Andalusia. The
defendant is shown O Keeffe’s play and asked
whether he took part in it. He does not think he
did. Then he is asked :
‘ Did you ever read a farce called No Dinner,
but However? —No; I have no recollection of it.
Did you ever take part in No Dinner , but How-
ever?—l have taken part in no dinner often
enough. lam glad your spirits are so good. Now
you have had your joke, will you answer the ques-
tion ? Did you take part in No Dinner, but How-
ever ? —No, Ido not remember that I did. I will
not swear, but I do not think I did.’
It seems that the Philosophers played The Castle
of Andalusia, followed by the farce of No Dinner,
but However, and, according to the playbills, Roger
played in the first the part of Ripino, and in the
second that of a villager. Here, again, the ques-
tion is, however insignificant the parts may have
been which a youth played while at College, would
he forget the fact afterwards ; or supposing it to
be almost buried in oblivioD, whether the play-
bills, with his name figuring in the parts, being
produced would not recall the circumstance? It
may be that he did not play, for we have no posi-
tive proof that he did ; but if he did it is for you
to consider whether he would be likely to remem-
ber the fact.
Now, I come to the last matter connected with
Stonyhurst. Under what circumstances did Roger
Q


leave the College ? I take it to he perfectly clear
from the evidence that Roger Tichborne left on
the Ist of August 1848. Did he ever return? It is
suggested that he did. The defendant conveyed
to the former jury the belief that he Roger Tich-
borne, left Stonyhurst prematurely before the
period had expired for which he was intended to
remain there. The reason assigned for this was
that he had contracted a disorder which showed
he had been guilty of such immoral conduct as
could not be tolerated in the institution. On the
present trial it has been suggested that Roger
Tichborne went back to Stonyhurst after the sum-
mer vacation of 1848, and that subsequently he
was summarily dismissed. In the cross-examina-
tion at the previous trial the defendant was asked
whether he had an illness at Stonyhurst. The de-
fendant admitted that he was ill for a few days,
but declined to say what was the matter with him.
I cannot solve what Sir John Coleridge had in his
mind when he pressed questions of this sftrt. The
medical gentleman. Mr. Pinder of Preston, went
over to S tonyhurst three times. The prescriptions
were a blue pill and a saline draught, evidently
for a disordered stomach, and afterwards he was
bled, but this treatment does not point in the di-
rection indicated. There is nothing to show that
Roger Tichborne had any illness of the kind hinted
at while he was at Stonyhurst. Whether the
Attorney-General had in his mind the occasion
when the doctor bled him I do not know, but the
defendant evidently had something else in his
mind. Mr. Serjeant Ballantine again takes the
matter up in the re-examination, when the defend-
ant says : ‘ I was attended by a doctor—one of the
priests.’ * Without going into details,’ asked Mr.
Serjeant Ballantine, ‘was any communication
made to you after that illness? —Yes, there was.
And how soon after that did you leave the college ?
—About a month afterwards. Had you intended
to leave so soon ?—No, it was not intended that I
should leave so soon.’ Thus the defendant refers
to this illness as leading to his leaving, and it has
no reference to the supposed illness of a similar
description which his learned counsel says hap-
pened soon after his arrival in the college.
We know perfectly well that Roger Tichborne
left Stonyhurst on the Ist of August 1848, and
that when his commission was applied for his
father stipulated that he should continue his
studies till that date. His accounts are made
up to that time. It is true an extra month is
charged for, and this at first caused some diffi-
culty, but it is explained by the fact that Roger
Tichborne went to Stonyhurst before the collegi-
ate year commenced, and therefore, in addition
to the IOOf. payable for the annual course, the
extra month had to be paid for. There is no
trace of Roger Tichborne in the books afterwards.
We know that after leaving Stonyhurst in 1848
he spent a little time with Mr. Seymour, that he
then joined his father at Clifton, that he stayed
there till the middle of September, and that he
then accompanied his father to llheims. We find
a letter from the father, dated Boulogne, 14th of
October, when they were coming back. Afterwards
he went with his father to Knoyle. The mother,
it appears, wished Roger to return to Stonyhurst,
but the father writes that this is altogether out
of the question, and when the young man himself
receives a letter on the subject from his mother,
he peremptorily declines to go back. Therefore,
to maintain that Roger Tichborne ever returned
to Stonyhurst is perfectly absurd, and the state-
ment of the defendant that he left Stonyhurst
earlier than he should otherwise have done in
consequence of the complaint he had completely
falls to the ground. Indeed, the statement is not
only unsupported hy the evidence, but it is con-
tradicted by it. Whatever may have prompted it,
what wasthe motive for making it I cannot suggest;
all I know is that it is positively and unmistakably
contradicted by the evidence. So much for Stony-
hurst, except the evidence of two witnesses, one of
whom at all events is worthy of attention.
Thomas Richard Hoffland says that in the years
1845 and 1846 he was drawing-master at Stony-
hurst, and that he remembers Roger Tichborne
as one of his pupils, but he made very little pro-
gress. This gentleman had a partner named Hill,
and they used to go from Preston to Stonyhurst
together. Mr. Hoffland taught landscape, and
Mr. Hill taught figure drawing. Mr. Hoffland
saw the defendant at the Royal Hotel, Preston,
to the proprietor of which he said he was perfectly
well known by name. The defendant, when he
saw him, said, ‘You are Mr. Hoffland, the gentle-
man who used, with another, to come over to
Stonyhurst, from Preston, once a week.’ The
defendant further told Mr. Hoffland that he did
not recognise him by his face, but he remembered
that he had lost a limb. Then the witness ques-
tioned him as to who was his partner, and, after
some consideration, he gave the name correctly.
He subsequently said that he remembered the
small public-house at Hurst-green, a short dis-
tance from the college, and that it was kept by
‘Old Betty.’ Now, that is rather striking, be-
cause upon the former trial the defendant did not
remember Hurst-green at all. Then, says Mr.
Hoffland, * I asked him whether he remembered
the name of the rector of the college at the time,’
and he said, ‘Yes; the Rev. Father Waltnesley.’
Now, gentlemen, the witness ceased to be the
drawing-master at the end of the collegiate year,
1846; and the Rev. Father Walmesley was not
rector until after that time; therefore the answer
must have been incorrect. The defendant only
appears to recollect Walmesley, although there
were three or four rectors at Stonyhurst in Roger
Tichborne’s time. Other questions follow, and
then he asks Mr. Hoffland whether he ever re-
membered meeting him at Preston in a place
where neither of them ought to have been, and
his (Hoffland) asking him not to mention to any
one the meeting. The witness replied, upon re-
flection, that he did remember the circumstances,
and added, in the box, that he had a firm con-
viction that no one else but themselves knew of
the meeting. Mr. Hoffland, when asked as to the
identity of the defendant, said, ‘I could not
speak from personal identity, but from the ques-
tion he ask6d me I should say that he was Roger
Tichborne. The general expression of the upper
part of the face reminded me of Roger Tichborne
at the end of the conversation.’
Now, gentlemen, you see here is a considerable
amount of want of knowledge displayed with re-
gard to the many points upon which the know-
ledge of the defendant has been tested with
reference to his going to Stonyhurst, with refer-
ence to his residence there, and the particular
incidents which happened while he was there.
Against all this want of knowledge there is some-
thing to be set off. He forgot Hurst-green on his
examination, but remembered it subsequently,
and then there is the other recollection, which
seems to be the one green spot on the waste, and
that is the recollection of his visit to Preston, and
his inopportune rencontre with the drawing-master*


The drawing-master was in pari delicto with the
naughty boy, and all he could say was 4 Roger,
don’t say anything about me, and I won't say
anything about you.’ Whether Roger Tichborne
afterwards mentioned the circumstance to some
of his companions while smoking behind the
hedge at Stonyhurst, and whether what the
learned counsel calls a 4 bird in the air’ carried
the story to the ears of the defendant does not
appear; but otherwise it is remarkable that there
should be one particular circumstance by which
he is enabled to revive the recollection of the
drawing-master on the subject of their common
transgression and so to satisfy him that he was
the real Roger Tichborne.
There is a young woman from Stonyhurst who
says she heard Roger Tichborne speak several
times, and noticed the peculiar manner in which
he used to throw his legs about. She takes upon
herself to speak to his identity, and expresses her
opinion that he is the man. That is the case
with reference to Stonyhurst.
There is one visit at this time to which impor-
tance is attached —namely, the defendant’s visit
to Burton Constable in the early part of 1848.
He is asked :
‘ Do you remember any particular place to
which you went in your holidays ?—Most likely
to Tichborne; and I went on one occasion to
Burton Constable.’
It is remarkable that he made no mention of
Knoyle, which Roger went to every year as regu-
larly as he went to Tichborne.
4 How long did you stay at Burton Constable?
—Just about five or six weeks, I think.’
Sir Percival Radcliffe tells us Roger was there for
a fortnight only. The defendant must have had
in his mind the Christmas vacation, he being
under the impression it lasted five or six weeks,
when we know it was only a ten days’ vacation :
4 Do you remember anything happening at Bur-
ton Constable?—Yes, several things. Do you re-
member the private theatricals? —Yes. In what
part of the house were they held ; in the long
room or the library?—lt was called the long room
and also the library. ’
He next speaks of his cutting down a hedge. Sir
Talbot Constable was cutting down a hedge on
one part of his farm, when the defendant came
up and said, ‘Let me cut it down ;’ and he says
he did cut it down. He also says he bought a
black mare of a horse-dealer named Lambert.
Then he tells us a story of his having helped him-
self and the guests with wine from the decanter
on the sideboard in the absence of the butler,
which, if proved, shows that the defendant had a
good memory, though it is not exactly a thing he
would remember in after-life if he forgets other
matters of infinitely greater importance. When
they were in the cab the defendant said he re-
membered giving to Bertram Talbot a black horse
which he bought of a farmer named Lambert,
upon which, says Sir Percival, it flashed across his
mind that such a thing did take place, but that it
was he (Sir Percival) who gave the horse to Ber-
tram Talbot; and that it was he also who bought
a horse from Lambert, though that was quite a
different one. So that the defendant, although
he had got hold of the story, was wrong altogether
as to its particulars. He was next asked about
some private theatricals at Burton Constable.
4 Do you recollect any French being played
there?—Yes, I think so. Then there was a French
piece played there?—Yes. Now tell me the name
of it ?—That I can’t. I should have thought you
would give me an answer like lightning?—No,
not like lightning. What did you play, prince or
servant?—l don’t recollect. You say there was
a French piece?—Yes, I believe it was a French
officer in an English piece. I think the name of
it was “Popping the Question.” Now we are
getting very close to it—quite warm, as they say.
Tell me all about it.—l don’t recollect anything
more. Tben there was a French officer in an
English piece ?—I have not said it was a French
piece. Surely you can give me the name of the
officer?—No, I can’t. But did you act anything
at all at Burton Constable?—Are you asking me
on that particular night ? I mean on the occa-
sion of your visit.—l thought you meant on that
one night. Did you act anything else?—Yes, I
did; I danced the “Can-can” before a lot of ladies
and gentlemen in the library. That was in 1847?
—I was just thinking. Will you swear?—Yes, I
am positive about it.’
I suppose the question of the Attorney-General
implied that the can-can was a dance of more
recent date than 1847 or 1848. However, lam not
acquainted with the can-can , and do not know
when it was first introduced into the world. One
generally understands that it is not the most
decent of all dances, but I am sure I don’t know.
The defendant is further asked:
‘ Did you play or take part in anything ? You
recollect the dancing. Did you act a part on that
occasion? —No, I don't recollect acting any part.
Will you swear you did not ?—Wait a little and I
may recollect all you are asking me about. Will
you swear you did not act a part?—You seem very
anxious to get me to swear to things that I don’t
recollect. Do you think you did or did not act a
part?—No, I don't think I did. If I did it was
something very simple. Can’t you pledge your-
self whether you took a part before the company
at Burton Constable ?—I tell you to the best of my
belief I did not. Was Mr. Percival Radcliffe there?
—Well, he says he was, but I don’t believe it.
Will you swear you did not act with him?—Yes,
that I will. Did you take any part in any per-
formance with him?—No, that 1 did not. Will
you swear you did not?—l think I may safely say
I did not, and I will swear it. Would you be sur-
prised to find that Roger Tichborne acted the part
of a French student, with Mr.Radcliffeas another
French student? —1 did nothing of the kind.’
Sir P. Radcliffe is called, and states that he met
Roger Tichborne at Burton Constable during a
visit there at the end of 1847 and the beginning
of 1848, and they became very intimate. Lady
Constable was fond of acting, and it was a com-
mon afternoon or evening amusement to get up a
play. He remembered performing in a French
vaudeville with Roger Tichborne. They were two
students. Sir Percival Radcliffe was asked whether
the can-can had been danced at Buxton Constable,
and he said he was sure Sir Clifford Constable
would never have permitted it.
About that time a visit was paid by Roger
Tichborne to Towneley, the seat of Colonel Towne-
ley, near Burnley. Upon this some questions
were put to the defendant as to the character of
the house. The defendant said it was about 12
miles from Stonyhurst, which I believe is right;
and he was also right in say mg that he was only
there about twice. He said there was a village
called Towneley, and though that is not correct,
there are anumber of straggling houses which might
give the idea of a village. He cannot remember
what the house was line, nor whether there was
a tower in the centre of the house, as suggested


by the Attorney-General. It does not seem that
there is a tower in the centre, but there are four
towers outride, which are conspicuous. Mrs.
Towneley asked him whether he ever remembered
going to Towneley, and he said, ‘Yes,’ but when
asked where it was he said, ‘ Near Bath,’ the fac
being that it is only twelve miles from Stonyhurs-
Now we can come down to the end of the yea
1848, and we enter upon the commencement of th
year 1849. On the Ist of January in that yea
Roger addressed a letter to Lady Tichborne, i
which he said that he was very happy at Tich
borne, and was spending his time in field sporl
and reading instructive books. After writing tha
letter he goes on two visits—one to Bilton Grang
and the other to Bath. The visit to Bilton Grang
was not marked by any particular incident, bu
it extended over a fortnight, and one would hav
thought that it was long enough to have impressec
upon his memory a recollection of the house
which in point of architecture is rather remark
ably constructed. He is asked in cross-examina
tion where it was, and he says either in Warwick
shire or Yorkshire. Well, then a scene occurs in
court—somebody, either intentionally or uninten
tionally, said ‘ Warwickshire,’and the defendan
then said, ‘ I said it was either in Warwickshir
or Yorkshire. I recollect now that it is in War
wickshire.’ On being asked, ‘ When you went to
stay there, what station did you get out at ?’ th
defendant replied, ‘ It was either Rugby or Crewe
—Rugby, I think.’ Now Rugby is the proper
station, and is the post town. This may be dis
covered by looking at the Court Guide , but it b;
no means follows that the defendant preparec
himself for the question. Then he is asked who
he met there, and he said, ‘I recollect meeting
my cousin Bertram there—Bertram Talbot.’ Mrs
Washington Hibbert was called, and she was
asked if she remembered this visit of Roger to
theirhouse at Bilton Grange. She saidthatMr. Ber-
tram Talbot came there from time to time; bui
she does not think he was there after September
1848. Then she is asked whether there was no!
a good deal of talk about Mr. Bertram Talbot.
Now, the defendant does not say that there was
conversation about him, but that he actually met
him at Bilton Grange, while Mrs. Washington
Hibbert says that her son was there in September
and not after, and that Roger Tichborne never met
him at Bilton Grange. Again the defendant is
asked what sort of place Bilton Grange is, and
he says he cannot recollect. A coloured drawing
of the place is shown to him ; but he does not re-
cognise it, because it is a bird’s-eye view, and he
never had a bird's-eye view of Bilton Grange.
Roger Tichborne afterwards went to Bath,
where his uncle Robert was staying. Mrs. Nangle,
her daughter, and her two sons were also staying
there, and Sir Edward and Lady Doughty came to
join them, so that there was a regular family
party. Roger went to the White Lion Hotel at
Bath. There were, it seems, one or two incidents
during the time he was there. In the first place,
there wasaball given, and Sir Edward Doughty
and Lady Doughty went to it. Sir Edward, while
going downstairs, had a very severe fall, which at
first caused considerable alarm to the members of
the family. The ball is remarkable in another
respect. Mrs. Allen, the butler’s wife, was de-
livered of twins just as the ball was about to
commence. The defendant is asked who was
there ; and he says he has no recollection of any
member of the Tichborne family being there ; he
does not recollect the ball, and he appears equally
ignorant of any accident having happened atit. He
does not remember any member of the family bein]
at Bath while he was there, whereas we know Sir
Edward Doughty was there at that time. We know
Roger Ticbborne was there at that time; and Ido
not find that Roger Tichborne ever paid any other
visit to Bath when Sir Edwaid Doughty was there
Again, he says he does not remember Mrs. Nangle
being at Bath. Questioned about the Nangles, he
says he does not remember meeting the young Nan
gles there ; or anything about being out with Cap
tain Nangle on one occasion, and being refused ad
mission to a ball; or that he used to go with the
captain when he paid visits to a young lady in
that neighbourhood whom he afterwards married
or their conversations in French, that being the
only language the Nangles spoke when talking
with Roger. The defendant said these things
never happened at all, and you, gentlemen, must
decide between him and Major Nangle as to
which you will believe.
We now come to 1849, when you know thal
Roger was working at his problems and taking
lessons from the Rev. Mr. Moberly at Owslebury.
You will remember that an application had been
made at the Horse Guards in 1847, and his name
was put down for a commission. You know also
that in the course of 1848 Mr. Seymour took him
to the Horse Guards and introduced him to Lord
Fitzroy Somerset to remind him of his promise,
so that Roger Tichborne became personally ac-
quainted with that distinguished officer. Months
passed away, and at length he took the decisive
and bold step of writing to Lord Fitzroy Somerset,
and you will remember that an answer came
stating that, subject to his passing an examination
in mathematics, bis commission would be sent
him. He had a very short time to prepare, for he
was to go to the Sandhurst examination on the
Ist of July. He went to Sandhurst, and at his
father’s request Colonel Greenwood went with
him. They got there on the evening of the 30th
of June, but could get no accommodation at the
Duke of York hotel, and were obliged to go to
the Tumble Down Dick public-house, near the
Farnborough Station. It appears that some
arrangement about the examinations was made,
and on getting a certificate for mathematics he
was allowed to join.
It was thought desirable by the defendant’s
counsel, in his examination-in-chief, to go into
this matter, and, in reply to Mr. Giffard, the
defendant said he was studying for going through
his examination before he went to Sandhurst, at
Mr. Seymour’s in Grosvenor-Btreet. He thought
some one came to the house to help him, and says
he got a certificate, but has no idea what has
become of it. Now, the certificate referred to
there is the certificate obtained at the only exami-
nation which had up to that time been mentioned.
He says he did go to Sandhurst to get a cer-
tificate. It would seem to be implied that he
was at Grosvenor-street studying previously; but
that is a mistake. He says he could not know
that he should have a commission until he had
passed the examination. The defendant seems,
first of all, to think it was Mr. Henry Seymour
house at which they were. Afterwards he cannot
say whose house it was—all that he knows is, that
Mr. Henry Seymour was there; but he believes the
house very probably belonged to his grandfather;
though he does not remember Mr. Seymour
being there. You will bear in mind that Roger
Tichborne was at Mr. Seymour’s house in 1845.
The cross-examination proceeds, and the defen-


dant said he remembered ‘ a professor of fortifica-
tion,’ who taught him ‘the landmarks of n =>"
land and beiug pressed to state what the land-
marks were he replied : ‘ The landmarks of Eng-
land insinuate the formation of England at differ-
ent points along the coast, which every officer is
hound to learn, 1 believe, before he can pass.
Now, what a cavalry officer can possibly have to
do with the landmarks of England I cannot pos-
sibly conceive ; but I believe we did discover the
solution of the mystery. It appears that there
is a book published for ‘ coaching’ purposes, and
is entitled the Landmarks of English History.
That at least is the only solution I have been able
to discover of this supposed study of land marks.
He is next asked, ‘What else besides landmaiks
did you learn?—There were some other subjects,
but I don't remember what they were. vYho
coached you? —George Greenwood. Colonel
George Greenwood was called and examined as to
other matters, but he was not asked whether or
not he had assisted Roger Tichborne in the way
of ‘ coaching. ’ I was very anxious to see whether
the defendant was right or whether he was wrong.
If he were right, it would have been a striking in-
stance of knowledge or memory with regard to a
subject which of course interested Roger lich-
borne at the time very much. Therefore I asked
Colonel Greenwood this question : ,
‘You told us you did go with him to band-
hurst?—Yes. You said you knew he was going
to be examined ; you were aware of that before-
hand, I suppose ?-Yes. Did you help him at
dll?—No notin the least. You did not coach
him ?—No. Did you happen to know whether he
had been preparing for that examination . No, 1
knew nothing about it. His father sent a letter
from Paris to ask one of the Colonel Greenwoods
to go with him to Sandhurst. Then you knew no-
thing of the preparatory course he had been going
through?—Nothing whatever.’
Nothing can be more precise than this testi-
raony, and what could have induced the deren-
dant to assert that he was coached by Colonel
Greenwood for the examination at Sandhurst I
cannot conceive. ,
The defendant is next asked about the number
of teachers he had, and then whether the name
of the man who taught him was Moberly, and he
said he believed it was some kind of name like
that, but he could not say, nor could he tell
where he lived. Then he is asked whether he
knew a place called Owslebury, and he said he did
not know it by that name, nor did he know any-
thing sounding like it. He says he has no recol-
lection of a place called Owslebury. Then a let-
ter is put into his hands. It is dated the 10th of
September 1819, and it is the one which Roger
Tichborne writes to Gosford begging him to send
a note to Mr. Moberly to say he is not going to
take any more lessons from him, because he is
studying in London. The Attorney-General asks
him if he would be surprised to learn that Mr.
Moberly was a clergyman living within three miles
(he should have said six) of Owslebury. The de-
fendant says he does not think there is a village
of that name, unless it is some hokey-pokey place.
He then adds that he has a recollection of going
somewhere in the neighbourhood for a certain
time before be joined the army. Here the defen-
dant is evidently puzzled with the date of the
letter. The examination at Sandhurst was on
the 12th of July, and the letter is dated the 10th
of September. He seems to have either forgotten
that there was a second examination, or that he
had passed it.
‘What did Mr. Moberly teach you?—Some-
thing in connection with the examination. What?
—I believe it was English. Was that all ?—I
really do not know what he taught me. Did he
come to you?—l think I rode over to him. How
often? —I cannot say.’
Now, we know that Mr. Moberly taught mathe-
matics to Roger, and you have heard his letter to
Gosford, in which he says he cant visit him, as
he has to ride six miles every day to take his
mathematical lessons. The reason suggested for
the defendant’s not knowing about this is that he
never heard of Owslebury, the place being called
vulgarly Husselbury, and no doubt he might have
forgotten it. But did Roger know how to write
it? In his letter to Gosford he spells it wrongly,
omitting the ‘ le,’ and makes it ‘Owsbury ; but
in his pocket-book, in which he took down the
name and address of his reverend instructor, he
spelt it correctly—Owslebury; but he could not
have failed to recognise in the Husselbuiy of com-
mon parlance the Owslebury connected with Mr.
Moberly and his mathematical lessons. Suppose the
question had been suddenly put to Roger, he might
have corrected the pronunciation of the word ; but
would he have said he did not recollect the man or
the place? Is the explanation satisfactory ?
The result is that the defendant makes several
serious mistakes, first in ignoring the preparatory
studies at Tichborne, and in supposing they were
pursued iu London; secondly, in ignoiing the
failure of the examination at Sandhurst, the ex-
pectation of a second examination, and the fact
that it was dispensed with on his obtaining a cer-
tificate from the professor who taught him mathe-
matics ; and thirdly in supposing the studies in
London to have preceded the Sandhurst examina-
tion, instead of being preparatory to the second
examination, and having led to his obtaining the
certificate which superseded the necessity for the
examination. In re examination the defendant
said he knew he was plucked at Sandhurst. He
identifies his problems and examination papers,
but says he does not remember in what he passed.
It is for you, gentlemen, to judge whether or not
the account the defendant gives of his preparation
for the army is such as you would have expected
from Roger Tichborne, making allowance tor the
time which elapsed between the event, and the
examination at ihe first trial. This concludes the
intermediate stage, and to-morrow we will go into
his life in the army.
Seventeenth Day, Tuesday, February 24, 1874.
Of tho J« 7 , -Before I r « to the
question 0 f the defendants recollection ot the
military life of Roger Tichborne there is one sub-
ject which I ought to mention, and that is, Roger s
visit to b Kno >l ein the year 1849. The defendant
wen w. a-Wrmwledsred Of that fact there is
oste d( ) u J|. J mt when the defendant
t subject, his statement does not
18 with state of things. He
“» aoked .l.Uher he celled hi. .»»« the Mi„


Seymours by their Christian names, or as ‘ Aunt
Jane,’ and so on, and his reply is, ‘ I should think
aunt, but I have no recollection.’ In like manner,
he says, he called Mr. Alfred Seymour Uncle Al-
fred, and Mr. Henry Seymour Uncle Henry, ad-
ding that at times ‘ I might have called them Al-
fred or Henry.’ He is asked, ‘ Will you swear you
called them uncle ?’ and he said, ‘ No, I do not
see any objection to swearing it.‘Will you? he
is asked ; and he answered, ‘ I will, to the best of
my recollection.’ That certainly is indirect con-
tradiction to the several members of the Seymour
family who have been called, and to the letters of
Roger Tichborne to his uncle, of which we have a
good many. The same thing occurs in reference
to Mr. Seymour. He says he called him grand-
father, and spoke of him to others as his grand-
father ; but we know that Roger, in his letters,
always referred to him as Mr. Seymour, and never
as grandfather. Now, we know that during
Roger s visit to Knoyle, in September, where he
joined his father, his grandfather was ill at Bath,
at the house of Mrs. Hopkinson, his wife’s mother,
where he died on the 27th of November following.
The defendant is asked whether he saw Mr. Sey-
mour just before his death, and he says,
‘ Wnat do you mean by ‘‘just?” A couple of
months ? I think I saw him in September. Where
was he ?—I do not think he was confined to bed.
Was he known to be dying?—l think not. Was it
not known to the family that he could not recover ?
—I have no recollection that he was so dangerously
ill as you talk about. Did you leave your grand-
father thinking that you should never see him
again ?—I think not. I never did see him again.’
Then he is asked:
* Were you ever at Knoyle with Sir James Tich-
borne ?—I think not. Where did Mr. Seymour,
your grandfather, die ?—He died at Knoyle, I
think. Would it surprise you to find that Mr.
Seymour did not die at Knoyle ; that you were at
Knoyle —or Roger Tichborne was—during his last
illness, or that he went: over to Knoyle to Mrs.
Hopkinson’s house at Bath, where Mr. Seymour
was lying dying, and saw him there, and that in
that nouse he died about a month afterwards? —
I deny that being the case.’
Well, we know that Mr. Seymour had gone to
Bath for the best medical advice that he Could
procure, and that Roger saw him and took leave
of him there, and we know that he died not at
Knoyle, but at Bath. Lady Rawlinson was at the
time in attendance on her father, and she tells us
she recollects Roger’s visit perfectly, and that at
that time it was well known that ner father was
dying. She is asked, ‘ Did Roger know that he was
taking a final leave of his grandfather?’ and she re-
plied, ‘Certainly.’ That is how the evidence stands
on that point. Now the question is, whether a man
could go to see a relative under these circum-
stances and forget it. Is it a thing likely to be
effaced from a man’s mind ? He had gone over to
Bath to take leave of his dying relative, and could
he, under the circumstances, have been so mis-
taken as to have forgotten the leave-taking, or
said that his grandfather died at Knoyle ?
Another question was raised respecting Knoyle,
and that was as to old Mrs. Hopkinson. She was
the mother of Mrs. Seymour, and invariably lived
at Knoyle with the family when they were there,
and they frequently stopped at her house in Bath.
The defendant, on being asked, said he did not
recollect such a person of the name of Hopkinson
at all; and when the Attorney-General asked him
if he should be surprised to learn it was Mrs. Sey-
mour’s mother, he then said he recollected the old
lady, but denied all the incidents connected with
her residence at Knoyle. We know that Roger
Tichborne always went to see Mrs. Hopkinson ;
and his father, in one of his letters, remarks how
kind she always was to both of them.
Then there arose the question as to Roger’s
smoking at the butler’s cottage. Mr. Alfred Sey-
mour had a room in the cottage, and as Mr. Sey-
mour disliked smoking in the house, and as Roger
was an inveterate smoker, he used to go to Mr.
Alfred Seymour’s room, and there smoke. He
used also to practise on the French horn there.
The butler's name was Thompson ; and he after-
wards, when he left the service of Mr. Seymour,
set up as lodging-house keeper in St. James’s-
place and Roger always used to stay there when
Mr. Seymour’s London residence was not avail-
able, so that he knew Roger familiarly and well.
The defendant, however, on being cross-examined,
said he did not recollect the butler, or his name,
or anything about him. That he should have for-
gotten this man does seem very strange, and it is
for you to say whether you think Roger Tichborne
could have exhibited so remarkable a forgetful-
ness as that of the defendant with respect to Mrs.
Hopkinson and Thompson. On the subject of the
smoking he is asked, ‘Youwere a smoker?—Yes,
I was. Where did you smoke at Knoyle ?—I do
not remember. In your own room? —1 think not.
Where then ?—Anywhere I could get. No doubt
I made use of the butler's room ; but I will not
say so ; because I do not remember.’
Well, a photograph of Knoyle was shown to
him. It was a correct representation of the front
of the house to the road, showing the butler’s
cottage opposite, and the window of the room in
which Roger used to sleep. This photograph
seems to me to be a very accurate representation
of the exterior of the house. It is shown to the
defendant in cross-examination, and he cannot
recognise Knoyle in it. For four years Roger
Tichborne spent his vacations at Knoyle, and the
natural conclusion would be that he would re-
member the photograph when shown to him.
The defendant is further asked, in cross-exami-
nation, whether he ever shot at Knoyle. and he re-
plies that he has no recollection, and adds thatcer-
tainly he never had a regularday sshooting there.
Now, Roger’s letter shows that he often went out
shooting at Knoyle; and Mr. Hewitt, who was
called here as one of his witnesses, and also Mr.
Baker, speak of Roger spending days and days
out shooting at Knoyle. We have here, too,
this very remarkable fact, that while at the last
trial the defendant knew nothing of the butler,
and denied that Roger ever had a day’s shooting
at Knoyle, when he subsequently sees Hewitt,
his attention having been drawn to the matter, he
perfectly recollects all about the shooting at
Knoyle, and not only that but the colour of the
dogs. Furthermore, he recollects Thompson, the
butler, and says he was a one-eyed man, and had
in consequence to shoot from his left shoulder.
I now come to Roger’s life in the army. He ar-
rived at Kingstown on the 25th of October, and
joined in Dublin on the 27th. The defendant
gives a different account; but there is no doubt
about the fact. Colonel Bickerstaff, who was
then adjutant, tells us that Roger presented him-
self in plain clothes ; that the regiment was giving
a dinner that day, and that Colonel Jackson mis-
took Roger for a person come to assist the cook,
as he was so queerly dressed. He, however, pro-
duced his letters, and was handed over to the ad-


iutant, who put him in the hands of Lieutenant
Forster. The defendant, in cross-examination,
was asked about this, and he stated that he was
four or five days in Dublin before he joined. That
we know is not in accordance with the fact. He
further stated that the delay was caused by the
fact that he had to procure regimentals and ac-
coutrements ; whereas we know that he had
dined at Knoyle before he left for Ireland in full
regimentals, and also at Tichborne House. He
went on to say that he joined the regiment in full
regimentals, and that he was introduced to the
colonel by Captain Jones. You have the evidence
of Colonel Bickerstaff as to the manner in which
Roger Tichborne presented and introduced him-
self to Colonel Jackson. Then he said he was
first attached to Captain Forster’s troop, lhat
is a total mistake, as Mr. Forster was then only a
lieutenant. He was in fact attached to Captain
Jocelyn’s troop. Here, then, we have a series ot
mistakes. We know by whom he was received
when he joined the regiment; we know also that
he was not in uniform, but that he was clad so
meanly as to attract the attention of Colonel
Jackson. ~ , , ,
The defendant was asked how long lie was at
Portobello Barracks, Dublin, and he thinks he
was there seven or eight months ; Roger J.ich-
borne was there only hve months. That is an
orror however, that might easily be made, mere
was then a good deal of inquiry with reference
•to the proceedings of Roger Tichborne in Dub-
lin society, and some of the answers given by the
defendant are worthy of attention. He is asked
in cross-examination: . ... „ w
‘ Did you go much into society m Dublin . JNo,
not very much. Did you at all ?—f used oc
casionally to a ball. Where ? — Different places
where the balls have been held. I suppose you
went to balls where the balls were held ; what 1
want to know is where the balls were held.— 1 here
were one or two balls held at the Castle, and one
or two private balls I went to. The balls were at
the Castle, and the levees as well were held there.
There were balls at the Castle, io which you
went? —Yes. And private balls? —I did not say
private balls ; I suppose so. Private balls
where ? Give me the name of any private gentle-
man where you went to a ball in Dublin. I do
not remember the names now. Did you dine out
in Dublin ?—Yes, a good many times. Where
I do not remember where. Cannot you give me
the name of any gentleman ?—No. Not one gen-
tleman with whom you formed an acquaintance .
—No. What I want to know is the name ot any
one in Ireland whom you went to visit or associ-
ated with ?—A lot of people. It i 3 quite impos-
sible to tax my memory.’
Next he is asked : . .
‘Did you go to the Castle?—During my stay m
Dublin’ At Dublin.—While I was in Dublin,
you mean? Yes. You were in Dublin some
time?-Yes. Did you go to the Castle?-Yes I
went there several times, Where l *
—Do you mean what part of Dublin . It is in St.
James’s district, I think. St. James s what-dis-
trict?-Yes, to the best of my memory. W here-
about does the Castle stand in Dublin .—I do not
exactly know how to describe where it stands—
about south-west, north-west, I should say. Neai
the river?—l do not remember whether near the
river now. What is the river ?-1 do not know ;
I forget what river it is. You say you went to
the Castle. How came you to go to the Castle.
How came I to go there ? Yes ; what did you go
I the Castle for?—l was presented to the new
rd Lieutenant on one occasion. Ido not know
at you are alluding to. Is that the first time
a went to the Castle ?—I believe it was. Who
s the Lord Lieutenant ? —1 think it was Clar-
ion, if I remember right. You believe it was
irendon. Are you sure ?- I think so, to the best
my memory. How many times were you at the
stle altogether? —About three times, I think
ree or four times. The presentation was on one
lasion, you say ; what were the other occasions
vour going to the Castle?-! think there were
Us at the Castle. Balls at the Castle, were
ere ? —Yes. The Castle is the place where the
ird Lieutenant lives, is it?—Yes, I believe so.
wording to your impression, did Lord Clarendon
eat the Castle when you were quartered in Dub-
l?—l really cannot tell you whether he lived at
e Castle or not. Cannot you give me more of a
>tion where the Castle is in Dublin than that it
in St. James's district ? Do you remember on
hich side of the river it is?-Which side of the
ver ? Yes.—l cannot bring it back at the pre-
mt moment. Do you recollect whether there is
terrace with steps down to the river from it.
o, I certainly do not. You do not remember.
o. Does it stand in a park ? You say in a dis-
•ict. Is there any ground about it, or do you
live up to it, or what?—No. Ido not know any
round to drive up to it. But is there, do you
, Y ?_No, I think not. There was an inspection
f the regiment in Dublin. Where were you m-
pected?—ln Phoenix-park. Did you go much
ito society in Dublin?—No, not very much.
>id you at all? —1 used to go occasionally to a
all Where ?—Different places. There were one
r two balls held at the Castle, and one or two pn-
ate balls I went to. Give me the names of any
entlemen where you went to a ball. 1 don t
the names now. Give me one place
diere you have been to visit ?—I used to visit at
[owth Castle. That is where Lord Howth
ves?—Yes. What sort of place is Howth ?
bis an old place. Where does it stand ?—On the
pposite side of the bay to Kingstown, on a kind
f neck of land that goes out. Whom did you go
9 see at liowth?-Lord St. Lawrence. Were
,ord St. Lawrence and you great friends'—W e
rere very good friends. He was a connection . 1
ielieve he was a distant one.’ ,
Now, with reference to Dublin Castle, we have
t in evidence that there is no St. James s district
n Dublin, and that the Castle stands in the
larish of St. Werburgh.
The defendant says he went to Howth to see Lord
it. Lawrence ; but why he should not to
iee Lord and Lady Howth, to whom he had been
ntroduced by Mrs. Washington Hibbert, I cannot
lav He then gives an account of having gone to
Howth by boat, and says that the boat capsized.
Mr. M‘Evoy tells us he questioned the defendant
as to Howth, and came to the conclusion that he
knew nothing about it. Lord St. Lawrence s*ys
he was not there at the time of the visit, but I
think he must be wrong on that point as I
gather from Roger Tichborne s account of tt mhis
letter. The defendant says he went to Howth be-
fore he joined his regiment, and that too is wrong
•iccording to Roger Tichborne s letters. Well,
now, the question is whether the defendant really
knew anything about Howth Castle until a late
neiiod, and after he had had one or two questions
put to him on the subject at an interview which he
had with Lord St. Lawrence. On that occasion his
lordship asked the defendant whether he remem-


bered walking with him to Howth Castle from
Dublin, and that the distance was about two miles.
The defendant said he did. Now, the distance is
between nine and ten miles. The learned counsel
for the defendant, in his speech, complained of
that as a ‘ trap,’ and a deception which was not
justifiable. I never think deception is justifiable
myself, but that is a matter to be settled between
Lord St. Lawrence and the defendant. He is fur-
ther asked :
‘ Was there anybody else at Lord Howth’s—any
other members of the family ?—There was a sis-
ter. What was her name ?—I cannot tell you. If
I remember right, she got married at the time I
was in Dublin. Do you remember what her name
was either her Christian or surname?—Her
Christian or surname? Yes.—Her name would
be Howth, would it not? What was her Christian
name ?—I do not remember.’
Now, the family name is St. Lawrence, and the
daughters, of course, would be Lady Emily and
Lady Catherine St. Lawrence, and that Roger was
fully aware of ihat fact is demonstrated by a let-
ter of his in which he refers to one of them by her
name. He alludes to a gentleman who was pay-
ing his addresses to one of the young ladies, and
he says that he feared it was the love that makes
haste, not the love that lasts. It does sound
straDgethat Roger Tichborne, who knew that per-
fectly, should make such a mistake as this.
Then he is asked, in his examination in chief,
whether he visited in any of the neighbouring
counties :
‘ Where did you go to ?—T went to Meath. Did
you meet any one there?—Yes, I met Mr. M‘Evoy.
Any ladies?—Yes. I think there were two ladies,
whose names were French.’
There is no mention of any such place in any of
Roger's letters ; and Mr. M'Evoy says he never
met Roger Tichborne in Meath, and that he had
no ladies staying at his house named French.
Then he is asked :
‘ Were there any people you knew when you got
to Ireland?—Yes ; there was Mr. Bellew, Lord
Bellew’s son. Where did you see him when you
got to Ireland? —I saw him both at Cahir and
Dublin.’
He is right as to having met Lord Bellew at
Dublin, but wrong in respect to Cahir, because
Lord Bellew says he never was there. Then he
is asked about a Mr. Burke :
‘Who is Mr. Burke?—Why, he is Mr. Burke,
I suppose. What was he?—l am sure I do not
know—a gentleman, I suppose. What happened
to you with Mr. Burke?—What happened ? Yes,
you say you knew him. Did you ride with him,
or what?—Yes, I believe we went out riding to-
gether. Can you tell me anything more of Mr.
Burke?—l do not know what more you want to
know about him. Had youanvthing to do at any
time in your life with a Lady Clanricarde ?—Yes,
there was a Lady Clanricarde in Ireland. Did
you know her?—l believe I did; not well, though.
Where did you know her ?—I think at the
Deases’ I met her. Where did the Deases live ?
—They lived in Dublin. You met Lady Clanri-
carde at the Deases’, did you ?—I think, to the
best of my recollection—yes. Will you swear you
spoke to Lady Clanricarde in your life?—Yes, I
will swear. Lady Clanricarde? —Yes. At the
Deases’ ?—I will not say at the Deases’, but I
know I have spoken to her. Where? —In Ireland.
Where will you swear you ever spoke to Lady
Clanricarde?—l cannot remember where it was,
but I am under the belief that it was at the
Deases’. Was she an old lady or a young lady ?
—She was not a very young lady. "Was she a veiy
old lady ?—No ; middle-aged. Who was Lady
Clanricarde? Do you recollect anything about
her ?—I do not know what her family connections
were. Did you know Lord Clanricarde or Sir
Edward Clanricarde?—l do not know Sir Edward
Clanricarde. Did you know Lord Clanricarde ?
—Well, I cannot say that I do. Did you ?—I be-
lieve I did. Was he with Lady Clanricarde ?
No, I do not tbiuk when I met Lady Clanricarde
there was anyone with her—not of the same name.’
Well, the question as to Sir Edward Clanricarde
was a deceptive one, and Lord Clanricarde, the
husband of the Lady Clanricarde here spoken of,
had long been dead. But the defendant speaks
of his having met Lady Clanricarde at the
Deases’, ignoring the fact that she had a house
of her own in which Roger Tichborne dined many
times. You remember the practical joke which
was played on him by Captain Forster on the
occasion of his first going to dine with Lady Clan-
ricarde. He was told he would be sure to meet
the Commander-in Chief—the Duke of Cambridge
—and that he should go in full regimentals, and
he accordingly did so, but he found that there
was no company, and he and Lady Clanricarde
dined tete-a-tetc. Well, Mr. Burke speaks of Lady
Clanricarde’s kindness to Roger. She was ex-
tremely attached to his sister, Lady Ann Tich-
borne, and showed Roger a great deal of attention.
Mr. Burke finds by his diary that during Roger’s
stay in Dublin he dined at Lady Clanricarde’s no
fewer than 36 times, and that he met Roger there
frequently. Then as to Lady Teresa, the defen-
dant is asked:
‘Did you know a Lady Teresa Dease? —I be-
lieve I know a lady in Dublin named Dease ; I did
not know that she was a lady of title. lam ask-
ing about Lady Teresa Dease. Did you know her
at all? Do you know who she is, to begin with?
I do not remember her : I remember the name.
Lady Teresa?—No, Dease. I am asking about
Lady Teresa Dease.—l think I knew a gentleman
of that name also. lam asking about Lady Teresa;
you would not know a gentleman of that name?
—I said Rees just now ; that is what I meant to
say; I have some recollection of the name, but I
do not recollect her. Who was she, if you knew
her?—lf I did know her I knew her in Dublin.
Who was she ? Do you know ?—No, I do not.
Did you know one of her sons at all?—I knew a
gentleman of that name. There was a Lady
Clanricarde in Ireland; did you know her? —I be-
lieve I did; not very well, though. Where did
you know her ?—I think at the Deases’l met her.
Where did the Deases live? —They lived in Dub-
lin. You met Lady Clanricarde at the Deases’, did
you?—l think, to the best of my recollection, yes.
Major Dease was examined and tells us that the
family lived in Westmeath, and we know from
one of Lady Doughty’s letters to Roger that Lady
Teresa Dease, whom she says she met at Brighton,
was a person known to both of them.
Now, the question is whether the defendant’s
recollection of Dublin society comes up to what
you would have expected from Roger Tichborne.
He speaks in his letters of going out to balls—at
private houses, at Sir Edward Blakeney’s, at the
Castle —and in one letter, dated the 15th of May
1852, on the occasion of his second visit to Dub-
lin, he says that he had been at balls and parties
almost every day for three weeks, and speaks of
Dublin society and how very pleasant it was. So
much for the visit to Dublin.


On the sth of April 1850, the head-quarters of
the regiment were transfetred from Dublin to
Cahir. It was at Cahir where a horse ran away
and occasioned the death of Roger’s servant
Clarke. It was there, also, that through the
bridle getting loose, Roger's charger, which must
have been ill-tempered and impetuous, ran away,
and coming into the barrack square, leapt over a
child without injuring it. Of course, these were
circumstances which would be well known in the
regiment. That year 1850 was remarkable for two
visits paid to Roger, the one by Mr. Hopkins and
the other by his father. The visit of Mr. Hopkins
was for the purpose of getting the deeds of settle-
ment of the estates executed by Roger. That visit
was made between the 7th and the llth of May,
because Roger, writing to Mr. Vincent Gosford on
the 7th, makes no mention of the matter then,
but, writing again on the llth. says that Hopkins
was with him to arrange as to the execution of
the deeds, and so, as we know, the settlement is
finally accomplished. In September his father
paid him a visit at Cahir of three or four days,
and while there occupied Colonel Norbury’s quar-
ters ; and after the visit we know from Roger's
letters that he accompanied bis father to Dublin
and spent two days with him there, returning on
the third day. The defendant was questioned as
to this visit and other incidents at Cahir, and, in
answer, he said he stayed there five or six months,
but the fact was that Roger was at Cahir more
.than 12 months. While at Cahir, on the 22d
of November 1850, he obtained bis lieutenancy,
the vacancy being caused by Captain Jocelyn
going on half-pay. On being questioned aboutthis,
the defendant said that with his lieutenancy he
got transferred to the G troop, but we know that
it was not until long after that he joined theG
troop. He was asked if his father had any special
purpose in paying him the visit at Cahir, and he
replied that he had such a purpose, and that it
was to gain his consent to the selling of Upton.
Now, I have noticed fiom the letters that when-
ever any attempt was made to induce Roger to
consent to the sale of Upton it always put him in
a fume, and he wrote to Mr. Gosford, complaining
that the subject had been brought up. I am in-
clined to think the subject was never mentioned
on the occasion of this visit, as I find no trace of
it in his letters at that time, and he speaks of the
visit as one of great pleasure and satisfaction.
Besides this, the final settlement had been accom-
plished by the deeds executed in the previous
May. Being further questioned he said he had a
visit from Mr. Hopkins for the same purpose, and
that both visits were made after he was 21—in the
year 1851. It is a total mistake to suppose that
these visits were made in 1851 ; they were made
in 1850. And, again, the defendant reverses the
order of them, and what is still more remarkable,
he wholly omits to mention the purpose for which
Mr. Hopkins really did go. He makes him out to
have gone to obtain his consent to the sale of
Upton. What he did go for was to get the execu-
tion of the deeds constituting the settlement of
1850, and which settlement proceeded upon the
assumption that Upton was not to be sold. Of
that the defendant seems to have been perfectly
ignorant.
At this point the defendant mentions a circum-
stance which he says happened upon an inspection
by a one-armed General, whom we know to have
been General Napier, at Cahir. He says, in reply
to his own counsel in his examination-in-chief :
‘ Captain Polhill forgot his word of command,
and could not draw the cavalry out. An orderly
officer was sent over to ask what the word was.
During his absence I happened to remember it,
and I gave it and drew the troops out, and Cap-
tain Polhill was reprimanded afterwards. The
troops were against the barxack-wall, and Captain
Polhill could not draw them out. I gave the
word of command myself, and drew them out,
but I ought to have given it first to the Captain,
I have no doubt. Captain Polhill was not pleased
with me after this transaction. Shortly after 1
went into the G troop.’
He is asked further about the reprimand, and
says it is painful to him to have to state these
things, adding, * You, Mr. Giffard, are forcing me
to do so.’ As his own counsel was examining him
on instructions given by himself, I cannot help
thinking that a piece of hypocrisy which might
well have been spared. This story is told with a
view to suggest that Captain Polhill Turner took
a dislike to the defendant, and was ready to turn
against him when the defendant wanted to be
identified. .
Let us see what was the word of command he is
supposed to have given. He is asked in cross-
examination :
‘As a matter of interest, let me readyou
an answer you gave to my learned friend. Ihis
is not one embarrassing you, but what you said
to Mr. Giffard. You were asked as to some
incident about Captain Polhill, and you said,
“ Captain Polhill had forgotten his word of com-
mand ; he could not draw the cavalry out, and I
happened to think of it, and took them away,
and, of course, he got reprimanded for it” “ You
happened to think of it?” —I did not think of it,
I happened to see it. I drew the troops out, my
Lord. The Foreman.—We had better have that
over again, Mr. Giffard. —Will you be kind
enough to say that over again to the juiy ! The
Witness.- —We were hemmed in against the bar-
rack walls—the tioops were— and Captain Polhill
had forgot the word to give to draw them out, to
take them out, and there was an orderly officer
sent over to ask again what the word was, and
during his absence it occurred to me, and 1 gave
the word of command, not thinking of giving it
to him for the moment. I did it on the spur of
the moment. I have no doubt I ought to have
given it to him, and let him say it, but I gave
the word of command, and withdrew the troops.
What word of command did you give ? Wheel
three to the left. And that extricated the troop
from its difficulty, did it ?—I am not certain at
this moment, but think it was “ Wheel three to
the left.” But surely this is a matter that Mr.
Giffard asked you about. Cannot you tell me
whether it was “ wheel three to the left. ’ Yas
that it ?—Yes, I believe it was. Will you swear
it was? Will you swear that ?—Yes. That you
will swear ? —That I will swear. Did that make
them go on or go back ? - Really I cannot under-
stand. That you cannot tell ? No, I cannot
understand what you mean. Cannot you ? Going
forwards is going forwards, and going back is
going back. What was the effect of this word of
command ? If the horses are facing you and you
call out “ Wheel three to the left,” which way
would you be going, forwards or backwards? I
say, did they go forwards or backwards?—l do
not understand what you mean, and nobody else
either. What is the word in the cavalry for
going back ? What do you do when you desire a
troop or a squadron to go back ? What do you
call it ? Y hat does the officer who gives the


word of command do ?—Do you mean to retreat ?
No, that is just what I do not mean. What is the
proper word?—Not “retreat” is it? What is
the proper word for retiring a troop back ?—I do
not understand what you mean. You do not
understand me ?—No, certainly Ido not. If you
wanted to back a troop, of course you would
wheel them round and take them back. And
what would that b 8 called in cavalry language?
What would you be said to be doing to that
troop?—(No answer.) You cannot tell me?—
No. I certainly cannot.’
Now, Captain Polhill Turner repudiates this
story altogether ; but then he assumes, from the
order in which the questions concerning the
matter were put, that it was an inspection at
Clonmel by General Macdonald. He says that,
so far from being reprimanded on that occasion,
the General complimented them on the way
in which evolutions had been performed. There-
fore, he considers this statement of the defendant
a gratuitous lie. I think, however,that defendant
was speaking of an inspection at Cahir. There
were two inspections by General Napier at Cahir;
one in May, with regard to which Roger writes in
a letter of that date that the General was very
mu:h pleased. There was another in October,
and then the squadron of which Captain Polhill
Turner’s troop formed a part does seem to have
got hemmed up against the wall and to have been
unable to get out of the situation satisfactorily.
That was in 1850. This did not happen, how-
ever, to one troop, but to the entire squadron,
and several witnesses say it arose not from the
commanding officer forgetting the word of com-
mand, but on account of his not having given it
time enough. Captain Custance, and not Cap-
tain Polhill Turner, was in command, and you
will ask yourselves whether, there being two
captains and a lieutenant above him, it would
accord with any reasonable man’s notion of mili-
tary discipline that the cornet, who, as I am
reminded by my learned brother, had always a
difficulty in giving the word of command, should
take on himself to give the order and so with-
draw the squadron.
Well, Roger went to Clonmel, and from Clonmel
he went to Waterford. The defendant says that
Captain Polhill Turner left to be married to a
daughter of Sir Henry Winston Barron, and that
thereupon he obtained charge of the troop until
he handed it over to Captain Bickerstaff. Colonel
Bickerstaff denies having received charge of the
troop from Roger Tichborne. We know that on
the 14th of December Roger got two months’
leave of absence, and that it was during those
two months that all the scenes occurred at
Tichborne of which we have heard so much as to
his cousin Miss Doughty. He rejoined on the
14th of February, but not at Waterford, for his
letters fiom that time are dated from Clonmel.
There was a good deal of cross-examination as to
his knowledge of Waterford. Ho is asked :
‘ What sort of a place is Waterford ; are there
any buildings that you recollect? —No, I do
recollect any buildings. Is the river there i The
sea is there. The sea at Waterford? —Yes, it is
on the sea coast. Did you use to bathe in the sea
there?—No, Ido not think so. I may have done,
I do not recollect.’
A few days afterwards the questions on this
subject were renewed :
‘ Is there a river at Waterford ?—There is rivers
at Waterford. Yes, you have told me about
that. Do you remember a bridge there ?—There
are several bridges there. A particular kind of
bridge ?—Yes. I think there are stone bridges, to
the best of my recollection.’
We know that there is but one bridge at Water-
ford, and that is of wood. Well, the regiment
goes back to Dublin and is dismounted with a
view to proceeding to India. In June the regi-
ment left Dublin, and that brings us to the end
of Roger Tichbome's life in Ireland.
And now let me cad your attention to this piece
of evidence. From the time Roger went to Ire-
land till he left it he kept up a constant corre-
spondence with his aunt Lady Doughty, and you
know what that correspondence was. It was a
correspondence of a most interesting character,
touching subjects the most important and inter-
esting that a man could well discuss--religion,
morals, habits of life, above all, the love which
clung to Roger Ticliborne’s heart for his cousin
Miss Doughty. In that period of two years and
seven months there passed between those parties
96 letters, which have been preserved, and the
probability is that there was more, so that we may
put the correspondence at least at 100 letters,
which would import a letter from each party upon
an average every fortnight, upon the most inter-
esting and affecting subjects. Would the recol-
lection of that correspondence as long as memory
lasted be effaced from the mind of the man who
took part in it ? And when the question is asked,
what does the defendant say :
‘ Did you while you were in Ireland keep up a
correspondence with friends in England ? —I have
no doubt I did, but I am sure I did not remember.
Who did you write to ?—I do not remember who
I wrote to. Did you to your father to France ?
Certainly. To Lady Tichborne? —Yes. Did you to
your relatives in this country ?—I wrote several
letters to Mr. Gosford, I think, and to other
people. I really cannot remember who I wrote to.
I ask you about your relatives ? —Very probably I
did. Ido not remember. Did you or did you not !
—There is no doubt I wrote one to Mr. Henry
Seymour. To anyone else?—l wrote to Henry, I
know. To anyone else ?—Really, I do not remem-
ber who I wrote to. It is quite impossible for me
to say. Did you write to Sir Edward Doughty,?—
Ido not remember doing so. Did you write to
Lady Doughty?—l do not remember doing so.
I should think the probability is that I did. Did
you write to your cousin ?—I do not remember
whether I did or not. Surely you can tell whether
you wrote to Miss Doughty during those three
years? I do not remember whether I did or
not. I should think that the probability is that I
did, but lam not certain. Did you ever receive
letters from her in Dublin? —I do not think I did.
Ido not remember doing so. Did you have any
letters from Sir Edward Doughty?—Not from
Sir Edward Doughty, I don’t think. From Lady
Doughty ?—I might have done, but I have no re-
collection of it. (Question repeated.)—It is almost
certain that I did. Can you not recollect for certain
whether you did or not ? —I have no recollection of
it. There is no doubt but what I did, but I have
no recollection of it. I do not think it is at all
probable 1 should have been there any length of
time without hearing from them. Ido not want
to catch you. I ask you, cannot you recollect for
certain whether while in Ireland you heard from
Sir Edward Doughty, Lady Doughty, or your
cousin, Miss Doughty? —No; I have no recollec-
tion of having received a letter from them.’
Well, gentlemen, I do not know that in the
whole range of the case there is anything, to my


I mind, so strange as that, and the question is whe-
ther, as sensible men, you can believe that such a
correspondence as that could have passed from the
memory of the living man. The defendant does
not recollect having written or received a single
letter, and yet in that correspondence is included
letters from Lady Doughty upon a subject which
was the closest to the heart of Roger Tichborne —
the hope of marrying his cousin, with whom he
was at that time so deeply in love. I know no
better test that could be put to the memory of
any one than that, and you will judge of the
effect of the answer given by the defendant upon
a matter as to which he was most fairly and pro-
perly cross-examined, in considering whether, in
your opinion, he is Roger Tichborne or not.
Upon looking back to the defendant's examina-
tion, I cannot help thinking there were some
questions put to him the answers to which it
would be unfair to take as a criterion. They were
pat by one apparently not cognisant of military
matters, but it was not to be expected that the
Attorney-General should have the knowledge of a
military officer. Still, certain questions were put
which are so elementary that you cannot conceive
how a person who was three years in the army
could have failed to answer them. In cross-exa-
mination a passage is read from the Queen’s Regu-
lations, and the defendant is asked what the book
is, and whether it is not a book which every officer
in the army would know at first sight ? He does
not know it. Then he is asked, ‘ls it not to an
officer what the Bible ought to be to a young
child ?’ And his answer is, ‘ I don’t know any-
thing of it.’. Then he is pressed as to what is this
I book which is called the Queen’s Regulations, and
he says, ‘ Certain regulations put down by which
an officer should know what a regiment is.’ And
now comes a matter of which I think most ci-
vilians are aware, and which, certainly, one would
have expected an officer of three years’ standing
to know. ‘ How many squadrons were there in
your regiment ?’ He answers, ‘ There were seven
different troops.’ That s a mistake, for there were
but six. Then he is asked, ‘ How many squadrons?
Do you think a troop and a squadron the same ?’
He answers, ‘ I believe they are.’ The Lord Chief
Justice repeats the question, ‘Do you think they
are ! And he says, * Yes.’ The fact is you form a
squadron by uniting two troops, and is it possible
that a man who had been three years an officer
would not know that? Then the defendant is
asked, ‘ How many men in a troop ?’ To this ho
answers, ‘Certainly some troops had more than
ethers.’
‘ What was the average number in the Cara-
bineers during the three years you were in the
regiment?—l have no recollection. From 100 to
150 I should think in each troop. It might be
more. And there were seven troops ?—Yes, there
■were seven troops. Then the Carabineers in your
time were something like 900 strong ?—Well be-
tween 900 and 1000.’
Now, gentlemen, we know very well from Cap-
tain Maunders that the regiment consisted of six
troops, with 55 men and 45 horses in each troop,
there being always a greater number of men than
horses, as there are supernumeraries, servants,
•and others who are not mounted. That would
make the strength of the regiment .‘l3O men and
iJ7O horses, so that the defendant makes it exactly
three times that which it really amountod to.
That indicates a total absence of the knowledge
which you would expect to find in an officer who
had been for three years in a cavalry regiment.
I Then he is asked about ‘ close and open order,’
which he explains to consist of ‘the distance be-
tween knee and knee, between man and man,’
not the distance between rank and rank, which
it really is. The adjutant of the regiment anc
the officers say it is not the lateral distanc
between man and man, but the relative distanc
between two ranks.
( 'The learned counsel for the defendant say
‘ Ay, but you must not be surprised at the de
fendant manifesting ignorance on those points
because .Roger Tichborne never mastered h:
drill, and, therefore, if he had been asked tiros
questions even at the time he was in the arm
he would not have been able to answer them
That might be a very good explanation if th
evidence before us bore it out. It is true Roge
richborne was an inefficient officer ; though wit]
an inclination for the service, he appears to hav
lad no aptitude for it, and when he was mounted
le broke down in attempting to give the word o
iommand. But we have the positive statemen
)f Colonel Bickerstaffe, the adjutant of the regi
nent, who took the greatest pains with him
laving taken a liking to the young man, anc
ised to teach him in his own room with pieces
>f cardboard, that he knew his drill in theory
rery well. Besides, the questions which the de
endant was asked are not about complicatec
natters, but simply about elementary things.
cannot suppose, therefore, that Roger Tich
lorne would not have known about them, and i:
le ever did know, do you think he could entirely
lave forgotten everything concerning them ?
Then there is another remarkable instance of
defective knowledge. It seems that while the
efendant was visiting Colonel Lushington he
let Captain Williamson, of the 60th Rifles, and
hat gentleman asked him whether he remem-
ered his being quartered in Dublin, in the 2d
lattalion of the 60th, not mentioning ‘ Rifles,’
ut assuming that any one acquainted with mili-
ary affairs would know that the 60th was a
igiment of Rifles. The defendant, according to
! aptain Williamson, did not recollect it, but he
sked whether the battalion wa3 quartered at
ortobello, or at Island Bridge Barracks. ‘ I
rid no,’ says Captain Williamson, ‘ Island
ridge Barracks is a cavalry barracks.’ ‘O, then,’
tys the defendant, ‘yours is not a horse corps.’
he explanation of this mistake, which one
ould suppose no officer that was ever in the
■my would have fallen into, is that the defendant
oked upon Captain Williamson as an officer of
le Artillery, and as there are horse and foot
rtillery, he thought the battalion to which
iptain Williamson belonged might have been
rartered in a cavalry barracks. Upon this he is
oss-examined.
*Do you know Captain Williamson, Sir Hed-
)rth Williamson’s brother?—Yes, I think so.
d you meet him at Colonel Lushington’s at
chborne?—lf it is the person I mean I met him
e other day. Did you have some conversation
out military matters with him ?—[ think not;
. Will you swear you did not with Captain
illiamson, Sir Hedworth Williamson’s brother ?
ally I do not recollect what was talked about.
1 not recollect what ?—I do not recollect what
spoke about. Did not you speak about mili-
y matters ?—I think not. Will you swear you
l not ?—No, it is very hard for me to swear I
not. You said you only met him the other
r ; you told me that yourself—“ If he is the
n I mean?’’—Just so. Assuming for a moment


it is the same man, you met him only the other
day; cannot you tell me whether you did talk
about military matters? —Well, really I cannot;
I was not aware you intended to have our con-
versation repeated here, or I would have made a
note of it. Was his regiment, do you know, ever
quartered in Ireland, near to or close to the
Carabineers?—Yes. Had you some conversation
on that subject with him and Mr. Liddell? —
Well, I think we had. Have you any doubt?
Did you speak to him about the horses of the 60th
Rifles ? —No, that I certainly did not. That you
swear?—Certainly I swear it, because the man I
mean was not in the 60th Rifles at all. Did
Captain Williamson say, “Horses ! why, we are
an infantry regiment 1” and did you say, “ O, are
you? I thought you were a horse troop?” Will
you swear that did not pass?—l certainly could
swear that did not pass, as I am quite certain it
never did. I ask you whether you ever had any
conversation with a young officer of the 60th
Rifles ?—Captain Williamson called on me, and I
certainly had a conversation with him, but if you
are speaking of a person belonging to the 60th
Rifles, he might belong to the 60th Rifles now.
I do not know, I am sure ; but the person I am
speaking of belonged to the Artillery.’
Then I put a question to Captain Williamson
as to whether the defendant may not have been
speaking of the Horse Artillery, but Captain
Williamson says, ‘ He gave me to understand it
was the 60th Rifles he was speaking of.’
Then there is another most striking matter. We
recollect not only that an application was made
to Lord Fitzroy Somerset for a commission for
Roger Tichboine, but that Mr. Seymour, at the
close of 1848, took him to the Horse Guards and
introduced him personally to Lord Fitzroy Somer-
set. You will remember, too, that when the
commission did not come as soon as it was ex-
pected, Roger, instead of asking some one of his
friends, some one of rank and position, to write
on his behalf, took the bold step of writing .to
Lord Fitzroy Somerset himself—a thing which,
perhaps, few young men would have ventured to
do. He got an answer directly from Lord Fitzroy
Somerset. The defendant is asked whether he
ever had anything to do with Lord Fitzroy Somer-
set. ‘Lord Fitzroy Somerset?’ he says, ‘no, I
think not. Who was he ? I don't know, lam sure.
I suppose he would be some relative of the Duke
of Somerset.’ Now everybody at all acquainted
with the class to which Lord Fitzroy Somerset be-
longed, or who had been at all in the world, would
know that Lord Fitzroy Somerset would be a bro-
ther of the Duke of Beaufort, whose family name
is Fitzroy, while the family name of the Duke of
Somerset is Seymour, or as they now call it, St.
Maur. I can understand that a young man who
passed the first years of his military life in Ireland
and then went abroad, might not have beeu aware
of the distinction of these family names. I, there-
fore, pass that over as an unimportant fact. But
when the defendant is asked twice if he can tell
who Lord Fitzroy Somerset was, and answers, ‘ I
think not; I have no recollection,’ is it possible
to reconcile that answer with the fact that Roger
did himself address Lord Fitzroy Somerset in or-
der to get his commission, and that he did get the
•ommission from him ?
But it does not stop there. Lord Fitzroy Somer-
set served during the Duke of Wellington’s cam-
paigns as his military secretary, and was attached
to him from the beginning. When the Duke died,
partly as a reward for his own military services,
partly as a compliment to the memory of his de»
ceased chief, Lord Fitzroy Somerset was raised to
the peerage under the title of Lord Raglan. That
must have been known throughout the entire
army, and I will venture to say there was not a
mess-room in which it was not mentioned that
this distinguished officer had received his fitting
reward at the hands of his Sovereign. But that
the memory of Lord Raglan should not slumber.
Lord Raglan was appointed to the command of
the army in the Crimean War, and though the
defendant was in the bush in Australia at the
time, I take it there was not a station out there,
or any other aggregation of human beings, not
even a camp fire, where the Crimean War was not
spoken of, and whtre the name of Lord Raglan
was not associated with his foimer name of Lord
Fitzroy Somerset; and is it possible that any
person who had been in correspondence with him,
and received his commission from him, could have
had the name of Lord Fitzroy Somerset so utterly
effaced from his memory as not to know who he
was ? That is a point which is well deserving of
your consideration.
And here, before we pass away from Roger
Tichborne, let us take a fair review of his intel-
ligence, education, and attainments. We have a
list of his books, and many of them have, I think,
been produced in Court. Among Roger Tichborne’s
books were the works of the great French drama-
tist Corneille, and as Roger was acquainted with
Moliere it is probable that he had studied Corneille
also. The defendant is asked, *Do you know who
Corneille was?’ He says, ‘I don’t remember. I
don’t understand what you meau.’ *Do you know
what this book, the Tliedtre de Pierre Corneille,
is about?—l don’t remember.’ He is pressed on
the subject, and, as Pierre sounds very like ptrc,
the defendant jumps to a conclusion. He is asked,
‘ Do you know whom it was by ?’ and he says, ‘ It
was by one of the Fathers.’ Do you think, gentle-
men, Roger would have made such a mistake?
Then he is asked about Gustave Beaumont, who
wrote a work in Ireland, and he says, ‘I don’t
know.’ He is here asked one or two rather insi-
dious questions, such as ‘AVas he a friend of yours?’
‘ Did you know him ?’ Then comes a word about
Rene. A passage was found in the handwriting of
Roger Tichborne which may be translated in these
words : ‘ I admire the life of Rene ; he knew how
to endure his sorrows and to keep them to him-
self. He retired from all his friends to be more
at liberty to think about his sorrows and mis-
fortunes, and bury them in himself. I admire that
man’s courage—that is to say, he had the courage
to carry his own sorrows to the grave.’ The de-
fendant is asked about this passage, and he says,
‘ltis an extract from St. Nicholas.’ He is asked,
‘Who is St. Nicholas?’ and he answers, ‘ One of
the saints and he goes on to say in reply to fur-
ther questions that the book is written in both
English and French. *lt is the life of St. Nicholas
the saint.’ The extract in question is from the
work of Chateaubriand. But one may well ask
what put St. Nicholas into his head.
The learned counsel for the defendant has a
very ready answer. He says, ‘No wonder that
St. Nicholas should have been uppermost in the
mind of the defendant, because Roger, when a
boy, went to school to M. Dupanloup, and St.
Nicholas is the patron saint of little boys who go
to school. True it is that the defendant has lost
the faintest trace of having gone to school; but
though he has forgotten that, the memory of the
saint who was his patron when he was a little


school boy remains impressed on his memory.
And that was because St. Nicholas was such a
saint—the saint of saints in respect of observing
the ordinances of the Church’ (the learned counsel
seems to have spent his life among the saints, he
is so well acquainted with them) —‘ because,’says
the learned counsel, ‘when he was an infant at
the breast he distinguished between fast days and
other days, and would not take the breast on
Wednesdays and Fridays.’ I don’t want to say
anything ludicrous, but it strikes me that he was
a sucking saint after all.
The defendant, on being further pressed, says
that Rene was an old King of France. He is then
asked whether he had read Anne of Geierstein. The
fact is, Rene was Count of Provence, but that is
a thing which he might very well have forgotten.
He is asked about the Koran, whether it is in
Latin, Greek, or Hebrew, and he cannot tell. He
is asked who Cromwell was, and he says, ‘ He was
the Commonwealth, was he not ?’ which was very
near the mark. He is asked about the life of John
Bunyan, and he says, ‘ I forget.’ Then he is asked
what sort of a fellow John Bunyan was, and he
answers, ‘Well, I should think quite the reverse
of what you are.’ But he does not remember who
he was. He is asked, was he a sportsman, and he
replies, ‘ You may ask me as many foolish ques-
tions as you like. I have told you four or five
times I don’t know.’ Well, there are few people
who have read anything who don’t know who John
Bunyan was, and who are not acquainted with
that work which will last as long as the English
language lasts, and by which the name of John
Bunyan will be perpetuated. There is no one
who wishes to know what pure, unmixed, unde-
filed English is who will not study the work on
that account, as well as for the contents of that
most charming allegory. I think if Roger Tich-
borhe had read the Life of John Banyan, and his
great work is in the list of his books, he would
not have forgotten it. We know Roger read Molihre,
and among other plays of his th e Misanthrope, and
that he discriminated between the two principal
characters. There is a letter from Lady Doughty
in which she speaks of the man of the world and
the man who hated the world, and prefers the
former. Roger took the opposite view, and he
was very apt when in gloomy spirits to call him-
self a misanthrope. In 1849 we find this reference
in one of his letters : ‘Everybody is gone out of
town. Lucky for me. lam a misanthrope,’ &o.
He understood, therefore, the meaning of the
term. The defendant is asked, ‘Do you know
what it is—whether a girl, a beast, a fish, or what ?’
He answers, ‘ Well, I think I made allusion to it
once with regard to some book.’ ‘ What is a mis-
anthrope?’— ‘ I’m sure I can’t tell.’ The defendant
does not know the meaning of the word at all.
That is very striking, considering that Roger Tich-
borne was in the habit of using the term repeat-
edly.
But there still remains the most striking in-
stance of all, of the absence of knowledge or of
memory, and you will at once understand to what
I allude—namely, his total loss of the French
language, for it amounts to a total loss. Up to
the age of 24 Roger Tichborne spoke French by
choice. An attempt was made by Serjeant Ballan-
tine to account for the defendant’s loss of the
French language by supposing he had abandoned
the use of it. The defendant was asked whether
he continued to speak French at Stonyhurst, and
he said, ‘ No, he was not allowed to correspond in
French.’ But the evidence proves directly the
contrary. The letters of Roger to his mother
until 1847 were written in the French language;
in bad French, no doubt, but still in French, and
we have a large body of evidence to show that up
to the time he left this country he preferred .to
speak in French rather than English. When he
was in Paris the language of the family was French,
his mother preferred it, and Mr. Alfred Seymour
and Mr. Danby Seymour, who are both French
scholars, say that Roger preferred it too. That he
kept up his acquaintance with French literature
we know ; he used to read French novels. He
went out to South America in a French ship, and
used to talk French with the captain and officers.
When Roger Tichborne was about to go to Chili,
and Moore was unable to continue his attendance,
we know he engaged a Fiench servant, and kept
him until he was no longer able to go with him,
when he took another French servant, Jules Bar-
ras, who remained with him until he went on
board the Bella. Therefore, Roger Tichborne had
full opportunity of speaking French, and the whole
body of evidence leads us to the conclusion that
to the last Roger Tichborne spoke French as well
as the day he left Paris. It was the language of
his preference, his mother tongue. He learnt it
from his first commencing to articulate words at
all, and it was Ihe language of his choice to the
very last. Could it have been wholly and entirely
forgotten? And this question is the more perti-
nent as we find that the defendant can speak a
language which he learnt from a stay of a year or
a year and a half in a foreign country.
There was a witness who could have told us
whether Roger Tichborne spoke French or not,
one who was with him at Santiago before he took
his course across the Andes, and who must have
known whether Roger spoke Spanish at all; and
if I had the power as a Judge of this court I would
have him called to answer that question. He was
produced at the last trial: he was brought into
court, but was not called. He ought to have been
called, and it ought to be in the power of a Judge
to insist that a witness shall be called, and I hope
our criminal procedure will not be considered what
it ought to be until the Court has power to call
witnesses whom either side is not disposed to call.
We know that Roger took a Spanish dictionary
and grammar out with him, and that he studied
Spanish on board the Pauline. But the most re-
markable circumstance of all is that the defendant,
if he be Roger Tichborne, should have entirely
forgotten French, the language of his childhood,
of his boyhood, and of his youthful life up to the
time he went on board the Bella, and yet should
remember the little Spanish he picked up.
Now comes a great question, whether it is
morally and intellectually possible for a man to
forget the mother tongue which he has spoken to
the age of twenty-four? I know instances have
been brought forward of persons having totally
forgotten their mother tongue in consequence of
residence in another country. I should like to be
better acquainted with the paiticular circum-
stances of each case before I accepted this state-
ment as a statement of fact. I believe most of
those statements are apocryphal. There is no-
thing in the world impossible, and far be it from
me to lay it down as impossible because within
the range of my experience it has not occurred ;
but this I will say, the instances in which a man
could forget the language of his childhood, of his
boyhood, and his manhood because he had lived
in another country ten or twelve years must be
most exceptional, and they are such as one would


hesitate indeed before he would accept. If such
a case has never occurred before in the whole of
our experience, it must be taken as an exception
to a great and uniform rule. That Roger Tich-
borne has lost the French language I do not sa
is impossible, but this I do say, it savours of tl
highest improbability. In considering whethe
such a thing is possible, you must take into con
sideration all the surrounding circumstance
Therefore, when I say I do not accept as con
elusive the accounts which we sometimes hea
of this person or that person having lost the re
collection of the language which he once spoke
you must consider whether the observation a]
plies to a person with a strung memory or
weak one. Here is a man who recollects afte
so many years every person he was acquaintec
with in South America, and gives the names o
no fewer than some fifteen of them; here is
man who, if his knowledge is not adventitiou
and derived from extraneous sources, has show
such marvellous instances of tenacious memor
and of the use of a language not acquired whe
he was very young, while his mother tongue ha
entirely faded from his recollection. The matte
is one entitled to your most serious considera
tion, and I should not be doing my duty if I die
not fully impress the importance of it upon you
good sense and your conscientious desire to d
your duty.
And next I must call your attention to th
various letters written by Roger Tichborne on
the subject of the disposition of the estates, anc
to the facts which have been brought before you
in evidence relative to that subject. The firs
question is, did Roger Tichborne thoroughly un
derstand the disposition of the Tichborne pro
perty and of the Doughty property as fixed by
the settlements relating to those two separate
properties : and, next, did he understand the dis
position of the Dongbty estate made by his wil
in 1852 ? The Tichborne estate at the time tha
Sir Edward Doughty was alive stood settled thus
It was settled on Sir Edward Doughty for life
with remainder to his heirs in tail male. But Sir
Edward had no son, and there was no probability
of his having a son. It was next to go to Roger
Tichborne’s father, Mr. James Tichborne, for life
and then to Roger for life, with remainder to the
heirs of Roger’s body in tail male ; then to Alfred,
his brother, in case of the failure of heirs male o)
the body of Roger Tichborne. In case of Alfrec
Tichborne not having issue male, it was to go to
James Dormer, in the same way, for life, with re-
mainder to his heirs in tail male. There were
charges to the extent of 60,000?. on the estate, a
very heavy charge on a property of from 5000?.
to 6000?. a year. By the settlement of 1850 the
Doughty estate stood settled in a very different
way. There Sir Edward Doughty took for life,
with remainder to his heirs in tail male: but,
as there were none, the life estate would come to
Mr. James Tichborne on Sir Edward's death, with
remainder to Roger in fee. Roger Tichborne,
therefore, having a remainder in fee, could deal
with the estate exactly as he pleased, subject
always to his father’s life estate, who would be
entitled to the whole benefit, of it for life, sub-
ject to the charges upon it, which were very
heavy. There were charges of 8000?. in favour of
Miss Doughty, and of 10,000?. which Sir Edward
was to dispose of by will. There was a charge of
100,0 ,0?., raised for the purpose of clearing off
the incumbrances on the Tichborne estate, and
then the residue was to be applied to the pur-
chase of land in Hampshire. Roger made a will,
and by it he gave his brother Alfred an income
of 2000 1. a year out of the estate, to be raised to
JOOO/. a year in case of his marriage. He directed
the residue to accumulate to pay off the heav;
charges upon the estate.
The Lord Chief Justice, having explained mi
nutely the various other provisions of the ■will
proceeded :
Now, we observe that the leading distinction
between the two properties was this—that the in
cumbrances were to be cleared off the Tichbome
estate by being put on the Doughty estate; anc
that whereas Roger Tichbome could not in the
slightest degree affect the settlement of the Tich
borne estate, he had the power, and he exercisec
it, of disposing of the Doughty estate according to
his own will and pleasure. If you are of opinion
that Roger Tichbome thoroughly understood the
disposition of the Tichbome and of the Doughtj
properties, then the question will be whether you
find in the statements of the defendant a know
ledge of those matters equal to what you woulc
expect to find if you had an opportunity of inter
rogating the undoubted Roger Tichbome.
The first assertion of any knowledge on the par
of the defendant with respect to the Tichbome
property was given at Wagga Wagga. There he
tells Mr. Gibbes he had inherited froih his father
an estate in Dorsetshire called Hermitage; that
it was entailed, and in the event of his death
would go to his cousin. In this statement there
is no reality. His father never had an estate in
Dorsetshire or anywhere else called Hermitage
Then we come to the Wagga Wagga will, and we
find him disposing of property which had no ex-
istence whatever. He disposes of property at
Cowes and at Ryde, in neither of which places had
he a stick or a stone. He disposes of pi operty at
Wymerirg, in Hampshire, at which there was no
property of the family whatever. The learned
counsel for the defendant suggested that at some
remote period the Tichbornes had property at
Wymering, and he promised an explanation, but
we did not get it. If the Tichbornes had property
there at some remote period, the probability is
that Roger Tichbome never heard of it. In short,
the defendant in that will displays the most abso-
lute ignorance of the property which belongs to
the Tichbome family. How comes it to be so ?
The defendant was called on to make his will; he
could not get money from Gibbes unless he did.
Of course he could not make a will without pro-
fessing to dispose of his property; and if he did
not know the property, it was necessary to draw
upon his imagination for the names of places to
insert in his will. But the defendant says, ‘I will
give an explanation which will be consistent with
the fact that lam Roger Tichbome. I wanted to
deceive Gibbes.’ But why run the risk of being
considered an impostor? What harm could it do
him to put in the real names instead of fictitious
ones? Is the explanation of the defendant one
which to your minds, gentlemen, is satisfactory?
If you do not think so, then you have on the de-
fendant’s part a total ignorance of the properties
which Roger Tichbome had to dispose of. Then,
when you come to a later period of his stay in
Australia, you find him writing about the Upton
property as if it had been bought by his uncle
Doughty. I have on a former day explained to
you that was a mistake into which Roger Tich-
borne could have never fallen, but that the de-
fendant was perhaps led into the misapprehension
on that point by an error of Bogle.


So matters stood until the defendant comes to
this Country, and then he is asked about it. One
of the earliest questions put to him by Mr. Gos-
ford at their meeting at Gravesend was, ‘Who
made your will?’ We know it was Mr. Slaughter,
but the defendant says, ‘ Hopkins, of course.’
When at Alresford, he probably learnt that Mr.
Hopkins was the family solicitor, and therefore
concluded that he must have made the will. Mr.
Gosford’s question, ‘Who made your will?’ im-
plied that Roger Tichborne had made a will; so
the next day Mr. Holmes and the defendant go to
Doctors’ Commons, and find Roger Tichborne’s
will. He was asked in examination how long be-
fore he left the country he had made the will, and
he says it was a long time in execution. He
thinks it was two or three months before he left,
and he remembers he signed it at Canterbury.
But we have the evidence of Mr. Slaughter’s clerk,
who was an attesting witness, that it was signed
in London, and he goes on to say that he was
never in Canterbury in his life. But there is an-
other circumstance which shows it was not exe-
cuted at Canterbury. The will was executed on
the 16th of January, and Roger came to town on
a week’s leave on the 14tb, and it is not likely
that he returned to Canterbury two days after
and signed the will there. When asked about the
will, he says, ‘ I have seen the will in charge of
two gentlemen at one side of a table, and I at an-
other. I merely sat down, and they tested me,
and asked me several questions, and compared my
signature.’ I don’t know whether any of you were
ever at Doctors’ Commons; but if so, you must
know that this statement is inaccurate. Any one
can get to see a will by paying a shilling fee; and
if you pay your shilling, you have evejy oppor-
tunity of seeing it. The clerks do not test you,
or attempt to prove your signature. They have
too much to do for that. The defendant adds, ‘ I
don’t think I ever saw the will since.’ At all
events, there was a copy of it in Mr. Holmes s
office, and if Mr. Holmes did not show it to the
defendant, that he discussed the contents of it
with him is a thing that cannot be doubted. He
told Mr. Gosford that Hopkins made the will, but
in cross-examination he said he got Slaughter to
make it. That information must have been got
after his statement to Mr. Gosford, if Mr. Gos-
ford’s evidence is true ; and that, gentlemen, is a
question for you.
Well, having gone to Doctors’ Commons with
Mr. Holmes; and Mr. Holmes having taken a
copy of the will, we may suppose the defendant
would have some means of gathering information
about it, because when the defendant was intro-
duced to Mr. Hopkins I suppose he must have
understood what the disposition of the property
was, otherwise I presume Mr. Hopkins would not
have adopted him. But if the defendant did pos-
sess this information when he was in communica-
tion with Mr. Hopkins, he had not the most dis-
tant idea of what the disposition of the property
was when he came to be examined in 1871. The
first thing that is remarkable before that examina-
tion is a letter which he writes to Rous in Janu-
ary 1867, in which he says :
‘ You know I expected to find in Mr. Gosford a
friend, but when I arrived in London from your
house I found that, instead of being a friend, it
was no other than Gosford who swore positively
that I was dead, and that I died on the 26th of
April 1854, and by so doing they deprived my
father and mother out (sic) of any of the Doughty
estates.’
I suppose what he means by that is that Mi - .
Gosford proved his will, aDd that by so doing he
deprived his father and mother of the Doughty
estate. There was never such a complete mistake
in the world. His father enjoyed every shilling
from the Doughty estate except the charges upon
it to the day of his death ; and, being able to
charge the estate for the benefit of his wife,
created two charges in her favour amounting to
2000/. a year; and at the time this letter was
penned Lady Doughty was enjoying this money,
and she allowed the defendant 1000/. a year out
of it. In cross-examination, having said that he
had not seen the will, but knew the general pur-
port of it, he is asked what the general purport of
it was? The answers that he gives are pregnant
with matter. ‘The general purport of the will,’
he says, ‘ was to gtt rid of the 100,000/. that was-
put on the Tichborne estate.’ There was not a
shilling put on the Tichborne estate. The 100,000/.
was raised on the Doughty estate in order to pay
off the incumbrances on the Tichborne estate.
Then he says there was a reserved fund formed by
the will. There was such a reserved fund, but it
was not raised from the Tichborne, but from the
Doughty estate. Then comes this strange state-
ment, ‘ I formed a sort of reserved fund by entail-
ing my father.’ What can he mean by ‘ entailing
his father?’ Why, from the beginning to the end
of the will his father's name is never mentioned.
He says, ' I so arranged it with my father that he
would have 8000/. a year out of the Doughty es-
tate, and the rest went to the accumulated fund.’
There was no provision for his father at all, nor
was it possible that he could have made any such
arrangement. Roger Tichborne could not restrict
his father to 8000/. a year, nor does he attempt
it. It is quite clear the defendant had some way
or other got into a maze of confusion upon this
subject. Now I ask you to consider whether you
think Roger Tichborne could have fallen into that
state of confusion. Did Roger Tichborne under-
stand the provisions of the settlement and the
provisions of the will as affecting the Doughty
estate ? We have the very best authority for be-
lieving that he did, and if so, and if you find this
chaotic state of confusion on the subject in the
mind of the defendant, you must say, gentlemen,
whether he can be Roger Tichborne.
Now, just let me refer to one more incident con-
nected with this will before I pass away from it
altogether. You will recollect that when Roger
Tichborne learnt—as he did by some of the letters
written to him when he was in South America —
that Everard Arundell had become a priest, he,
not being lawyer enough to know that a will can-
not be altered except by an equally solemn in-
strument, wrote home to desire that the name of
Everard Arundell should be struck out of the
will. That was because he said he objected to a
Jesuit priest having power to dispose of the pro-
perty. Is that a thing a man would be likely to
forget if he were interrogated on the subject ?
The defendant is asked :
‘ Did you ever make any addition to the will,
any codicil ? —No, I never remember making any.
Did you make any alteration in it ?—I don’t re-
member whether I did or not. Did you contem-
plate making any?—l can’t say, I am sure. I
know I went to Mr. Slaughter. Did you make
any alteration, or contemplate making any, after
you had signed the will ?—I believe I did contem-
plate an alteration after I signed it. What I want
to know is whether, after the will was signed,
you contemplated making any alteration? I


don't remember whether I did or not. Can’t yo
remember whether there was any one whose nam
you wanted to strike out ?—I don’t recollect. A
you referring to the Nangles ? Was anything don
about the Nangles?—l can’t say ; I have no reco
lection.’
Then there is a long examination as to wheth
he contemplated doing anything for the Nangles
and then, as to Gosford, he is asked :
‘Do you reco'lect a communication, written
verbal, made to Mr. Gosford on the subject of a
important alteration in the will as regards th
disposition of the property ?—I have no recolle
tion of that. Did you desire to make any alter
tion in their favour?—l am under the impressio
that I spoke to Mr. Slaughter about it. Wa
there any person at all, either your cousins th
Arundells or any other branch of the Tichborn
connection, either before you left England or afte
in respect of whom you wished to make any alte
ation? —Certainly not after. Will you swear yo
did not communicate with Mr. Slaughter or wit
Mr. Gosford on the subject of an important alte
ation in the will ?—To the best of my belief I die
not write anything about the will after I had le:
England.’
It i* a fact that Roger Tichborne did leave b
his will certain property to his cousin James Dor
mer. He left him property which had bee
bought out of the Doughty funds in the neigh
bourhood of Tichborne, and which property con
sequently formed part of the Doughty estate. H
left that to James Dormer. When the defendan
is asked about James Dormer, he says he canno
forget that because it gave rise to a quarrel be
tween himself and Mrs. Nangle. He states tha
‘ Mrs. Nangle was sister to my father, and sh
thought her son ought to have it. She has neve
forgiven me, even to this day.’ This would ac
count for Mrs. Nangle's taking part against the
defendant, and with a view to suggest a motive
for her conduct he gives prominence to the sub
ject. He is asked : ‘ Did you and she fall oui
about it?’ and he replies : ‘She came down to Mr.
Hopkins’s one day, and we had a few words aboui
it.’ This implies that Mrs Nangle had become
aware that he had made a disposition of this pro-
perty in favour of James Dormer, who, under the
settlement of 1844, was to take the Tichborne es-
tates in the event of the failure of issue of Roger
and his brother. However, it occurred to the de-
fendant that, as the will was a secret will, Mrs.
Nangle never could have known of his having
made a disposition in favour of James Dormer.
Accordingly, he says:
‘ I think lam going rather too far. I should
like to explain myself. Ido not mean to say she
had a row with me, because she did not know who
was in the will; she had a row with me because
she wanted me to make a will in favour of her son
at Mr. Hopkins’s. I did not tell her I had made
a will; and she has not forgiven me to this
day.’
In reply to furtherqnestions, the defendant says:
* What we fell out about was this. She came
down and wanted me to make a will in favour of
her son, and I said I would not make a will. I
went away without making a will, and for that
she has never forgiven me.’
Then he is reminded of having said that he had a
few words at Mr. Hopkins’s, and that he went a
little too far, and the question is put to him :
‘ Did she urge you very much to make the will
in favour of her son?—Yes, she did; and I re-
fused to make it.’
This statement is positively contradicted by Mrs.
Nangle. ' She calls it ‘ a most dreadful falsehood,’
and says she never was at Mr. Hopkins’s in her
life ; she never had a word with Roger Ticliborne
about making a will, and she never met him at
Mr. Hopkins’s at all. When could this have hap-
pened ? According to the defendant, he had made
his will at this time—namely, on the 16th of June
1852—and the only occasion on which he could
have had this discussion with Mrs. Nangle musi
have been after that, and for this obvious reason.
Mrs. Nangle lived at Boulogne, and she only came
over to this country to stay at Tichborne in that
very month of June. Roger was down there from
the afternoon of Saturday, the 19th, to the morn-
ing of Tuesday, the 22d. On the Monday, if we
are to believe the other part of the story, he was
engaged with his cousin. Miss Doughty, and how
he could have been at Mr. Hopkins s the same day
and have had this discussion with Mrs. Nangle I
am at a loss to see. The defendant further
says :
‘ I saw Mrs. Nangle once after that. We parted,
but not exactly on bad terms, or I should have
openly shown it She knew I never had any great
love for her. I cannot say we parted on good
terms.’
Here again the defendant is contradicted by
Mrs. Nangle. She says that she and Roger were
always on the best of terms, and, as far as we are
aware, there was no reason why they should not
be. The defendant says they parted on cold and
distant terms, but, according to the evidence of
Mrs. Nangle, they never formally took leave of
each other at all. When Roger Tichborne left
Tichborne, on the 22d of June 1852, Mrs. Nangle
had not the least idea that they would not meet
again. Therefore, as regards this episode in re-
ference to Mrs. Nangle, if you believe her testi-
mony, this parting on cold and distant terms and
the pressure put upon him to make his will in her
son’s favour must be pure invention from begin-
ning to end—an invention only resorted to for the
purpose ofleading the jury at the former trial into
the belief that Mis. Nangle had taken part against
him, and refused to acknowledge him as Roger
Tichborne, because he had offended her.
That is all I have to say to you on the subject
of Roger Tichborne’s property, his knowledge of
his property, and the dispositions of his will.
This is one of the most important issues of this
case —one of the best and most conclusive tests by
which the identity of one man with another can
be judged—whether, in respect of a thing so all-
important to him as a knowledge of his property
and the disposition of the estates to which he is
the heir, and to which he is to succeed—whether
the knowledge you think such a man ought to
have possessed is or is not possessed by the man
who comes forward and claims to be he who made
that will and made those dispositions of his pro-
perty.
Now I come to another part of this inquiry,
which is, if possible, still more important than
the last—l mean the relations of Roger with his
cousin, Miss Doughty ; and I take these relations
in the first instance sepaiately, and distinct from
the question of the scaled packet. Indeed, this
is one of the crucial tests to which your attention
must be seriously directed : and I must ask you
not to distract your attention by passing papers
from one to another, otherwise 1 shall decline to
go on with my address. This is one of the crucial
tests for the following reason. I cannot submit
the case to you in any other form than this —that


when a man has had a deep and passionate love
for a woman which has ended in disgrace and dis-
appointment, such a phase in his life will neces-
sarily leave impressions on his memory which it is
not in the power of time, under ordinary circum-
stances, ever to obliterate and efface ; therefore
one of the most important tests as to the identity of
the defendant with RogerTichborne will be the de-
gree of memory and knowledge which he manifests
with reference to so important a subject.
Let us recollect what the relations between
Roger Tichborne and his cousin, Miss Doughty,
were. We know that the comins first met after
the period of childhood in June 1849, when Mbs
Doughty returned from the convent where she
had been placed, and came to reside permanently
at home. They had not been long together before
Roger conceived an attachment for his cousin.
In other words, he fell in love with her, and he
took the opportunity of Lady Doughty coming to
town with her hushand and daughter, on their
way to Scotland, in August of that year, to reveal
under the seal of secrecy, and in perfect confidence,
to Lady Doughty the fact that he was in love with
herdaughttr. Itisvery clear from Lady Doughty’s
letters of that date that, if she did not actually
encourage the attachment, she certainly did not
discourage it. She writes to him constantly, re-
ferring time after time to the secret which he had
imparted to her, and speaking in terms which cer-
tainly led him to suppose that his attentions to
her daughter were by no means displeasing to her.
It is perfectly true there was the objection of near
relationship—an objection especially cogent in the
minds of persons belonging to the Roman Catholic
community. But Lady Doughty seems to have
thought that in many respects it would be an
eligible match; for, although she may not have
made up her mind that the UDion should take
place, she does not in any way put herself in
opposition to it. Roger Tichborne joins his regi-
ment, returns to Tichborne in the winter of
1849-50, and comes of age in the first week of
January 1850. On that occasion he manifested a
disposition to drink too much. Accordingly, when
he goes back to his regiment we find Lady Doughty
writing to him seriously on the subject, and from
this time to the end of 1851 we have constant re-
ferences to it in her letters. Misgivings arise in
her mind as to his habits, and the probability of
his getting over this unfortunate propensity to
drink.
In the middle of 1851 Roger paid another visil;
to Upton, where his cousin then was, and where
he again saw her. But at this time Lady Doughty
seems to have given him very little encourage-
ment indeed, and there were one or two other
visitors who paid attentions to Miss Doughty, one
of whom Lady Doughty was inclined to encourage,
and so excited the jealousy and dissatisfaction of
Roger. When he returned to his regiment he
could but have had little confidence in the event-
ful success of his suit. At the end of that year,
however, he got a couple of months’ leave, and
came to visit Sir Edward and the family at Tich-
fiorne; and on this occasion he discovered that
his passion was reciprocated by the object of it.
We know what happened on that occasion. Fluc-
tuating between hope and fear, conscious that his
cousin did not dislike him, but that, on the con-
trary, she received his attentions with pleasure
and satisfaction, he nevertheless knew there were
many difficulties and obstacles which might pre-
sent themselves to the union he desired. He then
left with Mr. Gosford the paper about which Mr.
Gosford has spoken, in which was recorded his
vow to build a church, under circumstances which
he stated. lam not at present anticipating the
question whether this was the only document he
left, or whether the statement of the defendant
is true that he left a paper with the instiuctions
which he says it contained. But that a pape
was left with Gosford recording a vow to build
church is perfectly clear from the contents of tw
letters written by Roger Tichborne. In one o '
of these, addressed to Mr.,Gojford, he says: ‘
will not build a church unless under the circum
stances which I left with you in writing wtiil
in the other, addressed to Mr. Slaughter, he re
marks, in reference to his will, that he also de
sires his private wishes and intentions to be car
ried out according to the paper he had left witli
Mr. Gosford.
At this time the attentions he was paying to
his cousin having been brought to the knowledg
of Ins uncle—in all probability by Lady Doughty
—Sir Edward, sharing her objections, summonei
his nephew to his presence. On a Sunday morn
ing, the 10th or 11th of January, when the bells
were linging for chapel, Lady Doughty tells u
Roger was summoned by his uncle to the library
and we know what passed. His uncle said he
objected to any marriage between his daughter
and Roger on account of their near relationship
and that it would be much better for the cousim
to be separated ; therefoie, he rr quested that he
would leave the house. Accordingly, Roger die
leave the next morning. Wh >t his feelings were
upon his uncle making this communication to him
is disclosed in the fiist paper he gave bis cousin.
It has been read more than once, and I will not
read it again. But no one who does read it can
fail to appreciate the strong, passionate love that
Roger Tichborne, however cold his nature may
otherwise have been, had conceived for this young
girl, or tbe anguish of mind a d heait he under-
went in having his relations with his cousin so
abruptly put an end to. It is not only from that
paper, but from contemporaneous correspondence,
that one is enabled to see what was at work in his
mind. * I little expected,’ he writes, ‘ three weeks
ago, that my visit to Tichborne would be cut short
as it has been ; but, however, such has always
been the case with me ever since I was born. It
is not new to me, but not less painful.’
It has been said in the course of this case that
there was no reality in the love of these two
cousins for one another. Why that should be
said lam sure I don't know. After reading the
documents to which I have referred and tbe lan-
guage of this letter, I cannot biing myself to
doubt that this was a real and sincere attach-
ment, which, if it had been allowed to run its
course, and suffered to end in a union between
these two persons, might have made Roger Tich-
borne all that could be desired. If he had evil
habits it might have won him from them, made
him a good domestic husband and father, and in-
duced him to settle down and lead the happy and
contented life of an English gentleman, blessed
with everything that can make life a blessing and,
at the same time, make a man’s life useful in the
sphere in which it has pleased Providence to place
him. It was not destined to be. It was frus-
trated. I think the more pity, because tUere was
good in the man, and a good wife mignt have
brought out the good and exterminated tbe evil.
It was thought then that there was an end to
everything. No doubt it was well known in the
house. The sudden and abrupt termination of
R


the courtship of the young heir, and the regrets
that would be expressed, would very soon be
talked about. There is never anything that deeply
interests the interior of a family, especially if you
do not wish it to be known beyond your own im-
mediate part of the house, but is known in the
servants’ hall almost as soon as you know it your-
selves. We cannot fathom this, but every one
knows it is a fact. I will undertake to say that
this was known in a very short time.
But, as it happened, that which was thought at
the time to be a final termination of the intimacy
between Roger and his cousin did not prove to be
so. Sir Edward Doughty was taken with an ill-
ness which every one supposed would be a death
illness, and Roger, as his heir and near relative,
was sent for to take a last farewell of his uncle
and to receive his dying blessing. We learn from
Roger’s letters that his uncle was supposed to be
at the point of death. Roger wrote to his father
to say that he hoped he would come over at once.
The return of Roger Tichborne brought the two
lovers together and revived their strong feeling
towards each other, and they thought about the
possibility of their future union. In order to se-
cure the blessing of Sir Edward Doughty before
he left this world, it was agreed that a last appeal
should be made to him to implore his blessing on
their marriage whenever it should take place.
Roger went to make his application to the sup-
posed dying man, and Sir Edward declares that
if the same feeling continues between them when
his daughter is of age, and if Roger gets his fa-
ther’s assent and the dispensation of the Church,
he shall look on it as the will of Heaven and will
consent to the union. Naturally, Roger would
consider this as a settled thing, though the pro-
mise was a conditional one, no doubt. Rady
Doughty herself appears at that time to have
been an assenting party. It must have been clearly
made manifest to her at this time that her daugh-
ter’s affections were engaged.
Yet there was the same difficulty as before
arising from the want of confidence which the
parents had in Roger’s habits. Lady Doughty
had learnt from some source or other that he still
continued to indulge in stimulants, and, unfor-
tunately, on one occasion, while Roger was stay-
ing in the house, and sat up with his uncle, he
took too much, and gave evidence of the fact,
which caused Miss Doughty to expostulate with
him. He gave her a promise never to touch
spirits any more, and he seems for a time to have
abstained from drinking, turned over a new leaf,
and sought to become a reformed man. For a
time Lady Tichborne believed in his assurances
of reform, and seems to have allowed this con-
ditional engagement between the two cousins to
hold good. She writes several letters to him after
his return to his regiment, in terms which quite
convey her assent to the supposed relations which
existed between the two cousins. Those letters
contained fervid expressions of hope that he
might steadily pursue the course of reform which
he had entered upon, and point out that such
conduct would not only have its reward in this
world, but also in the next. But in the mean
time there is evidence of Roger still continuing
his habit of drinking, and we shall see what they
led to hereafter.
On tIW 19th June 1852, Lady Doughty and
Miss Doughty were in London, and Roger came
up to town, and upon that occasion we find that
he was struck with some show of reserve and
coldness on the part of liis aunt, and possibly also
on the part of his cousin. This may have arisen
in the latter case from the advice of the mother,
who would probably remind her daughter that,
as there was no actual engagement between them,
it would be necessary to be somewhat reserved,
especially as they would be before the world of
London. After their return to Tichborne, Lady
Doughty writes another letter to Roger, in which
she alludes to the coldness he has complained of,
and again reminds him of the terms of the condi-
tional engagements which had been agreed to. It
is difficult quite to understand that letter, but
what I gather from it is, that she would rather
the marriage should not take place than it should.
The inclination of her mind was against it, and
yet she was not prepared to break the promise
and conditional engagement made by her husband,
while her confidence in Roger's promises of reform
was so much shaken that she did not desire that
the marriage should take place. That seems to
have been the state of her mind; but, on the
other hand, she did not wish to break with Roger,
and she desired him, therefore, to state what his
wishes were. She said, ‘My daughter is to be
perfectly free.’ He seems to think that he is
hardly treated, because he says, ‘ I never told
any one what engagement might or might not ex-
ist between me and my cousin,’ and reminds her
that he had already told her what his determina-
tion was, and he says :
‘Since I came back it has been my daily study
to try to improve. I don’t drink anything to
what I used, and have much improved in this re-
spect. If I find that my affection for my cousin,
instead of decreasing, has become stronger, I
shall always be too happy to oblige her in any
way in my power, though I shall be most likely
far away. lam in hopes of going to the Cape of
Good Hope before loDg, where I shall probably
remain two and a half years. I write to you,’ he
says to his aunt, ‘in honour ; at least, such has
always been my wish.’
He does not exactly say that he pledges himself,
if his cousin should remain constant in her at-
tachment to him, that he will marry her at the
end of three years. That is implied, though not
specifically stated. He adds :
‘ If you wish me, or like to do it yourself, to
give out my final decision about my cousin, you
are at liberty to do so ; but I leave it to you.’
That being the state of things between the two
at that time, he comes up to London on the 14th,
stays with his aunt and cousin until the 19th,
when they go down to Tichborne, in consequence
of their hearing that Sir Edward Doughty was
seriously ill. The alarm proved to be false, as
the illness was only temporary. Roger stayed
there until the 22d. Before he returned to town
he had an interview with his uncle. His cousin
and himself had determined that he should, be-
fore returning to his regiment, ask his uncle to
convert the conditional assent which he had given
into a positive one, and that they should be mar-
ried at once. Mrs. Radcliffe gives us the result
of that interview. She says Roger had urged
her father to withdraw his prohibition to their
marriage ; and her father’s reply was, ‘ Not at
present—wait.’ He was to wait and obtain his
father’s permission and the dispensation of the
Church before he could consent, but it was not
to be for two years, at all events. Then Roger
said, ‘ This is the promise I have made (pro-
ducing a letter) ; but I will fulfil certain con-
ditions. I have given a similar one to my father.’
They were walking by the river side—Roger and


his cousin—talking over future hopes and pros-
pects, when he told her he had made this appeal
to the uncle, that it had been unsuccessful, and
that he had refused to abridge the period of wait-
ing. And then she said he produced the paper
and read it to her. That paper is produced, and
there cannot he the slightest doubt that it is in
the writing of Roger Tichborne. It is as follows :
‘ 22d June 1852.
‘ I make on this day a promise that if I marry
my cousin Catherine Doughty this year, or before
three years are over at the latest, to build a church
or chapel at Tichborne to the Holy Virgin, in
thanksgiving for the protection which she has
thrown over us, and in praying God that our
wishes may be fulfilled. R. C. Tichborne.’
On the back was this memorandum in the hand-
writing of Lady Rad cliff e, ‘ This was written the
last day I ever saw Roger.’ And that is the end
of this romance.
As I have said before, if it had been allowed to
run its course, it might have led to a happy union
between these two young persons, but Roger (if
Roger Tichborne is not no v before us in the person
of the defendant) departed from this country in
search of the means of drowning his sorrows and
his cares in foreign travel—a search which ended
in his premature death, if it be true that he did
in reality go down when the Bella foundered.
Rut that he carried with him to the most distant
parts of the world to which he went, the love of
his cousin, is a thing we cannot doubt; for in the
last letter he wrote to Lady Doughty he told her
he was as much attached as ever to his cousin,
and there was no letter to Gosford in which he
did not inquire after her; and if he spoke of her
probable marriage in the next London season, it
was with assumed and forced calmness. It might
in truth be said, with very little change in the
exquisite lines of Goldsmith :
‘ Where’er I roam, whatever realms I see,
My heart, untravelled, fondly turns to thee ;
Still to my cousin turns with ceaseless pain,
And drags at each remove a lengthening chain.’
I dwell upon this part of the case for this simple
reason. I believe lam truly portraying the real
sentiments of Roger Tichborne towards his cousin.
I think those were feelings the memory of which
would never have been effaced. A heart’s wounds
leave scars quite as deep and lasting as those which
steel or fire impress upon the surtace of the out-
ward form, and the man who bad passed through
these passionate emotions could never have for-
gotten them in after life. Therefore, it is to my
mind a crucial test of the reality of the claim of
the defendant to stand before us as the living
representative of Roger Tichborne to see whether
he has a real and substantial remembrance of all
that passed between his cousin and himself ; and
that quite independently of the question of the
sealed packet, which I will deal with as an en-
tirely separate part of the case.
This brings me to the consideration of what the
defendant has said on the subject, but I must first
call your attention to a letter by which it has been
supposed that a complete termination was put to
the position in which Roger Tichborne stood rela-
tively to his cousin, and which I think has been
strangely misconstrued. It is the letter of the 3d
of July written by Lady Doughty to Roger after
his departure from Tichborne. He had appealed
to his uncle to allow the marriage to take place
either immediately or at no distant period. This,
I think, was a fatal mistake. If he had let things
remain undisturbed, the probability is that all
might have gone on smoothly, that Miss Doughty
might have remained constant and true to the
attachment which she had not disguised from
Roger, and that Lady Doughty would have had
no opportunity of interfering to disappoint his
hopes. But Lady Doughty saw that any appea
of this kind might bring matters to a termination
much more hastily than she was disposed to per
mit, and writes to him. I think it is not impos
sible that he had appealed to her also. Roge
Tichborne writes to Mr. Gosford, and says he it
expecting a letter from Lady Doughty, and tha >
he hopes she will not be too diplomatic, thougl
he says she is a very bad diplomatist.
.She seems to have been trying to force upon
him an irrevocable pledge, while she wished her
daughter to be left free that she might be at per-
fect liberty to marry any person. Lady Doughty
goes on to say that Roger had not shown a rea
change of habits, and that consent to their mar
riage could not be given until those habits were
conquered. She tells her nephew that he is ai;
perfect liberty to act as he considers best, and she
asks him to write a letter, after consideration,
which may be read by his uncle as well as by herself
She tells him he may wait till his cousin is of age,
and they will then see whether their feeling!
towards each other remain as before, and whether
their mutual happiness is likely to be promoted
by the union. ‘ Subject to that,’ she says, ‘ matters
may remain as they are, but my child is not to be
considered to be bound to any engagement towards
you if she meets any one else she likes better. At
the same time, I should like to know your views
on the subject—whether at the end of the period
named, if she has not bound herself to anyone
else, you will marry her.’ Well, he thinks that
that is diplomatising too much, and a very unfair
thing to impose upon him. He writes to Gosford,
‘ Lady Doughty has gained her point. It is the first
time that reports have been believed in preference
to my word of honour,’ and he winds up by an-
nouncing his intention of going abroad and not
going back to Tichborne for a long time to come.
He also writes to Lady Doughty absolving her
daughter from any engagement, if she saw any
one else whom she might prefer, and stating that,
if his cousin married, it was his intention to go
abroad.
Now, did Roger ever go back to Tichborne any
more, after June 22, 1852 ? Lady Radcliffe swears
that he did not. Lady Doughty swears that he
did not. Mrs. and Miss Nangle, who were both
staying at the house, swear that he did not. Mr.
and Mrs. Gosford, who, in all probability, if he
ever went back, would have known it, both say
he never went there any more. But what did
occur we know pretty well. He had intimated
his intention of not going back again to Tich-
borne unless he had an express invitation from
Lady Doughty. But he got no such invitation.
Lady Doughty, although she did not desire to
break off the existing r elations, did not wish the
two cousins to come together. Roger felt that
he had been hardly used by her in acting upon
the assumption that all the reports she heard
were true,. and he resented this state of things,
and kept himself in a state of moody silence. He
did not want to go to Tichborne, although he
wished they would invite him to go back. Then
he thought he would leave the army and take a
hunting-box in Hampshire. ‘No,’ says Lady
Doughty. ‘ I object to that; because if you come
into this neighbourhood you must come to Tich-
borne, and everybody will understand that there


is an engagement, and no one will come forwarc
to seek the hand of my daughter ; and if you c
not come to the house it will give rise i
rumours. Therefore you had better not come near
The correspondence upon this subject went o
till the middle of September, when he learn
from Lady Doughty that as they had not su
ceeded iu lettiDg Upton, the best thing to do wa
to offer it as a residence to him. Roger acceptec
it, went to Upton on the 28th of October, bavin
obtained leave of absence prior to his final]
quitting the regiment. It will be a question fo
you to consider by and by whether Roger eve
saw his cousin after he went to Upton. I too
you through the letters the other day, and ’
think you will see that from the time he returnee
to Canterbury, he did not leave it for a sing]
day, with the exception of the occasion when h
came to London to see his father till he went t
Upton, where he arrived on the 28th of October
The defendant says that Roger Tichborne, eithe
before or after he went to Upton, was huntin
in Hampshire, and that upon one occasion he me
his cousin, and they had a conversation whic
led to the sealed packet—a subject to whic
I shall call your particular attention to-morrow.
We have now to see what the knowledge anc
memory of the defendant is. In his examination
in-chief the following questions are asked him :
‘How many times did you go down to Tich
borne in the course of tbe year 1852?—I canno
say how many times —sever al times. In the year
1850 you said you had met Miss Braine and also
Miss Doughty ?—Yes. Did you meet Miss Doughty
in the course of 1852 while at Tichborne ?—Yes
I believe so.’
Observe his answer to the next question :
‘Were you at all intimate with that lady?
asked Mr. Giffard, in very measured terms. The
defendant replied: ‘Yes, I knew her very well
Did you walk about with her at all?—Yes, anc
rode about with her. Did you ascertain whether
the degree of friendship existing between you anc
Miss Doughty was acceptable to her father?—]
think not. You mean it was acceptable ?—No.’
The next question and answer are very im-
portant :
‘ Do you remember any particular time when
that became manifested? —During the latter part
of 1852.’
He fixes the date of his discovery that his in-
tentions were displeasing to her father as hap-
pening at the end of 1852 ; and he adds that he
did not go to Tichborne so often as before. Now,
the discovery was really made in January 1852.
But supposing his memory has failed him as to
the date, is it true that he did not go to Tich-
borne so often as he used to do before ? He was
there again in February ; he was there again in
June ; that is twice iu the course of six months
after the time of the discovery. That is quite as
often as he had been there in any preceding year
since entering the army in 1849. On cross exami-
nation he is reminded of what he had said, and
asked if it is true, and he answers that it is.
He is asked when it was that he discovered that
his attentions to Miss Doughty were not accept-
able to her father, and he said it was a bard
question to answer. The Attorney-General then
continues :
‘ Perhaps you could fix the time if I ask you
whether it was before or after you began to make
arrangements about selling out?—lt was about
July. Is that what you mean by “the latter
end” of the year?r*-lf you are going to catch me
up like that, how can Igoon ? I can’t fix it to a
day or a month. Can any man treat you more
fairly than to read you your own evidence, ques-
tions and answers bttweenyou and your counsel?
—I think you will find I never confined myself to
dates throughout. I believe I have expressed
that on several occasions. You have never con
fined yourself to dates throughout?—Not to
month or a week. Ido not do anything so un
reasonable as to ask you to do so. When I rea<
from your own evidence that you said your
attentions to Miss Doughty in the latter end o
1852 were disagreeable to her father, it is not
with any intention of catching you, as you tern
it. Is this true, that is what I want to know
—Well, isn’t July the latter end of the year? Is
that what you meant then to say ?—lt did no
occur to me what month it was in. lam noi
asking you that; I am asking you whether wha'
you swore to Mr. Giffard is true? Do you cal
July the end of the year? I must repeat, is what
you said to Mr. Giffard the other day true or not
—Yes. Then you mean July?—l do not think
I turned it over sufficiently iu my mind : the jury
will understand my meaning. Never mind about
the jury.—But I do mind about the jury; and
although you are trying to confuse me I do
not wish you to confuse them. The Chief Jus-
tice. The questions are very distinct, you
observe.’
The Attorney-General presses him upon that
point, and he repeats that it was July or August,
but at last says he cannot say positively, and
is all in confusion. Being further pressed, he
says there is only one thing he can refresh his
memory from, and the Attorney-General adds :
‘What is that?—That is my business. No, I
beg your pardon, it is my business.—You say so.
What is it?—l do not feel in duty bound to tell
you ; if the Judge tells me I am bound to tell you,
I will. The Chief Justice.—What is your ground
of objection? Claimant. —lt involves another
party. The Chief Justice.—Well, the whole ques-
tion involves another party. That is no ground
for not mentioning the circumstance to which you
refer. The Solicitor General. —Now, then, what
is it? Claimant. —Am I bound to tell? The
Chief Justice.—Yes. Claimant.—Then I must be
more careful for the future. 1 was paying my at-
tentions to Miss Hales, of Canterbury, at the
same time. The Solicitor-General. —When?—
That would be about September or October ; but
what are you alluding to? The Chief Justice.—
What are you alluding to? Claimant. —I re-
member that I was paying my attentions to Miss
Hales. I think the Solicitor-General wants to
put another construction upon it. The Solicitor-
General. —Ah! you are a great deal too deep for
me. I only want to get a date from you. I ask
you again, when was it you discovered that
your attentions to Miss Doughty were unaccept-
able to her father? Claimant.—About July or
August.’
Next comes a very important question as to the
last time he was at Tichborne, and the defendant
replies that he went there a few days before he
left England. Now we know that Lady Tichborne
wrote to him shortly before he left this country,
urging him to go to Tichborne to see his uncle who
was in such a state of health that he could never
expect to see him any more in this world, if he
missed that opportunity. But Roger refused to
go, and he never saw his uncle any more. The
defendant is therefore wrong in saying he went to
Tichborne a few days before he left England. As


to whether Roger Tichbome saw his cousin five or
six weeks before he left, that-is involved in the
question of the sealed packet, and I shall reserve
all consideration of it till I come to that subject
to-morrow. The defendant was next asked how
he made the discovery that his attentions to Miss
Doughty were displeasing to her father, and his
answers aie very important as showing his know-
ledge or want of knowledge of the history of these
two persons. We will resume the question of the
relations subsisting between Roger Tichborne and
Miss Doughty at that point to-morrow.
Eighteenth Day, Wednesday , February 25, 1874.
Gentlemen of the Jury,—We were yesterda
engaged in considering the statements of the de
fendant with reference to the breaking off of th
attentions of Roger Tiehborne to his cousin, Mis
Doughty. He said he had discovered that his at
tentions to her were unacceptable to her fathe
and mother, and he is asked this question,—
‘You say you discovered your attentions t
Miss Doughty to be unacceptable. Were thos
ordinary attentions, or were you paying your at
dresses to her ?—Well, ordinary attentions, I sup
pose. lam unable to draw a line between th
two. What I mean to say is, that what migh'
have been known privately between ourselves wa
not known outwardly to the world. What migh
have been privately between yourselves, sir
There is no privacy in this matter : Miss Dought;
is here? —I know that.’
Now, until January 1852, so far as we can gather
nothing very definite-was known by the cousins a
to their reciprocal feelings towards one another
Lady Radcliffe says she was not sure, but that sh
hoped Roger was paying her the attentions whici
a gentleman shows to a lady whom he hopes t
make his wife. He says himself that until tha
month of January he really did not know that sh
returned his affection. That would, therefore
hardly seem to be a correct representation which
the defendant has made.
And now comes an inquiry which goes to the
very root of the matter. The defendant is askec
how he first discovered that his attentions to Mis
Doughty were not acceptable to her father, anc
he replies, ‘ I don't see how it is possible you can
expect me to answer a question of that descrip
tion.’ The question is pressed, and then he says,
‘lt is simply impossible for me toanswer your ques-
tion.’ The Attorney-General next asks, —‘You
cannot give me the slightest notion when you dis-
covered it?—No, I really cannot.’ Well, we know
perfectly well that Roger was summoned to the
presence of his uncle iu the library, and that his
uncle then communicated to him the fact that he
had discovered he was paying attention to his
cousin; that he thought the blood relationship
between them too close to admit of marrying,
and that, therefore, his attentions must be discon-
tinued. The question is farther pressed in cross-
examination, and the defendant again says, ‘ It is
impossible for me to explain how it was.’ Then
the Attorney-General says :
‘ Now tell me what it was led you to discover
that your addresses were displeasing to the person
whom you were wishing to make your father in-
law?—l do not know that I can do that. Had
you no explanation before you parted ?—I do not
remember. Did you cease paying your attentions
to Miss Doughty? —No, I believe it was the other
way. She ceased to pay attention to you?—Yes,
I believe it was so. Did you write to her after it
was discovered that your attentions were displeas-
ing ?—lt might have been so. I cannot say. Upon
your oath, did you or did you not ? Now, did you
ever write one word ? —What is the good of your
asking me to swear when I say I do not remem-
ber ? Did you ever write one word to her ? 1
man cannot forget whether he wrote to a gir
whom he is trying to make his wife. Did you
ever write a syllable to her?—l believe I did. i
might have done so. I cannot say; I canno
swear. When?—When? Yes, when? Was ii
after you ceased to go there so often ? —Yes, I be
lieve that was so. When or where ?—I cannoi
remember.’
Now, a suggestion here naturally presents itsel:
to the mind—This man is in love with a young
girl whom he wishes to marry, but whose parents
on discoveiing that he was paying attention to
their daughter, said that the thing must be put a
stop to, —under these circumstances would not a
man jecollect whether he wrote to the person to
whom he was paying his addresses after his atten-
tions were abruptly put an end to ? He is asked,
‘You were paying attentions to Miss Hales at
Canterbury in September or October?—l was.
You did not write to her then?—l might have
done so.’
Now comes another important question—
‘Did you tell Miss Doughty of your attentions
to Miss Hales?—Really, I cannot remember. Had
you any interview with Sir Edward or Lady
Doughty upon the subject when this engagement
was broken off?—Yes, 1 believe there was an in-
terview. When and with which?—Well, I fancy
it was Lady Doughty. Not Sir Edward?—No.
Did he speak to you about it?—Yes, afterwards.
After when—after July and August?—ltwould be
about that time. A man does not easily forget
the breaking off of such an engagement, or the in-
terviews he had with the parents of the person
whom he wished to marry. What passed between
you and Lady or Sir Edward Doughty ? —I do not
remember. Did it make no impression upon
you ? —I think not. It didn't go very deep, then ?
—I cannot answer such a question as that, you
know. Can you not give us an outline of what
passed?—l do not remember what passed.’
Well now, is it possible that what passed on
such an occasion, when a man believed the happi-
ness of his future life depended upon what passed,
could have forgotten anything that occurred?
The defendant forgets all. We have here another
difficulty, and that is the defendant’s recollection
or belief upon the subject. The interview at
which the objection of the father and mother was
communicated, he says, was an interview with
the mother, and not the father, whereas we know
that it was the reverse. He was sent for by the
father and told that the connection must be
broken off, and it was not till after that time he
had an interview with the mother. The mother
informed her daughter of what had passed, and
Miss Doughty said, ‘ Let me see him,’ and Lady
Doughty consenting, Roger was sent for, and saw
them both in the drawing room. As for the cou-
sin, she had no other course to pursue than to
obey the injunction of her parents ; but Roger
then learned from her own lips that but for their
prohibition she would have been happy to become
his wife. The defendant makes the mother the


person who communicated this determination to
break off the connection. May not that be ac-
counted for? What actually passed between
Roger and his uncle in the library did not be-
come known. But the drawing-room door does
not always exclude what passes within. In all
probability somebody or other knew that there
had been a meeting there between the aunt, the
daughter, and the cousin ; and the matter would
be discussed afterwards. It was not unlikely
that the lady would be seen that day and the
next morning manifesting considerable signs of
emotion. Such things get talked about. Would
it not be said very likely, ‘O! Lady Doughty
has put an end to all hope of a match between
Miss Doughty and Mr. Roger, and Mr. Roger
must go away.’ The fact would soon get about,
and Lady Doughty would be named as the object-
ing party.
Now the next statement made by the defend-
ant is certainly a startling one. Having said he
did not remember what had passed, he is asked :
‘ Did it produce much impression upon your
mind?—Well, I really cannot say. Ido not re-
member how I felt at the time.’
You will ask yourselves, would Roger Tichborne
be likely to make such an answer ? The cross-
examination proceeds:
‘ I mean, did it produce such an impression on
your mind as to make you recollect it or not ?—I
think not. You think not ? You did not go very
deeply into it?—Really I cannot answer such a
question as that. Can you tell me whether you
cared for it at the time ? Did the matter grieve
you ?—Well, I dare say I felt it at the time. Of
course we all feel a thing of that kind. Did you
feel it very much one way or the other ?—My
answer is that I do not remember what it did at
the time. \\ hat did you do in consequence of
it - you said you did not go so often afterwards ?
—I went abroad. Anything else ?—I do not re-
collect. Can you give me any further account of
what passed with Sir Edward Doughty at the inter-
view?—No. Can you tell me what passed with
Lady Doughty ?—Do you suppose it possible for
me to remember ? Yes, indeed I do. Where did
you see Lady Doughty ? —ln the drawing-room at
1 ichborne. Was she alone ?—Miss Doughty was
with her. You say you can remember this. Now
-tell us what passed, because you were a good
match, you know, for her, being the heir of the
lichbornes?—You seem to know more about it
than I do myself. Ido not often agree with you,
but on this occasion I agree with you entirely.
Just try and come up to the level of my know-
ledge. Why were your attentions displeasing ?
I cannot say now.’
Then he is reminded of many things which his
memory had enabled him to speak to, and he is
pressed again as to what the objections of Sir
Edward to the match were, and he replies that
the principal objection was that they were first
cousins. He is asked :
‘Give us your own account of what passed when
you had this attachment broken off. What was
the ground ? What did they break it off for ?—I
cannot say justnow. Cannotyou say what grounds
Sir Edward and Lady Doughty gave for your at-
tentions being displeasing to them ?—I have given
you my answer. Do you really mean to say that
you cannot recollect upon what ground they
broke off your engagement with your cousin ? Is
that really what you say ?—Yes. And is it really
true that you cannot recollect ?—I do not recol-
lect. You really mean to say that you cannot tell
Ime on what Sir Edward placed his rejection to
your suit ?—I think his principal objection was
that we were first cousins. Did he say so?—I
think I have heard him say so. Do you really
mean to say that was the ground on which it was
put?—l-think it was one of the objections.
What was another ? —I do not know ; I have for-
got. There was a sort of understanding that it
was objectionable, and it was put an end to in
that way ?—I think so. Was it an understanding
arrived at with scarcely any talk about it ?
There was not much talk about it. You under-
stood that it was displeasing and went away?—
That is it. And, as I understand, you went there
not so often, but you visited thereat intervals ?
Yes, I did. And both Sir Edward and Lady
Doughty knew that you did so ; you visited by
their sanction and invitation, I dare say ?—Well,
I do not know much about that. You must know
one way or the other. You say you visited there
again at intervals; what I ask you is, did you
visit there ? Did you visit there as you had been,
accustomed to do before, only not so often?—
Ino ; when I went into the neighbourhood after
that I put up at Winchester.’
I shall by and by put before you letters which
show that after that Roger Tichborne only spent
one night and part of a day at Tichborne.
Then, do I understand you to say that you
never went to Tichborne after that ?—T did not
say so. Did you ever go to Tichborne after that?
—Yes, I believe I did. Well, that is what I want
ito know ; did you go to Tichborne-house ?— I be-
lieve I did. And sleep there as usual, only not so
often?—l did not say that. That is what I ask
you; did you go there as you had gone before, only
not so frequently ?—I believe I did. Have you
any doubt that you did ?—I have no doubt. What,
the whole time from July or August, when you
went away ?—No. You went there more than once,
did you not?—l believe I did. Were you received
there as before, only with the understanding that
there must be nothing more between you and your
cousin?—Yes, I believe that was so. I ask you
whether I am to understand that you went as often
as before, but not on such an intimate footing -
not as a suitor, but as a friend. Is that what you
mean?—Well, you may put it that way, but I
hardly understand it that way. (Addressing the
Lord Chief Justice)—My lord, lam getting very
fatigued, and certainly do not understand the
words so well as I should like to. Chief Justice
Bovill. Surely the questions are very simple.
You are asked whether you went to Tichborne-
house after the engagement was broken off?—
Yes, I did go there again. On what footing?—l
went there on the footing that we were all friends.
[ was glad to see them, but I didn’t stay there.’
, Now that is the cross-examination of the de-
endant upon the subject of his relations with his
:ousin, and the manner and ciicumstances under
vhich his courtship with her was put an end to ;
jnd the question is whether this statement of the
lefendant is such a representation of the facts as
ou might have expected from Roger Tichborne.
It is quite clear that in many respects he makes
nost serious mistakes. He is aware that these
elations existed, and that somehow they were put
n end to, but as to how or when he appears to be
;norant, or to have Only a very confused idea,
le supposes that his attentions to his cousin were
iscovered and put an end to in July or August,
ad he has no notion of what took place in January
ad February, his idea being that from the mo-
lent the discovery, as he calls it, was made his


attentions were ended, and his position with re-
gard to his cousin became simply that of a friend;
that he went occasionally to the house, not on the
same intimate footing as before, but merely in the
form of casual visits. He did not know that after
he had been told in the month of January that he
must no longer pay his addresses to Miss Doughty
the positive prohibition was recalled and con-
verted into a conditional consent. If it be urged
that, from failing memory, he put July for Jan-
uary, then the statement he makes is the very re-
verse of what occurred in January; so that which-
ever way you look at it he is at fault.
Then, again, he is obviously unaware that the
relation of lovers subsisted after the discovery in
January, and continued until the summer, and
that the breach then was occasioned, not by the
discovery by the parents that he was paying his
addresses to their daughter, for that they knew in
January, but by the precipitate conduct of Roger
Tichborne himself in pressing his uncle to allow
the marriage to be solemnised at once, and not at
the end of the probationary period of three years.
That enabled Lady Doughty to interpose, and to
put his relations to his cousin upon so cold and
distant a footing that he withdrew himself into a
position—as I have before called it—of sullen re-
serve. We must not lose sight of the fact that
the first statement of the defendant was that this
happened at the end of 1852. Under pressure, he
puts it as the month of July or August, and then
he says he calls July the latter part of the year.
But he makes no reference to the earlier part of
the year when these scenes occurred ; so that it
seems to make the- whole statement a mass of
confusion. The defendant is asked whether he
corresponded with his cousin after this, and he
certainly did not. He gave her those impassioned
papers of which the defendant had no knowledge,
but we have no trace of any correspondence. He
asked leave of the parents to correspond with his
cousin, but they objected, and he gave it up, and
Lady Doughty commends him for his honourable
conduct in that respect.
Well, then, in point of fact the relations sub-
sisting between the cousins were twice interrupted
—first by the father in January, and again by
Lady Doughty in July. The defendant speaks
of his attentions to his cousin being interrupted
by the discovery of the parents. The word ' dis-
covery’ was hardly applicable, because Lady
Doughty knew peifectly well of the attachment.
In the first instance, the defendant seems to have
been wholly unacquainted with the fact of the
state of the relations between them when they
were interrupted by Lady Doughty. It is alto-
gether as defective a state of knowledge with re-
spect to an event that you would think would
have made an impression upon most men’s minds,
and would not be likely to be forgotten, as can
well be conceived. The defendant is asked when
the affair with his cousin was broken off, and he
says about the latter part of November or Decem-
ber. This is all-important, because it has refer-
ence to the meeting at which the defendant al-
leges that Miss Doughty conveyed to him the fact
that she feared she was in the family way. He
saysthat they had a conversation about the uncle’s
behaviour, and he told her it was quite impossible
he could marry her after what his uncle had said,
though the defendant could not give the exact
words. He is asked :
‘Give jour own account of what occurred.
Really I do not recollect after all those years what
passed. What did you say to her, or she to you?
—I cannot tell wliat the conversation was. What
was it about ?—With regard to my uncle. What
was the substance?—l told her it was quite lin*
possible I could marry her after what my uncle
and aunt had said to me. Quite impossible you
could marry her? —Yes. It was on that subject.
I cannot give the exact words. Where was the
interview held?—At the lower end of the village
of Tichborne. I had just returned from hunting.
I got off and led my horse, and walked alongside
of her down the village. You told her this, and
cannot recollect what she said ?—No, I cannot.
Were you staying at ihe house?—No. Where?—
At Winchester. Do you mean to tell the jury
that what you have told us is all that passed at
the interview ?—No ; but what 1 want to state is
that there are matters which I should be very re-
luctant to state in a public court. If I do so, it
will be because lam compelled to do so. I told
you before there are two parties to be affected,
and on the part of the other one you are free to
speak. _Be good enough, therefore, to answer the
question. Is it all you recollect? —We had a long
conversation on the occasion, but that is all I can
recolleet of it. When did you see her next ?—(No
answer.)’
Then the Lord Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas interposes, and says :
‘ This is a very important matter. It was so
opened by your own counsel. What passed be-
tween another person and yourself, and which no-
body else could be aware of, is very material. If
you can recollect anything else, say so. Witness.
—lt is impossible for me to recollect the whole
of a conversation which was held 20 years ago.
The Attorney-General.—Nobody asked you to do
so. When did you see Miss Doughty next ?—I
never saw her after that. Did you not see her
after the end of November 1852?—I think not.
After the engagement was broken off you saw her
once, and once only?—Yes.’
At this point the defendant, addressing Lord
Chief Justice Bovill, said :
‘My Lord, there is one part of my evidence
given on Friday which I wish to correct. I said
that it was Miss Doughty who broke off the en-
gagement ; at least, I saw by the papers I said so.
That was wrong. The Attorney-General.—Well,
do I understand you to say you broke it off ?
—lt was my uncle broke it off. What is it you
want to correct?—lt was me who broke it off, by
her father’s command.’
Well, then the shorthand writer’s note .of .what
he had said is read over to him, from which it ap-
peared that not once, but over and over again, he
stated that it was Miss Doughty broke off the
engagement, and that he did not. Nothing could
be more explicit than the questions put and the
answers given. I suppose, however, that the
defendant afterwards thought that it was a very
rash statement to have made, and so lie corrects
it. Then the cross-examination as to this parting
interview is continued :
‘ May I take it that this was the first and the
last time you saw Miss Doughty after the engage-
ment was broken off ? —J believe it . was. When
you were going away did you see Miss Doughty.
—I am pretty well sure I did not. Lady Doughty
wished mo to go to Tichborne and bid my uncle
good-bye, and she went to Wardour herself be-
cause she would not meet me. If Lady Doughty
asked you to go, why didn’t you do so ?—Because
I didn’t think my uncle behaved properly.’
Now, in a former part of the defendant’s cross-
examination, which I have already read to you, he


said he did go, but did not see Sir Edward
Lady Doughty, because they were not there, am
I corrected that at the time by a reference t
letter written by Roger to Mr. Gosford in whic
he said that he had been asked to go, but did n
Then he is piessed as to whether he ever wr
to Lady Doughty after this period, and he s
he aught have done so. but he won't say. U
niately the Attorney General asks,— ‘ Will y
undertake to say that you ever wrote one wore
to your aunt between the time when the enga
ment was broken off and your going abroad?—
don t think I did.’ We know that between t
Ist of July and the time of his leaving Uptor
there were no fewer than 17 letters written
Roger to Lady Doughty.
Then the Lord Chief Justice of the Comm
Pleas again interposes, and says, ‘Do I unde
stand that there was an actual engagement b
tween you and Miss Doughty ?’ and the defends
replied, *lt was an understood thing. It was
eßg&aement, but it was not known to my unci
and when he heaid of it he became very angr
Now, we know perfectly well that if there ev
was an engagement at all it was not till aft
the attachment had become known to the unci
"VVe know, too, that it was only in February, wh<
Roger had his uncle's consent to the union, thai
an engagement was made, not a positive but a con
ditioi.al engagement, under which, if they sti
continued in the same state of mind after thre
yea.s, they might marry. But here the defendan
represents that there was an engagement betwee
Rorer and his cousin which was not known to th
uncle, and therefore must have existed prior t
1802. That is utterly inconsistent with the fact
lht*n he that his uncle became angry when h
heard of it, but there is no evidence to show tba
the slightest feeling of anger ever arose in th
mind of Sir Ed ward. The circumstances are these
He disapproved the match, and said, ‘ This mus
not be ; you are too nearly related ; but you seem
to be getting too fond of each other, so you hat
better, my dear Roger, leave.’ But as to anger
there is nothing in any of the letters or in th
evidence to show that he ever entertained ai
angry feeling towards Roger.
. comes an examination as to the last inter
view between the cousins, which is of much impor
tance, as it relates to the subject of the sealed
packet, and I think it right, therefore, to read
to^ you what the defendant said. He is asked :
‘ A as that the last day you were at Tichborne
Were you ever at Tichborne after that ?—I think
I whs. Did you see Miss Doughfy ?—I don't think
I did. When did you last go ? —A few days be-
fore I left. When did you last see Miss Doughty
before you left England?—l cannot exactly say.
Do I understand y ou to say or not that the parting
with your cousin was on the occasion when you
were leaving the house ?-I believe it was. Then at
that time the matter, as I understand it, was broken
off ? Yes. And by you it was never renewed ?
I did promise, if single when I came back, I would
marry her, I believe. When was that?—At the
time I met her in the village,’
Then comes a rather awkward reminder :
1 thought you were not coming back during
your fathers lifetime?—l don’t deny that that
was my intention.’
So that, according to him, after having told her
that in consequence of what the uncle and aunt
nad said to him he could not marry her, he tells
whVh she I j emi “ ne d single till he came back,
lch would, of course, represent an indefinite
period depending upon the duration of his father’s
life, be would marry her. Cold comfort that for
the poor girl if the rest of his story were true, be-
cause, according to his account, she made a com-
munication to him at that time implying to her
the most disastrous and calamitous state of things
that can possibly be conceived. That is the ac-
count given by the defendant in answer to a series
of questions with regard to his cousin, and with
regard to the last intervie w with that cousin whom
he wished to make his wife. As I said yesterday,
this is one of the crucial tests of the reality of
the defendant’s claim. You have followed care-
fully the letters of Roger Tichborne, and it is a
question for you whether upon those letters and
?'r her eviflence > and what you have heard of
the life of the defendant, the account given by
him is such as corresponds with what you know of
the relations of Roger Tichborne and his cousin,
and such as would lead you to come to the conclu-
sion that the defendant is the Roger Tichborne
he represents himself to be.
And now, gentlemen, let us come to the all-im-
portant subject of the sealed packet. Of this
sealed packet no mention was ever made by the
defendant, if we can trust the evidence that is be-
fore us, until after that remarkable meeting which
took place at the Grosvenor Hotel, in the month
of June 1867. Mr. Gosford, unfortunately, was,
as we know, a debtor in a considerable sum to Mr.
Bulpett, a banker at Winchester. It occurred to
some ingenious person that Mr. Bulpett would very
likely be able to exercise an influence over the
°i r ‘ f* ; and it was suggested to
Mr. Bulpett—l believe by Mr. Holmes, but with
the concurrence of counsel, which I state to my
ve ry great regret —that it would be an expedient
and politic thing for Mr. Bulpett to invite Mr.
Gosford to dinner, to say nothing to him about
the intention of bringing in the defendant after-
dinner; and in this way to bring them together.
It. formed part of the scheme—for 1 cannot other-
wise call it that there should be two gentlemen
with pencil and paper, pocket-book, or some other
medium of taking down what passed, who should
take notes of the conversation as it occurred. Not
a word was said to Mr. Gosfoid about this impend-
ing interview between him and the defendant,
until, according to Mr. Bulpett, they were at din-
ner. Mr. Bulpett then says, ‘The Claimant is
coming here after dinner with a friend or two • I
wish to biing you two together. But if you do
not like to meet him you can always go away.’ I
do not think Mr. Gosford was asked as to the let-
ter of this statement; but it is quite certain that
he went there utterly unconscious of what was
about to take place.
e lfi defendant and the two gentlemen
made their appearance after dinner. What passed
on that occasion is, of course, very material; but
the most important part of it is that which refers
to the packet which h id been left by Roger Tich-
borne in the hands of Mr. Gosford. The conver-
sation does not immediately turn upon that. Mr.
Bulpett said, ‘ I feel you two only want to be
brought properly together to understand one an-
other.’ Then,’ says Mr. Gosford in his evidence,
Mr. Bulpett said to me, “ A»k him some of the
questions that you put to him before, at Graves-
end. and you will see he will answer them.” ’ Mr.
Gosford here states that he had considered Mr.
Bulpett as an intimate confidential friend, and
that after the meeting at Gravesend he went to
his house and told him all that had passed ; and
then, at this meeting at Grosvenor Hotel, to his


surprise, when he meets the defendant there Mr.
Bulpett asks him to put, one after another, the
same questions which he had put before, and to
which he had received unsatisfactory answers.
Then he found that what he had told Mr. Bulpett
had been communicated to the defendant. That
is Mr. Gosford’s view of it. ‘Mr. Bulpett said,
“Ask him about the island,” and,’ says Mr. Gos-
ford, ‘I asked the defendant what he knew about
the island. J'he defendant replied, “Not much,
but I quite remember chasing some poachers who
were there into Poole.” ’ Mr. Bulpett said, ‘ That
is true surely.’ The next question was also put at
the suggestion of Mr. Bulpett. ‘ I asked him,’ said
Mr. Gosford, ‘whether he remembered the dog-
cart, and he replied that he had been driving me
into Poole and upset me. I said, “That is all wrong.
I was not within 50 miles of the place ; you are
referring to Mr. Slaughter.”’ Mr. Gosford goes on :
* I got angry, aud turning to Mr. Bulpett, I
said to him, “This is idle nonsense.” Mr. Bul-
pett tried to pacify me, but I said, “ I will talk
to him about some other thing.” ’
He then, he says, requested Mr. Bulpett and the
two gentlemen, Mr. Hingston and Mr. White, to
retire to the other end of the smoking room in
which they then were while he asked the Claim-
ant a question as to something known only to
themselves. They did so, and Mr. Gosford goes
•on to say:
‘I said to the Claimant, “Look here—if you
aie Roger Tichborne, you can tell what was the
. nature or the contents of,” I forget which, “ of
that paper you left with me when you went
abroad.” He thought a moment or two, and said,
“ I cannot remember.” What took place next?—
We got warm just then, and I led further up to
it, but he could not remember. At last I said,
“I will tell you further. It was that, in the
•event of your marriage with a certain person, you
would carry out certain arrangements at Tich-
borne. AVhat were they?’ and he again said he
•could not remember, aud that he did not. I then
said, “It is no use talking.” I got sick of the
whole thing. He too began to be angry, and com-
plained of being watched by two detectives. He
.also mentioned that Mr. Stourton, the guardian
of the infant, had been attempting to bribe his
witnesses, and added that Mr. Stourton should
remember that if he could give people 500/. others
could give 600/. I said, “ I know Mr. Stourton
too well to believe that,” and the subject then
dropped. Just at that time, whether Bulpett
.noticed that we were excited or not I don’t know,
but he and the others came back to us, and the
Claimant said something about Gravesend. Bul-
pett said, “I do not want you to talk about those
things, but about something you both know.” I
replied, “ I have just put to him a straightfor-
ward question. I have asked him the nature of
a packet Roger Tichborne left with me when he
went abroad.” Mr. Bulpett said, “ That is a
.straightforward question —what was it?” and the
Claimant said, “ I do not know,” or “ I do not
remember.” The next thing that Mr. Bulpett
asked was, “ Where is the packet?” I said, “No
matter where it is.” I did not say I had destroyed
it. Something was then said about Roger Tich-
borne’s letters, and I said, “ If I had thought of
it I could have brought a whole handful of them
written just before he went aboard the Bella.”
Other questions were put, and after a time I
asked him why he had not called or Lady Doughty,
and he replied that he was ready to do so. That
seemed to strike the othergentlemenasimportant.’
Well, if Mr. Gosford is to be believed, this is
the first mention ever made of the sealed packet;
but as the defendant does not admit the accuracy
of Gosford's evideuce, it is only fair that you
should hear his account of it. He says he remem-
bers meeting Gosford at the Grosvenor Hotel, and
admits going there for the purpose with two gen-
tlemen, Messrs. Kingston and White, and«he says
that the conversation was taken down in writing
by the two gentlemen named, and by Mr. Bulpett
also. So that the position in which Mr. Gosford
found himself was this. There were three per-
sons present taking notes on behalf of the Claim-
ant, while he had not one witness to check their
after-statements, or to confirm what he would
afterwards state about it. The defendant then de-
nies that he was asked any question by Mr. Gos-
ford about the do ic irt or the island at Poole. And
now we come to his evidence as to the really im-
portant part of the interview :
* Did Mr. Gosford say, “I should like now to
ask you a few things in private?” and thereupon
did the others leave the room, or go to the other
end of the room for that purpose? and when they
had gone, did Mr. Gosford say to you to this
effect, ‘‘lf you are Roger Tichbome you cannot
have forgotten that before leaving Eugland you
left in my hands a certain sealed packet which
you had marked private and confidential?”—No;
that was said in the presence of Mr. Bulpett.
Now, what was it?—You are surely not going to
extract that from me again. I am putting it to you
as a question ?—No, he did not. Let me see—stop
a moment. In the first place it was not said when
he and me was by ourselves. He did say I had
left a packet marked “ private and confidential,”
and asked me to tell him the contents of it, but I
said, “ I decline to do so in the presence of these
gentlemen.” I ask you whether this was not so
when the other gentlemen had gone away from the
table?—No, it was not. That question was asked
me in the presence of the other gentlemen, and
from the time the other gentlemen went to the
end of the room and left Mr. Gosford and me, he
never asked me one question that he there de-
scribed, merely speaking to me about my life in
Australia. When Mr. Bulpett came back he said,
“Have you asked him any question? ’ and he re-
plied, “ Well, no, I cannot; we have been talking
about local matters.” Did you say, “ I cannot re-
member ?” and did he say, “ Weil, it was to the
effect that you were to marry a certain person,
and carry out certain arrangements at Tichborne?”
—He did not. Can you tell me what it was ?—I
never mentioned anything of the kind. The
question was asked in the presence of the other
gentlemen. It is fortunate for me that they was,
because no doubt they have notes of it. My ans-
wer was, “You know, Mr. Gosford, the nature
of the document. I would not mention it in the
presence of others.” Did he say, “ Can you tell
me what those arrangements were?”—No, he did
not. Did he press you several times to tell him
the contents, and did you still say you could not
recollect anything conuected with it?—l did not.
My answer was, " You know very well I would
not tell you the contents of that document in the
presence of others.”
And then he was asked by Mr. Bulpett where the
document was, and whether it was in existence,
and he said, ‘ Yes, and it is in my lodgings in Lon-
don now.’ When cross-examined on that Mr.
Gosford swore he never said so. The cross-exa-
mination goes on :
‘ I am putting to you whether this passed in the


absence of Mr. Bulpett and the other persons and
you were unable to tell him, and whether he gave
you some suggestions about what the subject was
and you were still unable to tell the contents ?—I
say it was not so. I never denied knowing the
contents, but I refused to speak of them.’
Well, that statement is in direct opposition to
the statement of Mr. Gosford, and, of course, it
makes all the difference whether, when Mr. Gos-
ford put the question as to the contents of the
sealed packet, the defendant said he did not know
or that he declined to state before others owing
to the nature of the contents of the packet. If
Mr. Gosford asked the defendant whether he knew
the contents of the sealed packet, and if he was
under the necessity of admitting that he did not
lemember, that would be very strong evidence in-
deed against him. The defendant denies that he
ffV® c °u ]d not remember, but declares that
what he said was that he would not divulge the
contents in the presence of others. If it stood
there between these two witnesses it would look
very much as if one or the other was telling what
he knew to be false, but there would remain this
observation m favour of Mr. Gosford’s statement.
Mi. Gosford put the question as a crucial test of
!nnl!i de + tlty the d, fenda « t - If the defendant
could at once have stated the contents of the do-
cument corrects, it would have gone a very long
T.M.b ndeed ar< l 3 * Wm S that he 'Roger
Tichborne. Therefore I should have expected a
man under such circumstances to say, ‘ Mr. Gos-
ford you know as well as I do that the contents
ought not to be made known to any
one, but should be kept between ourselves. Let
tents > gen Tt mCn rC m\ and I , wiil tell y° u the con-
askiL eT h '!, ould have been no difficulty in
asking the gentlemen to withdraw. They had
gone before to the other end of the room and
would do so again if requested. That course was
certainly not pursued; and the circumstance, I
ford’ Th S Tf d< i gre ,®’ tells in favour of Mr -
defendant s own account of the matter
Pi* the question, and that the de-
tendant declined to answer it.
wl:J iu!pett , W / ls called ; and I think if the
learned counsel for the defendant had had anv
previous knowledge of what Mr. Bulpett would
say from first to last, and of the way in which he
confirmed Mr. Gosford, that gentleman would
Fr d ,v Ve i een Called ’ Mr ‘ Bul P ett was called on
Fnday ; he remonstrated with the learned coun-
sel foi the defendant; he then sent a note to the
Court to say that he was ill and would not be able
to be examined for some days, but the learned
counsel insisted on his coming forward, and a
more unsatisfactory exhibition than he made as
a witness I must say I never saw. Whether his
memory failed him, whether it was his zeal, or
what may have been the cause I do not know, but
a more painful exhibition I have not often seen
than was shown by Mr. Bulpett when under ex-
animation. He had seen Roger Tichborne, I
• a °i? ordy *h ree or four occasions, and then
m the hunting-field, just as he saw any other
gentleman; he had never spoken a word to him,
and, though a Tichborne banker, I believe he
never set foot within the walls of Ticliborne-
house. He goes to Holmes’s, he takes the deepest
he P laces mi - at tiie dis-
posal of the defendant without security, and
before u lm u e i f ’ ln Sh ° rt ’ a SOrt of blind Partisan
iuXn be bad „ a ° opportunity of forming any
from what i* aH - ln xu le lnatter : and 1 must say,
m what I saw in the witness-box, that I think
iMr. Bulpett took a very false idea and measure of
Ins own capacity and intelligence to arrive at any
Sat i‘jr faC i tory J ud g merit upon the sub-
* aI c J We . have him here equivocating,
shuffling—first saying one thing and then another,
and altogether making a most sorry exhibition.
However, this gentleman was called to contra-
dict an intelligent witness like Mr. Gosford. It
may be on the other hand, that Mr. Gosford is
sei e f n nr th he i°f St 7 at i OnS " Mch the learned coun-
sel for the defendant made with respect to him.
“ fo f y° u - You may not believe Mr. Gos-
lord ; that is, of course, within the range of pos-
sibility and therefore we must see what Mr.
Bulpett says. Mr. Bulpett admitted that his
memory was singularly defective, and, antici-
pating that Mr. Hawkins would ask him ques-
tions as to what occurred on the former trial, he
brought with him a newspaper report of what
men passed, made up as a book, and he sought
eave to use it in a manner that I wonder did not
nove the stern, unbending heart of Mr. Hawkins,
ie made piteous appeals to be allowed to use the
tewspaper report, but Mr. Hawkins declined to
' e „ n }° v . ed b J- hIS apptals > and P°°r Mr. Bulpett
ifcis left to his unaided memory.
Then we come to what transpired at the inter-
iew. I mu-t say that I think the whole proceed-
indefensible; and I am surprised that,
i h Mr. Locock Webb's concurrence, such a
memo should have been concerted to get Mr
osford alone into the hands of these four per-
ms. Mr. Hingston and Mr. White were there,
hey took notes. Why should they not have
:en called ? The defendant says that when they
ere present Mr. Gosford put the questions about
e sealed packet, and that he declined to answer
cause they were present. Mr. Gosford says that
is not so. You will ask yourselves whether it
hkely, if Mr. Gosford knew that the answer he
ght get would have impeached the honour of
_dy Kadcliffe, he would have put the question
fore third parties. Do you think that, if the
itents of the sealed packet had been such as to
•mp Lady Had cliff e with a brand which could
per be effaced, Mr. Gosford, the steward and
md of her father, would have asked the defen-
it to state the contents of the packet—the con-
ts being such as would cover her with infamy
1 shame—in the presence of strangers like Mr
Ipett, Mr. Hingston, and Mr. White? Whv*
peaks for itself. These gentlemen took notes!
iy we they not called to support the defen-
its statement ? Is it that their evidence would
bably be quite the other way ?
tki * 13 Mr Bulpett's account of what oc-
! asked whether h e said he had
tght the defendant and Mr. Gosford together
ie believed that doing so would lead to their
erst and mg one another, and he says he thinks
may have fallen from him. Then he is asked
ther he suggested to Mr. Gosford that he
dd put the same questions to the defendant as
ad put to him at Gravesend, and he said he
not use the words in the manner they were
to him ; that what he said was, ‘ If you two
lemen talk over matters, there are many
g 8 you must both know that happened pre-
jto Roger Tichborne leaving England. ’ Then
Hawkins asks, ‘Do you mean to swear there
no questions put before you retired?’ He
er f, "To the best of my belief, there were
1 Did Mr. Gosford say in substance, I have
omething I can put to him in private, before
ie else ?—I do not remember such an observa-


tion. Did you say you need not mind me?—l
will swear I did not. Mr. Gosford says you did.
—I beg Mr. Gosford’s pardon. I and the other
gentlemen went to another part of the room, or
into a separate room, I forget which; but we went
out of their hearing. I think I was away about
half an hour or twenty minutes, when 1 rejoined
them again. Did Mr, Gosford then say, “I have
asked him a straightforward question. I have
asked him about the contents of a packet he left
with me before he went abroad”?—No, I found
them talking about things they had talked about
at Gravesend. The conversation as to the packet
did not arise at that moment. The first question
Gosford put to the defendant was, “ Where were
you when you joined the army?” and the defen-
dant said, “At Canterbury.” The next question
was, “Why did you want to leave the army?”’
But here Mr. Bulpett checks himself, and says,
‘ No, I am wrong; I must refer to my book,’
meaning the newspaper report. But Mr. Haw-
kins would not let him. Then he says, ' The next
question was, “Why did you want to leave the
army?” The Defendant answers, “Because I was
in debt 300/. or 400/., and I wanted to get abroad.”
Then I think the next question was, “whether
the regiment was ordered to India ?” No, I am
wrong; the next question was, “Did not you and
Sir James Tichborne have some words about
leaving the army?” The defendant said they
had.’
A few more questions were asked, and then Mr
Hawkins brings him back to the subject of the
sealed packet, and inquires how it was introduced
Mr. Bulpett describes it in this way : ‘ I think
Mr. Gosford says, “ Do you remember leaving
packet in my possession before you left Eng-
land ?’” There, gentlemen, you see he makes Mr.
Gosford introduce the subject of the packet. Thei
Mr. Hawkins asks, 'Did you not upon that turn
to the defendant and say, “ Well, that is
straightforward question” ?—I did make use of the
word “straightforward” certainly. Did not you
make use of the words “straightforward ques-
tion” ? —I don’t remember. Did the defendant
say, “ I don’t remember”? The defendant’s ans-
wer was, “ I don’t remember anything about it.”
Mr. Bulpett then says he had omitted two or
three questions, and he appeals to Mr. Hawkins
to let him look at his book, trying, but in vain,
to touch the hard heart of Mr. Hawkins. The de-
fendant said he didn’t recollect anything about
the packet; and now observe how Mr. Bulpett
seeks—well, I don't know whether he sought, but
in effect he did give a different colour to the de-
fendant’s answer. At first he states expressly that
the defendant said he did not remember anything
about the packet; but he afterwards says the de-
fendant hesitated and said he would not state the
contents. Then I said to him, ‘lt makes all the
difference in the world which answer he gave. I
have taken down your words, and in the first place
you said he didn’t remember any of the contents.
Now you change the phrase, and say he declined
to state the contents. There is a great difference
between the two.’ His explanation of the diver-
gence is that there was a little irregularity in the
proceedings. Then my brother Mellor asked,
' Was it to the contents of the sealed packet he
was referring?’ and he says, ‘Yes, the sealed
packet.’ ‘ I put the question to Gosford,’ said he,
" Where is the sealed packet?’ and he answered,
‘ I have got it among my other papers in London.’
There Mr. Gosford and Mr. Bulpett are directly
at variance, and it is a pity that the other persons
who were present were not brought forward to re
late what had occurred. Mr. Bulpett is then
asked this question, ‘ Did not Mr. Gosford say
with respect to the sealed packet, “No mattei
where it is” ?’ The answer is, ‘ I believe he die
say so.’ ‘ Did he not also say, “If I had any idea
of meeting you, I would have brought a whole
handful of Roger Tichborne’s letters” ? —I believe
he did. He said he had a lot of his letters.’
Let us pause here for a moment, because we fine
Mr. Bulpett contradicts himself, for he said be-
fore that Gosford stated he had destroyed Roger
Tichborne's letters, otherwise he would have
brought them. Mr. Hawkins again says, ‘I ask
you with reference to the sealed packet, was no!
the last observation Mr. Gosford made, “ Never
mind where it is” ?’ The answer of Mr. Bulpett
is, ‘ I will not undertake to say whether it is so or
not. The subject ended abruptly, and then an
arrangement was made between Mr. Gosford, the
defendant, and myself to get some of the family
to me'St the defendant as soon as possible.’ Of
course, if once the packet was admitted to be de-
stroyed, there would have been unlimited scope
for conjecture as to its contents. But Mr. Gos-
ford swears that he left the matter in doubt, by
saying, ‘ I will not tell you whether I have it or
not.’ Mr. Hawkins then asks Mr. Bulpett, ‘ Did
not Gosford say that if the defendant were Roger
Tichborne he could tell him the contents of the
packet ?—Well, I think he said so. lam disposed
to think he made that observation; I am disposed
to think the defendant would not state the con-
tents of the packet, and that he said, in rather a
positive way, he would not.’ ‘I ask you,’ says
Mr. Hawkins, ‘ upon your oath, whether the de-
fendant’s words were not “ I don’t remember” ?
Upon the former trial you said the defendant
stated he did not remember anything about it.’
To this Mr. Bulpett answers, ‘ I did.’ ‘ Did you
not ask Gosford at that meeting to put questions-
to him about matters that occurred before he left
England ?—I did. Was not the result of the in-
terview a declaration by Gosford that he believed
the defendant to be an impostor ?—I believe it
was. The result of the interview upon the minds
of White. Hingston, and myself was that the
answers of the defendant were so natural that we
believed him to be the man.’
I asked him the reason why any human being
could come to such a conclusion from what had
occurred, and he says his reason was because the
questions were put and the answers given in such
a ready way. But were the answers true? The
defendant was asked where he had joined the re-
giment, and he said at Canterbury. Then said I
to Mr. Bulpett, ‘ You are not aware that he did
not join at Canterbury ?’ He answers, ‘No, lam
not.’ * Why, don't you know Canterbury was the
last place he was in with his regiment, and that
he joined at Portobello barracks?’ His answer is,
‘Well, that I did not know.’ Another answer
that the defendant gave very readily was that he
left the army because be was 3001. or 400/. in debt,
and wanted to go abroad. ‘Do you know he was in
debt?’ He answers, ‘ No, I do not.’ Well, if Roger
Tichborne did owe 300?. or 400?. he would have had
no difficulty whatever in paying the money. But
he was not in debt. Another question was whe-
ther there were not words between the defendant
and his father before he left England, and about
this also Mr. Bulpett knows nothing. And yet it
is upon the answers to such questions that Mr.
Bulpett makes up his mind as to the identity of
the defendant with Roger Tichborne—answers as


to the correctness of which he was wholly unable
to form a judgment.
Again, we come back to the packet, which Mr.
Bulpett now speaks of as ‘a brown-paper parcel,’
and he says he thinks it was Mr. Gosford who
said, ‘ Do you remember giving me a biown-paper
parcel?—O, no.’ He corrects himself; ‘ Let me
see, I think the inquiry came from the defendant.’
My brother Mellor then asks, ‘ Do you mean the
defendant suggested the brown-paper parcel?—
Yes, the defendant said, “Do you remember my
giving you a brown-paper parcel or sealed packet,
at Southampton before 1 left England ?” ’ I assume
this is a mistake about Southampton, but this un-
happy witness states that the defendant said he
gave Mr. Gosford a brown-paper parcel at South-
ampton. He is asked, * Did he say brown-paper
parcel or sealed packet?’ and he answers he does
not know which. Then I asked could he say
where the brown -paper parcel was first introduced,
and he says he thinks it was where the question
about the packet first arose between the defend-
ant and Gosford, and that it was the defendant
first introduced the subject. What seems to have
got into the head of this confused witness was
this : The defendant said to Gosford, ‘ Don’t you
remember I took leave of you at Southampton/’
and Gosford’s reply was, ‘I don’t admit that.’
Then Mr. Bulpett is asked, ‘ Was not the next
thing that was said by Gosford to the defendant
this, “Don’t you remember leaving in my posses-
sion a sealed packet before you left England?’’’
Mr. Bulpett answers, ‘Yes, I remember he said
so; but I won’t take it upon myself to say whether
the words were “a brown-paper parcel” or “a
sealed packet.” ’ Then Mr. Bulpett goes on to say,
‘Mr. Gosford asked, “Do you remember the con-
tents of the letter left in the parcel?’-’ and the de-
fendant answered, “I don t remember at this
moment.” ’
There, gentlemen, Mr. Bulpett comes round to
his original statement, and we have a distinct re-
cognition by him that Mr. Gosford was right when
he said that it was he who put the question about
the sealed packet to the defendant, and the de-
fendant acknowledged his inability to remember
the contents of the document. That is an im-
portant fact when we come to consider that this
witness made up his mind so completely in fa-
vour of the defendant’s identity with Roger Tich-
borne at a time when he admits the defendant
knew nothing whatever about the contents of the
sealed packet, which was mentioned as a test of
his identity.
And here my learned brother reminds me of a
point which I think I have already impressed
upon your minds, but it is so important that I
shall mention it again. It is, that precautions
having been taken that anything obtained from
Gosford at this interview might be recorded in
such a manner as to leave no shadow of doubt of
its accuracy, supposing the witnesses to be ho-
nest, and we have no reason to question the ho-
nesty of Mr. White or Mr. Hingston ; these gen-
tlemen, respectable witnesses living in London
who might be called, are not called to say whe-
ther the defendant did or did not remember the
contents of the sealed packet. This interview
occurred in June, and Gosford, I think most in-
cautiously and unfortunately, lets out the fact
that a sealed packet had been left by Roger Tich-
borne with him. Of course, the next thing was
to find out whether it could be produced. They
waited until an examiner had been appointed by
the Court of Chancery to take the cross-exami-
nation of the defendant. Mr. Gosford had been
made the defendant in one of the suits as execu-
tor and trustee of Roger Tichborne, and had to
make an affidavit. They were entitled to cross-
examine upon that affidavit, and, accordingly,
when the re-examination of the defendant comes
round, the only thing they want to know is what
has become of the sealed packet. They put that
question to Mr. Gosford, and he says, ‘ I de-
stroyed it.’
That examination was held on the Ist of Au-
gust, and on the 2d of August, the very next day,
the defendant, who did not know the contents
of the document when he was at the Grosvenor
Hotel, drew up a statement in which he impugns
the character and honour of Roger Tichborne’s
cousin, then Mrs. Radcliffe. And Bulpett was a
party to the suggestion, because he is not certain
whether it came from Holmes or him that they
should have Gosford up for cross-examination in
order to know whether this packet was in exist-
ence or not. He admits that he and Holmes and
the counsel concocted that scheme, though he
heard with his own ears the defendant say he
could not tell wbat the contents of the document
were. Well, Bulpett, having before him the pa-
per which the defendant drew up impugning the
honour of his own cousin, supposing him to be
Roger Tichborne, reads the document and puts
his initials to it in order that, at any future time,
it might, if necessary, be identified. But it never
occurs to him to say, ' Here is a statement of the
most vital and important character, made by a
man who, two short months ago, in my own hear-
ing, said he remembered nothing about the con-
tents of that packet. ’ He had heard that admis-
sion made, and yet he actually puts his name or
his initials to the paper which purports to repro-
duce what had been contained in the sealed packet
or brown-paper parcel. I must say that Mr. Bul-
pett stands in this matter in a very unsatisfactory
and unpleasant light, which only shows how un-
fortunate it is that a man of small intelligence
should put himself into a position altogether be-
yond his limited capacity.
Well, to this paper, drawn up on the 2d of
August, I will presently draw your attention. It
was not produced for some time after. But in the
month of February the defendant had an oppor-
tunity of making an affidavit in reference to the
document in his hands, and in this affidavit he
refers to the papers which he had left in possession
of Mr. Gosford. It is necessary that I should call
your particular attention to this affidavit. In it
he says: ‘Shortly before, and in anticipation of
my leaving England in the month of March 1853,
I sealed up and placed in the hands of the defen-
dant, Vincent Gosford, for safe custody, the docu-
ment set forth in the second part of the second
schedule, with instructions to hold the same for me
as my confidential agent, and not to open the same
except in certain events, one of which I know has
not happened, and the other I hope has not hap-
pened.' Now, that is not his own language; it is
the language of one of his legal advisers, and most
insidious language it is. In the schedule referred
to the paper is described as ‘ the sealed document
written by me relating to my cousin Katherine
Doughty, and left by me with Vincent Gosford
before 1 left England in 1853.’ I say that is in-
sidious language, because it must be taken in con-
nexion with the rest of the defendant’s statements
with respect to this affair with his cousin. I can-
not doubt it was a regularly and craftily devised
scheme to place the defendant in a position of


appearing to know the contents of the seale
packet, and with this object—that while thos;
contents would be fatal to the character of Mr
Eadcliffe, he might have the advantage of no
stating the contents in open Court, and so exposin
himself to the imputation of having basely t
trayed Mrs. Radcliffe s secret.
Who could read that document and not thin
there was latent under those ambiguous exprei
sions. an unmistakable reference to somethir
relating to Mrs. Radcliffe which would not be;
the light, and which, therefore, could only be
reflection upon her character and her honour
I placed in the hands of Vincent Gosford a ce
tain document, to hold the same for me as nr
confidential agent, and not to open the same e:
cept in certain events, one of which I know h;
not happened, and the other I hope has not ha'
pened.’ Would you understand that to mean thi
he wrote the document, sealed it up, and the
handed it to his confidential agent, unread by the
latter, enjoining him never to open it unless i
certain contingencies ? Or would you understanc
it to mean that he first read it to Mr. Gosforc
then sealed it up and placed it in his hands wit
directions not to open it until the contingencies
referred to had occurred? The defendant’s accoun
is that he took the paper to Gosford, wrote it i
his presence, read it over to hi n, sealed it uji, anc
then committed it to his charge. The true coi
struction, perhaps, is that he wrote the documeni
did not read it to Gosford, but placed it in hi
hands with instructions that he was not to mak
any one acquainted with it unless in certain con
tingencies. That is the first account of it. Le
us see what is the second. Serjeant Ballantine, ii
opening his case to the jury, makes this state
ment:
‘ Before Roger left the country he put into the
hands of Gosford a sealed packet. For reasons
which, before the end of this case may be madi
apparent, I do not desire to enter into this matter
in great detail. He put into the hands of Gosforc
a sealed packet, which he told him contained cer
tain directions in the case of his death. Since the
arrival of Sir Roger various witnesses beyond im-
peachment have testified that Gosford has ad-
mitted the possession of that sealed packet. He
lias admitted it in the presence of Mr. Bulpett and
others. Now, let us dwell for a moment on the
importance of that statement. was a packet
sealed up, the contents of which could only be
known to the young man who left Europe in the
aulme. No human being but himself could state
if ll ?'ii,^' 0 human being at this moment can tell
what they are.’
That seems to me to imply in the affidavit which
have just read that Gosford was not acquainted
with the contents of the document in question,
oerjeant Ballantine proceeds •
‘ My client is able to tell the contents of that
document, and if he does not tell them correctly
he challenges the production of the document for
the purpose of showing he lies, and if he does
where will be his case and what will be the
value of it? I kDow what has taken place. I
know what Gosford has said in his examination,
in which he appeared in the part of a defendant!
I do not believe that they will call Gosfoid again,
1 do not believe that the packet will be produced.’
What did the learned counsel mean the jury to
understand ? Why, of course, that the document
was in existence, and that the defendant chal-
lenged its production, and yet the learned counsel
knew from his own cross-examination of Gosford
that he had distinctly sworn he had destroyed the
document when he thought Roger Tichborne was
dead and gone. I must say that is not an in-
genuous statement. I say that Serjeant Balia
tine ought not on that occasion to have led the
jury to suppose that Gosford had admitted th
possession of the document, and might have pr
duced it if he dared. He ought to have stater
that Gosford had most distinctly declared that h
had not the document.
Now comes the examination of the defendant o
the sealed packet by his own counsel: ‘ Before !
went abroad I gave a sealed packet to Vincen";
Gosford. I read it over to Gosford when I wrot
it. It was in his own pailour at Cheriton.
read it over to Gosford before I left England
He is asked, What is it?’ and he answers,
‘ That is a private matter merely.’ Then the ex
amination in chief proceeds: ‘All I ask you a;
present is this—Do you know, and are you able to
repeat, the contents of that sealed packet ?’ Th
answer Is, ‘I am, but I decline to do so.’ Now
you see, as the matter was stated upon the affi
davit and upon the examination, the defendan
would have appeared to know the contents of th
packet, but would have avoided the discredit o r
openly compromising the woman whom he wa
prepared to declare he had dishonoured ; and ye ;
it would have the effect of compromising Mrs
Radcliffe, and of damaging her as a witness again s;
him, seeing that he had told out of Court the same
story he afterwards told in Court, and that this
statement of bis had become generally known
We know it had become generally known. Ithac
been talked about in Winchester ; it was as wel
known in London as anything could be that the
sealed packet had reference to Mrs. Radcliffe, anc
stated circumstances relative to her which of
course everybody would understand. So that the
defendant, by declining to tell the contents of the
packet, would have all the advantage without any
of the odium necessarily attaching to the disclo-
sure of such circumstances.
The Attorney-General knew too well to accept
that position. He knew very well that neither in
the interest of his client nor of Mrs. Radcliffe
could the matter be left there, and he was de-
termined, and very rightly, to drag it into the
open day and in the interests of justice, as well as
of all the parties concerned, to have the decision
of the jury taken upon it. The Attorney-General
accordingly says, ‘ I know what you refer to. I
make no objection to your openly stating it.’ But
Seijeant Ballantine says, ‘O, no, not now, we
had better postpone it.’ The matter was dropped
for a time, but on the cross-examination it was
taken up by the Attorney-General, who asks :
‘Did you go to Gosford on the subject of your
cousin more than once ?—I used to see him fre-
quently. I ask you whether you consulted him
on the subject of your cousin, Miss Doughty?—l
did. I wrote a paper in his presence, read it over
to him, and then sealed it up. That was in Novem-
ber?—l cannot speak to a day. I did not write it
from his dictation. The words were my own. It
was after my final parting with my cousin. Did
you* ever give her a copy of it?—Certainly not.
You merely told her the purport of it?—That is
all. At least, I don’t know whether I told herthe
purport of it. That was a thing separate from
the will altogether, and to be carried into effect in
certain circumstances. Do you recollect writing
to any one that your private wishes and inten-
tions, as you intended to have them carried out
you had left with Mr. Gosford ? Did you write


that to Mr. Slaughter?—l might have done so. I
think there was an allusion to the will. VV_ere
there any wishes or intentions you had left to Mr.
Gosford besides the sealed packet?—Yes, there
were I have written them out and my counsel
holds them. I told you before I am very reluctant
to go into these matters.’ , . , „ ~
The object of the Attorney-General is to fix the
■defendant to one packet, and a long examination
is gone overto get it firmly fixed that there was but
one. The defendant, however, says there was a
■second paper— ‘ I left two papers in one packet. 1
mean to say there were two.’ Then the Attorney-
General points out to him this remarkable circum-
stance —that as the affidavit was drawn up ori-
ginally the words were ‘documents’ in the plural,
but that the ‘ s’ was struck out and initialed in
the margin by the gentleman before whom the affi-
davit was sworn, so as to show distinctly that the
affidavit had reference to one single document,
and not to two. Then the Attorney-General tries
to fix him to this fact, but when the question is put
to him he says, ‘ I believe both documents related
to mv cousin.’ After a great deal of examination,
this result at length is obtained, that the docu-
ment, whether consisting of two pieces of paper
or of one, had reference to his cousin, with this
exception, that part of it related to instructions
about the property. . .
Meantime the cross-examination has reference
to matters of exceeding moment. You remember
that in the affidavit he said the opening of the
packet was to depend upon a double contingency
one an event which he knows has not happened,
the other an event which he hopes has not hap-
pened. The Attorney-General asks, ‘ What is the
event which you know has not happened ?-My
return, of course, within the time stated. \\ hat
time?—Before she was married. It must have
been that. Is that what you swear?—Well, I
don’t know; I put that in.’ Afterwards he says
* The event was my death. I knew that had not
happened. That is what I swear.’ He is pressed
a good deal on this contradiction, but he explains
it by saying that when he said it was the marriage
of his cousin he really could not remember for the
moment. . , , ~
Now comes the far more important question as
to the mysterious event which he hoped had not
happened. The Attorney-General asks,
‘ What is the event you said you hoped had not
happened ?-I said before I was reluctant to go
into some matters, hut if I am compelled the re-
sponsibility must be on the Attorney-General.
What is the event which you hoped had not hap-
pened?—You ought not to compel me—you compel
me to be irregular. I repeat again, whatsis the
event which you hoped had not happened. The
confinement of my cousin. Do you mean to swear
before the Judge and jury that you seduced this
lady ?—I most solemnly to my God swear I did.
Was there ever an appeal made to God under
such circumstances ? I could understand that, in
his assertion of his innocence a witness, or any-
one else, might appeal to God, but it is the first
time I ever heard God appealed to by a man who
is making an assertion of a most heinous and
wicked sin. A man who stands forward and says
he has committed seduction in its worst form—
seduction which brought dishonour to his own
family, seduction to the disgrace of those who had
been a second father and mother to him, upon
whom, as well as upon their daughter, lie had
brought, if his own account is true, dishonour,
shame, and discredit, the mother being still alive
to hear that statement which thus struck at the
character, the honour, and the virtue of her only-
daughter. I cannot conceive a greater desecration
of the name of God than that He should be ap-
pealed to to bear witness to an act of so detest-
able a description. There are certain forms and
circumstances in which immorality appears which
even those wlio are most lenient and most indulg-
ent to the frailties of men can only look upon with
detestation and horror, and I say that the worst
form of immorality of which a man could be guilty
is that of one who abuses the confidence of father
and mother to dishonour their only child, and who
then says, whether or not it brought about
a state of circumstances which could only end in
her shame and ruin for life, leaves her in uncer-
tainty, and never condescends afterwards to make
the slightest inquiry as to whether the fears of
the girl are likely to be realised or not. This
conduct can only cover him with confusion and
shame, and though he might have appealed to
God for mercy and forgiveness, he should never
have desecrated the name of the Most High by
appealing to Him to witness the truth of so scan-
dalous an act.
Then the Attorney-General requires particulars
of time and place, and in a case of this kind cir-
cumstances of time and place are everything,
otherwise a woman is at the mercy of the man
who brings an accusation of this kind against her,
just as in the converse case, where a woman
makes a charge against a man —and we meet
many such cases at the Assizes —a man is at the
mercy of the woman, unless circumstances of
time and place are carefully attended to. And
we do attend to them, otherwise justice never
would be done, and innocence, too often assailed
unjustly, could never be vindicated. It is mani-
fest, therefore, that particulars of time and place
are of the very essence of an inquiry of this sort;
and when I take you into the circumstances of
time and place as regards the statements made by
the defendant, and the observations t.hat arise
upon those statements, I am sure they will have
your most careful and watchful attention. lor
you have here a double duty to perform—a twice
sacred duty. It is not here a question between
the prosecution and the defendant; but here the
accused becomes the accuser, and in a matter in
which the honour, the position, and the happiness
of a woman are concerned, you must enter upon
the inquiry with the recollection that you are
fathers, husbands, brothers, and that therefore
you know what a woman’s honour is, and what it
is worth ; and, whether it becomes implicated in-
cidentally in an inquiry of this sort, or is assailed
in any other form, you are hound in justice to
give the most careful attention, in order to see
that the charge, if true, is proved to be true, and
that, if it be false, it must be pronounced and
declared to be false. Therefore, lam sure you
will go most carefully into this part of the in-
quiry.
It is true it is not one which goes to the very
root of the case. The defendant might be Roger
Ticliborne as far as this part of the inquiry is
concerned. It might be that Roger Tichborne
has brought forward this charge falsely ; it may
be that it is true ; that is an important issue in
one sense, and must have your most careful con-
sideration independent of any effect it may have
on the main issue of the case. And now let me
ask you to listen carefully to the statements made
in respect of it. The defendant is asked :
‘ When and where did it happen ? -It happened


at the mill. When ? —Not long after I came from
Ireland. When ? —About the month of July o
August. Of what year?—’s2. Give me som
nearer date than that.—lt was about the latte
part of July or beginning of August. Was it be
fore or after the breaking off of the engagement b
Sir Edward ?—Before. You say this happened a
the mill. Where is the mill ? - Almost facing th
house, in the village of Tichborne. What tim
in the day ?—About 4 o’clock in the afternoon
What day in the week ?—I cannot tell you that
Were you staying in the bouse ?—I was. How
long before the engagement was broken off ?
About a week or ten days. Do you mean to sa;
that you left your cousin with child?—No,
don’t say so. You left, you know, in Marc!
1853.—1 know I did. You say you seduced her
in July or August, and before the breaking off o
the engagement?-Just so. You have told m
you never saw her but once after that, and then
in the village.—Just so. And you spoke to he
about her confinement?—l didn’t say so. Do
you mean to say so ?—She wished to impress i
on me. When and where did she tell you ?—To
the best of my belief, when I met her in the vil
lage after I had been hunting. Will you swear it
was ?—Yes, I will. Did you make any arrange
ment to communicate with your cousin from
abroad?—Yes ; I told Gosford when I went away
that any letters I might send I should intrust to
his care. Was it before you left England in
March 1853, or was it in November 1852, thai
you left this sealed document with Gosford ?—II
was in November or December 1852. Then how
came you to say that you wrote it and sealed it
just previously to your leaving England?—l call
that “ just previously.” Did you ever make any
inquiry during the year 1853 whether the event
which you hoped had not happened had hap-
pened?—No. Did you make any further inquiry
after you left England?—No. Did you make
any inquiry between November 1852 and March
1853, when you went away ?—No ; I have spoken
of it, I have no doubt, to Gosford. Did you leave
this country in 1853 uncertain whether the young
cousin whom, as you say, you had seduced, was
about to have a child or not ?—No ; I don’t think
I did. What do you mean by that answer ?—I
don't think I left without making inquiries. You
have told me you don’t remember that you did.
I ask you again, did you leave here in the month
of March 1853, without satisfying yourself that
this young girl was about to have a child ?—I
never thought she was, myself. That is no an-
swer. Did you make any inquiry?—l don’t think
I made any direct inquiry.’
The next subject of inquiry in the cross-ex-
amination of the defendant was, 6 AVhat were the
contents of the sealed document ?’ The defend-
ant said he could not remember the whole of
them, but that they referred to what was to be
done in the event of Miss Doughty being confined
and in the event of his uncle’s and father's death!
There was a good deal which he could not re-
member, but he said he had written down the
substance of the sealed document on the previous
evening in the presence of Mr. Spofforth. The
paper, which was read by the Solicitor-General,
was in the following terras :
‘ Cheriton. November 1852.
‘ If it be true that my cousin, Kate Doughty,
should prove to be enceinte, you are to make all
necessary arrangements for her going to Scotland,
and you are to see that Upton is properly pre-
pared for her till I return, or she marries. You
are to show great kindness to her, and let her
have everything she requires. If she remains
single until I come back I will marry her. In
the event of my cousin’s death, you are to take
charge of the estates on my behalf, to keep the
Home Farm, and to repair the cottages at Prior’s
Dean.
__ „ ‘R. C. Tichbokne.’
Well, the defendant is asked—
‘ls that substantially the substance of the
document? Yes. And there is no substantial
thing left out of it?—l don’t remember anything
else at the present moment. In the envelope of
the sealed packet, you have said, were two pieces
of paper. Does this document contain the sub-
stance of what is written on both ?—O, no. Well
what is the other?—Well, I cannot remember
everything. You said, in reply to your own
counsel, that you were able to substantially re-
peat the contents of the whole document. Now,
I ask you, does the document produced contain
the substance of both the pieces of paper ?—]
have already given it to you. The Chief Justice.
—Then be good enough to repeat to us what was
in the other document ?—The paper I wrote yes-
terday may be the substance of all the papers for
aught I know. The Attorney-General. Was
there anything else contained in the packet?—
"Well, there must have been, because there was
a good deal more writing than what you have
there. _ In answer to the Chief Justice the Claim-
ant said: I don’t say I can tell the whole con-
tents of the document. I don’t think I said so.
If I did it was under a misapprehension. The
.Attorney-General.—Do you mean to say that you
did not know the meaning of the word “ sub-
stantially ! If substantially” means the whole
of the contents of the packet, I was under a mis-
apprehension when I answered. Do you call what
is in the packet two documents or one?—l should
call it one document on two sheets of paper. Are
you able to give us substantially what was on
those two pieces of paper?—l have given you the
substance of a great portion of it. Is there any
material part which you have not given us the
substance of ?—lf there is I don’t remember it at
the present moment. ’
Then we have the document of the 2d of Au-
gust 1862, which the defendant wrote out as the
substance of the sealed packet, on discovering
from the cross-examination of Mr. Gosford that
the sealed packet was no longer in existence. It
is necessary to read this paper attentively, in order
to see whether it is capable of being reconciled
with the last form in which the defendant gives
the contents of the sealed packet. The paper is
in these terms:
‘Principal Items in Document said to be De-
stroyed by Gosford.—ln the event of my Father
having prosession before my return, and also die-
ing before my return. He (Gosford) was to act
for me and according to instructions containd in
document. In the first place he was to have Up-
ton to live at and was to manage the whole of the
Estate. He was to keep the Home Farm in hand.
He was to show great kindness to my cousin Kate
and let her have anythink she required. My cou-
sin give me to understand that she was encent and
press me very hard to marry her before I left. I
did not believe such was the case nor have I since
heard it was so I allway believed it was said for to
get me to marry her at once. To this my Father
tried to persuade me. It allso referred to the
village at Priors dean. He (Gosford) was to have
cottages repaired and also to improve estate in


general was also to make arrangements for Kate
to leave England if such was true. Both Gosford
and wife pressed me very hard to marry at once.
Other items matteis of no consequence. I dont
think Mrs. Gosford knew about Kate.
‘RCD Tichbobne.’
Now, let us see what is the sum and substance
of the defendant’s statement as contained in his
affidavit, his examination, and bis cross-examina-
tion. It amounts to this - that a week or ten days
before his courtship of his cousin was put an end to
—in the month of July or Augu-t—he, being with
her at the mill on an afternoon about four o’clock,
took advantage of her and seduced her; that some
time afterwards, while he was staj ing at Winches-
ter, having been out hunting, he passed through the
village of Tichborne on his way home, saw his
cousin, and got off his horse, which he led while
he walked by her side; that she then communi-
cated to him her fear that she was with child,
upon which he told her that, after what his uncle
and aunt had said to him, he could not marry her,
but that if, upon his return from abroad, she
should still be single, he would marry her then ;
that he then went to Mr. Gourd's, saw him, and,
in the parlour of his house at Cheriton, drew up a
document, which, after reading it over to Mr. Gos-
ford, he sealed up and deposited with Gosford,
with instructions to him as to what he should do
in the event of his cousin proving to be with child ;
that after that he concerned himself no farther
about the matter, and never made any inquiry as
to whether there was any foundation for his sup-
position.
Such is the sum and substance of the defend
ant’s statement. You will see it involves three
leading facts—the seduction, the meeting with his
cousin, and the deposit with Gosford of the sealec
packet, which had reference to the pregnancy
which she had told him she was afraid was the
fact. The two first allegations—the seduction of
Miss Doughty and the subsequent meeting —are
positively denied by Lady Kadcliffe ; and the third
—namely the deposit of the sealed packet having
reference to the pregnancy of Miss Doughty —is
positively denied by Mr. Gosford ; and therefore,
as the whole must be taken as one entire story,
there are two witnesses to one. But that is not
conclusive, because the two witnesses might be
speaking falsely, while the one was Bfreaking the
truth ; and we must, therefore, look closely and
carefully into all the circumstances.
It is quite obvious that both the accuser and
the accused in this matter come before you under
considerable disadvantage. The defendant comes
before you in the position which a man is neces-
sarily placed in after having taken advantage of a
woman’s weakness and exposed her shame to«the
world. If anything can stamp a man with the
character of a base dishonourable person, it is this.
Nevertheless, there is no rule which may not have
its exception, and the question is whether this is
one of them. The defendant was placed in a very
peculiar position. Supposing this document to
be truly what he represents it to be, it is made a
crucial test of his identity. He does not at once
come forward and say to Mr. Gosford, ‘I can prove
my identity by telling you the contents of the
sealed packet, which nobody except you and me
knew anything about.’ The matter was forced
upon him by the somewhat incautious observation
of Gosford, who said, ‘lf you are really Roger
Tichborne, you can tell me what were the con-
tents of the sealed packet you left with me.’ It
may be said that a man who had only his own in-
terest at stake might say, ‘Rather than betra
such a secret, I will forego everything;’ but th
defendant has a wife and children, and I am no
at all sure that a man who finds such a matte
made a crucial test of his identity and his claim t
position and fortune would not be bound to dis
close a fact which he would otherwise be bourn
by a sense of propriety to keep secret. That i
the position in which the defendant is placed.
But, on the other hand, let us see the positio
in which Lady Radcliffe is placed. She, if thi
statement is untrue, comes foiward to prove he
own innocence, and there is the general feelin
of indignation against the man who places th
woman in such a position, and even the sternes
moralist might well say that a woman placed ir
such a position might be pardoned for stating tha
which was false. Unfortunately this deprives th
evidence given upon oath of the cogency which i
would otherwise possess. So that, while on th
one hand there is a feeling of indignation agains
the man, there is, on the other hand, a feeling o
distiust with regard to the woman. This is the
position in which Lady Radclilie comes here to
give her evidence, and we must look on one side
and on the other, and see on which we believe the
truth to be. Lady Radcliffe is asked :
‘ You were present when the defendant was ex
amined? —Yes. Was there any familiarity be
tween yourself and Roger Tichborne beyond that
which you have told us of this morning?—Never
—never. Did you hear this question put to the
defendant by the Attorney-General, “Do you
mean to swear before the Judge and the jury that
you seduced your cousin Yes. Did you hear
the defendant say, “ I most solemnly to my God
swear that I did ” ?—Yes. Roger would never have
thought of such a thing. It is perfectly false—
utterly false. Was there one s>liable of founda-
tion even for such a rumour ? —Never. You heard
him speaking of meeting you later on ?—That was
a fabrication from beginning to end. There is not
a word of truth in it. I never saw him after the
22d of June. Did you hear the defendant exa-
mined and give details of these matters ? —I did.
Did you hear his evidence on the subject from be-
ginning to end?—l did. Was there any one syl-
lable of truth in any one assertion ho made on
any one of these matters ? —Certainly not. Not.
one single word. God knows I am speaking the
truth.’
Here is an appeal to God also, but it is an ap-
peal to God to bear witness to innocence—not an
appeal to God to bear witness to sin and shame.
As I said before, in a matter of this kind we must
look closely to the particulars of the transaction
to which the accuser speaks. We have got par-
ticulars as to the time and place. The time he
alleges as the date of the seduction was in July
or August, when he was staying at Tichborne*
Now, I think it is perfectly clear from the cor*
respondence that Roger was not at Tichborne in
either the month of July or the month of August.
His regiment was then stationed at Canterbury,
and he himself was at that time in his regiment.
Always an active correspondent, he at that time
was carrying on his epistolary correspondence both
with his aunt Lady Doughty, with Mr. Gosford,
and occasionally with his father and mother. I,
have a list of the dates in a series of letters in the
months of July and August to show where Roger
Tichborne was at that time. Having received a
letter from Lady Doughty, which, without form-
ally putting an end to the relations between him-
self and his cousin, still practically did extinguish.


I his hopes, he writes on the next day, the 2d of
July, to Gosford, declaiing his intention not to
go back to Tichbome for a long time ; and a day
or two afterwards he writes to Lady Doughty in
answer to her letter of the Ist of July, declaring
the same intention unless a wish were expressed
to see him either then or during his leave. Lady
Doughty did not express any wish that he should
come to Tichborne. Then we have him going to
Poole election, and when he is about to return he
writes to Gosford and Lady Doughty asking them
to meet him at Winchester. On the 13th he is
back again in Canterbury, having missed Lady
Doughty on his way, and he writes to Gosford
again desiring him to send his things as he does
not intend going to Tichborne again. On the 18th
he again writes to Gosford saying that he has not
heard from Tichborne since he received his aunt’s
last letter. It is clear he had not been to Tich-
borne up to that time. On the 19th of July there
is a letter to Lady Doughty showing he could not
have been at Tichborne. On the 30th of July he
writes a letter which shows the same thing ; and
io we come to the end of July. On the 3d of
August he writes to Gosford and still shows a de-
;ermination to avoid Tichborne. On the 7th, he
writes to Gosford that he has not heard from Lady
loughty for a long time, and on the Bth he writes
o that effect to Lady Doughty herself.
The dates and contents of these letters strongly
onfirm the statements of Lady Radcliffe, of Mr.
xosford, and of Mrs. and Miss Nangle, that Roger
.iphborne was not at Tichborne in July or August;
o that in the two months in which it is alleged
ihat occurred between his cousin and himself
eems to be impossible as to time. His learned
ounsel appeared so to treat it and he says that he
'ill not be bound by dates, and though his client
light have said the end of July or the beginning
f August, it would not signify if it was proved to
emonstration that it could not then have oc-
lrred, for it might have been during his visit in
une. It is true Roger was there in June. He
ft London on Saturday, the 19th, and left early
i Tuesday, t'he 23d, so that those days were out
the question. There were the 20th and 21st,
i which it might possibly have happened.
Then comes the question of place, and the de-
ndant fixes that ‘ at the mill,’ and if there, how-
er, were any doubt about it on cross-examina-
)n, it was fixed irrevocably by the answers he
ve on re-examination :
. r ‘ Serjeant Eallantine. —ln the progress of
is case there has been a mill spoken of. Is that
1 now m existence ?-Yes. Is it now used as a
lu -o’ Where is i* situated ?—At the end
the village. What village ?-The village of
adjoining the bridge of Sevington.’
What can be understood by the expression ‘at
9 mill Is it in the mill, or some building
mected with it, or something outside, or a place
>arated from it by some hundred yards at least ?
e learned counsel said ‘ at’ did not mean in the
11, but meant some where there, as, for instance
the miller's house. ‘At the mill’ might very
11 include the miller’s house. As to its being
ihe mill, where the machinery was and the work
ried on, it would be preposterous to suppose
t Roger would take his cousin there. Then it
said it might have been the miller’s house,
l there, no doubt, there were parlours and
ms upstairs. But what is it meant that what oc-
red did occur at the miller’s house? That is
pretended to be made good on this trial, and
the best of all possible reasons. The house
was then occupied by Mrs. Burt’s mother and
brother and herself. We are quite sure that if
there had been the loan of a room in their house
at that time, if Roger and his cousin had asked
leave to sit in the parlour, for I do not suppose
they would have had the barefaced audacity to as’:
to have a bedroom placed at their disposal, and
they would not have gone to the miller’s house
without asking leave—you may depend upon it
you would have had Mrs. Burt come to tell you the
story, and not only that, but it would have been
all over the country within twenty-four hours of
the time it happened. Besides, just ask your-
selves whether it is at all likely that Roger Tich-
borne—living in the same house, as the defendant
represented, with Miss Doughty, with all the fa-
cilities which a common residence afforded, if
these two persons were so forgetful of what
was due to themselves as to anticipate the joys
of that marriage which at the time they hoped
might occur—would have gone to the mill a 3 the
place in Which to gratify his passion. It may
be said that they did not go there with that
intention, and that passion overcame the lover.
But it is quite impossible to suppose that they
went there purposely. Two people living in the
Scime house are not in the position of lovers carry-
ing on a clandestine correspondence, and with no
means of meeting except at some place of assig-
nation. Therefore, if it is alleged that he took
her to the mill for the purpose of gratifying his
passion, the answer to such a story is its inherent
improbability.
But how much stronger does the argument be-
come when you are asked to believe that it was
not in the mill or the miller’s house, but in an
open, exposed place called a grotto that this oc-
curred ! A photograph was produced which was
saul to represent that grotto, and it gave an idea
of a place covered in by trees, where lovers might
have found a place of shelter and convenience. I
cannot give you personal evidence of what the
nature of the place is. I only wish you had seen
it yourselves. But it is quite certain from the
picture and from Mrs. Burt’s evidence that any
one could walk down there, and would have to
pass the miller’s house right in front of the win-
dow, at the distance of only a little garden. Then
they would go down a walk by the river-side, ex-
posed to the river, and a footpath on the other
side. \ou walk about a hundred yards and come
to the place, which is not a regular grotto, with an
alcove to cover from view persons sitting beneath,
but a place where some shells and stones had
been put to make it look a little like a grotto.
There, Mrs. Burt says, was a rustic seat. You
could see the entrance from her house. "We are
asked to believe that those two cousins went
down into the grotto, passing in front of the
miller’s house, in the broad daylight of a June
afternoon, at four o’clock, and that there they
gratified their illicit passion. Would a hedge
strumpet have done such a thing? Why, gentle-
men, here you are dealing with a young lady deli-
cately brought up, trained to habits of modesty
and virtue. Do you think it at all likely that she
would have submitted to her lover under such
circumstances ? He was the man whose wife she
hoiked to become.
Was she likely to have yielded to hi r lover any-
where? That is the first question. I am told
that such things do happen. It may be so. I
remember that in the great German play, when
Faust reproaches Mephistopheles with the ruin
of the girl whom he has seduced, the mocking
S


answer of the fiend is, ‘She is not the first wl
has fallen.’ I do not say there is any impossibili
in it; but it does seem a strange thing, when 1
had parted with his cousin in February—up '
that time his approaches to her having been of tl
most respectful character—that, after spending
few days with her in London, he should go down
and she should be supposed to go with him in
this open place, and there to yield to him with
facility of which only the most wanton strumpe
would be supposed to be capable. It is for you 1
say whether this is a likely story or not.
But the seduction forms only one part of th
story. The meeting with his cousin at Tichborn
is of equal importance. Here again we must refe
to dates. The defendant first said this happenec
in October or November, and then that it hap
pened in November or December. Throughou
the month of October the defendant was at Can
terbury. In September he was still writing from
Canterbury, and he could not have been at Tich
borne in September ; but I do not know that tha
is so important, for he does not say the seductio
of his cousin occurred in that month. He coulc
not have been at Tichborne in September, be
cause Lady Doughty was staying at Hyde, anc
Roger Tichborne would have been there in hi
aunt’s absence. Throughout October there ar
letters of his dated October 3,5, 6, 10, 15, 17
23, 25, 28, running through the month, and al
from Canterbury, and he could not have lef
there without leave.
We find him fixing himself at Upton on Octo
her 28. During that month there was a corres
pondence about Roger Tichborne’s taking
shooting box in Hampshire. To this his aun
had strong objections, and as she would not tol
erate him in the vicinity of Tichborne, it is absurc
to say he went there at that time. Coulc
he have gone over from Upton and had a meeting
with his cousin ? I must ask you to attend to
the letters. He writes to Mr. Gosford to have
the stables prepared at Upton, and no doubt he
sent his horses there. On the sth of November
—having gone to Upton on the 28th of October—
he leaves for Paris and does not return until the
13th of November. Therefore, from the sth o:
November until the 13th he had been altogether
absent and could not have been in Hampshire.
On. the 22d he writes two letters to Gosford, from
which you will be abundantly satisfied that up
till that date he never hunted in Hampshire—he
could not hunt without a horse and he had no
horse in that county. He writes a letter to Mr.
Gosford dated Nov. 22, asking him to come to
the foxhounds meet at Four Lanes Beanworth,
but having posted the letter he looks into Brad-
shaw or some other time-table and finds that to
send his horse to Winchester and bring it back,
including a night’s stay there, would cost him 51.,
and he does not think a day’s hunting in Hamp-
shire is worth the money. Accordingly he writes
another letter of the same date, in which he says,
‘ I see by looking at the book that it would be too
expensive for me to have a day’s hunting with the
H.H. to-morrow, as the expense altogether would
come to 51. I believe that would be too much of
a good thing.’ Now that shows that he had never
sent a horse over to Winchester to hunt with
these hounds before that time, or he would have
known what the expense was. The next passage,
I think, shows very plainly that he contemplated
getting some horses :
‘I have been thinking that I might perhaps
keep two if not more horses at Winchester. As I
am obliged to keep them somewhere, it won’t be-
more expensive for me to keep them there for a
fortnight or three weeks than it is here. As to
telling me that there is any fox-hunting in this
neighbourhood, it is all nonsense. I might as well
hire a balloon and hunt for birds. I wish you woulc
let me know if you hear of any stables to be had.
Now, Gosford had occasion to leave Tichborn
to go and look after some repairs to the estate
in Buckinghamshire and Lincolnshire. He lef
on the 26th, as is shown by a letter of Lad;
Doughty’s, written on the 27th to Roger, in whici
she says:
. ‘ Mr. Gosford has gone to Buckinghamshire anc
Lincolnshire yesterday, and will not return till the
end of next week.’
It will be seen, therefore, that Gosford was no
there on the 26th. Now, Roger is determined to
have a day’s hunting before he finally leaves. He
has occasion to go to London, and he starts on
Sunday, November 28, and takes with him one o
his horses. On the 28th he writes to his aunt to
say he had that afternoon sent a horse to Win-
chester in order that he might, on the following
Tuesday, which would be the 30th, join in the
hunt. From these letters and papers it appears
that he could not have hunted on any other day
Yet it may be that what he states did happen may
have happened on the 30th, and we, therefore,
must inquire into that. It may be that on thal
day he met his cousin and had this conversation
with her, but this is made difficult if we look at
the evidence of Mrs. Greenwood. Roger Tich-
borne, she says, was brought to her house by hei
husband after the hunt to get some lunch, and as
soon as he had something to eat he went off, say-
ing that he had to catch the train at Winchester.
Now if that is true, he would not be likely to go
to Tichbome on his way to Winchester, as he was
pressed for time. When Mrs. Greenwood’s evi-
dence is taken into account, it would render it
extremely improbable that on this one solitary
day on which he could see Miss Doughty, the day
of the hunt in Hampshire, he would go to see her.
But we must take it in connexion with his saying
that he gave Gosford the document contained in
the sealed packet. We have it stated in one let-
ter, dated the 26th of November, that Gosford
had gone away and would not return until the end
of the ensuing week ; and Lady Doughty, writing
on December 4, adds in a postscript that Mr. Gos-
ford returned yesterday. On turning to an al-
manack I find Saturday'was the 4th of December,
which accords with the statement that he was-
away on the 26th of November, and would not be
back until the end of the next week.
On the 6th Roger writes to Gosford and says,
‘ I am glad to see by your letter that you are back
again to fairy land’—making reference, no doubt, to
Mr. Gosford’s residence. So that we have the
fact of Mr. Gosford’s return, and that of Roger
being still at Upton. On the 6th Roger writes
also to Mrs. Greenwood, excusing himself for not
coming over to Brookwood, on the ground that
he has so much to do in making preparations
for his departure to London, and also that he
intends going to Paris. On the Bth he writes to
his brother, and says he has been out hunting,
and has had a good day’s sport. He is speaking
of a Dorsetshire hunt, and not of one in Hamp-
shire. On the 9th he writes asking Mr. Slaugh-
ter to go down and see him. Mr. Slaughter went
down. On the 16th of December he writes about
his having pursued the poachers on the island.
That is rather a ludicrous account of his adven-


Itior 0 . On the 17th of December he starts for Paris.
At the end of the month he returned to Canter-
bury, and he wrote from there on the 2d of Janu-
ary.saymg that he had arrived there on the 31st
of December. Under those circumstances, can
you satisfy yourselves that either in November or
December, after he left Canterbury, and was re-
siding at Upton, he had a day’s hunting, and on
his return from hunting went, in consequence of
something communicated to him by his cousin, to
see Mr. Gosford? He could not have done that,
but must have gone back to Upton and made a
journey to Mr. Gosford’s, and Gosford positively
denies that he did so. But the learned counsel said
that on the 13th Roger Tichborne wrote to ask
Gosford to come and see him at Upton, as he
wanted to have conversation with him on private
business, and that private business, said the
learned counsel, related to Miss Doughty. The
date of that letter, however, shows that it could
not have related to that lady.
Let us, however, now suppose that time and
place did not offer any insuperable difficulties,
rhe defendant says he met his cousin, and she
;old him she was with child. He says he told
ler, I cannot marry you after what your uncle
md aunt have said.’ What had they said? It
vas never stated that anything offensive to Roger
tad been said, except that they objected to the
carriage. Did he wish for the marriage ? I think
here cannot be a doubt that the man who gave
liss Doughty the document of the 22d of June
in earnest. Roger Tichborne was a good
■atholic, and he would not invoke the aid of the
lrgin as mediator on his behalf with the All-
owerful if he did not desire that his union with
is cousin should take place. Is not the very fact
{ his giving this document to Miss Doughty one
: the strongest facts to lead us to doubt the state-
ment that be had at this time seduced his cousin ?
' °uld a man, who although not actually religious,
3t still had a firm faith in the religion he pro-
ssed —would a man reeking with pollution,
ivmg just before committed an outrageous sin,
ivoke the Virgin fo ask for the blessing of
eaven upon a union when he had desecrated it
id rendered it unhallowed by the anticipation
that which only the solemn rite of marriage
ould sanction ? Did Roger desire to marry his
usin .' If so, what did it signify what his uncle
d aunt had said? Would not the obvious re-
ction have been, ‘lf you are in that condition
ere is an end to all obstacles ; your father and
>ther will only wish to hurry the marriage ’?
e defendant says, ‘ I did not believe in the
r £ of . her statement. I thought it only a
ilish girl s fears, or something said for the pur-
se of inducing me to marry her.’ But that pre-
pposes that his marriage with her was depen-
nt entirely on his own will, whereas it was the
her and mother who stood in the way. Is it
ely that she pressed marriage when she knew it
ild not take place in the Roman Catholic
urch without their consent, because a dispen-
ion would not be granted until their consent
s obtained ?
A r e go a step further and come to the extraor-
iary circumstance of his never having in any
y communicated with her on the subject or
de any inquiry. He did not even ask her to
te to him or say that he would write to her.
ill this at all probable ? All this you must ask
irselves, because when you have two persons
sctly contradicting one another, before you
ide between them it is necessary carefully to
balance all the probabilities arising from sur-
rounding circumstances in order to see on which
side the truth may be fairly deemed to be. Is it
lilcety that a man, having taken advantage of a
person so nearly related to him, would not think
0t j u c ° ns e<l u ences-fatal and disastrous to her
and hardly less so to him—but would show him-
self so extremely indifferent? These things, it
seems to me, must be specially taken into con-
sideration. Did he seduce her? Is that yeur
judgment ? J
were called with a view of showing
that there was a greater degree of intimacy be-
tween Roger Tichborne and Miss Doughty than
she has been willing to admit. I think, however
you must be satisfied they could not be right
as to the period at which they say they saw this
familiarity between them. Therefore I do not
think it necessary to go in detail into the evidence
ot those witnesses. But there is one piece of evi-
dence which struck me as being very forcible. A
priest who had been confessor to Roger Tichborne
during nearly all his Parisian life was called and
asked whether Roger Tichborne had not confided
to illrn the fact that he had recorded a vow to
build a church in honour of the Virgin if he
were married to his cousin Kate. The defendant
had, in the clearest and most explicit way, de-
clared he knew nothing of this priest by name,
that lie never in his life confessed to him—he
ignored Father Lefdvre ; but the learned counsel
for the defendant deliberately put to the priest
the question whether Roger had not confessed to
him that he had seduced his cousin. I must say
that I agree with Mr. Hawkins that that was a
most insidious question, and the learned counsel
for the defendant, I cannot but think, was griev-
ously disappointed with the answer he got. He
speculated on the probability of the priest reply-
ing indignantly that he refused to disclose what
passed in the confessional, in which case the
learned counsel might have said, ‘ I did not ask
him to disclose the secrets of the confessional,
but he might have said that this did not occur
and the fact of his not denying it is proof that it
was disclosed to him.’ I have not the slightest
doubt that that was the view with which he put
the question, because the learned counsel was as
well aware as anybody that a priest would not
disclose what had been confessed to him. How-
ever, Lefevre saw the snare, the deliberate snare,
winch was laid for him, and he had judgment
sufficient' to avoid it. He said, in effect, ‘ Your
question is an infamous question. You know it
is one you ought not to put to a priest, for every
man knows that a priest would die rather than
disobey the ordinance of his Church by violating
the sacred secrecy of matters spoken to him in
‘But,’ he adds, ‘ I can answer
your question. I cannot tell you what is revealed
in confession ; but I can tell you what is not,
and, therefore, I can answer you emphatically
that Roger Tichborne did not tell me when he
last confessed to me that he had seduced his cou-
sin.’ So thus failed an attempt which I hope I
shall never see repeated.
But, putting that on one side, and making every
allowance for the evidence you have heard that
there was, perhaps, a greater degree of familiarity
than Lady Radcliffe remembers—is it not very
likely that, as boy and girl, when he first came
from school in 1849, they wandered about toge-
ther ? And who can wonder at it ? There was
the park, and the village beyond the park, and
the mill beyond the village, and what more na-


tural than that these two young people should
walk out together, and that little innocent famili-
arities should pass between them ? Would even
the most rigid stickler for propriety object to such
an acquaintanceship? I only regret that Lady
Radcliffe did not at once say when she was cross-
examined, ‘ O, yes, we walked out alone together,
but I dare say her mind was at the time fixed on
the latter years of their acquaintanceship after
she had grown older. I am very sorry to see that
among others who were ready to come forward and
cast a stone at her was old Bogle, who says that
from his window he had seen these two young
people go out together. But after all, as I said
before, what does it amount to? So much for the
question of seduction and the meeting ; and now
I come to the third point, which is the sealed
packet.
You SG6 there are three distinct statements by
the defendant in documentary proof upon the sub-
ject of the contents of the sealed packet. The first
is that which was drawn up on the 2d of August;
the next is that which is contained in the affi-
davit of February 1868 ; and the last is that which
was drawn up the night before the examination
in the presence of Mr. Spofforth, and in which I
cannot but think I trace Mr. Spofforth’s style
rather than the defendant’s. This is the state-
ment which he proposed to hand to the learned
counsel who was cross-examining, as well as to the
Judge and jury. It is impossible not to be struck
by the singular inconsistency which exists be-
tween these documents. I have pointed out the
one in the affidavit, which implies that he gave
the document into the hand of Gosford without
having first communicated the contents, and that
it was to be opened by him, so that he might be-
come acquainted with the contents only under a
given state of circumstances. That would cer-
tainly be inconsistent with his statement on oath
at the trial that he went to Gosford’s, drew up
the document there, read it over to him, and sealed
it. In thefirst of the two papers which he says were
in the sealed packet he states that in the event of
his father’s having possession before his return,
and also dying before his return, Gosford was to
act for him, and was to have Upton to live at, ac-
cording to the instructions contained in the docu-
ment, and was to manage the estate. Gosford was
also told what to do with regard to his cousin in
the event of her proving to be enceinte. He was
to show great kindness to her, to let her have any-
thing she required, and to make arrangements for
her to leave England if such should prove to be
true. You will there see that everything is made
plain, so far as Gosford going to live at Upton is
concerned. His living there is made contingent
upon the death of the father. At that time the
defendant seems to have had the idea in his mind
that so long as his father lived he could not dis-
pose of Upton, and therefore all he asks Gosford
to do in the event of his cousin proving to be with
child is to show her great kindness, to let her have
what she requires, and to make arrangements for
her leaving England. _
Observe what sort of position this poor girl
would be placed in if, after he had gone away, she
had found she was with child. Gosford, in the
state of circumstances anticipated in this docu-
ment, would have had no place to put her in, none
to send her to. Neither would he have had any
funds out of which to make the least provision
for her. It was only upon the father s death, and
when Gosford came into possession as trustee,
that he would have any means of doing anything
for this unfortunate lady. I cannot understand
what the defendant means by saying that he left
this document, sealed up, in the hands of Gos-
ford, in order that Gosford might take the neces-
sary steps for sending his cousin out of England,
and do for her what she might require, because
he had no means and no power to obtain any.
What a position for this young lady ! To be taken
by her father’s steward out of her father’s house,
and sent to Scotland alone, unprotected, unbe-
friended ! That would be a strange state of things.
But when he prepared the paper to put into the
hands of the jury, without making a public state-
ment in open court, he drew it up somewhat dif-
ferently. It was :
‘ Cheriton, Nov. 22.
‘ If it be true that my cousin Kate proves to be
enceinte you are to make any necessary arrange-
ment for her going to Scotland; and you are to see
Upton properly prepared for her till I return or
she marries. You are to show her great kindness.
Let her have everything she requires._ If she
remains single, when I come back I will marry
her,’ &c.
Then he is disposing of Upton in his father’s
lifetime, during which Roger had no power over
it whatever. Nay, at that time, Sir Edward was
not dead, and did not die until the following
March. He was in a precarious state, but he had
survived so many shocks that there was no reason
why he should not have lived for a long time. So
that there were two lives between him and the
possibility of his disposing of Upton in any shape
or form. The counsel for the defendant says that
Roger Tichborne had the mistaken notion that he
could do as he chose with Upton. The evidence,
however, is just the reverse—Roger Tichborne
never had any such idea. It really does appear as
if he had confounded the position of the Roger
Tichborne of 1852 with the position of the sup-
posed Roger of 1871, and assumed that Roger in
1852 would have had the same power as in 1871.
But the Roger of 1852 would have known better.
So that it comes to this: Here is a man who se-
duces another man’s daughter, and, being appre-
hensive of the consequences, and thinking it de-
sirable that the daughter should have a refuge
from the father’s wrath, he proposes to take the
father’s house to put the daughter in. And if
you could suppose Roger to have been so ignorant
of the state of things as to seek to impose a trust
of this kind upon Mr. Gosford, if Roger Tichborne
could have been such an idiot as to imagine that
he could then dispose of the property, Mr. Gos-
ford was not such a fool as to believe any such
stuff. In his evidence he says, ‘ How could Ibe
so idiotic as to suppose I could take my employer’s
house and put his daughter into it?’ Can you
conceive a steward, and especially a man of Mr.
Gosford’s intelligence and sense, taking upon him-
self thus to act towards his employer ? You must
consider whether you can believe a story based
on such a foundation.
If you look at the former document the diffi-
culty is greater still. She is to go to Scotland.
Well, was she to go there under the protection of
Gosford ? If not, with whom was she to go ? The
meeting is not alleged to have occurred at a time
when Roger Tichborne contemplated an immedi-
ate departure from this country. According to
the first affidavit, there was some sense in the
statement. Suppose a man, finding himself in such
a position, called upon to take a journey to a dis-
tant country after he had got a poor girl into trou-
ble, would he not tell her to wait till she could


know whether her fears were well founded?
Would he not tell her that he would do the best
he could for her, and would leave her in the care
of a friend who would aid her under the circum-
stances in which she was herself placed? In
March 1853, however, the certainty must have
been known one way or the other. At that time
Roger Tichborne was about to leave England, but
the date would not do, because it was clear that
he had never been at Tichborne, and consequently
had never had an opportunity for illicit inter-
course with his cousin since the month of June or
July. So the defendant goes back to November
as the date; but, inasmuch as Roger Tichborne
did not at that time contemplate leaving England
for South America, where was the necessity for
betraying his intercourse with his cousin, and re-
vealing the fact of his having seduced her even to
so intimate and confidential a friend as Mr. Gos-
ford, until his cousin’s fears had proved to be
well-founded ? It would surely be time enough to
confide to others that he had brought shame on
the girl he loved when the necessity became ma-
nifest. Why should he reveal the secret an hour
sooner than was absolutely and unavoidably ne-
cessary ? Therefore, if the meeting occurred in
November it is in the highest degree unlikely that
Roger Tichborne would hasten to impart this pe-
rilous secret, because there was not at that time
the slightest necessity for his doing so. All he
had to do was to say to his cousin, ‘ I hope it is
not as you apprehend, but keep me well informed
and I will do the best I can to protect you and to
set matters right.’ It strikes me that would have
been the course which every man would have
taken, and the fact of the defendant not adopting
that course is one of the improbabilities attach-
ing to this case.
Incidentally, in this part of the inquiry arises
another one. He says that his father pressed him
to marry his cousin. Now, the correspondence
distinctly shows that it was not until September
or October that his father could have known any-
thing about it. We know that before the end of
October Lady Doughty writes to Roger to say that
she has written to his father and explained how
it was that he no longer came to Tichborne. It
was not until Sir Edward and Lady Doughty had
set their faces against this marriage that his fa-
ther became aware of the engagement which had
existed. How could his father, under such cir-
cumstances, press him to marry her ? Then the
defendant says that Mr. Gosford and his wife also
pressed him to marry. They have both denied it,
and therefore upon this question the defendant is
directly at issue with the witnesses, with the cor-
respondence, and, as it strikes me, with the facts.
Taking all the.circumstances into consideration,
from the beginning to the end, do you believe in
the seduction ? Do you believe in the meeting of
the cousins, and in any communication made by
Kate Doughty to Roger Tichborne, to the effect of
her being, or fearing that she was with child ? Do
you believe the conversation which the defendant
has narrated —that he could not marry her then,
but would marry her if she remained single until
he came back ? Do you believe that he went to
Gosford and there drew up anything in the nature
of the instructions he has set forth in the two
papers which are irreconcilable the one with the
other? The learned counsel for the defendant
said that they must be read together. I agree to
the extent that they must be read side by side,
but I don’t agree that the statements in the one
govern and control the statements in the other,
especially when I find that in one of them Gos-
ford was to live at Upton in the event of his
father’s death, and in the other that his cousin
was to live there in the event of her being enceinte.
I ask whether any man with a heart in his body
would, on such a foundation as that, and with no
better prospect or foundation than that, have left
and abandoned her without care or regard, and
gone in pursuit of pleasure, health, and enjoy-
ment, leaving her here to shame and despair. Can
you say he did seduce his cousin ? You are bound
to look most carefully, with the utmost vigilance
and care, into all the details of this story.
The statement of Mr. Gosford is, no doubt,
fresh in your recollection, and the circumstances
under which the paper was committed to his
care I have no doubt are also fresh in your me-
mory. It was at a time when Roger waa quite
aware of all the difficulties in the way of their fu-
ture union that he gave that paper. Mr. Gosford
says he put the document away and thought no
more of it at that time. When he knew that the
Bella had gone down he did not at once destroy
the document, but on breaking up his establish-
ment at Tichborne subsequently he looked over
his papers and found a lot of old letters and papers
of Roger Tichborne, which he burned. Amongst
those papers was this document, and after debat-
ing with his wife on the subject he determined to
destroy it. Lady Radeliffe was the wife of another
man and a happy mother, and the paper might get
into other handv. \nd occasion idle gossip ; there-
fore, I think Mr. Gosford did right in destroying
it. He did not know that Mrs.' Radeliffe had got
a corresponding document. He thought the best
thing he could do was to destroy it. The defend-
ant was certainly reduced, on his cross-examina-
tion, to the necessity of admitting that he left one
packet with Mr. Gosford.
Which is true, the statement of the defendant
or that of Mr. Gosford ? If the statement made
by the defendant be true that he seduced his cou-
sin—if it be true that, in consequence of her re-
presentation to him, he drew up this document
and left it with Gosford, how is it that that was
not put forward until after the interview at the
Grosvenor Hotel? When Lady Radeliffe next
went down to see the defendant, the first ques-
tion she put to him was, ‘ Where did we two last
meet ?’ In what an infinitesimally short space of
time he could have brought conviction to her mind
if he had simply answered, ‘ At the mill at Cheri-
ton.’ He might have said this without impart-
ing any secret to the husband or those who were
present, while he would have at once convinced
her that he was Roger Tichborne.
Gentlemen, it is for you to take all the circum-
stances into consideration. Did Lady Radeliffe
fall by the act of her cousin, or is that statement
a foul, wicked, detestable, abominable slander,
resorted to for the purpose of carrying out a great
and iniquitous fraud? Judge between these par-
ties, and as you take the one view or the other
you will find your verdict on this, which, though
not the main issue, is a very important issue in
the case.


+S/ emea of U ?y»-We were occupied during
fhr ™ OOll ° f tbe , last da y we met in consider?
ng he answers of the defendant to questions put
S fcp n T oa i S vf Xa ™ m v ion relative to the events
SLu g lL Tlchb °/ ne s life > and the last subject
r^ff WaS ! hat ° f the sealed Packet. I now
hiVvnn w erent j “ atter only remind-
“gy?U, befo f e . doin g so that, irrespective of its
thi?P«. h 4 lm P°r ance as one of the issues in
ti h ons nf p U n’° n ™ kl ?u perjur y is signed, the rela-
tions of Roger Tichborne are of great importance
m determining the question we were thin con-
S”° g ~ na “ eI /> whether the defendant has ex-
hibited knowledge, or want of knowledge, of the
1 romment events of Roger Tichborne’s life. I now
that :r hGr an ? a totally different subject, and
in Kite t r h T Ile h r K onal maf } S 7 bich were to be found
if Tichborne, and which are to be found on
«onrf fd”Sj." °"” g liBh ‘ " P °"
Peculiar marks on the
on tv,A fth def . e ° dant such as were to be found
° n J b ?. er . s ? n ] ? f E °g er Tichborne ? The marks
may be divided into two heads— marks or personal
that h h ntl6 K Whlch are Coll g en ital, and next those
defendant is fi [ St thl ?» we of the
uerenaant is that he has a brown mark m, nn.
~A b out that tbere 13 no doubt or question
Eo °f r Tichborne any such mark ? Because’
i be bad > al though it would not be impossible
that two persons should be born with such a con
WoUld be a very -mark U a C ble a c X:
very strong ci?c aDy t Polnt -° f T iew U would be a
ery strong circumstance in favour of the man
who said he was Roger Tichborne. Bu t what Tv?
Thp C nrW aVe Z° that -Koger had any such mark’
The only evidence that lam aware of tt, o * r
o sajs he saw the brown mark on Rogers’ *irln
I h “ h « ™ Mine a bath neit m£X On
unlnown V™ C ] early a circumstance
T*c the family, and, what is far more
Tichhirn*’ v WaS as clearl y unknown to Lady
when the' Yeu remember that Lady
wnen the defendant in his letter from Wad
t&nec.^ 1 6ng k d he , r rec °g ri iii°a by referenced
whmi P ih l i?T k ’ m f° S answer ’ not at first > but
ftihhL h a Pressed u P° n the subject by Mr.
d *-
t ™«“«»oVMr. n Tho r mp“ r „ d
thatr d A 8 d!d b m! C keei,e , r ' comes forward and 1 says
that Lady Tichborne called on her, and said she
by reason* 1 of the f r ° Ve tbe defendant was her son
oy reason of the brown mark on his side There
was no person living such as a nurse who saw tta
B m : k >; d C( ? uld be called to corroboratethewH-
called Per + T '? uld dou btless have been
racy of her LmT o' led <0 doubt *be accu-
say it produce/; S*!?®."® * 3Cept it ’ Imust
with referencePautfui impression in my mind
erCllCe to sincerity of Lady Tichborne,
Nineteenth Day, Friday , February 27, 1874.
inot as to her being convinced that the defendant
was her son, but as to the length to which she was
prepared to go to establish the identity. If she
kne w nothing about this mark in 1866, it is re-
maikable that in 1868 she was prepared to speak
” s ., exis * ence as a means of establishing his
Roror T' J hen tbere is M - Gosselin, who knew
hZf -h- IChhorD l m IDfanc y- and if there had
b 011 hia side the proba-
bility is that he would have heard of it, but he
tells us he never did. Besides never having heard
in attendance upon Roger constantly
luring his boyhood, and frequently saw him un-
iressed while bathing while they stayed in Nor-
binv7 f ßr . ltta ny, and yet he never saw any-
-° h , k i. nd - ( 'hatillon is another wit-
ha7e \ een lfc had it existed. M. Cha-
illon took him to the swimming baths at Paris,
nd he says he never saw anything of the kind
pTJJp he . when bathing with him in the
at Bornic - Jherewas also a gentlemai? staying
t Tichborne, Mr. Talbot, who bathed with Ro^er
bUt f he 116 -t r saw any brovvn mark,
hat is the negative evidence on the subject, and
is for you to say whether Roger Tichborne had
brown mark or not If Roger Tichborne had a
own mark and the defendant has a brown mark,
:at would be very strong evidence to show that
e defendant is Roger Tichborne. But you must
ok at the question on the other side. Suppose
Jger had no brown mark, and that the defend-
VVJf’ j 0? 00 i U < i not well have a stronger proof
at the defendant is not Roger Tichborne. While
the one case-it makes powerfully in his favour,
the other it makes powerfully against him.
Well, independently of the brown mark, our at-
Sn\Yf t? ° ne T?r r t WO other Peculiarities
original formation. We have heard a great deal
iut a peculiar formation of the thumb, and I do
t know whether to class that as a congenital
ailiarity or not. The defendant has given us
account of how this peculiarity arose. He does
i show whether he had it from his infancy nor
she say how, why, or whence it came. It was
y at the late trial that this question of the
mb arose at all, and it is doubtful whether it
1 80me a lT e arance about the daguerreo-
es then produced that first presented theTdea
l O Vn G thumb - There Ls no doubt
J of one aS l ome Peculiarity about the
of one of his thumbs. The question is is it
Sdent P ’ r °lt C - 6d ’ ° r iS J* ? atural > or the re«uit
.cident? It is suggested on the part of the
ecution that it had been artificially produced
' de J t ° " la^ u the thumb of the defendant cor-
md with the appearance of the thumb in the
erreotype. Ido not think, however, that it
tisfactorily established. Mr. Holt and Mr
m, two eminent surgeons who were called for
Tosecution, seemed to think it was a factitious
artificial creation. The matter is compara-
r unimportant, unless you are satisfied that
r had that peculiar formation of the thumb,
question is whether there is any evidence
will at all satisfy your minds as to the
irreotype showing the exact appearance on
lumb. Whether it is the effect of the light
netimes happens in the representation of the
nities in photographic likenesses, I am sure
lot tell.


But there is no other evidence which I am aware
■of, except that of two persons, to show that Roger
had any such peculiarity about his thumb, and
those two persons are Captain Brown and Mrs.
Neale, who was the waitress at the inn at Melk-
sham. Captain Brown said that while he was
playing at billiards with Roger during those even-
ings at Rio he saw a peculiarity of the thumb.
But that was the thumb of the right hand; while
unfortunately, the peculiarity of the thumb in the
■defendant is on the left hand. Then Mrs. Neale
says she saw it; but when did she see it ? More
than twenty years ago, she says, she saw Roger
Tichborne when he was driven in a tandem to the
inn at Melksham by Mr. Spurling, where he hat
a glass of whisky, and when he was taking ii
from her she saw the thumb, and noticed the
peculiarity.
A Juror.—She put it as on the right hand also.
The Lord Chief Justice. —She did. I am
obliged to you for reminding me. I had over-
looked the fact. She says it was the thumb ol
the right hand, and that, too, is rather unfor-
tunate. Well, what is on the other side? No
member of the family remembers it. If it hac
been a fact it would be a thing known to the
mother, and yet Lady Tichborne never said or
was asked a word about it. The defendant, who
instructed hi 3 counsel to examine him with re-
spect to it, never suggested it to his mother or
Any one else as a mark of identity. We have had
members of the family here one after another,
but not one of them ever saw it or heard of it.
Well, besides the family, there were the officers
with whom he associated, and a great number of
other persons, and one or two were placed in cir-
cumstances in which it seems impossible they
should have omitted to see it if it existed. Lady
Rawlinson was in the habit of playing chess with
him at Knoyle, and Captain Polhill Turner ecarte
at Clonmel, and they must have seen his hands
continuously for long periods, but they say they
never saw any peculiarity in his thumb. The
learned counsel cross-examined some of the wit-
nesses for the prosecution on the subject, but he
put very few questions with respect to it to those
called for the defence. And from the beginning
to the end of this long roll of witnesses there were
only the two I have mentioned who speak to its
existence, and they placed it on the wrong hand.
You are to say whether their testimony satisfies
you that Roger Tichborne had this peculiar for-
mation of the thumb. If you think he had,
you will give the defendant the benefit of that
opinion.
There is another peculiarity to which, in the
present state of the Court, I find it very difficult
to refer. You will, however, at once understand
what it is I allude to, and it seems to rest upon a
very similar foundation. There can be no doubt
that there is a peculiarity of formation about the
defendant. The question is whether there ever
wa3 such a peculiarity of formation about Roger
Tichborne. The learned counsel seems to me to
have confounded—l do not know whether pur-
posely or not—-two things which are essentially
distinct; peculiarity of formation on the one
hand, and virile capacity on the other. There is
no evidence to show that Roger Tichborne had
any such peculiarity of formation. It is suggested
by the defence that he acquired a nickname in
the regiment, which would appear to have re-
ference to such a peculiarity ; but there was not
the slightest evidence of such a nickname. Not
one of the officers had heard of it. But the
learned counsel goes further, and refers to the
letters of the mother in which she makes inquiry
as to whether Roger was married, as showing thai
she had that in her mind as a test whether the
defendant was her son. We turn to the letters,
and so far from bearing out the theory of the
learned counsel, they bear the very opposite con-
struction. In every one she assumes the possibi-
lity of his being married. There is no suggestion
to the contrary. Assuming that he had married
and had children, she is only anxious to know
that his marriage was according to such a form as
would prove its legality and the legitimacy of his
children.
But the learned counsel assumed that she be-
lieved the contrary, and what is more, he suggested
—-I declare I could hardly believe my ears—that
this lady, uncertain whether this man was her
son or not, had taken care by personal inspection
to ascertain the fact. A more shocking or revolting
suggestion, involving the grossest indelicacy, I
have never heard made. And then the incon-
sistency of the learned counsel’s argument with
reference to this part of the case was of the most
striking character ; for while he assumed certain
incompetency on the part of Roger, and sought to
account for the gloomy state of spirits into which
he appears from time to time to have fallen, as
exhibited in his letters, by the consciousness of
this incompetency, and the'consequent hopeless-
ness of ever forming a matrimonial union, or
being the father of a family advancing the
extraordinary doctrine about the withered leaf
which supposed a knowledge of Hebrew on the
part of Roger—he, on the other hand, represented
Roger as a monster of profligacy, including always
the visit to Preston, and as a man leading a most
licentious life—incapable of conjugal love, but
marvellously ready for any liaison in any other
direction.
My learned brother reminds me of a matter to
which I had not intended again particularly to
refer to, and that is, that the learned counsel
dwelt most emphatically upon the alleged seduc-
tion by Roger of his cousin. It is one of the main
points of the case on which he relies, and wants
you to believe in, because without it the defendant
has exhibited an ignorance of the contents of the
sealed packet which would be fatal to him. He
is incapable of marrying his cousin, but capable
of seducing her. The topic is an unpleasant one,
and Ido not wish to dwell upon it further. The
argument involves so much absurdity and incon-
sistency that I do not say too much in expressing
an opinion that it will not find favour in your
sight.
So much for the peculiarities, congenital or
otherwise, about the defendant. Let us now look
at the other side of the case, and see if there were
any congenital peculiarities about Roger which
the defendant has.
If we can rely upon the daguerreotypes, Roger’s
ear was remarkable for a peculiarity of formation.
Every ear has a pendant to it, which is called the
lobe, being that part of the ear which hangs be-
low the gristly parts, and it is one of the features
one very seldom remarks. If you were asked as
to your most familiar friend whether the lobe 3
were detached from the cheek or attached to it, I
think you would be puzzled to say how the fact
was. Speaking for myself, I could not pronounce,
as to people with whom I am most familiar, as to
whether the lobes are more or less detached from
the ear. But as it is at birth, so it remains after-
wards, except that they grow with the growth of


I the person. If these daguerreotypes truly repre-
sent the ear of Eoger Tichborne, then the defend-
ant is not Roger Tichborne, for the defendant has
a well-formed lobe, well detached from the cheek.
Roger Tichborne seems scarcely to have had any
lobe, and to have had it attached to the cheek.
I am not a sufficient judge of photography to
know whether, in this respect, you can place im-
plicit reliance upon the daguerreotypes. Evidence
upon this point we had very little. Some wit-
nesses have said that Roger had a large lobe. "We
have here one, or rather, as my brother Lush re-
minds me, two daguerreotypes, and they both
disagree with that statement. If you are satisfied
that the daguerreotype truly represents the ear of
Roger Tichborne, and if you agree in the principle
that the lobe of the ear never changes in after-
life, so far as attachment or detachment is con-
cerned, then the defendant cannot be the man he
states he is. The evidence on the subject is ex-
tremely meagre, and that arises probably from the
fact that the ear is not one of the features which
generally attracts attention, unless it is extremely
Large, or, from some other cause, impresses itself
opon the memory. So much for the ear of Roger
Tichborne and that of the defendant.
Now I come to other marks, that is to say the
nar.cs which were contracted after birth, by acci-
lent or otherwise, and which were not congenital:
tnd, first, we come to the time when, in consc-
ience of Roger’s mother thinking that he was
lot m good health, applied that cruel process of
n issue to him. Was it an issue or was it a
eton ? It is necessary to establish that fact be-
ore we proceed further. Now, nobody has been
ound, except the defendant, to say that the arti-
cial sore in question was a seton, while on the
ther hand we have a strong body of evidence to
how that it was an issue. The defendant has said
hat it was a seton, and he has pledged himself
ot only to the fact, but to the details of the
rocess of keeping it o pen-namely, by movable
i!” Was that the case or was it not ’
We have had several witnesses upon that point,
he first is the old French servant, Gossein. He
lys that while Roger was quite a child this issue
as created m Lis arm, and adds that having oc-
ision to pass through the room where the boy
ept in order to go to his master’s room, which
I T ed - atel l l)ej ' ond **» he frequently saw the
irse dressing this sore, and he gives a description
it. He calls it cautere, which is the French word
r an issue ; while seton is the French word for
seton. ‘I have never dressed it,’ says he, ‘but I
.ve seen the pea put by the nurse in and band-
es applied.’ This issue was kept open from 1834
1835 until 1838. Mrs. Nangle tells us that she
w it, and says that on one occasion, when she
is dining at Upton, the little felloe came in to
1 her good night, and asked her if she would
et° go and see his cautere dressed. She went
boy’s bed-room and saw it dressed. She
?s : I was acquainted with the process, because
eof my sons had one. It was perfectly awful
the case of Roger. The flesh was quite raw,
1 the hole was big enough to put the tip of my
tie finger in.’ Mr. Henry Seymour says he never
v it, but it was well known in the family that
;xisted. He adds, ‘lt was done with a pea. I
rer the pea; but I remember my mother
nplaming of it, saying that she wished it
pped aHegmg that it was a foolish plan of the
mch doctors arid urging Lady Tichborne to
ss-examin f- Th< L n . £ e is asked a question in
is examination, which I should have thought
common discretion -would have led the learned
counsel for the defendant to avoid. Having got
the fact from Mr. Seymour that this was an issue,
m medical language, and distinct from a seton, he
get 3 from him the fact that in the family it was
always talked of not as an issue but as a seton. A
dangerous question for this simple reason—that if
it was always talked of in the family as a seton,
that fact may have suggested the adoption of the
seton by the defendant instead of an issue, which
was undoubtedly the thing Roger Tichborne had.
■Well, the next witness is Chatillon. He accom-
panied Roger and his father to England in 1838,
when Lady Doughty was so shocked with the
miserable appearance of the poor boy with the run-
ning sore on his shoulders, that she pressed hard
to have it closed. His father assented. The doc-
tor was sent for, the pea taken out, and the sore
allowed to heal. Chatillon says, ‘ I dressed it all
the time I was in England until it was closed.
The mark remained always afterwards.’ Lady
Doughty says, in her deposition, ‘ I remember my
nephew coming to England in 1838. He had an
issue in his arm at the time. It was kept open
by two peas. There was only one sore. The peas
were taken out, and the sore was allowed to close.’
Now, what says the defendant when he is first
examined about this ? He makes two most serious
mistakes; first, as to the nature of the sore, and
next as to the process by which it was kept open.
He was examined by his own counsel, when he
said that the seton was created when he came
over to England to attend his uncle's funeral;
that it was on the left shoulder, and was dressed
sometimes with one thing and sometimes with
another. Then, in cross-examination by the So-
licitor-General, he said, when reminded of what
he had stated previously, that he did not think
the seton was put in at that time ; he thought it
must have been some years previously, and goes
on to say, ‘To the best of my memory it was
done in France.’ Next there was a good deal of
questioning about the ivy-leaves with which he
said it was dressed, and he said he thought
they were got at Upton. Then he is asked if he
had seen Moore since his examination in chief.
The object of that, of course, was to lead to the
inference that Moore, who was servant to Sir Ed-
ward at the time Roger was at Upton, and who
had heard the defendant in his examination speak
of the sore, had told him he had made a mistake
and that, in consequence, there came about the’
change in his statement as to the time at which
the seton was put in.
. now c °me to that which is more material—
viz. what sort of thing the seton was. He was
asked that question, and he replied:
t j merely a thin thread of silk or worsted,
I don t remember which, put through the flesh,
“• The y w ere left in a long while, and
j think they were taken out ultimately. It was
dressed from time to time. lam not aware that
anything was done to keep it open, but the threads
were kept movable. I really do not remember
when I had the seton closed up. Ido not re-
member with whom I was staying at the time.
It occurred at Paris. The effect of the seton was
to relieve me from spasms of the heart, which I
had been suffering from. I have no recollection
as to how long it took to heal up. It was kept
open for several months. It does not surprise me
to hear you say that Roger Tichborne had not a
seton in the shoulder at all, but had an issue in
the arm, which was kept open with peas. It was
not so—it is false.’


There we have a most distinct statement by the
defendant that it was not an issue kept open with
peas that Roger had, but a seton with a piece of
silk or worsted passed through the two orifices, so
that the thread could be pulled up and down, as
he states was the case, to keep the sore open. 1
this was in reality an issue, and it was kept open
of course it must have been a constant source o
pain and annoyance to a young boy, who wouh
be worried by this painful process, and who woulc
not be likely to forget such a thing. The de
fendant takes upon himself to say that he ha
knowledge and memory about it. He does re
member it, and, so saying, he describes, not th
thing that was, but the thing that was not. How
has he fallen into that error ? Probably, as I sug
gested just now, the defendant, having heard tha
in the family it was called a seton, acquired know
ledge of what a seton was, unconscious of the bod;
of evidence that would be brought against him oi
the point. Then the question arises, Has the de
fendant any such mark? We find two marks so
punctured as to present the form of a seton tha
had been kept open for some time. Are those
real marks, or are they of artificial creation, in
tended to lead persons to suppose that the de
fendant had marks corresponding with those
which Roger Tichborne had ?
The surgical evidence agrees on one point—tha
the effect of a seton, when kept open for any con
siderable length of time, is to create a complete
destruction not only of the skin, but of the tissue
below the skin; and that an induration after
wards appears in the interval between the marks
where the holes have been—an induration thai
can be felt on the person’s shoulder. Of that, we
are told, there is no trace in the defendant's
shoulder. It is true the medical authorities say
that if you put a seton on for a short time only—
if you stop it after a few weeks or months—a suf-
ficient destruction of the superincumbent tissue
might not have occurred, and the consequence
might be that, in process of time, the whole thing
would heal again. But all the medical witnesses
agree in this that, suppose a sore be kept in active
operation for two or three years, the marks of it
would remain foreverafterwards. There is no trace
of hardness, or induration, on the shoulder of the
defendant. Therefore, those two marks cannot
have been produced by a seton kept open for such
a length of time. Did the defendant put it there
purposely in order to make marks to correspond
with those Roger Tichborne had ? It is suggested
that Roger first tried the seton, and after a short
time discontinued it. But that is a mere sugges-
tion, like many other things. Roger had un-
doubtedly an issue ; has the defendant any mark
of an issue ?
We have had four medical gentlemen before us—
on the part of the prosecution, Mr. Barnard Holt
and Mr. Seymour Haden; on the part of the
defence, Sir William Fergusson and Dr. Wilson.
The evidence of Mr. Holt on this subject was that
the marks on the defendant’s shoulder were not
the marks of a seton, because the intervening space
between the marks is perfectly natural, and shows
no trace of induration. There was no indication
of a tape or thread having been passed under the
skin between the marks. He describes an issue as
being a destruction of the skin and the tissues below
the skin by caustic or burning, and the sore thus
caused being kept open by peas, the object being
to create a running sore. When the sore is allowed
to heal a scar would remain; no lapse of time
could obliterate it, and a man would carry it to
the grave. The mark on the defendant's shoulder
was originally put as caused by the French system
of vaccination. In the former trial it was so de
scribed, and before that, when Colonel Lushington
introduced the defendant to Colonel Greenwood
in the railway train, the mark was pointed out as
the result of foreign vaccination, and as intimat-
ing that he was Roger Tichborne, born in Paris,
and vaccinated there. And so it was always
talked of, and so Sir William Fergusson, at the
former trial, accepted it. In the present trial,
however, it was first started that this mark on
the shoulder was the result of an issue, and ques-
tions have been put to the witnesses with a view
to establish that as a fact. Mr. Haden is asked
about the mark, and he says he is unable to ac-
count for it. It was not, he said, the result of
any surgical operation known to him; he could
not tell how it was made—it was beyond his
surgical experience.
When Sir William Fergusson was in the box,
the learned counsel put the point strongly to
him. Sir William said he had been told that
there was a seton, and he saw these two marks,
but did not recognise them at once as being
caused by a seton. There might have been a
seton, he said, but there were no strong indica-
tions of it; but, being pressed, he says he should
lean to the opinion that there had been a seton
there. ‘ I rather lean,’ he says, ‘to that view.’
Then comes a question with reference to the
larger mark on the left shoulder of the defendant,
which the witness says was a scar in the usual
vaccination place that probably would require a
shilling to cover it; but it might, he thinks, have
been caused by an issue. In cross-examination,
he does not admit that an issue must necessarily
have destroyed the skin. It is curious that
throughout the long course of the cross-examin-
ation the answers are of a very scientific charactor,
but science sometimes in its practical application
uses very confused language—or, rather, language
which to the mind of a layman does not carry
anything very intelligible with it. I read the
evidence through yesterday, and, although no one
has a higher respect than I have for Sir William
Fergusson as a great surgical and scientific au-
thority, I must say I never read anything which
was to my mind more perplexing than the evi-
dence on this point. Sir William goes into a
variety of speculative possibilities, out of which I
confess I cannot get at any very clear understand-
ing. I say it with the greatest possible respect
for Sir William Fergusson, but all those possi-
bilities seem to go in one direction. I do not
wish to draw any invidious compaiisons, but the
evidence of Mr. Barnard Holt and of Mr. Seymour
Haden is clear, distinct, and precise. You know
what they mean. Ido not mean to say a word
against Caledonian caution (a laugb), but the fact
to which I have referred may have arisen from
that. You know that people of Scotch origin, as
we are, are said to be a little over-cautious, and
very great caution at least is exhibited here. One
thing is quite clear—that up to the time this
theory as to the issue was started, Sir William
Fergusson looked upon this mark as having been
caused, as the defendant represented was the
fact, by pur ctures from vaccination. The wit-
nesses for the prosecution say it cannot have been
an issue. Mr. Holt and Mr. Haden both agree as
to that, but Dr. Wilson comes forward and says
that it may have been caused by an issue. With
respect to the other marks, Dr. Wilson goes 'a
great deal further than Sir William Fergusson,


for he says there is some induration to indica'
the real existence of a seton there. He descr
the mark.
I got rather tired of this scientific jargon, anc
asked, whether there was the mark of a pea iss
That is a question which might be answered ‘ 1
or 4 No but the witness says, 4 It is not the mar
of a one-pea issue. It could be made with so:
substance that would cause irritation undernea
I interpose and ask whether the mark could h
been caused by an issue kept open by a pea.
replied that it would depend entirely upon w
substance was used in keeping the issue open,
comes to this, that if you have two or three irr
tating substances you may get the sore into
greater state of irritation. Mr. Holt and Mr.
den say, and especially Mr. Haden, that it is
such a mark as would be produced by an iss
sore at all. Among these conflicting opinions
must form your own judgment. If the mark
the mark of an issue, and Roger Tichborne bad
issue, then it would tell very strongly in favour o:
the defendant if he could show such an issu
But we are in this difficulty : if there was sue]
mark on the defendant—if he really had an iss
—we might suppose he would have had some
•collection of it. What the defendant says is tha
he had a seton. The question is, whether t
reasoning of Dr. Wilson will satisfy you again
the evidence of Mr. Holt and Mr. Haden that t
defendant had an issue and also a seton.
We now come to another and equally importan
•case of marks on the defendant. We k now t p
Roger Tichborne was frequently bled. We kno
that he was bled after the accident at Pornic. W
know that he was bled at Stonyhurst, for the do
tor’s books were produced, and we know that
was bled at Waterford. Whether he was blec
elsewhere in Ireland we do not know. We know
too, that he was bled at Canterbury. One arn
was tried after another, and one ankle after am
th , er > without blood coming. Dr. Moore the
asked if lie should open the temporal arter
Open anything,’ said Colonel BickerstafFe, ‘h
is dying. Mr. Haden, with large experience, i
of opinion that the mark of a puncture by a lance
is indelible. Mr. Holt does not quite go tha
length, but he believes that only after a very lon
course of years the marks after bleeding could b
obliterated. Sir William Fergusson does not go
further. The marks of bleeding, he says, gener
ally remain. Dr. Wilson thinks the marks o
bleeding may be effaced. He says he was bled two
or three times in the South Sea Islands, and that
the marks, or some of them, have gone. They are
all agreed that it takes a very long time indeec
for such marks to disappear—much longer thai
nas elapsed since the time Roger Tichborne was
last bled.
A»e there any marks of venesection to be found
on the deftndant such as one might expect to
find on Roger Tichborne? Mr. Holt has examined
most carefully, and says that on the right arm
there was no trace, nor was there any on the left.
Then, with regard to the ankle, he says : 4 The
•scar found on the inner side of the right ankle is
certainly not the place where they usually bleed,
and there is no vein there for bleeding.’ Then
in reference to the evidence of Colonel Bicker-
stafFe that Roger Tichborne was bled in the tem-
poral artery at Canterbury, the witness said that
x not examined for it, and had no oppor-
tunity °f forcing a judgment, but if allowed to
refnl e e W ° uld lo °, k - Well > Dr - Kenealy did not
o answer that challenge, and accordingly
Holt stepped down from the box, examined
the defendant, and told us that there was no
mark of bleeding of the temporal artery. Mr.
Holt tells us that he examined the marks o:
punctures on each of the defendant’s ankles. ! e
found an indentation, which is the result of ulc
ation, but when put to the marks of venesectio ,
he says they are not in the place to which a su
geon would resort for the purpose of bleedin .
The veins which pass up the leg from the ank e
are well defined, and these punctures are not
the saphena vein, to which a surgeon would a )-
ply the. lancet. No surgeon, he says, would drea n
of placing punctures to produce bleeding whe
the marks the defendant bears are, as they a
not on or within two inches of a vein. The wt-
ness says, ‘ I examined him specially on the arm
for marks of bleeding, and there were not any.’
Dr. Kenealy having asked Sir William Fergu
son whether he had observed any marks of bleec -
ing near the left elbow, he answered, ‘ Very
distinctly.’ Upon this I asked him whether the
are marks, distinct or indistinct, and he says, ‘
should say the marks are very indistinct.’ ‘Bu ;
are there any ?’ ‘ Well,’ the answer is, ‘ I com
not swear there are.’ He could not swear ther
are any marks either on the left arm or the righ ;.
If, therefore, Sir William Fergusson, with all h s
disposition to serve the defendant if he cou]
honestly do so, could not find any marks of bleec -
ing on the arms, I think we may conclude ther
are not any. Then he is asked about a scar on th
inner ankle of the left foot, and he says it doe
not look like a puncture, but is rather a continu
ous scar. Nor was it in a place, he says, wher
he would try to draw blood, because if he did, a
it was ever the main artery, that artery would b
much more likely to be cut than the vein. In
short, the evidence of Sir William Fergusson 01
this point practically comes to this, that he woulc
not undertake to say there was any mark or punc
ture which would show there had been bleeding
at the place.
But then there comes a gentleman, Dr. Wilson
who does find marks of lancet punctures, and whe
ascertained that there were such marks by a pro
cess unknown to the other surgeons, who state
that venesection will leave a mark perceptible to
the eye. By drawing the skin towards the pari;
where the marks are sought for, and rotating il;
gently with the soft part of the thumb, Dr. Wil-
son says he can discover them by the touch, and
that they are more perceptible to the touch than
to the vision. He says the skin of the defendant’s
face is very loose, so he draws it at the temporal
artery over the place where he wishes to find the
mark, so as to make the skin tense, and then he
says he can discover a cut. On being asked
whether it is his opinion that the cut was caused
by a lancet, ho answers, ‘lt is quite possible,’and
he thinks that more than one puncture was made
on the artery. But here I was struck by what
appeared a very remarkable circumstance. Sir
William Fergusson had been examined the day
before, and at that very time this gentleman had
already discovered that by this process of stretch-
ing the skin and rotating it with the soft part of
the thumb he could find something perceptible to
the touch which was not perceptible to the eye.
There was Sir William Fergusson, one of the most
eminent surgeons in Europe, and certainly not in-
disposed to take any trouble to establish the iden-
tity of the defendant, if he could legitimately
bring his mind to do so, and yet Dr. Wilson never
suggests that Sir William Fergusson should have


an opportunity of seeing this process, and sayin
whether in his opinion the results correspond wit!
what Dr. Wilson says. Nor does the learnec
counsel for the defence, when he has Sir William
Fergusson in the box, say to Sir William, ‘ Com
down and see this process, and say whether you
judgment corresponds with that of Dr. Wilson
With regard to the ankles also Dr. Wilson fine
marks of lancet punctures which Sir William Fer
gusson did not discover. But then this process o:
Dr. Wilson’s was one with which, perhaps, S;
William Fergusson was not acquainted. Dr. Wi
son says he was himself bled in the South Se
Islands, and that the marks have disappearec
He says there were three lancet marks near th
elbow of the defendant, and that he saw distinctl
three punctures around one of the ankles of th
right leg, and three around one of the ankles o
the left; so that, according to this gentleman
there had been six several digs of the lancet, ant
venesection had been resorted to six times in th
case of this unfortunate gentleman, Roger Tich
borne.
I had Colonel Bickerstaffe, who saw the laDce
applied to both ankles, recalled, and asked him
this decisive question, * Can you take upon your
self to say that there was more than one incision
made on each ankle on the ocoasion of the bleedini
at Canterbury V And Colonel Bickerstaffe give!
the most distinct and positive answer that he saw
the surgeon try both ankles, and then he saw him
open the temporal artery, and as soon, he says, as
the lancet was put into that artery black blooc
flowed. Now, Dr. Wilson not having sought the
support of any eminent authority by whom his
views might be confirmed, I ask you, gentlemen,
whether his testimony is to be taken against thai
of Mr. Holt and Mr. Haden, and the equally con-
clusive evidence of Sir William Fergusson ? Roger
Tichborne having been bled, and the surgeons
saying that it is only after thirty or forty years
if even then, the marks of bleeding would dis-
appear, if such marks are not to be found on the
defendant it is a very important element in the
case.
A Juror. —I think Dr. Wilson found bleeding
marks all over the defendant’s body.
The Lord Chief Justice.— lt was Sir William
Fergusson who spoke of specks all over him.
Then there is the mark on the back of the head,
which the defendant ascribes to the accidental
fall at I’ornic. With regard to this. Sir William
i ergusson thinks there must have been some con-
tusion, and Mr. Holt speaks of it as an incised
superficial wound. The defendant, however, knew
very little about the fall. But there is a piece of
evidence which struck me very much, and that is
a fact spoken to by one of the witnesses for the
defence, who appears to have known Arthur Or-
ton for a good while. He says that when boys
they were out at play, and that another boy threw
an oyster shell which hit Arthur Orton and made
an oblique wound on the back of his head, draw-
ing blood. But Chatillon says there was no cut
at all from Roger’s fall at Pornic, but a deep in-
dentation, because he did not fall on a sharp sub-
stance.
Then the only mark which remains of any im-
portance is that on the defendant’s arm, which
you have seen, and which may have arisen from a
variety of causes. It may have been the result of
force, or it may have been that the skin has been
purposely destroyed. The defendant cannot ac-
count for it except on the supposition that when
he broke his arm a bandage was tied around it to
keep the parts when set in a proper position, anc
that this may have occasioned some such mark
But then there comes a man, the witness Lewis
who says, ‘ I did it by running a sharp piece o
iron at the end of a stick into his arm.’ Sir Wil
liam Fergusson, when asked on that point, on the
part of the defendant, says that the entrance o
a sharp-pointed instrument alone into the flesh
as described by Lewis, would not produce such i
scar. It could only be produced in case a portion
of the stick found its way into the flesh, then
scar might be left as large as that which is now
on the defendant’s arm. But then, in cross-ex
amination, he says such a wound would have pro-
duced a considerable ulceration and inflammation,
and would not be cured in the way Lewis de-
scribes by a bit of diachylon plaister, which he
went to get while Roger Tichborne waited for hi 3
returp on the Tichborne Downs. It is for you
gentlemen, to say whether the mark is to be at-
tributed to the cause ascribed by the prosecution
—namely, the intentional removal of a part of the
skin in order to get rid of something which it
would be very awkward to have.
And now I come to a piece of evidence which is
of the last and most vital importance, because, ii
you take the view presented by the prosecution,
it is final and conclusive—l allude to the tattoo
marks. If Roger Tichborne was tattooed, the de-
fendant is not Roger Tichborne. There is no
doubt of that. The defendant has no mark of
tattooing about him, and he has sworn most posi-
tively that he never was tattooed. It was sug-
gested by the prosecution that the last mark of
which I have been speaking was caused by the ob-
literation of a tattoo mark A. 0., and, according
to the evidence of Dona Hayley and Mrs. Mina
Jury, Arthur Orton had his initials tattooed on
his arm. The defendant was asked about this, and
swore most positively that he never had a tattoo
mark, and had never been tattooed on any part of
his body. Therefore, we have it quite clear that
he never was tattooed, and if Roger Tichborne was
tattooed, the defendant cannot be Roger Tich-
borae. Now, a witness comes forward whose evi-
dence, if believed, is conclusive on the point, and
that is Lord Bellew. Lord Belle w was a brother
philosopher with Roger Tichborne at Stonyhurst,
and he says that one day Roger drew his attention
to some existing tattoo marks on his arm, and
asked him to tattoo his initials Upon the same
arm, and that the two lads between them man-
aged to tattoo the letters R. C. T. lengthways on
the arm, there being already the tattoo marks
upon it of an anchor, cross, and heart, which went
across the arm. If that statement be right, there
is an end of the case. Lord Bellew is asked :
‘ Do you remember doing anything to Roger’s
arm? —Yes. Whatwas that? —I tattooed R. C.T.
on it; that is, I did part of it. Do you remem-
ber when it was?—l can’t say the exact time, it
was during the time we were at Stonyhurst. Were
there marks on his arm when you tattooed R. C.
T.?—Yes. What marks were they ?—A cross, a
heart, and an anchor. On what part of the arm
were they ?—The left forearm. Where were the
R. C. T.?—Lower down on the arm. Any other
marks?—A slight blotch, like a blot, near the
wrist. Had you learnt to tattoo before that ?
No. Who taught you to tattoo?—Roger Tich-
borne. And how were the initials tattooed?—
With needles fastened to a small piece of wood
and dipped in Indian ink, and inserted under the
skin. Who else was present when it was done ?
I can’t remember. This was your first attempt


at tattooing ?—Yes. How were the letters done?
—Very badly done in a line. On that occasion
was anything done to your arm? —Yes. By whom?
By Roger Tichborne. What was done?—He
tattooed an anchor on it. I have the mark on the
arm. Would you mind showingit?—Not the least.’
And Lord Bellew shows it to the jury and the
Court. Then he is asked, ‘ Did you, before you
left Stonyhurst, see the tattoo marks on Roger
Tichborne’s arm ?—I cannot say I did, but I have
no doubt of it. ’ There appears to have been some
doubt as to the accuracy of Lord Bellew’s recol-
lection on the subject, because when first applied
to he did. not distinctly remember what part of
the tattooing on Roger’s arm he himself had done.
He had a tolerably clear recollection as to what
there was on the arm, but as to what particular
part he had taken in the production of the marks
his memory was indistinct. The question is whe-
ther he is entitled to be believed at your hands.
The learned counsel for the defendant has de-
liberately and emphatically charged him with per-
jury—that he stated what he knew to be false in
saying that Roger Tichborne’s arm was tattooed.
Upon what grounds did he ask you to disbelieve
Lord Bellew's evidence ? On the ground that he
had committed a grievous sin. Under what par-
ticular circumstances we don’t exactly know, but
undoubtedly another man’s wife left her husband
to join him, and they lived together for a long
time. Dr. Kenealy asks you deliberately to come
to the conclusion that because of this said offence
Lord Bellew is not to be believed upon his oath. Is
that a conclusion which you can properly adopt ?
Is it because a man has committed a breach of
morality on one occasion that those to whom his
testimony may be important in a court of justice
should be deprived of the benefit of it ? In that
case, how many persons would be excluded as wit-
nesses from courts of justice? If a flagrant breach
of morality is to deprives man of all credit at the
hands of a jury, in what position would the defend-
be ? If seduction in its worst, its most
flagitious form should not amount to a disqualifi-
cation of a witness, why should the sin that Lord
Bellew has fallen into destroy his credibility ? I
do not remember ever to have witnessed in a court
of justice a more painful exhibition than the ex-
amination to which Lord Bellew was subjected.
_ I do not believe there are many men at the Eng-
lish Bar who would have raked up that scandal
and thrown it in his face. Whether it was that
the bitter and malignant spirit to be found in the
instructions of the learned counsel may have in-
fused into his mind a feeling of the same bitter
malignity towards the unfortunate witness whom
he had in his power I do not know, but I shall not
easily forget the malignant glee with which the
cross-examination was introduced. ‘ Talking of
practical jokes,’says the learned counsel, ‘did you
ever play a practical joke upon a friend ?’ Lord
Bellew had not an idea of what this meant. ‘ Did
you ever take away your friend’s wife ?’ I saw a
bitter, malignant exultation in the learned coun-
sel’s face as he asked this question, which Lord
Bellew could not refuse to answer, however anrt-
ious not to compromise an unfortunate woman.
That was the question the learned counsel asked,
but we must take Lord Bellew’s account of the
matter. Though anxious to spare the lady and
not to compromise her, he says, ‘ I didn’t take her
away. She followed me and left her husband’s
bouse.’ And, according to Lord Bellew, her hus-
band was a party to her leaving his house and
joining Lord Bellew.
Gentlemen, we are not acquainted with the ci
cumstances. Taking another man’s wife can neve
be other than a grievous sin, but it may be les
heinous and more venial in some cases than i
others. But to come back to the question which!
before asked. Are the parties interested to be de
prived of the benefit of a man’s testimony becaus
he did commit a grievous fault of this description
What if it had been the other way, and if Lore
Belle w had come forward and said, ‘ I recognis
this man to be Roger Tichborne because he has th
marks which I myself put upon his arm.’ How
would it have been if the counsel on the other sid
asked the jury to disbelieve him because of hi
sin ? And yet the same principle will apply to th
one case as to the other. There are crimes ant
offences which savour so much of falsehood anc
fraud that they do go to affect the credibility of th
witness. There are, on the other hand, offences
and grievous offences which, nevertheless, do no
touch that part of a man’s moral organisation, i
I may so call it. There is an essential distinction
between these two species of offence. There ar
offences which go to the root of a witness’s in
tegrity and truth, and do disentitle him to be be
lieved.
But the learned counsel goes further. He no
only says that Lord Bellew has committed perjury
but he cannot suppose that a man in Lord Bel
lew’s position would have committed perjury foi
nothing, and that he must have done it for a bribe
Gentlemen, there can be no bribery without two
parties—the person who receives and the person
who gives the bribe. So that it is not only Lore
Bellew that is implicated, but there is somebody
behind who pays the price of perjured testimony
I should like to know who it is? Does the learned
counsel mean to say that her Majesty’s Govern-
ment have procured suborned testimony? Or is it
Mr. Stourton, the guardian of the infant heir,
who has done so ? Or is it the Tichborne family
or the Seymours, who have no more interest in the
case than you or I? Does he mean that they have
subscribed some large sum to bribe this nobleman
to come forward and give perjured testimony? If
not, who is it ? Is it Detective Whicher or Mr.
Bowker who put their hands in their pockets to
pay the bribe ? Are not such charges open to the
strongest reprobation and condemnation as a sad
and painful abuse of the freedom of speech which
a counsel ought to exercise under the proper re-
straints and with a due sense of propriety and
decency ? I rejoice to be able to remember that
upon a former occasion a learned counsel, whose
zeal for his client was never exceeded, knew how
to restrain it. He neither sent the hot iron into
the soul of the witness by putting those painful
questions, nor did he for a moment hint that Lord
Bellew had been guilty of perjury. It was quite
lawful to suggest that Lord Bellew might have
been mistaken, but it never occurred to him to
hint that he was perjured.
Now, the learned counsel who took advantage
of his position to abuse the privilege of cross-ex-
amination, and to carry that privilege to an ex-
tent of license which I never before saw exhibited,
by an indiscretion of a most singular character,
chose to have brought forward a correspondence
between Lord Bellew and Mr. Bowker, which
shows that, so far from Lord Bellew having come
forward to state something which he did not state
from the outset, or something which he had volun-
teered to state, he was asked by Mr. Bowker the
question, and of course he could not refuse to ans-
wer, and the evidence he has given, with a very


slight qualification, is the same as he came forward
to give. It seems when it was known that the de-
fendant was coming to this country as a claimant,
Lord Bellew mentioned to some friend that if he
was the real Roger Tichborne he would bear the
marks of tattooing upon him. This having become
known to Mr. Bowker, who was acting on behalf
of Lord Arundell, Lady Tichborne, and the fa-
mily, he writes a very proper letter to Lord Bel-
lew, dated the 7th of June 1871, in these terms :
‘ My Lord, —Being engaged on the part of Lord
Arundell, Lady Tichborne, and the family in re-
sisting the claimant to the estates, I take the
liberty of addressing you.’
He does not say, ‘My lord, —Taking you to be
a scoundrel open to a bribe, if you will only swear
that Roger Tichborne was tattooed, I will give
you 1,000?., 10,000?., or some other large sum.’
Quite the contrary, he addresses Lord Bellew in
the most respectful manner. The letter then
proceeds:
‘ I understand that your Lordship was at Stony-
hurst with Roger Charles Tichborne, and during
that time tattooed on his arm emblems, “Faith,
Hope, and Charity.” The family are well aware
that he was tattooed, and if we could ascertain
where and by whom he was so marked, it would
tend to settle the question. Consequently, if your
Lordship would favour me with a letter by next
post to this address, it may be of important ser-
vice.’
Lord Bellew is asked upon that, ‘Had you ever
said anything about “ Faith, Hope, and Charity ?”
No, not previous to that correspondence. If
you had not so tattooed him, of course you could
not have said anything about it ?—No. _ You had
never told any one you had so tattooed him ? —Not
to my recollection. When did you tattoo Roger?
—lt was while I was in philosophy, which was
two years. Was it in 1847 or 1848 ? —I cannot fix
the date. Was any one present ?—My impression
was that somebody was, but I cannot recall who
it was.’ Then, Dr. Kenealy says ‘ You didn’t
give any exact date?—lt was during the time I
was a “philosopher” with him. Cannot you give
a more precise date ?—I cannot fix the date ac-
curately. Was there any one present besides
Roger and yourself ?—I think there was. I have
tried to remember who it was, but I cannot. I
believe it was one of the philosophers.’ Now comes
the answer of Lord Bellew to Mr. Bowker:
‘ Barmeath, June 8, 1871.
‘ Sir, —I am in receipt of yours of yesterday. I
was at Stonyhurst with Roger Tichborne. I re-
member his having a heart, anchor, and cross tat-
tooed on his arm, also R. C. T. I remember assist-
ing to tattoo his arm, but I find it difficult to
remember whether I tattooed the heart, anchor,
and cross, or R. C. T. The former were on his
left arm, and I am not certain whether the R.C.T.
was not on his right arm : but as he had another
mark on his left arm above the wrist, that may
account for my want of accurate memory on this
detail.’ .. .
Having used the word assisting’ in this letter,
counsel says, ‘ There you say you assisted. Who
assisted you ?—Roger himself, I believe, assisted.
You say you were not then certain?—No, I was
not certain at that time. What was it made you
certain?—l had a conversation with Mr. Seymour.
What brought it back to your memory ?’ Lord
Bellew answers, ‘ I asked Mr. Seymour whether
he remembered the marks, and he told me he did,
and said he remembered the letters being done
unevenly, like a schoolboy’s writing, and then the
fact flashed upon my memory that I had only done
the letters, and not the other marks. I remem-
bered the marks perfectly ; the doubt was only as
to what I had done. I knew at once I could not
have done the heart, cross, and anchor. I never
had any doubt as to the marks, but only as to the
part I had done myself.’ He says, when he was
first questioned, his memory about the marks was
not distinct; but talking it over with another, the
circumstances came back to his mind, and he adds
he is almost as perfectly satisfied as he can be of
anything that it was on Roger Tichborne’s left
arm the marks were. ‘ The only confusion that
was in my mind,’ he adds, ‘ was whether I had
tattooed the heart, the cross, and the anchor, or
not. I could not have tattooed them, because it
was the first time I tattooed in my life. I was
not in doubt about the tattoo marks, but about
what part of them I had done.’ The learned coun-
sel says, ‘At first you were in doubt about the
arm ?—Yes, when I wrote to Mr. Bowker ; but the
reason was because Roger Tichborne had another
mark on his left arm above the wrist.’ Then we
come to a second letter. Mr. Bowker having again
written to Lord Bellew to know more about the
marks, Lord Bellew replies as follows :
‘ Barmeatli , June 15.
‘Sir, —Roger Tichborne was tattooed at the
seminary at Stonyhurst when we were philoso-
phers there. I think Roger Chas. Tichborne was
already tattooed before he came, but am not sure.
I can swear to all the marks on his arms, although
not accurate about their history on all points. He
had a mark above his wrist on his left arm that
looked like a tattoo mark that had been badly
done, and merely produced a dim splotch like this
( ), but not so large, quite.’
Dr. Kenealy asks, ‘On what arm wa3 the
splotch ?—On the left arm, about the size of a
fourpenny piece. Can you give me any idea how
you came to tattoo Roger?—l don’t remember
how it arose. Boys do many things they don’t re-
member five minutes afterwards. Do you remem-
ber where it was done?—l can’t swear, but I
think it was in my room. Had you known him
long?—I can’t fix the period. Did you tell any
one in the college you had done it ?—I can’t re-
member. Did you ever see it again after you had
done it?—l don’t remember any particular occa-
sion, but I have no doubt I saw it.’ Then he is
asked as to the position of the marks, and he says
that, whereas the cross, anchor, and heart were
done transversely across the arm, the letters were
lengthways down the arm. In re-examination
he is asked, ‘ Have you the slightest interest in
this case?—None whatever. Did you volunteer
your evidence? —No. Nor have I the slightest
idea how the circumstances came to the know-
ledge of Mr. Bowker. It is likely I mentioned the
tattoo marks to some of my own friends.’ Then
he says that Roger Tichborne and he were good
friends, that he saw very little of him in Dublin,
but at Stonyhurst they were very intimate. He
is asked whether he received any communication
from the defendant since his arrival in this
country, and he says, ‘None whatever.’ Finally
he is asked by counsel, ‘Have you any doubt
that Roger Tichborne was tattooed ?’ and he an-
swers, ‘ None whatever, and by myself. I have no
doubt whatever that the marks were on one arm.’
Now, gentlemen, you must form your judgment
whether Lord Bellew in his account has come for-
ward and committed gross and deliberate perjury
in a matter in which he can have no interest, un-
less you suppose his evidence has been bought by


abominable means. He does not volunteer
evidence, but Mr. Bowker writes to him, ant
Lord Bellew tells what he knows. By degrees
memory is revived. His conversation with 1
Seymour in the gallery of the House of Co
mons, when Mr. Seymour had heard that Lort
Bellew had something to do with the tattooing o
Roger Tichborne, brings back the circumstan
to his mind. Nothing was more natural tli
when Mr. Seymour met Lord Bellew he sliou
ask him, ‘Do you recollect about the marks ant
the letters being so badly done ?’and then tha
the whole thing should have come back at once
Lord Bellew’s memory; so that, as he said,
had the most distinct recollection of it. No
what was the course under these circumstancei
it was incumbent on Lord Bellew to adop
Why, to say, ‘ If I can throw any light upon th
matter by the evidence I can give of a fact so
sential to the proper decision of the case, I can
not withhold my testimony.’ Everybody is bounc
to afford such assistance as he can to the cause o
justice by speaking to facts within his knowledg
and so Lord Bellew comes forward. If his stat
ment differs substantially from anything he sa
at first, that is a matter which you may thin
goes to affect the credibility of his evidence. Bu
if you do not think so, here is the clearest, mos
convincing, and most conclusive testimony tha
Roger Tichborne was tattooed, which disposes o
the main issue of this case.
But the fact does not stand at all on the'unsup
ported evidence of Lord Bellew, for there is othi.
evidence which goes to show that he is right in h
statement that Roger Tichborne was tattooed, anc
exactly in the way which Lord Bellew testifies
that is to say, he had the three emblems of Faith
Hope, and Charity, the cross, the anchor, and th
heart, with the initials rudely and inartisticall;
done upon the same arm. Now, I shall call you
attention to the various witnesses who spoke t
the fact that they had seen these tattoo mark
upon his arm, and I don’t think it is possible you
can disbelieve them, or accept the explanation
which the counsel for the defendant offers. Firsl
I take Lady Radcliffe. Although she may hav«
the deepest interest in this case, which unques
tionably she has, she must not Jbe altogethe
excluded from that degree of credit which she
deserves to have. She says that when Roger wa
at Tichborne preparing for his examination for
the Army, and was paying visits with that objec
to Mr. Moberley at Owslebury, she first saw those
tattoo marks on his arm. It was when she wantec
some flowers out of the water at Tichborne he
turned up his sleeves and she saw he was tattooec
with the cross, anchor, and heart. She is not quite
sure when she saw the marks next, but she remem-
bers seeing them about Christmas, in the end oi
1851 or the beginning of 1852. On that occasion
she remembers Roger showing his arm to several
friends at Tichborne, and among others, to Miss
"Weld. She says, ‘He said to me, “ Let me tattoo
you ; will jou be tattooed ?” I said, “ No, I don’t
like it.” He said, “It won’t hurt you.” I think
he told us it was done with needles and gun-
powder rubbed in. Afterwards he told me he
intended to have a cross tattooed over his heart,
so that if he died among the Indians they would
know he was a Christian. At that time he was
full of the notion of going among the Indians in
North America.’ On being cross-examined, she
mentions the names of those who were present
when he plucked the flowers out of the water.
I hey were forget-me-nots and water lilies also,
and when the learned counsel said he never sa
forget-me-nots growing in water, she tells hi
they are growing in the water at Tichborne, an
he could see them there now. She does no
lemember whether the sleeves were worn tight a
that time or not. She remembers that she had see
the marks distinctly three times.
Miss Weld was mentioned as one of the person
to whom Roger showed the tattoo marks at Tic!
borne, and she being a nun. Dr. Kenealy observer
that she was practically dead and could not 1
produced. But I reminded him that there was
certain process by wliich she could be producer
and that a little bit of paper sent out from th:
Court would open the gates of any convent or an'
place, no matter how strongly fortified,
England. And so a few days after Miss Welt
made her appearance.
Then Mr. _ Gerald Fitzgerald says that on
evening, having gone to the smoking-room wit
Roger, Roger having put on a dressing-gowi
turned up his sleeves and showed him marks oi
his arm, which he told him were tattoo marks
and mentioned a sailor as having had somethin
to do with them. His recollection of the kin
of marks is not distinct. He says they wer
not a representation of animals, but of inanimat
objects, that is all he can tell. All the mark
were on one arm, of that he is positive. In cross
examination, he says the fact that Roger was tat
tooed occurred to his recollection previously to
the first trial. When he heard the defendan
was coming over he told some friends that if he
were the real man he would have those marks
Nobody called his attention to the subject. He
remembered the marks himself.
Then Lady Dormer, Roger Tichborne’s cousin
says she remembers something on his arm. He
was very much tattooed. Her recollection is
that the marks were on the left arm, but she
will not swear positively. She remembers the
initials, the cross, and the heart. She does nol
remember the anchor. The tattooing extended
a great way up the arm, which was greatly dis-
figured by it. ‘ When he first showed them,’ she
says, ‘I expressed my dislike of them. He was
very much amused by it. My disliking them did
not make him cease to show them, but rather
the contrary. When I did not expect it, he
would say, “Eliza, look here,” and then he would
show the tattoo marks. That was at Upton. I
think it was Lady Doughty who told me there
was an anchor. She said, “Do you remember the
anchor? and I said, “I do not.” He used to
show the tattooing constantly, and make no secret
r vv t s P°k e before, for I said it was very
loolish for any one to appear as Roger Tichborne
who had not those marks. That was before the
defendant arrived in England. After he arrived,
and I had spoken about the marks, I was advised
to say nothing about them.’
Then there is Mr. Reginald Talbot, a boy friend,
who was staying at the house at Tichborne ten
days at a time during the vacation when Roger
was there in 1846, 1847, and 1848, He says he
remembers the tattoo marks. As far as his re-
collection carries him, they were somewhere on
the left arm. He recollects perfectlv a heart, an
anchor, and something else. There was some-
thing below, but he does not remember what. It
was in 1845 that he first saw the marks. The ini-
tials R. C. T.’ were not there then. Of course,
when ‘ R. O. T.’ were on the arm they would make
the marks appear larger. In cross-examination
he says that the matter was a subject of conver-


sation in the family before Roger went abroad.
When the Claimant first came over, the family
said if he were Roger he would have the tattoo
marks. There was no discussion of the subject,
but it was referred to and spoken of.
Then we have Mrs. Greenwood, who says she
remembers Roger telling her a great deal about
the tattoo marks, and describing how they were
done. She does not remember his showing them
to her. She thinks it was before he went into the
Army. ‘ I asked him,’ she says, ‘ about it, hoping
he might show the marks to me. I said, “Are not
you tattooed, Roger? How is it done? Did it
hurt you very much ?” He said, “ No, not all.
Will you let me tattoo you ?” I said, “ No.” He
described it as having been done with gunpowder.
My idea is he took up his sleeve and showed it to
me. But I would rather not swear to it. The
idea I have is that it was “R. C. T.,” an anchor,
and a cross, but whether I saw it or was only told
I do not know.’ The next witness to whom I will
call your attention is Mrs. Whitgrave. She was
present on one of the occasions when Roger
showed his arm. According to her statement, they
were talking about tattoo marks, when Roger
Tichbome pulled up his sleeve and showed the
tattooing, which was very badly done. She
remembers perfectly well the colour, which was
very indistinct,. so that she could not remember
what the marks were. However, she has a per-
fect recollection of the marks being there. Miss
Weld was also present at the time. The marks
were something of the shape of a shilling, and
went across the arm. They were roughly done.
Mr. Vincent Gosford, referring to the tattoo
marks, said he could not call to mind any occasion
when he saw them, but he has no moral doubt of
their existence. Then Brand, the keeper, speaks
of an occasion when Roger Tichborne and he were
out rook-shooting, and when Roger in climbing
over a fence tumbled among some nettles. He
had previously taken off his coat and his shirt-
sleeves were turned up. He stung his arms, and
while he was rubbing them with a dockleaf the
witness saw some tattoo marks on his left arm.
The marks were of a blue colour, but the witness
could not say what they were. Then we have an
important witness in the person of Mr. Scott, the
infirmarian at Stonyliurst. He says that upon
one occasion Roger drew up his shirt sleeves, and
showed him the tattoo marks, telling him that
they were done by a sailor in Brittany. To the
best of his recollection the marks consisted of a
cross, an anchor, and a heart. He is asked :
‘ Are you quite certain that you saw tattoo marks
on Roger Tichborne’s arm,’ and he replies, 4 1 am
perfectly certain of it.’ Father Rigby also saw
the tattooing, which, to the best of his belief, was
on the left arm. These two .Stonyliurst people
give evidence which clearly shows that, as far as
their recollection goes, they did see marks on
Roger Tichborne’s arm, and that the marks were
tattoo marks.
Another very important witness is Captain
Manders, who was with Roger Tichborne in Porto-
bello Barracks in 1850. They lived on the same
landing in the barracks, and Captain Manders
often saw Roger Tichborne half a dozen times a
day. He says:
1 1 saw his arms often. I was going out hunting
one day, and had a long way to go to cover. I
went to Roger’s room, and found him standing
•lv. re le B^ ass brushing his hair with both hands,
with his sleeves turned up. When I opened the
door he turned round, and I saw the marks on his
arm. I saw the anchor distinctly. There were
■ other things, but I don’t know what they were.
' I thought very little of it at the time. I think
about three years ago I read something about it,
and then I said, “ I can recollect that.”’
An account was given to us by Colonel Bicker-
staffe of the attack of illness which Roger Tich-
borne had at Canterbury, when he was expected
to die. Oddly enough, the evidence of this wit-
ness, which proved to be very important, was only
got out on cross-examination. Mr. Kenealy says :
‘ I observe my learned friend did not ask you if
you had ever seen his bare arms. Did you observe
his bare arms ? —I did. Did you observe any tattoo-
marks?—Yes. When I was first asked about the
matter, I said he was not tattooed, and I did not
remember anything about it till I saw it in the
papers. He had a little cross round his neck, and
I thought it was a superstitious thing. Moore said
to me, “ Look at his arm and I did so, when I
observed the marks. Did you tell Mr. Bowker or
any one about it?—No. What made you think
of it ?—I don't know whose evidence it was, but
the moment I heard of the cross upon the arm, it
came to my recollection. He was a very religious
fellow, and I thought it was from a religious point
of view he had got it on his arm. It was towards
the dusk of the evening that he was bled, and he
had nothing on but his jersey and drawers. Did
you see a splotch on the wrist ?—No ; but there
was a lot of stuff on the arm. Are you perfectly
certain in your own mind that you did see tattoo
marks on Roger Tichborne's arm?—l am perfectly
certain I did.’
Then Major Bott was called for a different pur-
pose, and he says in cross-examination :
‘ No doubt I have seen both his arms bare fre-
quently. Have you been asked if he was tattooed ?
—Yes, many times. Have you not always said
you did not see any tattoo marks?—l have always-
said I was under the impression that he was tat-
tooed, but I would not swear to it. What gave
you that impression ?—I can’t answer that.’
Then follows a long cross-examination, in the
course of which he says :
‘ I have been asked two or three times, and I
have always said I would not swear to it.’
Burden, who had seen him so often, was then
called and asked:
‘Did you ever notice any tattoo mark? —I have
a positive recollection of them at the present mo-
ment. When the defendant first arrived in this
country, I had no recollection of it; it had slipped
my memory; but as soon as I read of it in the
paper, I remembered it.’
Then, in cross-examination, he is asked :
‘ When was it you first recollected these marks?
—When I read ic in the newspapers.’
Healy, the man who kept the racket-court at
Clonmel, said he had seen him playing at rackets
frequently, and had seen him wash after taking
off his flannel. He is asked :
‘ Have you noticed anything on his arm ?—I no-
ticed the mark on one of his arms ; I cannot tell
which. It was a sort of bluish colour, but I could
not say what it was. It was not so dark as blue
ink. I saw it several times during the six months
he was at Clonmel.’
Lastly, as far as the English witnesses are con-
cerned, there is the dying deposition of Lady
Doughty, who says:
‘ I remember he had tattoo marks. There was
a cross, a heart, and an anchor, and also initials.
I saw them more than once. He said the cross,
the heart, and the anchor had been done by a


sailor on the coast of France. He said the initials
had been done by a young man at Stonyhurst af-
terwards.’
That is the last statement on the subject made
by members of the family or by witnesses here
but there are two very important witnesses fro
Paris, namely, M. Chatillon and his wife. On tl
last day Roger Tichborne ever spent in Paris, ]
called upon M. Chatillon, his old tutor, to tal
leave of him, Chatillon was sitting down at d
jedner, and begged Roger to sit down with him
While Roger was talking, he gesticulated in sue
a way that he threw his sleeve back. Madam
Chatillon observed some blue marks upon his arm
and she was curious to know what they were. A
her request, her husband asked Roger, who pullec
up his sleeve and showed them the marks. Bot
of them agree that there was a cross, an anchor
and a heart; and Madame Chatillon says ther
were rough initials besides. M. Chatillon after
wards made a drawing of the marks from his reco
lection, which was correct, except as to the exac
positions of the emblems. Madame Chatillo
corrected the error from her recollection, and sh
put the emblems in the position described by Lore
Bellew and the other witnesses. That is the en
tire body of the evidence with respect to the tatto
marks.
The learned counsel for the defendant said, ‘ ]
cannot gainsay the testimony of such a body o
persons.’ Well, then, how is the difficulty to b
got over ? because the learned counsel admits, i
Roger Tichborne was tattooed, the case of his clien
is at an end. Accordingly, he is driven to see!
some explanation whereby he can admit thei
evidence to be true and yet ask you to believe tha'
there was no reality in the tattooing. His sug
gestion is that Roger Tichborne, when he founc
that the exhibition of these tattoo marks on hi
arm caused surprise and in many instances annoy
ance to the persons to whom he showed them, hat
recourse to a sort of fictitious tattooing, but which
was not in reality tattooing, by means of a pig
ment, coloured pencil, or paint, and then, says the
learned counsel, he would quietly rub them ou
after he had shown the marks. That is the theory
gentlemen, which is propounded for your adop
tion by the learned counsel for the defendant.
One point which you should not lose sight of is,
that it always occurs to the defendant to draw the
same marks, and always upon the same part of the
left arm.
But in this course of exhibition of marks, there
are one or two instances which would lead one to
the conclusion that it could not be done for any
such purpose. On two occasions he is taken by
surprise. Captain Maunders enters the defend-
ant’s room one morning while he is dressing, and
as the defendant is brushing his hair with two
brushes he sees the marks. Is it probable, as the
learned counsel suggests, that the marks had been
done the night before for the purpose of amusing
his friends '! Do you think he had fictitiously
tattooed himself the night before and had forgot-
ten to wash it off ? At Canterbury, where he is
bled, his sleeve is turned up. The surgeon, before
using the lancet, calls Colonel Bickerstaffe’s atten-
tion to the mark of the cross on the arm, and says
he thought it had been placed there from some
religious or superstitious motive, as there was
another cross fastened to his neck. Roger Tich-
borne was certainly taken by surprise on that oc-
casion, and did not prepare his arm beforehand in
order that the surgeon might see it when he came
to bleed him. Is it at all likely ? We may sup-
pose that with boyish trickery he might hav
played off these pranks with Lady Dormer or h:
Aunt Nangle; but when he was with men, wil
his brother officers, can you suppose such a thing
It is true there is a considerable body of wi
nesses who say that they never saw any tatto
marks and that they had more or less opportun
ties of doing so, and that if he were constant]
and permanently tattooed they must have seen i
My duty is to bring these witnesses before yoi
and you will then have this matter, which is
crucial test, fairly before you. These witnesse
may be divided into two groups those from
Hampshire and those from the Carabineers. Gn
saw him ‘grubbing’ up the old oak ‘moor’ wit
his jacket off and his sleeves turned up, and neve
saw any marks ; and a number of other witnesse
said the same thing. Then a man named Bailey
a horse-breaker, saw him under similar circum
stances, helping Colonel Greenwood to build u
the cairn over Colonel Greenwood’s horse. H
saw him with his sleeves turned up, and ther
were no tattoo marks. Mansby, the under-keeper
helped him to cast bullets, when, having his sleeve
turned up, he saw his arms, and there were n
tattoo marks. Mrs. Neil, the waitress at Melk
sham, took him up water to wash, and saw him
with his coat and waistcoat off and his sleeve
tucked up, and declares there were no tattoo
marks. Ann Mines, housemaid in Lady Doughty’s
service, said he used to come into the kitchen to
wash his hands, and on one occasion, in conse
quence of some hurt to his fingers, she tucked up
his sleeves, and she saw no tattoo. Muston was
undoubtedly, a strong witness. He was in Roger’s
service from 1849 to 1851, and had continually
assisted him when washing and dressing, anc
never saw any tattoo marks. Then Hewitt, the
servant of Mrs. Hopkinson, when Roger was stay-
ing at Knoyle, says that he was in the habit ol
amusing himself with the boxing gloves and hac
sparred with him. He always had his sleeves
tucked up as high as they would go, and witness
did not at any time ever see a tattoo mark.
Mrs. Legge tells rather a curious story. She
says she used to go to the house at Upton when
Roger was there in November 1852. She went
with the linen about three times a week, and has
seen Roger in the butler’s pantry at least half
dozen times ; has seen his arms bare but no tattoo
marks. You naturally ask how that came about,
for the butler’s pantry is not the place where a
young gentleman occupying a house as the master
would be likely to exhibit. She explains that he
came in from shooting, and used to clean his gun
at a sink in the pantry. Ido not want to disparage
her testimony, but it strikes one as odd that a
gentleman with two servants and a keeper should
clean his own gun, and that the laundress should
see him so often. But, even if she merely saw
him with his arms bare while he was cleaning his
gun, you must bear in mind that she may not have
seen jthe inner part of the arm, where the tattoo
marks are said to have been. The general position
of the inner part of the arm is level with the
body, and this inside of the arm would be next the
body when he was cleaning the barrel of his gun.
If you are satisfied that there were these tattoo
marks, one would anxiously wish to see some
solution to account for this evidence of witnesses
for the defence. There is this remark, which is as
old as courts of justice themselves, that affirma-
tive evidence of a fact which persons say they
have seen—supposing always that there is equal
probability and truthfulness on both sides—is in-


finitely stronger than the negative testimony of
persons who say they had an opportunity of see-
ing but did not see, unless, of course, the oppor-
tunity of seeing is so remarkable, that it is im-
possible not to know, as for instance in the case of
a surgeon bleeding a man’s arm, and being asked
whether he saw a mark immediately below th
spot where he was able to insert the lancet.
There is Charlotte Grant, who says Roger usee,
when he returned from trout fishing, to wash his
hands in the kitchen, and frequently came in wit 1
his coat off. She saw his arms bare, but never saw
tattoo marks. She fixes the time as in 1850, anc
the answer to that is he was never at Tichborn
during the trouting season of that year. There
fore that statement must have been untrue. There
is a witness of a more serious character—l mean
Bogle. He cannot say he has seen Roger’s arm
bare, but he has sat with him in his bedroom whei
he had on his night shirt and was smoking. Roger
used to rub his arms up and down and the sleeves
were not buttoned, but he saw no tattoo marks
From the evidence of this witness it appears than
Dr. Lipscombe was examined at the previous trial,
and was asked if he saw the marks on the arm.
It is somewhat remarkable that, though Dr. Lips
combe was called at the last trial, he was not callec
at this trial. He could have told us whether he
had seen the tattoo marks, or whether he had
made a statement one way or the other. Then there
is the witness Budden, who was employed at Up-
ton in 1848 and 1849, and who says that he saw
the arms of Roger Tichborne bare, but that there
was no tattoo. Lillywhite saw him working at
getting up the stump of a tree, and Noble saw
him working away at the old oak stump, but they
do not speak to the tattoo.
Then there are the list of Carabineers who say
that they never saw any tattoo marks on Roger
Tichborne’s arm. Mrs. Ella, the wife of one of
the Carabineers, speaks to having seen him in the
kitchen with his arms bare, but no tattoo. Some-
times she has taken water to him, and sometimes
he has met her in the passage and taken the water
from her. Strange to say, on nearly all these occa-
sions he seems to have come into the passage with
his arms bare, and she saw nothing. Then there is a
man named Robinson, who was formerly in the Ca-
rabineers. He has seen him playing at skittles with
his arms bare, but has never seen any tattoo marks.
The next witness is Margaret Horniblow, who was
a servant at Cahir at the time that Roger was
stationed there. She has seen him washing and
wiping his hands when talking to other officers in
the passage, but she never saw any tattoo marks.
Again, there is Colonel who speaks of
one occasion when he went into Roger’s room late
at night after they had been pulliDg him out of
bed. Colonel Norbury saw him in a loose silk
singlet, with a locket round his neck. His arms
were bare, and he tells us that he saw nothing in
the way of tattoo to his recollection. But at that
hour of the night, when they were all joking and
tumbling about and trying to get the locket from
this young lad, it may have been very likely that
the witness saw his arms bare, and yet saw nothing
of the tattoo. There is not very much in that.
The next witness is named Bird, and he tells
us that on one occasion he went with Roger and
his father to the railway station at Cahir to see
the father off, and that Roger, having no money
with him, asked him to go down to the barracks
with him and he would pay him for his services.
He says he went back, and Roger, having no
change, gave him a note to get cashed. He adds,
‘I saw both his arms bare, and there were no tatt
marks on them.’ Now, the difficulty in this ca
is that Roger and his father went away by ra:
from the station together on the date fixed by tl
witness, and therefore the story Bird has told
inconsistent. Then there is a man named Munda
a warder in the Chatham Convict Prison, who w
formerly in the Carabineers. He on several occ
sions, after returning from church, had seen Roge
Tichborne washing himself. He had seen him bar
up to the elbow, but had never seen any tatto
marks. There is a good deal of cross-examinatio
as to the position of Roger Tichborne at the tim
and also the position of the washstand. If yot
will consider in what position a person worn
stand to wash his hands, you will no doubt fee
that this man may be speaking the truth when h
says that he saw no tattoo marks, and yet the;
might have existed. Child is another man wh
had seen Roger washing himself, and had not see
any tattoo marks. He had gone up to Mr. Tich
borne’s room and caught him washing his hands
Then there is a great deal of the cross-examinatio
as to what this man had to do in Roger Tichborne
room, he not being a servant.
The next witness is a man named Davis, wh
sold the fighting-cock. He goes to Roger Tich
borne’s room and finds him with his shirt off. H
was in his company for 10 minutes or a quarter o
an hour, but he did not see any tattoo marks
That was the only occasion on which he had seen
his arms bare. Old Leicester, the trumpet-major
says he used to go to deliver the officers’ letters
He had gone up and seen Roger washing, when
if he had been tattooed, he thinks he must hav
seen it. George Wild says he had seen him pla;
at rackets and at cricket with arms bare, and hat
never seen any tattoo marks upon them. A witnes
named Brittlebank, of the Carabineers, says he
saw Roger Tichborne in his room when his arm
were bare, and they bore no tattoo marks. George
Ella, also of the Carabineers, sees Roger Tich
borne when he comes into the kitchen for ho'
water, when his sleeves are tucked up, but ob
serves no tattoo marks. Another military witness
named Marks, speaks of a foot-race, in which he
says Roger ran, with his arms bare to the elbows.
If there had been any marks, he says he shoulc
have seen them; but he saw none. I may here
remark that Roger Tichborne was a man of sallow
complexion, upon whom tattoo marks might pass
unobserved; whereas they would not pass un-
noticed in a person whose skin is fair. A witness
named Ratcliffe, also of the Carabineers, says he
has been in Roger Tichborne’s room and seen him
washing his hands, but saw no tattoo marks.
Somehow, all these witnesses happen to be about
when he is washing his hands, or something of
that kind. There are, however, a good many wit-
nesses who had had the opportunity of seeing the
arm bare, and never saw tattoo marks; and you
must judge whether those to whom the arm was
exhibited for the express purpose of showing the
tattoo marks are more likely to be right, in saying
they had seen them, than those who, having also
had an opportunity, though not so good an one,
of seeing them, say they did not observe the
marks. But suppose you adopt the hypothesis of
Mr. Kenealy that these were fictitious tattoo
marks made by Roger Tichborne for the purpose
of deceiving people, then the two classes of wit-
nesses may very well be reconciled. Unless, how-
ever, you believe that the testimony of Lord Bel-
lew is perjured testimony and that it has been
bought with gold, or unless you adopt Mr. Ke-
T


nealy’s new and strange theory that these were
not real and genuine but fictitious tattoo marks,
the only conclusion you can arrive at must be
that Roger Tichborne was tattooed; and the con-
sequences of that I need not tell you.
And now I come to another test which may
greatly assist you in coming to a decision —that of
the handwriting. You have had evidence on the
handwriting in this court, and I ask you, before
you finally determine this case, carefully to look
at the handwriting of the undoubted Roger Tich-
borne, of the Claimant as Roger Tichborne, and of
Arthur Orton. First, as regards the handwriting
of the defendant and Arthur Orton. But before
we do anything else we must try to fix in our
minds the characteristic peculiarities of the hand-
writing of the defendant. Now, there are certain
letters of the defendant which are peculiarly cha-
racteristic, and which it is difficult to think we
could be mistaken about. The first of these which
strikes me is the capital letter ‘ I.’ You know
that letter consists, in the first place, of a semi-
circular initial up-stroke, from the top of which,
and through which generally, the main body of
the ‘l’ is brought down. Some people make this
up-stroke entirely on the left side of the ‘ I,’ others
make a little flourish as they are carrying it up,
and others, again, bring the main down-stroke
through the initial up stroke. The defendant in-
variably does the latter, and I cannot imagine any-
thing more peculiar than the formation of his Ts.’
It is just as if he were going to make a semicircle,
which he does not quite complete, and then
brings his main down-stroke through the centre
of it. I have desired that some specimens should
be found for you, but I do not think those which
have been selected are peculiarly happy. Another
letter which is quite as characteristic is ‘L.’ It
is more like a crushed Z than an L. I have never
seen a letter so peculiarly formed by anybody
else. The next important character is the letter
‘N.’ There are two modes of writing the‘N.’
One consists of the letter which is formed as it is
when the up-stroke begins at the bottom, but
there is another mode of writing it when it is
made like a small ‘n’ enlarged. In very small
handwriting the defendant makes a sort of rudi-
mentary loop. You will find that the peculiarity
I have pointed out is noticeable in all the defend-
ant’s capital ‘N’s.’ His capital ‘P’s,’again, are
extremely remarkable. In writing between lines,
if you make a capital ‘P,’you bring the main
stroke to the lower line ; the defendant brings it
down and makes it like a small ‘p.’ His ‘ WV
are very remarkable. They are like a bird flying
with extended and flapping wings. They are very
marked. His ‘BV are very remarkable, and his
letters generally are characteristic and peculiar..
Now, let me ask you to follow the matter in
these letters. The Masters have been good
enough to afford you the opportunity of making
a comparison between the handwritings of the
undoubted Roger Tichborne and of the defendant
as Roger Tichborne, and of Arthur Orton.
With respect to Roger Tichborne, his hand-
writing is as peculiar as that of the defendant.
One remarkable circumstance connected with it
is the habit he has of prefixing a sort of hook to
the words which he writes ; so that, if you look
perpendicularly along the margin line of one of
Roger Tichborne’s letters, you will find a series of
hooks extending a long way out beyond the line
of letters. Ido not suppose that anybody ever
before saw a handwriting of the same character
in that respect. But when you come to look at
the defendant’s handwriting, says his counsel,
you will find a hook. Well, there is a something,
but it is hardly a hook; it is more like a little
knob, as if he had rested his hand firmly on the
table before commencing to make his up-stroke,
and I must ask you to look at Arthur Orton’s
letters and see whether they do not present ex-
actly the same peculiarity. So with regard to
many of the defendant’s other letters. If you
look at Arthur Orton’s capital ‘ I's’—there are
some of them placed here in juxtaposition with
those of the defendant—l am afraid you will not
find much difference between them. With regard
to the capital ‘M,’ I doubt if you will find any
distinction at all. I call your attention to ‘ The
Vow’—
‘ This day i have received a letter from Donald
M‘Donald With the Seal Broken.’
I ask your attention to the W in this document,
and then to compare it with the W’s in the Wagga
Wagga letters. Then I ask your attention to the
words :
‘ I Arthur Orton here make a vow on this Book,
Although not a Bible. It bear a cross.’
I ask you whether that ‘ I’ is not the same as
that of the defendant, and that this document
was written by Arthur Orton we know.
‘ That as I am a man of Bone Blood and flesh.
That i will find out the man if possible. That
broke the said seal. And that I will punish him
according to the laws of My Country.
• Sined Arthur Orton, Dargo.’
And I must call your attention here to the use
of full stops instead of commas, which same pecu-
liarity attends the letters of the defendant. The
capital ‘M’s’ are distinct. In the words ‘ Newbon
Park,’you have the capital ‘P’ made in the way
I have described. Here are capital ‘ P’s’ in abun-
dance taken from the defendant’s writing.. .There
is no doubt about this vow being the writing of
Arthur Orton, and it is for you to judge, for your-
selves whether the writing in the book is not the
writing of the defendant.
When we come to the comparison of Roger
Tichborne’s handwriting you will see that almost
every letter is formed in a different manner.
Then again, when you look at the signature, un-
less Roger has totally altered the character of his
writing, it cannot possibly be said to be the writ-
ing of Roger Tichborne. Supposing shortly after
the loss of Roger Tichborne a man had come for-
ward and said, ‘ I am Roger Tichborne,’ would
you have believed that it was the same writing ?
I asked that question of Dr. Kenealy, and he said
no, he could not, but that twelve years may make
a man forget the writing he was accustomed to
use, and when he is put to write again he will re-
vert to the handwriting of bis boyhood. ‘ I think,’
he says, ‘ you will find a likeness between the
handwriting of the defendant and the handwrit-
ing of his (Roger Tichborne’s) boyhood.’ But I
consider the handwriting of the defendant as
dissimilar from the writing of Roger Tichborne in
his boyhood as it is to his writing of later years.
I must ask you also whether you do nob trace the
same style in the writing of both the boy and the
man, and whether you can find any resemblance
in the writing of the defendant to that of Roger
Tichborne. They are rudimentary letters—the
letters of the boy Roger Tichborne, says the
learned counsel. Does the whole theory rest upon
anything but a most shadowy foundation ! Do you
believe that a man who has not had the opportu-
nity of writing for ten years would forget the
writing of his manhood, and go baok to that of his


boyhood? He would, I imagine, rather return
to the handwriting he had written last. Unless
you can adopt the theory of the learned counsel,
and are satisfied with the explanation he offers,
then I say, if you look at the general character of
Roger Tichborne’s writing and examine that of
the defendant, the two will be found as dissimilar
as it is possible for one man's writing to be from
that of another.
Besides the question of handwriting, there is
that of the composition of the letters. Roger
Tichbome was not what is called a scholar—not
a man of high-class education, but still he was a
man who could think, and think, too, upon seri-
ous subjects; and he could express himself. He
had no lack of fluency of language, but he spelt
badly, if you like; and in spelling badly he wrote
sometimes ungrammatically, and more often in
French idioms, translating from the French into
English. But there are none of those gross, un-
educated vulgarisms which yon find in the defend-
ant's letters. Roger’s style is flowing, and the
composition in certain cases would do no discredit
to an accomplished letter-writer. But the defend-
ant’s style is like that of a schoolboy—with short,
hopping sentences ; and there is the perpetual
introduction of this phrase, ‘My dear Mamma,’
—so totally different from the habit of Roger
Tichbome, who never indulges in that except at
the beginning and the end of a letter, whereas
in the defendant’s letters it occurs on an average
once in every three lines. Here, again, the learned
counsel propounded the theory that the state of
semi-civilisation in which the defendant so long
lived caused him to forget partly how to think
and altogether how to write. Again, in the
abundant introduction of the small ‘i’ for the
personal pronoun the defendant’s writing is pecu-
liar. In one letter of sixteen lines this small ‘i’
occurs no fewer than fourteen times. If you take
Roger’s graphic description of his passing over
the Andes and his ride across the Pampas, and
then take the letters of the defendant—unless
you are satisfied with the explanation of the
learned counsel that the difference is explained
by the absence from civilised life of the defend-
ant—that difference is very much against their
being written by the same person. Supposing
any one had risen twelve months only after the
Bella had gone down, and had written like the
defendant, would anybody for a moment admit
that they were the letters and handwriting of
Roger Tichbome ? That, however, is a considera-
tion which must be left to you.
Then there are characteristics of spelling in
both these writings. There are hundreds of in-
stances in which both Roger and the defendant
make mistakes, but there are only four words
in which the mis-spellings concur and coincide.
‘Meant’is spelt ‘ment,’ ‘lodging’is spelt ‘lodgin,’
‘ expense’ is spelt ‘ expence,’ and ‘ intend’ is spelt
‘ entend.’ Both Roger Tichbome and the defend-
ant make a great many mistakes in spelling, but
they only have these four mistakes in common.
Besides, there is an extraordinary disproportion
in the quantity of mistakes in relation to the ex-
tent of the correspondence. It is not enough to
say that one man has made 500 mistakes in spell-
ing, and another has made an equal number, un-
less you get an equal quantity of writing. Mr.
Chabot has given us the result of adding up the
number of instances in which each mis-spells,
carefully distinguished between the spelling of
the one and the other, and pointed out that there
are only these four instances in which they coincide.
But it occurred to me that that was not alto-
gether a satisfactory criterion, and I desired that
the number of lines should be counted. The
Masters have assisted me. I have seen to it my-
self, and I know it has been carefully done. We
know the number of lines in the letters of the
defendant, and in those of Roger Tichbome. I
have had the mistakes of grammar and spelling
carefully collated and compared, and the result
is that there are 7 mistakes in 100 lines of Roger’s
and 57 in 100 lines of the defendant’s. Certainly
that is very extraordinary. Now, I will point
out some of the characteristic mistakes made by
Roger Tichbome. He invariably writes ‘ sais’ for
‘ says.’ That occurs 13 times. He writes ‘ begin’
and ‘ beginning’ with an ‘ i’ in the first syllable
instead of an ‘ e,’ ‘ intend’ he writes ‘ entend,’
and ‘cloths’ he misspells ‘clothes.’ Then for
‘ promise’ he writes ‘ promiss ;’ for ‘ relief’ and
‘ helief,’ ‘relieve’ and ‘ believe ;’ for ‘ fortunately’
and ‘ unfortunately,’ ‘ fortunatly’ and ‘ unfortu-
natly.’ The defendant has several characteristic
mistakes ; ‘ received’ is spelt ‘ receved’ 106 times ;
‘ affidavit’ * affidavid’ 30 times ; ‘trouble,’ ‘ troble’
or ‘ truble’ 19 times ; ‘ children,’ ‘ chilldren’ 18
times; ‘few,’ ‘fue’ 9 times; ‘necessary,’ ‘ne-
cessory’ 5 times. He also spells in a peculiar
manner ‘ enormous’ ‘ a Normous,’ and ‘ enough’ ‘ a
Nuff.’ Ido not propose to go further into these
numerous instances, but I must call your attention
to one very remarkable word, which appears once
in Arthur Orton’s letters, and twice in documents
written by the defendant. I refer to the word
‘ Elizabeth,’ which is spelt ‘ Elizaberth.’ Here I
am obliged to ask you to look, not only at the
spelling, but at the handwriting, and you will
find that the ‘ z’ in ‘ Elizaberth’ is about as pecu-
liar a letter as is to be found in the whole range
of this handwriting. Arthur Orton makes the
‘ z’ come half way up alongside the loop of the
letter ‘ I,’ and a long way above the top of the
line of the ordinary small letters, and thus it as-
sumes a disproportionate size. The very same
peculiarity attends the ‘ z's’ of the defendant.
There are also other peculiarities, specimens of
which will be placed before you ; and unless you
can really come to the conclusion that the ex-
planation suggested by the learned counsel for the
defendant is one that is tenable, and is one which
reasonable and thinking men acquainted with
handwriting can accept, then undoubtedly these
letters as exhibited and compared between Roger
Tichbome and the defendant show two handwrit-
ings as dissimilar as it is possible for two hand-
writings to be, independently of Roger Tichborne’s
characteristic habit of prefixing hooks to his initial
letters. Moreover, when you come to compare the
handwriting of Arthur Orton with that of the de-
fendant, especially when taking the entry of the
vow in the book entitled the Rivals, you may.dis-
cover fresh proof in addition to that already given
as to Arthur Orton and the defendant being one
and the same person. It is quite true that in Ar-
thur Orton’s letters you find a cramped and rigid
hand, like that of a boy who had just emerged
from the schoolroom and the ferule of the writing-
master ; but at the same time you find there the
rudiments of the later handwriting. If you look
at the writing in the Rivals, you will find it cor-
responds in some degree with that of the youth
Orton; and you must judge for yourselves whe-
ther it does not correspond with the writing of
the defendant. If you find it does, I suppose that
will lead you to the conclusion that the defendant
is Arthur Orton. This is all I have to trouble you


with on the subject of handwriting and spelling,
To-morrow I shall have to address to you a few
observations in conclusion, and then I shall leave
to you the decision of this great case.
Twentieth Day, Saturday, February 28, 1874.
Gentlemen of the Jury,—We have now travelled
over the large and extensive range of this case,
and the evidence tending to establish the facts on
the one side and the other. My purpose through-
out has been to place it before you as one great
whole, to show you how the various parts of it
dovetail, as it were, into one another, and the re-
lation which these parts bear to the case as one
great and entire whole ; because I was satisfied
from the beginning that it was only by looking at
it in that light—by seeing the relations the parts
bear to the whole, and taking in the whole in one
large and comprehensive view—the case could be
thoroughly understood, and its merits duly appre-
ciated. Let us now, at the last moment, see whe-
ther we can gather together the threads of this
somewhat tangled skein, by just passing in review
the prominent and salient points which have
arisen in the case.
Is the defendant Arthur Orton ? We have a
strong body of evidence affirming his identity with
that man. We have, on the other hand, a consi-
derable body of evidence to show that he is not.
In point of numbers the witnesses for the defendant
exceed those called by the prosecution. Never-
theless, the evidence of the witnesses for the pro-
secution, though they are less numerous, may, pro-
bably, be considered more weighty, because it in-
cludes the evidence of the woman with whom Ar-
thur Orton kept company, and if anyone would be
likely to have his features impressed upon the me-
mory she would be that person. But then, on the
other hand, the defendant has produced witnesses
who speak to personal marks upon Arthur Orton
which undoubtedly the defendant has not, and if
the evidence of those persons could be implicitly
relied on there would be an end of the matter so far
as the Orton case is concerned. But it is necessary
to look beyond the evidence of those witnesses,
and to take the whole range of facts connected
with the Arthur Orton question. These witnesses
may have intended to deceive us or they may, not
intending to deceive us, have deceived themselves.
They may be applying to Arthur Orton facts and
circumstances which possibly existed in one or
other of his brothers, with whom, after the lapse
of many years, they may have confused him.
They may forget that these scars and marks, and
the earrings we have heard of, may have been on
and worn by one of his brothers, and not Arthur
himself.
We must extend the inquiry further. We must
follow Arthur Orton to South America. We know
that Arthur Orton was at Melipilla. We know
that the defendant was at Melipilla. We know
that,, according to the evidence, there was one
Englishman, and one Englishman only, at that
time at Melipilla. We find no trace of Roger
Tichborne either in the evidence or in the Castro
correspondence as being at Melipilla ; but in the
Castro correspondence we do find that an English-
man was there, and that his name was Arthur
Orton, and we find there was but one Englishman.
And so it stands thus: There was one Eng-
lishman there, and one alone. The Englishman
who was there went by the name of Arthur Or-
on. .The name of Roger Tichborne was unknown,
it is impossible to suppose that Roger Tichborne
could ever have adopted the name of Arthur Or*
ton, because that is probably a name of which he
had never heard. We have, then, these circum-
stances —that there was simply one Englishman
there, and that Englishman was known as Arthur
Orton; that the defendant was there, and that
there is no trace of Roger Tichborne having been
there. What explanation can possibly be put for
ward to meet the inference that legitimately
arises from that set of facts ?
Well ; we must follow this Arthur Orton to
Australia. We find him landing at Hobart Town
and at once betaking himself to the occupation
which his education and his antecedents render
him fitted for. He becomes a slaughterman to
butcher at Hobart Town, and he changes that oc-
cupation for the occupation of a stockdriver or
herdsman. He passes from Tasmania into Aus-
tralia Proper; then we find him at Dargo anc
Boisdale, occupied in the same way—a butcher’s
man, a slaughterman, or a mounted stockdriver,
the same occupation that he followed in Tasmania.
Afterwards we hear of him—if we accept the evi-
dence of Hopwood—at Wagga-Wagga, carrying on
the same business. Thus we trace Arthur Orton
from South America to Tasmania, from Tasmania
to Australia, and find him always following the
same pursuits. For even the witnesses for the
defendant who distinguish between Castro and
Arthur Orton tell us that these were the callings
Arthur Orton followed. That Arthur Orton was
at Dargo and Boisdale we know as an absolute
certainty, and the same reasoning which applied
to Arthur Orton at Melipilla applies again to
Arthur Orton at Dargo and Boisdale. If Arthur
Orton was there, and you find no trace of Castro
—in other words of Roger Tichborne under the
name of Castro —what is the legitimate inference
which would follow? The defendant was un-
doubtedly at Boisdale and Dargo ; Arthur Orton,
undoubtedly, was there too; there is no trace
whatever of Castro—what is the inference ? Is it
capable of any other solution than this—that the
defendant having been there, and Arthur^Orton
having been there, and no Castro, so far as the
evidence and books of Mrs. M'Alister show—is
there any other solution than this—that the man
who was there was Arthur Orton, and that the
defendant is Arthur Orton ?
Again, when the defendant comes to England,
what is the course of conduct which he pursues ?
He goes to Wapping the very first thing after he
arrives. In what way can that be explained, ex-
cept on the hypothesis of his being Arthur Orton ?
Is there any other solution or explanation pos-
sible ? He keeps the whole matter a secret; he
takes care that neither his friends nor his ad-
visers shall know his relations to the Orton fa-
mily, and when the thing is discovered, or thought
to be discovered, he meets it by a denial, which
denial he is afterwards constrained to admit was
false. Under all these circumstances, and espe-
cially when we look to the fact of his marriage, to.
the Richardson letter, and other things which
might not in themselves lead us to the conclusion
that this man is Arthur Orton, but which, never-
theless, it is necessary to take into consideration
as minor points in the case, what conclusion can
we arrive at ? His marriage would be perfectly
consistent with that of a man in the position of


Arthur Orton ; but the Richardson letter, which
could easily be accounted for if it emanated from
Arthur Orton, could not be accounted for on the
hypothesis that it was written or dictated or sug-
gested by Roger Tichborne. All these things are
matters for serious consideration, in order that we
may determine on which side lies the truth. The
witnesses who say they have seen these two per-
sons—Orton and Castro —at one and the same
time may be telling you the truth, or they may
be deceiving you. Rut there remain the stagger-
ing facts to which I have called your attention.
No one but Arthur Orton was at Melipilla; no
one but he was known at Roisdale and at Cargo.
Then again, how can we explain that the de-
fendant told Mr. Gibbes that he had St. Vitus’s
dance ? When had Roger Tichborne St. Vitus’s
dance ? We know Arthur Orton had it from his
boyhood. How do we explain all these things ?
Then the introduction into the Wagga-Wagga
will of names known to Arthur Orton, but un-
known to Roger Tichborne—how can we explain
that ? How can we explain, again, that when
suddenly called upon to say in what ship he had
left England and on what date he had left Eng-
land, instead of giving the name of the ship in
which Roger Tichborne sailed, and instead of giv-
ing the date on which Roger Tichborne left, he
gave the name of the vessel in which Arthur Or-
ton left, and he gave the date on which Arthur
Orton left ? When could the knoavledge of the
ship Jessie Miller have reached Roger Tichborne ?
An explanation was put forward by the learned
counsel for the defendant, which you have heard.
If you think it one any reasonable or sensible man
could adopt, and if it carries conviction to your
minds, adopt it; but if you think it the mere
production of a wild and exuberant fancy, do not
adopt it.
Let us now go to the far more important ques-
tion of whether the defendant is Roger Tichborne,
because the question of whether he is Arthur
Orton is merely subordinate to the still larger
question of whether he is Roger Tichborne, and if
the question as to whether he is Arthur Orton
remains unsolved there will still be left the ques-
tion to be considered whether he is Roger Tich-
borne. Let us look at all the facts from the time
the defendant came forward. He presents himself
after many long years have passed without any
tidings having been heard of Roger Tichborne,
and when all those connected with him, with one
solitary exception, believed that he had long
ceased to exist. Then it was that the defendant
dropped, as it were, from a summer cloud, and the
question naturally put to him was, ‘You come to
us like one risen from the dead : what have you
been doing since you disappeared ?’ Of course, he
is under the necessity of affording some explana-
tion in answer to questions which were so natural.
He must afford some explanation before he can
invoke the aid of the Courts of Justice to assist
him in making good his claim. ‘ Tell us how you
were picked up. Tell us how you were saved.
Tell us what has become of you since?’ These
were the questions put to him, and, beginning with
the story of the shipwreck, he tells a story which
no man in his senses can believe, and which his
own counsel cannot ask you to believe.
The assertion that the captain of the ship walked
the deck of that vessel when there was 12ft. of
water in the hold, and yet remained unconscious
that the vessel was in that condition, is a story
which no sailor—l will go further, that even no
landsman would adopt. What becomes of him
next? He is asked how they escaped from the
vessel, and he tells the story of how they betook
themselves to the boats ; how all the water and
provisions were put into one of the boats —not
that into which he got—and how the other boat,
in which he was, had to follow it in order to obtain
the necessary supplies. Again, that story is con-
demned, and no man can ask the jury to believe
it. And then we have this additional improba-
bility, which of course must be considered, and
that is that the boat in which he describes the
rescue of the crew with the captain and the pro-
visions is found bottom upwards in the immediate
vicinity of the floating wreck of the vessel, so that
the supposition of that boat having been rowed
away for two days and two nights from the scene
of the shipwreck must fall entirely to the ground.
No one can believe that story. The learned
counsel for the defendant ascribes all these things
to the imagination of his client. Then we come
to the saving ship, and we have the extraordinary
statement that the defendant was three months
on board that vessel, and though he may have
been ill for some time, he must have been well
long before the vessel arrived at its destination;
and yet he cannot tell us for certain whether that
vessel was the Osprey or the Themis; and he
cannot tell us the name of the captain or what was
the state of things under which they parted at
Melbourne. Then we have the additional and
singular fact that from that hour to this, with the
single exception of the trumped-up story of Luie,
no voice has come either from the sea or from the
shore to tell us that any one was either a part of
that crew that was so saved, or had been onboard
the saving vessel—though, according to the defen-
dant’s own story, there were numerous persons on
board —no one, I say, has come forward to bear
testimony to the truth of this story.
The defendant lands at Melbourne. He has to
account for the time between that at which he
landed there—if he ever landed at Melbourne —till
the time he came forward to make his claim. He
tells us he was three years and upwards a stock-
keeper, first at Boisdale and then at Dargo, and
then at Boisdale again. And if that part of the
story falls to the ground, if that turns out to be
false, what becomes of the superstructure of the
Australian life which has been founded and built
upon it ? And yet, with the evidence of Mrs.
M'Alister before us, and with the books from
Boisdale confirming that evidence, can you come
to the conclusion that the defendant was there, or
that, if he was there at all, he was there in any
other character than that of Arthur Orton ? Is
there the slightest trace of Castro there ? If the
effect of Mrs. M’Alister’s evidence and the evid-
ence of these books, carefully kept, and to all ap-
pearances genuine and true —if the effect of all
this be to satisfy you that Roger Tichborne never
was at Boisdale and Dargo at all; if the view you
take be that he has adopted the circumstances of
Arthur Orton’s life there, what becomes of the
rest of the story ? Three years are wholly and en-
tirely unaccounted for.
But let us pass on. He leaves Boisdale and
Dargo and takes to a wandering life. He is some-
times horsebreaking and horsedealing, and at other
times he is acting as stockdriver; while again, at
others, he is a slaughterman and acting as butcher.
Can you fail to be struck with the singular coin-
cidence between that certain life of the one man
and the life which we are told was lived by the
other? How could Roger Tichborne ever have
thought of being either a drover or a butcher ?


ITo Arthur Orton these things were natural. He
had been brought up as a butcher, and was ac-
quainted with cattle. Must we not take it as
strange that the very life we know that Arthur
Orton was living was the one adopted by the de-
fendant? Yet so it is. In Arthur Orton we have
first the butcher’s man and the stockdriver, and
then we have him setting up for himself as a but-
cher. The defendant follows the calling of a
stockdriver and that of a butcher’s man, and fin-
ally sets up as a butcher himself. How should
that kind of life have entered into the thoughts
of Roger Tichborne ? Then you have him wander-
ing about breaking-in horses. Arthur Orton used
to be occupied in breaking-in Shetland ponies,
and it is only a change from Shetland ponies to
horses. So that we have the defendant following
exactly the course which Arthur Orton would na-
turally follow and appears to have followed; and
we find him following a course of life which- —un-
less under very extraordinary circumstances such
as have not been brought to our knowledge—we
can hardly suppose it could have occurred to Roger
Tichborne to follow. Then, in addition to that,
just look at the life of hardship and toil, privation
and distress, through which the defendant, by his
3wn admission, has passed. Upon what possible
hypothesis can you conceive that Roger Tichborne
would have voluntarily adopted that life ? Let it
)e granted that he was a man of eccentric mind—
md of that we have no proof, except the supposed
act of his going to lead this life—let it be sup-
>osed that he was a man capable of betaking him-
elf to a wild and adventurous life; that he was
ated with the pleasures and enjoyments of life
lere, and wanted to lead a wild and adventurous
ife for a change. But was this a life of adven-
ure ? For my part I can see no trace of it. Was
fc a life a man would adopt from any of those
trange but still exalted feelings which have in-
uced men to desert society and betake themselves
o the desert ? Nothing of the kind. It was ex-
ctly the life that Arthur Orton would have led.
t was exactly the life that would have been led
y any one under similar circumstances who may
ave gone out to find employment in the New
forld which he could not find at home.
We must follow him further on. The defendant
akes a marriage which it is impossible to sup-
>se that Roger Tichborne would have made unless
d away by some strange passion or infatuation—
marriage which Roger Tichborne could hardly
ive been expected to form if he ever intended to
turn to this country and claim his estates. Is
ere anything to show that he did not intend to
turn ? Why should he have led this life ? Why
ould a man in his position, with an independent
rtune of lOOOi. a year, which no person could
uch, and the heir to a title and to large estates
the value of at least a year—the heir to
baronetcy—why should such a man adopt the
e of a stock-driver and a butcher’s assistant in
istralia i These are very honest occupations if a
m honestly pursues them, but they are not the
Jupations that a man of rank and fortune would
expected voluntarily to adopt. What explana-
n can be given of it ? What explanation does
i defendant himself give? The only explanation
gives is that he did not intend to come back to
rope until his father died. How long was he to
it ! Would a man under such circumstances not
taken some trouble to find if his father was
tying or had died? Besides, do we find any
nonty whatever in the letters of Roger Tich-
ne which intimates any such intention? All he
says there is that he was going away from England
for some time, and would not reside at Tichborne
while his parents lived.
Hien there is another consideration, which also
must be borne in mind. If there was one person
in the world whom Eoger Tichborne loved that
person was his brother Alfred, and reading his let-
ters to or about his brother it is impossible not to-
see that he was really fond of the boy, of whom he
always speaks with a playfulness which is one of
the best forms in which affection could show it-
self. Could Roger Tichborne, with his knowledge
of how things stood as to the position of the pro-
perty, fail to know that if his father died while he
gave no sign of life or existence, his brother Alfred
would step naturally, under the ordinary course
of things, into the possession of the title and es-
tates which the defendant, if Roger Tichborne, was
entitled to/ Could lie fail to know that, grown to
man’s estate, Alfred Tichborne would be likely to
form a union with some lady in his own position
in life ? Could he fail to appreciate the humilia-
tion to which he would put that brother, as well
as his wife and children, if, when he had assumed
the title and entered on the enjoyment of his es-
tates, he should have to step down from the po-
sition that he had taken, and to admit that he had
improperly, in one sense, assumed a title and taken,
possession of estates to which he had no claim?
No man, I think, could fail to be conscious of the
painfully false position in which he was placing,
his brother by allowing him to take a position
from which he was afterwards to be ejected, and
I cannot help thinking that this is a matter which,
goes strongly to show that the defendant cannot
be Roger Tichborne, who willingly permitted years
and years to pass and allowed his father to die and
go to his grave without taking the trouble to make
any inquiry as to whether he was alive or dead.
Again, touching on the same subject and going
over the same ground, can we persuade ourselves
that Roger '1 ichborne would have written that
Richardson letter? For what conceivable motive
for what earthly purpose—could he have done
so/ Then we come to his relations with Mr.
Gibbes, and see what occurs then. He is ig-
norant of his birthplace; he asserts that his fa-
ther had a seat in Dorsetshire, when in reality
his father never had one there at all. He tells
Mr. Gibbes that he has had the St. Vitus’s dance *
he tells him that he has been educated only by
snatches by a Jesuit priest, ora Christian Brother,
he is not sure, and it does not matter which. He
ignores entirely the three years’life at Stonyhurst.
He ignores entirely the three years’ life in the
army. When Mr. Gibbes tells him that his
mother says that he was an officer in the army he
peremptorily denies it. The defendant represents
that he enlisted in consequence of getting into
some pecuniary difficulty or Bcrape; that he was
bought out by his father after he was thirteen
days in the army ; that he was shut up at home,
and kept there —until when ? Until the very iden-
tical month in which Arthur Orton left London,
but not the month by many months in which
Koger Tichborne left this country. Then we have
the extraordinary circumstance that he does not
know the Christian names of his own mother.
Can you reconcile that fact with his identity with
Roger Tichborne?
Then he comes to England, and the same obser-
vations that apply with relerence to Arthur Or-
ton apply in the opposite direction to Roger Tich-
borne. How can you suppose that Roger Tichborne
on the very first night of hisarrivalin this country'


would go down to Wapping, that he should have
recourse to fiction and fraud, and, in one instance,
to forgery? But can you not suppose that .Arthur
Orton would communicate with his sister, inordei
to obtain information, so that he might not run
his head against any one of the family, and so be
detected and exposed. Can you imagine that
Roger Tichborne would have done any one of
these things, and for what purpose, and what pos-
sible explanation has been offered ? These are the
substantial difficulties, with which the learned
counsel for the defence shouldhave grappled, if he
could, but of which I have heard no explanation
whatever. Then we have the defendant going
down to Alresford to look about the place, but
going under a feigned name, concealing himself
there, instead of immediately seeking his mother.
We have him holding no intercourse, with the
family, keeping aloof from them, avoiding them,
under the pretenee of his mother’s injunctions,
which he said were not to see any one until he
had seen her, when we know that her injunc-
tions were to see her with the utmost despatch.
Yet day after day passes while he is at Alres-
ford, looking about Tichborne, and holding com-
munication with the tenants there. And when
at length he goes, in what form does he present
himself ? Instead of as a son rushing into the arms
of his mother, he brings an attorney and a brewer’s
commission agent. And when he gets to Baris, in-
stead of rushing to his mother, he lies down on
a bed and turns his face to the wall. Are these
things that would be done by the real undoubted
son, or are they not? Well, then, he comes
back. He has interviews with members of the
family—interview's sought by them, not by him.
Two meetings take place, and if you believe the
evidence of the witnesses at those meetings he
failed to know any member of the family. He
mistook Mrs. Radcliffe for Mrs. Towneley and
Mrs. Towneley for Mrs. Radcliffe, and on the
second occasion he sees his aunt, Mrs. Nangle,
and does not know her. All these things are
strong evidence to show that he is not the man,. if
you can depend upon the testimony of the wit-
nesses. Well, time passes on. You have heard
the defendant’s evidence —I have had occasion, I
am afraid, to weary you with it, but it seemed to
me of the very last importance that you should
have the statement of the defendant fresh in your
recollection.
Now, what is the knowledge the defendant had
of the life of Roger Tichborne at Paris ? He
knows one or two circumstances, but there, are
others of which he knows nothing, of which it is
very difficult to suppose that Roger Tichborne
would be ignorant. The old friend whose pet he
was as a boy he did not know. His second tutor
—his tutor for three or four years—he did not
know even by name. The issue which he had
as a child is converted into a seton. The confes-
sor to whom he was in the habit of confessing is
not known even by name, and he puts forward
another who never confessed him in his life. Of
the journeys he took with his father and mother
he is quite ignorant when first examined. The
house in which they resided is described as being
in the most out-of-the-way part of the Rue St.
Honore, in which it was not, and things are sup-
posed to be seen from it which could not be seen.
The first residence is made the last and the last
residence the first. The street in which his father
and mother lived, and where he took his final
farewell of them, is supposed to be the street in
which his tutor taught him as a boy, and the Rue
St. Honore, where his parents never lived after
1844, is supposed to be the last street in which
they lived. So much for Paris.
We now come to the reminiscences of Stony-
hurst. What are they ? He denied that it was
his father who took him to Stonyhurst. We know
it was. He tells us that he resided for the first
12 or 15 months he was there in a cottage. Do
you believe that to be a fact ? and if it is not,
what becomes of the defendant's recollection of
Stonyhurst ? He tells us that after that he resided
in the college. We know that the Philosophers
resided*™ a separate and detached building called
the Seminary. Of the Seminary he knew nothing.
He supposes the Cemetery is meant when the
Seminary is mentioned. Of the studies it is un-
necessary to remind you. Of the jumbles, of
Hebrew, and Greek, and Latin, and mathematics,
and chymistry, it is unnecessary to do more than
iir a passing observation to call attention to it. Of
the masters he forgets those who taught him, and
says those taught him who never taught him at all.
Of the game of bandy—to which Roger Tichborne
was particularly addicted —he knows nothing ;he
thinks it is part of the building. He puts a vaca-
tion in the winter when there was none, and mis-
states the time of the summer vacation. Are
those things sufficient to establish the identity
of the defendant as Roger Tichborne ? Is this
amount of knowledge in your judgment sufficient
for that purpose, or does it tend altogether in
the opposite direction ?
Then as to the intermediate timein which hewas
undergoing a course of preparation for the Army.
Here, again, we find everything reversed. He has
no knowledge of his having failed in his exami-
nation, and having got the fact that Roger
studied in London—a fact which was mentioned
in Roger’s letters—he conceived that he must have
been examined at a time anterior to that at which
the examination really occurred. He is totally
ignorant of having studied with Mr. Moberly at
Owlesbury—which is pronounced Usselbury—a
name of which he knew nothing, even when men-
tioned in connection with Mr. Moberly, his tutor.
He says he called Mr. Danby Seymour uncle; we
know he did not. He speaks of Mr. Seymour as
his grandfather; we know Roger did not. He
forgets the butler’s cottage at Knoyle—he even for-
gets the name of the butler, although we know
that he lodged in the man's house when he set up
for himself in St. James’s-street. He forgets the
dying illness of his grandfather, Mr. Seymour; he
forgets that he went to Rath to see him J he does
not know Mr. Seymour died at Bath ; he asserts
that he died at Knoyle. He forgets taking the
last farewell visit to the person who, though not
nominally, was in reality his grandfather, and had
always shown to the boy that kindness which a
grandfather would naturally show to a grandson.
He does not know that Roger Tichborne went
from Knoyle to Bath to take that last farewell, or
that the grandfather, when Roger did go, was in
the last stage of a lingering disorder, which ren-
dered it perfectly hopeless that in this world they
should ever see each other again.
Then we come to his life in Ireland—we come
to his recollections about Dublin. There was a
lady there—Lady Clanricarde, whom Roger knew
well, but the defendant hardly knows her name.
He says that he met her at the house of the Deases,
when we know that the Deases had no house in
Dublin, and that Lady Clanricarde had her house,
at which he was not a casual but a constant visitor.
He forgets Lady Clanricarde and asserts that he


saw her in the house of a family, which family had
no house in Dublin. Yet it is with this period of
Roger's life that the defendant shows the best re-
collection. He can tell us many things that ha
occurred. He knows the circumstances of po
Clark being killed when Roger Tichborne’s hoi
ran away with him. He knows that Roger Tic
borne s horse on another occasion ran away wi'
its rider and imperilled the life of a child. ]
knows the various tricks and practical jokes th
were played upon Roger. He knows that adc
key was put in his bed and he knows the name o
the man Davis, who was on duty that night anc
whom Roger called to come and take the devil
he supposed, out of his bed. He knows havii
punished men and sentenced them to drill and v
rious punishments of that sort for military o
fences; and, what is more, he recollects, as he say
after a long lapse of years, the punishments
awarded them, and the names of the men who
he punished, giving instances of marvellous mem
ory, as it appears to me, for he even recollects th
number of a trooper’s horse, associating the hors
with the name of a particular man. We have nu
merous instances of this species of knowledge, an
these simple-minded Carabineers come, and upo
putting questions of this sort to him and receivin
ans wers, or upon his asking them questions the'
rush to the conclusion that he must be Roze
Tichborne. &
But are we satisfied that the information thu
exhibited came from within, or must we not as
ourselves whether it did not come from without
YVe hnd that he surrounds himself with source
of extraneous information. Why does he tak
Bogle into Ins service, or rather into his house
hold, for service he rendered none. Why does h
bring that old man to England ? For no earth!
purpose that we can see only to have him besid'
him when he needed information which Bogle
could render. For what purpose did he take Car
ter into his service-a man who had been Roger
lichborne s servant for many years and who knew
all about Roger’s military life ? For what pur
pose did he take M'Cann, the worn-out old man
who could render no service in his household, but
with a similar object ? That is what we must ask
ourselves.
How can we find an answer—what becomes of
the knowledge of those details if you carry back
your minds a.nd recollections to his statements as
to Australia ! The man who recollects the num-
ber of the trooper’s horse, and the little incidents
of Roger Tichborne’s military life, even to the
men he had punished and the punishment he in-
flicted—that man, before he came to England, and
before he had those meetings to which I have re-
ferred, did not know that Roger Tichborne had
been in the Army at all. You cannot suppose it
woula ° ccur to any one to say for a moment that
he had a purpose in deceiving Mr. Gibbes. Not
so. He had a purpose in telling Mr. Gibbes things
which were incorrect to enable him to borrow a
sum of money from the bank. He was obliged to
answer the question which, with that view, Mr.
Cubbes put to him ; but if he knew the truth he
?? ui had no P ossible motive in deceiving
»» b y substituting falsehood for fact,
hen Mr. Gibbes reminded him that he never
had said a word of having been an officer, as his
mother said he was, in the Carabineers, he says
t I;,-. 19 tr , ue - 1 never was in the Carabineers!
I enlisted in the 66th horse regiment, but I was
a . l** ‘-T in “ d therefol ’' you must
not ask for any information from me ab.ut cavalry
drill ’ Do you suppose that if he had known Roger
Tichborne had been three years an officer in the 6th
Dragoon Guards he would not have told Gibbes
so? And, therefore, what becomes of all that
knowledge of petty details which he exhibited in
reference to Roger’s three years of military life,
did not know in Australia that Roger
Tichborne had been in the Army at all, and espe-
cially when all these details may have been ga-
thered from the persons with whom he surrounded
himself or possibly—l only put it hypothetically
—may have been found recorded in a diary which
Roger Tichborne kept ? The same observation
applies to Stonyhurst. He reminds the drawiDg-
master of an event to which I need not more par-
ticularly refer ; but what becomes of that solitary
instance of Stonyhurst recollection when we know
that in Australia he did not remember anything
of having been at Stonyhurst ? That he repre-
sented that he had enlisted in the 66th Regiment
we find not only in the evidence of Mr. Gibbes,
but in the document which was formally drawn
lip by Mr. M'Arthur, and signed by the defen-
dant. What, I say, becomes of the Stonyhurst
evidence, when we find that in Australia he was
1 i& of having been at Stonyhurst at
all ? However, so it stands.
He does show knowledge of these petty details,
but with regard to all the great facts he is entirely
at a loss. When he is asked to make the Wagga-
Wagga will, he does not know the property which
Roger Tichborne had a right to dispose of; he
does not recollect his mother’s name, unless you
accept his explanation ; and, in addition to that,
he inserts the names of persons who could not
have been known to Roger Tichborne, just as he
does also, in the case of the ship, give names which
Roger Tichborne could not possibly have known,
unless upon the strained hypothesis of the counsel
for the defendant, that, having associated so long
with Arthur Orton, the recollections of Arthur
Orton had been impressed upon Roger Tichborne’s
nund as his own. I confess this want of know-
ledge in Australia seems to me to afford the sim-
plest and easiest solution of how it comes to pass
that he does know things in England of which he
knew nothing whatever before he came to this
country. We must therefore cast around us to
see what sources of information he had which would
give adventitious aid to his mind in these things
Now, gentlemen, what explanation is offered to
you with respect to this want of memory upon the
great and leading events of Roger Tichborne’s
life ? How can you reconcile the fact that he has
a knowledge of petty details which he might have
obtained from extraneous sources, and has no
knowledge of the great, leading, essential events
appertaining to the life of Roger Tichborne?
bays the learned counsel for the defendant, ‘ Me-
mory is a strange thing. The mind of man is so
strangely organised and constituted that you can
never tell how any one of its faculties may work
and exhibit its operations; and the strangest of
them all, and one of the most difficult to follow
and deal with, is memory, A man’s memory may
be so constituted that he may have a faculty for
remembering the small things, but not the great.’
Well, by those who deal in metaphysical science
there is nothing that may not be asserted, and
nothing that may not be more or less plausibly
defended; but that is a sort of memory with
which my experience has not made me ac-
quainted. I should think that the great and
leading events of a man’s life would make the
deepest impression on one’s mind, and that a man


would not forget things which men ordinarily re-
member, and yet exhibit a wonderful faculty for
recalling petty things which pass by unheeded in
the floating stream of life, and which are not im-
pressed on the memory unless something out of
the ordinary happens to fix them on the mind.
But, then, how do you account for the fact that
the defendant tells things which are absolutely
impossible ? ‘ O,’ says the learned advocate, ‘that
arises from the habit of giving way to extravagant
fancies and indulging in a reckless disregard for
truth. ’ But what do you say when we find him
in conflict with twenty witnesses, every one of
whom gives a distinct contradiction to what he
says ? ‘ O,’ says the learned counsel, ‘ pay no at-
tention to that. ’ Then, what shall we say about his
defective memory? The last observations apply
to assertions which prove to be untrue ; but what
shall we say to defects of memory with respect to
essential and important things? Then we have
another explanation which it is necessary to con-
sider. The great point made by the learned
counsel with respect to the defective knowledge
which the defendant in so many instances ex-
hibited, and which appears to renders his identity
utterly incompatible with that of Roger Tichborne,
is this—that he had a diseased brain, disordered
faculties. ‘ He' had led a life of intemperance,’
says the learned counsel, ‘ a life of vice ; so that
his brain was destroyed, his memory disordered,
his faculties impaired.’ Was that the case, or
was it affirmed because the defendant exhibits a
total inability to tell us of the leading incidents
of Roger Tichborne’s life—incidents which we
might reasonably expect from any man who came
forward to assume the personal character of Roger
Tichborne ?
What proof is there of a diseased memory?
There is no disease traced to Roger Tichborne
which could have that effect, and the best answer
to be found to it is this—that, so far from show-
ing a defective memory, the defendant exhibits,
if we are to assume that those instances of know-
ledge are gathered from his own recollection, and
distinctly exhibits, a memory of the most mar-
vellous tenacity and power. He writes, after
twelve or fourteen years, a letter to a man in
South America, having references to people whom
he says he had never seen but for one short fort-
night or three weeks, and in that letter he enu-
merates thirteen different persons. Speaking of
them with regard to their personal peculiarities,
he manifests the most accurate recollection of
them all, though every one has a foreign name,
and it turns out that these are not fictitious per-
sonages, the coinage of his own imagination, but
downright actual living people in the flesh, every
one of whom is to be traced as either still alive
or as having passed away. To my mind that is
one of the most prodigious efforts of memory that
can be conceived. I can well conceive that Arthur
Orton, who for more than a year and a half or
two years lived with these people, should show
this recollection, but even then it exhibits a very
considerable power of memory indeed. And, be-
sides, consider all the instances of memory I have
referred to this morning about the horses and the
tricks played on him in his military life ; all this
implies a marvellous degree of memory, and yet
we hear of disordered faculties. But does that
apply to the defendant ? I have read his cross-
examination on all the points essential to this
case, and there we find him struggling with the
first lawyer of the Crown, and from time to time
baffling the attempts of that distinguished advo-
cate to extract from him the information he
wanted. Have you, in the course of that exami-
nation, to which I have recently called your at-
tention, discovered any trace of diseased or disor-
dered faculties? Was not the impression pro-
duced upon every man’s mind this—that he was a
man of extraordinary sagacity and shrewdness ?
Is not that the impression which naturally arises
from the perusal of the evidence in print which
was then taken ? The learned counsel should re-
collect that it is not enough to start theories un-
less you support them by fact or by reasons which
carry conviction to the mind ; and if the learned
counsel has not satisfied you that there is some
ground for supposing that the intellect of the de-
fendant is in the slightest degree disordered and
impaired, then we come back to the question
whether you find in the defendant that knowledge,
either in the spontaneous conversations he has
had with different individuals in answer to ques-
tions put to him, or in statements coming from
him, which you would expect from Roger Tich-
borne ? If you do not, then, when you put all the
facts of the case together, the Australian life
incompatible with anything that could be ex-
pected from any person like Roger Tichborne, but
corresponding in all its essential elements with
what we should have expected from Arthur Or-
ton, when you take the statements made by Gibbes
of the conduct of the defendant in Australia and
consider what his conduct was when he came
home from the first beginning to the very last
moment, if you have followed the careful examina-
tion and analysis which I have made of Roger
Tichborne’s life and character, you can judge for
yourselves whether it be in keeping with what we
know of and would naturally expect from Roger
Tichborne.
And I would make this further observation,
suggested by my learned brother—that whenever
things were exhibited to the eyesight of the de-
fendant which could not have been brought to his
knowledge from without his memory entirely fails.
Photographs, coloured drawings, were shown to
him, and the defendant has no memory at all. In
the photograph of Knoyle, exhibiting that resi-
dence with unmistakable truth, there is the win-
dow of the room which Roger Tichborne occupied
for years from time to time, for each year’s holi-
day brought Roger there. There is the cottage
where he used to smoke. There are places which
must have been familiar to his mind. The defend-
ant }mows them not. Then, when he is brought
to the test by questions devised for that purpose,
how does he come out of it ? He is asked about
property with which Roger was as well acquainted
as any one of you is acquainted with his own. In
Wagga Wagga he knows nothing, and, though he
might have learnt a lesson in England, when he
comes to be examined in Court he knows no more.
Afterwards, when he is asked about the sealed
packet, he knows nothing-he remembers nothing
about it. But when it comes to his knowledge
that the packet has been destroyed, then he re-
presents it as instructions to his father’s or his
uncle's steward to deal with his uncle’s daughter
in a manner rendered necessary by his seduction of
that uncle’s child. The explanation on that sub-
ject which he makes you have heard ; you have
heard the evidence and all the observations which
can be made upon it. Do you believe it or do you
not? And if you do not believe it, it is the
strongest and most conclusive proof that the man
who put forward that statement, which, if untrue,
is perhaps the most abominable that ever was in-


vented by the imagination of man or by the ora:
and subtilty of the devil' —if you do not believe
I say, can you suppose that Roger Tichborne wou
have recourse to such a statement in order
crush, to damn, to destroy the only woman t]
in life he ever loved—the woman for whom he hac
that passionate attachment which those papers
that have been read to you reveal, and whom, h
she shown herself as his foe when he returned,
never would have sought to destroy by such
story as that ? And if you disbelieve it, if in yo
hearts and souls you believe it to be scandalot
and false, there is nothing in the case more at
verse to the defendant.
Now, gentlemen, I have gone through all t
observations on this case which I think it nec
sary to make. I have tried to bring it before y
as a great whole, convinced that in that way on!
can it be satisfactorily dealt with. I have soug
to.lay before you all the facts connected with
fairly, truthfully, and impartially, but nevertli
less with a stern sense of the duty which it w
incumbent on me to discharge. I have been
Bailed from without by abuse from critics who e
tered upon the inquiry with a foregone conclusio
and with the belief, I suppose, that they know m;
business better than I do. I have been abuse
for placing the case before you, it is said, in a pa
tial and one-sided point of view. Gentlemen,
cannot invent facts, and I cannot, with the u
most efforts of ingenuity, find explanations whic
have no reality in point of fact. In my opinioi
a Judge does not discharge his duty who conten
himself with being a mere recipient of evidence
which he is afterwards to reproduce to the jur
without pointing out the facts and the inference
to which they naturally and legitimately give rise
It is the business of the Judge so to adjust th
scales of the balance that they shall hang evenly
l>ut it is his duty to see that the facts as the
arise are placed in the one scale or the other ac
cording as theybelongto one or the other. It is hi
business to take care that the inferences whicl
properly arise from the facts are submitted to thi
consideration of the jury, with the happy con
sciousness that if he go wrong there is the judg
ment of 12 men, having experience in the every
day concerns of life, to set right anything in re
spect of which he may have erred. But if the
facts are such that, placed in the scale to which
they respectively belong, the one scale kicks the
beam and the other goes down, the fault is in the
nature of the thing and not in the conduct of the
Judge. If converging from one point the foot
steps concentrate in a common spot, and on thal
spot stand, and if when measured their measure
corresponds with the foot-tread of the accused, il
is the business of the Judge to take care that the
fact shall be brought to the mind and the atten-
tion of the jury. I have taken counsel with my
learned brothers, I think I may say on every point
of this case. We have questioned our own minds as
to whether solutions are to be found for many
things that press with heavy weight on the defen-
dant. If we could find none, it has not been the
fault of our desire to do strict and impartial jus-
tice. But we must remember that while it is the
business of judicial action to protect innocence,
so, on the other hand, it is the duty of the Judge
to take care that the guilty do not escape. In the
conviction of the innocent and also in the escape
of the guilty lies, as the old saying says, the con-
demnation of the Judge. It is the condemnation
of the Judges of the fact as well as of the Judge
who presides at the trial. You must take care
that the innocent does not suffer, but you owe it
to society that if guilt is brought home to the ac-
cused that guilt shall carry with it the conse-
quences of the verdict.
1 ou have been asked, gentlemen, to give the
defendant the benefit of any doubts you may en-
tertain. Most assuredly it is your duty to do so.
It is the business of the prosecution to bring
home guilt to the accused to the satisfaction of
the jury. Hut the doubt of which the accused is
entitled to the benefit must be the doubt that a
rational, that a sensible man may fairly enter-
tain, not the doubt of a vacillating mind that has
not the moral courage to decide, but shelters it-
self in a vain and idle scepticism. It is not a
doubt of that kind; it must be a doubt which
honest and conscientious men can entertain. But,,
gentlemen, you have been addressed in language
the like of which has never before been heard
within these walls. You have been exhorted, if
there should be one man who might entertain
any different opinion from the rest of his brother
jurymen, that he should obstinately stick to it
without seeking to reconcile it with the opinion
of the rest of the body. I never heard that lan-
guage addressed to a jury before, and therefore I
am obliged to express my judicial sense of such
an argument, not that I believe there is the
slightest necessity for warning you against the
doctrine, which might lead to mischievous conse-
quences if it were to be entertained. But as the
doctrine has been propounded, I must make an
observation or two upon it. ■
I should be the last man to suggest to any in-
dividual member of the jury that if he entertains
conscientious, fixed convictions, although he may
stand alone against his eleven fellow-j urors, he
should give up the profound and unalterable con-
viction of his own mind. The law requires the
unanimous verdict of twelve men before a verdict,
of either ‘ Guilty’ or * Not Guilty’ can be finally
pronounced, and I say that if a man is satisfied
on the evidence, after having given to the case
every attention in his power, that he cannot find a
verdict with therestof liisfellow-jurymen,itis right
that he should stand by his conviction. But then
we must recollect that he has a duty to perform
and that it is this. He is bound to give the case
every possible consideration before he finally de-
termines upon the course he will pursue, and if a
man finds himself differing from the rest of his
fellows with whom he is associated in the great
and solemn function of the administration of
justice as jurymen, he should start with the fair
presumption that the one individual is more
likely to be wrong than the eleven from whom he
differs. He should bear in mind that the great
purpose of trial by jury is to obtain unanimity
and put an end to further litigation; he should
address himself in all humility and all diffidence
in his own judgment to the task he has to per-
form, and carefully consider all the reasons and
arguments which the rest of the body are able to
put forward for the judgment they are ready to
pronounce, and he should let no self-conceit, no
notion of being superior to the rest in intelligence,
no vain presumption of superiority on his part,
stand in the way. "What lam anxious to im-
press on you, and not on you only, is that the
one or two who may stand alone against their
fellows are bound to do their best to satisfy their
minds that sound sense and judgment are not
with the majority instead of with the few. That
is the duty which the juryman owes to the admi-
nistration of justice and the opinion of his fel-


lows, and therefore I must protest against the
attempt to encourage a single juryman, or one or
two among a body of twelve, to stand out reso-
lutely, positively, and with fixed determination
and purpose, against the judgment and opinion
of the majority.
If such rules as were laid down by the learned
counsel for the defendant were adopted and acted
upon, and great trials were rendered abortive by
no verdicts being pronounced, and the recom-
mencement of long protracted litigation would be
necessarily occasioned, it would make trial by jury
not the blessing that it is, the great and noble in-
stitution that it is, but a curse in the administra-
tion of justice, and lead by legislation to a modi-
fication in our existing course of procedure—a
modification which I for one do not desire to see
introduced. I have long thought that a jury, as-
sisted by a Judge, is a far better tribunal for the
elucidation and establishment of truth than a
Judge unassisted by a jury would be. But lam
perfectly satisfied that it is the business of the
Judge to assist the jury in the way I have sought
to assist you, by placing the whole case before
you, by pointing out all the facts and the infer-
ences which appear to me to arise. from those
facts. I trust you will be able, whichever way
your verdict goes, to pronounce an unanimous ver-
dict, and to put an end to this litigation, so. as not
to create in the popular mind the intense dissatis-
faction which would arise from this trial being
rendered abortive by the dissensions of the jury,
which might lead to the introduction of a change
into our system which then, I think, would be
loudly called for, a change which I for one would
deprecate and deplore, although its necessity
would perhaps be undoubted, and the change
would be one of which everybody would approve.
So much for that matter.
But I have also heard other language addressed
to you, such as I never heard before in a Court of
Justice, and which I hope and trust I shall never
hear again. You have been invited to pronounce
your judgment not simply with reference to your
own convictions, but with a view to promised
‘ ovations’ at the hands of your fellow country-
men. lam sure there is not one of you, however
much you may desire that public opinion should
go along with you and should ratify your verdict,
however much you may desire that that which
you do should find favour in the sight of your
fellow countrymen, I am sure there is not one of
you who would not consider it an insult to be
asked to sacrifice his own sense of duty and of
right for the sake of popular applause, or the idle
gratification resulting from what is called ‘the
ovation’ of your countrymen.
There is but one course to follow in the dis-
charge of great public duties. No man should be
insensible to public .opinion who has to discharge
a public trust. No man should be insensible to
the value of the good opinion, if you like the ap-
plause, of your fellow countrymen. But there is a
consideration far higher than that. It is the satis-
faction of your own internal sense of duty, the
satisfaction of your own conscience, the knowledge
that you are following the promptings of that still
small voice which never, if we listen honestly to
its dictates, misleads or deceives that still small
voice whose approval upholds us even though men
should condemn us, and whose approval is far-
more precious than the honour or applause we
may derive, no matter from what source—that
voice whose approval makes us walk by day serene
and makes our pillow smooth by night. Listen to
that, gentlemen, listen to that; do right and care
not for anything that may be thought or said or
done ’without these walls. In this, the sacred
Temple of Justice, such considerations as those-
to which I have referred ought to have and can
have no place. You and I have only one thing to-
consider, it is the duty we have to discharge be-
fore God and man according to the only manner
we should desire to discharge it, —honestly, truly,
and fearlessly, without regard to any conse-
quences except the desire that this duty should,
be properly and entirely fulfilled. And, gentle-
men, 1 say it without fear, and I say it not un-
advisedly, that we have been threatened. A sys-
tem of intimidation has been attempted to be
brought to bear upon us who are seated here to
administer justice. We have been told that if
our countrymen do not meet us with sufficient
reprobation the history of this cause shall be
written in which those who do not take part with
the defendant, or who think it necessary in the
honest and fearless discharge of their duty, to
point out things that may make against him,
shall be delivered over to the unrestrained license
of unqualified abuse. We are to be handed down
to posterity covered with Infamy.
I have heard language applied to this tribunal
which I will undertake to say in the whole annals
of the administration of justice in this country
no advocate ever before dreamt of addressing to a
Court. When I say I heard it, I must correct the
phrase. I did not hear it. It had been spoken
with bated breath, and I must suppose only with
the purpose and intention that I should not hear
it. If I had heard it, most unquestionably it
should not have passed without that punishment
which it is competent for this Court to inflict and
which should be inflicted upon those who outrage
decency and heap upon it indignity and insult.
The learned counsel spoke with bated breath,
loud enough for the reporters to catch his woids,
but not for us. And yet one or two words caught
our listening ears which to me seemed as if
some contumely or insult was intended to be con-
veyed, and I called upon the learned counsel to
speak out as a man should speak ; but his answer
was that his indisposition, brought about by over-
work and exertion, prevented him from speaking
aloud. Afterwards, however, when he changed his
subject, he was loud enough to be heard at the
other side of Westminster-hall.
I must say that in the way the learned counsel
comes forward to insult this Court there is coward-
ice and insult combined. I rejoice to see the Bar or
England here, in order that its members may hear
the way in which a member of their body ad-
dressed the Court of Queen’s Bench—l will say the
august Court of Queen’s Bench. There is abundant
opportunity for pointing out any errors into which
it may fall, but the Court is not to be insulted and
bearded in this manner.
• There is no actor in this trial, says the learned
counsel, ‘from the humblest to the most exalted
(we know whom he means), ‘who may not well
look with apprehension and almost with dismay at
the position he may occupy before his countrymen
and the world for all future ages. I should be
sorry to think that there is any person connected
with this great controversy who does not look
with a species of pride in maintaining an honest
fame before the world and posterity. I should be
sorry to think that there was one of us who was
dead to the future—who did not sometimes ask
himself, with the utmost feeling of solemnity,
“How shall I also appear in the historical re-


miniscences of this great trial?” For my own part,
from the first moment that I became connected
'with it I knew that it was one which must cover
the names of all prominently engaged in it, in
future ages, either with infamy or with honour,
and I on a former occasion took the liberty of
calling your attention to the blazon of glory which
still surrounds the names’ (this is intended for
you, gentlemen), ‘and which will for ever sur-
round the names,. of all those noble jurymen who
were connected, in a former age, with the great
Annesley trial, and I am anxious that a similar
illumination of splendour should surround not
your names only, but the names of others also, in
the eyes of those persons who will read this trial
during all ages, because never was there a trial in
England, I believe, since that memorable trial of
Charles I. which has excited more the attention
of Englishmen and the world than this. Many
‘'kings have passed in the course of this trial
which I would give a portion of my heart’s blood
had not passed. Many things have occurred in
the course of this trial which in my judgment will
for ever blur and sully the name of certain indi-
viduals—individuals with whose name and glory
many of us were concerned, individuals whose
name and glory are part—’
Here I said, ‘Will you speak a little louder’’
and the learned counsel said, ‘I will speak as
loud as I can. It would be idle to affect or pre-
tend not to know to whom these observations
connected with the alternative of infamy or
honour were addressed. Whose names are to be
blurred and sullied’ for the future ? Is that the
way in which counsel is to speak of the Judges
or the tribunal before whom he is pleading ? lam
sure that there must come but one response from
the body that I see before me. (Applause from
the Ear, which was immediately checked.) Gen-
tlemen, the history of this cause may be writ-
ten by whom it may ; I care not. lam conscious
of having done my duty in it, and I can only say :
' There is no terror in your threats,
For I am armed so strong in honesty
That they pass by me like the idle wind
Which I regard not.’
But the history of this cause may be written
hereafter by a pen steeped in gall and venom—
a pen that may not scruple to lampoon the living
or revile and calumniate the dead; I have no
fears, the facts will speak for themselves. I have
administered justice here now for many years. I
cannot hope that my memory, like that of the
great and illustrious men who have gone before
me, will live unto after ages; but I do hope it
will live in the remembrance—may I venture to
say in the affectionate remembrance—of the gene-
ration before whom and with whom I have admin-
istered justice ; and if my name shall be traduced,
i conduct shall be reviled, if my integrity
Ehau be questioned, I leave the protection of
my memory to the Bar of England (applause, which
was again instantly suppressed), my relations with
whom have never until this trial been in the slight-
est degree other than the most pleasant, and whose
support has been, I may say, the happiness of
my judicial life. *
Gentlemen I have done ; I have discharged my
duty to the best of my ability. It only remains
that you shall do yours, and I am sure that the
Wu y ° U Wl , P ron °unce will be received on all
men d lV? 0e ? by faaa , tioS and fools, as the judg-
-Bideratio t n W nf V i) i meil wh ° have brou S ht to the con-
attention thlS B r e<lt cause the most vigilant
attention, the most marked and, I may 5 say
i remarkable intelligence, and the most sincere
desire to discharge their duty before God and man
according to what they believe in their hearts and
souls to be the truth and justice of the case.
(Applause, which was again checked).
Mr. Justice Mellor.— Gentlemen, this being a
trial at Bar, it is competent for each individual of
1 i, j Urt to ex P ress own opinion, and to give
such directions as he may think fit, and under
some circumstances it might be his duty to do so.
Happily, those circumstances do not now exist!
You have heard from the Lord Chief Justice that
during the course of this protracted trial we have
had almost hourly opportunities of conference and
discussion on the evidence, as to which we were
entirely agreed; and we resolved that my Lord
Chief Justice should speak in the name of the
Bench. . Gentlemen, I forbear, for reasons that
are obvious, to say anything with respect to the
charge that has just been concluded; but Ido say
this, that from the masterly and marvellous ar-
rangement of the facts, from the perfect accuracy
of the details, from the analytical and synthetical
power which has enabled the Lord Chief Justice
to extract such light from the correspondence of
the undoubted Roger Tichborne with Mr. Gos-
ford, with Lady Doughty, and with Lady Tich-
borne, his mother, and from his handling of the
other facts and documents of the case, we are en-
abled to present to our minds and to call up before
us Roger Tichborne as if we had known him alive.
But there are two incidents of the case with re-
spect to which I may venture to pronounce an
opinion. I must say I entertain the highest sense
of the value of good relations existing between the
Judges and the Bar; but, though I concur in the
censure which has been passed upon the learned
counsel who led for the defence, I have no fear
for the Bar of England. I have known them too
long, and I have not the least doubt that in the
future, as in the past, they will be able to distin-
guish between truckling and independence, be-
tween braggart demeanour and the manly dignity
becoming their profession. There is another mat-
ter upon which I must make an observation or
two, and that is with regard to the restraints
which have been imposed upon tile Press, and the
exercise of the power of fine and commitment.
That power is not conferred upon the Judges for
the aggrandisement of their own individual dig-
nity, but for the benefit of the public ; and it is a
power which ought to remain with them so long
as it is exercised for the public interest. There
is no greater friend of the freedom of the Press
than myself. It is with the greatest reluctance
* ev ® r impose on the Press any restraint at
all; but if trial by jury is to continue as an in-
stitution, we ought to have power to prevent
any interference with the free exercise of the
functions of Judge and jury. In a trial of this
description, in which the incidents are of the
most striking character, and with regard to which
the greatest excitement prevailed, if we were not
to impose restraints upon the Press, we should
have articles, no doubt very able and clever, dis-
cussing from day to day the evidence given, but
written, without any responsibility, except the re-
sponsibility of the writers’ own consciences and
regard to the interests of the paper. That would
lead to other articles, and articles of great ability
would be addressed not only to the public, but to
the jury; influences would be brought to bear
upon them which it would be impossible for the
Judge to set right; and trial by jury would be-


come at last trial by the Press. I believe, there-
fore, that the power which the Judges possess
is a necessary power, to be exercised in the face
of day and of public opinion, and under a respon-
sibility so great that they feel that if it were im-
properly exercised it would be put an end to.
Gentlemen, I desire to express our great obliga-
tion to the Master of the Court, the Master of the
Crown Office, Mr. Davis, and the other officers
who have given us such valuable assistance in this
case. The multiplicity of documents has been
very great, and yet not a moment has been lost
in producing any of them whenever they were re-
quired.
Mr. Justice Lush.—l cordially join in the
tribute which my learned brother has paid to the
officers of the court for the most valuable aid they
have given us during the whole of this protracted
trial. Gentlemen, you have heard from the
Lord Chief Justice and my brother Mellor that it
was not our intention that each of the Judges
should address to you anything in the shape of a
direction. We have consulted from day to day ;
the Lord Chief Justice has delivered his views,
which are in entire harmony with our own, and I
am proud to say that throughout the whole of
this trial there has never been a difference of
opinion between us on a single point. I adopt
the directions of my Lord Chief Justice fully,
and I consider myself as responsible for them as
if I had uttered them myself, entirely agreeing
with him, as I do, in his views of the evidence,
and also in his remarks on the highly censurable
conduct of the leading counsel for the defence. I
cannot but think that if a like spirit were mani-
fested by the Bar, if advocates were at liberty to
treat as enemies all those who were on the other
side, to brand them as perjurers and conspirators,
and to use denunciation and slander as a weapon,
the so-called independence of the Bar would be-
come a public nuisance. lam sure I know the
feeling of the Bar of England too well to think
for a moment that they would wish to use any
such weapon, or that they would accept the
challenge which the learned counsel has chosen
to throw out. The views of the Lord Chief
Justice are the views of us all, and I emphatically
say I entirely concur with what he has laid down
as the duty of a Judge. Some people seem to
think that the more cogent the facts, the more
the Judge ought to try to neutralise them. I
cannot concur in such an opinion; the duty of
the Judge is to assist the jury in the discovery of
truth, whether the truth make for one side or
the other. I entered upon this trial without any
prepossession whatever. I had never taken the
trouble to read the evidence on the last trial, and
I formed no opinion as to whether the pretensions
of the defendant were just or not just; indeed, I
may say, that whatever opinion I had was rather
in his favour, but I knew nothing about the facts.
Whatever views I have since formed have been
derived from a careful consideration of the evi-
dence, sifted in a mind which, I will venture to
say, was wholly and entirely unbiassed. Gentle-
men, I have no doubt that was the state of your
minds also, and when you retire to consider your
verdict, you will take into consideration the evi-
dence, and the evidence only. If that evidence
satisfies you that the defendant is guilty, you
will return a verdict to that effect; if it does
not, you will acquit him.
Mr. M‘Mahon.—Your Lordships may be aware
that it was my intention to suggest that the two
points raised at the close of the prosecution might
be raised by a bill of exceptions; but since my
learned friend came into Court this morning, we
have come to the conclusion that a bill of excep-
tions is untenable.
The Lord Chief Justice.—Well, in that case
it is quite unnecessary to say anything.
Mr. M‘Mahon. I thought your Lordships
would have expected me to say something.
The Lord Chief Justice.—We should notlisten
to any argument. A bill of exceptions is merely
tendered.
_ It was just after 12 o’clock when the Jury re-
tired to consider their verdict, and in the court,
every part of which was densely crowded, great
excitement prevailed. Dr. Kenealy, who during
all the previous days occupied by the charge of
the Lord Chief Justice was but rarely present,
and then only for a very short time, was in his
place. He arrived before the sitting of the Court,
and remained until the end of the proceedings.
The defendant was in his usual place. In the
space between the inner bar and the bench a sort
of rude table, covered with green baize, had been
fixed to the floor; at this he was seated, and be-
fore him were writing materials, which on pre-
vious occasions he kept continually using. At one
side sat his solicitor and private secretary, on the
other the younger Bogle, his constant attendants
throughout the trial. He entered shortly before
10 o’clock, looking nervous and anxious, and
seemed struck by the appearance of three men in
plain clothes, who were sitting right in front of
him, and who up to that day had not appeared in
court. Their services were shortly to be required.
As soon as the jury retired, Mr. Frayling, jun.,
tipstaff of the Court, took his place beside the
defendant in the seat before occupied by the
younger Bogle. On a sudden there was a hush,
and it was whispered, but hardly believed, that
the jury had agreed on their verdict. The jury
returned into court at 33 minutes past 12 o’clock.
They were absent one minute less than half an
hour, and every one now knew what the verdict
would be. They took their places in the box,
their names were called over, and the foreman
pronounced the verdict —‘Guilty on all the counts,’
with a special and emphatic vindication of Lady
Radcliffe.
The defendant stood up, confused and abashed,
to hear his sentence.
Master Cockburn, addressing the jury, said —
Gentlemen, are you agreed upon your verdict ?
The Foreman.—We are.
Master Cockburn.—Do you find the defendant
guilty or not guilty on the first count ?
The Foreman.— Guilty.
Master Cockburn.—Do you find the defendant
guilty or not guilty on the second count ?
The Foreman.— Guilty.
Master Cockburn. —You say he is guilty on
both counts, and that is the verdict of you all ?
The Foreman.—That is the verdict of us all.
The Lord Chief Justice. —Are you agreed
upon all the issues ? Are you agreed that the de-
fendant is not Roger Tichborne ?
The Foreman.—We are, my Lord.
The Lord Chief Justice.—Are you agreed that
he is Arthur Orton ?
The Foreman.—We are.
The Lord Chief Justice.—Are you agreed on
the issue of the assignment of perjury in reference
to the sealed packet and Lady Radcliffe ?
The Foreman.—We are.
Mr. Hawkins.—On behalf of the Crown, I pray
for immediate judgment on the defendant.


I Foreman of the Jury;—l him. read the ver-
We find, first, that the defendant is not
Charles Doughty Tichborne; secondly, we
tat the defendant did not seduce Miss ( a-
e Doughty, no wLady Radcliffe, and, furth
d that there is not the slightest evidei
oger Charles Doughty Tichborne was ev •
of undue familiarity with his cousin Lac r
ffe on any occasion whatever (applause ;
", we find that the defendant is Arth
Lord Chief Justice.—That disposes of
ues.
Foreman then handed to the Lord Chie
■ a written paper prepared by the jury, anc
;he opinion of the Court whether it was
one to be read.
Lord Chief Justice.—Yes, I think it
ight. This is the general opinion of you a ?
Foreman. —Yes, my Lord, the genera
. of us all.
Lord Chief Justice thereupon read th
which was in these terms :
jury desire to express their opinion th
rges of bribery, conspiracy, and undue i
brought against the prosecution in th
s entirely devoid of foundation; and the
ixceedingly the violent language and d
r of the leading counsel for the defendan
itacks upon the conduct of the prosecutio
n several of the witnesses produced in th
(Signed) H. F. Dickens, Foreman.’
efendant having been ordered to stand ui
ustice Mellor pronounced the sentenc*
ourt upon him as follows : Thomas Castro
ie called Arthur Orton, otherwise callec
harles Doughty Tichborne, Baronet, afte
>f unexampled duration, you have been
d by the jury of the several perjuriei
in the counts of this indictment, anc
ere truly described by your counsel a
as black and foul as j ustice ever raisec
d to strike.’ In the trial of your case th
e exhibited a care, a patience, and an in
e never surpassed—indeed, it was such
iort expressions of admiration from you
nsel, and their verdict meets with the
us approval of the Court. Indeed, it is
to conceive how any person who has con
he intrinsic improbabilities of your story
intelligently considered the evidence
is been adduced in the course of this
Id have come to any other conclusion
mony of individuals, however numerous
stable they may be, to your personal
vith either Arthur Orton or Roger Tich-
comparatively of little worth after so
apse of time, except in the instances
there existed special interest to observe
;mber you. Of course the evidence of
>r, of the family of .Roger Tichborne, and
sford is of great importance in this case.
l I mention the name of Mr. Gosford I
a moment—speaking for myself at all
3 say that he has placed public justice
his debt.
itire ignorance of the native tongue of
hborne coupled with at least the partial
i of another language, the tattoo marks
e proved to have existed on the arm of
bted Roger Tichborne, and his genuine
l the letters written by you whether in
ter of Roger Tichborne or Arthur Or-
Imissions expressly made or implied in
act, and all that is known of thehistory
of the life and character of Roger Tichborne and
of yourself present an accumulation of proof such
as can rarely be given in a court of justice, and
which conclusively demonstrates the propriety of
the verdict of the jury. No man can look with an
unprejudiced mind and a clear observation at the
letters of the undoubted Roger Tichborne without
coming to the conclusion that they were never
written by you, while between the undoubted
letters of Arthur Orton and your own there is evi-
dence of identity most complete and convincing.
Of what avail could the negative evidence of your
identity with Arthur Orton be against the cir-
cumstances connected with your visit to Wap-
ping, with your assumption of a false name, and
your correspondence and dealings with the family
of Arthur Orton, added to the fact that your
counsel did not venture to put into the box
Arthur Orton’s sisters, who from the very first
were in your interest, who had received money
from you, and had made affidavits in your favour?
The inference from your not calling them is irre-
sistible namely, that they were possessed of
knowledge which must have tended strongly to
prove your identity with Arthur Orton. That
question, important as it is, is only material as
affording one of the modes of proof that you are
not and cannot be Roger Tichborne.
Whether you origiually conceived and planned
the entire scheme which you ultimately carried
out, I know not. The marvellous growth and
development of your knowledge as to the cir-
cumstances connected with the history of Roger
Tichborne and his military life, leave it un-
certain whether your original design was not en-
larged by reason of the ease with which you found
people so ready to become your dupes, and I fear
in some cases your accomplices. However that
may be, in the carrying out of your scheme you
hesitated at no amount of perjury and fraud
which you thought to be necessary to its success.
Wicked and nefarious as it was to impose yourself
upon society as Roger Charles Tichborne, and to
attempt to deprive the lawful heir of his inherit-
ance, that offence sinks almost into insignificance
when compared with the still more infamous per-
jury by which you sought to support your scheme.
I refer to your attempt to blast the reputation of
Lady Radcliffe. No more foul or deliberate false-
hood was ever heard in a court of justice. I can
hardly restrain the indignation which I feel at
the incredible baseness of your conduct in that
respect. Happily the means of refuting that
cowardly calumny were immediately at hand,
and never was a charge so completely shattered
and exposed as was that. It is not, however, be-
cause the refutation of the falsehood was singu-
larly easy and complete that the baseness of your
conduct, is diminished. I believe lam speaking
the sentiment of every member of the Court when
I say that the punishment about to be assigned
by the Court is wholly inadequate to your offence,
framers of the Act of Parliament that fixes
. m^s sentence which the Court is au-
thorised to pass upon you, never dreamt of cir-
cumstances so aggravated as exist in your case.
The sentence of the Court which I now pronounce
is, that for the perjury alleged in the first count
of this indictment upon which you have been
convicted, you be kept in penal servitude for the
term of seven years ; and that for the perjury
alleged in the second count of this indictment of
which you have also been convicted, you be kept
in penal servitude for the further term of seven
years, to commence immediately upon the expira-


tion of the term of penal servitude assigned to
you in respect of your conviction upon the first
count of this indictment, and that is the sentence
of the Court.
The Defendant.—May I be allowed to say a few
words ?
The Lord Chief Justice. —No.
. The defendant then shook hands with his lead-
ing counsel, Mr. Kenealy, and was immediately
afterwards removed from the court in the custody
of Mr. Frayling, jun., the tipstaff.
The Lord Chief Justice.—l wish in the first
place to say that I have received a letter from Mr.
Lo.cock Webb, in which he assures me that he was
neither a party to the scheme for getting Mr.
Gosford to meet the defendant at the Grosvenor
Hotel, nor in any way privy to it. The evidence
of Mr. Bulpett led me to suppose there had pre-
viously been a consultation with the gentleman
who had been throughout advising in the matter,
and that he approved the plan which was adopted!
lassumed that that gentleman was Mr. Locock
Webb. lam glad to find that such an idea was a
misapprehension on my part, and I am also ex-
tremely anxious to say at the earliest possible
moment that I accept his disclaimer and assur-
ances on that point in the most unqualified man-
ner. I have also received a letter from General
Custance, saying it is a mistake to suppose that
he was the commander of the squadron which
got into a difficulty at Cahir. It was Alex-
ander Cumming, a Carabineer, who mentioned
General Custance’s name, lie having thought that
aptam Gustance was the officer commanding
at that time the squadron in question. I am
extremely anxious that this correction should be
made known. Gentlemen, I do not think we ought
to part without my thanking you for the patience
—the prolonged and enduring patience—which you
have exhibited in this case. Your anxiety to get
at the bottom of the case and to sift it to its
foundations in order to ascertain the truth and to
do justice has been most marked. No jury ever
deserved a more unqualified encomium on the part
of those who have presided at a trial than you
are entitled to at our hands. In that we all
concur. I much regret that so much of your
valuable time has been taken from your several
avocations, but it may be some consolation to you
to think that your names will be associated with
the most remarkable trial that has ever occurred
in the annals of England.
The Foreman.—My Lords, I beg to thank you
on behalf of my colleagues for your complimen-
tary remarks and for the extreme kindness which
you have shown to us throughout this case. I have
also to express our thanks to the Masters and
other officers of the Court for the courtesy they
have shown towards us; and to Mr. Inspector
Denning and the police under his command fdr
the protection they have afforded us on several
occasions.
Their Lordships then retired, and the pro-
ceedings terminated.




INDEX.
'A.M.D.G., what do those letters mean?’
Defendant replies 4 that he cannot remember,’
222.
Acceptances, the defendant's, to Messrs. Cubitt
and Gibbes, 109.
Account books at Boisdale, 84.
Advertisement in colonial papers of a reward to
be given to any one who can furnish informa-
tion of Roger Tichborne, 90.
Affidavits of the defendant in the Court of
Chancery, 63, 64,147; in favour of defendant,
improper manner in which they were obtained,
156, 192.
Age of Roger Tichborne, 59.
Agitation, public, kept up during the trial, 164.
Ahumada, Dona, cut 3 off a lock of defendant’s
hair, 169; 4 ls she dishonest?’ 169; defendant’s
counsel’s observations on, 169.
Aitcheson, Mrs., a Wapping witness, 162.
Albury, the Australian residence of Arthur Or-
ton, 177.
Alfred, Roger’s affection for his brother, 60.
Allen, Henry, a Wapping witness, 162.
Allen, Mr., defendant’s executor to his will,
176.
Allen, Mrs., wife of Mr. Robert Tichborne’s
butler, confined of twins during a ball, 228.
Alresford, 12, 119; a meeting of defendant’s
friends held at, and the evidence taken before
the Chili Commission read, 159.
Analysis of the defendant’s account of himself,
61.
Andes, 51; Roger’s graphic description of, 55.
Angell, Henry, a Wapping witness, 163; defen-
dant’s appointed executor, 104.
Appointment made for the defendant to meet
Sir Percival and Lady Radcliffe, 142.
Army, the, 13, 14, 16, 18, 46, 60; Roger Tich-
borne’s life in the, obtained from the Horse
Guards, 148, 230 ; defendant's account of his
preparation for the, 229.
Arica, port of, 51.
Arithmetic, 17.
Arundell, Everard, Roger’s reason for striking
his name out of his will, 238.
Arundell, Lord, 7-
Ass’s bridge, the, 15, 122 ; ‘ How far is it from
Stonyhurst?’ Defendant replies, 4 1 will not
put up with such nonsense,’ 221.
Attorney-General, his cross-examination of de-
fendant about his going to Lloyd’s, 78; on the
Richardson letter, 88.
Auctioneer at Melbourne, witness concerning
the Osprey, 71.
Aurora Floyd , by Miss Braddon, from which
‘interesting novel,’ said the Lord Chief Jus-
tice, 4 the defendant got the words “ fellows
with plenty of brains,”’ &c., 101,
Australian career of the defendant, comments
upon the, 113.
Australian Commission acceded to, 157 ; affi-
davit in connection with the postponement of
the Commission, 157.
Australian part of the case, close of the, 176.
Australian witnesses proving Arthur Orton and
defendant to be one and the same person, 85.
Baigent, 91, 133, 148.
Bailey, an innkeeper at Ropley, identifies de-
fendant as Roger Tichborne, 195.
Ball, incidents at a, 17, 228.
Ballantine, Serjeant, examination of defendant
concerning a cheque on Glyn’s bank, 78 ;
ashamed of his client, the defendant, 131; ad-
mits that the list of the Jesuit Fathers was
obtained from Mr. Holmes, 148.
Balzac, 43.
Bankruptcy Court, 161.
Barber, Mr. Chapman, on the barring of the en-
tail, 133.
Barclay, an Australian witness who shows by
dates that defendant and Arthur Orton can-
not be the same person, 177.
Barmeath, 40.
Barras, Jules, 173.
Barrow, Father, Superior at Stonyhurst, 224.
Bartow, Father, 10.
Bath, 9, 14, 17, 23.
Bedford Hotel, Brighton, the scene of the card
case, 125.
Bell, witness concerning the Osprey, 72.
Bella, the, 16, 58, 60, 66, 67, 136; the Lord
Chief Justice’s observations upon the defen-
dant’s account of the, 75, 76, 77.
BelleTete, defendant said, may have been some
person travelling with him, 215.
Bellew, Edward, 24.
Bellew, Lord, his description of Roger Tich-
borne, 185 ; his account of the unhappy event
with his friend’s wife, 268; letter to Mr.
Bowker on the subject of the tattoo marks,
269; cross - examination of, on the tattoo
marks, 269.
Bellew, Lord and Lady, 24, 39, 40.
Bellew, Miss, and Roger Tichborne, matrimonial
alliance between, 135.
Berkeley, John, death of, 225.
Betting on the verdict, Mr. Onslow censured
by the Lord Chief Justice, 188.
Bickerstaffe, Colonel, 24; his description of
Roger Tichborne, 185; examined about the
lancet incisions on Roger Tichborne’s ankles,
267; speaks pointedly, while under cross-
examination, of the tattoo marks on Roger's
arm, 271.
Biddulph, Mr., the only relative besides Lady
U


Tichborne -who gives evidence in favour o:
the defendant, 4; cross - examined on li
evidence, 190; his evidence commented
by the Lord Chief Justice, 191.
Billing, a Wapping witness, 166.
Bilton Grange, 17.
Bingley, a witness to prove that Roger Tich
borne was in Chili, 172.
Bird, Father, a lecturer at Stony hurst, 224.
Bird, Rev. Mr., denies the defendant to 1
Roger Tichborne, 185.
Bird, Sir John (defendant's appointed execu
tor), 104.
Birkett, captain, of the Bella, 58.
Birth of defendant and Roger Tichborne, 92.
Blakeney, Sir Edward, 232.
Bleeding of Roger Tichborne, and the marks :
left behind, 266.
Bloxham, Mr., 156.
Bogle, 91, 97, 107, 111, 113; his evidence ana
lysed, 112; his truthfulness doubted by th
Bench, 119 ; visits Tichborne on his retur
to England, 119, 148; why was he taken int
the defendant’s house, 280.
Boisdale account-books, containing account
with Arthur Orton, 62, 175.
Borromeo, St. Charles, relic cut from the
blanket of, and given to Roger Tichborne
the convent at Milan, 214.
Botte, Major, his description of Roger Tich
borne, 187; his cross-examination about the
tattoo marks on Roger’s arm, 271.
Boulevards, pointed out by the defendant to
Mr. Gibbes in a photograph, 108.
Bourbon Conti, 7.
Bouverie, Mrs., 133.
Bovil, the Lord Chief Justice, cross-examina-
tion of defendant about the Richardson let-
ter, 88.
Bowker, Mr., letter to Lord Bellew on Roger
Tichborne’s tattoo marks, 269; Lady Tich-
borne’s legal adviser, 127; letter to Lady Tich-
borne, expressing doubts about the defendant
being her son, 127; letter to Lady Tichborne
expressing his fears that the defendant’s
claims are for the purpose of extorting money,
128; conversation between him and Lady
Tichborne about the defendant, 128 ; Lady
Tichborne dispenses with his services, 130-
his ‘ tricks,’ 153 ; a violent attack upon, 189.
Braddon, Miss, author of Avrora Floyd, 101.
Braine, Miss (governess over Miss Doughty), cross-
examination of, 197, 198, 199; remarks’upon,
148; defendant’s opinion of, 155.
Brand, a name assumed by Charles Orton in his
correspondence with the defendant, 160.
Brand, the gamekeeper, letter from the defend-
ant to, 189; description of his visit, and cross-
examination upon it, 189.
Breakfast at M. Chatillon’s, 48.
Bridges (concerning the Themis), 75.
Bridport, 110.
Brighton card case, 35, 45, 93, 110, 111, 125,
126; races, 45, 125, 126.
Brimont, M. de (Roger’s cousin), 10, 14, 131.
Brindle, 27.
Brindle, Father, who was the priest named by
defendant who took him to Stonyliurst, but
he would not swear to it, 216.
Brittlebank, Sergeant, ‘feels convinced that de-
fendant is Roger Tichborne,’ 203.
Bromley, George, knew defendant by his like-
ness to Sir Edward Doughty, 196.
Bromley, of a Dundee steamboat, 114.
Lrookwood, residence of Colonel Greenwood, 134,
Broome, John, the pugilist, 125.
Brown, Captain James, 66, 72 ; his evidence on
the brown mark on the defendant’s side, 262.
Brown, Dr., a Wap ping witness, 163.
Brown mark on defendant’s side, evidence abou
the, 110, 111, 127, 166, 262.
Bryant, Ann, defendant’s wife, 86.
Buenos Ayres, 49, 50.
‘ Bullocky Orton,’ 102.
Bulpett, Mr., invites Mr. Gosford to meet th
defendant, 248; cross-examined on the co
versation that took place about the sealec
packet between the defendant and Mr. Go
ford, 250, 251; remarks upon him as awi
ness, 250.
Burdon (an old servant of Sir James Tichborne
poultices Roger’s throat, 48 ; his evidenc
concerning Mr. Seymour’s visit to the defenc
ant at Alresford, 136.
Burke, Lady, 24.
Burke, Martin, of the Carabineers, recognises de
fendant by his voice, 202.
Burnett, J., witness for defendant in the care
case, 126.
Burroughs, Lady, witness for the defendant
200.
Burton Constable, defendant’s visit to, 227.
Burton (servant to Sir James), his description o
Eoger Tichborne, 185.
Butcher in Australia, defendant a, 175.
Butt, Mrs., wife of the proprietor of the Na
tional Hotel, 107.
Butts, Stephen, proprietor of a Sydney hotel
Byles, Mary Ann, recognises the defendant a
Roger Tichborne, 194.
Cabs of London, four-wheeled, described from
the Bench as a disgrace to a civilised country
Caesar, Julius, 15.
Cahir, 28.
Cairns, Sergeant-Major, cross-examination of,
145.
Calvert, 107.
Canterbury, 40, 46, 127.
Cape Horn, 50.
Carabineer witnesses, introduction of, by the
Lord Chief Justice, 200.
Carabineers, 127, 145 ; list of, against the tattoo
marks, 273.
Card case, Brighton, 35" 45, 93,110, 111.
Carl, a German linguist, 173.
Carrol, of the Carabineers, recognises the de-
fendant, 202.
Carter, 91, 148.
Castle of Andalusia, the, did the defendant
take part in it ? 225.
Castro and Orton, were they two different per-
sons ? 176.
Castro, defendant assumes the name of, 167.
Castro, Pedro, two letters to the defendant,
1/0; letter to Mr. Holmes, 171.
Castro, Senor Don Pedro, 157.
Cat, Etheridge’s, 119.
Cator, offered 10007 by Mr. Spofforth for the
production of Arthur Orton, 182.
Celia, the name of the shijr that brought the
defendant from Australia, 129.
Chancery, Court of, 61, 147, 149.
Chapman, Mr., of Hobart Town, 81.
Character, dark traits in Roger’s, 48.
Character of his mother, Roger’s, 53.
Chatillon, tutor to Roger Tichborne, 2,7, 8 9
10, 59, 212 ; his account of an interview with


the defendant, and his decision that he was
not Roger Tichborne, 131.
Cheetham, of the Carabineers, recognises the
defendant as Roger, 204.
4 Chemistry, what is it about ?’ Defendant an-
swers, 4 With what is given and taken as phy-
sic,’ 222.
Cherbourg, 48.
Childers, witness concerning the Osprey, 72.
Chili, 49, 50, 51, 80,157; daguerreotype of Roger
Tichborne, 173; evidence regretted that it was
not admissible in the trial of the defendant,
159.
Church, Mrs., a Wapping witness, 162.
Church or chapel to the Holy Virgin, Roger
vows to build in the event of his marrying
his cousin, 42.
Churches, Spanish fashion of, 51.
Circumstances adverse to the defendant, 178.
Clanricardes, the defendant cross - examined
about his knowledge of them, 232.
Clanricarde, Lady, 17, 24.
Clifton, 14.
Clonmel, Captain Turner's inspection of his troop
at, 35.
Coat, the hiding of Colonel Greenwood’s, by the
defendant,. 190.
Cockburn, Mary Ann, a Wapping witness, 161.
Cockshot, James, a witness that Arthur Orton
was pitted with the small-pox, 166.
Colchester, 153.
Collington Flat, in Melbourne, 179.
Collins, a Wapping witness, 162.
4 Colonel George found his lies no good,’ refer-
ring to Colonel Greenwood, 157.
4 Come with me to Fairyland,’ 57.
Commission in the army, application for a, 18.
Commission to Chili and Australia to examine
witnesses, 157.
Common Pleas, Court of, 4, 16.
Communion, Holy, 14.
Comparison of the defendant and Roger Tich-
borne, 59.
Composition, peculiarities in the defendant’s,
pointed out, 102.
4 Confuse everything in his head,’ is the defend-
ant likely to do that? 111.
Confusion of mind, Roger’s, explained, 42.
Congenital peculiarities of Roger and the de-
fendant, 263.
Constable, Sir Talbot, 24.
Convent, 32.
Cooke, Mrs. Brand’s debt to, 189.
Cooper, Rev. Mr., and his affidavit, 156.
Cordilleras, 51.
‘Cottage, the’ (where defendant stated that he
resided at Stonyhurst), 11; his cross-examina-
tion about, 217.
Cottie, manager of the Wagga-Wagga Australian
Joint-Stock Banking Company, 101.
Counsel, defendant’s, 1,2, 4, 14, 16, 22, 24, 36,
42, 53, 60, 61, 85, 118, 123, 132, 133.
Counsel, defendant’s, on the Wapping part of
the case, 118; abuse of the Tichborne wit-
nesses, 133.
Counsel for defendant defames the name of his
client’s father, 54.
4 Cousing Kate Letter,’ from the defendant, 135.
Cousins, first marriage between objectionable,
20, 35, 37.
Cowes, Ryde, and Wymering, property at, dis-
posed of by defendant, who had none there to
dispose of, 238.
Coyne (Lady Tichborne’s servant), account of
the defendant, for whom he was sent, 130.
Creighton, William, an Australian witness, who
saw Orton once a week, and distinguishes him
from Castro, 179.
Crest, Tichborne, how did the defendant dis-
cover it ? 108.
Cronin, Charles and Frederick, Wapping wit-
nesses, 162.
Cross-examination, the privilege of abused by de-
fendant’s counsel, 268.
Croydon, 147.
Cubitt, proprietor of a Sydney ‘ Missing Friends’
Office,’ receives a letter from Lady Tichborne
concerning her son, 89; Letter to Lady Tich-
borne, acquainting her that he had discovered
her son, 104; Letters to Mr. Gibbes on the
discovery of Sir Roger Tichborne in the de-
fendant, 95, 96.
Culloden, a friend of Mr. Gosford's, 119.
Qunliffe, Captain, recognises the defendant, 201.
Curiosities Roger picked up while at Valparaiso,
53.
Custance, Colonel, 153.
Daguerreotypes, the, 263.
Daguerreotypes taken at Santiago, 55.
Daranza, M., 48.
Dargo Station, 62, 84.
Davis of the Carabineers recognises defendant,
203.
Davis (officer of the Court at Westminster), 49.
Deases, the defendant examined upon his ac-
quaintance with them, 232 ; De Castro, the
name of, adopted by the defendant, 80.
Death's-head pipes, Mr. Biddulph examined by
Mr. Hawkins upon the, 191 ; remarked upon
by the Lord Chief Justice, 191.
Death of Lady Tichborne, 16.
De Gramont, Mademoiselle, 25.
Defendant, his Examinations and Ckoss-Ex-
AMINATIONS :
Regarding the Bella, in the Court of Chancery,
69.
Concerning the name of any person saved from
. the Bella, 77.
On the Richardson letter, 88.
About St. Vitus’s dance, 93.
Mr. Stephens’ card, 116.
Why he had told Rous that he had never been
at Wapping ? 119.
About Mr. Gosford, 122,123.
Concerning the Brighton card case, 125, 126.
Grandfather Seymour, interview with Danby
Seymour, 137.
About Mr. Seymour and Mr Hopkins, 138.
Relating to Mr. Radcliffe and Mrs. Townley’s
visit, 140. . .
On the interview he had with Sir Percival
Radcliffe and Mrs. Nangle, 143.
Jesuit Fathers, 148.
About Roger Tichborne’s missing diaries, 148.
Upon Captain Fraser’s snuff-box, 154.
On the lock of hair, 171.
Respecting Arthur Orton, 154.
Why did he not go to the Chili commission?
158.
His relations with the Orton family under a
false name, 160.
Presents given him on his first communion,
214.
About his going to Stonyhurst, 216.
About the ‘ Cottage ’ at ditto, 217.
Concerning the Philosophers, 217, 219.
What is a Quadrangle? 217.
Upon the localities about Stonyhurst, 220.


Defendant, his Examinations and Cross-Examin-
ations ( continued ):
On the studies pursued at Stonyhurst, and
his knowledge of Latin, Greek, Hebrew,
mathematics, chemistry, &c., 220, 221.
Upon his contemporaries at Stonyhurst, 223.
On the vacations at Stonyhurst, 224.
About Father Seed, 224.
Private theatricals at Stonyhurst, 225.
On his visit to Burton Constable, 227.
About Bilton Grange, 228.
Upon the ‘ Landmarks of England,’ and who
‘coached’ him, 229.
How he addressed the several individuals of
the Tichborne family, and about his grand-
father's death, 230.
About his visit to Knoyle, 230.
Concerning Captain Turner forgetting the
word of command, 233.
Waterford, what sort of a place is it?&c.,
234.
Correspondence with friends in England dur-
ing his stay in Ireland, 234.
Upon his conversation with Captain William-
son, 235.
On the nature of his will, 239.
As to the date when his attentions to Miss
Doughty became displeasing to her father,
244, 245, 246.
Leading up to the contents of the sealed
packet, 246, 247.
Defendant’s Letters to Lady Tichborne :
His first letter from Wagga-Wagga, 96.
Upon the death of Sir James, her husband,
102.
In admiration of Mr. Cubitt, 105.
Enclosing a photograph of himself, 107.
Giving an account of his visit to Tichborne
1124.
Describing his interview with Danby Sey
mour, 138.
On the hiring of horses, 144.
Mr. Holmes requires 5001. to file bills, 144.
Complaining of Constable Talbot, 144.
Recommending that she pay Tucker 50 per
cent, 144.
About Bogle, Baigent, and Mr. Radcliffe, 144
Requesting her to engage Mr. Norris in the
Chancery suit, 145.
His arrival at Alresford, and his meeting with
Captain Heywood, 146.
I Success in obtaining witnesses, 146.
On a visit from Gosford, wherein he spells
Seymour ‘ Seymore,’ 146.
Regarding his not going to lunch with ‘ Pol-
hill’ at the Bedford, 147.
Preparing for his examination at the Law In-
stitution, and spelling Elizabeth ‘ Eliza-
berth,’ 149.
About the Bella, 150.
Shooting with Mr. Bulpett, and acknowledging
receipt of cheque, 151.
Telling her of several letters waiting for her
at the Abbe Salis’, 151.
Containing the sentence, ‘ I will make a
Bowker of him before I have done with
him,’&c., 153.
Communicating his successful tour for wit-
nesses, 153.
A first reference to the suggestion that he is
Arthur Orton, 156.
On his arrival at Boulogne, 157.
Defendant’s Letters to Various Persons :
Carter, inviting him to Tichborne, 98.
Defendant’s Letters to Various Persons (con-
tinued):
Cottie, enclosing the leaf of a book given him
by Boyle, 113.
* Cousing Kate,’ 134.
Castro, Pedro, about the ‘agents on the othe
side’ having called upon him, 170, 171.
Castro, Tomas, on his property in Englanc,
169.
Constable, Sir Talbot, with Mr. Radcliff
‘ Ratty,’ and others, 141.
Fraser, Captain, conveyed by Mr. Rous, 154.
Gibbes, for a loan of 21., and signing himse 1
R. C. Tichborne, 97, 98.
Hopkins, explaining his reasons for not visi
ing him at Aires ford, 135; about Carte
and his brother officers, 143.
Jury, Mrs., sending her a copy of the affidavit
161.
Kellet, Major, sending copies of the affidavits
156.
Rous, concerning a will he had given to Holmes
159 ; announcing the death of Captai
Strickland, 150 ; acquainting him that ‘ the; r
were going to apply for a receiver,’ 157
complaining of Gosford and Slaughter, 132
Seymour, Danby, concerning the Poole elec
tion, 134.
Turner, Captain Polhill, upon his arrival
England and excusing himself for not ac
cepting the captain’s invitation to lunch
147 .
Defendant, his account of the shipwreck of the
Bella and how he was saved, 61; affidavit
about his landing in Melbourne, 80; narra
tive of his life at Melbourne, 80,84, 86; mar
riage with Ann Bryant at a dissenting chapel
86 ; his reasons for so doing, 87; first meeting ■
with Mr. Gibbes and their conversations, 91
92, 93; statement about his family to Mr
Gibbes, but no mention of Alfred, 92; makes
a will at Wagga-Wagga, 102 ; visit to the
Globe public-house at Wapping, 113 ; arrival
in London on a Christmas Day, and after din-
ner goes to Wapping, 114; first visit to Alres-
ford with Bogle, 119 ; interview with Mr.
Gosford at Gravesend, 120, 121, 122; first
meeting with Bogle in Sydney, 112 ; account
of his first meeting with Lady Tichborne,
130; account of his interview with M. Cha-
tillon, 131; impropriety of his taking M'Cann
into his service, 148 ; explains the reason he
did not recognise the four officers in the Cara-
bineers, 150 ; fails to recognise Mr. and Mrs.
Radcliffe, Danby Seymour, Colonel Green-
wood, Mrs. Hibbert, and four officers of the
Carabineers, at his cross-examination, 150;
his description of Arthur Orton, 153 ; reluct-
ance to meet the commission, 157,158 ; affida-
vit to postpone the Australian commission, 157;
attends a meeting of his friends at Alresford,
160; destroys the Orton letters, 161; ‘ls he
Arthur Orton, or is he not?’ 161; description
of Arthur Orton, 163; his marriage by a dis-
senting minister, 176; the strength of his case
lying in the multitude of his witnesses, 178;
and Roger Tichborne contrasted, 183; re-
markable conversation between him and Cap-
tain Turner, 188; recollections of his religious
and secular education, 212-13; insult to the
Attorney-General, 214 ; no recollection of his
excursions with Sir James into Germany and
the Channel Islands, 215; story about his
being devoted to the ‘ Order of the Blue’ when
a boy, 215; his mind in a confusion about the


vacations at Stonyhurst, 225; his ignorance of
the death of John Berkeley, 225 ; assigns ill-
ness as the cause of his leaving Stonyhurst,
226 ; considered by Mr. Hoffland to be Roger
Tichborne from his conversation with him,
226 ; Preston, his remembrance of having vi-
sited, 226; Burton Constable, his visit to, when
at Stonyhurst, 227; states he danced the can-
can before ladies and gentlemen at Burton
Constable, 227 ; Bilton Grange, his statement
about his visit to, 228; and Major Nangle’s
discrepancies in their evidence concerning the
events at a ball, 228 ; his ignorance of Owsle-
bury and the Rev. Mr. Moberly, 229; account
of his preparation for the army, 229; Knoyle,
he fails to recognise a photograph of it, 230;
about the Dublin society he mixed in, 231;
troop and squadron, ignorance of the differ-
ence between, 235 ; military blunders pointed
out by Captain Williamson, 235; ignorance
of Lord Fitzroy Somerset, 236; total loss of
the French language, 237; fictitious property
at Cowes and Wyoming, 238; his ignorance
concerning the Tichborne and Doughty es-
tates, or who had power over them, 238-39;
his memory and knowledge about the sealed
packet, 244; his oath and confession that he
had seduced his cousin, 254 ; statement re-
garding that he had a seton created on his
left shoulder, 264; ‘ls he Arthur Orton?’
276; ‘ Is he Roger Tichborne ?’ 277; his coun-
sel’s reasons for not calling any of the Orton
family as witnesses, 182; counsel reproved by
the Lord Chief Justice for the manner of his
cross-examination of Lord Bellew, 268; se-
verely censured by the Lord Chief Justice,
283; delusions of the human mind, 210; coun-
sel censured by the Lord Chief Justice, 1,2,
4, 43, 67.
Description, Roger’s powers of, 28.
Diaries, Roger Tichborne’s, what became of
them, 54, 149.
Disagreement in evidence about their veils up
or down, between Lady Radcliffe and Mrs.
Townley, 140.
Discrepancies in dates of some of the Australian
witnesses, who show that Orton and Castro
are not the same person, 179.
Discrepancies in the evidence given by Captain
Fraser and the defendant, 154.
Dix, a Wapping witness, 166.
Dobbinson and Geare, letter to Mr. Holmes
upon the identity of the defendant as Sir
Roger Tichborne, 139.
Dobbins, Steers, Williams, and Pebbles, four
names given by defendant as those saved from
the Bella, 78.
Doctors’ Commons, 239.
Dogs’ names of Roger Tichborne, 194.
Dormer, John, 35.
Dormer, Lady (daughter of Sir Henry Joseph
Tichborne), 7, 14, 15; speaks to the tattoo
marks on Roger’s arm, 270.
‘Do you believe in the seduction?’question to
the Jury by the Lord Chief Justice ; * or is
the defendant’s statement a foul and wicked
slander?’ 261.
Doughty and Tichborne estates, a history of, 20.
Doughty, Katharine Mary Elizabeth, afterwards
Lady Radcliffe, and first cousin to Roger
Tichborne, 17, 19, 20; always in Roger’s
mind, 54 ; relations with her cousin, narrated
by the Lord Chief Justice, 241; defendant’s
oath and confession that he had seduced her,
254.
Doughty, Lady, her Letters to Roger Tich-
borne :
On his college studies, 13.
Saying how much he is missed at Tichborne,
19. „ .
Stating Sir Edward’s refusal to interfere be-
tween his father and mother, and suggest-
ing improvement in his handwriting, 23..
Hoping that change of scene might give him
more cheerful views of life, 24.
Congratulating and encouraging him on his
resolution to reform, 26.
Dissuading him from going to India, 32.
On his great depression and the ‘ withered
leaf,’34.
On his being more careful in dress, 35.
On the danger of reading vicious books, 39.
Her anxiety about his health, 40.
Vacillates about his engagement with her
- daughter, and charges him with intemper-
ance, 41.
On his uncle’s decision against a present
union with his cousin, 43. _ _
Expressing her complete satisfaction with his
explanation concerning the rumours of his
intemperance, 44.
Sending him his uncle’s love and blessing, 45.
Concerning his father's health and low spirits,
46. , .
Her regret that he was going to settle in the
country, 47. _
Doughty, Lady, letter to Sir James Tichborne,
on his mistaking the feelings of herself and
husband, 14; her dymg deposition about the
tattoo marks on Roger s arm, 271; the part
she played in Roger’s wooing of her daughter,
243.
Doughty property, Mr. Slaughter on the deri-
vation of the, 32.
Doughty, Sir Edward, letter to Roger Tich-
borne concerning the Upton estate, 29; his
death, and notice in the Illustrated London
News , 49, 93.
Downley, a Wapping witness, 162.
Drinking and smoking, Roger’s propensity for,
60.
Dublin, 23, 24, 39.
Dupanloup, M., tutor to Roger Tichborne, 9.
Dupanloup, Chatillon, and Jolivault, defend-
ant’s ignorance of, 212.
Dying deposition of Lady Doughty about the
tattoo marks, 271.
Dyke, a billiard-room proprietor, saw Orton and
Castro together in his room, 179.
Edinburgh, 23.
Education, defendant’s reason to Mr. Gibbes or
his imperfect, 92.
Egyptian mythology, Roger’s acquaintance with,
Elizabeth, Queen, portrait of, at Tichborne, 119.
Elizabeth, spelt Elizaberth by the defendant
both in a letter to Lady Tichborne and in his
affidavit, 149.
Essex Lodge, Thornton Heath, Croydon, defend-
ant’s residence, 135.
Etheridge, Father, Professor of Logic and Moral
. Philosophy at Stonyhurst, denies that either
he or Father Seed gave Roger lessons in a cot-
tage, 223.
Etheridge, the blacksmith, and the defendant,
119.
Euclid, 15, 16; has that anything to do with
mathematics? Defendant said he did not
recollect, 221,


Evidence, conflict of, between the defendant
and Mr. Gosford, 123.
Evidence of the witnesses for and against the
defendant being Arthur Orton, 161.
Eyes, twitching of the, 146.
l*acts about the Tichborne family, supposed to
have been gleaned by the defendant from the
Illustrated London News, 95.
Fairhead, Mrs., mother of Mrs. Jackson of the
Globe at Wapping, 115.
Falmouth, 48.
Family deeds, Roger’s impatience at the cost of
them, 31.
Family discord, Roger’s remarks upon, 49.
h ather s grave, his, would Roger Tichborne have
allowed it to be spat upon ? 54,
Fathers, Jesuit, list of, obtained by Mr. Holmes
(defendant’s attorney) from Mr. Norris (Lac y
Tichborne’s solicitor), 148.
F Arthur Orton’s, size of, an exaggeratio
Ferguson, Sir William, evidence about th
marks on defendant. 265, 266; on the mark
on defendant’s arm, 182.
Ferguson, pilot of the Dundee boats, 114, 180.
Fifty-eight witnesses give evidence that the de
fendant is not Arthur Orton, 166.
Fifty witnesses give evidence that the defend
ant is Arthur Orton, 163.
Finnis, a Wapping witness for the defence, 163
Fishing, shooting, and hunting, Roger’s font-
ness for, 59.
Fitzgerald, Mr., his description of Roger Tich
borne, 184 \ speaks to the marks on .Roger’
arm, 270.
Ford’s Hotel, Manchester-square, 114, 119 129
Forgeries, letters written to the Orton sister
declared by the defendant to be, 160.
Foster, defendant’s master at Boisdale, 62,80,84
Foster, Major, his description of Roger Tich
borne, 186 ; his practical joke on Roger, 24.
Fraser, Captain, of the Carabineers, not recog
nised by defendant, 150; letter from the de
fendant to, accompanied by a copy of his affi
davit, and the Castro correspondence, 154
account of his interview with defendant 154
his description of Roger Tichborne, 185 ’
French hotels, 50.
French idioms pointed out in Roger’s letters 25.
brench language, defendants total loss of, 237.
French novels, 13, 43.
Gambling, 93.
Garden of the Soul,’ defendant proved to be
wrong in saying that was one of the books
Roger richborne read while preparing for his
first Communion, 213.
Gardiner (witness concerning the defendant’s
visit to Lloyd’s), 74.
Gardner, Robert, evidence to show that Castro
and Orton are not the same person, 180
Germany Normandy, and the Channel Islands,
places to which Roger accompanied his father,
defendant has no recollection of, 215.
Gibbcs, Mr., an attorney at Wagga-Wagga, 62,
00, defendant s first meeting and conversa-
tion with, 91, 92, 93; letter to Lady Tich-
bome, advising her of the defendant’s depar-
ture for England, with Bogle as valet, 107 •
defendant’s intercourse with, 176.
Giffard, Mr., elicits a reason from the defendant
for his going abroad, 98.
GUI, Sarah, a Wapping witness for the prosecu-
won, 152.
IGippsland, 80.
Globe public-house, Wapping, 115.
Glyn s Hank, the defendant’s statement con-
cerning a cheque on, 78.
Godhart, a Wapping witness for the defence,
163.
Godsmark, Henry, a Carabineer, recognises de-
fendant, 204.
Gold watch and breast-pin, presented to Roger
on his first'Communion, which defendant had
• no recollection of, 214.
Goodwood Races, 45.
Goodyer (witness concerning the Osprey), 70.
Goole, a lighterman, and Wapping witness, 16
Gosford, steward of the Tichborne estate, 1.
17, 19, 22, 45, 93, 104, 120, 121, 122.
Gosford, Mr., his account of his first meetinj
the defendant at Gravesend, 120-122; an
observations upon by defendant’s counsel,
123 ; does not believe the defendant to be he: •
son, 129 ; defendant expresses his suspicion o
239 ; relates his conversation with the defenc -
ant about the sealed packet, 249; has ‘ n
moral doubt of tattoo marks having been or
Roger Tichborne’s arm,’ 271.
Gosford, Mr. and Mrs., their description o ’
Roger Tichborne, 185.
Gosford, Mrs., letter to her husband influencin ■
his judgment in favour of the defendant, 12c?
Gosford, not ‘Sir’ Vincent, but Mr., 110.
Gossein (valet to Sir James Tichborne), 8, 9
48; the defendant’s ignorance of, 211.
Grammar, 10.
Grant, Charlotte (a Tichborne servant), swear
to the defendant as Roger Tichborne, 194:
used frequently to see Roger washing, bu
never saw any tattoo marks, 273.
Gravesend, 120.
Green, George, a Wapping witness for the pro
secution, 102.
greenwood, Colonel, 134, 157: his description
of Roger Tichborne, 184; his conversations
with the defendant, and his test, 189, 190
denying that he ‘coached’ Roger Tichborne
for his military examination, 229.
Greenwood, George (regimental tailor of the
Carabineers), his evidence and testimony in
favour of defendant, 205.
Greenwood, Mrs., her description of Roger Tich-
borne, 184 ; speaks to the marks on Roger’s
arm, 270. 6
uaquilla River, 51.
uilfoyle (an old servant of Sir Edward
Doughty’s), 107, 114.
Guilty or not Guilty?’ 282.
aden, Mr. Seymour, evidence about the marks
on defendant’s shoulder, 265, 266.
air, Roger Tichborne’s, 59.
air, the lock of, sent by Don Pedro Castro,
was it defendant's or not? 157, 171, 172.
ales, Miss, a lady to whom the defendant says
he. was paying his addresses during his court-
ship of his cousin, 246.
ill, Mr., 158.
illan, Mr., a Wapping witness, 162.
illett (a friend of old Mr. Orton), 110.
dlin of Bridport, 110.
listed, Thomas, a Wapping witness, 163.
ily, Jeremiah, keeper of a racquet-ground at
Clonmel, his description of Roger Tichborne
188.
imilton, sergeant-major in the Carabineers,
witness for the defendant, 202.
impshire witnesses, tenants, servants, &c., 192.


Handwriting, composition, and spelling of de-
fendant and Roger compared, 274.
Hannah Frances, the name given by defendant
as his mother’s Christian name, which was
‘ Henriette Felicite,’ 103.
Hannon (witness concerning the Osprey), 72.
Harvie, 48.
Hawkins, Mr. (counsel for the Crown), 110,135,
208.
Hayden, a witness proving by dates that Orton
and defendant are not the same person,
178.
Hay ley, Dona, evidence on the initials ‘A. O.’
on the arm of the defendant, 169,182.
Head, marks on the defendant’s, ascribed to
the accident at Pornic, 267.
Health, Roger irritated with Lady Doughty’s
inquiries about his, 40.
Hebrew, which way is it read? Defendant
could not answer, 220.
Height of the defendant, 59; of Roger Tich-
borne, 59.
Helsby, Mr., photographer, 173.
Hermitage, the, 92,113.
Hewett (footman to Mrs. Hopkinson), recognises
the defendant as Roger Tichborne, 197.
Heywood, Major, of the Carabineers, 145.
Hibbert, Mrs. Washington, 17; examined upon
the visit of Roger to Bilton Grange, 228.
Hieroglyphics of Arthur Orton, affixed to his
signature in his letters to the Ortons and
Miss Loder, discovered to be a Spanish fashion,
116, 181.
Higgins, hotel-keeper at Wagga-Wagga, 62, 86.
Higgins, Mrs., her description of Roger Tich-
borne, 184.
Hingston, Mr., 156.
Hiscock, Mrs., an Australian witness, who says
that the defendant in the Black Forest gave
her the name of ‘ Roger,’ 178.
Hobson’s Bay, 62, 73.
Hodder, where is it ? 220.
Hodgson, a witness concerning the defendant’s
saying he had St. Vitus’s dance, 93.
Hoffland, Thomas (drawing-master at Stony-
hurst), his reasons for believing the defendant
to be Roger Tichborne, 226.
Holidays at Stonyhurst, 12.
Holmes (concerning the defendant’s visit to
Lloyd’s), 74.
Holmes, Mr., accompanies the defendant on his
first visit to Lady Tichborne, 130; letter to
Messrs. Dobbinson and Geare, on the defend-
ant’s identity, 139 ; letters to Mr. Radcliffe
about his interview with the defendant, 142,
143; censured by the Lord Chief Justice for
the manner in which the affidavits were ob-
tained, 156 ; his affidavit for postponement of
the Australian Commission, 157; censure on,
for inducing defendant to make a will, 159 ;
gives up the defendant and his cause, 159 ;
letter to Don Pedro Castro on his knowledge
of Orton, and sending copies of the affidavits,
171.
Holt, Mr. Barnard, evidence about the marks
on defendant’s shoulder, 265, 266.
Hopkins (the family lawyer), 22; answer to Mr.
Killey for information concerning the ship-
wrecked crew of the Bella, 78.
Hopwood, Mrs., Newman Park, 84; in direct con-
tradiction to Mrs. M‘Alister, 175 ; relation of
‘ matters about a horse,’ 176.
Horse given by Sir Percival Radcliffe to Talbot
Constable, 142.
Horse Guards, 18, 24.
Hotel de Louvre, residence of Sir James and
Lady Tichborne, 213.
‘ How do you do, Kattie ?’ 139.
Howth, Lord and Lady, 17, 24.
‘Humbug,’ assigned by defendant’s counsel to
Roger's love for his cousin, 36.
Hunting, shooting, and fishing, Roger’s fond-
ness for, 59.
Hurst Green, 220, 226.
‘ I am the long-lost Roger Tichborne,’ 60.
I, the personal pronoun, written as small i’s in
fifteen instances in one of the defendant’s let-
ters, 133.
‘ I wanted to deceive Gibbes’ —defendant’s rea-
son for making a fictitious will, 238.
‘ I will make a Bowker of him before I have
done with him,’ 153.
Identity, on the difficulties of, 4.
* Ignorance of defendant, of persons he ought to
have known, pointed out, 188, 210.
Indelicate passage in a letter written by defend-
ant to Lady Tichborne, 153.
India, 20, 28, 32.
Indignation of the Lord Chief Justice at the de-
fendants oath of the seduction of his cousin,
254.
‘lnfamous priest,’ epithet applied to the Abbe
Salis by Dr. Kenealy, 132.
Inflammatory speeches during the trial, public,
163.
Information, sources of, concerning the Tich-
borne family, accessible to the defendant,
149.
In-kneed, witnesses who agree that Arthur Or-
ton was, 167.
Illustrated London News, advertisement in the,
not giving the date of Roger’s birth, 92; no-
tice of Sir Edward Doughty’s death, 94; no-
tice of Sir James Doughty Ticliborne’s death,
94.
Intellectual character, Roger’s, 59.
Intemperance, Roger’s, 20, 38, 41.
Irwin, John, mess-waiter to Roger Tichbome’s
regiment, 154; his description of Roger Tich-
borne, 187.
Italian princess, 54.
Itchin, 151.
Jackson, Colonel, 24.
Jackson, Mrs., landlady of the Globe, at Wap-
ping, 115.
Jamaica, 54.
Janes, the ‘ sly grog-seller,’ proves that Orton
and Castro are not the same person, 179.
Jarvis, a Wapping witness, never saw the brown
mark, 167.
Jealousy of a rival, Roger’s, 35.
Jervis, John, defendant’s executor, 104, 176.
Jessie Miller, the, 81,169.
Jesuits, 11,16, 92.
Jesuit Fathers at Stonyhurst, list of them ob-
tained by Mr. Holmes from Mr. Norris, 148.
Jesuit, ‘Your brother is a,’ said by the defend-
ant to the Solicitor-General, 214.
Jocelyn, Major, his description of Roger Tich-
borne, 186.
‘Johnson, Mr., Newburn Park, Gippesland,’
written inside The Rivals in defendant’s
handwriting, 175.
Johnstone, Mr., of Newman-park, 84.
Jolivault, tutor to Roger Tichborne, 9.
Jolivault, Chatillon, and Dupanloup, defend-
ant’s ignorance of, 212.
Jones, Colonel (now General), of the Carabineers,


inot recognised by defendant, 150: his descrip,
tion of Roger Tichborne, 187.
Jones, George, a witness who proves by dates
that Arthur Orton and defendant cannot be
the same person, 177.
Jones, Miss (of Poole), recognises the defend-
aut as Roger, 196.
Journal, Roger’s, 55.
Journal, sent by the defendant to Lady Tich-
borne ; where is it ? 148.
Jurors, questions by, 14, 43. 45 51 66 72 73
76 78, 82, 86, 95. V 114,
165, 166, 169, 180, 188,194, 201, 210. ’
Jury, Mr. Justice Mellor’s charge to them to
consider their verdict, 284; their written cen-
sure on the defendant’s leading counsel, 286 •
their thanks to the Lord Chief Justice for
his complimentary remarks, 287; Lord Chief
Justice to the, on the public agitation,
Mrs. E., letter to, from Arthur Orton 83
117, 160. ’
Jury, Mrs. Mina, account of her lending Orton
some money, 83,174; saw the initials ‘AO’
on defendant’s arm, 182.
Pellet, Major, his description of Roger Tich-
borne, 187.
Celley, Mr., letter from Mr. Hopkins to, ans-
„ wenng his inquiries about the Bella, 78.
L marks* hypothesis of the tattoo
L marks^l66 B ’ a witness to orton ’ s small-pox
-noyle, incidentally mentioned, 7,12,15 16 23 •
Roger Tichborne’s visit to, 229; photograph
or, defendant cannot recognise, 230.
incaster, Elizabeth, a Wapping witness, 166.
of English History,’ a book for
coaching’ purposes, 230.
i Pauline, 48, 51, 52.
itin, 15.
laughing all over his face,’ the defendant’s
smile so described, 163.
wes, Mrs., a Wapping witness, 162.
w Institution, examination at the, 1.
™, ce ’ paries, a Wapping witness, 162.
zarette of the Bella, 58, 65.
D.S., the three letters prefixed to the exer-
,ise books used at Stonyhurst College, 222
if, the withered, 34. ’
at, Mr the friend who accompanied the de-
rSs 130 hlS £rSt Visi * t 0 Lady Tichhorne
evre, Pore, 131; who prepared Roger Tich-
orne for his first Communion, 213, 214-
is answer to counsel when asked whether
mger Tichborne had confessed the seduc-
on of his cousin, 259.
al adviser Mr. Spofforth ceases to be de-
indant s, 207.
?e, illness of Mrs., a circumstance con-
Jcted wdh the hiding of Colonel Green-
ood’s coat, 190.
;e, Martha (a laundress at Poole), recognises
fendant as Roger Tichborne, 196.
;e, Mrs. tells a curious story about the
ttoo marks, 272.
ware (trumpet-major in the Carabineers)
-ogmses defendant as Roger Tichborne, 203.
-rs from Roger and defendant to Mrs. Green-
od, compared, 134.
a SKSFs&ft.ife*
Letters of the defendant given up by Mr, Rous
to his opponents, 159.
Letter-writing, Roger’s fondness for, 59.
Lewis, Charles (the draper’s assistant at Alres-
i AV hls evidence and cross-examination upon
it, 195.
Liardet (witness concerning the Osprev) 70
Lichfield, Captain, 145.
Lilly white, Thomas, declares defendant to be
Roger Tichborne, 192.
Lima, 50, 51.
Line, crossing the, 50.
Literary tastes, Roger’s, 59.
Livy, 59.
Lloyd’s, cross-examination of defendant on his
going to, 73 ; clerk, examination of, 73.
Lock, lid ward, a mariner, gives evidence show-
ing that Orton and Castro are not the same
person, 179.
Locket, the, containing photograph of defend-
ant s wife and child, 117.
Lockhart, witness concerning the Osprev. 71
Lock of hair, the, 157.
Loder, Miss Mary Anne, 81, 82, 117; her testi-
mony affirming the defendant to be Arthur
Orton, 161; attack upon her character by de-
fendant’s counsel, 162; her address entered
in defendant’s pocket-book found at Wagga-
wagga, 180.
Lord Chief Justice, the, cross-examination of
the defendant about the Richardson Letter,
88.
P hief Justice, the, his closing remarks to
the jury, 282; his peroration to his memorable
summing-up, 284; compliments the jury, 287;
on his own share and conduct in the great
trial, 288. °
‘ k°ts of Priests,’ defendant’s reply when asked
to whom did he confess, 214.
Loyat, master of, 35.
Luie, his statement analysed, 75, 76.
Magellan, straits of, 50.
Major, spelt with a g, 28.
Manders, Captain, his description of Roger Tich-
borne, 186; account of Roger Tichborne’s regi-
ment, 235; speaks to the tattoo marks on Roger
Tichborne’s arm, 271.
Mandeville, Comte de (friend of the Tichborne
family), 9.
Mann, Father, 15.
Mann, Rev. Maurice, his statement about the
studies of Roger Tichborne, 224.
Manning, Joseph, on the scar on Arthur Orton’s
-bead, 166.
Mansfield Mr. (under-keeper at Tichborne), his
account °f Roger Tichborne, 184; his evidence
about the dogs’ names, 194.
Maria, the Blessed, a sentence found on the de-
fendant’s letter to Lady Tichborne, 107,174.
vu j Mr., and Mr- Scott, friends who urged
the defendant not to leave England for Chili,
100.
Marriage between first cousins objectionable,
3b; Roger Tichborne on, 33; Lady Doughty’s
seeming opposition to the union between
Roger and her daughter, 40; defendant’s, by
a dissenting minister, 176.
Marseillaise, the, sung by the defendant to
M Evoy, 189.
Marshall (witness concerning the Osprey), 72
Martin, David (a professional pedestrian), recog-
nises defendant, 204.
Marx, Mr. and Mrs., 201.


iMary, tlie Blessed, the correct Catholic exur
sion, 107. 1
Mathematics, defendant’s cross-examination
Mather, Frederick, of the Carbineers, reco°ni
the defendant as Roger Tichborne, 202.°
Matters connected with a horse at Wa®
Wagga, 176. °
M'Alister, Mrs., her account of employing
thur Orton, 84 ; concerning the 1000 Z. she
ceived for her evidence, 85; story about t
defendant, 175.
M'Cann, 91, 148; ‘a worn-out old man’ i
what purpose did the defendant take him in
his house ? 280.
McCarthy, Mr., solicitor to the Sydney Join
Stock Bank, 105.
M'Eleney (son of the trumpet - major in t
Carabineers), recognises defendant, 202.
M -hvoy (an officer in the Carabineers), describ
a visit he paid to the defendant, 188.
M Manus, an Australian employer of Arthu
Orton, 178.
Medical testimony on the marks on the d
fendant’s shoulder, 265.
Melbourne, 62, 75.
deHpilla, proof that the defendant was there
Helipilla, 51, 54, 81, 157; was Roger Tichborn
there, 51, 54; no mention of it in Roger
letters, 52, 54.
lellor, Justice, his charge to the jury, 284.
lemory, on, 5,6; loss of, remarks upon, b
the Lord Chief Justice, 237.
lendoza, 54.
lendoza and Rio, distance between, 158.
lental differences between Roger Tichborne
and the defendant, as pointed out by the
Lord Chief Justice, 210.
tetaphysics, what are they ? Defendant answers
I don t know what you are alluding to ’ 222
lilitary witnesses, 185.
t , be ’ wllere the defendant says he sacrificed
the honour of his cousin, 255.
ilport, Mr., who takes down'defendant’s de-
claration, 106.
issing letters ‘ I hope, dear mamma, you
have found some of the letters,’ 144.
istakes, serious ones pointed out, made by the
defendant m his cross-examination about Miss
Doughty, 246.
oberly, Mr. (Roger’s mathematical tutor),
18, 19; not mentioned by the defendant, 229
jliere s Misanthrope, 59.
mte Yideo, 49, 50.
>ody, Walter, of the Carabineers, recognises
defendant, 203.
xijen, Mr., 162.
•ore, John (his servant, who attended him on
lis travels), 51, 52, 57.
lore, Richard Henry, evidence on the scar on
Arthur Orton’s cheek, 165.
ral character, Roger’s, 59.
rley, James (a servant of Sir James), relates a
onversation with defendant, whom he de-
lares to be Roger Tichborne, 193.
rton, Captain Villiers, his description of
loger Tichborne, 187.
ther’s, a, recognition of a son is important
ut not conclusive, 124.
bher’s temper, Roger’s character of his, 54.
le accident, the, 172.
ston, Thomas (a groom at Upton), examina-
on of, 194.
iton, Sir Roger's new valet, 51.
Nangle family, the defendant’s small acquaint-
ance with the, 210.
Nangle, Henry, 24.
Nangle, Major, 17; and the defendant discre-
pancies between, 228.
Nangle, Miss, 42.
Nangle, Mrs., only daughter of Sir Henry Tich-
borne and aunt of Sir Roger, 7, 17; her ac-
count of an interview with the defendant,
142; her description of Roger Tichborne,
184.
Nash, witness concerning the Osprey, 70.
New Bedford Osprey, 76.
New York, 58.
Noble, Mr. and Mrs., tenants on the Tichborne
estate, recognises the defendant as Roger Tich-
borne from his walk, 192,
No Dinner, farce of, played at Stonyburst, 225.
Norbury, Colonel, his testimony in favour of
the defendant, 200, 201.
Norman, witness concerning the Osprey, 71.
Norris, Father, Superior at Stonyhurst, 224.
Novels, French, 43.
Novices at Hodder, 220.
Oates, Captain, 58, 65; defendant denies all
knowledge of him, 65; his statement regard-
iing the Bella, 65.
Ocean, the bark in which Arthur Orton left
England for Valparaiso, 167.
Old Betty of Hurst Green, 220, 226.
‘Old Clo,’ a suggested nickname for Father
Clough, 223.
Onslow, Mr. Guildford, his letter to M'Evoy,
188 ; his betting on the verdict censured by
the Lord Chief Justice, 188; letter from to
the Lord Chief Justice, 204; defendant’s in-
debtedness to, as shown by his balance-sheet
in bankruptcy, 204.
Orton and Castro, were they two different per-
sons? 176.
Orton and defendant, resemblance between, as
argued from the evidence on both sides, 209.
Orton and defendant, witnesses having seen the
two together, 177.
Orton, Arthur, 2,3, 5, 48, 62; career of, 81;
letters to Miss Loder, 82; hieroglyphics
attached to his signature, 46, 82; letter
to Mrs. Jury, 83; Mrs. Tredgett, 116;
description .of, by defendant and witnesses,
153; peculiar marks about, 165; bitten
by a pony, 165; becomes a Roman Ca-
tholic in South America, 174; ships to go
home in the name of ‘ Joseph M. Orton,’ 174 ;
his writing on the fly-leaf of The Rivals, 175;
defendant’s account of his intercourse with,
176 ; letter to, presented by Mr. Stephens,
181;. acquired the hieroglyphics placed after
his signature in his letters from his residence
in South America, where it is the custom to
do so, 181.
>rton, Australian evidence pointing to two de-
scriptions of person as regards, 180.
►rton, Charles, 160 ; letter from, to the defend-
ant’s wife, commencing * My lady,’ 161.
'rton, Elizabeth, 83.
'rton evidence, for and against the defendant,
the Lord Chief Justice’s remarks upon, 182.
rton family, cross-examination of the defend-
ant concerning his relations with the, and the
money he contributed to them, 160.
rton, history of the family, 81.
rton, Mary Anne, 181.
rton sisters, the, why were they not called
for the defendant ? 182; letters written to


them by the defendant, which he declared at
the Alresford meeting to be forgeries, 160.
Osprey, examination of the defendant regard-
ing the, 75 ; the Lord Chief Justice’s review
of the evidence concerning the, 75, 76, 77.
Owen Lewis, or Lewis Owen, 62, 74, 78.
Owlesbury, the place where Roger's mathema-
tical tutor resided, not remembered by the de-
fendant, 229.
rage, Mr., a Wapping witness for the defence,
Paintings, a box of, that Roger had sent from
Valparaiso to Gosford’s care, 52.
Pampas, 53, 55.
Paris, 2,7, 16, 35, 48.
Paris residences of his father and mother, de-
fendant would not swear to any single one,
Parker, Thomas (a farmer), recognises the de-
fendant from his likeness to Sir Henry Tich-
borne, 194.
Parry, Patrick, a Carabineer witness for the de-
fendant, 202.
Passage in La Pauline, Roger takes his, 48.
Pater, Roger’s Latin tutor at Stonyhurst, un-
known to defendant, 224.
Paul de Kock, 43.
1 aul. William (a blacksmith on the estate), re-
cognises defendant as Sir Roger Tichbome,
Peculiar marks about the defendant, 262.
Peebles, Williams, Sheers, and Dobbin, names
given by the defendant as those saved from
the Bella, 78.
Pells, lighterman, a witness that Orton was
pitted with small-pox, 166.
defendant alleging that the Solicitor-
General was trying to make him commit, 131.
1 ersonal appearance of Roger Tichbome, wit-
nesses who speak to the, 188.
I etre, Lord, mentioned by the defendant as one
of his contemporaries at Stonyhurst, but he
was not, 223.
‘Philosophers,’ the, 11, 12, 13, 216; defendant’s
cross-examination upon, 217; names of, at
Stonyhurst, contemporaries of Roger Tich-
borne, and not remembered by the defendant,
Photograph of the defendant sent to Lady Tich-
■ borne, and her remarks upon it, 111.
Itysiology, what is it/’ defendant answers ‘The
formation of the head,’ 224.
‘Piecrust,’ ‘Spring,’ and ‘Bess,’ names of
Roger Tichborne’s dogs, 194.
Pirn, a Hampshire witness, declaring defendant
to be Roger Tichbome, 194.
Pinder, Mr., a doctor who attended the defend- •
ant at Stonyhurst, 226.
Pinkney, Captain, 153.
Pipe, the, with the letters R. C. T., 100.
Place de la Madeleine, residence of M. de Bri-
mont, 131.
Pl °wden, a distant relation of the Tichbornes,
Pocket-book entries, 101.
Pocket-book, entry in the defendant's, 180.
1 ole, who saw Orton after the defendant left
Australia, 180.
Pons Asinorum, 222.
Poole election, 30, 43.
Pormc Roger Tichborne’s fall at, not remem-
ered by the defendant, 131; examination of
occ e iire e d n at, n 2lT ardinS aCCklent ’ &C '’ that
Portobello Barracks, Dubiin, 39, 230.
Possession, law of, 4.
Pouncet, a witness to Orton’s smallpox marks,
166.
Powell, Henry (Roger's old music-master), re-
lates a conversation with the defendant, 193.
Practical jokes played on Roger, 24, 34.
Preceptors, Roger Tichborne’s, 111.
1 resents made to Roger Tichborne on his first
communion, and which defendant failed to
remember, 214.
Preston, defendant’s remembrance of his visit
to, 226.
Printing lettei’3, inaccuracy of, 49.
Private theatricals at Burton Constable, 227.
Privates in the Carabineers, fifty-eight in num-
ber, who recognise defendant as Roger Tich-
borne, 201.
Prohibition of the union between Roger and
his cousin rescinded, 37.
Purcell, his statement that he could find no re-
gister of an Osprey, 76.
‘ Quadrangle, what is it ?’ 217.
Radcliffe, Lady, 3, 4,14,19, 36, 42 ; her history
of Roger’s interview with her father concern-
ing their marriage and the sealed packet, 242;
appeals to God in virtue of her innocence of
the defendant’s foul charge against her, 256.
Radcliffe, Mr. and Mrs., visits the defendant at
Croydon, 130; his account of the meeting
with defendant, 140 ; letters to Mr. Holmes,
expressing dissatisfaction with the interview,
142, 143.
Radcliffe, Sir Percival, questioned about the
can-can, 227.
Rawlinson, Lady, 133.
‘ Recognise,’ the meaning attached to the word,
150.
Redmond, an Australian witness who knew
Arthur Orton at Boisdale, and that the de-
fendant is the same man, 175.
Relations and friends of Roger Tichborne, de-
fendant’s ignorance of, when examined by Mr.
Chapman Barber before Mr. Roupell, 210.
Remarkable conversation between Captain Pol-
hill Turner and defendant, 188.
Rheumatism and St. Vitus’s dance, 111.
Ribble, the, 220.
Richards, witness concerning the Osprey, 71.
Richardson letter, the, 87, 101, 176,
Rio and Mendoza, distance between, 108.
Rising Sun, Brighton, 127.
Rivals, The, a book lent by Mrs. M'Allister to
Arthur Orton, 175.
Roach-backed horse, the, 206.
Robinson, William, of the Carabineers, recog-
nises defendant, 203.
Roger Tichborne’s father, described by defend-
ant’s counsel as a cowardly degraded slave, 54.
Roman Catholics on marriage between first cou-
sins, 20.
Roman Catholic religion, where did Arthur Or-
ton learn anything about the, 174.
Roupell, Mr., examination of defendant before,
67, 147, 157.
Rous, landlord of the Swan Inn, at Alresford,
75, 91, 119, 146; gives up the defendant and
his cause, and gives up his letters to his oppo-
nents, 159.
Rowena, Miss Doughty’s favourite mare, 190.
‘Rubrica,’ a Spanish term for a special mark
after a signature, without which it is not con-
sidered complete, 181.


Rue Castiglione, 7.
Rue de la Ferme, 7; called by the defendant
the ‘Rue de Ferme,’ 212.
Rue de la Madeleine, called by the defendant
‘ Rue du Madeleine,’ 212.
Rue des Pyramides, 7.
Rue Neuve, 7.
Rue St. Honore, 7 ; suggested that Sir James
had two residences in the, which was stigma-
tised by the Lord Chief Justice as a ‘ wicked,
downright, premeditated lie,’ 213.
Russell (witness concerning the Osprey), 70.
Ryas, John (a carter at Southampton), recog-
nises the defendant at Southampton because
he had the Tichborne face, 194.
Ryde, 46.
Salis, Abbe (a close friend of the Tichborne
family), 7, 12, 14, 48, 129, 132; defended by
the Lord Chief Justice against Dr. Kenealy’s
attack, 132.
Salloway, a Wapping witness for the defence,
163.
Sankey, Captain, recognises defendant as Roger
Tichborne, 206.
Santiago, 51, 52; Roger’s two journeys to, 167.
Scar, the, on the back of defendant’s head, ac-
counted for, 131,
Scott and Marks, friends who urged the defend-
ant not to go to Chili, 158.
Scuttling the Bella, 66.
Sea birds, Roger shoots, 50.
Sealed packet, 3, 44; its contents, the whole of
the evidence about, 251-254; the defendant’s
statement of its contents, 255; defendant’s
documentary proof upon the contents of the,
260.
Seduction of Miss Doughty by the defendant,
his oath and confession of the same, 254.
Seed, Father, defendant being asked whether he
was not professor of Greek all the time Roger
was at Stonyhurst, replied * I cannot recol-
lect,’ 224.
Seminary, defendant confounds with ‘ cemetery,’
218.
Sentence on the Defendant, 286.
Separation of Roger and Miss Doughty by Sir
Edward Doughty, 36.
Seton, a, defendant’s description of what it is,
264 ; evidence of Gossein, Mrs. Nangle, and
Mr. Seymour that Roger Tichborne when a
boy had one on his arm, 264.
Seymour. Henry (Roger’s uncle), 19, 23.
Seymour, Miss (afterwards Lady Tichborne, and
Roger’s mother), 7.
Seymour, Mr. (father of Lady Tichborne,
Roger’s mother), 8, 10, 13, 15, 23.
Seymour, Mr. Alfred (brother of Lady Tich-
borne), remonstrates with Lady Tichborne on
her delusions about her son, 128 ; called a
d—d liar, 183 ; his description of Roger Tich-
borne, 183.
Seymour, Mr. Danby, 13, 43; remonstrates with
Lady Tichborne on her delusions about her
son, 128; denies that Roger Tichborne was
ever solicited to stand for Poole, 134; meets
with the defendant at Alresford, and his rela-
tion of it, 135.
Seymours and Lady Tichborne, suppression of
relationship between, 132.
Sheers, Williams, Dobbins, and Pebbles (four
names mentioned by the defendant as those
saved from the Bella), 78.
Sherriff, Mr,, engraver to the Mint, 173.
Shetland ponies, 81.
Shipwreck of the Bella, defendant’s account of
it, 61.
Skins of birds Roger had shot, a box of, 52.
Slate, a Hampshire man, from whom it is sug-
gested defendant got much information r< -
garding the Tichborne family, 93, 95.
‘Slobbery Orton,’ 163.
Slaughter, Mr., on the derivation of the Dought l r
property, 32, 104.
Slaughterman to Mr. Higgins, defendant a, 86.
Small hand, Roger Tichborne’s, 111.
Small-pox on Arthur Orton, conflict of testi
mony, 165.
Smith, a Wapping witness for the prosecution
163.
Smith, Charlotte, a "Wapping witness for th
prosecution, 102.
Smith, evidence regarding picking up a ship
wrecked crew from the Themis, 75.
“Smith, Pettit (foreman to a store at Wagga
Wagga), conversation between him and Mr
Castro, 86.
Smith, Mr. Store (a relative of Captain Man
ders), gives striking evidence and cross-ex
amination against the defendant; his letter to
Mr. SpofForth about Roger’s eating flies, 206
207.
Smoking and drinking, Roger’s propensities for,
59.
Smoking at Stonyhurst, Roger Tichborne’s, 225.
Snuff-box given by Roger Tichborne to Captain
Fraser, cross-examination of the defendant
about the, 154.
Solicitor-General, his dignified reply to the de-
fendant when he said to him ‘Your brother is
a Jesuit,’ 214.
Somerset, Lord Fitzroy, 13, 14, 18.
South America, 50; the defendant no intention
of going to, 158.
South American career, Roger’s, 58.
Southampton, 52.
Spanish spoken by the defendant, as observed
by Mr. Gibbes, 92.
Spelling and composition of defendant and Roger
compared, 275.
Spelliug and grammar incorrect in defend-
ant’s letters, 107, 124, 130, 14 L, 144, 175.
Spelling, defects of Roger’s, pointed out, 14.
Spofforth, Mr., offers a thousand pounds for
the production of Arthur Orton, 182; letter
to Mr. Store Smith about Roger Tichborne’s
habit of eating flies, and stating that he had
ceased to be the defendant’s legal adviser,
207.
Squadron and troop, defendant’s ignorance of
the difference between, 234.
Startling statement made by the defendant that
he left England without any intention of going
to South America, 158.
Steer, a Wapping witness, on Arthur Orton’s
being pitted with small-pox, 166.
Stephens, W. H., of Australia, 116.
Stonyhurst, 3, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 60.
Stonyhurst, statement made by the defendant
regarding the life of Roger Tichborne at,
216.
Stonyhurst witnesses, seven, who agree that
defendant is not Roger Tichborne, 185; closing
remarks upon, by the Lord Chief Justice,
226.
Stout men and lean men, 59.
Strickland, Captain, 145,
Strickland, Walter (a young friend of Roger’s),
St. Lawrence, Lady, 39.


St. Vitus’s dance, 92, 93, 111, 114, 166.
Stubbs, Elizabeth (wife of a farmer on the
estate), states that defendant was like Sir
Henry Tichborne, 193.
Summer holidays at schools, 225.
Summers, witness concerning the defendant’s
signing the name of R. C. D. Tichborne to a
receipt, 79.
Suppression of relationship between Lady Tich-
borne and the Seymours, 132.
Swan Inn at Alresford, 119, 135.
Tailor, military, 59.
Tattoo marks, seen by Madame Chatillon, 48;
Lord Bellew’s examination upon, 267; the
Lord Chief Justice reviews Lord Belle w’s evi-
dence upon the, 270; the evidence analysed
and commented on by the Lord Chief Justice,
272; closing observations of the Lord Chief
Justice upon the, 274.
Taylor, a witness for the defendant in the card
case, 126.
Tests applied by Mr. Gosford to the defendant,
48, 120; put to the defendant by Mr. Tur-
ville, 107.
Themis, the, 75.
Throat, poulticing of Roger’s, by Burdon, 48.
Thousand pounds, a, offered by Mr. Spofforth to
Cator for the production of Arthur Orton,
182.
Thumb, peculiar formation of Roger Tich-
borne’s, and evidence respecting it, 262.
Tichborne and Doughty estates, disposition of,
by Roger, 238.
Tichborne family, history of the, 6 and 7 ; their
different interests in the estates, 183; and
Doughty estates, 20.
Tichborne Park and Court, 11, 12, 13.
Tichborne, Roger, his Letters to his Mother:
Stating his arrival at Stonyhurst College, 10.
Reproaching her for her letter to the rector, 10.
Complaining of her conduct to his aunts, 10.
On her opposition to his coming to England,
10.
On the state of his health, &c., 12.
Suspecting her of intercepting his letters to
the Abbe Salis, 12.
Stating that he had quitted college, and ask-
ing her to come to England, 14.
Saying that he is too old to return to college,
15.
Giving an account of his occupations at Tich-
borne, 17.
Begging her not to be unhappy about his
health, 40.
Advising her not to come to England, 46.
Describing the Andes and Cordilleras, &c.,
51, 56.
Tichborne, Roger, his Letters to his Aunt,
Lady Doughty:
Informing her of the result of his military ex-
amination, 18.
On Dublin society, 24.
On meeting Lord and Lady Bellew in Dublin
society, 24.
Expressing a determination to turn over a
new leaf, 26.
Excursions in Cashel, 30.
About his new valet, Tom Muston, 31.
Attachment to his cousin, 31.
Lottery of marriage, 33.
Captain Turner’s inspection of his troop at
Clonmel, 35.
Resolution to reform his conduct, 38.
Tichborne, Roger, his Letters to his Aunt, Lady
Doughty (continued):
Depression of spirits, &c., 39.
Causes of his intemperance, 41.
His past bad habits, 43.
Scenes at the Poole election, 45.
Giving an account of a cricket-match between
Kent and All England, 46.
About his residing at Tichborne, 46.
Informing his friends and relatives what had
become of him, 48.
On the receipt of news of Sir Edward Dough-
ty’s death, 49.
Regretting that his aunt should still suspect
him of evil habits, and asking that the let-
ter should be burnt when read, 50.
Giving an account of his travels, and asking
her to address him at Kingston, Jamaica,
53, 54.
Crossing the Andes, 55.
Tichbokne, Roger, Letters to Mr. Gosford :
Advising him of boxes addressed to his care,
14 .
Asking him to write to Moberley to say that
his services were no longer required, 19.
On the settlement of the estates, 23.
Giving reasons for not going to Tichborne, 25.
About the deeds of the estates, 28, 29.
Asking for information when Miss Doughty
was to return to the convent, 32.
On the opposition of his parents to his going
abroad, 34.
On a letter he had received from Mr. Slaugh-
ter, 34.
Telling him his father’s strong wish that he
should leave the army, and that he had
made up his mind to do so, 46.
Expressing surprise that no letters awaited
him at Valparaiso, 50.
On the family settlements, 52.
Advising him that he had sent skins of five
birds and paintings to his care, 52.
On the unhappy differences between his father
and mother, 53.
Concerning an alteration in his will, autho-
rising him to strike out the name of E.
Arundell, 56.
Stating his reasons for leaving England, 57.
Concerning his aunt, Lady Doughty, 48.
To his father, regretting that he had not
heard from him at Valparaiso, 50.
To Miss Doughty, revealing his love for her, 36;
on his thoughts and feelings on their posi-
tion, 37.
To Mr. Slaughter, on the testamentary dis-
position of the estates in the event of his
death, 38.
To Mr. Hopkins on his mathematical studies,
18 ; on the Doughty estates, 22.
To Mr. Seymour (his grandfather), informing
him that he had passed his examination, 18.
To Mr. Henry Seymour (his uncle), on his
regimental outfit, 19.
To Mr. Danby Seymour, congratulating him
on his success at the Poole election, 44.
To his cousin, Mrs. Greenwood, excusing him-
self from visiting Upton, 134.
To Lord Fitzroy Somerset, concerning his
commission, and on receipt of his nomina-
tion for a post in the army, 18.
Tichborne, Roger, and his father, differences be-
tween, 113; was he ever at Melipilla ? 167;
his life in South America, 172; his life at
Stonyhurst College, 216, 224; summoned to


Sir Edward Doughty, 36 ; Miss Doughty
wishes him to endeavour to persuade her
father to rescind his prohibition to their
union, 36 ; his South American correspond-
ence, 98; and the defendant contrasted,
183 ; under what circumstances did he leave
Stonyhurst? 226; his property; closing re-
marks upon by the Lord Chief Justice,
240; Lady Doughty’s reasons for request-
ing him not to take up his residence in
Hampshire, 243; did he ever go back to
Tichborne after June 22, 1862? 243; his
letters to his aunt and Mr. Gosford show the
continuance of his affection for his cousin,
243; his relations with his cousin, Miss
Doughty, as narrated by the Lord Chief
Justice, 241-243; leaves England for foreign
travel to drown his cares and sorrows, 243 ;
extracts from the love letters to his cousin,
242.
Tichborne, Sir Edward, accident to while at a
ball, 228.
Tichborne. Sir James, Letter to Mr. Sey-
mour (his wife’s father) on the violent temper
and eccentric habits of Lady Tichborne, 8.
Expressing his hopes that his son would get
a cavalry- commission, 14.
Unhappy differences between him and his
wife, 53.
Tichborne, Lady, her Letters :
To defendant, acknowledging him as her son,
99.
To Mr. Gibbes, expressing her thanks for his
kindness to her son, 110.
To Mr. Gibbes, advising him that she had made
up her mind to send her son 400?., and that
she does not remember the brown mark nor
the Brighton card case, 111.
To Mr. Gibbes, requiring farther proof of the
identity of defendant as her son before she
parts with 400?., 105.
To Mr. Gibbes, on the ‘ idea of her son wanting
the necessaries of life,’ 109.
To Mr. Gibbes, strongly objecting to his resid-
ing in the country, 151.
To Mr. Bowker, saying that Roger belongs to
a colonial militia, 127.
To Mr. Bowker, that he had done right in not
forwarding more money to the defendant,
128.
Tichborne, Lady, her mental condition analysed,
129, 147; her death, 149, 157 ; her belief in
the’ defendant as her son reviewed by the
Lord Chief Justice, 208.
Townley, Mrs., visits the defendant at Croydon,
i 39, 142. ,
Tozard, witness concerning the Osprey, 71.
Travellers’ Club, 58. _
Travels, Roger’s, and the time he intended to
employ in them, 50, 58.
Tredgett, Mrs., Arthur Orton’s sister, 115, 11/,
160.
Trevitt, an Australian witness, who proves by
dates that defendant and Orton cannot be the
same person, 178. .
Troop and squadron, defendant s ignorance of
the difference between, 234.
Tumble Down Dick, 228. .
Turner, Captain Polhill, 35, 147 ; invites de-
fendant to lunch, 147 ; not recognised by de-
fendant, 150 ; his description of Roger Tich-
borne, 186 ; remarkable conversation between
and defendant, 188 ; forgets his word of com-
mand, 233.
Turville, Mr., an Australian gentleman who had
known Roger’s parents, 107; letter to Lady
Tichborne on the identity of her son, 108.
Tutors and lecturers at Stonyhurst, their state-
ments concerning Roger’s studies at the col-
lege, 224.
Tutors (Chatillon, Dupanloup, and Jolivault),
defendant’s ignorance of Roger Tichborne’s,
211.
Twins, Mrs. Allen confined of, during a ball,
228.
Upton estate, 7, 13, 39, 47, 113.
Vacations at Stonyhurst, defendant cross-ex-
amined upon, 224.
Vacillation of Lady Doughty, 32.
Valet, Roger engages one at Valparaiso, 52.
Valparaiso, 48, 49, 50, 52, 167.
Venables, Father, to whom defendant says he
was first introduced at Stonyhurst, 216.
Venesection, ‘ Are there any marks of about the
defendant ?’ question put to and answered by
four doctors, 266.
Verdict.—Guilty on all Counts, 285; that
the defendant is not Roger Tichborne, 285;
that the defendant is Arthur Orton, 285;
that he committed perjury in reference to
the sealed packet and Lady Radcliffe, 285.
Virgil, Livy, and Corneille, 59.
‘ Virgil, was he a general or statesman ?’ De-
fendant could not tell, 221.
Voice, the difference between that of Mrs.
Townley and Lady Radcliffe, 140.
Voyage from England to Valparaiso, Roger's
description of his, 50.
Vow, Roger’s, never to drink spirits again, 38.
Wagga-Wagga, 62, 89.
Wagga-Wagga will, the, 238.
Wakeling, an unsatisfactory 'Vapping witness,
166.
Walmesley, Father, to whom defendant subse-
quently said he was introduced at Stony-
hurst, 216.
Wapping, incidentally mentioned, 3, 62, 114,
160.
Wapping witnesses, all the, for the defence,
say Arthur Orton had St. Vitus’s dance, 167.
Wapping, cross-examination about his visit to,
115; defendant’s counsel shows his client’s
visit there as a strong point in his favour,
180; witnesses charged with perjury by de-
fendant’s counsel, 110; why should the de-
fendant go there ? 116, 180 ; defendant denies
ever having been there, 181.
Ward, a witness who had the conversation with
Orton about the murder of Ballarat Harry,
180.
Waterford, quarters at, 41.
Waterlow, prefect of the ‘Philosophers,’ 10.
‘ We won’t go home till morning,’ 57.
Weld, Miss, her description of Roger Tichborne,
184.
Welsh (a tenant on the Tichborne estate), a
striking circumstance in his evidence about
chopping lead off the roof of the chapel, 191.
Weston, bootmaker, a Wapping witness for the
defence, 103.
Weston, Dr., a witness that Arthur Orton had
smallpox marks, 166.
Whalley, regarding the Osprey, 70.
‘What a pretty fellow he wa3,’ cried the de-
fendant when Rous abandoned him, 160.
Wheble, Lady Catharine, 200.


Wheeler, Walter, a Wapping witness, 162.
Whitbread, Mr., a Wapping witness, 162.
Whitbread, Mrs., her description of Roger Tich-
borne, 184.
White Lion Hotel, Bath, 228.
Whyler, John, a Wapping witness for the de-
fence, 163.
Wilby, William, a Carabineer, recognises de-
fendant, 205.
Will, Roger’s, 32, 40, 42; Lord Arundell’s name
to be struck out of it, 56; Sir Edward
Doughty’s private, 57.
Will, the defendant’s, deposited for a loan,
102; cross-examination upon the, 103 ; the,
admitted by the defendant to be fictitious,
103 ; the fictitious names as executors ex-
plained by the defendant, 104; censure on
Mr. Holmes for inducing him to make it.
159.
Willes, William, a Wapping witness, IC6.
Williams, Joseph, a witness that Arthur Orton
had smallpox, 166.
Williams, Sheers, Dobbins, and Pebbles, four
names given by the defendant as those saved
from the Bella, 78.
Williamson, Captain, points out a great blunder
made by defendant, 235.
Willoughby, William, a Wapping witness for
the prosecution, 163.
Wilson, Dr., evidence about the marks on de-
fendant’s person, 265, 266.
Winchester, 45.
Wine-drinking, observations on, 20.
Witcher, Detective, 156.
Withered leaf, 34.
Witnesses, Australian, proving Arthur Orton
and the defendant as one and the same per-
son, 80; at Chili, defendant avoids, and re-
turns to England, 159; evidence of the, for
and against the defendant being Arthur Or-
ton, 161; who prove that the defendant is
not Roger Tichborne, and their description of
the latter, 183; who showed that there was a
great familiarity between Roger Tichborne
and Miss Doughty, 259; to the tattoo marks
on Roger Tichborne’s arm, 270.
Wolf and the lamb, fable of the, and applied
to defendant's counsel by the Lord Chief Jus-
tice, 127.
Woodgate, a witness who proves by dates that
Arthur Orton and defendant cannot be the
same person, 177.
Woodman and Pierce, daughters of the game-
keeper of Lord Glengall, 208.
Woolnough, an Australian witness for the de-
fendant, 179.
Word of command, the forgetting of it repu-
diated by Captain Turner, 233.
‘ Would you be surprised to iind that it is your
grandfather’s handwriting ?’ 216.
Wreck of the Bella, 60.
Wright, Mrs., 132.
LONDON: HOBSON AND SONS, PBINTERS, PANCBAS ROAD, N.W.


MISS BRADDOM'S ILLUSTRATED MAGAZINE
Now Eeady, price One Shilling*,
BELGRAVIA FOR MARCH
CONTENTS:
i. Lost for Love. A New Novel. By the
Secret,’ &c. Illustrated by li. Caldecott.
Author of ‘ Lady Audley’s
ii. My Recollections of Fenton Grammar School.
hi. The Three Generations. By T. H. S. Escott. Illustrated by
(j-corrje Kirby
iv. On Dinners ‘ sent out’ from the Pastrycook’s. A Homily. By
George Augustus Sala. JJ
v. Proverbs.
yi. Dead Sorrow’s Kin. A Novelette. By Mrs. C. Reade, Author of
Her Master, Swift as a Flash,’ &c. Illustrated by H. French.
yii. The Russian Court in the Sixteenth Century. By Jame®
' Hutton. J
viii. Rossall.
ix. Lord Lytton as a Fabulist.
x. ‘Well Done !’ A Complete Tale. By Mary Cecil Hay, Author of
Victor and Vanquished,’ ‘ Hidden Perils,’ &c, Illustrated by Louis
Huard.
. l The J Se s°" d Volume of the Third Series of BELGRAVIA, elegantly bound in crimson cloth
S’KXS •*«*«•*• ■■ -4.
MISS BRADDON’S FORTHCOMING NOVEL
Early in April, at all Libraries, in 3 vols.
TAKEN AT THE FLOOD
Cheap Edition of Miss Braddon’s Novels
In April, price 2s. boards, 2s. G d. cloth gilt,
LUCIUS DAVOREN
A NOVEL
By the Author of ‘ Lady Audley’s Secret,’ &c.
©ffice:
WARWICK HOUSE, PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON, E.C.
New York: Willmer& Rogers. Paris: A. &W. Galignani. Brussels: C. Muquardt. Leipsic-
Brockhaus. Stuttgart : Hallberger. Berlin: F. Schneider & Co. Vienna : W. Braumuller.
Antwerp: Max Kornicker. Rotterdam :H. A. Kramers. Turin and Florence: H. Loescher.'
Stockholm: SAMSON & Wallin. Athens: C. Wilberg. Constantinople: S. H. WEISS. Madras-
Gantz Brothers. Calcutta: Thacker, Spink, & Co.,G. C. Hay & Co., and R. C. Lepage & Co.’
Bombay : Thacker, Vining, & Co. Kingston, Jamaica : De Cordova, M‘Dougall, & Co.
Melbourne: G. Robertson. Adelaide: W. C. Rigby. Sydney: W. Maddock. Tasmania: J.’ Walch
& SONS, Hobart Town. Walch Bros. & Birciiall, Launceston.


Entirely New Edition, enriched with above 500 Descriptive Engravings, extra cloth, gilt side, hack, and
edges, bevelled boards, price ss.
THE ILLUSTRATED BOY’S OWN TREASURY.
Comprising:—l. Science. 11. Drawing. 111. Painting. IV. Constructive Wonders. V. Rural Affairs.
VI. Wild and Domesticated Animals. VII. Outdoor Sports and Indoor Pastimes. Forming a Com-
plete Repertory of Home Amusements and Healthful Recreations.
N.B.— This Work is beyond doubt the most useful, amusing, and permanently valuable Boy’s Book ever produced.
It cannot be surpassed either in richness of illustration or in accuracy of information. The whole has been
most carefully compiled by the Editors of “ The Family Friend,” with a special view to the enlightenment
and entertainment of Boys, to whom it must prove a most acceptable and valuable present.
This day, price 3 s. 6 d., solidly bound in cloth, bevelled boards, gilt side and back, red edges, illustrated
with Hundreds of descriptive Engravings,
THE BOY’S BIRTHDAY BOOK:-
The New Edition of this most agreeable Gift-Book, composed by Mrs. S. C. Hall, Augustus Mayhew,
William Howitt, Thomas Miller, George Augustus Sala, and other well-known writers, illustrated
with nearly One Hundred original Engravings, is now ready, elegantly bound in cloth, silt side,
back, and edges, bevelled boards, price 3 s. 6ct.
“ The very best book of the kind extant.”
This day, with Hundreds of Engravings, strongly bound, bevelled boards, red edges, price 3a. M.
THE YOUNG HOUSEKEEPER,
As Daughter, Wife, and Mother, forming a perfect “ Young Woman’s Companion” in all her Social
delations: including Practical Instructions in Plain and Ornamental Needlework, Letter Writing,
Sick Room Management, Dress and Clothing, House Furnishing, Gardening, Etiquette, and every
other variety of Household Economy in the Nursery, Kitchen, and Parlour; with copious Notes of
the Months, complete History of Domestic Manufactures, Moral and Religious Readings in Prose
and Poetry, and Four Hundred Golden Rules of Life. Compiled by the Editor of “The Family
Friend.”
LONDON : WARD, LOCK, k TYLER, WARWICK HOUSE, PATERNOSTER ROW.


THE PARLOUR LIBRARY.
NEW ISSUE.
Probably no Series of Novels ever published obtained more universal acceptance than those
produced in the Parlour Library. First in quality as a series, largest in quantity, and com-
prising the most popular works of the most successful Novelists, the Parlour Library took
and held a leading position which excited the envy and aroused the imitativeness of the Pub-
lishing Trade. An overstocked market was the natural result. Time, however, which tries all
things, has demonstrated the necessity for Cheap and Good Books, such as the Parlour Library
only admitted, and such as it is intended henceforth to produce in the following manner:—
I. A Series of Volumes at Sixpence each.
11. A Series of Volumes at One Shilling each.
111. A Series of Volumes at Two Shillings each.
The Books in these Series will be chosen with the most scrupulous care as to
literary merits, and while every work will be complete in itself, each book also will be the best
of its kind: quality shall be united to quantity.
SIXPENNY VOLUMES.
NOW HEADY.
1. THE YOUNG LADY’S BOOK OF
TALES. Numerous superb Illustrations.
2. THE BOY’S OWN BOOK OF TALES.
Numerous superb Illustrations.
3. THE SHIP CHANDLER, and other
Tales. By G. A. Sala.
4. THE FAMILY CREDIT. By West-
land Marston, LL.D.
5. THE FILIBUSTER, and other Tales.
By Albany Fonblanque.
6. THE CRUISE OF THE BLUE
JACKET, and other Tales. By Lieut.
Warneford, R.N.
7. UNDISCOVERED CRIMES. By
“ Waters,” Author of “ Recollections of
a Police Officer,” &c.
8. LADY LORME. A Novel. By Annie
Thomas.
9. THE MUTINY OF THE SATURN,
and other Sea Tales. By Lieutenant
Warneford, R.N.
10. THE FAIR OF EMY VALE. A Tale.
By William Carleton.
11. THE PERFIDY OF CAPTAIN SLY-
BOOTS, and other Tales. By G. A. Sala.
12. “ GIVE A DOG A BAD NAME, AND
” By Albany Fonblanque.
13. THE WIFE’S PORTRAIT. By West-
land Marston, LL.D.
14. MRS. WALDEGRAVE’S WILL, and
other Tales. By Albany Fonblanque.
15. EXPERIENCES OF A REAL DETEC-
TIVE. By “ Waters,” Author of “ Re-
collections of a Police Officer,” &c.
16. THE LATE MR. D , and other
Tales. By G. A. Sala.
17. THE BOOK OF MORAL TALES.
Numerous Illustrations.
18. THE GIRL’S OWN BOOK OF TALES.
Numerous Illustrations.
19. THE LITTLE RED MAN, and other
Fairy Tales. Numerous Illustrations.
20. THE SILVER ACRE. A Tale. By
William Carleton.
21. THE DREAM AND THE WAKING.
A Tale. By Annie Thomas.
22. THE VALARY FAMILY. By “Waters.”
23. TURF CHARACTERS.
• SHILLING VOLUMES.
NOW READY.
1. LADY GOODCHILD’S FAIRY RING.
A Collection of Fairy Tales. Superbly
Illustrated.
2. CYNTHIA THOROLD. A Novel. By
the Author of “ Whitefriars.”
3. LEONARD HARLOWE; or, the Game
of Life.
4. BLOW HOT, BLOW COLD. A Love
Story. By Augustus Mayhew.
5. THE ROUND OF WRONG. A Novel.
By Edmond About.
6. RECOLLECTIONS OF AN IRISH
POLICE MAGISTRATE. By Lieut.-
Col. H. R. Addison.
7. AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A FRENCH
DETECTIVE. Edited by Sir C. F. L.
Wraxall, Bart.
8. SOMETHING TO LAUGH AT. Nume-
merous Grotesque Illustrations.
9. THE FUNNY FELLOW: A Book for
the Merry and Wise of all Ages and
Climes. Hundreds of Comic Illustrations.
10. DICK DIMINY, THE JOCKEY. By
C. J. Collins ("Priam”), Author of
“ Sackville Chase,” &c.
11. MAKE YOUR GAME. By G. A. Sala.
Illustrated by W. M'Connell.
12. THE GREEK BRIGAND; or, the King
of the Mountains. Illustrated by Gustave
DorA
13. THE CHAIN OF DESTINY. A Novel.
By Vane J. St. John.
14. MEMOIRS OF A LADY IN WAIT-
ING. By Mrs. F. Aylmer.
15. WHICH WINS, LOVE OR MONEY ? A
Novel. By the Author of “ Whitefriars.”
16. THE REV. ALFRED HOBLUSH AND
HIS CURACIES. By Percy Fitz-
gerald, M.A.
17. CLEVER JACK; or, the Adventures of a
Donkey. Numerous superb Illustrations.
18. THE NIGHT MAIL. By Percy Fitz-
gerald, M.A.
19. STORM-BEATEN. By Robert Bu-
chanan and Charles Gibbon.
HUNTED TO DEATH: A Tale of Love and
Adventure. By W. S. Hayward. 2s.
LONDON: WARD, LOCK, & TYLER, PATERNOSTER ROW.


MONEY, TIME, & LIFE
ARE LOST IN THE EVENT OF
ACCIDENTAL INJURY OR DEATH.
PROVIDE AGAINST THESE LOSSES BY A POLICY OF THE
Railway Passengers’ Assurance Company
AGAINST
ACCIDENTS OF ALL KINDS.
The 1 Oldest and Largest ACCIDENTAL ASSURANCE COMPANY.
* Hon. A. KINNAIRD, M.P., Chairman .
I
PAID-UP CAPITAL AND RESERVE FUND, £140,000
ANNUAL INCOME, £160,000.
£BlO,OOO been paid as Compensation
i' ' BONUS ALLOWED TO INSURERS OF FIVE YEARS’ STANDING,
v„ ( ■
Apply to the Clerks at the Railway Stations* the Local Agent* or at
6A, CORNHILL & 10, REGENT STREET, LONDON
WILLIAM J. VIAN, Secretary.
