

pern prvm
q£'l
f'h /
Colonial and Indian Exhibition,
1886.
THE
COMMERCE AND INDUSTRIES
QUEENSLAND
HORACE EARLE.
LONDON:
WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, Limited,
printers anti Publtsfjers to 3&ogal Cotmnfestort,
13, CHARING CROSS, S.W., and at THE EXHIBITION.
1886.


CONTENTS
INTRODUCTORY .... 3
THE PASTORAL INDUSTRY - 4
THE SUGAR INDUSTRY - - 6
BANKS 7
MANUFACTURING INDUS-
TRIES—
Foundries and Iron-workers - 9
Brass and Copper Foundries - 11
Galvanised Iron Workers and
Plumbers - - - - 11
Saddle and Harness Making - 12
Boot Manufacturing - - 12
Cabinet-making - - - - 12
Coach-building - - - - 13
Potteries 14
Tanneries ----- 14
Foods 15
Fruit Preserving - - - 15
Manufacturing Confectioners 15
MANUFACTURING INDUS-
TRIES- — continued :
Distilling 15
Breweries ----- ig
Coal Trade - - - - 16
Woollen Manufacture - - 16
Nursery and Seed Business - 17
MINERALS—
Gold ------ 17
Tin ------ 18
Coal 19
Silver - - - - . . 19
Copper 19
PUBLIC Works-
Railways ----- 20
The Post and Telegraph De-
partment - - - - 20
Harbours and Rivers - - 22
Lighthouses - - - - 24
CONCLUSION - -25


THE COMMERCE AND INDUSTRIES OP
■QUEENSLAND:
HORACE EARLE.
INTRODUCTORY.
In the early days of this portion of Australia, now known as Queens-
land, the trade done could scarcely he classed under the head of
commerce. There were people, few enough indeed, who required-
stores, and there were merchants in Sydney who could supply them,,
hut the trade was so small that a single schooner, trading between the
ports, was sufficient for the carrying trade. But with the withdrawal
of the convict element free settlement was encouraged; and a
gradually increasing business was done, which tempted the directors
of the enterprising Hunter River Steam Navigation Company, now so
well known as the Australasian Steam Navigation Company, to lay
on a steamer between the ports, even in the face of great opposition
from a very large and influential section of shareholders, who could
see only loss in the enterprise. The “Shamrock” was the steamboat
selected for the new service—a tiny boat of 211 tons, the captain of
which was supplied with a manuscript chart of Moreton Bay. But
she proved too large for the trade of 1842, and after a few trips,
covering about five months, she was withdrawn. The objecting share-
holders were right—a loss had accrued. Nevertheless there were all
the elements of prosperity in Moreton Bay, as the port of Brisbane
was then called, and southern speculators had their attention fixed
upon the rich soil and luxurious grassy plains of our scrubs and
downs. They saw that therein were the “ potentialities of growing-
rich beyond the dreams of avarice” ; and these potentialities would
almost raise a dead speculator from his grave. Numbers of persons
following in the wake of Cunningham, the first “overlander,”
wandered from their old southern settlements to find prosperity here.
Names still revered among us are in the list of the stout pioneers who
boldly ventured, with their lives in their hands, into our grassy wilds,
bringing with them their flocks and herds, and stirring into life and
active producing power this hitherto undeveloped land.
And so once again an attempt was made to connect the prosperous
own of Sydney and the gradually rising settlement of Moreton Bay,
by steam. The “ Shamrock’’ was seen once more upon our waters,
and this time with better pr ospects of success. The steam company
were determined to force the trade, and their enterprise was
rewarded; for shortly afterwards we find another steamer, the


“ Sovereign,” placed upon the line. So certain now were the directors
of the company of eventual success, that they secured river frontages
in Brisbane, and supported with the utmost liberality every scheme
for the advancement of the new settlement.
Brisbane then was but a poor place—a mere clearing reserved
from the primeval forest. Standing in Queen street, the principal
thoroughfare of the metropolis of our sturdy young colony, one can
scarcely realise that ever its hills were silent, or its surface green. On
either hand we behold structures rivalling in magnificence those of
the older cities of the South. We observe evidences of wealth, refine-
ment, and enterprise, wonderful for the age of the place. Enormous
warehouses and shops are distributed on every hand, and are visible
in every leading thoroughfare. Banks, insurance offices, and Govern-
ment buildings adorn the city, and testify to the opulence and
commercial vigour of its inhabitants.
Formerly a part of New South Wales, Queensland became a
separate colony in the year 1859, at which time its population was
estimated at about 20,000 souls. Even then its trade was not incon-
siderable, for the Government statistics for the first year of its
independent existence place the imports at the respectable figure of
£742,023, or about £3O per head of the population, while its exports
are recorded at £523,476. This consumption of imports at £3O per
head may seem heavy, but it must be borne in mind that prices of
most goods at that time were higher than at present. That this was
the case was evident from a comparison of the result of the present
figures, for we find that the imports for the year 1884 amounted to
£6,045,026, while the population stood at 309,600 souls, giving about
£l9 10s. as the annual consumption per head of population ; and yet
the luxuries of life enter far more freely into our general habits now
than in those rough old days. The trade of the colony for several
years was left in the hands of but few commercial houses, some of
which are yet recognised in the business of to-day. Outside of
Brisbane, wdth the exception of Ipswich—then of even greater
commercial importance than the metropolis-—there was but little
done, and a few country storekeepers, scattered here and there in
squatting districts, supplied local wants, and formed centres around
which were to gather future townships.
THE PASTORAL INDUSTRY.
The year 1859 is to be ever remarkable in the history of Queens-
land as the year of its birth. The population was small, numbering, as
I have stated, but little over 20,000 souls, while its area was vast
enough for any empire, covering 668,224 square miles, of which it is
estimated that not more than 2,000 acres out of 80,000 alienated
from the Crown, were under cultivation. The principal crop was
maize, followed by potatoes and oaten hay, at a long distance.
Banana cultivation was carried on pretty extensively, and occupied
about one-fifth of the cultivated area. The live stock was estimated
at 23,504 horses, 432,890 cattle, and 3,166,802 sheep. The Queens-


land historian, Mr. Coote, who is responsible for these estimates, values
the live stock at the time at £2,500,000, and the “properties comprised
within the municipalities of Brisbane and Ipswich at the then current
rates, at £900,000, and the gradually growing townships in the
interior —seven in all—at £350,000 more.” These figures added to
the estimated value of runs, and “the movable property employed in
industrial processes,” would total up to about £4,250,000, which
represented the actual wealth of a community of 20,000 souls. These
estimates are interesting, and contrast remarkably with the present
values, which will be given as we proceed.
Having thus briefly sketched the condition of the colony at _ its
start, I will now proceed to consider its present position, introducing
from time to time such information as I am able to command regard-
ing the several items of commercial importance.
The vicissitudes of climate have not been withouttheir effect upon
the yield of some of our most important staples; our wool exports for
the year ending in December, 1884, were seriously affected by the
long continued drought, during which an immense number of sheep
were sacrificed, and their fleecy yields lost to the country. The
figures before us, however, are not inconsiderable, and shew an enor-
mous increase upon the exports of 1860 when the first returns were
made; for while in that year the export value of wool was only
£444,000, that of last year reached the large figure of £1,889,000, and
that in the face of a calamity which destroyed millions of sheep.
Such losses as accrued to commerce during the prevalence of the
drought would have created in times past a state of things which the
country must have sunk under; but it has outlived weakness, and can
withstand the effects of even extraordinary trials. Our varied indus-
tries fill the gap created by the depression of any particular one; and
although we do not accumulate the wealth an entirely successful
season would have produced, we are fortunately enabled to tide over
the effects of those disastrous ones which now and then overtake us.
Even as it is, the wool produce for the half-year ending June 30
last showed a marked increase over the corresponding period of the
previous year; the drought continuing still to almost decimate the
flocks.
The infliction, how ever, has not been without its lesson, and wool-
growers are profiting thereby. It is a proven fact that beneath the
surface of our widely extending plains there are immense natural
reservoirs of fresh water, which only require expenditure in money
and labour to develop. In many cases works of this nature have
been locally undertaken to the advantage of the stock-owner, who
may now almost defy the fiercest drought. This endeavour to
counteract the effects of this great scourge is warmly supported by
the Government, even to the extent of establishing a special depart-
ment, and instituting a series of experimental borings which have, so
far, proved remarkably successful. There can be no doubt that
visitations in this respect will in future be far less disastrous than
in the past; and it is only a matter of time for droughts to be looked


Cattle
4,266,172
Sheep ... ...
9,493,829
Horses
253,116
Hides
... £10,000 ...
... £92,600
Skins
3,700 ...
16,000
Tallow
25,000 ...
76,000
"Wool
444,000 ...
... 1,889,000
upon without the dread of the ruin which they have heretofore brought
with them. I mentioned above the estimated number of cattle, sheep,
and horses in the colony at the date of separation from blew South
Wales, and now proceed to give the figures, from the last published
returns, showing the numbers as they now stand: —
Taking into account the enormous losses through drought, which
could only be roughly estimated, this is a large increase upon the
original returns, and is a satisfactory proof of the suitability of our
climate for pastoral pursuits.
In connection with this industry it may not be out of place here
to contrast the past with the present as regards the value of exports -
1860. 1884.
But even this does not show the increase in actual numbers, for 25
years ago prices were throughout much higher than they range at
present, and a very considerable per centage might be added to the
present figures to place the actual exports upon the same level, item
for item, as in the 1860 returns. And again, there are thousands of
hales forwarded by squatters—on or adjacent to the border —to Sydney
for shipment, which therefore do not come into our customs’ returns.
But on the other hand the greater care which has been bestowed upon
the breeding has, no doubt increased the weight of fleeces, so as in some
measure to reduce the discrepancy caused by the alteration in prices.
The present decline in the price of wool shows cash returns which
are inadequate to the cost of producing; and, considering the increase in
production and quality in other wool-producing countries, an advance
of any magnitude cannot he looked for with any certainty. Never-
theless it will he many years before wool of equal quality to
Australian wool be produced in foreign producing countries, our soil
and climate being peculiarly adapted to the growth of the finer sorts,
namely, the fine combing Australian merino, to the cultivation of
which our growers should give increased attention.
Taking the next item of export in value we come to the—
THE SUGAE INDUSTRY.
A long series of experimental efforts at length resulted in sugar
being placed on the list of our products. The coffee and sugar Act
of 1862 brought this about, and large areas of suitable land were
placed under cane. Later on —some four or five years—when it was
proved beyond doubt that sugar could he grown profitably in Queens-
land, many more sanguine investors became inspired with the idea of
becoming planters, and spent immense sums in machinery, clearing,


planting, &c., and also invested in the labour considered most suitable
for such work. But unfortunately for most of them, their labours
were of too experimental a character, and the expenses proved too
heavy for their pockets. Machinery of an expensive kind was
purchased, and, for lack of knowledge of the subject, was in many
eases useless to the purchasers. At that time the price of sugar was
such that a yield of any importance, if obtained, would have met
almost any outlay the planter may have been at, but for want of
proper cultivation the yield did not appear, and thousands of pounds
were thereby lost. This failure was most apparent in Southern ;
Queensland, although it was not unknown in the tropical districts
of the colony. People persevered, however, and at length
acquired that knowledge of the subject which, enabled them to
work their plantations with some approach to success. The first official
returns show that there were six mills in operation, and that the
united crushings were 168 tons, and a large quantity of molasses. This
was in 1867. In 1872 there were 65 mills, crushing 5,000 acres of
cane for 6,266 tons of sugar, and 357,614 gallons of molasses. Still
progressing, in the returns for 1882-3 we find there were 120 mills
with a crushing of 15,702 tons of sugar, and 663,825 gallons of
molasses. The returns since have shown a constant increase, and at
the present time, with prices depressed quite one-half, the value of our
sugar returns may be estimated roughly at £1,000,000, inclusive of
that consumed in the colony. The difficulty in getting cheap and
suitable labour is almost overwhelming at the present time, when the
price of sugar but little more than pays the cost of production.
This industry has now assumed such gigantic proportions, that the
returns, under favourable circumstances and with all the mills in full
work, have placed its export value next to gold. We still hope to see
it profitably worked, without shocking the prejudices of any class.
The sugars produced by our best mills are of a very superior
description, being well made, with good grain and colour. The large
sugar-mills of Tengarie, which were established about 1872, for a long
time produced the best and most marketable samples; indeed although
rivalled by the produce of some of the more northern mills, their
sugars still command the highest prices. The principal sugar
districts of the colony at the present time are the Eiver Mary,
Bundaberg, Mackay, Mourilyan Harbour, and the Johnstone Eiver;
other lands are equally good, but the present depressed condition of
the sugar market has prevented its being worked.
BAHKS.
Before 1859 but three banking institutions had established them-
selves in Brisbane : the Bank of Hew South Wales, the pioneer bank,
which struggled for business as far back as 1850 ; the Union Bank,
which opened in 1853 ; and the Australian Joint Stock, which opened
in 1856. The Bank of Australasia had located itself in the then
important town of Ipswich in 1853, and shared the financial business
of that town with the Bank of Hew South Wales, which opened there


at the same time. These great establishments had to content them-
selves with small beginnings, but have grown with the growth of the
city, and are now possessed of buildings of vast magnitude, though
not too large for the business transacted within them. As the
commerce of the colony progressed other banking corporations,
followed in the wake of the three just mentioned, which we name in
the order of their establishment here :—■
V The Commercial Bank of Sydney ... ... 1862
The Queensland National Bank ... ... ... 1872
The London Chartered Bank of Australia ... 1882
: The Mercantile Bank of Sydney.. 1884
’The Commercial Bank of Australasia ... ... 1885
The Bank of Australasia, which we have stated opened in
Ipswich in 1853, found it to its advantage to be represented in the
rising metropolis, and commenced business there in 1860. The city
of Brisbane has liberally responded to the efforts, made in its behalf by
these grand institutions, their annual dividends being considerably
the better for their Queensland trade. The gradually expanding,
importance of the colony, its increasing wealth, and spreading indus-
tries (of which I shall speak hereafter), offered a fair field for invest-
ments, which the closing markets of the western world denied to
capitalists, wdio gladly turned their attention to our increasing
capabilities. Through these institutions they have been enabled to-
reap heavy dividends, to their satisfaction, doubtless, and also to our
advantage. Judiciously liberal in their advances, the support of the
banks has maintained the commerce of the colony in a sound and
satisfactory condition ; and has promoted and encouraged the growth
of those industries which have given us a permanent claim to be.
regarded as a wealth-producing colony.
Within the limits of such an elementary paper as this it is
impossible to reproduce the elaborate details of their business, as
shown in their periodical returns to the Government; but some idea,
may be gathered from the following summary:—
*For Quarter ending March 31s£, 1885.
£ s. d.
Notes in circulation not bearing interest ... 607,038 1 9
Coined gold and silver and other coined metal 1,167,953 15 9
Deposits not bearing interest ..2,298,178 9 1
Deposits bearing interest 3,963,155 2 6
Amount of all debts due to Banks ... ...9,796,888 310
These returns speak volumes for the amount of business done its
the colony, and therefore need no comment from me. I have at my
disposal figures which would show the gradually increasing nature of
the hanking business in Queensland, but lack of space for such details-
precludes their insertion ; moreover it is sufficient for our purpose to
show the present condition of our monetary interests.
* These returns do not include the Commercial Bank o£ Australasia, which opened after they
were prepared.


Prom the list above given we must extract one Bank for special
notice, it being a local institution.
The Queensland National Bank was founded in 1872, and at once
secured the position among kindred institutions which it has since
maintained. The management struck out boldly and planted branches
in every country town as it evolved from the wilderness, and it now
numbers no fewer than forty-four. Its liberality induced custom,
while the local knowledge of its practical conductors almost reduced
its risks to a minimum. The new bank building in Queen street is
the most imposing structure in the colony, and leaves little to be
desired in the way of accommodation.
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES.
The efforts made by the industrial section of the various com-
munities of Queensland to push local work into the front rank have
met with the greatest possible success, and our foreign imports are
greatly diminished thereby. A good tradesman is invariably successful,
providing always that his efforts are well directed and that he devotes
himself assiduously to his work. A waster of time drops out of the
line and sinks into comparative nothingness, however clever a work-
man he may be. Ours is a country for the industrious; the idler
need look for no success here, but on the contrary will sink lower and
lower until he becomes an impecunious loafer. We have amongst us
so many examples of successful industry that it may be safely asserted
that fortune will favour the industrious. Men who have started in
life with their skill and energy as their only capital are now become
wealthy capitalists and the employers of hundreds of hands. Or
these I propose to give instances as I proceed, and in doing so I may
fearlessly hold out the hope of a like future for all who put heart
and head into their work. Unfortunately we are not without our
share of thriftless, idle loungers, who shuffle through existence in an
aimless manner, and ultimately disappear without leaving behind them
any greater lesson than that afforded by the utter failure of their
lives. Perhaps the most important industry cultivated amongst us is
the mechanical, and this affords us so many instances of successful
enterprise that I shall place it first.
FOUNDRIES AND IRON WORKERS.
The oldest foundry in this colony is that now owned by the firm
of Smith, Forrester and Co. It was originally started some twenty
years ago by a working man of the name of Cameron. His business
was small, of course, but it gradually increased under the subsequent
guidance of Mr. John Sinclair, late Mayor of Brisbane, and was
purchased in 1868 by Messrs. Smellie and Co., who conducted it most
successfully, and finally sold out to the present proprietors. These
were three hard-working, steady mechanics who had made up their
minds to thrive. Commencing business in a small way in 1873,
starting with tools which their own ingenuity devised and skill
manufactured, they laboured on, and within a month of their starting
3 a 2


foWhd employment fo? twelve men. Soon their business so increased
that they found it necessary to search for larger premises. About
this time, 1882, only three years ago, Smellie and Co. decided to
relinquish their foundry business, the two firms came to terms, and
Smith, Forrester and Co. entered upon the extensive premises which
they now occupy, where they employ about 200 men. So rapidly is
their business extending that they have secured land a few miles down
the river, where they purpose to carry on the shipbuilding business,
which they are so actively engaged in. Theirs has been one unbroken
success, and the magnitude of their operations has never proved too
much for their powers. Their arrangements have permitted them to
engage in extensive contracts, including the building of steamers ; and
when their yards at Breakfast Creek are completed, no vessels could
be too large for their resources.
Messrs. J. "W. Sutton and Company’s establishment is at present
even larger than the before-mentioned, and gives employment to 300
hands. Beginning in a small way, this firm lias now become the most
important in Queensland in its line. Their works are very extensive,
and are equal to any demand made upon their resources. Machinery
of all descriptions, and steamers of all sizes are constructed in their
workshops and yards; the work in all cases being in the highest degree
satisfactory. Their capabilities are unlimited ; and whatever may be
done by skill and capital may be safely undertaken by this vast
•establishment, which has now become one of the institutions of the
colony. From a small beginning —the very smallest imaginable, only a
few years back —the establishment has grown into its present vast
proportions, and its heads are among the wealthy of the land. Since
1881, when this firm may be said to have commenced, they have built
eleven steamers for private purchasers, have constructed a large
number of sugar plants, and completed a considerable quantity of
rolling-stock for the Queensland [Railways-; and have now on hand
orders for four steamers averaging 60 tons register, and twelve
hopper barges. As soon as possible, this firm intends to avail
itself of the greater convenience offered by their extensive area
on the river bank, about four miles down the river, when they will
construct a patent slip.
Still other instances of well-earned prosperity press forward for
our consideration. Messrs. Evans, Anderson, Phelan and Co. —pushing,
industrious, and intelligent -workmen, bred at the forge, the anvil and
the lathe—dusky workers, amidst smoke, heat and noise—issuing forth
to secure the premiums their untiring industry has won for them.
Here again the busy hum of labour arises from the united efforts of
begrimed and stalwart workmen, numbering some hundred and fifty
strong, who work at the boiler, the engine, or the steamship ; the
sugar-mill, the. quartz-crusher, anything that iron or steel can be
turned into, or that mortal engineer can fashion.
Then come Harvey, Sargeant and Co., a year or two since earning
wages in other shops, and now masters of their own with thirty men
at their command, casting huge girders, or fashioning graceful pillars


and railings, for the huge buildings springing up around us. But a
little while since such goods were brought from the other colonies, or
from England. Their manufacture was beyond our hope or expecta-
tion • now we give our orders to our fellow citizens and are satisfied
with’the quality of the work supplied, and care not to _go outside for
what can be so well done here. Many smaller shops exist, and in time
they will, in turn, become enlarged, and their patient industry shall be
rewarded.
In Ipswich, in Toowoomba, in Bundaberg, the busy workshops
resound with the stroke of hammers, the hum of men, and buzz and
whirl of engine and connections. In Maryborough the great firms of
J. Walker and Co. and Tooth and Co., employing some 350 hands,
turn out such work as would do no discredit to the great shops of
England. Dredges, barges, steamers, iron lighters follow each other
from the busy ways, and glide into the element which is to be their
home. Eobertson and Co., of Mackay, with sixty busy men, labour to
meet the demands of the great sugar district in which they are located.
Making and repairing, this busy shop is ever astir with noise and
bustle, each man adding wealth to the long-headed Scottish foundry-
man’s teeming purse. Townsville has its Foundry Company with forty
hands, each busy supplying the demands of the vast district around
them. Indeed, in all parts where such work is needed, may be found
evidences of successful progress and unwearying industry. The faithful
worker is always well above the level, is always comfortable in pocket,
and beyond the reach of those petty trials and shifts which are so
markedly characteristic of working life in England.
BEASS AND COPPEE EOUHDEIES.
We have also brass and copper foundries, the chief of which is
the establishment of Messrs, J. Hipwood and Co. Commencing in
1870 with two workers, we now behold works equal to any possible
demand, and in which are constructed large plants for distilleries and
breweries, also Baur and Wetzell pans. A great portion of their trade
at the present time is with the shipping, on which they are constantly
engaged, the mail ships keeping them always going. The work turned
out by this establishment is first-class, and in every respect equal to
imported.
G-ALYANISED lEOH WOEKEES AND PLUMBEES.
One house finds very profitable work in galvanising. Messrs. W.
Keith and Co. are an old-established firm, but until lately have con-
fined their business to tinsmithing and galvanised-iron working • they
have now, however, added galvanising to their business, and their work
is so satisfactory as to command a very large portion of the trade, to
the exclusion in a great measure of imported goods.
Gralvanised iron workers and plumbers are very strongly repre-
sented in the colony, each town of any importance having it’s quota.
The industry is a paying one, and it may be safely said that every house
is successful, while most are wealthy.


SADDLE AND HAENESS MAKING.
Saddlery and harness making is also a profitable industry here,
and its representatives in a wholesale way are a thriving people. The
workmen are the best procurable, and turn out work quite equal to
imported. The establishments of the local makers give employment
to a great number of hands who are all well paid. Toowoomba, the
centre of a rich squatting district, gives business to a large number of
makers. Bockhampton, Townsville, and Maryborough —important
Northern centres —are well provided in this department of trade.
Bating back almost to the origin of the colony, the principal firms
have, with the aid of the best hands procurable from ail parts of the
world, worked up into wealth and station.
BOOT MANUEACTUEING.
The boot-making trade is carried on very extensively. The whole-
sale manufacturing is of course not in many hands, but the amount
of capital invested is very large. There are two leading establish-
ments which I shall mention, space being too limited for further dila-
tion on this branch of our commercial development.
The establishment of Mr. James Hunter is remarkable for its
vastness ; the manufactory, five stories high, stands upon nearly an
acre of ground, with a total area of some 47,700 feet; and employment
is given to 450 hands, embracing every class of boot workmanship.
The output is stated to be about 60,000 per week —an enormous
quantity certainly, and one would think ample for the wants of the
320,000 inhabitants of this great colony. Mr. Hunter, however, not
only manufactures for our wants, but sends forth his work into the other
colonies, where it is highly appreciated.
The next important manufacturing house in this trade is E. T.
Neighbour’s. This establishment started about ten years since with
four hands, and by dint of unwearying industry and energy it has
now increased to its present enormous proportions. The number of
hands employed at the present time is 200, each of whom, under the
careful supervision of an able manager, seems to turn out excellent
work. The factory is large and roomy, well ventilated, and clean;
while the evidences of an extensive trade is visible all round. This
factory turns out 300 different sorts and styles of boots, and is cer-
tainly very creditable to our young colony.
CABINET-MAKING.
Cabinet-making is a well established and thriving industry, its
representatives being scattered about throughout all the large towns
of the colony, the metropolis, however, naturally attracting the best
workmen, and boasting of the larger establishments. The work
turned out by them is certainly unsurpassed in quality and taste by
any imported goods, while the establishments would do credit to any
city in the world. Imported goods in this and, indeed, any other line,
labour under the disadvantage of being made for Australia ; that is to
say, they are poorly finished and decidedly unreliable in point of
durability. Our local men are striving to establish preeminence in all


Branches of trade, for their reputation is their fortune. It is sufficient
to say that there is no occasion whatever to go outside of our own
workshops for most articles in this category. The lighter and more
artistic branches of cabinet-making are by no means neglected in our
advancing industries. Magnificent show-cases, elaborate . and
exquisitely finished and designed fret-work, and ice-chests of perfect
construction are produced here. Perhaps the most artistic among
his many rivals is Mr. P. Thomle, whose works are most thoroughly
interesting, from the beauty and grace of the various works with
which his workshops are crowded. So greatly is his work approved,
that he has been awarded medals of high value from most of the
exhibitions. This gentleman commenced, of course humbly, seven
years ago, and now employs twenty highly-paid men.
COACH-BUILDING-.
That the refinements and luxuries of life are not absent from our
social condition may be proved by the enormously increasing develop-
ment of the coach-building trades in our midst. Where but a few
years since an occasional buggy might have been seen, and that of the
humblest and least pretentious description, we now behold carriages
by the hundred, and many of them equalling in style and finish the
stately vehicles of the famous “ Eow.” Our beautiful suburbs are
alive with them. They shed a lustre of refinement and grace on our
capital, and make us hopeful that in course of years our Queensland
metropolis may vie with other capitals in everything that softens and
elevates labour and struggle. The oldest coaehbuilding establishment
in the trade started as a blacksmithy and wheelwright, as far back in
our dark ages as the year 1843. With patient industry and untiring
energy, L. McLean plodded along until he was enabled to leave to his
son, the present head, a business employing some forty hands. The
present business is of a mixed nature, and includes the manufacture
of agricultural implements, in which department Mr. A. McLean has
achieved great success. The present shops are found to be too small
for the work to be done, and larger premises are being erected about
a mile from the centre of the city.
Another old firm stands in the front rank in this department
of our local industries. The firm of J. McNab and Son commenced
in a very small way in the year 1854, and have now achieved a reputa-
tion which is an honour to the firm and the colony. They have
.managed to keep up with the times, and the work turned out by them
is in most respects cheaper and better and as well-finished as any
imported goods. They do no heavy work, confining themselves
entirely to the construction of carriages.
Mr. P. Troy must not be omitted from this category of successful
workers. A blacksmith and wheelwright by trade, he commenced
business in a very small way in 1867, and has gradually worked himself
up into wealth and consideration. His workshops embrace every class
of vehicle, from a tip-dray to a carriage. He, also, gives work to a
large number of men.


Mr. W. Edds commenced business with forge, hammer, and a
blacksmith or two in .1861, and gradually expanded his business, until
now with forty hands he is enabled to turn out carriage work in all its
branches. His cabs, carriages, omnibuses, dog-carts, and what not,
may be seen all over the colony, and are proved to be of a quality
unsurpassed by any imported articles of the kind.
Our coachbuilders are an active and industrious class, as well as
most excellent tradesmen. Closely following the march of improve-
ment, the character of their work will bear the closest inspection, and
few strangers visiting Brisbane could guess that the highly-finished
carriages flitting here and there through our streets were not made in
Long Acre or Oxford street. There are many other makers whose
works are highly esteemed; indeed, so excellently do all our coach-
builders turn out their work that it is almost invidious to particularise,
and we have therefore confined our notices to the oldest establishments.
There is one thing certain in connection with this branch of our trade,
that we do not need to go abroad for our supplies.
POTTERIES.
Our potteries are also strongly represented by A, Fischer and
Co., the Dunmore Brick and Tile Company, and others, who produce
articles in every way equal to the imported. In the porcelain and
crockery branches, of course, we have no works ; our discovered clays
not being equal to the production of such delicate and fragile ware.
Still, if attention were turned in this direction, I am of opinion that
in course of time suitable clay could be found, and our intelligent
operatives would turn it to excellent account.
TANNERIES.
We have several large establishments in this branch of our
industries whose work is eminently satisfactory, and these works
exhibit to a large degree the skill and energy which our colonists
devote to any undertaking to which they may give their attention.
By way of illustration, we adduce one or two instances in this line.
The Grraziers’ Butchering Company erected their works about two
years ago ah Esher, a few miles from Brisbane. They chiefly make
light leather, quantities of which they export to England; the principal
boot factories of Queensland are supplied from this establishment, as
well as the manufacturing saddlers. It is noticeable that their bridle
leather is quite equal to English, and that therefore its importation in
quantities is rendered almost unnecessary. Their works are very
extensive, and a large number of men are employed therein. Their
fellmongery establishment is very successfully worked, and tbe export
of wool therefrom reaches a large total. The Leather Company,
Limited, is another important concern in this branch of trade, having
extensive works at Lutwyche, a Brisbane suburb. The third of
the principal tanneries is that of W. Stephens, the oldest house in
the trade, and one highly esteemed for the quality of the work
turned out.


FOODS.
We now pass to those manufactures which may he classed under
the general heading of the food section of our varied and rising
industries, and the first that occurs to our mind is the biscuit factory of
Messrs. E. W. Wilson and Company, of Brisbane. The house in question
cannot pretend to rival in vastness the great English houses of
Huntley and Palmer, or Peak, Erean and Company; but as regards the
quality of the work produced it certainly is in every way equal. The
establishment is one of which Queenslanders may be justly proud ;
and as it is sufficiently extensive to provide for all our wants in this
direction, and as its manufactures are so pre-eminently superior to
many imported goods of the class, we cannot but feel that in course
of time importations will be unnecessary. The varieties manu-
factured by this energetic firm are limitless, and render selection a task
of difficulty from the very abundance of the samples. George Hiron, of
Toowong, an extensive suburb of our metropolis, is also a large manu-
facturer in this branch of our industries; there are also others, but
space forbids their mention.
FRUIT-PRESERYIN GL
Of fruit-preserving works and jam manufacturers we are not
without representatives, and most excellent goods are produced, and
both as regards quality and price they are every way equal to
imported. Some large works are now in active operation, the chief of
which are those of McLeod and Wills, and B. Skinner. In this
industry we are quite in a position to ignore foreign makers ; never-
theless good foreign brands find a good sale here.
MANUFACTURING- CONFECTIONERS.
Manufacturing confectioners in Brisbane and other towns of the
colony have certainly laid themselves out to rival imported manufac-
tures, and are gradually working their way into public esteem. The
large works of Messrs. W. C. Green and Company are worthy of a few
special words. Devoting themselves entirely to this branch of trade,
they have succeeded in winning their w r ay into the foremost position.
Their business has progressed under careful management, and they
now employ a very large number of first-class hands. Every depart-
ment of the trade has been carefully worked up, and they are now in
a position to supply the colony with all that may be desired in the
way of confections. Through their exertions a large industry has
been carefully fostered, and paying employment has been found for
immigrants who would otherwise have wandered off into less remune-
rative occupations.
DISTILLING-.
The immense amount of sugar now manufactured in this colony
permits of an extensive business being done in the different products
of distillation therefrom. Brisbane, Mackay, and other sugar-growing
districts all have their several distilleries, and have achieved renown
for their products.


BREWERIES.
One industry which lias now secured a firm grip of the;colony, and
wdiich seems likely to maintain it, is the brewery. It is now some
years since the first brewery was started in Queensland, but since then
the growth of the industry has been rapid, and Brisbane alone lays
claim to three wealthy and highly profitable concerns. The oldest
establishment of the kind is that of Messrs. Perkins and Co, (Limited) ,
a highly flourishing firm, doing an enormous business, and possessing
premises worth a fortune in themselves. The very name in connection
with beer should recommend it to the public taste; and yet there is
no doubt that Perkins and Co. (Limited), and Barclay, Perkins and Co.,
of Bankside, are widely different establishments. The next established
brewery is that owned by Pitzgerald, Quinlan and Co., and better
known as the Castlemaine Brewery. This also does an extensive
business, and has acquired a renown for its beer. The third brewery
is the Queensland Brewery Co., the youngest born but still a very
thriving child, and one which, young as it is, is running its elders very
closely. Such beer as that brewed by these great companies, and also
by the Grynipie and Townsville breweries, is bound to materially affect
the English beer imports —indeed it must have done so already, for
our beer imports show no marked increase, although the colony’s
population is constantly increasing. Numerous hands are employed
in these works, which have considerably relieved the labour market.
COAL TRADE.
The coal trade of the colony must not be omitted from our list
of industries, as it has become a source of wealth to the community,
besides absorbing a large number of hands. The great collieries of
Ipswich and its neighbourhood are now making their mark in the
business of the colony. To enter into details respecting the consump-
tion of the coal raised from these mines would press too heavily upon
the space at our command, but the output is certainly increasing and
runs into many thousands of tons annually. Besides the coal raised
within a radius of twenty-five or thirty miles of the metropolis,
coal is being discovered in many places ; and in the course of a few
vears our exports will he largely increased by this industry.
WOOLLEN MANUFACTURE.
Some few years ago a company was formed in the town of Ipswich
for the manufacture of tweed cloth. Eor a long time it languished, and
it was feared that the scheme would collapse; but a little more energy
and better management succeeded in restoring it, and the industry
may now he said to be in a flourishing condition. The material manu-
factured is of excellent quality, while the variety of patterns and
colours enables the directorate to gratify all tastes. We can foresee an
important future for this branch of our commerce, and have faith
in its ultimate development and the eventual introduction of other
branches of textile'manufacture.


NURSERY AND SEED BUSINESS.
The advance into the realms o£ taste and refinement has been most
certainly aided by our interest in the botany of qur own colony and.
that of the outside world. Our gardens are by no means the most
insignificant evidence of our progress, and our tastes have been
fostered by those of our industrial population who have made this
subject a specialty. The firm of Messrs. A. J. blockings & Son have
a reputation which extends far beyond the limits of the colonies..
Established in 1848, when a flower was a rarity indeed, the senior
partner devoted himself to the development of botanical taste and
science, and established gardens and nurseries in the suburbs for the
propagation of tropical and semi-tropical plants; especial care and
attention being given to the acclimatization of fruit trees. In this
endeavour he was very successful, and we have now at our command
fruits and flowers of almost all kinds. The seed business in connec-
tion with this establishment is very extensive; and most of the floral
treasures which ornament our gardens and tables are due to the
civilizing efforts of this firm.
To the extensive development of these several industries Queens-
land is indebted for the sound and solid position which she now
enjoys. They have given occupation to thousands of men who, with-
out such resource, would have wandered away into the bush in search
of such work as may have been obtained, and who would, in this time
of severe drought and pastoral and agricultural depression, have
become a burden on the State. Sufficient justice in the discussion of
our position has not been done to those far-seeing workers who, by
embarking in settled and well known industries, have found labour for
the thousands who have cast in their lot with us. They now find that
the skill and energy by which the business of the world is pushed
forward can be properly and profitably utilised here in our very
midst, instead of being wasted in the desert or the forest. They
discover that the money which would, under other circumstances, have
been remitted to other countries can now, in a great degree, be circu-
lated here. Thus it is that we are enabled to combat with adverse
climatic influences, and to keep business steadily floating. Every
penny we can save by diminishing our imports is a gain to the colony,
and assists us to tide over the deplorable seasons which have so long
oppressed us.
MINERALS.
GOLD.
The year 1866 was a very disastrous one for Australasia, indeed I
may say for the world. Some malign influence had operated to destro}'
confidence, and with confidence, credit and trade—our revenues were
at their lowest, our markets were depressed, our energy was dead or
moribund. There was silence in our streets, there was stoppage in our
works; our shops were empty, and our balances were all the wrong
side. The cry arose, “Oh ! for a local goldfield.” Oh ! for anything
that would restore life and activity to our depressed and almost


starving population. General ruin seemed to be inevitable. Property
bad decreased in value; and wages, when there was any work to do,
were insufficient to support life with any liberality or comfort; and
things will be worse before they are better ” was the most comforting
prophecy we could extract from the down-cornered mouths of the
unhappy citizens. And so through the whole of that year (during
which the establishment known as the Bank of Queensland sank never
to rise again), until September of the next year, 1867, when a
wandering miner named Hash, travelling in the neighbourhood of
Gympie Creek, following his usual occupation of “ prospecting ” for
gold, came upon the precious metal. In course of time the news of
the discovery was wired throughout the length and breadth of
Australia, at any rate wherever the wires could carry them ; a “ rush
ensued, rich gold was struck ; Gympie, one of the richest fields in
Australia, was an accomplished fact—and Queensland was saved! Prom
this goldfield an almost fabulous quantity of gold has been obtained,
which has enriched numbers; while the town itself is an extensive
trading centre. There followed upon the discovery of this goldfield an
extensive exploration, which has resulted in the opening of several
other rich gold centres, from which large returns are constantly
recorded. This industry has developed a busy share market, which has
its brokers in the metropolis and every mining town in the colony.
Even as far hack as 1859 our statistics showed an export of gold; the
quantity recorded for the year 1860 having been valued at £14,500,
while that for 1884 was valued at £1,077,314, a falling-off from the
exports of 1876, which were valued at £1,427,000. This of course is
exclusive of the large quantity removed without report by Chinese
miners on their return to their own country. The past year,
however, promises to exceed the yield of 1876, and will take first place
on the list of exports. At the present time the mines are very active,
and are yielding very freely; and fresh discoveries of the precious
metal are being constantly made. The total yield of gold from all
mines to December 31, 1884, was 4,529,280 ounces, valued at
£15,852,480.
This metal, though richly scattered throughout many regions of
our extensive area, was not discovered until 1872, when the country
went mad over it. The excitement caused by its discovery at Stan-
thorpe was only equalled by that of gold on Gympie; it also appeared
when trade was depressed, and people were looking about them for
profitable employment or investment. Por some years the mines were
worked spasmodically, as companies could he conveniently formed, or
as conveniently wound up. Immense sums of money changed hands
in these investments, many of which were of the shadiest character.
But eventually, the excitement over, the district settled down into a
permanent condition, and the yields became steady. In other districts
in the colony this metal has been found in even larger quantities-
notably in the North—and at the present time, with all the froth
blown away, and the mines settled into systematic working, the export


Tin
Tons.
3,383
Value.
... £130,460
Silver and lead
4,386
35,327
Antimony
748
6,469
Coal ...
... 120,727
*>
60,025
Copper
...
17
129,246
68 ,
... £232,298
value is considerable; tbe 1884 table of statistics placing it at
£228,000. For years tbe gradually diminishing price in the home
market somewhat crushed the industry, but better appliances having
been obtained for working the mines, though still imperfect,
and the price having somewhat recovered, they are now working
to a profit, and add materially to our wealth. There are several
extensive smelting works in connection with our tin production,
which are admirably managed, and enable us to ship our product in
the form of ingots, instead of, as heretofore, in ore. Our tin com-
mands a fair price in the English market, and will in all probability
retain its position. These mines give employment to a large number
of persons, who receive a fair rate of wages, and in some eases entirely
support the trade of a town or district.
Other minerals are discovered in our rich soil, which space forbids
us to detail, but the tables of statistics give us the following details,
which cannot fail to be interesting to whomsoever may be desirous of
knowing the character of the mineral resources of this rich colony,
We learn that during the year ending December 81st, 1884, the
quantity raised was as under, valued at the mines;—
From the mines of Herberton, Palmer, Eavenswood, and Star,
Hodgkinson, G-ympie, Wide Bay, Ipswich, and Stanthorpe.
COAL.
This industry, as will have been seen, is no unimportant one at the
present time, and this year’s yield will no doubt double the 1884
figures. We look forward to great things from this branch of our
mining industries, as the quality of the coal is gradually winning the
esteem of consumers of all classes, and our mail service is making free
use of it.
SILYEE.
The silver yield is also creating a sensation, and the business of
the current year will be an enormous increase upon the past —indeed,
at the present time, fortunes are being made on the mines, which bid
fair to equal some of the richest American successes.
COPPEE.
The copper mines in the various producing districts have been
seriously affected by the low price of the smelted ore in England and
other markets; nevertheless the great Cloneurry mines look very
healthy, and great quantities of the ore have been raised, and might be


placed on the market as soon as smelted, lumbers o£ copper lodes
are being found in all directions in this rich mineral district, and only
require an improved market to work them successfully. This industry,
which might have been one of the most important, is temporarily
crushed, as I have stated, hy the abnormally low price of the metal;
but we may look for restored activity and prosperity in course of time.
There is no question of yield, the stagnation is merely a matter of
price, and the general relinquishment of active work in the mines will
soon have the effect of restoring this.
PUBLIC WORKS.
EAILWAYS.
Our railway system is necessarily extensive, and is being annually
added to by liberal votes for the purpose. Our Governments have
been keenly alive to the advantages of this mode of communication
with the interior, believing justly that settlement would be a slow-
process without it. The question whether a railway system should
precede or follow settlement has received wide discussion, with the
result that wherever the prospects of either agricultural settlement or
mining operations were sufficiently favourable, a line should be formed,
and the district in question be made available for industrial purposes.
The gradually increasing and extending railway system is blotting out
distances, and the wild deserts of the interior are even now being
brought within its influence. Starting from the various busy seaports,
the lines traverse hundreds of miles of mining, agricultural, or pastoral
country, and remove at once the old trouble of getting the produce to
a port.
According to the latest returns we bad 1,207 miles of railway
completed, and 746 miles in course of construction. Still further
work is in contemplation, which will have the effect of rendering the
greater part of our vast territory available for settlement. The
gauge adopted by the Queensland Government is very narrow, but the
engineering skill manifested in the construction of the lines is of the
highest order, while the rolling stock, a considerable portion of which
has been made in our local workshops, is highly creditable to the skill
of our workmen. All this work has been completed at a heavy cost,
the amount comprehending the greater part of our loan liability ; but
the money has been well and wisely spent, and future generations of
Queenslanders will have reason to bless the sound reasoning upon
which the expenditure was based. And after all, the net earnings of
our railways give a return on the annual cost of 3 per cent., which is
not so bad considering the small population of the country. With
increased immigration will arise increased traffic, both in passengers
and goods, and future returns may show an increased profit.
THE POST AHD TELEGEAPH DEPAETMENT.
This is now very complete in all its details, and both postal and
telegraphic communication are opened with every civilized part of the
world. Yfe have not less than 6,979 miles of lines in use, with 11,300


miles of wire, and communication is open with 202 stations throughout
the colony ; while the Telephonic Exchange communicates with more
subscribers than the constantly increasing number warrants our
mention of. Over 300 miles of wire are used for this service.
Our mail services by sea are thoroughly efficient, and we are in
almost daily communication with the Southern colonies. The oldest
service is that of the Australian Steam Navigation Company which,
as I have already stated, opened steam communication with us as far
back as December, 1841, the steamer “ Shamrock,” of 211 tons, being
considered large enough for the trade. To this company we are
largely indebted for our colony’s progress, although, doubtless, the
monopoly of the steam traffic was a paying one at the time. Their fleet
is now very large, comprehending some of the fastest and best
equipped boats on the coast. The success of this company in con-
nection with the Queensland trade, however, produced the usual effect,
and other companies competed with more or less want of success, until
the Melbourne Steamship Company organised an opposition line,
which has managed to hold its own against its powerful opponent.
Meanwhile the largely increased intercolonial trade warranted the
introduction on the coast of an efficient opposition, and we are now
greatly benefited thereby. Watching closely the requirements of our
commerce, these active and well-managed companies have in many
cases anticipated our wants.
The large fleet of the Melbourne Steam Shipping Company
(Messrs. Howard Smith and Co.) find profitable employment on our
waters, and have largely increased the business of our ports. In
addition to these two wealthy and influential companies, we have the
Queensland Steam Shipping Company—an intercolonial service estab-
lished under the auspices of the British-India Steam Navigation Com-
pany, and managed by that body. Its steamers are large and swift,
and find ample occupation both in passenger and goods traffic. These
lines of steamers maintain a pretty constant connection with the other
colonies, and link us with the huge foreign mail services which have
their termini in Sydney. With our own mail service, via Torres
'Straits, we are thus able to communicate with Europe and all the rest
of the world sis times per month.
The British-India line, subsidised by our Government for postal
and immigration purposes, has been most successful in promoting the
commercial interests of our colony; and to its introduction may be
traced the vast increase in trade which has so marked our later years.
By this grand scheme the whole of the ports north of Brisbane have
benefited, and direct communication has been opened with countries
heretofore closed to us. The introduction of a direct service of trade
between this port and Calcutta is now contemplated—indeed, we may
say the scheme is gone beyond mere initiation. —for the large steamers
of the British-India Company are actually laid on, and will shortly
appear in Queensland waters. It is clearly evident that capital casts
loving eyes upon our prosperous colony, and seeks therein for an
(outlet for its pent-up stores of wealth. The merchant-fleets of the


world will te soon striving for a share of our trade, and then w©
shall begin to feel the pinch of a small and thoroughly inadequate
population.
Under the auspices of an influential concern—the New Zealand
Loan and Agency Company—direct steam communication has been
opened with New Zealand, while Tasmania has found it to its advan-
tage to send its produce direct, instead of through Sydney or
Melbourne. On all sides we see public and private effort extending
our communication with the outer world, and our Post Office
authorities are by no means slow in taking advantage of the oppor-
tunities thus offered for increased postal connection.
Our inland postal arrangements are fairly complete; indeed,
considering the primitive methods which have to be adopted to get at
some of the backwood stations, it is a matter of wonder that letters
do not more frequently go astray. The railway is, of course, availed of
to the extent of its possibilities; over 5,000 miles are served by coach,
and horses are utilized for nearly 18,000. The inland postal system
covers over 24,000 miles, at a cost of £55,000; and the total distance
annually travelled is considerably over 3,000,000 miles.
HAEBOUES AND EIYEES.
Since the establishment of the colony in 1859, the Government
have devoted much money and time to the proper regulations and
improvement of the ports of Queensland. The Government of New'
South Wales had in its time deemed the northern districts of their
vast territory altogether beneath their care; indeed the population
was so small and scattered that they had really some reason for their
neglect. But the young and vigorous Queensland Government had
scarcely taken the reins in hand, when they began to take the
necessary steps towards the development of the ports. Dotted wdth
sand-banks and shallows, Moreton Bay navigation was a task of
difficulty and danger for any vessels of considerable draught, and it
certainly was a matter for congratulation w'hen, in 1855, Messrs.
Geo. Baff and Company loaded and dispatched from their wharf the
“ Gazehound,” a vessel of 600 tons. The necessity for forming a
channel and deepening the bar (which seems inseparable from all
Australian rivers) was obvious, and in due course the channel known
as “ Brands ” was formed, and the various flats of the river cleared
to such a depth as to permit the passage of ships of large size to the
wharves of Brisbane. Still, with the grand object of improving the
port, and with a view r to the extension of the commerce of the
metropolis, successive Governments have laboured to improve the
river’s approach. A more direct channel has of late been formed of
greater depth and width, the river shallows and flats have received
proportionate attention, and at the present time ships of 2,000 or 3,000
tons can make the passage to the wharves with absolute safety.
The following extract from the report of the Engineer of Har-
bours and Elvers, W. C. Nisbet, Esq., will sho'w the extent of the -work
accomplished in the port of Brisbane to the end of last year:—“The


Bar cutting lias been deepened to 15 feet below low water for 200
feet in width ; the Inner Bar cutting to the same depth for a width
of 150 feet; Pinkenbar Plats cutting, to the same depth for a width of
200 feet; Eagle Parm Plats.cutting, to the same depth for a width of
200 feet; and the cutting through the Upper Plats will be completed
to the same depth for a . width of 200 feet in two or three weeks’
time. All these cuttings will be widened to the full intended
width of 330 feet in the order that seems best suited for the traffic
of the river.”
Large sums of money have been spent, and profitably spent, in
plant for this and similar work in the other ports of the colony.
There are six very powerful dredges, with attendant hopper-barges
and steam tugs, constantly at work in one or other port or river,
representing a money value of some £314,500. While there are
under order, or in course of construction, at the various works in the
colony, the following extensive additions thereto, which will bring up
the cost of plant to £400,000 : —■
Twelve 200-ton side-delivering hopper-barges.
Pour screw tug-boats of 24 h.p. nominal each.
The above being built by the firm of J. W. Sutton and Co., of
Brisbane.
Three 160-ton bottom-delivering hopper-barges.
In course of construction by Messrs. Evans, Anderson, and Phelan,
who are also building a new dredge, for which the sum of £30,000 has
been voted.
One new dredge, similar to the above.
Pive steam hopper-barges of 450 tons each.
Being built by J. Walker & Co., of Maryborough. Votes for the
clearing and rendering navigable the principal rivers of the colony are
freely granted, and, under the control of responsible and efficient
executive officers, the works are, and have been, executed in a most
thorough and satisfactory manner.
The deepening of the Moreton Bay cutting, and the various cut-
tings in the river before-mentioned, are to go on until vessels of the
size of the Orient liners or P. and O. Company’s steamers can come
up to the wharves in Brisbane. These operations are expensive, and
are undoubtedly a large drain upon our revenue; but they are
remunerative. The trade of our ports is increased, and the inward
and outward tonnage dues are enhanced. By such wise expenditure
our Government have succeeded in turning a beautiful though value-
less port, which at the commencement of the colony could only permit
the passage of vessels of small tonnage and the lightest draught of
water, into one permitting the free and safe access of steamers of
4,000 tons and a proportionate draught.
In addition to the dredging and cutting operations which, as I
have said, have been carried out so extensively and completely, the
Government have constructed a graving dock of considerable length.


at a cost o£ £60,000, for the use of the port. This has been of
immense convenience, and its usefulness will grow with the trade of
the port. At the present time preparations are being made to lengthen
it, and for that purpose the ground within the dock enclosure is being
levelled and surveyed. The dock is large enough for present demands,
and has accommodated a vessel of 315 feet in length; but with a view
to the possible advent of vessels of still greater length, the enlarge-
ment is considered advisable and will be at once proceeded -with.
Wharves and sheds have been erected at Government cost on so
many rivers that space will not’ permit of detail. Wherever such
accommodation has been satisfactorily proved to have been necessary,
the Government has ordered the construction. So far, also, as may
have been practicable, the rivers have been deepened to admit of their
free navigation by the settlers thereon. This work has proved of
immense service to farmers and others, giving them the great advan-
tage of uninterrupted water carriage for their commodities and
stores.
To give my readers an illustration of the advancement of the
business of the port, and to prove that the enormous expenditure in
improving it has not been without reason, I have only to mention
that the inwards and outwards tonnage for the first year of the
colony’s independent existence, ending December, 1860, was 84,000, in
round numbers, while that for the year ending December, 1884, was
1,152,000, and for the whole colony, including foreign, coastwise, and
intercolonial, probably three times these figures.
LIGHTHOUSES.
It is said, and with truth, that the coast of Queensland is the
best lighted in the world, and it is a fact that the Government of the
colony has expended a greater proportion of its revenues in this very
necessary work than any other Government. With a coast line
calculated to be about 2,200 miles in extent, furnished with many
flourishing ports, and flanked by reefs, rocks, and sand-banks, the
navigation is naturally extensive and intricate; hence a system of
lighthouses, and other land-marks and danger-indicators, has natu-
rally exercised the skill and judgment of the port authorities, with
the result that the navigation of the coast is now rendered safe and
simple ; the sailing directions, based upon accurate and approved
surveys, being available for mariners of all nations. The dangers of
the Torres Straits route, hitherto the terror of seamen, are now disposed
of, the track being buoyed and lighted throughout, so that vessels can
pass through without the slightest risk : for this alone the Queens-
land Government deserve the thanks of the world. Straits’ pilots-
men, thoroughly approved by an exact and careful board, are appointed
to conduct vessels through the various intricacies of these waters,
so that the large steamers which now traverse the Straits, and at all
seasons of the year, with safety, prove the value to the various ship-
ping communities of the world of the careful buoying, marking, and
lighting of this route.


The following is a list of the leading lights on the Queensland
Coast, from Cape Moreton to
Carpentaria: —-
Cape Moreton ... ... 1
Inskip Point ... ... 1
Hook Point ... ... ... 1
Sandy Cape ... ... ... 1
Woody Islands ... ... ... 2
Lady Elliott’s Island ... ... 1
Burnett Elver ... ... ... 1
Gatcombe Head ... ... ... 4
Bustard Head ... ... ... 3
Auckland Point ... 1
Cape Capricorn ... ... ... 1
Keppel Bay ... ... ... 1
Sea Hill ... 1
Bolmlara Island ... ... ... 1
Port Alma ... ... ... 1
North Eeef ... ... ... 1
Pine Islet... ... ... ... 1
Elat-top Island ... 1
Norman Eivcr, in the Gulf of
Pioneer Elver ~. (bar lights) 2
Dent Island ... ... ... 1,
Port Denison ... ... ... 3
Cape Bowling Green 1
Cape Cleveland ... ... ... 1
Hinchinbrook Bar ... ... 1
Port Douglas ... ... ... 1
Low Island ... ... ... 1
Point Archer ... ... ... 1
Eocky Islet ... ... ... 1
Grassy Hill, Endeavour Elver... 1
Channel Eock ... ... ... 1
Clermont Island ... ... ... 1
Piper Island ... ... ... 1
Goode Island ... ... ... 1
Proudfoot Shoal ... ... ... 1
Norman Bar ... ... ... 1
Anri, in addition to these coast lights, every hay and river has its par-
ticular system of guiding-lights, beacons, and buoys, to enable mariners
to get to their several destinations at all hours and without mishap.
Too much cannot be said in praise of the care and skill displayed
in rendering the navigation of our coasts and harbours safe and con-
venient; and this, too, at
a cost which could only have had in view the
future development of our tra.de, and the security of life and property
in our vast waters. With efficient
sailing instructions, the reefs,
shoals, banks, and general impediments
which render dangerous under
other circumstances the traffic of these seas, any mariner can traverse
the various passages without fear of wreck or other disaster, can find
and easily navigate vessels into safe havens, when the winds and waves
in the vast Pacific threaten them with destruction.
It may be here mentioned, that the large steamers of the British-
India Steam Navigation Company have traversed the intricate and
dangerous Torres Straits route for over four years without a single
mishap; and when it is known that thirty ships of their line alone pass
through that passage per annum, it will be readily understood that
the sailing rente has been carefully and thoroughly marked out.
CONCLUSION.
In concluding this paper, which, however, is too brief to do
Justice to the subject, I wish to make a few general remarks on the
subject of our trade and prospects, which may not, perhaps, be
unacceptable. I have said enough to prove that our resources are
incalculable, and that their development has been so far satisfactory.
We, the workers, have shown that they can be worked profitably, and
foreign capitalists have come in with their means to do the rest. Our
squattages in many cases, our mines, our financial institutions, every-
3 A 3


tiling save onr manufacturing industries, have been pressed forward
from outside, and in nearly every case the investors have been satisfied.
TV e have not lived long enough yet to have established a wealthy class
amongst us, although we are very rapidly approaching that condition.
The recent rise in the price of land will have operated in this direc-
tion, for many amongst us will have realized portions which, in their
turn, will require investing. A distinct leisure class cannot be fairly
said to exist in Australia. Our moneyed men are still workers and
their sons are to be workers also. This condition has its effect upon
the higher culture of the colonists, and prevents the spread of those
refining influences which are so distinctly visible in older communities.
We are an industrious people; we are working with an object, and
time alone will develop the class which shall give a higher tone to our
society, while it may, perhaps, deprive us of many of those qualities
which, rightly used, induce solidity and wealth. We are buyers,
■sellers, and producers, at present, and are working to create a
nation. We are doing our very best, according to our means, to
provide a home for the “crowded out” of the British Empire, and
n field for the industrious of the world. We have ample room for
millions, and invite them. We want customers for our wares and
produce; we want occupants for our unoccupied acres.
The field of commerce w r e have ploughed, and it is now ready to
.■receive the germs of future greatness. Our commercial system is
based upon fairly sound principles, and is supported by men of
probity and experience; it has grown with our growth and, like our
growth, is sturdy and healthy. With fairer seasons than we have
lately experienced, there can be no doubt of our future progress ; we
have fought a sturdy fight with opposing influences and are still
healthy and strong. There are evidences of continued prosperity daily
brought to our notice in improved buildings, in expanding suburbs, in
enlarged industries, in extended commercial relations, in a continued
access of foreign capital, in a regular succession of mining develop-
ments, in improved literature, in educational expansion and more
elevated thought. Our immigration scheme is liberal and comprehen-
sive ; it offers comfort and independence to all industrious and steady
sons of toil who may feel inclined to make Queensland their home.
The agriculturalist will find a yielding soil and cheap land; the
mechanic will find work in one or other of the large workshops we
have before indicated ; the skilled workman will be appreciated ; the
man of thews and sinews will find them very marketable ; the domestic
servant will meet with ready employment in all cases, providing that
honesty and sobriety be added to proficiency in their several
callings.
