









The Diary
of an Australian Soldier




The Diary
of an
Australian Soldier
(Captain K. j. Barrett)
The Lothian Book Publishing Co. Pty. Ltd
Melbourne and Sydney
1921




PREFACE
The publication of the diary of my elder son, who fell in France,
April 16th, 1917, has been undertaken for two sets of reasons. I am
desirous of doing whatever may be possible to place on record the
services rendered by one who played the game of life 50 loyally and
so well. The personal side of the matter has, however, been dealt
with in a manner which I can admire, but cannot hope to emulate,
by my old friend, Mr. H. G. Turner, and the memorial booklet
written by him contains all that can be said on that aspect of the
matter. The diary, which was submitted to him and by his advice
deferred for publication until after the conclusion of the war, furnishes
much of the data on which he based his conclusions.
Apart from the personal interest, the diary to me is of profound
educational significance, and as such I present it to those who are
interested In following so remarkable a human development.
Keith Barrett as a boy showed little sign of scholastic ability. Possess-
ed of an affectionate and sunny nature, he passed through his school days
at the Melbourne Grammar School without showing any remarkable
ability, or indeed any great interest in his work until he began to
study physical science. During the whole of this school period,
however, he was keenly interested in what is generally known as
nature study, and acquired a fairly full knowledge of the wild life of
the Australian continent, as well as an intimate knowledge of the
biological characteristics of certain domesticated animals, especially
old English game fowls. He entered the Melbourne University, and
in due course obtained the degree of Bachelor of Agricultural Science.
At the University his work again was not remarkable from the
ordinary academic standpoint. During this course, however, he
obtained a good working knowledge of the theory of Mendel, and
began to apply it to a series of experiments in the breeding of fowls,
which became more and more comprehensive. In the intervals of the
v


military campaign he kept sending home directions for the conduct
of experimental work, which unfortunately was never completed.
Owing to the pressure of military work he never had time to set out
comprehensively the results he was seeking. At the end of the
agricultural course he went to Queensland to get an experience of
station life before embarking on a career of his own. Whilst In
Queensland war was declared, and he volunteered at once, becoming
a private in the 2nd Field Ambulance, He encamped at Broad-
meadows, and left Australia with the first contingent on the S.S,
“Wiltshire” on October 18th, 1914.
I saw him in Egypt on my own arrival there in 1915, during
which year he received a commission in the Imperial Army. I again
saw much of him in the winter of 1915-16, when I was invalided
to England from Egypt, and he was invalided from the Dardanelles.
He kept up a full correspondence with me until the end.
I suppose there must have been many such instances during the
war, but his development in character and grasp under military
necessity was amazing.
The agricultural curriculum at the Melbourne University has been
much criticized, but the diary furnishes convincing evidence of the
value of the scientific outlook given by that training. Lieut.-
General Sir J. Monash has voiced the opinion of all sound observers
that the university-trained man almost invariably rose to the top. And
the reason is easy to comprehend. Students have been taught how a
problem should be attacked, they have been taught what scientific
evidence really means, and above all they have been taught from the
intellectual no less than from the moral point of view that there is
only one policy which pays: downright unflinching honesty. Those
who read this diary will note the systematic way in which all problems
are attacked; they will be able to see the question continually put to
himself by the writer: What is it we have to do ? What are the data
of the subject ? What are the principles involved and how are they
to be applied ?


The diary itself was kept for the purpose of giving an indication
to his family of what was actually occurring. It was never written
for publication, and it is absolutely unconscious in its frankness. It
was kept only during actual military operations; during sickness, or
when wounded, or on leave the diary is interrupted. He has, how-
ever, left behind him numerous notebooks, filled with studies on
bombing, on infantry attack, on artillery work, on aeroplane recon-
naissance, essays on discipline, on the art of making men comfortable
and contented, on the military efforts of various countries, and a
large number of other technical subjects. These essays incidentally
furnish to the non-combatant soldier evidence of the soundness and
thoroughness of training in the officers’ schools in the British army.
Indeed, some of the instructions issued relating to causes of military
failure are classics and force the reader to fully understand why that
improvised army ultimately succeeded.
Like many other people, a survey of such a record forces on me
the reflection that if Australians, in common with other British
people, could develop in this extraordinary way under military
necessity, why cannot we pull together, create a parallel civil
organization and do great things in civil life ? This, to me, is the
final lesson to be drawn from such a record. I commend its perusal
to those friends who will appreciate it for personal reasons, and to
the serious-minded who are interested in educational matters and
who will realize its significance to the full.
Readers of this diary will find in it an accurate and faithful record
of the events experienced by thousands of men during four and a
half years of war, and of the manner in which they faced the daily
difficulty with courage and intelligence.
Those who were fortunate enough to survive and who owe their
existence to the men who fell cannot but keep before them for all
time the dignified words officially addressed to surviving relatives:
“He whom this scroll commemorates was numbered among those
who, at the call of King and Country, left all that was dear to them,”


“endured hardness, faced danger, and finally passed out of the sight of
men by the path of duty and self-sacrifice, giving up their own lives
that others might live in freedom.”
“Let those who come after see to it that his name be not forgotten.”
JAMES W. BARRETT.
November, 1920.


KEITH BARRETT
October loth, 1891. Born at Kensington Rd., S. Yarra, Melbourne.
1901. Entered Preparatory Church of England Grammar School,
Melbourne.
1904-1909. Senior C. of E. Grammar School, Melbourne.
1910-1912. Ormond College, University of Melbourne. Agricul-
tural Course. Honours.
1913. Dookie Agricultural College and Sparrowvale. Graduated
Bachelor Agricultural Science, 1914.
1914. Gained his Half-Blue for Boxing.
1914. Queensland.
August, 1914. Broadmeadows. Private 2nd Field Ambulance, A.I.F.
October 18th, 1914. Boarded S.S. “Wiltshire.”
December 10th, 1914. Reached Alexandria. Mena Camp.
1915- Recommended for a commission in the Imperial Army by
G.O.C. Australian Force, and joined the 2nd Royal Fusiliers,
86th Brigade, 29th Division, in July. Trained in Egypt.
August 17th, 19 1 5. Felt for Dardanelles. Reached Suvla Bay
August 24th.
September 1 Bth. Contracted typhoid. Sent to Hospital at Malta.
December I sth, 1915. Arrived Wandsworth Hospital, London.
January 10th, 1916. Discharged from Hospital, two months’ leave.
Light duties, Falmouth.
June 9th, 19x6. France.
June 30th, 1916. Wounded in shoulder in attack on Beaumont-
Hamel. Invalided to England again.
Sept. 16th, 1916. Joined 4th Royal Fusiliers in France.
Xmas Eve, 1916. Promoted to Captain (temporary).
January 4th, 1917. Mentioned in despatches.
March, 1917. Recommended for Military Cross.


KEITH BARRETT
May 21st, 1917. Mentioned in despatches (second occasion).
April 9th, 1917. Helped in capturing “The Harp” in Arras fight-
ing and recommended for D.S.O.
April 13th, 1917. Mortally wounded in fighting at Guemappe,
France.
April 16th, 1917. Died in hospital at Camieres.
April 17th, 1917. Buried at Staples.
December 14th, 1917- Mentioned in despatches for third time.


DIARY
October 18th, 1914. Left Broadmeadows and board-
ed “Wiltshire.” Same afternoon we anchored about
a mile off Port Melbourne pier. Another troopship
there too, A2O.
Monday, October 19th. Cleared Heads about 11
a.m. Other troopship following but soon left behind.
Saturday, October 24th. Arrived in Albany Har-
bour about 10 a.m. after a wonderfully calm trip.
Passed some ships on route almost every day, one said
to be a cruiser. One troopship already in, more coming.
Sunday, October 25th. Now 14 troopships in har-
bour. One cruiser outside Heads,
Wednesday, Albany, October 28th. There are now
about 30 troopships in the Bay, inclusive of nine New
Zealanders which arrived this morning: they are painted
grey. Four cruisers came with them, including one
Japanese, I believe. We are expecting to be joined by
two West Australian boats soon.
Sunday, November Ist. Left Albany Heads at 7
a.m. Our speed averages about 10 miles per hour.
We travelled along the coast.
Monday, November 2nd. Said to have passed Leeu-
win 2 a.m. In morning our course was N.W. Heard
that a wireless had come through to the effect that Great
Britain had declared war on Turkey. At 3 p.m. I


observed that our course was nearly due N. In even-
ing it went to about N.N.W.
Tuesday, November 3rd. Our course is now N.
20° to 30°, W. Wireless come through saying that
Great Britain has lost a big cruiser in the Straits of
Dover (“Hermes”). At about 4 p.m. we picked up
the West Australians; they fell into line immediately
in rear of us. One cruiser came with them. We have
now “Minotaur” in front, “Sydney” on port side, Jap.
to starboard, and “Melbourne” astern.
Sunday, November Bth. We have been steering
N. 20° W. Now have been going fairly close to the
mail route. The “Osterley” came through our lines
one day last week, via Colombo, We had a couple of
fairly rough days shortly after leaving Albany (west-
erly weather), but have since had wonderfully calm
seas. We are very close to Cocos Islands, where it is
said we are to pick up two French transports and two
cruisers. Talk of fleet splitting up, etc. We were
inoculated against typhoid. First injection about a
fortnight ago. Second one on Saturday. Arm sore.
Received news of a naval engagement off Valparaiso in
which the “Monmouth” was said to be sunk. This morn-
ing the “Minotaur” sped off in a westerly direction, the
“Melbourne” taking her place in front. Three British
cruisers, the “Good Hope,” the “Monmouth,” and
another are said to have engaged five Germans—the
“Scharnhorst,” “Gneisnau,” and “Leipzig,” and two
others off Valparaiso.


Monday, November 9th. The “Sydney” has cleared
out in a south-westerly direction this morning. The
“Southern” is our slowest ship, about io| miles per
hour. There is now talk that we might leave her at
Colombo, taking the men on the other ships; highly
improbable.
About 10 a.m. The “Melbourne” is now steaming
S.W., too. Ship’s alarm rung, and our stern-guns
(4*7) cleared for action; also the Japanese cruiser is
going full speed across our bows from starboard to
port. Rumours afloat about intercepted German
wireless.
Later. Reliable information to the effect that “Syd-
ney” and “Minotaur” are in action to westward. At
11.25 a.m. word received that enemy beached on Cocos
Island to save sinking. Said that it was “Emden” and
an armed collier.
Tuesday, November 10th. The last we have heard
about yesterday’s action is that the “Emden” surren-
dered and beached, and that the collier’s crew was
taken off and the vessel sunk (why sink her?). The
“Sydney” is said to have done all the fighting and lost
two men killed and thirteen wounded.
Wednesday, November nth. We have now the
“Melbourne” and the Japanese cruiser with us. It is
said that the “Minotaur” has returned to Australia.
The “ Sydney” has not come back yet. I might mention
that we passed the Cocos Islands about 30 miles to our
left—the wrong side. We could not raise their wireless


station, and it is supposed that the “ Emden” destroyed
it and then lay in wait for us. It is stated that the
presence of the “Emden” was discovered either by
intercepted wireless messages or by interference with
our own messages. There are rumours (unconfirmed)
that another German cruiser, the “Konigsberg,” is in
the vicinity. The rumour is, however, more or less
discredited. We are now right in the tropics, not far
south of the line, it is very hot, and our troop-deck
(down below where we eat and sleep) is an inferno. We
have our meals in almost aboriginal fashion, stripped to
the waist. They permit us to sleep on deck. This is
a great improvement. Our parade-deck, where we are
expected to sleep, is, of course, between decks and pro-
tected from rain. This is good, but the deck is unfor-
tunately hosed down at 5 a.m.; this is bad. We don’t
have to drill until 6.30. To escape from this early
rising many sleep on hatchways and other exposed
parts. This commonly results in some slight activity
about 2 a.m., when down comes a tropical shower
(light or heavy), and if one can find any spare space on
the parade-deck good; if not, one takes one’s ham-
mock with one to hell—or, rather, the troop-deck.
Just as I write orders have come out that we must
wear singlet and trousers at mess. At times we are
entertained by the ship’s alarm when every man has to
rush to an allotted post —fire stations, etc., etc. This
is sometimes done at night. I think it very essential.
There are some very ugly rumours re deaths. When


a ship wishes to bury someone it falls out of line and
slows up and stops. This has been done many times
by different boats, unhappily. On one boat, the “Eu-
ripides,” it is said three deaths have occurred, one from
lockjaw and two from diphtheria. The worst news of
all is that there are over roo cases of typhoid on the
“Orvieto.” We have had measles on this boat ever
since we left, and there are now ten cases in the isola-
tion hospital. A more serious outbreak is feared, I
understand, as the inoculation period is about fourteen
days.
Thursday, November 12th. This morning the
“Melbourne” sent us a message saying that she was
ordered on service elsewhere and wished us “God
speed,” etc. She made off about N.W., that is ahead
of us. We have now only the Jap. with us, unless,
indeed, the “Pyramus” is to the rear, which is exceed-
ingly unlikely as she cannot and has not been seen by
us. This afternoon a big three-funnelled boat appear-
ed on our starboard bow. The Jap. rushed to meet her.
She turned out to be the auxiliary cruiser “Empress
of Asia,” a large vessel painted grey going at a high
speed, to repair wireless at Cocos which German land-
ing party destroyed. This party got clear away in a
schooner.
I forgot to mention that at daybreak the “Orvieto”
was right away ahead with the “Melbourne.” One
man says he saw a rocket go up. Both ships were
lying to so we soon came up with them, and passed


them to starboard. Later the “Orvieto” regained her
position and the “Melbourne” said “good-bye” and was
off. The Jap. is very formidable looking and belches
forth a tremendous quantity of smoke when going at
full speed. There are rumours about the “Minotaur”
having met the “Konigsberg” and being on her heels.
Friday, November 13th. We are told that we
crossed the line about 7 o’clock this morning. At
daybreak we observed a new cruiser in the lead —the
“Hampshire,” also the New Zealanders were coming
up between our lines. Finally the New Zealanders
and three of our ships (“Anglo-Egyptian,” “Karoo,”
and another) steamed ahead of us under escort of the
“Hampshire.”
It has been raining all day and for the third time our
parade deck is being used to exercise the horses, so that
we have nowhere to go practically. At sunset the New
Zealanders are still visible on the sky-line. They have
gone on, to save time at Colombo. Latest news is bad:
“Good Hope” was sunk, “Monmouth” beached, but
“Glasgow” escaped in the Valparaiso action; Germans
unscathed. Also statement that the “Konigsberg” has
been located (where ?) and her crew is entrenched ashore
and being shelled by the “Chatham.” Position in
France unaltered.
Monday, November 16th. We arrived at Colombo
about 1.30 p.m. Sunday. Early in the morning, the
“Sydney” and the “Empress of Russia’ (with German
prisoners and 150 wounded). The “Empress of


Russia” is sister ship of “Empress of Asia.” 20,000
ton and 25 knots, one year old. Only merchant ships
with three funnels and cruiser sterns, four propellers.
Word received that in action with “Emden” Jap.
cruiser signalled, “1 want to go.” “Melbourne”
replied, “You can’t go.” Jap, “But 1 want to go.”
Reply, “You can’t go.” Also said that, one night
when Jap, sole convoy, “Orvieto” left all her lights
burning. Jap signalled, “Are you a troopship or a
moving picture palace?”
Lots of ships here in port. Curious five-funnelled
Russian cruiser, “Askold.” Reports re Valparaiso
action conflicting. Russians said to be in Eastern Prussia.
Wednesday, November 18th. The centre and the
port lines and the New Zealanders left Colombo about
11.30 a.m. yesterday. We are accompanied by the
“Hampshire.” At present she is keeping just a little
ahead of us. The “Euripides” and her following were
to leave later accompanied by the “Yarmouth.”
Friday, November 20th. Still steaming towards
Aden. Calm weather. This morning at daybreak
another cruiser was seen to the rear; looks like Jap.
Towards evening more ships of the third division were
seen catching us up. The “Euripides,” etc., also four
New Zealand ships, went ahead with the “Ascanius.”
(Pay day again, another 145.) The Jap. cruiser also
went ahead.
Sunday, November 22nd. On Saturday morning
before daybreak ships of the third division were seen


lying to on our port side; there were about seven life-
buoy lights seen in the water. The “Ascanius” was
also there. The “Hampshire” used searchlights and
came across from the starboard side and used her lights
among the buoys. It appears that the “Shropshire”
and “Ascanius” had collided, and it was thought that
men had fallen overboard; this, however, was found to
be a mistake (rumour). Shortly the third division and
the “Ascanius” then steamed ahead again and out of
sight. They must have first passed us in the night.
There are 24 troopships now in our fleet. It is said
that the “Orvieto” is carrying German prisoners. We
have lost twelve horses to date.
Tuesday, November 24th. On Monday we steamed
past Socotra, spent most of the day passing. Splendid
rugged scenery. In the afternoon Captain Shaw left
us and went on board the “Orvieto” (or warship). This
morning the “Orvieto” left us, going for Aden. We
are now in between the two lines of ships.
Saturday, November 28th. On Wednesday evening
we arrived at Aden, where the other ships of our fleet
were lying at anchor. There were many ships in the
harbour, and many were numbered, evidently troop-
ships, perhaps returning for more Indians. We did not
get any stores, etc., and all weighed anchor at 6 a.m.
Thursday. The same evening we passed through the
Straits. The “Ascanius” is now tenth ship of the star-
board line. We have the “Hampshire” still with us.
The New Zealanders have gone ahead again. We have


passed many ships since Aden; many have been troop -
ships.
Yesterday we had to pull bags of rotten potatoes
from No. 5 hatch to be sorted on forward skid deck.
The stench was fearful and many bags boiling hot.
It is a scandalous waste; a few days ago we had to
throw overboard bags of rotten onions and swedes from
the stern room. Ship’s staff might have saved nearly
all. I asked Capt. Morley yesterday if he would like
an assistant ashore at Port Said in getting stores. He
said he would remember it, and I believe I will have
the good fortune to go ashore. The latest news is
that we are to go to Cairo to relieve the Territorial
Garrison there. This afternoon the “Orvieto” went
ahead again.
Tuesday, December ist. We arrived at Suez at
12 noon to-day. The first part of the Red Sea trip
was hot with a following wind, the latter part was cool
with a strong head wind. We heard to-day that the
“Orvieto” was sniped at going through the Canal, also
learnt that a Turkish army is marching on Egypt. Spent
an interesting morning at Suez. Boats doing barter.
At about 7 p.m. this evening we weighed anchor and
steamed into the Canal. We have an armed guard on
deck. Many of the troopships have preceded us.
Thursday, December 3rd. We arrived at Port Said
about 9 a.m. yesterday. About 1 a.m. in the night we


passed an encampment of the nth Gurkhas and the
9th Lancashire Regiment; guarding the Canal apparently.
We coaled yesterday (and got more water?). Several
English and French warships at Port Said. One
British ship, the “Swiftsure,” has 12 inch guns fore
and aft. Last night some of the men got ashore.
We had an extra guard of 80 men put on board.
This afternoon Indian troop fleet steamed away,
probably for Europe. They had come through since
our arrival, about 20 ships, I think ; rumour says 27,
a cruiser as escort. To-night at 8 p.m. we weighed
anchor bound for Alexandria.
Thursday, December 10th. On Tuesday morning
we arrived at Alexandria and have been at anchor
since.
Leave was granted yesterday and 1 went ashore for
the afternoon. This was a very enjoyable break, and
it was good to feel the land under one’s feet again. A
great number of the men were ashore and all enjoyed
the holiday. Alexandria is a place where one could
spend a month exploring; picturesque though dirty
like most other Egyptian towns.
Rumour is still rife as to troops arriving in Egypt
from all parts, and it will be a good thing when our own
departure is settled. News of this is likely to come
along at any time.
Friday, December nth. Last night we came along-
side wharf. To-day was spent in getting oflF all the


Light Horsemen, their horses, and nearly all equipment,
only ten men remained.
On Saturday we got our equipment, etc., on train
and finally left in evening by train for Cairo. Forty
men as rearguard stayed behind to look after luggage.
We arrived at Cairo about 10.30 and about 2 a.m. we
left by tram for camp where we bivouacked on the sand
for the rest of the night. Have been getting camp gradu-
ally into order ever since. We are now down to proper
rations, which does not permit of gorging.
Hammit and self had a swim and wash at Mena
House, and a meal, smoke, and chess at restaurant
opposite.
About February 10th the 2nd Expeditionary Force
arrived and encamped at Heliopolis.
About January 27th about half of the New Zealanders
left for the Canal.
On February 3rd at about 10 a.m. the yth and Bth
Infantry Battalions also left for Ismalia. They returned
on the 10th inst.
February 28th. Some days ago word was received
that we might strike camp any day. Last night the
12th Battalion left, destination unknown. 1 sent in an
application for a temporary commission in the British
Army. Applications have been called for; about a
month ago a number of names were sent forward, among
them mine, but so far no word has been received. The
New Zealanders have just returned from the Canal,
where some of the companies were under fire.


March 12th. The remainder of the 3rd Brigade left
shortly after the 12th Battalion, and the whole sailed
from Alexandria somewhere about the 2nd inst. General
Birdwood left Cairo previous to the departure of the
3rd Brigade (where for ?), but returned about a week
ago.
On Monday, last, Father went to meet the 3rd Con-
tingent : four troopships, Light Horsemen and Rein-
forcements. On Tuesday some of these came into our
camp occupying the position of the 3rd Brigade. Col.
Downes, Light Horse Field Ambulance, is with
them.
On Wednesday I saw Stan. Barber at the head of
some of the Engineers returning from the Canal.
There are all sorts of rumours about our departure,
but little is certain, though it appears highly probable
that we will be off very soon. From what information
is obtainable it also appears probable that we will pursue
the “Wily Ottoman’’and not the “ Insouciant Teuton,”
The last few days in camp have been very unpleasant
owing to a violent westerly wind. Yesterday this reached
its climax and every one was sand and dust from head
to foot. Unfortunately these periodical disturbances
seriously affect the social customs of the soldiers, e.g.;
it is an unwritten rule that the private performs an
entire ablution once every month, whether he needs it
or not. Latterly, due to aforestated circumstances, he
has had to increase his efforts in this direction, which
is a case of much hardship.


Much has been said about the behaviour of the Austra-
lian soldiers : to my mind there is little doubt that that
percentage of wasters spoken of by Capt. Bean is very
much in evidence. There is also no doubt, however,
that the great majority are fine men, and if not so
amenable to discipline as the English soldiers, are pro-
bably more responsive to an appeal to reason. They
are, however, much sloppier in appearance than Terriers,
and this is only partly accounted for by their less spruce
uniforms. The Australian is inclined to lean up against
the shop windows, etc., etc. There is a further diffi-
culty which arises out of two qualities, a good and a
bad—Australians always stick together. The rotter
does something contemptible, a row starts, perhaps with
the natives; the better stamp of soldier sees the trouble,
asks no questions, but assists the rotter, who escapes
when the row is at its height.
The food on the whole has been very good. We
get rations which in themselves would be meagre enough,
supplemented by a 6d. a day allowance.
March 15th. Last night Father went off to Port
Said again to meet two more troopships. He has been
made consulting oculist to the forces in Egypt; more
work for him I suppose. 1 hear Stan. Barber is now
first lieutenant.
My old friend, Mr. Arboo, has fallen on evil days.
Alas! For some considerable time past he has been
laundryman to our corps. His trusting soul and method-
ical business arrangements enabled some of the infantry


to walk off with many of our men’s pants, etc., that
were being washed. A soldier is not efficient without
trousers, and poor Arboo had to make good these
losses out of his own pocket. His business has further
declined due to his returning clothes washed indeed,
but also inhabited by not too welcome visitors.
About a week ago one of our corps died; a nice
young chap called Morris.
Wednesday, March 17th, 1 9 1 5 > O n Monday
evening, night, and Tuesday morning it actually
rained; the first that could be called rain since we came
here.
All marching: orders have been cancelled tor the
present. The rumour is that we were to be trans-
ported to a Greek island (Lemnos) as a base —Greece
having joined the Allies. As Greece did not join we
have been held up. Rumour also hath it that the
3rd Brigade is in Syria, has been in action, and has a
number of casualties.
Last Monday week Father went to Port Said and
met four more troopships, containing Light Horse, Re-
inforcements, and Ambulance (Col. Downes). These
began to arrive in the early hours of Tuesday morning.
On Wednesday last, in the afternoon, 1 saw Stan.
Barber and the men returning from the Canal. Stan,
now first lieutenant.
On Saturday Father went again to Port Said to meet
two more troopships.
March 20th. Climbed the forbidden Pyramid with


DIARY
Ruf. Nothing in it, though care is necessary. We
had no guide, though 1 had a fair idea of the way.
March 22nd. There was a Capt. Todd there who
had been seaplaning at the Dardanelles. His mother-
ship had been torpedoed. He was asleep at the time;
it didn’t wake him; boat didn’t sink, luckily, though
one hold filled, and she listed badly. I wasn’t able to
ask him any questions, but there are rumours of 42
transports at Alexandria, and that English troops have
been landed there. Further, the 3rd Brigade may still
be at sea (outside Lemnos),
Tuesday, March 30th. Last Friday Sir lan Hamil-
ton arrived at Cairo. On the same day 500 New
Zealanders also arrived.
French and English troops have recently arrived in
Egypt. There is a naval brigade at Port Said.
All of us are apparently being held in readiness to
be launched anywhere when opportunity permits.
Rumour that 2nd Brigade is at Smyrna. In orders
this morning that there will be a mail to them this
week. 1 think it quite possible that they have gone
to Europe, as Australian Refs, in the western theatre of
the war.
General Hamilton inspected the Ist and 2nd Bri-
gades yesterday morning, and is busy inspecting all the
forces in Eg^pt.
Saturday, April 3rd. Last Monday evening General
Hamilton returned to Alexandria. Yesterday Father
went off to meet two more troopships. To-day the


camp is in a great state of bustle, and some battalions
and No. i Field Ambulance are going to-night. We
may go to-morrow.
A number of us were offered commissions this morn-
ing. lin the infantry. Conditions are a course of
instruction in Egypt, and then sent anywhere. I
accepted and was told I would receive instructions shortly.
Friday, April 9th. Last Sunday we (Morrison,
Peacock, Fox, and self) were sent out here (Base
Details Camp, Abbassia). On the same evening most
of No. 2 Field Ambulance and some of the 2nd Bri-
gade Infantry went off to Alexandria. Last night I
saw the remainder of No. 2 F.A. (the ambulance
waggons) going to entrain. Some of the artillery have
also gone. Shortly after we arrived here 18 out of the
59 of us were sent away, including Tom Fox. Six
sent to Ismalia (artillery), and twelve (Army Ser-
vice, Cavalry, etc.) straight to England. Yesterday
General Spens had a word with the remaining 41 of
us and the same evening we were gazetted and put up
our stars. Before this our treatment had been so-so.
I had some practice at company and platoon drill, but
of course not enough. Our men are now helping to
run two of these mixed battalions. A sgt.-major —
now Lieutenant Creaney —is adjutant (acting) to No. 1
battalion and he has made me assistant-adjutant. Our
battalion commander is Capt. Permezel. I have been
all day in the office and hope to pick up the running
soon.


Sunday, April 18th. On Wednesday last about 60
Ceylon planters, rifle corps men, arrived at this camp.
Like us they have been given commissions and have
been spread out among our two infantry battalions.
The 4th Brigade has gone to Alexandria—a few light
horse, some artillery, and, I think, most of the New
Zealanders; all the infantry.
On Friday I gave up the assistant-adjutant job, or,
rather, was transferred at my own request to a platoon
to get outside work. Was sorry in a way to leave the
office in such a bad state, as the adjutant’s job was a
very trying one, and I didn’t know enough about it to
be of much assistance. The adjutant himself almost
transferred, but the O.C. wouldn’t let him go. A
Ceylon planter of some experience has been put on to
help him.
P.S. —The adjutant was wanted for another position.
The man to take his place I knew I would not work
well with, hence I asked to be relieved of the assistant
position. Afterwards the adjutant was not allowed
to go.
The chief trouble is the enormous number of fatigues
required, and the fact that the company officers are not
up to it, don’t bother, and have no control over the
men. The men also clear out of camp to Heliopolis
in droves, and cannot be found when wanted. My
short experience in an adjutant’s office has convinced
me more than ever of the need of discipline, i.e., the
immediate, precise, and thorough carrying-out of all


lawful orders. Without this, military organization is
impossible. I am certain I will have not the least
trouble in commanding men when I know my work.
Last night 180 sick Australians arrived from Syria (?).
They are mostly 3rd Brigade men who, it appears,
have not fired a shot, but have been at anchor off
Lemnos, and going ashore daily for exercise, but always
sleeping aboard. Some of these sick were “venereals,”
Yesterday in town I met a lady journalist who had
been to Alexandria. She said some Australians troop-
ships had come back and disembarked, and that many
are now under canvas at Alexandria. Apparently none
have landed Dardanelles way. She didn’t think much
of the French troops, especially the transport and
ambulance which she said were very antiquated—one
had date 1870 on it.
I have, after some little difficulty, obtained permission
to hold a soldier’s concert here in the Cinema Hall.
It is to come off to-morrow night if we do not strike
camp and go to Zeitoun before then.
We are still without pay but hope to hear something
about it soon. Seems certain that we will be here,
Egypt, for some time.
Saturday, April 24th. We left camp on Monday
last and established ourselves at Zeitoun. Ist Battalion
left about 10 o’clock; 2nd in afternoon early. I don’t
think the 4,000 remounts are being shipped, and a few
details were also left, but headquarters are with us.
The two battalions are now quite separate and the


officers have battalion messes ; the only possible arrange-
ment. The tent accommodation for the men is much
more limited—eleven to a tent, which is far too much
in this weather. We have three to a tent (officers).
I here are about two officers to each platoon; i C.P.R.
and i A.I.Z. (roughly). lam attached to ist Platoon
Company, with a C.P.R.; man in charge named Bland.
Some talk of trained officers and sgt.-majors from home
to come here to instruct us. Hope it is true.
On Wednesday I suddenly, during the morning, got
a bad headache and became very flushed, temp., etc.,
and was finally sent over to No. i General, where I
am at present. Turned out to be only tonsilitis, and
am nearly right again. Very good treatment in hospital.
News in morning’s paper says 20,000 of Med. Exped.
Force have landed at Enos, probably Australians. Soon
be fighting. Looks as though they either hope to
invade European Turkey and catch them on the hop
from that point, and so perhaps weaken the Dar-
danelles forces, necessitating their partial withdrawal, or
perhaps a direct attack at Dardanelles from the north
on land, A great portion of this Med. Exped. Force
has been gathered at Lemnos awaiting a favourable
opportunity—all under Sir lan Hamilton. How many ?
Hard to say; perhaps 100,000 men. Large Turkish
army.
Friday, April 30th. Quite well again, but still at
hospital. Many sick had arrived from Dardanelles up
to yesterday, including 60 recent venereals. Yester-


day three trainloads of wounded returned, mostly slight
wounds, but in last train a large number of serious ones,
about 450 all told. Three more trainloads to come to-
day. About 650 beds are at Luna Park, 1,000 here;
another building near racecourse holding more, and
another building at Abbassia with venereals at present.
All these are under management of No. 1 General, All
venereals to go back to Australia. It appears that
Australians landed on the Saros side of Gallipoli on
Sunday last at several points and that they had a very
rough time.
Zeitoun, June 6th. On May Ist an officers’ school
of instruction commenced here. Forty men from the
Australians and C.P.R.’s were selected. I was not
among them, but was able to fill a vacancy, and on
May 2nd joined the class (Tuesday). Ihe instructors
are officers straight from France: Commandant, Major
Colston; Adjutant, Lieut. Cook; Q.M., Lieut. Chad-
wick; Inst., Lieut. Clark. The course lasted four
weeks with exams. It finished on Friday, May 28th,
and we received our certificates on Monday, 3 1§ t- Y»/e
are now hoping to be sent to England.
July 24th, From the time our course ot instruction
started • until June 27th we combined in our training
battalions. lin the first attached to A Coy. under
Fussel; enjoyed the work.
On June 28th about 60 subaltern officers (also
N.C.O/s) from the 6th Aust. Brigade, which had lately
arrived, began a course of instruction at the Zeitoun


School. Imperial men who had done their course
there were to replace them for the three weeks. As
luck would have it, I, with three others, became at-
tached to the 23rd Battalion and sent to the range
as firing point o. Two were subsequently with-
drawn; Armstrong and I being left. We finished our
three weeks there and then returned to our training
battalions. Armstrong and I returning on Tuesday,
July 20th.
I have been attached now to C Coy. under an O.C.
who hardly ever appears on parade or takes any interest
in the company, etc., etc.
On Saturday, July 3rd, all men awaiting Imperial
attachments were paraded by order S.O.C. We were
asked what regiments we would like to be attached to,
belonging to the 29th Division, at the Dardanelles. On
Sunday we were again paraded and asked did we speak
Hindustani.
About Tuesday, July 6th, 20 of our fellows, selected
by ballot I believe, were sent off to . Last we heard
was that they were at Malta. The same week twelve
men were warned to hold themselves in readiness for
the Canal (Indian Army) ; they have not gone yet. On
Wednesday last, July 21st, another twenty were told to
hold themselves in readiness, probably for the Dardan-
elles. I was the fifth to be recommended from Ist
Battalion, but only three were wanted.
My experience at the range was useful re musketry
and manhandling. Also it was another eye-opener re


the Australian Forces. Men splendid, but untrained ;
August 2nd, On Saturday, July 24th, thirteen of
our men went to join the Canal defences. On the
following Wednesday 20 went off for Dardanelles.
I had a fortnight helping to instruct some Australian
recruits. They left for the Front on Saturday last
after a fortnight in Egypt, quite untrained.
I have just been attached to a fresh company just
arrived (7th of the 10th).
There appears to be a great fight either in progress
or pending at the Dardanelles. We have an immense
army there and it is imperative to break through
before winter.
Sunday, August 15th. Twenty of us received
orders to hold ourselves in readiness on Thursday
night and to report at 7.30 a.m. on Friday, August 13th.
We did so, and were told to entrain for Alexandria at
4 p.m. There were Bainbridge, Horsfall and self from
No. 1 Tr. Battalion, Hanner and Webster from 4th;
excluding Bainbridge the four of us made a party.
On arrival at Alexandria we were told to report at
Mustapha Barracks at 9.30 next morning. Spent
night at Regina and next morning, Saturday, were told
to embark on “Tunisian” at 3 p.m. Did so and have
been here since. About 1,000 troops (largely Terriers)
embarked last night but disembarked again this morn-
ing. The trouble is the propeller shaft has received
injury and the boat may not be able to leave for some


time. All unattached officers are forbidden shore leave
and await orders.
Wednesday, August 18th. We had leave ashore
from noon to midnight on Sunday. On returning to the
ship we found orders to embark on the “Arcadian” at
9 a.m. next morning awaiting us. On Monday we
embarked here and found much pleasanter quarters.
The “Arcadian” has just come out from England,
R.M.S.P. line. A fine ship containing various drafts
for the Dardanelles. News arrived last night of one
of our transports being sunk with large loss of life.
We were to sail in the afternoon but anchored in the
harbour for the night. Saw two packed troopships go
out; no escort. On Friday night from the “Tunisian”
we had seen a troopship go out, preceded by two sub-
marines. Yesterday morning we left Alexandria at
daybreak.
All men have to have lifebelts with them every-
where and every now and then an alarm goes. Un-
attached officers have been given certain posts, etc.,
and sort of sentry-go business in case of accident.
Food on ship is excellent. Most of the younger
officers are nice, some very young. Highest rank on
board is captain—three of them. O.C. is a captain,
very young and “mush quies”.
Passed Aegean Archipelago Islands this morning
early on port bow (Crete). British Tommies much
better disciplined than Australians, very respectful, etc.
Sturdy but not big men. Quite a different expression


of countenance, not nearly so bold or self-possessed as
Australians though no doubt just as brave. Three
officers and 150 men of Royal Fusiliers on board—very
good. Tommies’ speech is very amusing to me.
12 noon. Islands on our starboard bow now. Also
overhauling a steamer to starboard, painted grey;
probably another troopship.
12.45 p.m. A British cruiser steamed towards us from
the port bow. 1 had a splendid yiew of her through
my glasses. Islands are still all round us, look very
rugged and barren, but as plenty of fishing boats about
presume they are inhabited.
2.30 p.m. Houses on top of island to starboard;
one shining white building, looks like a temple or
mosque; most unique appearance.
August 19th. After a peaceful night, during which
we zig-zagged the whole time, we arrived at Mudros
about 8 a.m. Most picturesque harbour, with a tre-
mendous number of ships in the very fine harbour; all
sorts of ships—battleships, cruisers, destroyers, trans-
ports, hospital ships, etc., etc., mostly British and
French.
About 11.30 the M.C.O, told us our regiments. 1
am to be with the 2nd Battalion Royal Fusiliers ; only
a few of us with the 29th Division; very lucky. To
leave for Cape Helles at 1 a.m.
N.B. on Mudros. Two or three net booms across
neck of harbour (I could only see two). Camp all
round on hillsides. A few villages. A glorious day


and altogether the most delightful and interesting
scene since leaving Australia. Nets round some of the
warships.
Saturday, August 2ist. Order came on Thursday to
the effect that I was to land at Lemnos with rest of
Fusilier draft (150 men and three officers). R.F.’s said
to be coming back to rest. Landed last night. All three
officers were ashore when boat came to take us off, but
came back in time. After a very rough march of about
three-quarters of an hour we arrived at our camp here
(Mudros West). It is on an island in the harbour.
Senior Officer, Ist Lieut, of Fusilier draft, “mush
quies.” Very pretty here in camp, and nice to be on
turf again. A few pretty-looking villages about. There
is another draft of R.F.’s already here, the one before
our one, so they don’t seem in a hurry tor us. We are
to see Major-in-Charge here at 9.30 a.m. and will then
know something.
Sunday, August 22nd. Am on a sort of water guard
near Gippies’ and Hospital camps on point. Deadly slow.
Had a couple of pleasant walks yesterday, fine view of
harbour from one of the hills ; went through a couple
of the Greek villages: stone walls, red tiles, blacky
buildings, walls of all sorts and shapes of stones.
Cultivation is carried on extensively, various kinds:
beans, Indian corn, grain, etc.
There are the usual donkeys everywhere; a peculiar
breed of sheep with very poor-looking wool; in fact,
rather a poor-looking beast altogether. They have


also tiny, little ponies, about as small as their donkeys,
a few cattle, and saw a bull yesterday, not unlike a
Jersey, only smaller, with upright horns and a paler,
more greyish, colour, also very poor in hindquarters.
Round stone buildings everywhere, with a wind
wheel with fixed axis, but with sails attached to the
arms, so can accommodate to any wind. I take them
to be corn mills, but haven’t been inside any so far.
Observed many of the fowls had a very large game
element, and go all colours—black-reds, duckwings,
spangled, blue, red cuckoo, etc. The people are, I
believe, nearly all Greek, wear various rough clothes,
but not skirts, and not gaudy like Egyptians. Very
few speak English; civil enough and answer “wheel-
barrow” or some such when said “Good evening” to.
News from Dardanelles speaks of advances at great
cost; also another troopship sunk.
Monday, August 23rd. Yesterday afternoon I
chanced on five Canadians. The first was a captain who
asked the way to a camp. I guessed he was a Cana-
dian by his very strong accent. He was pretty abrupt,
and only thanked for information received over his
shoulder after he had gone about ten yards. There
are two Canadian hospitals just arrived and he was
evidently a doctor. Next a chaplain came round and
he was very pleasant. Finally three Canadian privates
appeared on the scene; they were great; quite respect-
ful in intention, but more independent even than the
Australians. I should judge at the same time their


manner was very manly and open. They were all of
fine physique and didn’t need much encouragement to
talk about Canada.
About one o clock this morning I was awakened and
told to come back to camp as R.F.’s might be sent off
at an hour’s notice.
We left camp about 10.30 a.m., both drafts of
Fusiliers and six officers, and the Lane. Fusiliers with
two officers. We were ferried to the “Prince Edward,”
a naval paddle steamer, to take troops to Gallipoli. A
lot of other troops embarked in the afternoon—
yeomanry and line regiments. The Y. officers done up
to be killed.
There was a Border regiment draft, the men of
which were particularly fine. We began to steam for
harbour mouth at 4.30, bound for Suvla Bay. Our
boat is said to be able to do 21 knots. Caught a rotten
cold last night, first for months—rotten luck.
Tuesday, 24th August. We reached Suvla Bay
about 9.30 p.m., as far as I remember. Saw a couple
of hospital ships at Cape Helles on way and two more
plus numbers of warships, etc., at Suvla. We could
hear firing going on on shore. We went off in two
boatloads. I was in the second boatload. We got
ashore about 2.30. Tramped along in the dark for a
couple of miles by winding path. For first time heard
bullets go past. If near your head you want to duck, al-
though of course, it would then be too late. Finally, after
going to the right place were sent by mistake to the


Headquarters, where we stayed for two hours’ sleep.
At 3 a.m. we were aroused, and after some little delay
went by tens in single file a short distance to the sup-
port trenches of the 2nd R.F.’s. There are as yet no
communication trenches to the fire trenches, so we are
waiting for nightfall to go up. The fighting goes on
in a desultory sort of way all day and all night, with
varying intensity.
The Turks were shelling a ridge to westward held
by us. Just now one of our guns replied and some
naval guns from the Bay also had a say. It was quite
an interesting duel and seems to have stopped by
mutual consent. The naval guns make a terrific noise.
Hullo ! the Turks have started again.
Wednesday, August 25th. Last night we came to
the trenches; marched by a circuitous route in single
file. Prickly scrub everywhere and snipers occasionally.
We endeavoured to conceal our approach as much as
possible and arrived without casualty. It was exciting,
as we didn’t know what the danger was. The adjutant
goes backwards and forwards two or three times a day.
Old hands we were relieving took not the least notice
of the firing, though their sgt.-major had been hit in
the foot on the very afternoon.
At 1 a.m. 1 had the pleasure of directing the burying
of a dead mule by seven Tommies; a great job. 1 was
relieved at 2 and should have been called again at 4
a.m., but they did not call me till nearly 5 a.m.


At 4 a.m. everybody is aroused and stands to arms.
The company I am attached to is commanded by a
Capt. Bruce. Shaw and self now attached, another
officer, a first lieutenant, having been appointed
machine gun officer. The time is now being spent in
improving trenches. The Turks are a long way off and
we send out patrols, etc. All day long the snipers are
alter us, and this morning one of our men was slightly
wounded, and another had a hole cut clean through
his hat, which scared him considerably. “Some artil-
lery” going on, but all is comparatively quiet.
Friday, August 27th. Still hard at it improving our
trenches, and there is a great deal of work ahead of us.
At present the thing is to see that they are deep
enough everywhere.
On Wednesday afternoon a sniper got a sergeant and
a lance-corporal: the sergeant just slightly through
the arm, the lance-corporal through the shoulder.
The work is very tedious and, though there is hardly
any firing to speak of, sentry-go must be rigorously
adhered to. During day one in twelve on sentry from
5 a.m. to 7 p.m., but from 12 to 3 p.m. they are
doubled ;at night four in twelve. While these are on
sentry, halt are sleeping and the remainder on fatigues
and digging. This is normal, but last night, for
example, everyone had to be working until midnight,
as a lot were away at the regimental dump getting
rations here; it was advisable that we should be pre-
pared. The men are frightfully sleepy, and I have had


to send some men to orderly room for being more or
less asleep on duty or not standing up when “stand-to”
is ordered. “Stand-to” is for an hour at dawn and
dusk: 4-5 a.m., 7-8 p.m. Everyone must be awake and
standing to arms.
We have a very nasty place in my trenches, where
a huge stone in the way forces one to come right up in
view, and I am always in fear of someone getting hit.
The captain ordered a forward sap to be made, and the
last two nights we have been at it; last night we nearly
finished it. I have a splendid old corporal, just made
a sergeant to-day; been in France, a great worker and
knows the job. He was conducting the digging party;
it was done above parapet, and he says while 1 was up
some other part of the trench they were sniped at and
his shovel hit. This caused some little perturbation
among the new hands; however, it soon became very
dark and clouded (nearly full moon), and they were able
to go on uninterrupted most of the night, though in early
part now and then it was so bright I thought it advis-
able to keep down. We had outposts all out in front
of us. The Turkish trenches are about 700 yards
away. My company commander, Capt. Bruce, is a fine
chap, knows the job and as “cool as a cucumber.”
Lieut S. is now in charge of 1 and 2 platoon, and I
of 3 and 4,
Monday, August 30th. Things have been going
on as usual, with exception that we have straightened
our line out. Cut a new line of trenches from corner


of X Company to near corner of No. 4 Platoon: we
commenced Saturday night, the men digging all night
without rest, then sleep all day Sunday and digging all
last night again. To-night we will be at it again and
will occupy the trenches to-morrow. It is about 135
yards of trench, the old trench behind will make an
excellent support trench. Luckily we have not had a
single casualty the whole of the two nights. Most of
the fire was well over our heads but quite a number
were close; as the captain says “there is such a lot of
air and so little man for the bullets to go through,” but
nevertheless even he thought we were very lucky.
Lieut. S. has been at the base the last few days, but
will be back shortly when the rest men return, which
will probably be to-night, i.e., when the new trench is
occupied. So far we have had five casualties in the
battalion; one is dead, and at least three were due to
carelessness.
There has been a more or less broken battle going
on on the hill to the S.E. The Turkish trenches are
very visible and our guns often shell them. Last night
was much quieter, but a night or so ago we could hear
a very hot fusilade of musketry. One of our aero-
planes comes out, and has a fly round every day.
Sometimes the Turks have a shot at him. I saw a
shrapnel burst high in the air about a mile from him
to-day. The men say a German one was out yester-
day, but 1 didn’t see him.


Thursday, September 2nd. On Tuesday night we
and the Dublins were relieved by Lancs, and Munsters.
On the last day we had three more casualities. We
filed back to the regimental dump which, by the way,
is now often under shell fire. The idea is to give the
Royals and Dublins a week’s rest (?) there, and then
perhaps the whole of the brigade might have a week
at Imbros. The Lancs, have been very depleted of
officers and four of the Royals are on loan to them, I
included.
Capt. Bruce (once captain of Melbourne Grammar
and my company commander, W Company), gave me
a good rec., 1 believe. He himself has just been
recommended for the Military Cross.
On Wednesday morning after breakfast we trooped
back from the dump to our old lines and reported to
O.C. Lancs.—“a topper.”
Am attached to a Company D on extreme left of
lines. One officer in charge, a second lieutenant Steven-
son, a New Zealander, who was at second school, Cairo,
but got away with first draft.
In afternoon one of our men was sniped. He was
digging my dug-out but got up on the top of the para-
pet and paid the price ; he was an old soldier.
At 7.30 p.m. a few Turkish shells were fired at the
87th Brigade on our left. On the instant following
the Turks began a real tusilade of rifle fire. This con-
tinued down the battalion line and lasted for a couple of
hours with one interval. The row was terrific and the


Turks, for them, fired quite a lot of shells, not very
near us but plenty at the hill on our left. We with-
held our fire as much as possible as there was nothing
to see. Our naval guns replied vigorously. Our only
anxiety was the gap in the line between our brigade and
the 87th. However, all quieted down eventually about
9.30. Our company, however, lost one man killed.
The battalion is said to have fired 21,000 rounds
(exclusive of machine guns) and as there are three
companies and ours only fired 3,000, we did very well.
It was also satisfactory to me because I had been going
up and down the line telling the men not to waste
ammunition, only to fire when they saw something and
then fire low.
After all the row was over I took a reconnoitring
patrol about 300 yards to the front. We went up a
gully until we could see the sky-line. My orders were
to see if there were any enemy on this side of the sky-
line. I satisfied myself that there were not and returned.
All to-day has been fairly quiet.
Friday, September 3rd. Last night the R.F.’s put
wire across the gap dividing us from the 87th Brigade.
All day has been quiet till early afternoon when they
began to shell us, our naval guns replying; two or
three men from this company being wounded. Later
we had word from headquarters that the aerial people
had reported to howitzer observation officer that the
Turks are massing on our left and that an attack is
probable. It is further stated that the attack would


probably commence with a bombing party. It is now
6.55 p.m.; all quiet. By the way, one of our naval
shells fell short and wounded one of our men. Whether
the Turks will or will not attack remains to be seen,
but there is no doubt that our line is not strongly held
by any means, and is as yet unjoined on the left. I
observed that the Turks were very vigorous in shelling
our aeroplanes to-day.
Sunday, September sth. Well, the “Turkos”
didn’t make an attack on our side of Friday night; but
a party tried to dig themselves in opposite the battalion
centre, but had disappeared after a little rapid fire. One
dead was left.
Yesterday a couple of our guns opened fire on the
Turks from our rear. The result was that the Turks
shelled us. Most unpleasant, but only one or two
hurt. You get about a second’s warning to duck and
cling mighty close.
Last night 1 and servant found a dead man unburied
about three yards at back of Stevenson’s dug-out. A
staff-officer had reported his presence about two days
before and we had sent two parties to look for him, but
they said they couldn’t find him. The air was a bit
“melly” and put me off food for a bit, but I ought to
get used to it. My servant has not been altogether
satisfactory. He sleeps like a log all night and then
denies it, says he has worries, family, etc,, which keep
him awake. He has about as much initiative as an Or-
pington hen. 1 told him 1 wanted a sunshade over


my dug-out. He made every difficulty and said he
were no “archie-tect I asked him what he was in
civil life, he replied: “Oh, 1 earns mee own living,”
(reflection on me, I suppose) ; “ I’m a norse ’air and
feather buyer.” Rather comical, but he does annoy
and I shall have to get rid of him. Just as I write he
has stuck a knife into his “finner”. These Lane.
Tommies are fine men in their way but mighty rough.
The N.C.O. 1 s in this company are rotten.
This afternoon another officer has arrived for this
company. He is a Lane, native who has lived most
of his life in Ulster; very bright, vivacious, and like-
able, and quite uncommon, so in every respect welcome.
He reports that the battalion, and presumably the
brigade, is going to Imbros for a week’s rest on Wed-
nesday.
Monday, 3.15 p.m. Last night was comparatively
peaceful except that the Turkos bombed the scrub
about 200 yards in front of our lines. They evidently
heard our people digging the gap and the R.F.’s put-
ting up the wire and thought they were more advanced.
A N.C.O. on listening post came in at 2 a.m. instead
of 3.30 a.m. Evidently got the jumps. Lied like a
Trojan about it. Got severely reprimanded. Very
quiet day.
Tuesday, September yth. Last night we connected
up on left with the S.W.B. B’s of the 87th. The men
did a good night’s work. I was on duty from 8-12


midnight. Patterson was in charge of the S.W.B. dig-
gers and it was a great pleasure to meet him.
The C.O. came round fairly late and told me that
there was some very good war news not yet public.
Could speculate for a week. At 12 midnight A. went
on duty, 1 said the first day he came he was uncom-
mon; he is, fair “ Wwahnsinnig”.
About 3.45 a.m. I was awakened from sleep by a
wild shout. I listened and once or twice it was repeated
so I went out to investigate. After questioning the
sentries along the line I came to two who told that
about 100 yards to their front a voice had thrice called
“Lancashires, where are you?” 1 thought it was
probably one of the S.W.B.’s men’s covering party lost,
but it might be a Turk with bomb, etc. It was nearing
daylight and if the man was wandering about it would
be futile to send a patrol out. I decided to risk a shout
and called the non-committal word “Lancashires”.
Immediately there was an answering cry about 70 yards
off of “Where are you ? Keep shouting, keep shout-
ing”. At the same time there was a great crashing
through the undergrowth, so to speak, and a figure
came tearing along towards us. 1 called upon him to
stand and told the sentries to level their rifles at him,
asked him who he was and found —A. His explanation
was that he had gone out on the right to see it our
listening post was all right, couldn’t see them, walked
straight on about 60 yards away, came across what he
took to be one of them asleep, kicked him several


times, and found it was a dead man ; lost his head and
careered about the bush, losing all sense of direction
though the moon was well up and N. Star plainly
visible. Swore snipers were after him, called out
several times, and finally did the maddest thing of all
—rushed in at top speed when he heard my voice.
Luckily he didn’t strike the barbed wire or he’d prob-
ably have been shot by our men. He is very young,
but imagine his control of men !
Thursday, September 9th. Tuesday night passed
quietly as did all Wednesday. Last night we were to
be relieved by the Worcesters, but they lost themselves
on the way, with the result that we weren’t finally
relieved till midnight. We should have embarked by
that time. We then had a march of four or five miles
to West Beach which was done at the run and very
exhausting; many men suffering with dysentery. Fin-
ally got to beach at 4 a.m., only to find the boat gone
without us. We bivouacked the night in dug-outs,
and have spent the day on hillside; were shelled a little
in the morning. The “Swiftsure” and one or two
other warships here doing a little shooting now and
then. Two aeroplanes spying for them (one hydro-
plane). Fine view of harbour, and can see Achi Baba
and Helles in the distance. Are to go over to Imbros
to-night.
Friday, September 10th. Last night we embarked
on a fairly large transport; ferried out to her, and in
the morning, after some delay, were landed at Imbros.


Sunday, September 12th. The C. 0., on Sunday
morning, informed the other R.F. officers and self that
new officers had arrived. I reported back at our camp
and then went with Stevenson and a new Lane, officer
to the native village of Panaghea, whither most of the
R.F. officers had gone. We rode on donkeys and,
being late, had to take what animals were lett. It is
about an eight-mile trip from the camp and one has to
pass over some hills. It was a very delightful ride and
as one reached the top of the ridge three villages
gradually became visible; their red-tiled houses showing
out fairly plainly. We had a late lunch at Panaghea
which we enjoyed immensely though it was nothing
remarkable, and then wandered round the village.
Most of the inhabitants are Greek, and very sturdy
they are, too. The children looked fine. We had
some late “afternoon tea,” and by the time we were
ready to start for home it was dark. Then came
trouble with our donkey men, who refused to start with-
out the money first. They were put up to this by the
wretched landlord who had overcharged us for dinner
and I had refused to pay in full. After about two
hours of trying to get other donkeys we visited the
house of the English military police officer, a Mr.
Thompson. He lives with a Greek interpreter, another
first lieutenant. We found Mr, Thompson a charm-
ing man, and he eventually procured us animals for the
trip home. While waiting, he told us he had been in
Turkey at the outbreak of the war. He speaks Greek


DIARY
fluently, and has as his men a number of Greeks who
were bandits or other such pleasant things in Turkey
or Gallipoli, but who were now perfectly trustworthy
to him. These men were posted on the hills around
and kept an eye open to see that no secret signalling
went on to Gallipoli, etc. Also, if there was any trouble
with the inhabitants they acted as policemen of a rather
peculiar character, thus : The Greek Government laid
no claim to the island, and when Mr. Thompson com-
plained to the Greek official of the island, he replied,
“Why don’t you deal with him yourself?” Con-
sequently, if there is any trouble Mr. Thompson will
tell a couple of his sturdy gentlemen that so-and-so has
been giving trouble; so-and-so happens to be in a quiet
part of the island one day or night, and then Mr.
Thompson’s gentlemen bring him to order.
Tuesday, September 14th. Yesterday we, the 86th
Brigade, moved our camp about a mile and a half up
a valley to a much more sheltered position. I was
transport officer and everything went smoothly, fortu-
nately. The reason of the move was that a great
number of the men were being knocked over with
dysentery, due probably to dust infecting the food.
The old camp site was beastly, due to the dust.
Our rest time was also extended to Monday, 20th.
Saturday, September 18th. I had not felt too well
on Monday last, and got steadily worse, until to-day I
told the doctor I was afraid I could go no longer. He


sent me off at once to the clearing hospital to await the
arrival of the first hospital ship.
Sunday, September 26th. At last the hospital ship
came, and I, with a number of others, was put on
board.
Friday, October Ist. The hospital ship, the “Leices-
ter Castle,” first went to Anzac and collected sick and
wounded, and then to Mudros for more. We then left
Mudros one evening, and after three nights and two
days steam arrived at Valetta. We were well treated
on the hospital ship. They sent us out here to the
Officers’ Hospital, Imtarfa, in motor ambulance.
Sunday, October 31st. I forgot to mention that
while at Imbros we had several raids by aeroplanes,
which endeavoured to drop bombs on General Head-
quarters, our air sheds, etc. They often occurred in
early part of the night. The warning gun would fire
three rounds; there would be a rush to turn out all
lights and then a great row would commence from
anti-aircraft, machine, and other guns.
November 16th. Had progressed uninterruptedly
until November Ist, when, after three days on chicken
diet, symptoms of dysentery were observed. Went
back to fluid with one egg diet. Was not bad at any
time. On November Bth got sore throat and tempera-
ture for a few days. Now all right again and have been
three days on fish diet.
Tuesday, November 17th. First official sitting in
chair.


November 18th. Received cable from Father to
effect that he had left Cairo for England on Monday,
November 16th.
Saturday, November 26th. Boarded to-day with
success. Major Elliott said I would be sent off as soon
as possible.
December sth. Left Imtarfa, and boarded the hos-
pital ship “Re d’ltalia,” along with three other officers
from Imtarfa. Are to sail to-morrow after loading some
Red Cross stores, which are to be taken to Syracuse
for new convalescent hospital or camp.
Monday, December 6th. Reached Syracuse at 6 p.m.
when quite dark. After some little delay we steamed
alongside the wharf and unloaded the stores. The
officers were allowed shore leave until 11 p.m. I took
a stroll through some of the streets, but did not find
them too encouraging. There are a few fine broad
ones, and one rather nice walk with trees along the
harbour front, but, of course, not much to see in the
dark. The average street is made of large square
cobblestones, very narrow and no footpath, so that the
heavy stone houses rise abruptly from the street.
1 observed several wine saloons and a few fruit
shops, etc.
December 7th. The “Re d’ltalia” is a ship of
between 6,000 and 8,000 tons, high out of water, with
a somewhat narrow beam. She averages about fourteen
knots, and did the trip from Malta to Syracuse in six
hours. At present we are carrying a large number of


sick and wounded Tommies, and ten more or less
convalescent officers. The ship’s company and hos-
pital staff are Italian, with the exception of the sisters,
who are English, and two English and two Maltese
doctors. The Italians are very polite and courteous
indeed to us, though truly one is usually polite to
strangers. We are, however, shown every considera-
tion. We (the ten officers) have a small ward to our-
selves (the Major, M. Cooke, has a cabin), which is
quite nice, though the bunks were not made for me.
The meals are truly excellent, and I think they have
sought more or less to Anglicize them. To-day,
though, they gave us octopus on toast for lunch. It
would doubtless have been very nice but for our foolish
squeamishness, which somewhat damped the vigor of
our attack. Free wines are provided at lunch and
dinner, so that what with ample and excellently-served
meals I feel that I will be not unlike Sir G. Reid, in
one respect, by the time I reach England. The meal
hours, by the way, are—breakfast, 7.30 a.m.; lunch,
11.30 a.m.; afternoon tea, 3 p.m.; dinner, 7 p.m.
We expect to reach Southampton exactly to-day
week. The ship’s captain and staff are very anxious to
spend Christmas in Italy, so that we will not dawdle on
the way. Added to this we have so far experienced
most delightful weather. No doubt things will liven
up after we pass through the Straits on Friday.
Friday, December 10th. We arrived at Gibraltar
about 7 a.m. to-day; anchored in the harbour until


certain instructions were received and departed again at
9 a.m. Weather perfect.
Wednesday, December 15th. Arrived yesterday at
Southampton at 9 a.m., but were not entrained for
London until 5 p.m,, as the “Mauritane” had just got
in before us and had to be unloaded first. We arrived
at Waterloo, and thence went in private cars to No. 3
General Hospital, Wandsworth.
Monday, January 10th, 1916. Left Wandsworth
free of infection, with two months’ leave.
Southampton, Thursday, June Bth. Boarded the
“Caesari,” a small black-painted steamer of some
eighteen knots at 7 p.m, and sailed at 8 p.m. (summer
time).
About 700 men and 100 officers on board. Men
chiefly Canadians, who look hardy, but untidy and
rough. Do not impress one much; nor are they much
bigger than the Tommies and are less smart than Aus-
tralians. A good number of Scotch officers of good
type. Officers chiefly subalterns. We are bound for
Havre and are being escorted by a destroyer.
A crowded ship and a piggy night in amongst the
baggage.
Friday, June 9th. About 3 a.m. we reached Havre
after nearly running down a picket boat. First time 1
ever heard French swear words. Everything very
quiet; a solitary French marine doing sentry with a
tremendous long rifle. Later, one of the silver-coloured
dirigibles seen at Gallipoli had a cruise. Saw the French


sentry relieved by another, who strolled up and took
the rifle in one hand and ate a bun, which he held in
the other. Later, he put his rifle in the sentry-box
and took in the air from without.
After reporting we found we had till 12.30 for
Rouen train. (French line unchanged.) I joined
three Scotties, and we had a good breakfast, and then
took a taxi all round the town and environs. The
town was quite interesting, but looked antiquated and
could do with a coat of paint. Women mostly hatless;
dogs mostly clipped, muzzled, and tethered; streets
dirty, but wide, made of cobblestones. Some buildings
hung their beds out of the windows to air. A few of
the buildings were very fine. The country around is
very pretty; green, but not so intense as in England.
No hedges, and only a few wire fences. Live stock
not abundant, being chiefly cows, which are always
tethered, so eating off a little feed at a time. They
always looked remarkably well. A good deal of red
and white clover grown for feed, while the chief grain
appeared to be barley. This is hand-reaped and put in
single sheaf stocks. On entraining we had a very slow
journey through pretty country forest to Rouen.
Trains are slow and bumpy. Eventually reached
Rouen, and thence by tram to 29th Division, Infantry
Base Depot (at the racecourse).
Sunday morning, June 1 ith. The method of passing
an officer along to the front is quite a credit to the
army, and is of necessity, I suppose, a heavy business.


The War Office, or Southern Command wires for you;
the adjutant, acting under previous instructions, wires
for confirmation; War Office replies, “2nd Lieut.
K. J. Barrett will proceed as ordered”; the adjutant
gives you a lot of papers and says, “Report to Embark-
ation Commandant on . . . ,” leaving you a clear two
days in town; you report to someone on station, and
he says report to “someone” else at such a time; he
has your name and everything already. Then you
embark as ordered at Havre; next day you report to
M.T.0., who knows all about you, and says, “R.T.0.”
The latter has already found out about you in the
police records, and says, “Entrain at . . . and report to
R.T.0., Rouen.” Latter is quite charming and says,
“Report to O.C. Reinforcements, Rouen.” Here you
see a sergeant, who says, “Report to O.C. 29th Divi-
sion, etc., according to your records which he has;
and so you arrive at your base. In all this only one of
the papers is of any use, and one or two others are
given you and taken away. It is delightful to find
yourself so well known and cared for in a strange
country, and gives you a true idea of your impor-
tance. Well, the camp here is very large, though of
our own division there are not a great number of men
or officers. The 29th have an unpleasant habit of
parading at 6 a.m., all subaltern officers to attend, Sun-
day included. I have been put in charge of the Mun-
ster Fusilier unit, about 120 braw Irish laddies—“Owh,
lave it to moy, sorr”—as there is another officer in


charge of the Royals. At 6 a.m. this wretched roll-
call parade takes place. Breakfast any time after 7.
At 7.50 we fall in and march off to a huge plain in the
Seine Valley, about two miles away, where the men are
left to certain N.C.O.’s and the officers.
This early rising here calls to my mind the method
by which Rowe and 1 used to call one another when
at Falmouth. If he woke up first, he put a chalk
mark on my door, while should I wake first I rubbed
it out. We found the method worked with great
comfort. Rowe also had a curious way of saying to
anyone he wanted to get rid of: “Now, make a noise
like a tree and branch off”.
Yesterday afternoon was a half-holiday and I went
into Rouen, a few miles. We are at the racecourse,
with an officer from the Worcesters. It is an interest-
ing town but like Havre dirty and more or less squalid ;
wretched cobblestone roads though not so narrow as
English. Rule of road—to the right. We looked
over the cathedral, a most remarkable looking build-
ing, and finally climbed the tower, a tremendous height,
from which a fine view of the town, etc., is obtained.
The town is on the North side of the horseshoe bend
of the Seine, while our camp is within it. Later we
went up to a hospital where my companion (Woodhead)
saw a friend and I had a chat with an Australian named
Thompson. He had been at Vimy Ridge (English
Regiment), had been out nine months but got hit by
H.E. about ten days ago.


Monday, June 12th, 5 p.m. Yesterday turned out
fine after all. W ent to church in morning and observed
one of the hymns began, “As pants the h(e)artfor cool-
ing streams,” evidently composed especially for the
Army.
L. Cooke will not be coming over as they do not
wish unofficial help. To-day I am O.C. but had to
take musketry parade as short of officers. The Scotty,
named Reed, has gone off to the Front and am sorry
I had so short an acquaintance with him. All the
officers are very nice, the Irish lads quite entertaining.
“Sure, an’ the naxt toime Oi be joining the harmy x , an’
it won’t be the harmy at all, but ’twill be the naevy
I’ll be joining.”
Tuesday, June 13th, 7 p.m. Rather a slow day.
Fired Lewis gun in morning early, and then a memorial
service to K. of K. in the rain. It wasn’t much of a
service in any event, and it always makes one think
that we are going back 200 years. It is interesting
meeting various officers from the Front and hearing
their opinions of the war. I still think there is a
possibility of our winning it this year, but it remains to
be seen what our coming move will be able to accom-
plish. Still beastly weather here, rain on and off all
day long.
Thursday, June 15th, 7 a.m. Nothing of much note
Wednesday, except that an officer with a draft of
cavalry had been sent here the night before, and was
obliged to return with his men to Havre; some


muddlement. Officers keep coming, and we have been
kept fairly busy with funeral parties, etc., we being
duty div. for the week. Amongst the officers is a most
amusing one, named Badger Clark, of the cheery
pessimist type; he looks great when detailed to take
charge of funeral party. Badger Clark told us that he
had trouble in understanding the speech of his
Scotchmen. To-day the corporal had remarked to him
that such and such a man was “naw gude,” “juist luk
at his needious park.” Clark was puzzled for a long
time as to what “needious park” was, but eventually
learnt that it meant “hideous (untidy) pack.”
The Doctor, who was a Tommy in the S.A. war,
but quite young, is quite a character, and got the M.C.
at Gallipoli. The adjutant is an old ranker, who does
not quite understand the handling of officers, not
always easy for an educated man.
Last night several of us got orders from the front.
I will probably take a draft, and there is another
officer, Humphrey, senior to me, and attached to 2nd
Battalion R.F., though a Buff, who will also be going.
Same day, 4.45 p.m. We are at last in the train.
I have three small drafts for different regiments (Ist
K. 0.5.8., 2nd R.F., 71st R.D.F.), and after delivering
these I am to join my own battalion. There are ten
R.F. men including my servant, a bright lad of 22,
who has served six years, mostly in India. He is
rather a hard case, and amusing; gave a very broad
grin when first he found my coat had no brass buttons


to polish. The entraining arrangements were pretty-
rotten, but we did get off at last. It is about the
longest train I have ever seen, should say about a
quarter of a mile, with an engine to pull and one to
push, and when it is going almost reaches a speed of
six miles per hour; just now it is having a rest. It is
a lovely day, first for a week, and the journey should
be pleasant, if only we could get a move on. All along
the line French children cry to us for biscuits; they seem
great cadgers, and evidently the Tommies have had
plenty to give away. They occasionally sang “Tipper-
ary,” or such songs, for pennies. Some of them look
bright, and others wretched. All wear skirts with
a belt.
Last night (Wed.-Thurs.) clocks were put on an
hour to correspond with English summer time.
Friday, June 16th. Last night about 8 o’clock on our
road to Amiens we stopped (some three hours’ journey
off) for the night and split the train in half. Our half
moved on at 3 a.m. There was a canteen, however,
where we got tea. About 7 o’clock this morning we
reached Amiens, but passed the town on our right;
thence through Canaples in the direction of Doullens,
but we branched off before we reached that town, along
a line towards Acheux. In the distance we could see
one or two observation balloons and hear the boom of
a gun.
At 11.30 we stopped at a station which seemed to
have immense stores of war material and a camp. All


tents at the Front are coloured (either clay or green
patches, etc.) to prevent detection by aircraft. About
i o’clock we reached Belle Eglise, the nearest station
to Lourecourt, where I have to take my first draft.
Hence I had to get off here with the lot, though
Acheux would have suited best for the other two.
Humpherus also had some men for Lourecourt, so we
went together. After a half-hour’s march we arrived
at L. (H.Q. of 87th Brigade) and delivered our drafts.
It was a picturesque old village and appeared to consist
of old barns chiefly, and full of troops. The houses or
barns seemed full of live stock in the nature of fowls
and rabbits, and green ponds. After lunching at L. we
marched via Acheux to Mailly and were finally sent to
Mailly Wood, where the regimental Q.M. store is
situated. From here we were to be taken by a guide
to Anchonvilliers, a small village behind our lines,
where the reserve company (W) of our battalion was
billeted; the remainder being in the trenches.
About 8.45 p.m. we started off gaily enough, being
told the distance was about miles (we had already
marched nine with packs). We had previously left
some of our kit with the Q.M. and the men left their
packs. All of us were issued with the dish-plate steel
helmet. Well, we started off and marched through
the village. Troops, troops, troops everywhere. Of
course our guide took the wrong road out of the
village, though at the time we were blithely unconscious
of this. After about half an hour’s tramp our guide


had to ask a policeman at some cross roads the way.
We were told very definitely, “Straight along the main
road tor Anchonvilliers.” So we tramped along for
another half hour until we came to a dead stop at a
support-trench and our wretched guide confessed him-
self lost.
While asking the way a machine gun opened fire on
us and return along the open road was impossible. It
was mighty lucky it hadn’t started before. Eventually
we got an R.E. guide who took us along a trench through
a part known as the “White City” (chalk) to a road
leading to our village. Our original guide now claimed
to know where he was, but on reaching the village he
again lost us, and we had to enquire of a sentry where
the company was. We eventually reached our billets
and were given a good tea and a still better sleep.
June 17th. This morning we learnt that we were over-
officered, having about eight to ten per company. One
of them took us for a view of the Hun lines and showed
us the village (Beaumont-Hamel) which our battalion
is to take, the first to attack of our division. This
attack has been rehearsed for a couple of months. In
the afternoon Humpherus and 1 had orders to report
at H.Q., where we were told by the C.O. (Col.) that
we were to be attached to Y and Z Companies. On
winning the toss 1 chose Z.
Being so complete in officers there is not very much
to do; the officers take it in turn to keep watch over
the whole line.


Our dug-out is very crowded, underground, and full
of rats. Already my stick has been broken in despatch-
ing a fine specimen.
The men here do eight hours’ sentry (on and off),
eight hours’ fatigue, and eight hours’ sleep, and as the
trenches are fairly comfortable and dry they are much
better off than in Y. This afternoon a considerable
number of German aeroplanes came over our lines pur-
sued by some of our own. It was wonderfully pretty
to watch, and they soon returned, but one little one of
theirs was much faster than ours. We, however, have
the mastery and appear much more numerous. One
subaltern named Bennett was a sergeant in the Cold-
stream Guards and was promoted on the field of Loos.
He has been in nearly all the big fights and told us how
at Loos the Guards dressed their line when on the top
of the parapet, before charging. He attributed his
success in avoiding bullets to an extra rum issue, which
caused him to sway about so much that the Huns were
unable to hit him. He also told us how when he first
joined the Guards at the outbreak of war, a sergeant
said to him that he should grow a moustache. He said,
“I do, but 1 draw it in at night and bite the ends off,”
The sergeant promptly ran him in and he got seven
days C.B, and extra pack drill.
Sunday, June 18th. They have a very neat device
for telling which way the wind is blowing in case of gas
attack—simply a stick with a cross-piece and two pieces
of string with balls of fluff attached. These are fixed


at many points along the line and are very necessary.
A gas attack may only give fifteen seconds warning,
probably about 45, a wind of from three to nine miles
an hour being best.
This afternoon we were told that the bombardment
will commence on Tuesday at 6 a.m. and last five or
more days. The Royal Fusiliers are to commence the
attack, taking Beaumont-Hamel, and then consolidate
while the Dubs go through them, battalion to go
through battalion, and brigade through brigade, and so
on, on this front of some 500 yards. We were further
told that ten per cent, of the battalion will be left to
hold the line during and after the bombardment, and
only brought up the last night before the attack. Only
four officers of the company, the C. 0., and adjutant to
attack; the remainder, including myself, to hold the
front line. It is said the Russians commenced their
true offensive yesterday, and that we have tremendous
resources in artillery, about a million and a half shells
for the Fourth Army alone. Also that the attack is
over a front of 46 miles. Unfortunately about an hour
after all this information reached us word was received
that the bombardment has been postponed four days.
Many air fights occurred this afternoon and our gun-
ners are said to have brought down one of their aircraft.
Monday, June 19th. This morning I was awakened
by a large rat nibbling my eyebrow. On getting up I
learnt that a man had been killed by a whiz-bang, the
first death since leaving Gallipoli.


This afternoon the Dubs relieved us, but not until
they had sustained several casualties by whiz-bangs.
Unfortunately, we had omitted to put earth over some
sand-bag work, with the result that the Germans
spotted it and ranged on it repeatedly.
When relieved we marched to Mailly Wood, where
we are now encamped under canvas.
Note. Our mess is a very entertaining one, there
being included in its members a musician, a comedian,
a Rhodesian, and another born comedian though not a
professional, and lastly a public schoolboy who can’t
say anything without finishing with “Eh ! What!” to
the delight of the remainder. The born comedian keeps
on cheering up the rest by saying “No, no, dearie, you
are too young to die. You must not go,” etc., all with
an inimitable voice. Then he breaks out into:
“On this my daughter’s wedding day
Ten thousand guilders do I give away;
But on second thoughts I deem it best
To put the guilders in my old oak chest”,
and so on. The Rhodesian is an awfully nice fellow,
and is for all the world like the Tommy in the sketches
of Bruce Bairnsfather.
Wednesday, June 21st. Yesterday passed quietly.
The colonel had a word (a well put one, too) with us
in the afternoon. Told us that for our corps alone we
had sufficient artillery ammunition to stretch a length
of 46 miles if put on lorries. This morning Bennett
and I went over to Acheux to get cash, stores, and a


bath. We succeeded, and in addition got a good cheap
lunch. The difficulty of making oneself understood
is really not very great, though one officer offended the
good lady very much by saying “Donnez le jambo”
when he wanted jam. She thought he said “jambon”.
To-night three of us and some men take a fatigue party
to “White City”, a lively corner.
Saturday, June 24th, 7 a.m. The fatigue on Wed-
nesday night turned out to be for carrying numbers of
50 lb. shells for the Stokes Batteries. It was a weari-
some night, but was quiet enough. Thursday was not
of much account except that Major Ryan (second in
command, and staying behind with us, the colonel and
adjutant going forward) told us a much more detailed
account of what is to take place. The whole affair has
been very well thought out, as far as I can judge, and
the first phase should certainly be successful. Yester-
day, Friday, the noble ten per cent, relieved the Dubs
(Royal Dublin Fusiliers). It had been a sweltering hot
day until about 3.45 p.m., just when most of us were
out in the middle of some fields, when a most terrific
rain-storm struck us, and we were shortly all drenched
to the skin. The trench we were to have gone up was
found to be so full of water that we had to take another
route. Eventually we got to the lines, which are any-
thing but pleasant. Our clothes have by now partially
dried on us, but we must expect sopping feet for the
next five days while the bombardment lasts. This, by
the way, commenced very quietly at 6 a.m., and it is


to gradually work up, we believe. It is drizzling
slightly now and the trenches are beastly slippery. I
have just been warned for an observation post with a
trench mortar battery, so that I may observe how the
cutting of the German wire goes on. Later I will
probably go out on reconnaissance patrol to inspect the
damage. All officers and men have a long deep dug-
out as a refuge and sleeping-place, as doubtless the
Germans will give us something to go on with before
they get knocked out.
8 p.m. To-day the gunfire has chiefly taken the
form of wire cutting and has not been intense nor has
there been any considerable reply.
On reporting at the R.H.A., 29th Division F.0.P.,
I found the officer was cutting the support trench wire
only. It was an 18 lb. Field Battery Horse Artillery
—L Battery from Peninsula (?). It was very interesting
seeing him register and direct by telephone. There will
be no patrol just yet, as he is not cutting the front line
wire—shrapnel is used. On returning after an excellent
lunch on game pie, I learnt with regret that our second
in command, Major Ryan, had left to take charge of
10th West Yorks, Capt, Swift has taken his place.
Incidentally the journey along the trenches to the O.P,
was beastly.
Sunday, June 25th. Last night we were to have
attacked by gas but owing to unfavourable conditions
(hardly any wind) it was not let off, though on our left
apparently it was, with the result that some of our own


troops were gassed. The Huns evidently thought we
were going to attack last night as they strafed us some
tune, particularly on our support line. We (officers and
men of the company) are in a long dug-out, some dozen
feet underground and strengthened with wood. At
night we could hear and feel the guns pounding on top.
In the early hours of this morning I was officer on watch
and with the first grey streak of dawn our planes were
out registering for the guns, while two of our battle-
planes cruised about as a sort of convoy. In the later
morning I again went up to watch the wire cutting and
had a fine view of the bombardment which had now
commenced; the German trenches being shelled with
H.E ~ as well as the wire-cutting.
Monday, June 26th. Last night the weather was once
more unfavourable for gas, but this morning from the
A.O.P. I had a splendid view of an attack made from
the right of the R.F. line. One could see the yellowish
mixture of smoke and gas come out as a thick bank
about four feet high, gradually becoming thinner and
more vapourish until it passed all over the Hamel, as
a thin mist. Unfortunately the wind was N.E. instead
of E., so it did not reach their front line very concen-
trated, but the expert considers that considerable damage
was done.
Shortly after it had started, about 10.30, the point
from which it was issuing was most vigorously shelled
and a few casualties sustained by us due to this and
various causes (carelessness of operators). The strafe


has now commenced in earnest and Beaumont-Hamel
has been reduced by trench mortars and H.E. up to
fifteen inch. It looks chiefly a mass of bricks now.
Also the trench mortars are doing fine work wire-cutting.
The Germans have replied to some degree and shelled
in front of “White City” very vigorously early this
morning. The row is now incessant and the trench
mortars bursting on the German wire deafening.
Wednesday, June 28th. On Monday I was sent
out in charge of a patrol of an N.C.O. and four men to
examine the state of the German wire in the southern
part of the re-entrant, south of the Hawthorn Redoubt.
It had rained again in the afternoon fairly heavily; as a
consequence all was mud once more. The night was
very black, and crawling through mud and slush in
front of the German wire is a very poor entertainment.
The whole thing reminded one strongly of the picture
by Bruce Bairnsfather of the Tommy cutting wire and
the Verey light showing him up. The Huns were con-
tinually sending these up and lighting everything up
beautifully while we lay still as mice. As we got up
close the Germans were firing over us, and once 1 heard
a voice. Rifle-fire at night is nearly always high, and
consequently not so dangerous as unpleasant.
This was all done at the silence hour, i.e., the period
when our rifles and machine guns do not fire and our
artillery lift. The Lancs, on our left also had wire-
cutting parties out. As a result of the Lancs’, wire-
cutting, the Germans gave our frontline a furious bom-


bardment, and evidently thought we were about to
attack. However, one of the men and myself crawled
for some distance along the front of the German wire,
and I was able to report definitely that it was still intact.
Yesterday, Tuesday, the bombardment went on with
about the same intensity, and occasionally the Germans
warmed us up in reply, our front line being badly knocked
about, but owing to the very few men actually kept on
duty our casualties were always slight.
At night there were quite a number of things on,
chiefly during the silence period, which was from 12
to 1. Firstly, there were parties out completing the
cutting of gaps in our own wire, work that had been
commenced the night before. They were made about
six feet wide and fish-tail shape so that they should not
be apparent to our friend the enemy. Secondly, there
was a raiding party under one of our lieutenants (about
sixteen men) to endeavour to capture a prisoner. They
entered north of the Hawthorn Redoubt and had
difficulty in getting through the wire. The Lancs,
were supposed to have cut a gap there the night before.
However, by the time they got to the German trenches,
they found the Huns all ready for them and were glad
to get out of it with only one man lost and some
wounded. Lastly, Fox and I were each put in charge
of parties with a Bangalore torpedo and told to make
a gap in the enemy wire. Now a word about the
Bangalore torpedo. It is just like a 20-foot piece of
iron waterpipe, about an inch in diameter. It is plugged


with wood at one end, filled with ammonal (safest of
explosives) and at the other end a small hole for the
detonator. You put the detonator in, wire it on, screw
the automatic fuse slightly, after withdrawing safety-
pin, and after fifteen seconds up goes the Bangalore.
Well, the first part went swimmingly, like the night
before, except that the Huns were giving us a good
deal of rifle and machine gun fire, but of course it was
high. After crawling along and selecting a spot, I
pushed in the torpedo, one end resting almost on the
German parapet, as the wire was not very wide at this
point; it was also considerably damaged. When all
was ready I sent two of the men some yards back and
a third with a post painted white on one side. This is
put into the ground, white side to us, so that we could
locate the spot in the morning. Then 1 endeavoured
to light the fuse. After much twisting and inward
cursing 1 gave it up as a bad job and put in another.
This immediately began to sizzle and smoke and the
lance-corporal and 1 ran for it. We had gone half a
dozen yards when the corporal fell into a shell-hole
and knocked both me and the post sprawling. He was
up like a flash and gave me a pull up by my glasses
strap; we ran on, but soon had to lie flat, as Verey
lights went up. By this time there was a proper
fusilade going on, and bang went the torpedo. The
minute it was dark we ran on a bit further till we got
to about the centre of No Man’s Land. Meanwhile, the
Huns had sent up two red flares for artillery support,


evidently thinking they were going to be attacked, and
in incredibly short time our front line was subjected to
a furious bombardment, and rifles and machine guns
fairly went the pace. I realized at once that it was
better to risk it where we were than to endeavonr to
rush into our trenches. Unfortunately, the other men
had become too frightened to wait for me, and ran on,
with the result that three out of the five were hit,
though not seriously. After lying doggo for about a
quarter of an hour the shelling subsided somewhat, and
we were able to enter our trenches quietly.
The lance-corporal, Yates by name, was very good
indeed, and remarked that it was the tightest corner
he had ever been in. It was also satisfactory to find my
own nerves of the best. Mr. Fox’s party were unable
to reach the German wire, due to the rifle and machine
gun fire. On returning to report I found that Major
Cripps had returned to take charge of the Reserve.
To-day the bombardment is continuing, but the rain
has made things pretty miserable. To-night the bat-
talion is to occupy the trenches prior to the attack
to-morrow morning. I fear in the attack our troops
may catch it somewhat from the enemy’s artillery,
which is by no means silenced. I shouldn’t think their
infantry would cause us much trouble.
Later, This afternoon word has just come round
that the attack has been postponed 48 hours. Doubt-
less some good reason for it, but it is somewhat
depressing nevertheless.


Thursday, June 29th. Last night four parties of
Bangalore torpedo workers were sent out under my
direction. They all came from the battalion at Mailly,
and included two officers, Blackwell and Westaway.
They started off fairly close together and spread out on
nearing the German wire, and were successful, in that
three torpedoes went off, while two of the party
reported that they had been able to crawl right up to
the German trench, which was only manned in parts.
Our own artillery caused us some trouble, and shelled
us pretty vigorously, wounding at least one man. On
the return after firing the torpedoes, which was done
simultaneously at a given signal, some of the men got
lost, due to not sticking to their leaders. 1 recovered
one panic-stricken individual myself. He had lain
doggo too long after his officer had run, and so lost
him; then without compasses anyone might easily lose
himself. The net result of our own and the enemy fire
was a few wounded and two men missing.
Later, some hours. Westaway and I made enquiries
about these two men without avail, when of a sudden the
Germans turned on a rapid fire and we guessed it might
be our men wandering about. We both called the pass-
word “Venus” loudly to give them the direction, and
in a minute the German fire increased while up went
two red flares, and again our line was subjected to a
furious bombardment, the Hun evidently thinking we
were about to attack. After this we did not search any
more as it was pitch dark and practically hopeless. They


probably strayed into the German trenches. This morn-
ing the Huns have had two or three observation balloons
up, the first we have seen for some days.
I am at present on watch in the front line trench.
Nothing to do except be there should the one and only
sentry report anything. The rats have been very enter-
taining, and I have been much amused at one big fellow
that has been trying to screw up his courage to seize
some remains of dinner. Ah !at last he has it and is
off like a “bolt from the blue”! Here he comes again
for a second helping—mighty quick at storing the first!
These rats are quite a feature of the trenches and appear
very upset by the shelling. They are most useful scav-
engers and one gets quite to like them, and for my part
they may go in peace.
The bombardment continues, trench mortars and
shells plugging away steadily. Of the trench mortars
there are two chief kinds that have so far been in use.
i. A 60 lb. bomb and tail—the latter or tail end
being a cylinder about two feet long and three inches
diameter. This is pushed into the barrel of the gun,
which fires with considerable concussion. The bomb
explodes on percussion, with a terrific noise, and as it
does not go deep, being round, it is very useful for
breaking wire. The eye can readily follow it in its path
as it slowly goes up in a curve. It looks like a big
stud head as it travels, and appears quite small. Most
of these trench mortar guns are placed in deep gun-pits.


2. Heavy trench mortar. A French invention.
This is shaped more or less like an ordinary shell, with
a wind-vane in addition. It is 9-4 inches in diameter
and weighs 192 lbs., standing about three feet high. It
has a time fuse. The gun goes off with a tremendous
concussion, and the man firing it does so with a cord
attachment, taking care to be well round the corner
himself. It looks like a huge cigar as it slowly mounts
to a great height, then down, down, deep into the earth
(20 feet), a second silence, and then a tremendous ex-
plosion —earth and rubbish being hurled to a great
height. The torpedo takes about 25 seconds, roughly,
from the time of firing to time of explosion, and clouds
of white smoke appear afterwards over the crater.
4.50 p.m. There has been a tremendous strafe going
on for the last ten minutes on our left, the artillery
on both sides giving the opposing infantry in their
trenches hell. Just now I saw a most peculiar shell-
burst on the German front line send up a clearly de-
fined ring of smoke which rose to a great height before
dispersing.
The Huns have their three observation balloons still
gaily flying, but no aeroplanes of theirs have put in an
appearance since the first day of the bombardment or,
rather, day before bombardment.
5.5 p.m. Our artillery is still vigorously strafing,
though theirs has died down. Two of our planes are
most pluckily observing for them, and now the Huns’
balloons have been withdrawn.


triday, June 30th. Last night we had a most un-
fortunate accident, in that one of the trench mortars on
our right, together with 200 rounds of primed ammu-
nition, exploded. A hole of some 30 feet in diameter
and about 15 feet in depth was made; the three men
working the gun and the gun itself completely disap-
pearing. A fourth man, who was just at the mouth of
the pit, was dug out, badly knocked about. The cause
of the explosion was uncertain, but it must be remem-
bered that a single bullet hitting the primed cap would
be sufficient to explode the whole concern. At the
silence hour (10.30) I organized another Bangaloring
expedition, again with four parties. Three Bangalores
went off, and the information brought back was satis-
factory. The whole affair went as a parade movement,
and was without casualty.
In the early hours of this morning and in fact right
up to 8.30 the Huns subjected us to periods of intense
bombardment and about one o’clock poor Fox and his
orderly, Preston, were both killed while on watch. I
went on duty at 8.10 and from then until 8.30 we had
a pretty warm time. At 8.30 our guns gave the Hun
an hour’s period of intensive strafe. I hope they enjoyed
it; I did.
To-day should be the last day of the bombardment.
Our trenches, especially W Company’s on our right, are
badly knocked about. Our casualties in officers to date
have been two wounded and one killed.


for the withdrawal of our men to 86th trench though
some of us, including myself, were staying back in the
front line. My post was to be at the top of 2nd Avenue,
and Hyett and I found a lovely R.E. dug-out next to
the mine in which we intended to spread ourselves.
About 11.30 1 took watch. All our men (10 per cent.)
had long since gone out and the trenches were literally
packed with the incoming men. For the moment, how-
ever, there was no one in the front line at all, though I
had to reach it by going along the top. 1 decided that
the corporal and I would do a little sentry-go. I had
hardly got on the firestep when a whiz-bang burst in my
face, hitting me only in the shoulder however. The
C.C. sent me back to the dressing station and I walked
back along the very route I had marked out for wounded
only a few hours earlier. The doctor said it would take
three weeks at least to heal and that I must go. It was
most disgusting.
I walked with an S.B. guide to Anchonvillers dressing
station where I slept for the night. This morning to
Louvencourt via Ettienville, Forceville, and Acheux in
an ambulance. At Louvencourt other wounded began
to arrive, including another R.F. officer from W Com-
pany. While commiserating with myself at this depot
I came across another officer who had as yet not been
m the trenches, but attended an accident at a bombing
school. He was a battered wreck. I began to think
I was not so unlucky after all, a thought which was
considerably augmented as reports of the attack in our


sector began to arrive. It would appear that where we
were the advance had failed and that our battalion had
once more been cut to ribbons. Few of our men were
able to get far past our own wire. All were laden up
very heavily with various forms of equipment. The
mine appears to have gone up all right but did not make
as big a crater as was expected. All testify to the sur-
prising number of machine guns the Huns had left,
which they used with deadly effect. Their artillery was
also said to be very severe.
After lunch we were driven to Sezamcourt (some-
thing like that) to the 29th C.C.S.—an officers’ hospital
a mansion in beautiful grounds belonging to a French
count. It was already full of patients.
July 3rd, Monday. We did not leave Sezamcourt
until noon yesterday when we embarked or rather en-
trained for Rouen. Such a picturesque parade was never
seen—officers in rags, torn and battered, covered with
mud and dried blood, some without putties (myself),
others without coats or only remnants of same, all un-
shaven. At last we got off, reaching Rouen (No. 2
Stationary Hospital) at 11 p.m.
I may mention here that we on the train had a
“sweep as to the time we should reach Rouen Station.
I asked what time I had drawn and was told 11 o’clock.
At 10.45 the train stopped outside Rouen and our small
party at my end were quite excited about the prospects.
As for myself the effort to appear unconcerned nearly
caused me to faint. At last the train actually steamed


in on the very tick of 11. The crucial moment had
arrived and the future was assured. The manager
stepped forward; “Mr. Marriott here? You have won
first prize.” The wretched fellow had mistaken our
names and it was really Marriott who had drawn
“eleven.” It was very nice at the hospital and this
morning we were X-rayed. It was here that I had
vengeance on the miserable Marriott. At i o’clock this
afternoon the doctor came round and said : “Oh, Barrett,
I don’t want you to eat anything at all until 6 o’clock when
you will be on the table. You have a piece of shrapnel
in your shoulder.” There was nothing to do but look
on hungrily and strafe, as the others filled themselves
with afternoon tea, etc. At 5.45 the doctor came round
again: “Oh, Barrett, I don’t want you after all. It’s
Marriott who has to be chopped up.” It was the judg-
ment of God! The unhappy Marriott having over-
eaten himself was now before it!
Wednesday, July sth. Yesterday about 1 o’clock we
entrained once more, reaching Havre about 7-3°) an d
there embarked on the good ship “Lanfranc.” About
10 p.m. we left Havre and reached Southampton early
this morning, but had to wait until the other hospital
ships were cleared. At 4.20 we got alongside the wharf
and about 8 p.m. the few of us who were lucky enough
to be booked for London entrained.
Thursday, July 6th. Last night we finally reached
Wandsworth once more, Ward H, just opposite the
famous Ward M. I might mention that Cox is still


with me. He caught me up at Sezamcourt, wounded
in the arm with shrapnel on the morning of the attack.
Coming up last night we were afforded some amuse-
ment at the stations by wounded Tommies describing
the horrors of war to breathless admirers. “Oh, Miss,
it was simply ’orrible.”
Friday, July 7th. To-day 1 managed to get the
doctor to let me be boarded and was granted leave
henceforth till ....
Note on the on July Ist. August 28th. From
accounts received from officers and men who took part
in it, it would appear that for our portion of the line and
in fact from Thiepval northwards, the assault was a fail-
ure. The mine blew up the Hawthorn Redoubt and
was a tremendous explosion. Our battalion succeeded
after heavy losses in entering the front line trench, i.e.,
the re-entrant. They were, however, eventually forced
to retire as no support was forthcoming. Two officers
were captured. All testify to the deadliness of the
machine guns and shrapnel fire, the Germans having
several of the former in the front line (re-entrant). Our
battalion was cut to pieces though what extent of cas-
ualties I don’t know. The reserve battalion was very
roughly handled in the rear,and some were never brought
up at all. The question naturally arises as to why the
attack failed. When one considers the limiting pace of
50 yards a minute and that the men were heavily laden
it becomes obvious that it was planned on the theory of
no resistance. There was, however, considerable re-


sistance and apparently any number of men and machine
guns in the trenches, to say nothing of the artillery
support. Whether lightly clad infantry could have
rushed two or three trenches and so on is a question I
cannot answer. We were handicapped in not having
any main communication trenches, a point which Major
Cripps emphasized strongly on one occasion.
Tuesday, September 12th. Received orders report
at Folkestone, Thursday morning; about 8 others also.
September 14th. Left Folkestone by the “Victoria ”
at 4 p.m. bound for Boulogne. Boat all officers.
Glorious day.
Friday, September 15th. Arrived last night at
Etaples and leaving Boulogne at 6 p.m. W 7 e are now
at the great Etaples encampment under canvas. An
officer has just come from Somme and says the great
push has just started, and that the artillery is tremen-
dous. Rumours are as usual well under way. It is
now said a great number of cavalry are to dash forward,
and another says that the big French push is from
Verdun.
Saturday, September 16th. Joined the 4th R.h.
(Royal Fusiliers.)
Sunday, September 17th. On Friday afternoon
three of us from the sth (Atterwells, Robertson, and
self) had orders for departing next morning at 4 a.m.
In the evening we went for a stroll through Etaples.
One of the dirtiest towns I have ever been in. We
did manage to get a good meal, however. Yesterday


morning we started off, while our servant in great zeal
woke us at 2.15. We didn’t leave the station until
nearly 8 a.m. We then travelled back via Boulogne,
Calais, Hazebrouck, and finally finished up at Bethune,
being bound for the 4th R.F, 9th Brigade, 3rd Division
of the sth Army (XIII Corps). Two other officers (from
the 6th RT.) came with us and eventually we reached
our battalion in billets at Phillosophe, a small village.
1 was posted to X Company. I may mention in passing
that Bethune is quite a nice town, a great improvement
on Etaples, The Germans have however shelled it a
bit lately with 13 inch. I was glad to find Holland from
the 17th still here. So also Sperring, Captain of W.
Company, A major of a Lancashire regiment is in
command—a man of few words.
Tuesday, September 19th. On Sunday night I had
to take a party of 36 out to dig T.M. emplacements.
A very long tramp up a C.T., about 3,000 yards. Of
course the guide lost his way. It poured all the time,
but we arrived back very early. Yesterday passed
quietly enough, but rained a good deal of the day. This
afternoon Willis had news of a different appointment,
and is leaving the battalion. Our company is X Coy.
Commander Temp. Capt. Millson; subalterns: Rendell,
Hudson, Brasher, and self (second in command). Com-
pany about 150 strong.
We are in the Loos salient area, and all is very peace-
ful just at present. The 111 Div. Artillery has come
up, however, and is said to always bring trouble with


it, being very good and energetic. Many rats are in
the front line.
Wednesday, September 20th. Yesterday afternoon
late we went to Noeux-les-Mines to see a demonstra-
tion of Flammenwerfen. The apparatus was a captured
one and consists essentially of a metal cylinder about
as big as an oil-drum. This was attached to a short
hose with a nozzle and straps, by which it can be carried
on the back. It is filled with a mixture of light and
heavy oils and compressed nitrogen; about 30 atmos.
It is divided into compartments, so that the oil can be
put in after the nitrogen. At the end of the nozzle is
a tarry rag, or some such, which is lighted. On release
of a valve a jet of this burning oil is emitted with great
violence as a huge flame with intense heat. The range
of this concern was about fifteen yards, but the operator
said we had one that carried 80 yards. It can’t hurt
anyone in a trench. Last night the 3rd Division Ar-
tillery strafed considerably, and our M.G., etc., also had
periods of intense fire.
Thursday, September 21st. Last night I had an-
other fatigue party and a long, weary tramp up muddy
trenches. We managed to get back about 1.30, how-
ever, which was most fortunate. This morning we
were relieved by the 2nd Devons of the Bth Division
and have moved into billets in Mazingarbe, but depart
again at 6 a.m. to-morrow. Apparently the wholedivision
is going to have three weeks’ training, and it’s quite
nice to be on the move —something doing. To my


delight this afternoon I witnessed a fine game cock in
the yard next door to our mess billet. Nothing much
to do this afternoon. Willis has returned. Our route
to-morrow is W.N.W., via Noeux-les-Mines, Four-
a-Choux, Marles-les-Mines, Louinghen. Note: Maz-
ingarbe is N.W. of Lens.
Sunday, September 24th. On Friday we had a good
march through endless French villages. It is the coal-
mining area, and one continually sees these huge slag-
heaps which are quite a feature of the country.
At Lozinghem we had moderate billets, and at one
house a rather sweet French girl of about sixteen gave
us some excellent and much appreciated wine, and would
accept no remuneration. Our interpreter rather put the
acid on this by asking if it was really wine or only red
water. The district was evidently a more or less edu-
cated one, as 1 espied another rather fine black-breasted,
brown-red game cock.
Yesterday morning we again started off, but rested for
lunch this time. Early in the route we went through
Couchy-la-Tour (General Petain’s birthplace). After a
hard day’s march of some fourteen miles we arrived at
Laires about 5-3° P- m - Fourteen miles doesn’t sound
much, but when done with heavy packs without much
training, and with the constant short stoppages which so
often occur with imperfectly trained troops, it is quite
all one wants.
Our billets here are quite fair, Capt. Millson, the
C.Cr, and 1 are sleeping at the mess-house, while the


other officers are in various places. Millson and I have
quite a nice room and good beds. There are no civilians
in the house, which is quite at our disposal.
These French villages are very dirty, but somewhat
fascinating. The houses or buildings are all overrun
with rabbits, fowls, dogs, pigeons, etc., and nearly all
have a cesspool or manure heap in the central yard. In
our little place we have two rabbit hutches by the mess
—quite pretty-looking beasts. Still glorious weather,
and I am beginning to hope for letters. We are in for
a fortnight’s hard training, I believe.
Thursday, September 28th. On Monday we had our
first day’s training but for me it ended there, as I was
warned to go to the Divisional Grenade School for a
short bombing course. I left next morning, with my
servant driving in the mess cart, to the Brigade H.Q.
about four miles off, whence we went to our destination,
La Buvriere, by bus. On the way we passed through
Tillers, a fine looking town. On arrival we found quite
good billets and as nothing to do for the day another
chap and I walked over to Bethune. The Huns have
shelled it somewhat and consequently many of the shops
and hotels are closed. The spire has been knocked off
the steeple—clean as a whistle. On Wednesday morn-
ing our course started. The class consists of ten officers
and there are also a number of men. There is a three
weeks’ general course which other officers are at and
O
which is apparently a great loaf. A captain is in charge
of us (a little man, very Scotch), while a sergeant does


most of the instruction and talks to us about “Demo-
looshun Toobes.” Our hours are roughly from 7.30
a.m, to 4 p.m. To-day passed much as yesterday. All
are feeling pretty bucked up by the news of Combles
and Thiepval having fallen.
Monday, October 2nd. The bombing course went
on smoothly, finishing yesterday. Had one premature
explosion with Mills bomb fired from rifle. Luckily for
me no ammonal in it.
On Saturday afternoon we, or rather two of us from
the bombing course, joined the Divisional Course officers
in a very nice cross country ride. We took bus to
Mametz where we got our horses and had about an
hour and a half. A glorious day and very enjoyable.
On the way home we stopped for tea at Aire.
Yesterday the Divisional officers finished and a new lot
came out, but to-day we have had word that all are
returning to their work to-morrow. The show is
closing up and the division is going over the top some-
where, probably Somme again. We had nothing to do
to-day, but of course the weather must break and hence
it resolved itself into bridge this afternoon. Bought
three pairs of French cocks’ spurs as curios yesterday.
Good cocks in the village and apparently everywhere.
At the estaminets they fight cocks in peace times. A
strong dark red cock here is said to have won three
battles. At our house they have some queer dark silver-
grey coloured rabbits.
Thursday, October sth. On Tuesday the Div. school


closed and we all returned to our battalions. The weather
still beastly. Yesterday we had a field day —practising
the attack for the third time, 1 believe. It wasn’t well
done to my mind. A miserable day five and a half to
six miles each way, and raining continuously. We got
back about 4 o’clock and then had our lunch. After
the attack they gave a display or demonstration of Stokes’
guns, to give us an idea of the barrage we have to ad-
vance under. It was very effective. There was one pre-
mature burst. Last night they issued us with Lens
maps, and there is little doubt we are off to the Somme.
We leave here this morning.
Friday, October 6th. Yesterday we had a long, hard
tramp of about thirteen miles to Pierremont, arriving at
a little after 4 p.m. without stopping for lunch, which I
considered damn bad staff work. Not a man got past
the rearguard of our battalion, while the King’s and
West Yorks had streams fall out. Not a single man
fell out of our company though we had to carry the
packs, etc., of some who were at their last gasp. The
men are certainly not as good as they used to be. None
of the real old Tommy type. We have not such good
billets here and the dame of the house Is a most sour
person. She would give us nothing to eat when we
came in famished, and as our servants were lost we got
nothing but a biscuit or two and wine until after 6 o’clock.
The roads were very bad on the march but It didn’t rain.
Overcast again to-day but no rain so far. W r e spend
the day here and entrain to-morrow, we believe.


Monday, October 9th. On Friday at midnight we
paraded for the march again and started off for St. Pol.
It was drizzling again and not a very cheerful time to
begin operations but the men were in fine spirits. After
a couple of hours we arrived at St. Pol with bands play-
ing. Many of the inhabitants came to their windows
even at that hour and often had the torches flashed on
them to the immense delight of “Mr. Atkins.” At
St. Pol after the usual delay we entrained and believed
we were bound for Acheux. The whole division was
en route.
After endless delays we arrived at Puchevillers about
five in the afternoon—drizzling again. Thence we had
a nine miles’ march to Bertrancourt via Louvencourt
two villages I had been in in June. Louvencourt was
packed with troops, mud, and smell. At Bertrancourt
where we arrived pretty fagged about 7 o’clock we found
that some other battalion had boned our billets through
bad staff work and hence we had to go on to another vil-
lage, Beaussart, about a mile on, where the men had one
shed and we had another and what with the rain coming
through and general discomfort it was not very jolly but
might have been worse.
It appeared from the Q.M.S. that the site of our billets
had been changed literally about five or six times in the
course of the day.
On Sunday we were informed we were to go into the
line at once. Starting at 1 o’clock we went via Mailly
Maillet and right up to the crossroads where my guide


of June had taken us wrong. Here however we turned
to the left and entered C.C. (Railway Avenue) a good
deal north of our old line. On the way up another com-
pany had one man killed and one case of shell shock.
On arrival due to some mistake X and W Companies
had been given the wrong guides and the usual muddle-
ment ensued. Y and Z Companies are in reserve. The
general situation of the trenches is elementary and in-
structive. The front line has been so hopelessly bashed
about by T. M.’s that we only occupy it at a few points
by night and still less by day. In the bottom of the re-
mains of the trench is anything up to two feet ot mud.
Thank God I had trench boots and am still dry-shod.
The main firing line is or was the old support line—
called Rob Roy. This has some good dug-outs but
is badly enfiladed from our left as the line sweeps right
back. This line (Rob Roy) is about 150 yards behind
the old front line which in turn is 150 to 200 from the
Huns who are on the sky line more or less. In between
is just a mass of shell holes. Behind Rob Roy a few
hundred yards is Monk, the support line where the
remainder of our company (two platoons) is placed. I
had first watch last night but nothing of much event.
Later the Huns crumped the lines on our right pretty
freely.
An R.E. officer here had been down Beaumont Hamel
way on July Ist put the failure of the attack down to the
artillery lifting too soon —quite likely.
This morning “stand-to” at 5 a.m. and my tour from


6to 9 —C.O. just come round. Another very dull day
but so far no rain. The trenches, except the old first
line are really quite good considering the past weather.
Note. Advance by platoons and intervals (?).
The shells were directed against our batteries which
are all along the C.C. and the E. road behind; also more
emplacements being made, something doing alright.
We relieved 2nd Battalion O.R. and Bucks, seemed
pretty good, all their officers appear to have M.C.’s
Poor old Fusiliers don’t get them. They didn’t do
half as much on the Somme as our battalion, though 1
believe they did well. A successful attack by infantry
calls forth praise, while an unsuccessful attack does not,
though the latter is rarely their fault.
Wednesday, October i ith. Yesterday was fine, the best
day of the month and the artillery livened up consider-
ably, wire cutting being definitely begun and various
other preparations going on. For our part weareendeav-
ouring to improve the two trenches in the rear and 1 have
been doing my best to urge other people to work. It is
pretty hard, as few seem to quite understand the need for
it, though they will vividly if they have to attack from
the trenches as they are. In Rob Roy two new trenches
are badly needed as the enemy enfilades us perfectly from
the left. Gommecourt way. It is probable in the
event of an attack here the 9th Brigade will be in reserve,
but whether the R.F. will have to hold the trenches till
then I don’t know.
They have been sending a few H.E. over this morn-


mg and just this minute a rum jar or Minnewerfer landed
with its tremendous crash right in front of our trench.
Last night and henceforth an officer has to be all night
in the front line as well as one in Rob Roy. My watch
was from 10 p.m. to 2 a.m. last night and now again
from 6to 9 a.m. in R.R. Stand-to is from sto 6 a.m.
and 6 to 7 p.m.
The last two nights parties have been out endeavour-
ing (in bright moonlight) to capture a Boche but of course
havn’t succeeded. Bang! they are now shelling just on
our left. It’s a mighty accurate gun, however a miss is
as good as a mile, they generally send over about six at
a time. Rather an amusing incident occurred the other
night when one of the men on front line threw a bomb
at what he supposed was a Boche entering our line —
it was one of our patrols returning. Even if it had been
a Boche it was a disgraceful thing not to try to capture
him. To-day unfortunately is dull again and even
threatens rain. Our artillery is also less active.
Saturday, October 14. On Wednesday night there
was to be a raid by the 4th Gordons on our left. I
was on watch in the front line till twelve and saw the
T.M. man who got his three Stoke’s guns in some shell
holes in the valley between R.R. and front line. He
explained the gun and fired a shot for my edification.
It is a beautiful weapon and wonderfully simple. Event-
ually, however, the raid was disallowed.
On Thursday we w T ere to be relieved by the NT. and
eventually after the usual mixing up and losing of guides


the handing over was accomplished. For my part, how-
ever, 1 was detailed to observe enemy artillery in the
afternoon on the occasion of an attempt on our part to
draw their fire. I had the sector between R.R., front
line, Jordan, and JLe Cateau to observe, and we were to
report to the intelligence officer.
I may mention here that while getting instructions at
H.Q . the dump at Monk Trench, Jordan Trench corner,
was blown up by a Hun shell and a tremendous explosion
followed as the T. M. ammunition went off. Huge lumps
of trees were thrown hundreds of yards, and a mass of
flame went up, and a crater of about 40 yards across
and about 30 feet deep was all that was left. An offi-
cer in a dug-out nearby was buried, and one of my men,
a stout fellow named Clarke, came running to me to
say that this officer was buried, and that he didn’t know
just where, and that his men ran away and left him.
Eventually Clarke and I found the dug-out, and started
clearing it. We got his coat, revolver, bed, etc., and
were going strong when some of his other men came
along, so we left the remainder of the task to them,
and were pleased to hear later that they found him
under the debris unharmed.
Well, at 2 p.m. our little affair started, and I observed
from Campion Trench. The plan which was carried
out was as follows: first, a show of bayonets in the
front trench; second, clouds of smoke let off from
front by parties of men under the bombing officer,
Holland; then simultaneously with the smoke our guns
f 81


and mortars opened fire on front line and support and re-
serve trenches, etc., lifting in due course, and generally
behaving as though for an attack. It was a pretty
imposing spectacle, but it failed in its object, i.e., to
show where the Hun will put his barrage. He sent up
two red lights from the front line, but his artillery was
slow in coming up to assistance and, when it did, merely
strafed our trench in retaliation. I had a lovely view of
some of his rum-jars—big trench mortars filled almost
entirely with H.E.; they make a tremendous explosion,
but our part of the trench was really wonderful lucky.
After all had died down and 1 had reported, I went up
to the front line to see how Holland was getting on, as
I feared he might have had casualties, as the Huns
strafed the two lines pretty well. I found poor Hoi-
land killed,
I returned and went back to Mailly to rejoin the bat-
talion in their billets. It was great getting a bath again
and also a night’s sleep. Our billet is quite a good one.
They have planted a number of guns all round us, and
last night and Thursday night they sent some shells
over, but none came too near, fortunately, as we were
far too lazy to move. Yesterday was a day of rest and
so also to-day. So far, though, the men are constantly
on fatigues, and to-night Brasher and I are on one.
We have been told of the general plan of our attack
to come, and we (9th Brigade) are in reserve. It is
hoped to be a great stroke, and surely after three months’
bitter experience on the Somme, and with all our pre-


ponderance of artillery, we can make a success. We shall
see. We were relieved in the morning.
Monday, October 16th. Nothing much to report,
except that Brasher and I had a fatigue on Saturday
night, but we were back at r o’clock. On Sunday I
was told to take over command of the bombing com-
pany, much to my disgust, and that 1 would be out of
the stunt at the beginning. 1 understand the discipline
of the bombers was slack, and I am to put it right. In
the evening there was a pretty lively display of artillery
on our left for a little while. I believe the King’s had
sent back for assistance when the Boche sent over
T.M.’s. This morning I was told that I should be per-
mitted to go into the attack in command of W Com-
pany, and they would have Sperring back for the present.
It suits me, and they probably don’t want to lose Sper-
ring; he is thfe best C.C.
This afternoon the wily Teuton sent over some
“heavies.” A couple landed on the side of the road
about 100 yards off and made craters six feet deep and
about ten across,and covered everything withinaradius of
50 yards with mud. Another smashed a huge tree up
and covered our washing with mud, to the great annoy-
ance of our servants. “There goes two hours’
——- washing!” All day Hun planes were very
active and were over our lines several times. Doubtless
they directed the shells on the guns in our garden.
Tuesday, October 17th. This morning, or rather
early this afternoon, we left Mailly and marched to


Courcelles. Found the latter full of guns and troops,
and very poor billets.
Due to some error Junior H.Q. missed their mess and
are now under canvas. 1 have joined them now, and
miss my triends of X Company very much and, to
add to the depression, it has begun to rain. We expect
to go a few miles further back for five days’ training
shortly. Looks as though the stunt has been post-
poned, seeing that wire cutting of at least a portion of
the line began six days ago, I do hope the weather
does not crack up. It’s certainly getting jolly cold.
Friday, October 20th. Well, let us look back on the
last few days. On Tuesday night the C.O, sent for us
at 9 p.m. It was raining steadily, and was generally a
beastly night. On reporting we were informed that the
attack had all been altered. The whole corps on our
left has been washed out of the attack (probably wanted
elsewhere), and our Division is attacking in quite a
different manner. We, the 4th R.F.’s, are now first in
attack, and have to take the first six lines of trenches.
The C.O. wished the C.C.’s to inspect the area from
which we are to start (to the right of the line we occu-
pied). Our battalion left is to advance on a line with
left of Serre Wood, two companies abreast, W on right,
four waves in all. We, the C.C.’s, at the C.O.’s request
went forth at 4 a.m, next morning to inspect the
trenches. It was miserable getting up, but eventually
we arrived at the front line, which we found most
severely knocked about and more or less a mortuary.


In passing along the line we were completely exposed
to the Hun from time to time, but luckily we were not
sniped at. The Hun wire was very thin and not a
hundred yards from us . . .
[Pages 58 and 59 unreadable.]
. . . deserved a V.C. for riding a bike on it through
such traffic. The day, for a change, was beautifully
fine, and on the way back, after the stunt, the roads
were much better.
Two other young officers from W Company and
self managed to get on board a locomotive going to
Acheux, where we had lunch, after which we boarded
a motor-bus or transport back to Vauchelles.
Yesterday the guns were very active, and again this
afternoon they all thundered away. Hun planes were
also active, and I saw one hotly shelled to-day; they
also dropped bombs on the roads.
Tuesday, October 24th. The last few days have
been fruitful, chiefly in showing how often our higher
command can change their minds. On Saturday and
Sunday we practised the attack with all men, but
nothing was definitely fixed until yesterday, by
which time half our men had been sent into the
trenches again. This was due to a note coming in on
Sunday night to the effect that three companies were to
be in the trenches by 9 a.m, next morning—somewhat
a bombshell. The Colonel went and saw the heads, and
the order was altered to 200 men of three companies,
and later to 200 men representing two companies;


though this was no use to us, as already a lot of our
men were out on fatigues, and we couldn’t get 200
men from two companies. I may mention that on Sun-
day, after the operations, our Divisional General spoke
to all officers and again warned us about keeping up to
the barrage. Our Brigadier, Potter, is a very fine man,
and very clear and practical.
Well, to continue. Yesterday morning the 200 men,
with a proportion of officers, moved off for the trenches.
In the afternoon they were followed by the remainder
of the three companies, while at 3 a.m. we had a con-
ference at H.Q. and got some points finally settled.
Then at 5.30 p.m. we had another conference with the
Brigadier at Louvencourt, which was also very helpful
(all officers of brigade). The Brigadier read us some
extracts of a German officer’s diary, which was very
pessimistic, but very amusing. They must be having
a rotten time.
After this performance we returned to , after
which the remaining officers of the three companies,
except the Company Commanders, went off to the
trenches. Incidentally it began to rain, Millson came
and had dinner with me, and we talked our part of the
show over.
Last night, late, word came round that no officer
would be going up to-day at all—nor, of course,
the remainder of the battalion. God help us—the
last alteration of the staff! I am hoping it only means a
two days’ postponement of the “strafe” and that the


men are coming out of the trenches. It is most unfair
to keep them long in the line before attacking, and we
can do little good. However, it is only 8.30 a.m., and
doubtless we shall hear in due course. The attack was
to have been at dawn to-morrow.
Sunday, October 29th. Before 9 o’clock on Tuesday
morning word came round that Company Commanders
were to go into the trenches at once. Phillips, Millson,
and 1 accordingly started off—raining, of course. We
arrived at the trenches about four in the afternoon; had
tea with Major de la Perrelle and went on—now in
pitch darkness. The difficulty of finding one’s way was
beastly—mud over the ankles. Eventually, I reached
W Company headquarters —a most miserable apology
for a dug-out—just a few sandbags head cover. We
learned that the attack had been postponed 24 hours.
After taking over command from Radford and grop-
ing about the lines a bit I sent Nichollsand his platoon
up to the front line. Nicholls himself and, later, two
or three of his men, got bogged going up Flag Avenue,
and had to be dug out. Eventually, I got them all
there. Later, Nicholls went out and patrolled the Ger-
man wire. He found working parties repairing it, and,
of course, it is dreadfully thick. Our front line is even
worse than where we were before. On our left was
Giles and his company, assisted by Phillips.
After a pretty rotten night I went out to have a look
at the wire between our front and support line, as we
have to cut it sometime. This was about 6 o’clock,


fairly light, and our guns had begun bombarding the
enemy, I judged the latter would be keeping their
heads down. However, I was mistaken, and got sniped
at for my pains, and my orderly and I had a fairly lively
time. We got into the front line, but almost at the
same time the Hun guns began—“whizbangs” all
round us. We ran for it, as far as we could, through
the mud and, once, I remember the red flame of a shell
in our eyes, but we got away untouched, though had
to get into a dug-out for a spell. On returning to
C.H.Q. later I learned that we were to be relieved that
day (Wednesday). This was eventually carried out, but
not before the Hun had sent over numerous “rum-
jars” and made a lovely crater, completely blocking the
trench about 20 yards from our dug-out. The explo-
sion was augmented by some “tadpoles” being left in
that part of the trench.
We were eventually relieved, and after a weary march
in rain and slush to Courcelles, we got lorries home. 1
may mention that the R.S.F. got badly caught in
Southern Avenue, losing many men, and also one of
our planes was brought down. We were very lucky
as far as casualties went.
We returned to our old billets, where we have been
since, with the exception that to-day all officers were
billeted, and I have joined W Company mess.
Radford has gone sick, and Robertson has now joined
us. The men have been doing fatigues, bathing parades,
a little work, etc. The stunt has, of course, been post-


poned again and again, as the weather has kept bad and
the trenches been almost impassable. The General and
some Colonel (Brett) went to inspect them the other
day, and coming down Flag Avenue, over one of the
parts that had been smashed in, Colonel Brett got
bogged, and at the same time a sniper opened fire on
him, with the result that he was obliged to lie flat in
the mud. Now they know what the trenches are like.
On Saturday I was to “pay out,” and after everything
was ready found that Nicholls had gone off to Louven-
court with the cash.
Monday, October 30th, Rain again nearly all the
day. Plenty to do as a C.C., but find it interesting
enough, and there is lots to improve from discipline
downwards.
Tuesday, October 31st. Yesterday passed moder-
ately miserably, as it rained most of the time. To-day
Phillips left us—a sad blow—and this evening Sperring
came back, and Jervis is also going—a great loss. I have
reverted to the bombing company.
To-night on rejoining my J.H.Q. mess my orderly
came round to say good-bye, and said he liked some-
one like himself—rough and ready. Apparently he
wants to be my orderly in battle—rather nice. He is
a stout lad, and was at the Dardanelles.
Wednesday, November Ist. Nothing much doing,
except that weather last two days has been better. I
have been strafing the bombers pretty thoroughly, and


they need it. Some of them have been looting poultry.
Jervis left to-day, returning to 76th Brigade.
Sunday, November sth. On Thursday, November 2nd,
Sperring went sick, and I had to take over command of
W Company again, as well as the bombers. I had a
pretty active time, as I was hard at it having the
bombers trained and also livening them up on parade.
This latter 1 think I accomplished, and some day I shall
write a book on “How to be unpleasant on parade, by
one who has done it.” On Friday C.Cr.’s had to
reconnoitre the line, same place as last held. I had to
go up as well to see that the training of the bombers
was carried on. All went well, and even the day was a
little better, but it was a long, weary tramp.
On Saturday (yesterday) we all went up to the line,
leaving, we hope, Vauchelles for the last time, and
relieving the . They appear to be a very
rag-time crowd, and have certainly raised the ire of
the divisional commander, as he gave the order that
they were not allowed to leave the trenches until
we were satisfied with their condition. Their
condition is worse than it ever was, but out of mis-
taken kindness we let them go, and now we have
the job of clearing up. I am luckily in reserve this
time, but as McMichael has gone sick I am sole bomb-
ing officer as well as company commander. Yesterday
went quietly enough for us, though the men had to work
hard all night. This morning, unfortunately, they have
taken Robertson from me—an awfully nice boy; he is


to go with one of the front line companies (Z). This
leaves me with Nichols and Attewell. Both last night
and this morning our artillery gave periodical strafe.
The Hun hardly replied at all. Just this afternon,
however, a damned fool of a signaller had a fire that
was smoking from the bottom of their deep dug-out,
and brought some shelling right on our bit of trench,
much to our annoyance. There are some damned fools
in this world. I should have reported the whole crowd,
only did not wish to get the signalling officer into
trouble ; I should do so were any of my men hurt or
if the damage to the trench is not repaired.
They have at last taken to giving us a change of socks
each day for the men in the trenches, but we have been
unable to get underclothing for nearly a month, which
is scandalous. The men are, of course, lousy.
The weather has been better during the day, but rains
again at night. We have been told definitely that the
attack and whole stunt has been put off altogether. It
is a great pity, of course, but the cracking up of the
weather has made it quite impossible.
The 3rd Division is expected to move to another quar-
ter shortly. We anticipate a three days’ sojourn in these
merry quarters. The trenches for my company are by
far the best, though that is faint praise. There are,
however, practically no deep dug-outs except B.H.Q.
which is near by. Our company dug-out has one of
these steel arches and about two to three feet of earth
—possibly whizbang proof.


November yth. Yesterday and in fact ever since we
have been in we have had to work night and day in
cleaning up the trenches. Last night a raiding party of
ours endeavoured to catch a Hun. They got into the
front line all right, but found it unoccupied for a distance
of 200 yards. The wire was bashed about so as not to
be an obstacle any longer, while the ground even from
our trenches looks more like a ploughed field than any-
thing else—shell holes galore.
Yesterday morning we were told that the R.N.F.’s
were relieving us to-day, then that the relief was can-
celled, then that the attack was coming off after all on
Thursday, and that we were to be relieved to-day after
all. Finally this morning I hear that the attack has again
been postponed, but our relief is going on.
Sgt.-Major Wheeler’s death on Monday, and same
night Thodey headed a small raid in front line—
chasing dead men.
Friday, November 10th. In due course, Tuesday
morning, we were relieved by the N.F.’s, and, of course,
it simply teemed, landing us at Courcelles more like
drowned rats than like anything else. I found that in
addition my men’s billets were untenable. This, after
some difficulty, I set aright, but only to find there was
none for me. This again was eventually put right,
thanks to Major de la Perrelle and the town mayor.
The men, of course, were detailed for fatigues in no
time. I may mention that Sperring returned on Tues-
day, and I am once more with the bombers.


We have, of course, had continually changing infor-
mation as to our final doings, and only this morning we
were all packed up for Bus, when word came to unpack.
I was on fatigue—carrying party last night—as were
the remainder of the battalion. Some had casualties—
about four killed—probably due to smoking cigarettes
and drawing Hun artillery. Coming home they shelled
Colincamps and Courcelles with gas shells, but did no
harm, except to keep us awake.
Saturday, November nth. Last night our guns in
the village strafed heavily; even more so than usual.
This morning, shortly before breakfast, we were sum-
moned to the C. 0., who informed us that the whole
plan had been completely changed once more, and that
now the 76th and Bth Brigade were attacking while
we are in reserve, also the depth of the attack is being
altered (shallow). Our particular battalion of the 9th
Brigade is going to be in Sackville Street. We were
sent off to reconnoitre, but on returning shortly were
informed that half of the part we reconnoitred was not
to be occupied by us after all. The weather continues
passably fine, though it is to be hoped no more rain
comes and no more changes. There are practically no
dug-outs in our trench, and we will have a jolly time
being shelled, doubtless. We are to see the C.O. at
9.30 to-night.
We have a new padre now; he was an Australian
stretcher-bearer at Gallipoli; seems a nice chap. We


introduced him to our mess this afternoon, and robbed
him of 23 francs at bridge.
Sunday, November 12th. The day draws to a close,
and to-morrow at dawn begins the Battle of the Ancre.
Our final dispositions are that we remain in Sackville
Street until called for, either to re-counter-attack the wily
Teuton or to continue the advance. We go up at 9 p.m.
Last night the Hun raided the N.F.’s, and got right
into Rob Roy, captured a Lewis gun and knocked
another out of action, wounded one or two men, and
returned scot free. The raid was preceded and
accompanied by a very heavy barrage.
Monday, November 13, 9.15 a.m. Last night we
occupied our trenches about 10.30 p.m. A very heavy
mist everywhere. The night passed quietly as far as
we were concerned, though our guns kept up a more
or less continual shelling.
At 5.45 a.m. the Battle of the Ancre began, and then
truly was let loose the thunder of a thousand guns.
We were all very hopeful, but as casualties began to
arrive it became obvious that the attack was being held
up in many parts, when allowance had been made for
the stories of shaken men. We have been ordered to
dress in fighting order, and are now waiting to be sent
whither ?
Note. A— leads his platoon five minutes too early
through Colincamps (9.25 p.m.) on 17th.
Scene. A pitch dark night; platoon after platoon at
200 yards intervals team along road. B— and his


platoon ten minutes too early. Voice in dark behind
B—, “Halt, there; halt, damn you; halt.” B—,
“Who says halt?” and after some delay stops. C.O.
appears from gloom, “Why the hell didn’t you halt?”
B—, wheeling round to man behind him, “Why the
deuce didn’t you say who gave the order to halt?”
C. 0., “Didn’t you synchronize your watch?” B—,
“No, sir.” C. 0., “Don’t grin at me, man.” At this
moment up stumbles W— in the dark. C. 0., “Is this
keeping 200 yards interval?” W—, “Didn’t know there
was a platoon in front, sir.” B— escapes in the dark,
and afterwards says, “And to accuse me of grinning at
that hour of night —was it likely?”
Friday, November 17th. Well, my dear mother, we
are back in billets once more in Bus after some adven-
tures, but were not called on to attack.
After waiting nearly all Monday to be sent up to the
line, and seeing the wounded stream in about 2 p.m.,
Millson and I were sent for and told that we were to be
lent to the Shropshires and East Yorks respectively.
I eventually posted my company in Legend and Mait-
land trenches, where we spent the night and part of
next day.
In the meantime it became certain that the attack in
our sector and in that of the 2nd Division had been a
failure. Apparently in the thick fog men had lost direc-
tion hopelessly, and what with mud up to their waists,
and wire, and Huns, they lost the barrage. The
Bth Brigade on our right apparently did worse than the


76th, but eventually all had to retire. The 2nd Divi-
sion, however, attacked again on Tuesday morning with
success, and formed a defensive flank on our right, while
down south we were informed that everywhere had we
had success and that Beaumont-Hamel had been captured.
On Tuesday at 2 p.m. all C.Cr.’s were sent for, and
we were informed that the whole battalion was to be lent
to the 6th Brigade of the 2nd Division on our right.
We started off* along Sackville Street, but there was a
heavy strafe, and the C.O. decided it was best to return
and await quieter moments. By the time we set out
again night had fallen, and it was only after great effort
that we eventually reached the H.Q. after travelling
over badly knocked about trenches. Here the Brigadier
was very nice, though he didn’t want to see all C.Cr.’s.
He told our C.O. what we were to do, etc., and told us
also how successful the attack had been down south.
I was somewhat appalled to hear him say that he
only found out on the night before the attack that the
Bth Brigade had replaced the 9th.
After the C.O. had made arrangements with the 2nd
South Staffs.’ C. 0., whom we were to relieve, and also
another battalion, both of whom were weaker than our
battalion, since they attacked, we arranged that Z and
Y Companies should take the front system which was
ever so much worse than any Rob Roy part, and that
Z and X should be in support, but be allowed our old
position on the first night before the attack. In due
course we moved off, being relieved by the King’s, and


about 12 midnight I was able to report that we were
once more in our position in Sackville Street.
I may say here that we did not sustain a single casu-
alty, as it is more or less behind a ridge, and most of
the shells went either over to Euston Dump way or on
the trench in front. It is perfectly straight, without
any shelter at all, but from its position cannot be enfi-
laded. Before closing the narrative of Tuesday it should
be remarked that in the afternoon numerous Hun aero-
planes came over, and ours showed considerable activity.
On the day of the attack almost all aeroplane observa-
tion was impossible, and artillery observation likewise
out of the question.
Another factor of interest is the fact that the weather
though fine is getting mighty cold.
On Wednesday all went quietly until once again,
shortly after lunch, Attewell and I were sent for. The
C.O. informed us that the 6th Infantry Brigade wanted
a real good officer and 50 men, and a machine gun or
two, to reinforce the defensive flank on the right of our
sector near the Quadrilateral, It was at present held
by the 22nd R.F., 13th Essex, and Ist King’s. Their
numbers were said to be very diminished.
Attewell and 1 with Nos. 2 and 4 Platoons and
Lewis guns were to be off. We were soon ready, and I
went on ahead with my orderly, Gosling, to report to
O.C. 13th Essex, who were to provide us with a guide
across the new trench in No Man’s Land. I started off
along Sackville Street; we had not gone very far before
g 97


the trenches became worse and worse, and soon quite
impossible—mud up to the waist, and bashed about so
as to be almost unrecognizable. There was nothing for
it but to go over the top and risk the considerable
artillery strafe which was going on at the time. On
our way we crossed a tram road and saw two
smashed up tanks and also a smashed aeroplane with a
[illegible]. We reached Egg Trench, whence some
men took us to Essex H.Q. I reported and returned
to look for men with a couple of guides. After travel-
ling right back to our old place in Sackville Street I
was unable to find any trace of them. And then began
a lovely time of chase about on top at 3 o’clock in the
afternoon, looking for them, in the midst of a fine
strafe. One C.Cr, complained that I was drawing fire
on them, and he in his deep dug-out! After the devil
of a time I found Corporal Carrie and Lance-Corporal
Cope and a half drunken wretch who had been the
cause of their staying behind, through losing the rest
of his party. 1 forgot to mention that before this I
had met Sergeant slightly wounded and shaken
returning to dressing station after having been buried
by a shell; he was my best sergeant. To return,
I took this remnant into a bit of trench near Essex
H.Q. to decide on the next step to be taken to find Mr.
E and the remainder. After a little delay I sent
Corporal Clapham back down Egg Trench to look for
them, as I judged sooner or later E would hit the
C.T. and begin to come up it. My expectations were


justified as soon I saw Clapham waving and men
began to appear out of a trench to the rear. I went
out to hurry them on, when a large shell burst quite
close, wounding Corporal Carrie and the drunken
wretch in the trench, but left me untouched. Eventually
all reached , except about six to eight casualties.
I reported to H.Q. Essex again, and was then sent
on by guide to go in and report to Major Adams of the
of the flank. It was now nearly dark, so we
rushed on without delay, and though some shelling
was going on, reached the old S.L. without further
mishap.
On reporting to Major Adams I learnt with keen
disgust that he had already more men than he wanted
and our being sent up was most certainly a mistake.
I was ordered to put my men into the German dug-
outs and await orders. This I did, also saw very much
of interest.
The German trenches are very well made, deep,
well rivetted, and traversed; depth about nine feet, and
fire-step often four feet six inches, with regular shelves
to get up. In the parapet is a long, deep, and almost
continuous dug-out system with any number of entrances.
To each of these is attached a kind of glorified periscope,
through which the sentry can observe all that is going
on in the front while he himself is within the shelter of
the dug-out entrance. Then there is a bell which he
can press and which rings down in the dug-out, and in
a moment the trench is manned. This particular bit of


front line appears to have been occupied only the night
before, and any amount of equipment, etc., was left
lying about, while with regard to comfort, etc., there
were numerous wire beds and small side pockets, as it
were. To return, Attewell and I got our men all in,
and put a sentry at each entrance of our portion, and
then the remainder turned in to sleep. Attewell and I
were very hungry so we tackled some bully and button
biscuits and found it excellent. We also found a small
round loaf of German bread on the floor—all muddy,
but the inside might be all right—so we started on it.
It was very sour and a failure, and I remembered it to
my cost next day. All this time there was a consider-
able strafe going on—in fact, when we were going into
the dug-outs had it been our trenches we must have
had casualties, but their trenches are so beautifully deep
that we came through unscathed. About 9 o’clock, just
as we were all comfortably asleep, word came round
from Major Adams that 4th R.F. detachment were to
go back at once to Bus.
We collected the men again, and after some of the
usual delays found our way back to battalion H.Q.,
where I reported to the C. 0., who appeared very
pleased with our performance. We then made our way
back to huts at Bus, and after a very arduous day had
the satisfaction of being the first of the battalion to
arrive home—l 2 midnight.
On Thursday the weather was colder than ever, but
nothing much doing, except that in the evening the


C.O. asked me if I would care to take on adjutant.
I told him I should be pleased to do anything I was
asked to do, but that my ambition in soldiering was to
lead my company in the field; and this morning I was
definitely posted in command of Z Company, Sey-
more Brown having been hit slightly on Wednesday
last.
Sunday, November 19th. Last two days have
passed quietly enough, except that there was snow
Saturday morning, but rain later and more again to-day,
so that once more everything is beastly. This morning
the brigadier had a word with us re trench duties, and
drove home a few points I had been striving hard at
while in command of W Company, with partial success.
He also informed us we might be about this area all
the winter, and that the brigade was expected to be in
for a fortnight in our old sector, N.F.’s and W.Y.’s
starting first. Other rumours are also afloat. How-
ever, this afternoon we moved to Courcelles once
more—rotten billets, and village more shattered than
ever due to all the howitzers about it.
Sunday, November 26th. We stayed at Courcelles
until Tuesday night, when we relieved the N.F’s. My
company on left front, Won right. We are in Rob
Roy, and hold the front line with bombing post and
Lewis guns. Wednesday was a glorious day, but an
attack of Frankfort Trench on our right at 3.30 p.m.,
to get out some marooned men, caused a beautiful
barrage to be put on Rob Roy, which was kept on for


over an hour. Our casualties were very slight, though
one man was hit next to me just as I was leading up a
relief to the front line. Subsequently we learnt that the
200 surrounded men surrendered, after being in the
German lines for five days. Thursday and Friday were
very fine days with black nights. Trenches are very
bad, but we are hard at work repairing them. Yester-
day, unfortunately, opened with a heavy mist, which
developed into rain, but too early. Visibility was so
low that we were able to do wiring during the day.
By night the trenches were well filled with water, and
we have now a sticky time before us.
During the afternoon an orderly, a bright lad named
Lawson, and I discovered a “Stiffun” near the top of
Souther. I suggested to Lawson that we should pull
him by the heels into a crater, but Lawson said, “I’m
afraid he’ll pull right out, sir.” So we got him by the
coat, and after some effort got him into the shell hole.
We then hastily threw mud at him, as he was
thoroughly roused, then gladly departed.
To-day the trenches are worse than ever and it is
still raining, What with one thing and another—
endless chits, to send reports, to make reports, etc. —
I’ve come to the conclusion a C.Cr. earns his “filoose.”
We hope to be relieved to-morrow night.
Wednesday, November 29. On Monday we were
properly strafed from our flank, due to a number of
parties wandering about on the top on our right.
The weather again cleared up, and after great efforts


my little part of the trenches was made passable, but
C.T.’s, etc., in many places were impossible, while the
company on our right was frightfully knocked about.
At night, in due course, we were relieved by the
10th R.W.F.’s of the 76th Brigade. There were only
two officers in the company which relieved me, and the
captain had been made a subaltern in the attack. Only
four out of seven of their officers returned. He
emphasized the great use of the rifle as compared with
the bomb for attack. I am also in entire agreement
with him, and said as much with regard to two bomb-
ing posts in the front line, which to my mind should
be snipers’ posts by day. Old French says the rifle has
been superseded by the Mills and Lewis sentries; let
him come into our front line for a bit. After a con-
siderable struggle we finally got back to billets in Bus,
myself and Robertson, about 4 a.m. Tuesday.
They actually took some of the officers, etc., for
fatigue yesterday, and to-day the whole battalion is
hard at it. They have actually got some road-cleaning
machines, but evidently not enough to leave the men
alone. To my mind it is absolutely sinful to use men
who have just been under arduous conditions up the
line for this sort of thing.
Undoubtedly the whole success or failure of an at-
tack rests with the infantry, and these are pelted about
until they are exhausted and weary, and then flung into
an attack. Is it any wonder that they sometimes fail ?
Again, officers get little encouragement —they can get


temporary promotion if in command only; but as soon
as they get wounded or sick they go back to be second
lieutenants. It is said 70 per cent, of officers in France
are second lieutenants.
Monday, December 4. The days have passed peace-
fully enough in lines except that the men have had end-
less fatigues. The weather has been quite kind, and
to-day is glorious, \ and Z Coys, are again together
and we have quite a nice billet. The other night we
had quite an amusing little incident. We had played
Bridge until about 11.30, when we retired to our bunks,
but L. decreed we should have a little gramaphone.
He put in “The End of a Perfect Day,” but had hardly
set it going when he fell over the red hot brazier, catch-
ing his breeches to the handle. He made desperate
efforts to extricate himself, but only succeeded in scat-
tering the charcoal about, and dragging the brazier
round the room. His language no one could under-
stand. All the while the machine kept up “The Per-
fect Day.” We were all quite helpless to assist him
until finally Shannon cut him free. He has not for-
given us yet.
Yesterday the Doc. and I were going up the main
street when a hoary-headed old Frenchman rushed out
upon us in a state of hysteria, pointing the while to the
back of his cart, and then at some Tommies in a billet
nearby. We followed him into the billet on the assump-
tion that the back of his cart had been stolen for fire-
wood. We were unable to find any trace, and of course


the Tommies denied any knowledge, and we were about
to send the frantic man to the Town Mayor when of a
sudden he looked into his cart again and there saw the
tail-board under some straw. Shrieks of merriment
from all 1 ommies, and frightful scowls and cries of
“Mauvais” from the aged Frenchman.
Tuesday, December 12th. On Tuesday last (sth) we
moved into Courcelles once more, but for a wonder
had quite good billets, both for the men and ourselves.
The men were again put on endless fatigues, to my
intense disgust. In addition we had to snatch them
for wiring instruction, as this is to be our turn in
the line. On the night of the 7th the C.O. was sent
to take temporary command of the Bth Brigade, the
Brigadier having been wounded by a sniper that day.
In the night of the 9th we took over again from the
N.F.’s and thus we have a much more extended line
to hold, with less men than ever, and wire is urgently
required to be put up. Of course it began to rain the
same evening, and the trenches were knee-deep by the
time we arrived, all the nice drainage channels we
carefully prepared having been allowed to fill up by
the other people who took them over from us. I have
the same sector as last time, except I entered further on
the right, and have fewer men than ever. To-day is
our third day in, and the men have had the hardest
time yet; nevertheless, the best keep in wonderfully
good spirits, and dream of the two months’ rest which
is coming in due course. Some of them are really


priceless, and too comical for words. One of my cor-
porals who is always chuckling, was sent out to
reconnoitre the enemy wire.
On going up to take a stroll round later I found it
was bright moonlight and immediately thought of my
patrol, as I knew nothing would stop the corporal.
Hurrying up to the front line to warn them to be care-
ful I saw to my horror that they were already halfway
across “No Man’s Land,” as clearly visible as by day,
and WALKING BOLT UPRIGHT.
I told the sergeant that they were mad, and had hardly
spoken when “Crack, crack, bang,” rifle and machine
guns started and also a bomb. That patrol came back
at about 40 miles an hour, and where they had taken
half an hour to get out through our own wire, they
only took about two seconds to come in through it.
The two men were in a state of complete panic, but old
Corporal Lumly was chortling the whole time.
Then I had another corporal—Corporal Salt, and a
hard old Salt, too —out with a wiring party. He is
absolutely the last Bairnsfather touch to the tee, and
has me in shrieks of merriment.
Sergeant Sullivan, who has been out ever so long, is
simply priceless. I have him on trench duty entirely,
as he can get more work out of men than anyone else,
and has heaps of common sense. He looks after the
trench drainage for me. Lastly, young Lawson, whom
I have made a lance-corporal, is a bonny boy, very


bright, quite fearless, full of energy, and also keeps me
thoroughly amused.
It is the comic side of these men that makes life
worth living, but it is very hard to describe. As an
example: when 1 told Sergeant Sullivan to get some
men for pumping water out of the trench he wished to
take eight. I said, “Wouldn’t six be enough?” He
said, “Well, yer know, sir, they gets that there rheu-
matics feeling in the joints very quick if they don’t get
plenty of reliefs”—said inimitably.
Yesterday three new officers came out. One tem-
porarily posted to my company—a very lively chap,
named Dick, who was out thirteen months before;
one of the other officers—Chamberlain, from Falmouth
way —and the other, a Captain from Dover (Cave).
There is also another captain expected—a very good
chap.
1 am Junior Coy. Cr., but don’t think they will take
my company from me again. I hope not.
Friday, January sth. I fear my diary has been neg-
lected recently, however we will resume from the day
before we came out, i.e., Tuesday, 12th.
On Wednesday we got half an hour’s intensive from
the wily Teuton, which fairly smashed things up, but
by marvellous good fortune no one was hit, though a
big lump of chalk hit me on the wrist once, and another
time a packet of iron stakes which had been hurled in
the air landed on my back.
The relief in the evening was finally completed,


though, as usual, Sgt. Sullivan amused me immensely.
We had signed for a large number of gloves when
we came into the trenches, but at the end of the tour
over half were missing. Sgt, Sullivan was arranging a
scheme by which the incoming officer should count a
certain number in the first dug-out, and then while he
was going to the next dug-out someone was to run
round with those he had already counted and get there
first for him to count them over again. Sullivan said,
“I don’t like doing it, sir, of course, but there ain’t no
help fer it—no other way out at all, sir.” We returned
to Bus once more, and did not get bad billets.
Time passed as usual at Bus, and we were all very
bucked at the thought that the next would be our last
tour for a time. The C.O. went home on leave before
we got as far as Courcelles.
On December 24th I was given my temporary cap-
taincy, and on Xmas Eve we went up the line to the
same old sector. Of course going up the artillery had
a strafe on, but apart from this nothing much occurred.
One shell landed within about three yards of me, but
did not touch me, though I was quite in the open;
rather lucky.
The next four days were stickier than ever, and the
trench was almost waist deep in parts. However, it all
came right in the end, and we were duly relieved by
the gallant R.W.F.’s on the night of the 29th.
I might mention that before going up the line this
time Sperrin again went sick, and Finney, who had


returned from four months’ sickness, took command of
W Company. He is a topper, and a great acquisi-
tion, as he has plenty of pluck and ginger. On return-
ing to Bus I found that the N.C.O. reliefs had come
out from England a few days ago. My old man
returned. The three new ones seem good, and the new
C.S.M, quite a success.
The men held Xmas Day on January ist, and had a
gorgeous spread, and appeared to generally enjoy them-
selves.
Yesterday Major de la Perrelle told us that he was
being sent to command the East Yorks. What will
become of us I don’t know, as he is simply splendid,
and puts a bit of keenness and discipline into the whole
battalion.
Colonel North has not yet returned.
Monday, January 22nd. On Sunday, January 7th
we left Bus and marched to Sarton, where we spent the
night and the following day.
On Tuesday we marched on to Bomvalle, our train-
ing area, where we are now.
The chief features of the last fortnight were Major
de la Perrelle’s regrettable departure on the 10th, leaving
me temporarily in command. However, the C.O.
returned about 11.30 p.m. in great form—in the Earl
of Fitz William’s car.
The next few days were spent in reorganization,
until Sunday, when the Divisional General gave us an


interesting lecture on our training, and on the French
attacks at Verdun.
On Monday our training started in earnest, and since
then we have been fairly hard at it—parade 9 to 1, and
then recreational training in the afternoon.
Friday, February 2nd. On Saturday last a small
cyclone hit us, in that we received orders that the
division was moving to a new area the following
morning. This had not been altogether unexpected,
but it came very suddenly, just when two weeks of our
training were up.
On Sunday we marched to Barty, and on Monday
we had a long tramp past St. Pol to Souchon. The
men marched very well, but fifteen miles with heavy
packs is very severe. The cold was as intense as ever,
and it was my first experience of frozen roads, which in
parts were so slippery that it was only with the greatest
difficulty that the transport came along at all. We
rested at this place next day, and then went on again
on Wednesday, marching about eleven miles to Her-
min, where we got fine billets for the night. Yesterday
we moved on again, and reached our destination,
Louey, N.W. of Arras, Our new role is to work on
the railway lines, I believe; for how long no one
knows. The cold is still severe, though the sun is
bright enough.
Thursday, February Bth. The battalion is still at
work at Louey, but I have had a stroke of luck, as
yesterday I was sent to Arrai-le-Chateau, the third


Army Infantry School, where I now am. Everything
is most promising, and this is just what I have been
longing for. The course is to last five weeks—all
captains, bar one or two majors. Now for solid but
interesting work.
Thursday, February 15th. Course going strong;
very good. Had a slight thaw a few days ago, and
weather better. Had fine concert last night—“ Blue
Birds” of 30th Division. Heard yesterday that bat-
talion had moved again ; now at Magincourt sur Coucy,
not far from here.




EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS
FROM KEITH TO HIS FATHER
[Written in great haste November 20th, 1916.]
Just a short line to let you know that I am still going strong, and
though many times on the brink of leading my company into the
attack in the recent battle of the Ancre did not actually do so, the
battalion remaining throughout in reserve. I did actually take half
the company to reinforce in the old German line the day after it was
occupied, but only to find we were not needed.
The German trenches are very good and a great object lesson to us.
The recent attack was made under great difficulties, in a dense fog,
rendering the keeping of direction difficult, and aerial and artillery
observation impossible, and the ground in parts was waist-deep in mud.
Nevertheless one cannot help feeling that if every man efficiently and
resolutely discharged his part of the work no attack would fail, as this
one did in places. It is this spirit that one is always endeavouring to
instil in all ranks and, of course, officers sometimes lack it too.
I see that at last they are endeavouring to harness the nation at home,
but one cannot help fearing that some wretched politician who doesn’t
know the ABC of economics will be made “ Food Dictator.”
The Australian business, at the height of the struggle, is very de-
pressing, while the Roumanian business is another “eye-opener.” The
C.O. asked me to be adjutant the other day but I said I prefer to lead
my company in the field and, indeed, I feel I can do this well, while,
in addition, it is the men that are three parts the interest of the job.
He seems very pleased with my exploit in getting my men across to
the German lines, which was attended with some difficulties. I might
mention I saw one scuppered tank in our lines on the way.
Now in billets but expect to be in the line again soon.


[Letter dated March 2nd, 1917.]
(The last letter received.)
Just a line to thank you for your letter and to let you know that I
am getting on all right.
We have just come out of the trenches after a pretty strenuous tour.
We had to consolidate a position which entailed much hard work, but
the battalion received high praise from the general for what was
accomplished.
Am pretty well occupied now-a-days. My only regret is that con-
ditions are not conducive to study. We have to get up early to be
ready for the Huns.


NOTES ON LEADERSHIP
This is becoming more and more important. In old days only one
course was needed but now much more is necessary.
The country has built up an army out of nothing. It is a wonder-
ful achievement and has never been done in time of war before. If
we are going to use this army to the best advantage we must have skilful
leadership. Discipline, as we know, is essential to success, but we
must have the leadership to apply it.
British army goes in for esprit de corps . Continental nations for
army spirit. To keep up our esprit de corps it is essential to have capable
leadership.
Every officer has a great responsibility in that he controls the lives
of his men and possibly the lives of the men of his battalion; if he
fails to make himself efficient he is wasting his men’s lives.
What is leadership ? It is getting men to do what you want and
to follow you—but not through fear.
There are two sorts of leaders; the born, and the man who has
acquired the art through study. It is merely a matter of applying
certain principles.
Essential Qualities in Leadership.
i . Knowledge of human nature.
2. Example.
3. Sympathy.
4. Justice.
5. Determination.
6. Knowledge of your job.
I. By understanding your men you understand their motives and
act accordingly. Also you can then select the right man for right job.
2. Example: French say men of the company are the mirror of
their officers and N.C.O.’s.


Example in all kinds of behaviour. Must keep fit endurance is
essential.
3. Sympathy, Must look after your men but combine this with
strictest discipline. Do not confuse with cheap effort at popularity.
4. Justice. Always. If you understand your men you will be
able to punish for the motives more than for the acts.
3. Determination and courage and cheerfulness. Latter is of
tremendous value under adverse conditions. A good word of com-
mand on parade is essential.
6. Know your job. Skill needs a lot of hard work and thought,
in and out of line. Skill in use of ground and in movement, etc., is
important.


LETTERS
Received by Relatives and Friends after April ijth, 1917
The diary relating to the battles of April, 1917, and during the
months preceding, either was not written or has been lost. The
part he took is, however, indicated in the letters which follow.
War Office, Whitehall, S.W.,
July 6th, 1917.
Sir,
I have it in command from His Majesty the King to inform
you, as next of kin of the late
LIEUTENANT (ACTING-CAPTAIN)
KEITH JOY BARRETT
of the Royal Fusiliers (City of London Regiment), that this Officer
was mentioned in a Despatch from General Sir Douglas Haig dated
November 13th, 1916, and published in the Second Supplement to
the “London Gazette” of 2nd, dated January 4th, 1917.
Also in a Despatch from Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig dated
April 9th, 1917, and published in the Second Supplement to the
“London Gazette” dated May 22nd, 1917, for gallant and dis-
tinguished service in the field.
I am to express to you the King’s high appreciation of these ser-
vices, and to add that His Majesty trusts that their public acknow-
ledgment may be of some consolation in your bereavement.
I have the honour to be,
Your obedient servant,
(Sgd.) M. D. GRAHAM, Colonel,
Assistant Military Secretary.
Lieutenant-Colonel J. W. Barrett,
Royal Army Medical Corps,
Shepheard’s Hotel, Cairo, Egypt.


[EXTRACT OF LETTER.]
Dear Colonel Barrett, April 20th, 1917.
I cannot tell you how deeply I sympathize with you in the loss of
your most gallant son.
He was one of the finest characters I have ever met. Brave to a
fault, absolutely fearless, cool, self-reliant, most unselfish, and kind-
hearted, with the very highest ideals of honour, duty, and loyalty.
In my 2 7 years’ service I have never met a better or more capable officer.
His death has cast a deep gloom on the whole battalion, who were
devoted to him.
Not only was he a first-class company commander, but was an excel-
lent second-in-command, and had I been hit, would have commanded
the regiment.
The brigade commander (General Potter) thought him the best
company commander in the 3rd Division.
We all hoped that his splendid courage and vitality would pull him
through.
Your son behaved magnificently both on April 9th, when he held
the post of honour in the capture of the Harp, near Arras, and on the
1 3 th, when he was mortally wounded, and died on April 16th, at Etaples.
I have asked 2nd Lieut. Binn, the only surviving officer of your
on’s company, to write to you.
Our success on April 9th was greatly due to your son’s fine leader-
ship, and his behaviour on the 13th simply magnificent.
He was the most popular officer in the battalion with all ranks.
He was a son to be proud of, and the world is a worse place since
he has gone.
No words of mine can adequately express my deep sympathy and
that of the battalion, and especially his own “D” Company, at the
loss of one of the finest officers and charming men I have ever met.
Yours sincerely,
(Signed) EDWARD B. NORTH
Commanding 4th Royal Fusiliers, B.E.F.


April 23rd, 1917,
8.E.F.,
France.
Dear Mrs. Barrett,
By now you will have heard of the very sad death of your son,
Captain Barrett, who died of wounds, and I am sure you will be
only too grateful to get news about him from one of the officers.
I was in his company, and from the very first time I met him I
had a very great respect for him, which latterly grew into a love for
him. lam very young, being nineteen, and to my mind he was
the bravest man 1 have ever known. He not only had a name in the
battalion for being a brave, ever keen soldier, but was known well by
the brigade staff and higher authorities.
When I was posted to his company, when I joined the battalion,
the colonel said to me, “ I have put you in Captain Barrett’s company,
and he is my best officer.” Only to-day one of the men said to me,
“We shall never get such a fine leader, sir; the captain was almost
too brave.” I cannot tell you how much we miss him, and I know
too well what a loss he will be to you. He was always extra-
ordinarily keen on his work, and his keenness never slackened. His
favourite remark was, “We are out to beat the wily 1 euton.
Everyone in the battalion who is left will ever remember him, and I
for one will always hold his name sacred.
I sent you a photo of us, which Captain Barrett asked me to send
you. I am the right hand one of the back row, and I hope you will
receive it all right.
Offering you my deepest sympathy.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
RASHLEIGH H. WILLIAMS,
2nd Lieut., 4th Royal Fusiliers


Lady Carnarvon’s Hospital for Officers,
48 Bryanston Square W.,
Paddington, 2301,
April 24th.
Dear Colonel Barrett,
I was terribly sorry to see in yesterday’s paper that your son had
died of wounds, and I want to offer you my sincerest sympathy on the
loss of one of the finest men who ever walked.
I was in the 4th Battalion with him for about six months, and our
two companies usually messed together, so we saw a good deal of each
other. We were both wounded on the 1 3th, and travelled down to
the base in the same car on the hospital train. At the time he seemed
to be getting along all right, and the nurses said that, although his
wound was serious, he would probably recover. He seemed to
have difficulty swallowing any food; his fractured jaw, of course, being
the cause. At the base we parted, as I was sent on to England almost
immediately.
Both Keith and I got through the first attack on the 9th; his Com-
pany Z leading the battalion, with W Company beside him. We got
our objectives all right, and did nothing more until Friday, 13th.
Then we attacked again, and this time W and Z Companies were sup-
porting X and Y Companies.
Our leading companies, with whom I was, got about wiped out by
machine guns, but the companies in rear caught the artillery barrage
and had an equally bad time. Three of the four officers with the
leading companies were hit, and I am afraid the other companies must
have suffered equally.
Keith’s loss will be a most severe blow to the battalion, where he was
one of the reliable men who could be counted on to do the right thing
at the right time, and his presence seemed to inspire confidence in
both officers and men, all of whom will deplore his loss.
You may not have heard that he was recommended for the M.C.
for his excellent work in the push last November, and Colonel North


was putting his name in for the D.S.O. for the way he handled his
company on April 9th. I sincerely hope that they both come through
all right.
I am sorry that I cannot write more fully or give more details just
now, as I have a bullet wound in my right shoulder, and writing is
rather difficult.
Again with my sincerest sympathy,
Yours sincerely,
COLIN W. G. GIBSON,
Capt. Royal Fusiliers.
May 17th, 1917.
Dear Mrs. Larking,
I must apologize to you for not having answered your letter, but
the battalion had only just come out of action and had been in the
trenches over a week.
Colonel North has already written to Captain Barrett’s father. As
it is now some time ago that Captain Barrett was wounded, I think I
may safely give full details.
He was wounded on April 13th, 1917, at Guemappe, while lead-
ing his company—although wounded he led his men on through those
hostile barrages where he was severely wounded. Being unable to
speak he issued orders in writing. Our padre Captain Andrews, who
has since got his M.C., at the risk of his own life carried Captain
Barrett to safety, and it was owing to him that Captain Barrett got
medical attention as soon as possible.
We all hoped and thought that the wonderful determined spirit and
energy of Captain Barrett would bring him through safely but I regret
to say that he died in hospital at Etaples, on April 16th, 1917, in
No. 20 General Hospital and was buried in the mortuary at Etaples.
His wound was a gunshot wound in the jaw causing compound fracture
of the lower jaw.


His loss is very great to his battalion. His Colonel had the very
highest opinion of him and valued him greatly. He always did his
work with minute thoroughness—most conscientious and was most
courageous and a fine leader.
I offer you my sincere sympathy.
Yours sincerely,
KEITH J. MARKBY,
Ass. Adjutant.
September 16th, 1917.
Dear Mr. Barrett,
Ever so many thanks for your letter of the 29th June. I always
wanted to write to you after the death of Keith, but being away from
the battalion, and having plenty of work to do, I have never carried
out my intention. Yes, lam very fond of Keith, and knew him to
be one of the very best of fellows, besides being one of the bravest of
officers out in France. He was a sincere friend.
I cannot speak too highly of him; he and I were the greatest of
“pals” out in France. It is to him that I owe my present position;
it was he who recommended me to the colonel to become adjutant to
this battalion, and I regret very, very much that I cannot thank him
in person. I often think of him, and often speak of him to my
colonel, who also knew him well, and thought much of him.
He is always referred to as “dear old Barrett.” He was one of the
best, and out here in these times of stress, friendship is a far greater
thing than one can imagine it to be. I have always maintained that
if the British army had officers everywhere like him, this war would
have been over ages ago, with a fine victory for England.
I was posted to his company in December, 1916, after returning
from wound leave in England. He was in trenches at Terri at the
time, and I found him there. The trenches were the worst I have
ever come across. But things were not so bad with such a Company


Commander as Barrett. Whenever the enemy shelled he was out
with the men in the trenches, when he might have been sitting safe
in a deep dug-out.
We went in and out of those trenches till early in January when
the entire division was withdrawn, preparatory to the great Spring
offensive. It was about this time that I left the 4th Royal Fusiliers,
and became adjutant to the Bth Bt. E. Yorks. I saw little of him
during the coming months, except occasionally.
On the night before the battle (evening of April Bth) I saw
him, and we had a talk together on the coming struggle. He was
full of enthusiasm, and so were all officers and men of the companys
who had the greatest confidence in their leader. On the morning of
April 9th the great attack commenced. Everything went well. It
was his company, in conjunction with another, which captured the
famous German strong point south of Thllloy known as “The Harp.”
It was there that I met him during the battle. He was going strong
and as enthusiastic as ever. I had to push on, but we wished one
another the best of luck, and that was the last time I saw him. But
what I knew after that I heard from the padre, who, unfortunately,
was wounded about three weeks ago. I will find out from him all he
knows and get him to write to you.
The battle of Arras continued all that day and night, right through-
out the following day. The division having completed its allotted
task was asked to do a little more.
A certain village just opposite the position we had captured had
still to be taken, and the 9th Brigade (including 4th R.F.) was called
upon to complete this task. The battle started in the evening of the
1 2th about 6.30 p.m., the result proving disastrous. The Germans
had brought up many machine guns. It was during this attack that
dear old Barrett was wounded. In spite of his wounds and loss of
blood he continued until carried away in an ambulance. All the way
from the battlefield, although he could not speak, he wrote on paper
what he wanted to say. He was enthusiastic till the last. When I


heard this story I was confident that he would live, and it came as a
terrible shock when I heard he had died.
This is my whole story. It is short, but in the short time I was
with Barrett, a great bond of friendship arose between us. I will com-
municate with you again as soon as I have found out where his padre
is, and also one or two other officers, but I don’t think anyone can tell
you any more about him. I hope sincerely that I shall meet you once
after the war. I should just love to talk to you about Barrett.
There is still plenty of fighting to be done yet before the war is
finished.
With many, many thanks for your kind wishes for my welfare.
I remain,
Yours very sincerely,
R. E. H. DICKE,
Adjutant Bth Bt., E. Yorks.
The Royal Overseas Officers’ Club,
At the R.A.C.,
Pall Mall, London, S.W. i.
December 10th, 1917.
Dear Colonel Barrett,
I am so sorry you did not receive my last letter which I wrote some
time ago from France. Since then I have been wounded and am
home in England.
Your son was a great friend of mine, and, as I expect you have
heard from all sides, he was much beloved and respected by all in the
regiment.
I reached him soon after he had been shot, and did everything to
get him away immediately. He had all his senses, although he could
hardly speak, and he wrote me several messages in the dressing station,
as we were attending his wounds. The messages he wrote were about
the other officers and men—how they were getting on, etc. As long
as I was with him his thoughts were of them.


He wrote me and said his wound was not giving him much pain,
which much relieved me. We then conveyed him by motor ambulance
to a clearing station, where I left him, and the doctors had great hopes
of his recovery.
I did not see him again, as he was taken by train to the base, and
when I left him he seemed confident he would recover.
After the war I hope to be coming out to Australia again, and am
looking forward to meeting you.
With kindest wishes,
Yours sincerely,
(Signed) L. MARTIN ANDREWS, C.F.


Wholly set up and printed by G. Hassell is f Son,
Currie Street, Adelaide






1508
00246502




J ‘V. 1 ■ ■«'7* 's=7 T"
.
I
I
' I
A '
Vi
PP - ■- ' W
he Diary of
An Australian
Soldier
Capt. K. J. Barrett
