

€]je m Jfitto nf ilustralia
SYDNEY, THE CAPITAL OF NEW
SOUTH WALES.
The City of Sydney stands upon the south coast of the bay of
Port Jackson, about seven miles from the open sea, on a ridge of
sandstone rock, which runs down into the bay; and the waters
are so deep that ships of almost the largest burden may load and
unload at the wharves which project from the various points of
the land about the city. The situation is excellent, and the
population and trade of the place are rapidly increasing in
importance.
Most of our readers will be aware that Sydney is the capital
of the now extensive and flourishing colony of New South Wales
—a colony extending along the eastern coast of the great island
continent of Australia for nearly 1300 geographical miles, and
including within its boundaries, an extent of territory about three
times greater than the extent of England and Scotland combined.
The rapid progress of the colony may be inferred from the
fact, that in 1810 the population amounted to only 8293, of
whom, by far the greater number were convicts; whereas now,
the population exceeds 250,000, of whom about 50,000 belong to
the capital, Sydney. The total number of convicts now in the
colony is about 16,000; but a considerable proportion of the
children born there are the offspring of the convict popula-
tion. The county of Cumberland, in which Sydney is situated,
is one of the least fertile of the counties of New South Wales ;
its chief advantage being in the splendid bay, or inlet of Port
Jacksou, ou which the capital and seaport of Sydney is built.
Few ports have a more beautiful location —not even Cork can
surpass Sydney. It is built upon two necks of land, with a safe
harbour between, possessing a depth of water which enables
vessels of the largest burthen to lay at anchor close to the laud.
From the water, the houses, ranged in streets, rise like so many
terraces up to the crown of the hill; the view from the upper
platform (on which the Government buildings, barracks, and
offices, are erected) commanding, as it does, nearly the whole
estuary of Port Jackson, is remarkably fine. There is good
anchorage for ships of largo burden on all sides of the city. The


quays arc in a bustle with trade, the place being a kind of
Liverpool or New Orleans, the port for almost the entire country
behind it. Large vessels from England are constantly arriving
there, as well as coasting vessels and steamers, which sail
regularly to Victoria, Van Diemen’s Land, New Zealand,
and all parts of the colony. A large ship-building trade is
carried on at Sydney, to meet the increasing commercial require-
ments of the place. We need not describe the city more particu-
larly, further than to state that it contains numerous churches,
belonging to the principal Christian sects, a college, excellent
schools, mechanics’ and literary institutes, a theatre, several
banks, newspapers, markets, a handsome post-office, and other
public buildings. Some idea of the extent of the place may be
formed, when we state that the principal street, which is a very
handsome one, called George Street, is about two miles long!
Sydney is the great landing port of New South Wales.
Thither all emigrants for the interior first betake themselves,
and they have no difficulty in obtaining there the soundest
information as to the best districts for settlement, or the most
desirable modes of investing their capital. Settlers and squatters
from the interior are to be met with there at all seasons, and
they are usually disposed to be communicative, and to give the
best information in their power. From Sydney, all the other
Australian colonies can easily be reached, as well as the principal
towns along the coast of New South Wales. Steamers regularly
ply to Paramatta —a town of some 5000 inhabitants, beautifully
situated at the head of the bay of Port Jackson, about eighteen
miles from Sydney. The sail is lovely, rivalled only by that up
the Bay of Cork. Twenty-one miles further inland is Windsor,
also a town of some importance, situated on the Hawkesbury
River, which is navigable to this place—the lands in the neigh-
bourhood being especially rich and fertile. Besides these towns,
with which Sydney holds regular water communication, there is
the town of Liverpool, situated about twenty miles from Sydney,
in a southwesterly direction, on the banks of George’s River,
which flows into Botany Bay. It commands an extensive and
fertile district lying behind it inland. Then, northward of
Sydney, the most important town is Maitland, which commands
the navigation of Hunter’s River, and is the centre of the most
flourishing agricultural and grazing district in the colony. Its
date is very recent, but it is already the third town in New South
Wales, in point of population and importance. Steamers ply
regularly between it and Sydney. There are numerous other
towns throughout the country, though in their infant state ; most
of them are little more than villages in extent; those which wo
have named are the most important.
The country improves as you advance into its interior, from
the direction of the port. It is diversified by occasional hill and
dale, and in some parts it stretches out into immense plains.


The settled parts of New South Wales extend along the coast,
mrth and south of Sydney, and for about one hundred and fifty
piles inland. The sea-coast is bold and rugged, and the land in
Ve neighbourhood is for the most part unfertile. About five or
Ik miles inland, nearly parallel with the coast, run ridges of
aids tone, and beyond these there extends an undulating country,
a I alluvial plains some thirty, forty, or fifty miles in breadth.
L r i'n there is the lofty range of the Blue Mountains, rising
cJla height of 3000 or 4000 feet above the level of the sea.
wyond the Blue Mountains the land again slopes away towards
interior, and on the fringe of the settled districts lies the vast
mdiscovcrod land of Australia, sheep farmers and squatters
/V 15305/
THE GOLD FIELDS OF AUSTRALIA.
resembling the steppes of Asia. Considerable tracts of open
forest-land are met with, the occasional clumps of trees reminding
one of a gentleman’s park in England. The soil in many districts
is rich and well-watered ; but the great complaint of Australia is
drought, the weather continuing dry and uninterrupted by rain
for many weeks together. There is some difference of opinion as
to the climate of Australia, but on the whole it is highly favour-
able. It will of course be understood, that in Australia the
seasons are reversed as compared with our own—their winter
occurring at the time of our summer, and while at Christmas our
fires are blazing to keep out the cold, their doors and windows
are all open to secure a cool draught during the noontide heat.
The soil of New South Wales, from its light character, is better
adapted for grazing than for agricultural purposes, though there
are, in different parts of the country, extensive tracts of land
suitable for tillage, and capable of growing from thirty to forty
bushels of wheat, or from fifty to sixty bushels of maize, per
acre. Four to five tons of potatoes an acre is considered an
average crop, and from the mildness of the winter, two crops a-
year can easily be obtained from the same ground. As much as
ten tons of onions have been raised per acre, and after the onions
have been gathered, a crop of maize has been got off the same
field in the same year. All grains, fruits, and vegetables, known
in Europe, flourish abundantly in New South Wales; besides the
ordinary fruits known in this country, grapes, peaches, nectarines,
figs, oranges, and lemons, grow in the open air; and all the
ordinary vegetables produce heavy crops.
But grazing is the great and prevailing occupation of the
colony. The boundless pasturage affords sustenance to vast
herds of cattle, and flocks of sheep ; the former being slaughtered
and boiled down for the sake of their tallow, the latter being
maintained chiefly for the sake of their wool, which is the most
valuable of the Australian exports. About 37,000 cattle are
slaughtered on an average of all the year round, their carcasses
being for the most part thrown to waste. Hence, butcher-meat
is extremely cheap in Australia, the supply being far greater
than the demand.


penetrating its outskirts here and there, at the most fertile
points, with their flocks and herds. Such is a general outline of
the external features of the colony. By far the richest land, and
the most suitable for emigrants, is that undulating and level
country lying between the sandstone ridges and the lofty Blue
Mountains. There the vegetation is luxuriant, the pasture rich,
and the scenery beautiful. The forests are not too dense, the
trees in many parts standing in clumps—just enough to add
beauty to the scene, without obstruction to pastoral or agricul-
tural pursuits.
The older and more settled counties of New South Wales arc
these —Cumberland, lying on the sea-coast, containing Sydney,
and the principal towns : Camden, to the south, a rich and
picturesque district, containing the fertile and beautiful region of
lllawarra (a tract of 150,000 acres), and the luxuriant Cow
Pastures, so called from the splendid herds of cattle found there ;
then, west of Camden, lies Argyle county, undulating and well-
watered, its finest districts being Goulburn Plains and Eden
Forest; north of Argyle is Westmoreland county, and west of
Cumberland and Westmoreland is Cook’s county, lying among the
Blue Mountains—the beautiful and fertile vale of Clwdd running
along the foot of a range of mountains covered with dense forests.
Further west again, lies the magnificent county of Bathurst,
beyond the Blue Mountains. Roxburgh county lies north of
liathurst, and Wellington county northwest. The other northern
counties are Philip, Bligh, Brisbane, Hunter, and Northumber-
land. But a glance at a map will give the reader a better idea
of the geography of the district than any description in words
could do.
The whole of this district is now well opened up and accessible,
either by navigable rivers, or by public roads constructed by
Government. There are three great roads leading from Sydney
into the interior —one nearly due north to the town of Maitland,
another southwest to Victoria (600 miles in length), and the
third runs nearly due west, through the towns of Paramatta and
Penrith, over Mount York (which forms part of the Blue
Mountain ridge), then on to Hartley, in the vale of Clwdd, and
thence through Bathurst to Wellington Valley, on the Macquarie
. river. The view from Mount York, on this road, looking east-
ward, is very grand. Here and there are to be seen a few cleared
spots, amidst an apparently interminable forest. To the east,
some sixty miles off, is the Pacific Ocean. In every other
direction is an endless variety of hill and dale, of deep gulleys,
inaccessible ravines, perpendicular rocks,and towering mountains
covered with trees and green grass and flowers to their very
summits, displaying Nature in her wildest forms.
New South Wales has heretofore been shunned by colonial
emigrants, in comparison with the more inviting fields of Port
Philip, New Zealand, and South Australia. The large propor-
-6


tion of convicts’ inThe older colony has tainted its blood, and
polluted its social conditions in many ways; and notwithstanding
the greater wealth of New South Wales, the cheapness and
fertility of its lands, the abundant demand for labour, and the
salubrity of its climate, emigrants have given the preference to
those Australian colonies more recently planted, which are free
from the admixture of a convict or criminal class. Yet, New
South Wales is equal to any other Australian colony, in most
respects, and superior to them in several. Its larger extent and
population, its diversity of industrial pursuits, its extensive trade
and commerce, offer to the labouring classes a larger field for
their industry, and a greater choice of occupations than is to be
found in any of the smaller colonies. The farmer and stockholder
has also a more ready market for his produce in the metropolis
of Sydney—a place of rapid growth, and already assuming the
importance of a city, in its extent, population, and commercial
transactions. And now that gold has been discovered in
Australia, we shall probably see, in the course of a very few
years, an influx of emigrants into that district, such as no mere
fertility of its soil, no demand for labour, no abundance of food,
none of the attractions of ordinary industry, could possibly have
effected. But thus will Australia become peopled, and a new
empire be planted in the southern hemisphere, radiating civiliza-
tion and Christianity, and sending forth in all directions, vigorous
offshoots of liberty and enterprise. Thus even evil is turned to
good, in the march of humanity towards the hopeful future.
THE GOLD DISTRICT OF BATHURST.
No small excitement was produced in Sydney in May, 1851,
by the rumour that gold had been discovered in largo quantities
in the District of Bathurst, lying to the west of the city, some
forty miles beyond the Blue Mountains. Let us take a brief
journey in the reader’s company, into this newly-discovered Gold
District.
The Paramatta, situated at the head of the bay of Port Jack-
son, is about seventeen miles, —and to this place steamers now
ply daily. It is a pretty little thriving town, situated in the
centre of a very picturesque district. From this place, for some
thirty or forty miles westward, the country is a gently undulating
plain, covered for the most part with clumps of gum trees —the
Australian bush ; sometimes in thickets, or “ scrubs,” sometimes
in clumps of tall straight trees —with straggling grass growing
about in the open spaces. The road which passes through this
district is pretty good, though in places rather rutty and not
very well kept. Occasional villages, newly sprung up along the
road-side, are passed, with squatters and farmers' houses, of the
7


rough and ready sort. Twenty-two miles from Paramatta, the
little town of Penrith is reached. It stands on the river Nepean,
which is crossed by means of a floating bridge or punt, worked
by men stationed there for the purpose. The Emu plains lie on
the opposite side—famous grazing grounds for cattle, which
abound in this district.
A range of mountains now rises before you—the Blue Moun
tains, which you have to cross in order to get to the place of our
destination, —Bathurst. The mountains, at a distance, look a
long, uniform, and gently sloping ridge, with a few breaking emi-
nences rising above it, —the highest being about 3000 feet above
the sea. The crossing of this ridge was, with the early colonists,
a matter of very great enterprise and ditficulty. Of late years, a
good road has been formed through a gorge of the mountains, —
amid gullies, and precipices, and ravines hewn out of the rock by
mountain torrents. This road was formed by the energy of Sir
Thomas Mitchell, by means of convict labour; and it promises to
be as noble a monument to his memory, as the famous road hewn
by Napoleon’s army across the Alps.
The inn of Blackheath, standing on the top of a high moun-
tain, amid this range, is one of the well known resting-places for
travellers. It is 70 miles from Sydney, and 50 from Bathurst,
which still lies to the westward, and the journey to it, from
Blackheath, may easily be performed in two days’ more, —or a
total of about four days from Sydney.
Descending the mountains on the further, or western side, the
traveller reaches the Bathurst plains,—an open country, in which
occasional groups of trees are studded, as in an English park,—
and in the midst of these plains, which are of great extent,
stands the town of Bathurst.
The county of Bathurst is thus situated immediately to the
west of the Blue Mountain ridge, which slopes away by almost
imperceptible degrees into the interior. There are, however,
many irregularities in the surface of this territory—many vast
rocky ranges, almost impervious to the common modes of convey-
ance, and in other places rich valleys lying among the clefts of
the hills. Indeed, to an artist, Bathurst offers some of the
richest scenery in the world. The country may be described as
an elevated plateau of broken table-lands, —the greater part of
it about 2,000 feet above the level of the sea ; and the air is so
salubrious, that only two persons in the county died from disease
in the course of twelve years. It has been styled the Montpelier
of New South Wales. The district is well watered—the river
Macquarie, fed by numerous streams, flowing through its extent,
and it is little affected by the droughts which prevail in the other
parts of New South Wales. The celebrated Bathurst Plains
embrace an area of some thirty square miles of the finest land,
capable of growing any crop, and with the command of a bound-
less extent of pasturage towards the interior. Bathurst has long
8


been famous for its fine wooled sheep, and for its great agri-
cultural prosperity. It is distant about 120 miles from Sydney,
and had already assumed a position of considerable importance
in the colony before the recent discovery.
There are many hills to be found in ranges throughout the
“ Plains” of Bathurst. Hills in detached groups or rauges, of
various sizes aud character, both as to height and extent, and
these extend a long way into the interior, for several hundreds of
miles. It was in one of these groups of hills, called the
Canabolas, a very few miles west of the town of Bathurst, that
the first discovery of gold was made, and amid which the new
settlement of Ophir at once sprang up.
The town of Bathurst is a place of growing importance in this
district, and its population is rapidly increasing. In May 1851,
previous to the discovery of the Gold Diggings, its population
had reached about 6000; and it is now nearly doubled. It is
situated on the borders of the Bathurst Plains; and the river
Macquarie, one of the finest rivers in Australia, runs through the
centre of the town. It contains plenty of good inns, and stores,
in the latter of which everything may be had, from a needle to a
dray complete. Many wealthy colonists reside in its neighbour-
hood, aud it prides itself in the name of “The City of the Plains.”
A mail runs regularly between Sydney and Bathurst. ■—"
The town of Ophir, founded since the discovery of Gold there,
is about thirty-five miles northwest from Bathurst, in a country
to which no roads but dray tracks had before penetrated. The
lands in the neighbourhood are, however, extremely well adapted
for farms. At the “ Cornish settlement,” about seven ifiiles from
Ophir, Mr. Thom —commonly known as Parson Thom, —a
Cornish farmer, who came out to the colony about thirty years
ago, and obtained a grant of land, made about £20,000 by
growing wheat in the time of the great drought, when crops
failed at Bathurst, as well as throughout the greater part of New
South Wales. So that there is money to be made in Australia
by other means besides gold-gathering. Most of Mr. Thom’s
neighbours are Cornishmen. The climate there, and all round
the Canabolas Mountains, from which the streams descend that
wash the gold diggings, resembles that of the south of England—
rather hotter in summer, but not so cold in winter ; so that,
besides the Cornish settlement, on Emu Swamp, Blackman’s
Swamp, King’s Plains, Pretty Plains, aud Frederick’s Valley,
there are lots of small settlers, either freeholders or leaseholders,
who have capital gardens, and raise wheat, potatoes, melons,
pumpkins, oats, and hay; who make butter and cheese, and doall
that can be done with the help of their families, without much
hired labour. There is plenty of laud fit for the plough, on
which it would not be necessary to cut down a single tree, besides
abundance of other land, which a very little clearing would
render cultivable. And now that the discovery of gold has
9


attracted a large new population into the district, perhaps there
is not a place in the world that offers greater inducements to
hardworking farmers than the Bathurst and Wellington Districts
hereabout. The Summerhill Farm, close to the Summerhill
Creek, is admirably adapted for growing wheat. It forms part
of a grant of upwards of 10,000 acres, the whole of which, if
cleared, would be capable of growing heavy crops. Peas and
broad beans may be seen growing along side of melons, pumpkins,
and cucumbers. It is also a capital dairy district, and the
farmers are now realizing excellent prices for all the milk,
butter, and cheese they can produce.
Thus it will be seen that the Bathurst District is naturally
rich, abounding in fertile land partly occupied, where food for
millions of people could be grown if required.
THE FIRST GOLD DISCOVERIES!
For some time past, scientific men had been pointing to
Australia as a probable Gold field. The striking resemblance of
the Australian geological formations to those of the Ural moun-
tains in Russia, where gold is found in considerable abundance,
was first observed and remarked upon by Sir Roderick Murchison,
the eminent geologist; and he was so strongly impressed with
the fact that he felt it his duty to allude to it, in the address
which he delivered to the Royal Geographical Society, as Presi-
dent, in May, 1845. In the subsequent year, he specially
addressed the Cornish miners on the subject, and adverted
particularly to the discovery of gold near Bathurst, on the
western flank of what he styled the great Australian Cordillera ;
and he strongly urged the propriety of a strict geological investi-
gation, with the view of establishing gold workings. Colonel
Helmersen, of St. Petersburg, a member of the Russian Academy
of Sciences, also well acquainted with the Ural gold works,
expressed the same opinion.
The Reverend W. B. Clarke also published letters, suggesting
a theory of the gold deposits, in which, following Sir Roderick
Murchison, and taking the Russian deposits as a basis, he pre-
dicted gold deposits in California and Australia. He likewise
points out the Equator as a great gold region ; and this, too, the
best practical authorities confirm.
Mr. Francis Forbes, of Sydney, about two years ago published
and circulated in New South Wales a paper, in which he affirmed
in the strongest manner, on scientific data, the existence of gold
formations in New Holland. Mr. Forbes, not being listened to
nor encouraged in his researches, went to California, where he
died in 1850.
Even the discoveries in California did not arouse the Austra-


lians to adequate researches, though reports wore spread of
wonderful discoveries in Victoria and South Australia, which
were speedily discredited. It was reserved for a gentleman of
New South Wales, Mr. Edward Hammond Hargraves, to make
the definitive discoveries. He appears to have acted independently
of all previous views on the subject; but having acquired expe-
rience in California, and being struck with the resemblance
between the Californian formations and those of New Holland,
he determined on a systematic search for gold, which he brought
to a successful issue on the 12th of February, 1851, by the dis-
covery of Gold Diggings in the Bathurst and Wellington districts,
and which he prosecuted until he had ascertained the existence
of Gold Sands in no less than twelve places.
Mr. Hargraves stands undisputedly as the first explorer of the
Australian Diggings; though, as already stated, gold ores had
been already found in many places, and especially near Bathurst.
Having finished his explorations on the ground, he drew up a
regular report, which in April he laid before the governor-general,
who, after some consultations, sent the colonial geologist, Mr.
Stutchbury, to make a further scientific investigation, which has
resulted in a full confirmation. At a later period, the surveyor-
general, Sir Thomas Mitchell, and staff, took the same route.
The proceedings of Mr. Hargraves and of the Government got
spread about, and on the Ist of May 1851—on the day of the
opening of the Great Exhibition in London, and five years after
Sir Roderick Murchison’s Cornish address —it was made known
in Sydney that great Gold discoveries had been made in the
interior, when a period of wild speculation immediately com-
menced. In the beginning of June, the Governor-General made
a grant of £SOO to Mr. Hargraves, and afterwards an appoint-
ment of £350 a-year; and at the same time the Sir Thomas
Arbuthnot sailed from Sydney for England, with £4OOO worth
of gold among her cargo.
For many years, however, previous to Mr. Hargraves’ dis-
covery, gold had been picked up among the Bathurst mountains
from time to time. A shepherd was known to have sold some
hundreds of pounds’ worth in Sydney; and he was constantly
dogged by his fellow labourers to discover the “find,” the locality
of which he would not divulge. Yet no one thought of prosecut-
ing the search systematically, until the fact was demonstrated by
Mr. Hargraves; to whom, therefore, is due the honour of the
discovery.
The startling intelligence that gold had been found in large
quantities in Australia —and that the mountain ranges north and
south of Bathurst, as well as to an undefined extent westwards,
were “ one immense gold field,” —reached England in September
1851 ; and it was at first disbelieved. It was said to be
“ too good news to be trueand people who proposed to
emigrate, were cautioned repeatedly that “it was’nt all gold that


glittered.” But the news were confirmed by detailed statements
of facts. Ship after ship reached England with the same intelli-
gence, the last more startling than the first; and then large
actual imports of gold from Australia took place ; and the
discovery could no longer be denied.
Let us now look at the progress of the Gold Mania —for it
amounted to nothing short of this —which followed close on the
heels of the discovery. The first step was taken by Mr. Har-
graves, who led Mr. Stutchbury, the government geologist, to the
ground on Summerhill Creek, on the upper basin of the Mac-
quarie river, and with his own hands washed a pan of earth in
his presence, from which twenty-one grains of fine gold were
produced. He afterwards washed in like manner several baskets
of earth gathered indiscriminately from the ground, and produced
gold by washing. Mr. Stutchbury at once expressed his satisfac-
tion with the experiment, and furnished Mr. Hargraves with a
certificate to this effect, which was forwarded to the government.
The news soon got wind, and people went to the spot to try the
earth by washing. They also searched among the soil, and soon
abundant specimens of the auriferous deposit were obtained.
The excitement spread, and more searchers ran towards the
Summerhill Creek. What assisted very materially to fan the
excitement into a flame, was the arrival of a son of Mr. Neale,
the brewer, of Bathurst, with a piece of pure metal weighing
eleven ounces, which was purchased by Mr. Austin for £3O, who
started to Sydney by the following day’s mail with the gold and
the news. Since that an old man arrived in Bathurst with
several pieces in mass, weighing in all from two to three pounds.
He also started for Sydney with his prize. Mr. Kennedy, the
manager of the Bathurst branch of the Union Bank of Australia,
visited the diggings in company with Messrs, Hawkins and
Green, and each of these gentlemen picked up a small piece of
the pure metal; and a few handfuls of the loose earth from the
bed of the creek, which were brought home by Mr. Kennedy
from motives of curiosity, having been assayed by Mr. Korff,
from Sydney, a piece of gold was extracted therefrom of the size
of a small pea.
The excitement produced by this intelligence, when spread
abroad, as it speedily was, was immense. First Bathurst, and
then Sydney, and all the interjacent country, were intoxicated by
the astounding news. High and low, rich and poor, masters and
servants, magistrates and policemen, landsmen and seamen, men,
women, and children, by an instantaneous and unanimous con-
sent, precipitated themselves upon the diggings. The roads
leading to Bathurst were covered with pedestrians, horsemen,
and drays. The people came swarming from every quarter.
The tracks and highways were alive. Bathurst was converted
into a great house of call for immigrant miners from all directions.
Some came armed with picks, others with shovels, and not a few
12


bore wash-hand basins, tin pots, and cullenders. Nothing was
thought of, nothing was heard of, but Gold ! Soon from five to
six thousand people were busy in the creeks, and rivers, and
diggings, washing and searching for Gold ! Many a hand which
had been trained to kid gloves, or accustomed to wield nothing
heavier than the grey goosequill, became nervous to clutch the
pick and crowbar, or ‘‘rock the cradle” at the mines. The
blacksmiths of the town could not turn off the picks fast enough,
and the manufacture of cradles was the second briskest business
of the place. The roads to Summerhill Creek became literally
alive with new-made miners from every quarter; garden and
agricultural implements of every variety, either hung from the
saddle-bow or dangled about the persons of the pilgrims to
Ophir. Now and then a respectable tradesman, who had just
left his bench or counter, would heave in sight, with a huge
something in front of his horse which he called a cradle, and
with which he was about to rock himself into fortune. Scores
rushed from their homes, provided with a blanket, “ a damper,”
and a pick, or grubbing-hoe, full of hope that a day or two’s
labour would fill their pockets with the precious metal; and a
great number started without any provision but a blanket and
some rude implement to dig with. Business was all but sus-
pended, and provisions at once rose above 50 per cent, in price at
Bathurst. Sydney also felt the excitement through all its
members. Sailors left their ships to go to the Diggings; sea-
men’s wages were at once greatly raised, to enable the vessels to
put to sea. Clerks, servants, policemen, squatters, draymen,
porters, shepherds, labourers, teachers, hut-men, pldfighmen,
tradesmen, and all sorts of people, ran the same road—towards
Bathurst: there threatened to be a famine of labourers, and
wages for all kinds of work rose prodigiously.
Ophir was soon established—“the gold mines of Ophir”—
richer than those of the Scriptures. Ophir, like most of the other
Bathurst Diggings, is on the Macquarie. But soon numerous
others were discovered by the enterprising searchers, at Swallow
Creek, and at the head of the Hunter River, and all along the
little branches of the Macquarie. The gold was found in lumps,
and in quantity. Many of the labourers gathered as much gold
as was worth five pounds, a-day. From twenty to thirty pounds
a-week was considered a fair week’s work. But the earnings
often amounted to far more than this. One little man, des-
cribed as “ a shrimp of a fellow,” by the aid of a forked stick
and an old frying-pan, had raked up more than five pounds’
worth of gold in half-a-day. Among the whole diggers engaged
in the district, the average earning of man, woman, and boy,
was supposed to be not less than £1 a-day ! One person collected
£l7O worth in seven days. But, more extrordinary than all,
was the discovery of several blocks of gold in one day, by Mr.
Kerr of Bathurst, worth from £3OOO to £4OOO. A few days pre-
b 13


vious to the finding, an educated aboriginal, formerly attached to
the Wellington Mission, and who has been in the service of W.
Kerr, Esq., of Wallawa about seven years, returned home to his
employer with the intelligence that he had discovered a large
mass of gold amongst a heap of quartz upon the run, whilst
tending the sheep. Gold being the universal theme of conversa-
tion, this sable son of the forest was excited, and provided with a
tomahawk he had amused himself by exploring the country
adjacent to his employer’s land. His attention was first called
to the spot by observing a spot of some glittering yellow substance
upon the surface of a block of the quartz, upon which he applied
his tomahawk and broke off a portion. He then started home
and disclosed the discovery to his master, who was soon on the
spot, and in a very short time the three blocks of quartz contain-
ing the hundredweight of gold were released from the bed where
they had rested for ages. The largest of the blocks was about a
foot in diameter, and weighed 75 lb gross. Out of this piece 60
lb. of pure gold was taken. Before separation it was beautifully
incased in quartz. The other two were something smaller. The
auriferous mass weighed as nearly as could be guessed from two
to three hundred weight.
All this but served to increase the excitement, and new hosts
of gold-diggers poured into the district. They increased to many
thousands ; each digger paying for license to dig, the sum of 30s.
to the government. The towns became comparatively deserted
for the “ gold of Ophir and the difficulty of finding labourers
increased. Masters had to black their own shoes ; those who
kept carriages had to put them down ; ladies had to wait upon
themselves, and supply their own wants, for their servants had
discovered an occupation more remunerative than anything their
mistresses had to offer. The price of provisions rose ; and
though wages rose, servants of all sorts left their situations.
The post-office could scarcely get the letters delivered for want
of men. The police could scarcely be induced to stay ; and
soldiers were with difficulty prevailed upon to remain at their
posts. The diggers continued to make their average of about £1
a-day. Some made much more, and others less ; but the sum
named seems to have been about the average earning of those
labourers who were employed during the first three or four
months in the neighbourhood of the Summerhill Creek.
When such were the gains of the gold-washers, the rush of men
to the occupation will not be matter of wonder. There were
several ships lying in Sydney harbour, bound for California; the
passengers were on board, their berths paid for; but they at
once, on hearing the news from Bathurst, forfeited their money,
and started for the diggings. Another ship was about to sail for
New Zealand, but the passengers and sailors abandoned it, and
started like the others, for the diggings. The men belonging to
two of the breweries of Sydney intimated their intention of
14


THE GOLD FIELDS OF AUSTRALIA
leaving for Bathurst; on which their masters raised their wages
ten shillings per week per man, with a prospect of further
increase; nevertheless nearly half of them set out for the
diggings. The constables had their pay greatly increased, and a
large number of them resigned, to be off like other people, to the
gold region. Indeed, at this time, it was said truly that the
working-classes were, with a few exceptions, gone, going, or
making early preparations for an early departure to the diggings.
Emeralds and rubies began to be picked up with the gold. The
success in some cases was marvellous. One poor Scotchman
picked up, in four days, gold which sold for £282. Eight others
realized £36 each in a week. Many others were equally success-
ful ; and when the first convoy of gold, guarded by soldiers,
arrived at the bank in Sydney, the excitement had almost reached
the pitch of madness.
The suffering fell upon the sheep farmers. Their men left
them, and their flocks were allowed to run wild. The clip of
wool ran imminent risk of being lost for the season. The gain
from this source, though considerable, was too slow for men to
consent to wait for it, when they could make £1 a-day by gold
gathering. So the farmers, wool-growers, and others, suffered,
and are still suffering, greatly from want of labourers.
Up to August, the discoveries went on increasing in importance.
Some finders were lucky far beyond others. One person picked
up lumps of gold weighing 106 lb., which sum sold for £4160.
Hall’s party collected in three weeks upwards of £l6OO. One
man of a party of three, made £BO in a fortnight for his own
share ; three sailors, who had arrived from Sydney, picked up
£BOO worth of the precious metal within a fortnight, and they
declined the offer of £5OO for the “claim” from which they
gathered it, near the Wallaby Rocks. This was like the
Arabian Nights over again. The amount gathered weekly, was
estimated at £lO,OOO, or equivalent to an average of about £2
for each man. Up to the end of August—the finding having
commenced only in May—the gold shipped off from Sydney for
England, amounted in value to nearly £75,000 ! And during
the three following months, the yield was considerably greater.
Up to November, considerable difficulty had been experienced
to find money to pay for the large remittances of the precious
metal from the mines, and the banks had been obliged to limit
their advances, whilst many of the mercantile houses were com-
pelled to suspend purchases for the present. It was, under
these circumstances, in contemplation to issue gold tokens of
2(.'s. each, in order to afford some relief from the difficulties
thus experienced in all monetary transactions. At the rate at
which the gold was arriving at Sydney, upwards of half a
million sterling of coin would be required in the space of the
next five months to pay for it.
The ground continued to yield largely. In one day, the
15


government escort brought into Sydney not less than 6456 ounces
in one day. In January, not less than £lOO,OOO worth of gold
from Sydney was imported into England, in three Australian
ships! The people employed at the diggings continued very
peaceable and well-disposed—no robberies, nor assaults, such as
are so frequent in California, took place ; and the labourers,
without exception, cheerfully paid their usual licences of £1 10s.
a-mouth to the government. Up to the date of the last accounts,
the total number of persons employed in the New South Wales
Colony, in digging for gold, was about 10,000.
The average wages earned throughout the Bathurst diggings,
according to Mr. Hardy, the government superintendent, was £1
a-day. And as the cost of living was only from 9s. to 12s. a-
week for each man, he had per week a clear profit of about
£5 10s., or per month say £2l 10s., out of which he had to pay
the odd £1 10s. in the shape of a government license, for which
he was secured protection and peace. Mr. Hardy estimated that
there was abundant room for 5000 men to work on the Summer-
hill and Lewis Pond Creeks alone, at an average profit of £1
a-day to each.
The Summerhill Creek, where the gold was first discovered, is
situated on the north side of the Canabolas Mountains —a small
group of hills consisting partly of Palaeozoic rocks, containing
limestone, pierced by masses of trap, mica slate, and similar
rocks, with many quartz veins. From the north side of this
range, flow the two creeks or small rivers, called Summerhill
Creek and Lewis Ponds Creek, After a course of a few miles,
winding through narrow and deep vallies, with sloping sides and
terraces, these two creeks unite and flow on as Lewis River,
down to the Macquarie. The first diggings were commenced at
the junction of the two creeks, at which spot all the large
pieces of gold, from 2 oz. up to three lbs. have been obtained.
Mr. Hardy states, as the result of the first few mouths’ ex-
perience, that in all the windings of the brooks, the banks on the
inside, or in the concave portion of the bends, was the richest in
gold. “ Such parts,” he says, “ form long slopes, with a perpen-
dicular bluff opposite ; and wherever these slopes are formed
opposite to such bluffs, it may very safely be declared that gold
exists in abundance.” The reason of this will be clear to any
one. It is just against such bluffs, that the stream, especially in
floods, will strike with the greatest force, and will, therefore,
tend most to remove gold and every other substance, from those
spots, and deposit it in the comparatively slack water on the inside
of the next bend. Several miles of auriferous ground of this
character were first worked, each set of men having allotted to
them a strip of ground on the slope, with a river frontage,
varying from twenty to forty feet according to the number of the
party. The parties usually varied from three to twelve.
Mr. Stutchbury, the government geologist, meanwhile pro-
-16


cceded with his investigation of the district, and soon after
announced the discovery of good gold-bearing ground at several
places on the river Macquarie, and especially on another of its
tributaries called the Turon river. This river runs about thirty
miles north of Bathurst; springing, not from any of the outlying
ranges, but from the western defiles of the Great Eastern Chain
itself, and it runs into the Macquarie after a course of about
thirty miles. Mr. Hardy, in one of his despatches to the govern-
ment, gives the following interesting account of this Turon
district:—
“ I am very happy,” he says, “to be able to state, that the
Turon gold field is of the most satisfactory nature, and places the
settled and profitable nature of gold digging beyond question.
“ The geological nature of the Turon district, its physical
conformation, and the description of gold found there, are all
totally different from the same at Summerhill Creek. Summer-
hill Creek is narrow, confined between high ranges, witli a fall
so great, as to make the rush of water in time of flood immensely
great; and you cannot ride 100 yards along the stream, so
broken, narrow, and difficult, is the water course. On the other
hand, the Turon river runs through a valley of some miles in
width; and the Turon hills are twice the height of those of
Summerhill. The latter are of mica slate, with broad and well ■
defined quartz veins ; the former are of mica slate, with no quartz
whatever. As might be expected, from the width of the valley,
the bed of the Turon is broad, level, not tortuous, compared with
Summerhill Creek ; presenting few of those elbows so frequent in
the latter. In Summerhill Creek, the gold is always large in the
grain, often massive, seldom thin and scaly. At Turon, the gold,
for the nine miles that I have carefully investigated it, is found
in small, flat, irregular pieces, rounded at the edges, and varying
in size from the merest scale to about half the finger nail; the
largest pieces are about as thick as a shilling. For nine miles,
the production of gold appears to be as regular as wheat in a
sown field. I found several parties whom I knew at Summerhill,
at work, several miles apart on the Turon. They had tried up
and down (for that nine miles and a few miles further down), in
hopes of getting into the coarse gold of Summerhill; but the
result was always the same. It does not matter where you
work, in the bed of the creek, or the impending banks, any
steady working man can earn ten shillings a day with the utmost
regularity. I found a settler named Schofield, who has two flocks
of sheep and some cattle on the banks of the Turon, at work 100
yards from his own door. He had been working at Summerhill,
and said that he had left it only because what he was now
getting was at his own door, and as much as he wanted, though
he had averaged thirty shillings a day at Summerhill. He told
me of his trials in various parts, and his invariable success. He
had just come to his work from dinner wdicn I came up to his
n 2 17




THE GOLD FIELDS OF AUSTRALIA,
cradle, and showed me the proceeds of the morning’s work in a
pannikin, got by one cradle and himself and two men. It was
exactly one quarter of an ounce, and I gave him 16s. for it. I
weighed the proceeds of their work for the previous four days,
and it was exactly two ounces of gold.
“In short, from the top of the bank across the whole bed of the
river (from 50 to 100 yards wide), and from the whole of that
nine miles at least, the result is as absolutely to be depended upon
as weekly wages, and 5000 workers would be nothing in that
space. You must, however, observe, that Schofield and his
mates, and the other persons whom I knew, were steady, hard-
working men, who began at sun-rise, and with the interval of an
hour for breakfast, and an hour for dinner, kept steadily on till
sun-down.”
Mr. Hardy, in his report, further points with great probability
to the sources of the Turon, among the hills and narrow gorges,
as the place to look for the “ coarse gold” and the large lump,
such as were found at Summerhill Creek—“ pieces too heavy to be
carried, with the lighter particles, by any flood, towards the
Macquarie and this prediction was afterwards confirmed, —
the block of gold above referred to, having been discovered by
Mr. Kerr, on the Marroo Creek, a river north of the Turon, at a
spot where the Meneda Creek falls into it, about 53 miles north
of Bathurst. In fact, that the district in question is “ one
immense gold field” seems now to be no longer matter of
question.
A word of caution from a settler on the Turon, may here be
put in ; for it is well to know what can be said against the
Australian Gold Fever, as well as in favour of it. The writer
thus speaks in the Illustrated News of January 31st, 1852 :
“ No profession, trade, or calling seems to keep persons from the
diggings ; and Sydney, as well as most other towns in the colony,
is left almost entirely to the women. For a time it had the
effect of raising provisions to a fearful price.
“ You will take it for granted that 1 am hard at work at the
diggings ; but such is not the case. The land on which this dis-
covery has been made had been my sheep run ever since I have
been in the colony ; all the sections adjoining my purchases 1
have rented from the government from year to year. 1 find it
will take up all my time and attention in looking after my sheep.
I think I shall be better off for labour than many, and hope to be
able to pick up some disappointed diggers ; but how the large
sheep-holders at a distance will manage, remains to be seen.
<e It must not be supposed that all who come to the diggings
make fortunes ; certainly many have done well; but hundreds
are disappointed. It is a strange life, and a hard one. We have
had a great deal of rain lately, which has made the work more
miserable ; although a gold-washer must not mind a little wet, as
he has to rock the cradle, and at the same time throw water in,
19


which keeps him continually wet in the feet. The soil is taken
in buckets, bags, or any other convenient way, from the banks of
the river ; a bucketful at a time is put into the sieve, and the
man, while rocking with his left hand, dips the water with his
right, and continues pouring it into the sieve till the earth is
clear; and then, casting a longing eye into the sieve to see if
there be a “ nugget” too large to go through the holes, he unships
the sieve, and throws out the stones. Another bucketful is then
taken up ; and when from fifty to sixty sievefuls have been
washed the rocker is cleared out, and what is deposited at the
bottom is put into the washing pan 1 have shewn, when the gold,
being heaviest, settles. Most of the gold found in the Turon is
in small pieces ; but there also are large ones. Since the hun-
dredweight was discovered, about thirty-five mile? hence, many
seekers have gone there, and companies are forming to crush the
quartz. 1 saw this gold weighed at our bank at Bathurst, a most
wonderful sight.
“ I have been a purchaser of gold for a house in Sydney, at
from £3 3s. to £3 4s. 6d. per ounce on commission ; per
cent, for any quantity. The extent of my purchase at this time
has been 517 ounces in about a month. I bought from three men
who came from the Hunter, and had worked twelve clear days,
72$ ounces, £233 13s. sd. What will this discovery be thought
of in England V'
Whatever may be the immediate results of this extraordinary
discovery, of the issue there can be little doubt. It will have the
effect of peopling Australia within a very short space of time.
Emigration thither will go on henceforward in an accelerated
ratio ; and possibly within our own day, the Australian people
may be numbered by millions instead of thousands.
The population at present amounts to only about 320,000
Europeans, and 30,000 natives, and not one-hundredth part of the
Australian territory is yet settled. The greater part of it, in-
deed, still remains unpenetrated and undiscovered.
The wealth of the colonists has hitherto been derived from
pastoral pursuits, and their teeming mines of copper, which pro-
duce incalculable returns. But now a new fortune has opened to
them, and the dreams which intoxicated the enthusiasts of an
older time are realized amongst this community of shepherds.
The metal upon which man has set most value, for which he has
toiled, and thought, and bled, and sinned since the primmval
fall, is flung into the hands of this fortunate people with a prodi-
gality which nature has never conferred on any nation of men
before. The prize for which intellect has exhausted its powers,
for which the world has been desolated by wasting wars, for
which virtue has prostituted itself, for which murder has bared
its arm ; which is in this world a sword and a sceptre, a curse
and a benediction, the right arm of beneficence, and the agent of
the tempter, is acquired with no other condition than that of en-
-20


durance of physical toil ; tom from the rock or dug from the
muddy deposit of the river by the outcast of society a thousand-
fold more easily than the banker or the merchant gathers it from
commerce in all the seas.
For the present, however, it is easy to perceive that the in-
dustrial pursuits of the colony will be disturbed. The scarcity
of labour, which has long been a crying evil, will be aggravated ;
and, possibly, a loose and lawless population may become congre-
gated in the neighbourhood of the gold mines. For it is a well-
known fact that gold-seeking has never prevailed in a district to
any extent, without human degradation and immorality of the
worst kind. But it will in due time be discovered, that the true
wealth of Australia consists in its soil, its atmosphere, its vegeta-
ble productions, its flocks and herds, as well as in its metals ; and
when the gold-hunting mania has subsided, its prosperity will go
on apace.
THE DISCOVERIES OF GOLD IN PORT
PHILIP, OR VICTORIA COLONY.
Since the discoveries of gold in such quantities as we have
above described, in the colony of New South Wales, still more
astounding discoveries of immense deposits of the same metal in
the colony of Victoria, have come to light, which almost throw
those of the Bathurst district into the shade.
Sydney, it will be borne in mind, is situated on the eastern
coast of Australia. If we sail down the coast towards the south,
for several hundred miles, and enter Bass’s Straits (which sepa-
rate Van Diemau’s Land from Australia), doubling the ridge of
Wilson's promontory, a wide bay opens on the right hand, round
the head of which stretches low and level land, covered with
bush, and ending in small cliffs towards the sea. At the northern
extremity of the bay, a little gap in these cliffs conducts us by a
narrow and rather shoal channel into a great expanse of water,
which looks at first like another sea, since it is so extensive that
no land can be seen across it towards the north. This wide
extent of water is however, nearly landlocked, though about
twenty-five miles from side to side in all directions. It is the
noble bay of Port Philip. On the northern side of the bay, hills
rise up along the horizon, and on the banks of the little river,
called the Yarra Yarra, which flows into its north-eastern corner,
about a mile above the point at which the river runs into the bay,
stands the capital of the colony, the city of Melbourne. On the
south-western shores of the same bay, about thirty miles across
the waters from Melbourne, is another thriving town, the pretty
little seaport of Geelong. Both these towns are built principally
of red brick, and both towns, but especially Melbourne, are
21


wonderful places for their age. Melbourne is a handsome town,
rapidly increasing, of considerable wealth, and likely eventually
to be a place of very great importance.
In August, 1851, Mr. Latrobe, the Lieutenant-Governor of the
Colony, sent home a despatch to Earl Grey, in which he first
announced the discovery of gold in Victoria, and that diggings
had been established at Clunes, at Buningyong (fifty or sixty
miles north-west from Melbourne), and at Deep Creek (only six-
teen miles from Melbourne).
Since that date the news received from Victoria has been but
fragmentary. The following is a newspaper paragraph brought
by the overland mail in the beginning of February ;
“By the overland India and China mail, we have received
accounts from the gold diggings to the beginning of November.
The excitement had been augmented a thousand-fold, the colo-
nists had nearly gone mad. This extraordinary excitement was
brought about by the announcement of gold being discovered at
Melbourne, Port Philip (now called Victoria), in such prodigious
abundance as to leave the Sydney diggings completely in the
shade. A complete reaction had taken place, to the great injury
of the sister colonies, which were daily being deserted by all
classes of labourers, who were hurrying away to the new El
Dorado; thousands were on their way, and hundreds were
arriving, even from California itself, lured by the reputed wealth
of the Victoria province.
“ From all accounts, the Melbourne diggings are inexhaustible,
whilst the daily yield to each man exceeds in quantity the lucky
weights of which we heard so much in the early gold history of
California. About 10,000 diggers were at work at the mines at
the end of October, and the average yield or earnings of each
digger was from 1 £ to 1 £ ounces of gold per man per day.
“ The towns of Melbourne and Geelong, at the last-mentioned
date, were deserted by the male sex. Their only population con-
sisted of females. Flocks, herds, workshops, and the fields were
all deserted by men, who preferred the moderate luck of £2O to
£lOO per day at the diggings, to toiling for a whole week for so
many shillings. Government escorts had been established to pro-
tect the treasure in its transit to town, the daily amount trans-
ported being from 2000 to 3000 ounces. For example, on October
23rd, the arrival of gold under escort from the neighbourhood of
Melbourne, was 88 lbs. 11 oz. 4 dwts., and 136 lbs. 9 oz. 16 grs.
from the Geelong and Ballarat diggings, or a total of 2,708 oz.
4 dwts. 16 grs. The quantity will increase with the increase of
diggers ; and the same idea may be formed at the rate at which
this was going on from the fact, that on October 24, no less than
299 steerage passengers arrived in Melbourne, by four different
vessels from Van Dieman’s Land.
“ Some notion may be formed of individual success from the
circumstance that on October 23, the large amount of 93 lbs.
22


weight, or 1,116 oz. was exposed for sale in the rooms of Symons
and Perry, in Bourke Street. The person in whose possession it
was, stated that a party of seven had obtained it at the Ballarat
diggings in the space of fourteen days. ‘ Such an arrival,’ says
the Melbourne Argus, ‘ throws all minor quantities into the shade ;
but we may mention that a respectable spirit merchant at Mel-
bourne returned to town yesterday from Mount Alexander, who
brought with him 250 ounces, which he had procured from the
recently discovered gold field in that locality.’ Mr. Westgarth,
mayor of Melbourne, has stated the daily yield of the mines to
be no less than the enormous sum of £lO,OOO sterling. ‘So sur-
prised,’ says the Argus, ‘ were we at observing so extraordinarily
high an estimate, that we could not help asking the hon. member
for Melbourne, whether he had not allowed himself to be led
away by the excitement of the scene, and to forget for once his
usual moderation and circumspection. The only answer we
could get was to the effect that he had not expressed the opinion
without careful consideration, and that he still adhered to it.”
At Melbourne the most exciting accounts were received from
the Mount Alexander diggings, and the lieutenant-governor had
started off to judge for himself. A rapid emigration was taking
place from Ballarat towards these diggings. A man named
Sewell had returned from Mount Alexander, bringing with him
gold, lor which he obtained a cheque for £75, being the earnings
of fourteen days’ work.
The following is an extract from the report of a lecture de-
livered in Melbourne by a Mr. Gibbons, taken from the Melbourne
Argus, of October 7, 1851. :
“ On the surface of the earth was turf, in a layer of about a
foot in depth, below which was a layer of rich black alluvial soil,
and below that, grey clay ; below that again was a description
of red gravel, which was sometimes very good ; then red or yellow
clay, in which gold was also found ; and then a stratum, varying
in thickness of clay ; streaked with various colours, and scarcely
worth working ; and the next stratum was of hard, white pipe-
clay, which was a decided barrier. Immediately above it, how-
ever, was a thin layer of chocolate-coloured clay, tough and
soapy. This was the celebrated blue clay, and was very rich.
“ The ground on which the diggings were situated, was a
sloping bank, and the strata lay with their inclinations upwards.
The blue clay is found near the surface, on the brow of the hill,
that is at the depth of about a foot; but sometimes it is necessary
to dig twenty feet before arriving at it.”
Private accounts to which we have had access, confirm these
statements, and inform us that the government clerks and em-
ployes had received an addition of 50 per cent, to their salaries,
besides a bonus, in order to induce them to remain at their posts,
instead of hurrying off to seek their fortunes at the diggings.
The supply was so great at the date of the last advices, the
23


gold deposits were so abundant, so accessible, and so wide-spread,
that it seems improbable that they can soon be exhausted ; and
the only limit to production is the want of hands. Already the
estimated yield of gold in the Australian diggings is £3,000,000
per annum ; but probably this will prove to be greatly under-
estimated, as population flows into the country, and sets to
work upon the gold-yielding earth and rocks.
As yet, the richest district is that in the neighbourhood of
Mount Alexander ; but rumours of other discoveries, equally
rich in yield, are coming in from various parts of the colony, near
and remote. The Ballarat diggings, near Geelong, are extremely
rich, and further researches only serve to show how golden the
soil of Australia is. In the course of one week, not less than
£lOO,OOO worth of gold was carried into Melbourne from the
diggings, and already very large exports of the precious metal
have been made from the colony to England.
The following account gives a graphic picture of life at the
gold diggings, and of the excitement which prevailed there about
the end of last year :
“ After an early breakfast at the little inn where we spent the
night, we rode seven miles through a rugged forest road to Bal-
larat, till within these last few months a part almost unknown,
and simply forming a portion of a sheep-run. The hills, of
very moderate height, rise from the valley with little hollows
(or gullies, as they are called) between them. Here the
discovery of gold caused an accumulation of 8000 or 10,000
people in a few weeks ; and although by the time I arrived the
greater part of these had gone away again, there were still
enough left to form a very curious scene, many hundreds of tents,
of all sorts and sizes, being scattered about the valley in the most
irregular manner ; while others, including several stores, were
clustered together on one particular hill, called Golden Point, the
lower part of which has been upturned and ransacked for the
precious metal it contains. At a little distance this hill looks like
a vast gravel-pit, consisting of fine red gravel, such as you would
choose, when sifted, for your garden-walks.
“ On examining the ground more closely, the excavations are
found to consist of square holes of all sizes, and from three or
four feet to twenty or thirty feet. The strata are very variable
and uncertain, but generally this bed of gravel lies upon a bed of
whitish sandy clay ; and the gold is for the most part found in
the lower part of this gravel, which is generally so firmly bound
together, that it has become a hard conglomerate which can only
be broken up by hammers. This gold is usually found in small
rounded and evidently water-worn pieces, from the size of a pin’s
head to that of peas, but now and then of much larger size. The
great bulk, however, is small and scarcely perceptible to the eye
among the gravel, which is taken down to the bed of the stream
and washed in tin dishes and cradles


“ Among the rough, unshaven, dirty-looking men who were at
work, I every now and then discovered some friend who could
hardly be recognised in his bush attire, consisting generally of a
blue or scarlet woollen shirt, worn outside a la House with a
leathern belt round the waist, a straw or ‘ wide-awake’ hat, and
trousers, and thick boots of coarse materials, and all of one
colour, viz., that of the clay and mud with which they are
covered. Mr. W. was one of those who masqueraded, and ad-
dressed me without my knowing him. Among others of my ac-
quaintance with whom I met, were lawyers, doctors, tradesmen—
in fact, people of all sorts ; but I noticed that generally the par-
ties of labouring men were doing best. The success is very
variable indeed ; in proof of which one gentleman told me that
he and his party had been working hard for six weeks, and had
sunk thirteen deep holes, but got nothing. On leaving one of
their holes as a failure, another party took possession of it, and
in two or three days took out £720 worth of gold
“ For some time past, a new district, called Mount Alexander,
had been attracting a good deal of attention, and a great many
had proceeded thither from Ballarat. From all I heard, I con-
cluded that this would be the best place for our object of pur-
chasing gold ; and therefore we proceeded there, after spending
three days at Ballarat. One of these days was Sunday. It was
a very wet morning, and, probably owing to this, no clergyman
visited us ; otherwise there is generally service. The place was
very quiet and orderly, no work being done, and most men being
very glad of a day of rest after their week of toil, for gold-dig-
ging is no easy occupation.
u lt was in the afternoon of the 11th of November that we
strapped our baggage on to our horses, wound the tether-ropes
round their necks, and started for Mount Alexander, having the
greater part of our money still with us. The direct distance is
fifty miles, but we were too late to make a single ride of it, and
slept at the house of Captain S • •
“ Leaving Captain S.’s after breakfast, we rode at a moderate
pace, thinking that we had plenty of time ; but in consequence of
our horses being low in condition, and losing our way, we were
in our saddles till some time after dark.
“ Our first business on arriving at Mount Alexander was to in-
quire for the tent of the Government Commissioner, where we
deposited our money, as we had previously done at Ballarat, for
the sake of safety. lam slightly acquainted with the Commis-
sioner, who was very polite, gave me some information, and re-
gretted that, owing to their small tent being full, they could not
give us accommodation for the night. We therefore continued
our ride for about three miles, to where the main diggings and
the largest collection of tents were, in hope of finding some place
of rest and some grass for our horses.
“ A friend with whom I happened to fall in, allowed me to creep
c 25


into his tent; and, having obtained the loan of a blanket, I rolled
myself up in it, munched a biscuit which I had in my pocket, and
then lay down on the floor, and soon fell asleep, thinking how
many with feather beds and pillows would sleep less soundly.
After an early breakfast 1 rode slowly up the valley, visiting
several gold-washers on the way, and buying a little gold. These
diggings are of a very different character to those at Ballarat,
being much more widely distributed; consequently the tents of
the diggers are scattered up and down the various valleys over
a considerable distance, more or less thickly according to the
richness of the locality.
“ After looking about us, and making some inquiry, we decided
upon pitching a tent (if we could get one) close to that of the
commissioner, where I could carry on the business of gold-buying.
Meanwhile we made a few purchases, and at night got accommo-
dation in the tent of an acquaintance. No tent was to be bought
or borrowed, and therefore, as there was no time to lose, we set
about making one. We got the loan of a tarpaulin, and then set
to work, dug holes, cut down trees, stripped some bark off of
others —in which, by-the-bye, a black fellow helped us—and by
night had our tent pretty well secured. You would have laughed,
or perhaps stared with astonishment, if you had seen me one
minute chopping away at a tree, or carrying it on my shoulder,
and the next sitting on a log, weighing gold and counting out the
bank notes, for we did not lose any opportunity of buying when
it occurred.
“ The next day was Saturday (the 15th). —We were again
early at work. Did more to our tent, and bought more gold.
“ My furniture consists of a piece of bark stripped from a gum
tree, and nailed to four bits of rough wood in the form of a table
(on which, moreover, I am now writing), and on which I weigh
my gold. My wardrobe —what I brought on horseback, and a
pair of blankets.
“ On Sunday, when I was as glad of a day of rest as any of
the diggers, I read the church service to myself, and only went
out a little in the afternoon when the weather cleared up.
“ Monday, the 17th. —I was busy all day buying gold, writing
letters for the post, and in the evening making up my bags of gold
for the government escort, which was to leave for Melbourne the
following morning. I found I had purchased altogether just 600
ounces, for which I paid on an average about 575. per ounce.
“ The following morning presented a bustling and picturesque
scene when the escort was preparing to start. Previously to this
week, only two lots had been sent down from here by govern-
ment, and each time on horseback ; but the success of the diggers
had so increased, that there was now gold to the amount of
i£25,000, and a chaise-cart was necessary. The cavalcade con-
sisted of two mounted troopers ahead, then the chaise-cart,
driven by an officer with an armed guard beside him, and six
26


more troopers on horseback behind, four of them, I think, of the
native black police. The pretty scene alluded to was when all
this was preparing. The hilly, open forest land is in itself park-
like ; and on a rising ground the commissioners’ establishment is
placed, consisting of several tents and two or three gunyas or
bark huts, made by the native police after their own fashion.
The troopers’ horses were standing about ready saddled ; and the
men themselves, both black and white, and in various costumes,
gave life to the picture, while of course some interest was added
by the knowledge of the valuable load contained in the cart, and
the rugged forest country through which it had to travel. I lost
sight of the train as it wound among the trees, and in due time
heard that it had safely reached its destination.
“ My occupation during the remainder of the week was very
uniform, but I occasionally took a ride or walk among the gold-
finders, but did not leave my tent for long at a time, as my com-
panion had now left me. About this part there are chiefly two
kinds of diggings—surface digging, which is simply skimming off
a thin layer of gravel from the surface of some of the hills to the
depth of a few inches, when a bed of gravel is reached ; and
hole-digging, which is digging down in hollow places in the
streams, and between hills, and searching the fissures which exist
between the slate rocks there found. Both kinds have proved
very profitable to many. As an extreme case, three men, last
week, got above 30 lbs. weight of gold in less than two days, out
of a little patch of gravel of a few feet square, and not more than
six inches deep. And, an extreme case of hole-digging,l heard
to-day of four men who took seven pint pots of gold out of a hole
or fissure on Tuesday last. What a pint pannikin of gold weighs
I do not know, but, at a rough guess, I should think this prize
would be worth not less than £3OOO. Of course these are but
two extraordinary cases among some thousands of diggers ; but,
nevertheless, the great number of persons who are getting rich in
this district is almost incredible.”
The excitement had by no means subsided in November;
on the contrary, it had greatly increased. Emigrants were
pouring into Melbourne and Geelong, and proceeding at once
to the gold mines. There were then about 15,000 persons
at work. In January, the number had increased to about
20,000. The yield was daily increasing; and the pursuit of gold-
finding absorbed all other vocations. Nothing was thought of,
spoken of, or written about, except gold. Servants were leaving
their places, sailors their ships, shepherds their stations, to go in
search for gold. The rate of wages had enormously increased.
Labouring men could scarcely be had for £1 a-day! Five men
in one gang collected 250 lbs. of gold in six weeks; and the
metal so collected, sold for nearly £lO,OOO ! One writer says —
“ I saw four men lifting a seaman’s chest into a dray half an
hour ago, almost too heavy for their united strength. This chest
27


contained the product of six weeks’ labour, and contained at
least 200 lbs. of gold. Tho banks and the post-office are working
double hours ; all other public departments are crippled for want
of hands ; male servants are not to be had, even at extravagant
rates; women are not much better. Marriages are now in high
favour ; almost all the single men arrive from the diggings with
gold enough to maintain a wife. So far, the abstraction of young
women from service is desirable, be the inconvenience what it may;
but there are other channels for expenditure where profligacy
and licentiousness are exhibited on a fearful scale, amid the riot
of waste and reckless prodigality. Enormous sums are squan-
dered by the diggers and their familes. Every Jack has his
Gill, and Jack has more money besides than his master of the
preceding month.”
The Times city article of the 12th of May stated-“ Special
instances were mentioned in which parties had obtained gold
valued at about £3O per day for several successive days, while
even since the scarcity of water the average at the chief point of
operations had been £3, These results were principally obtained
from surface diggings on a slope of the range not a quarter of an
acre in extent. It was estimated that since the discovery the
general yield, including what had found its way into the banks,
had been at least £1,000,000 sterling, and that already, up to
the 18th January, £660,000 had been exported to this country.
When the winter rains should set in, it was anticipated that the
most extraordinary consequences would be witnessed. In the
meantime labour was fetching high rates ; reapers were paid
28s. a-day, besides a considerable allowance of spirits, and
servants who previously obtained about £3O to £35 per annum
were now readily engaged at £6O. The retail business of the
place had improved in proportion, the expenditure by the mining
population being distinguished for its extravagance. The latest
price of gold was £2 18s. to £3 per ounce.”
There was scarcely such a thing as getting one’s clothes
washed; one must either do it one’s self, or buy new ones.
So, people were learning to work for themselves who had
never worked before. The prices of all necessaries of life had
gone up prodigiously: such as, a pair of boots, £2 10s.; a pair
of shoes, 205.; ss. for a load of water; 30s. for a horse-load of
wood. There was a capital crop of wheat on the ground, but
there was fear lest it should not be got in for want ol hands —
though 10s. and 12s. 6d. per day, with rations, were freely
offered. The people would work at nothing but gold-hunting ;
and with such industry did they pursue it, that in four months
they had gathered 9| tons weight of it —or about £700,000
worth in value. The gold sold at about 60s. an ounce.
The shifts to which the respectable people, who had before
been waited upon by servants, were coming to, were somewhat
ludicrous. They could not get labour for money, and were under
28


the necessity of helping themselves ; accordingly their conclusion
was “ that the colony is ruined,” —and all because, perhaps, they
had to black their own shoes! Ladies had to bake their own
bread ; and were in great distress at the fact! Is it not clear
from this, that Australia is an El Dorado for the working man ?
A correspondent of the Times of the 20th April, 1852, thus
writes :—“ 1 have cross-examined numbers of labouring men, on
whom I can depend, have seen their earnings at the mines, and
have come to the conclusion (which is confirmed by those who
have resided up there among them to purchase extensively),
that a fair working man can make full £l2OO a-year on the
ground, clear of his expenses at the present rate of food ; that
nine out often will do this readily, and some few here and there
much more. Men have made as much as £lO,OOO in two months,
four men dividing about £40,000. When hundreds of thousands
of mere labourers can do this, imagine the magnitude of the
effects to be produced on the world.
“ Some curious anecdotes might be picked up out of the
unnatural state of the labour-market here. One which I heard
lately from a member of our club was an odd one. The gentle-
man, a large sheep-owner, and not a small man either in his own
estimation, or in that of his own shepherds before the gold
revolution, being in great trouble about shearing his flocks, went
to a party of shearers at the gold diggings to ask them to engage
to shear his flock. He fancied in his innocence that by offering
high wages they would come for a few days, and had fully made
up his mind to give whatever they asked. He found the men
lying indolently round their fire, and told his wishes. The men
went aside and consulted with each other, and their speaker
advanced with gravity, and said they would do it. ‘ Well,’ said
our friend, ‘ let us have a written agreement,’ and produced ink
and paper. 4 Now, what are the wages to put in ? 4 All the
wool!’ and on no other terms would they come, so he was going
away in disgust. But they called him back, and he, thinking
the men had relented, returned eagerly. The man then said,
4 Master, we want a cook, and if you will take the place we will
give you 15s. a-day.’”
Of course, follies will be committed by those who have
suddenly come into the possession of plenty of money, without
very hard work. But we have known even respectable people
who have been foolish in the same way. For instance, one
letter-writer exclaims, — 44 The judge’s servants are all gone;
he has put down his carriage, and his sons clean the knives and
shoes, —this, I assure you, is true, —and wheel their afflicted
father about in an invalid chair. In this state he goes to his
court of a day. The men from the gold fields are rolling in
gold, and so perfectly reckless of it, that the anecdotes told of
them are not only amusing but astonishing. One man put a£s
note between two pieces of bread and butter, and ate it up as a
c 2 29


sandwich. Another rolled two £5 notes into a small ball, and
swallowed it as a pill. Another went into a confectioner’s to eat
a few tarts, put down a £5 note, and would not accept the
change. They seem to have no idea of the value of money, and
take their losses and robberies as complacently as philosophers,
merely remarking ‘ Well, there is plenty more.” This was the
remark of a man at the bank when he had been robbed of a check
for £149, and which had been cashed before he called about it.
If the gold fields were limited in extent, and would only suffice
for a certain number of fortunate diggers, or if they were in their
nature exhaustible, I should say that the misfortunes of this
place would be limited only to time—that it would be, in fact,
only a question of time; but the fields are unlimited in extent
and inexhaustible in their treasures.”
The Geelong Advertiser writes as follows : —There is no mistake
about the matter. Mount Alexander is, without doubt, the
richest gold field in the world. There are at present upwards of
17,000 men digging on this same Mount Alexander, all of whom
are doing well. Many have realized a fortune in a few days.
A report is current to-day of a young man having got £BOOO
worth of gold in one day ! Many have given up business, shut
their shops, and gone to the diggings. Shoemakers, tailors,
wrights, blacksmiths, and all other trades are at a great loss for
men to carry on their business. The consequence is, that wages
are up, and everything rising in price. A pair of boots, which 1
could have bought three weeks ago for 18s., would now cost £2,
and almost everything else in like proportion. A friend of mine
last week offered a blacksmith £4 per week wages, and was
refused! The man has gone to the diggings. There are only
two men in the shop of the individual referred to, and he could
employ twenty. One firm could employ just now upwards of
fifty men, such as blacksmiths, millers, cartwrights, founders,
finishers, and labourers. Many other establishments in town are
equally destitute. Another firm has stopped this week for want
of hands, The foreman of their millers had £8 per week, with a
free house, fire, and water ; but he has resigned all and gone to
the diggings. Come here. We have plenty of room, plenty of
food, plenty of money ; and if you do not choose to dig for gold
in the bush, you can work for it in the town. We require men
of all trades —the only qualification is that they be able and
willing to work.”
Mr. Collyns writes home to his brother in England, as follows,
in a letter dated “Mount Alexander Diggings, January 18th,
1852.—The gold here is generally found in clay, clayey gravel,
and in interstices of slate, &c., at depths varying from the surface
to 25 feet. It is more generally diffused on this ground than it
ever was known in any other part of the world, hence persevering
and steady parties are sure to do well. It is found in patches,
or ‘pockets,’ as if is termed, and sometimes a party of, say three
30


or four, will obtain over 50 lbs. weight in a day. Having a
splendid pair of scales, I am in the constant practice of weighing
and subdividing gold for parties, and have had as much as 20 lbs.
or 30 lbs. brought by one party at a time. About a fortnight
since I was purchasing gold at £2 17s. the oz.; now the price is
down from the quantity thrown into the market, and I can get it
at 50s. per oz. —I have bought it as low as 455.
“ Provisions, &c., are at a high rate here—flour sd. per lb.;
ham and butter, 2s. 6d. per lb.; oats, 18s. per bushel; slop boots,
245. per pair; common pitchfork and shovel, 10s. each. These
rates are under those of several stores in the district.
The cattle-owners now want men to look after their sheep. The
price of labour is most enormous, a man is worth £1 per day.
“ The gold discovery is ruining the neighbouring colonies,
Adelaide, Van Diemen’s Land, &c., which are fast becoming
depopulated.
“At night the sight of the thousand fires around us is very
pretty, and the incessant firing of guns and pistols rather
astounding. Almost every man is armed, and I can assure you
the state of the society requires it, for crime in almost every
shape and form is being perpetrated almost daily.
“ You may suppose a gold field a most original sight; at a
distance it can only be compared to an immense army, encamped
in myriads of tents of all shapes, sizes, and colours, h rom where
I write are the main diggings in the country, they extend for
about ten miles, and about three weeks since contained from
12,000 to 15,000 persons; besides there are many other places
close at hand, and gold is still being found at several new places
throughout the colony. To give you an idea ot the business I
am carrying on, I may tell you I sent down 26 lbs. weight of gold,
and about £2OO in checks, per last escort, the proceeds ot one
week.”
Such is a picture of life at the Victoria Diggings, and a most
extraordinary and exciting one it certainly is !
HOW THE GOLD IS GOT.
Gold is found in two forms —in the matrix, that is, combined
with quartz rock, which is its native state ; and in alluvial de-
posits, that is, in the low lying grounds whither it has been
washed down from the rocks and mountains by the long continued
action of water. „ . ,
<£GL/IL/H Ui VYaiDl. . ,
The larger pieces of gold are usually got out of fissures in the
rock, consisting of quartz or clay slate ; there it lies in veins
sometimes of considerable thickness, out of which the gold is
taken pure. But when the operation of abstracting gold from
quartz is carried on upon a large scale, machinery, worked by




steam, is employed for the purpose of breaking the stone, by
which the separation of the precious metal is effected with extra-
ordinary rapidity and economy. The rough ore having a quartz
matrix, is first broken into small lumps, and is then thrown under
a set of vertical stampers, which are kept in motion by the rota-
tion of an axle bearing cams. The stampers work into a basin,
through which water runs. The metal sinks to the bottom, and
runs off into another basin placed below the upper one, and so
on to another,-—the ground quartz floating away, and leaving the
gold deposited in the several basins.
The most usual mode of gathering gold in Australia, is by the
second method —by washing the alluvial deposits. To dig for
alluvial gold, the payment of 30s. license to the government is
required, paid in advance ; and to obtain matrix gold, a written
permission from the commissioner of the district is requisite, and
security for the payment of a royalty of ten per cent, for gold
found on crown lands, and five per cent, for that found on private
lands, must be given. For it may be mentioned, that in all sales
of land in Australia, the government has invariably reserved its
royalty over the minerals, &c., contained therein.
The privilege of gathering the alluvial gold has also its limita-
tions, as regards space for digging, and water frontage for the
purpose of washing the alluvium, which is a point of great im-
portance. A water frontage of 9 feet is allowed to each party of
two persons ; 15 feet to each party of three persons ; 1(3 feet to
each party of four persons ; 21 feet to five persons ; and 24 feet
to six persons. Where there is no frontage to a stream, 20 feet
square is allotted to each party of three persons.
We now give a brief description of the process of washing the
diluvium for gold. A considerable quantity of earth is first dug
out of the ground, containing the gold deposit, and thrown up on
the bank. If the pit is a rich one, the digger will see and pick
out the larger pieces of gold, called nuggets, as he proceeds ;
these vary in size from a pea to a nut, large and beautiful speci-
mens being also occasionally found embedded in pieces of de-
tached quartz. When sufficient earth is raised, the whole of it is
conveyed to the creek side, there to be washed, that the earth may
be separated from the gold, which is then gathered.
The most ordinary machine used for washing, is called a
Cradle. It is six or eight feet long, open at the foot, and its head
has a coarse grate, or sieve fixed upon it. The cradle is placed
on rockers. Four men generally work this machine. One digs
the ground, if the earth is close at hand ; another carries the
material to the cradle, and empties it on the grate ; a third gives
a violent rocking motion to the machine; and the fourth dashes on
the water. If the earth has been dug at a distance, and brought
to the creeksido to be washed, then three men only are required
to work one cradle. The sieve at the head keeps the coarse
stones from entering the cradle ; the current of water gradually
33


softens and washes off the earthy matter, which is carried awa
by the foot of the machine, leaving the gold mixed with san
above the small elects which are nailed across the bottom of the
cradle at intervals, all the way down.
Sometimes the gold particles are so small, and so mixed up
with black sand, that it takes great pains to separate the metal.
This is mostly the case with the Californian gold. Thus mixed
up with sand, the deposit is drawn off, dried in the sun, and the
sand is afterwards separated by blowing off the sand, or, what is
the more usual process in California, by the process of amalga-
mation with quicksilver. This unites with the particles of gold,
rejecting the sand ; and then, by the application of a moderate
heat, the quicksilver is evaporated, leaving the pure gold behind ;
and the former metal, being distilled into a receiver, is collected
for use over again. But this process is too slow for the Austra-
lians. The gold is found in particles so large, as to render it a
waste of time for them to separate it by quicksilver. They take
only the larger particles, which are found in great quantities,
throwing away those ii’hich are mixed up with the sand, and can-
not easily be picked out. Thus, it may yet be worth while, when
the supply of gold falls off in Australia, (of which at present
there seems no probability), to submit the rejected earth to the
process of separation by quicksilver. The above fact, however,
we think, sufficiently proves the much greater richness of the
gold mines of Australia, when compared with those of California.
Indeed, the Californians are already emigrating to Australia in
considerable numbers, attracted by the far greater richness of the
soil in the latter place.
Besides the cradle washers, there are a large number of poorer
diggers, who wash with a tin dish only ; and often, by this simple
means, they are enabled to gather large quantities of gold ;
though, of course, they take.a much longer time to get through
the same quantity of earth.
HOW TO GET TO THE AUSTRALIAN
COLONIES AND GOLD DIGGINGS.
The only way is by sea-voyage. It is true the voyage is a
long one—l6,ooo miles; and it is rather expensive; but there
are cheap methods of getting there, as we shall show.
For those who can afford to pay for their passage, there are
numbers of vessels sailing weekly—from London, Liverpool, and
Southampton—for Sydney and Port Phillip. We see such
vessels daily advertised in the Times, as about to sail; and the
fares are usually on the following scale :
34


Cabin — Intermediate Steerage—with
with —with full allowance
Provisions. Provisions. of Provisions.
F 7o m Sy L d°ney on “ d .“"T?! } t 0 i6 ° " * l6t °* 3s }
From the ports in the Clyde \ £gs tQ __ £ls _ £lO 1-2 6
to Sydney i
From London to Victoria •.. ..£42 to £BO •. £2l to £35 .. £l5 to £2O
Liverpool to Victoria.... £45 .. £l5 to £26 .. £lO to £l5
the Clyde to Victoria , ,£35 to £4O .. £l5 •• £lO 12 0
These terms are now being lowered, in consequence of the
large emigration trade now going forward, and the competition
among shipowners for freights. Children from Ito 7 years, are
usually carried at one-third fare ; from 7 to 14, at one-halt tare ;
infants going free. Most of these vessels carry experienced
surgeons, and they are inspected by the government emigration
agents before sailing, in order that their sea-worthiness may be
ascertained, that they have on board a sufficient supply of pro-
visions, water, medicines, &c., and that they sail with proper
punctuality.
Outfit. —The following is a list of the principal articles of
outfit recommended for families; but it cannot be too strongly
impressed as a general rule, that the more abundant the stock ot
clothing each person can afford to take, the better for their health
and comfort during the voyage.
For Males. —18 striped shirts, 2 blue or red woollen shirts, 6
pairs of worsted half-hose, 12 pairs of cotton socks, 1 pair "Strong
fustian trowsers, 3 pairs strong canvass ditto, 1 fustian or beaver-
teen jacket and waistcoat, 1 pilot coat, —cloth coat, waistcoat, and
trowsers, —Scotch cap or thrasher’s hat, 1 pair strong boots, 1
ditto shoes, 6 handkerchiefs, 6 towels.
For Females— 3 cotton dresses, 2 bonnets, warm cloak and a
shawl, 12 calico chemises, 4 petticoats, 2 flannel petticoats, 1 pair
of stays, 12 pair cotton stockings, 4 pair black worsted stockings,
1 pair boots, 2 pair shoes, 6 pocket handkerchiefs, 4 net^ handker-
chiefs for the neck, 6 caps, 4 night caps, 4 sleeping jackets, 6
towels. ...
There will also be required—Flock mattress and bolster, 1
pair of blankets, 2 quilts, 6 pair cotton sheets, 2 table cloths, 6
lbs. yellow soap, 4 lbs. marine soap, metal wash-hand basin, comb
and brush, 2 shoe brushes, 2 pots blacking, knife and fork, deep
tin plates and pint tin mug, tapes, needles, cottons, and clothes
bag, and a chest (two feet long, twenty-two inches broad, and
sixteen inches deep).
For single persons the most limited outfit which will be al-
lowed is that admitted by the Emigration Commissioners, viz.: —•
For Males. —6 shirts, 6 pair stockings, 2 pair shoes, 2 complete
suits of exterior clothing, one to be warmly lined —with felt hat.
35


For Females. —6 Chemises, 2 flannel petticoats, 6 pair stockings,
2 pair shoes, 2 gowns.
Together with Mattress and Bolster, 2 pair sheets, towels, 1
pair of blankets, 1 quilt, comb and brush, shoe-brushes, knife,
fork, deep tin plate, pint tin mug, large and small spoon, 4 lbs.
of marine soap, tin. wash-hand basin, clothes bag, and chest.
First Class Passengers do not require bedding or utensils
during the voyage, but are recommended to take with them a
supply for use in the colony.
For Free Passage, &c., see Chap. 19 of the Emigrants
Guide to Australia, where a full description of the Colonies of
Australia, the prices of land, wages of labour, with accounts of
the climate, national wealth, farming productions, and mode of
living in those colonies, may also be found, to which the reader’s
attention is respectfully invited.
The Emigrant’s Guide has been prepared with much care, and
the information which it contains, has been brought down to the
most recent date.


Emigrant's iuik tn Inatralin
CHAPTER I.
Emigration to Australia.
Introduction-Extent of Australia. —Its distance front England. —
Divisions Appearance Climate and Seasons.—Soil and Pro-
ductions. —Grazing capabilities. —Mineral productions.—Popu-
lation.
The question of Emigration is daily engrossing a larger share
of public notice ; and information on the subject is eagerly sought
for. The Australian colonies have recently excited much interest
and inquiry. Their beautiful climate; their pastoral, agricultural,
and mineral wealth : the extraordinary prosperity which they
have already experienced ; and the great demand for labour
(even though very highly remunerated,) which exists throughout
them ; have together contributed to direct the attention of intend-
ing Emigrants to those colonies, during the last few years.
It is important that information on this subject should be
placed within the reach of all, that all may have the means of
judging and determining for themselves, whether emigration is
likely to bo of advantage to them, and to those dependent on
them. With the view of furnishing such information, we now
present to the public the results of extensive observation and
inquiry in this field, in a form so cheap as to be within the reach
of all classes of inquirers. And in the first place we shall give
a brief description of the colonies in question, commencing with
a general view of the Australian continent; as the remarks with
respect to climate, productions, &c., apply alike to all the colonies
in that quarter.
Australia.
Extent. —This immense island, which has been called £ ‘the fifth
quarter of the world,” is nearly 3000 miles from east to west,
and about 2000 miles from north to south. It contains a super-
ficial area of 3,000,000 of square miles; and so far as it has
been yet explored, has been found, throughout a large extent of
its surface, available for the production of human food, and for
the conveniences and luxuries of life.
Distance from England. —This great island continent lies to the
south-east of Asia; distant from England at different points as
follows :


Sydney (New South Wales)... 15,350 miles ... 120 days voyage.
Adelaide (South Australia) .. 10,450 „ ... 126 „
Port Philip, or Australia Felix, which is situated between
those two colonies, is about 16,000 miles, or about 123 days’ voy-
age from this country. Some sailing vessels have, however, per-
formed the voyage in 90 days ; and when regular steamers are put
on, it will occupy still less time, —probably not more than 60 days
on an average. .......
Divisions— The continent of Australia has been divided into
three principal divisions —Eastern Australia, or New South
Wales, on the east; Australia Felix, or Victoria, to the south of
New South Wales ; Western Australia, or the Swan River Set-
tlement, on the west; and South Australia, of which Adelaide is
the chief town, lying between Western Australia and Victoria,
to the south. The northern and north-western portions of the
island, called New Holland, are haunted by aboriginal tribes of
a very low order of civilization, but who give the settlers very little
trouble, unless they are wantonly injured or meddled with.
Appearance of Australia— The appearance of this great country
near the coast is not very inviting, but greatly improves as yon
proceed inland. Occasional forests present themselves, but no-
thing like the dense gloomy forests of Canada and the States. Tho
country is diversified by occasional hill and dale, sometimes ex-
panding into immense plains like the steppes of Asia, sometimes
resembling an English park, sprinkled here and there with clumps
of trees. “ Picture to yourselves,” says a recent writer,* “in the
midst of the ocean, surrounded with precipitous rocks, and nearly
opposite to England, on the globe, a vast forest diversified with
mountains and valleys ; innumerable plains without a tree ; rivers,
some of them consisting only of a chain of ponds ; others of them,
after running for hundreds of miles through extensive tracts ot
fertile soil, rapidly disappearing in the midst of arid sand, while
others of them roll their majestic streams for a thousand miles,
until they mingle their waters with the ocean; here and there, like
an oasis in the wilderness, a solitary patch of cleared land, with a
hut, rudely constructed of slabs and bark, in the rear ; a tribe of
naked blacks, carrying their weapons of war, roaming across the
distant plains ; large tracts of open forest-land, resembling a gen-
tleman’s domain in England, but occupied only by the kangaroo
and the emu, which seem to claim and enjoy hereditary possession ;
lofty ranges of hill, covered with the most beautiful verdure to
their very summits; extensive lagoons, darkened with legions of
wild ducks and teal, the property of any man who may choose to
shoot them; innumerable birds of the most beautiful pannage,
chirping in every branch around you ; flowers of every hue and
shade of colour strewing your path wherever you go : above you
an Italian sky, without a cloud or speck, and the air you inhale
pure and balmy ; a fearful suspense pervading the forest around
* The Rev. I). Mackenzie's Ten Years' Practical Experience in Australia.


vo«, and vividly impressing upon your mind the idea of solitude
and desolation— that is Australia.”
Such is a graphic sketch of this wonderful new land, now wait-
ing to be peopled, and said to be quite competent to afford the
means of ample subsistence for upwards of one hundred millions
of people.
Climate and Seasons. —The climate of Australia* is one of the
finest in the world, equal to that of Italy or Spain. It is both
warmer in summer and milder in winter, than in England. The
temperature is remarkably uniform, and is not liable to those sud-
den changes which are so deleterious to health in this country.
Hence the rarity of diseases of the lungs in Australia, and the
great benefit which emigrants from England so afflicted, experi-
ence on settling there. For eight months in the year the weather
is mild and unbroken —the winter season is particularly delightful.
From March till November the sky is seldom clouded ; day after
day, for weeks together, the weather is fair and genial— though
at other times refreshing showers are not unfrequent. At Sydney,
taking the whole year round, there are about 210 days of fine
weather, to about 125 of rain.
Occupying a position on the earth the opposite from our own,
the seasons are there reversed as compared with ours. The Aus-
tralian winter is in May, June, and July, and its summer in
November, December, and January. The summer heat is seldom
oppressive, and at Sydney frost and snow are almost unknown.
The average temperature of the coldest month (July) is 53°, and
of the warmest months (January and February) is 75°.
The longest day is from 5 a. m. to 7 p. m., or fourteen hours ;
and the shortest day from 7a.m.to sp. m., or ten hours. The
longest day is on the 22nd December, and the shortest on the 21 st
June; or, as nearly as possible, the very opposite of the order of
seasons at this side of the world.
Soil and Productions. —The soil of Australia is generally light,
and better adapted for grazing than for agricultural purposes.
In some parts of the country, however, there are immense tracts
of rich and fertile land, capable of yielding, for several years in
succession, without any manure, from 30 to 40 bushels of wheat,
or from 50 to 60 bushels of maize, per acre. As much as 80
bushels of maize have been repeatedly raised per acre. F rom four
to five tons of potatoes per acre are considered an average crop.
Two crops per annum may be obtained from the same ground.
Ten tons of onions per acre have been raised, and after the onions
have been gathered, a crop of 50 or 60 bushels of maize or Indian
corn, have been got off the same ground in the course of the year.
Barley grows well, and oats are cultivated, but the soil'is
rather too warm for this grain. “In our gardens,” says Mr.
Mackenzie, “ we have, besides several others, the following fruits
and vegetablespears, plums, cherries, apricots, peaches, grapes,
nectarines, figs, oranges, and lemons; also carrots, parsnips, tur-
-3.0


nips, cauliflowers, asparagus, broccoli, onions, cabbages, potatoes,
pumpkins, rock and water melons, cucumbers, vegetable marrow,
and peas. We have the green peas during the whole winter. In
the Sydney market, fruit and vegetables are remarkably cheap.
Grapes are sold at 2d. per lb., and large ripe peaches at Id. per
dozen. But except those whose business or inclination confines
them to the heart of a town, no man in the colony need be without
a garden, where he may have abundance of all the above-named
productions growing at his door. It has now been clearly ascer-
tained that all tropical and European fruits grow to perfection in
one part or another of the Australian colonies.”
The vine grows remarkably well in Australia, and we have no
doubt but before long it will become a great wine exporting
country. In 1845,55,000 gallons of wine were produced. There
were in that year, in the New South Wales district, 611 acres of
vines, and their produce was immense. The olive and the hop
also flourish abundantly ; and tobacco yields a good crop of excel-
lent quality.
Some districts are peculiarly adapted for the growth of wheat,
which is of the finest quality, and brings the highest price in the
English markets. The Victoria colony already produces and ex-
ports largely of this article. Upwards of a million bushels of
wheat are gathered in New South Wales annually.
Grazing Capabilities. —Other parts of Australia, perhaps by far
the larger portion of it, are highly adapted for pastoral purposes,
and it bids fair before long to become the greatest grazing country
in the world. It already produces and exports more than twenty
millions of pounds weight of wool annually ; the Sydney wools
fetching from Is. Bd. to 2s. 6d. per lb. in the London market. The
value thus exported in 1846 was £1,280,000.
Immense quantities of cattle are every year boiled down for the
mere sake of the tallow. Several hundred thousand sheep are
thus destroyed annually, their flesh being allowed to rot, no suffi-
cient population existing there to eat it.
There arc positively no limits to the cattle breeding of Australia
—stock of all kinds, horned cattle, sheep, horses, increasing at an
immense rate. It is already the great sheep-farm of England—
its wools keeping up the supply in the home-market. It also
breeds and exports horses largely to India for the uses of our
cavalry there. About 37,000 cattle on an average, are slaughtered
per week all the year round; most of the carcasses going to waste.
The tallow obtained in 1845 was 51,000 cwts.; lard, 26,000 lbs.
The live stock of Australia already amounts to about 2,000,000 of
horned cattle, 12,000,000 of sheep, and 150,000 horses.
Minerals. —The soil is rich in mineral products of all kinds —
copper, lead, iron, coal, lime, &c. A more particular notice of
this description of the wealth of the country, will be given in our
description of the colony of South Australia, which is peculiarly
rich in mines and minerals.


Australian Colonies, their Population , Ac. —The whole of the
continent of Australia belongs to England by discovery, acquisi -
tion, and settlement. The parts of it which have been yet colo-
nized, are comparatively insignificant, consisting only of strips of
land along the coast, each of which, however, is as large as all
Great Britain and Ireland in extent. New South Wales and Port
Philip, at the south-east extremity,—Swan River, or Western
Australia, on the extreme west, —and South Australia, situated
between these, on the south, are the chief points of settlement.
Port Essington, on the northern coast, is as yet merely a maratime
station not yet brought within the effects of colonization, but likely
to become a place of considerable importance. The population of
the Australian colonies is at present somewhat as follows ;
In New South Wales—in 1847 ... 205,000 inhabitants.
In Victoria —in 1847 ... 82,800 „
In South Australia... —in 1847 ... 35,000 „
The total population of Australia at present, allowing for the
recent influx of emigrants, will not exceed 450,000.
We shall now give a brief description of each of these Colonies
in detail.
CHAPTER 11.
New South Wales.
Description of the Colony. — History.—Agricultural and Grazing
wealth.—Minerals. —Climate and Seasons. —Description of the
principal Counties and Towns. — Cumberland. —Desmption of
Sydney. Paramatta. Windsor. — Liverpool. — Maitland —
Camden County—Argyll and Westmoreland Counties. —Cook
County.—Bathurst County. — Roxburgh, Philip, Hunter, and
Northumberland Counties. —Roads in New South Wales.
The colony of New South Wales is situated on the eastern side
of the Australian continent (for we can scarcely with propriety call
so immense an extent of territory an island), and stretches about
860 miles along the coast, reaching some two or three hundred
miles inland. It contains an area of 50,000 square miles.
The general aspect of the colony is a bold sea-coast for five or
six miles inland, then ridges of sandstone, and an undulating
country and alluvial plains for 30, 40, and 50 miles; and then
a lofty range of the “ Blue Mountains” from 3,000 to 4,000 feet
above the sea. There are good roads in every direction. Some
of the rivers are navigable.—the Hawkesbury is so for 140 miles
by vessels of 100 tons burthen. Others, as the Paramatta, the
Hunter, the Brisbane, and Hastings rivers, are navigable for less
distances. The aspect of the country, between the Blue Moun-
tains and the sea, is in some parts very beautiful. Sydney, the
d 2 41


chief town, is situated in Cumberland county, which in point of
fertility is one of the least attractive in the colony. But, five or
six miles inland, the soil improves, and begins to be dotted with
tall and stately trees, which soon again thicken into a dense and
magnificent forest. Advancing further inwards, another change
takes place. The forest is cleared, and a new and open country,
fertile and picturesque, is reached. Here there is an endless
diversity of hill and dale, covered with luxuriant vegetation,—now
extensive plains, resembling the finest parks in England, inter-
spersed with occasional clumps of magnificent trees, just enough
to add beauty to the land without encumbering it. Such is the
favourite region of the corn-growers and sheep-farmers of the
colony—a region of immense extent, and only here and there
partially occupied. In the interior, large plains or savannahs
occur, belted with tall trees, copses, and occasionally small skirts
of open forest. On the level, although undulating tracts, the
grass grows with great luxuriance—so much so, that if it has not
been eaten oif by the end of summer it becomes necessary to burn
it, when the locality assumes a dark and dreary appearance, but
soon after the first rains have fallen, the ground becomes covered
with a rich carpet of green, presenting to the flocks and herds, as
it were, a new existence.
In 1788, the first settlement of Europeans was made in New
South Wales. For some time it was the place of banishment of
condemned felons —being then regarded as a desert on the con-
fines of creation, and shut out from the civilized world. Supplies
of provisions were sent for the support of the colonists, for at first
the place was not considered capable of yielding the indispensable
necessaries of life.
In 1801, the population of the colony amounted to about 8,000,
the chief part felons. About this time, however, it was discovered
that the country was eminently adapted for sheep-grazing and the
growth of wool; free settlers resorted to the colony, and it
assumed a flourishing aspect. Slow at first, the progress of this,
as well as of the other neighbouring colonies, was retarded by
unforeseen circumstances, by want of experience, and by commer-
cial convulsions, which at times seemed to peril its very existence.
But having attained a certain degree of maturity, the rate of
progress became accelerated, and the successive discoveries of
large tracts of good land having demonstrated the capabilities of
the country, the rate of progress has rapidly increased. The
population of the colony is now about 205,000; that of the
capital, Sydney, was 45,190 in 1846. The revenue is about
£400,000 a year; the imports in 1845 were £1,233,854, and the
exports £1,555,936. In 1846, the Colony exported 19,000,000
pounds weight of wool, in value £1,280,000. Indeed, one-third
of the entire wool now imported into England, comes from
Australia. In 1846, there were in the Sydney district, alone no
fewer than 4,409,504 sheep ; also large quantities of cattle of other
42


kinds. In 1845, the extent of land under crop in the colony was
163,331 acres. The property annually created in New South
Wales is estimated at £6,000,000 a-year; and the property
moveable and immovable is valued at not less than £50,000,000
sterling.
Minerals also abound in New South Wales, though South
Australia, as we shall afterwards see, bids fair to become the
great mining colony of the South. Coal, iron, lime, and granite
abound in New South Wales. An extensive coal-field has
already been worked to great advantage to the south of Hunter’s
river; and in almost every district where the attempt has been
made, strata of coal have been found. Seams are visible in the
face of the cliffs on the shore in many places, extending for miles
in length. Copper is also found in this colony, but not in great
quantities. Its greatest mineral wealth as yet is in coal, the
handmaid of steam and qf all manufacturing production.
As we have already observed, the climate of this colony is
remarkably fine. The air is pure, balmy, and bracing. The
atmosphere, owing to its great capability for the absorption of
moisture, is generally dry, so much so, that in the upper parts of
the colony the absence of rain has sometimes given rise to com-
plaints of drought.
The colony is, for these reasons, highly salubrious, endemic
diseases being unknown. Natives born of European parents
improve in strength and vigour; and settlers, who have brought
with them from Europe diseases of old standing, often become
quite cured in a short time. Instances of persons attaining a
very old age are numerous. The climate is equally healthy for
animals, as is proved by the immense rapidity of their increase.
Sleeping in the open air is often practised by the colonists with
impunity. Bullock drivers and carriers sleep in the open air for
weeks together, in winter as well as summer, without the
slightest bad effects.
Count Strzelecki, in his physical description of the colony,
remarks that, as regards temperature, the range and fluctuations
of the thermometer are particularly favourable, —that Port Mac-
quarie has the summer of Florence, Barcelona, Rome, and
Naples, with the winter of Funchal, and Benares; and that Port
Jackson has the summer of Avignon and Constantinople, and the
winter of Cairo or the Cape of Good Hope. Indeed, though
situated in the temperate zone, the colony of New South Wales
can scarcely be said to have any winters at all. In Sydney snow
and frost are almost unknown. Nor is the summer’s heat at all
oppressive. Occasionally, severe droughts have occurred; but
fortunately these visitations are rare, and when they do occur,
are confined to particular localities. Victoria is remarkably free
from them.
Counties and Towns of New South Wales.
The settled parts of New South Wales extend along the coast
43


Bligh
Brisbane
.. Scone
Camden ....
... Wollongong
,, ....
.. Berrima
Cook
chiefly in the neighbourhood of Sydney and Maitland, which are
the principal towns in the colony. Beyond this sea-bound belt
lies a vast, and for the most part, undiscovered tract of land in
the interior, in a state of nature, the property of the crown. On
the outskirts of the settled districts, the land is occupied by
sheep-farmers and squatters on the soil, who raise the flocks and
herds, in which so much of the wealth of the colony consists.
Besides the rural districts which lie in the interior, the located
parts of New South Wales, within which land is disposed of by
the crown, consist of the following twenty-one counties: —
Counties. Chief Towns.
Argyll Goulburn
„ Bangonia
Bathurst ... Bathurst
Cumberland . Sydney
„ Paramatta
„ Liverpool
„ Campbeltown
„ Appin
„ Windsor
~ Richmond
Northumber-
Counties. Chief Towns.
Cumberland. Pitt Town
Durham Patterson
„ Muswellbrook
Georgiana...
Gloucester... Raymond Terrace
Hunter Murrarundi
King
Macquarie... Macquarie
Murray Queenbeyan
„ Yass
Northumber
land Maitland, East
„ Maitland, West
„ Newcastle
„ Singleton
St. Vincent.
land Gosford
Philip
Roxburgh... Kelso
Stanley
Wellington. Wellington
Westmoreland, Molong.
Besides these counties, there are the six counties of Ward,
Rous, Buckland, Buccleuch, Wallace, and Wellesley, which are
to be immediately proclaimed, if not proclaimed already; five
other counties, those of Vernon, Hawes, Parry, Cowley, and
Beresford, that were expected to be ready for proclamation by
the end of 1848; and the four counties of Richmond, Clarence,
Raleigh, and Dudley, lying along the sea-board north of Mac-
quarie county, which were to be provisionally proclaimed in the
course also of 1848.
The central county on the coast is Cumberland, which, in point
of size is one of the smallest, and in fertility and general
features, one of the least attractive of all the counties. It is
however, one of the most important, from its containing the
principal towns in the colony, amongst others Sydney, the
capital. On its coast is also situated Botany Bay, which has so
long enjoyed an infamous reputation in this country, from its
having been the first point at which penal settlements were
formed. The soil in the neighbourhood of Sydney is poor and


EMIGRANT'S GUIDE TO AUST
sandy, and is at present chiefly laid out in market-gardens, for
which purpose it answers pretty well.
Sydney is situated about seven miles from the sea, upon the
shores of Port Jackson, one of the most magnificent estuaries
in the world, extending fifteen miles inwards, and its shores now
dotted all round with thriving towns. Sydney is a sort of Liver-
pool or New Orleans, the centre of all the traffic, and the shipping
port for the produce of the rich country in the interior. The city
is built upon two necks of land, with a valley between called
Sydney Cove, possessing a depth of water which enables vessels
of the largest burthen to come close to the land, hrom the
water, the streets rise in terraces, and the view from the upper
houses are extremely fine. The quays are crowded with shipping,
and have an appearance of great bustle and traffic. The shipping
trade of Sydney is extensive. In twenty years, from 1822 to
1842, 219 vessels of a total tonnage of 11,095 tons, were built in
the colony ; or an average of ten vessels yearly, of 52 tons each.
Large vessels from England are always constantly in the port,
engaged in the large export and import trade of the colony. In
1846, it was estimated that wool to the value of upwards of
£1,200,000, was exported from this colony. The streets of Sydney
almost all run at right angles; the principal are lined with
substantial houses of brick and stone,— though some of the older
buildings are of wood, which material is, however, now disused.
Many of the shops and stores are of noble dimensions, and remind
one of the metropolitan buildings of England. The large propor-
tion of splendid spirit shops, or “gin-palaces,” is a matter of
surprise to the stranger. In some of the houses, wood is used
for fuel, in others coal, for coal is abundant and cheap. This
city, the site of which thirty years ago was a barren waste, now
contains a population of above 50,000 persons ; and it has all the
conveniences and luxuries of a British town of the same extent—
regular and handsome markets, public seminaries, banks, extensive
warehouses, hotels, distilleries, breweries, steam-engines, stage-
coaches to different parts of the colony, numerous newspapers,
monthly magazines, and annuals, &c. _ .
General trade, mercantile and shipping business, mechanical
industry and such like, occupy the greater part of the population.
It is the great landing port of the colony; immigrants there
obtaining all the best information as to the proper fields in Aus-
tralia for their industry, and the investment of their capital. From
this port, there are water communications with Victoria, South-
Australia, Western Australia, and Van Diemen’s Land, by means
of steam and sailing vessels. It is, therefore, a good point of des-
tination, perhaps the best, for the intending settler from this
country. The best information is there to be obtained from the
daily and weekly papers, as well as from captains of ships,
squatters, and settlers from all parts of the interior.
Paramatta, in the same county, eighteen miles from Sydney, is
45


a very beautiful and improving place. It is situated at the head
of the Port Jackson estuary—lying in a spacious hollow covered
with the richest verdure, and surrounded by hills of a moderate
height. The streets are built chiefly of white free stone, they are
regularly laid out, and are occupied by a busy and thriving popu-
lation, Here also, are churches, seminaries, hotels, taverns, and
all the other appendages of a large provincial town. Many of the
private houses are of elegant construction, and have parks and
gardens attached, which give an air of beauty and healthfulness
to the place. Stage-coaches and steam-boats ply daily between
the capital and this place. The sail from Sydney to Paramatta
is one of great loveliness—nothing can surpass the scenery of the
shore as you pass along, the sea generally as smooth as glass, or
but gently rippled by a light breeze ; promontories covered with
wood to the water’s edge stretching into the sea, and forming an
innumerable succession of beautiful little bays and inlets.
About twenty-one miles further inland, is Windsor, in the same
county. The situation of Windsor resembles Paramatta. It is
situated on the Hawkesbury river, and is a place of much import-
ance in the district. The lands in the neighbourhood are ex-
tremely rich and fertile, bearing heavy crops of grain. The chief
disadvantage of the place, is its being liable to inundations from
the Hawkesbury river at particular seasons, which have occasion-
ally done great damage. The Hawkesbury is navigable for ships
of about 100 tons burden.
Next to Paramatta and Windsor, Liverpool ranks in import-
ance. It lies about eighteen or twenty miles from Sydney in a
south-west direction ; it is situated on the banks of George’s
river, which discharges itself into Botany Bay, and is navigable
up to Liverpool for vessels of 50 tons burden. The soil in the
neighbourhood is of an indifferent quality, but the place is rising
into importance, in consequence of its position between Sydney
and the central districts of Airds, Appin, Bunbury Curran, Cab-
ramatta, Bringelly, the Cowpastures, Illawarra, Five Islands, and
the neighbouring country. Stage-coaches ply regularly between
this town and Sydney.
Maitland, which lies well to the northward of Cumberland
county, promises shortly to be the town next in importance to
Sydney, from its situation at the head of the navigation of Hun-
ter’s river, and in the centre of the most extensive agricultural
and grazing district in the colony. Steamers are constantly ply-
ing from Sydney to this place ; and there is also easy communi-
cation over land, though the distance is great. It is already the
third town in the colony in point of population, though it has only
sprung into existence the last few years.
Camden county lies on the sea-board, to the south of Cumber-
land county. It is an extensive district, containing 2000 square
miles—a large portion of which consists of fertile land. The
Cowpastures, consisting of 60,000 acres of land, are famous for
46


their grazing stock. The Illawarra district, extremely picturesque
and beautiful, forms also a highly fertile portion of the same
county.
Argyll county is inland, lying to the westward ot Camden.
Westmoreland county lies to the north of Argyll, and west of
Cumberland. These counties are diversified by swelling hills,
witli irregular plains between, watered by the branches ot the
Hawkesbury and Shoalhaven rivers. The plains are occasion-
ally of great extent; for instance Goulburn plains contain .35,000
acres of land without a single tree ; and in Eden forest they are in
clumps resembling a baronial park, 'this latter district bears a
remarkable resemblance in its natural state, to the once ploughed
lea-land of our own country. The furrow and the ridge seem, by
some mysterious process, to have been as skilfully effected as if
done by the most accomplished prize ploughman. In Major Mit-
chell’s opinion they have been produced by the agency of water
at some remote period, as those ridges always appear on gentle
declivities where there is a tenacious sub-soil and a loose super-
strata. The water, by flowing down, and then settling for a time,
would, it is supposed, produce something like the present appear-
ance. Westmoreland contains part of the Blue Monntain range,
which towers from 3000 to 4000 feet above the level of the
ocean.
Cook county lies westward of Cumberland and Westmoreland.
It is chiefly table land, lying among the Blue Mountains, and
abounding in highly picturesque scenery. The vale of Clwdd
runs along the foot of mountains covered with dense forests the
rich soil being watered by the Fish and Clarence rivers, on their
course to the Macquarie.
Further west again, lies the magnificent county of Bathurst,
where the first gold in Australia was discovered, about 120 miles
west of Sydney. The Bathurst plains which slope downwards
from the Blue Mountains towards the interior, include about
60,000 acres of the richest soil in Australia. The soil consists
generally of broken table lands, forming extensive treeless downs.
The agricultural resources of this county are immense, its pas-
turage is ot the richest kind for fine-woolled sheep, and its air is
remarkably pure and salubrious. For a person of moderate
capital, perhaps no part of the colony offers greater advantages
than the plains of Bathurst. .
According to the last official advices (August, 1851) the prin-
cipal gold stations in New South Wales were at Ophir, on the
Summer Hill Creek, to the westward of the town of Bathurst, and
about 150 miles from Sydney, and on the river Turon in the Wel-
lington district. In Victoria the stations were at Buninyong,
where the metal is found imbedded in compact quartz; at “ Clune s
diggings,” where it is found in an alluvium composed in a great
measure of decomposed quartz ; and at “ Deep Creek ” (10 miles
from Melbourne), where it is found in contact with a slaty rock.
47


Fresh discoveries, however, were constantly taking place, and the
Government Mineralogical Surveyor of New South Wales re-
ported on the 9th June, that gold might be sought for with profit
at the following places in that colony, viz:—
The great bar in the river Macquarie at Wallgumballa, about
three miles below the junction of the Turon river:
The bars at the junction of the Turon with the Macquarie
river:
The several bars on the Turon for eight miles up, especially the
first three from the junction:
On the Macquarie at Neeli (Nelly’s Creek), and the bars above
and below, three or four miles either way.
Roxburgh county lies to the north of Bathurst, and Wellington
county rather more to the north-west. The district called Wel-
lington valley, in the latter county, is a fertile tract of land, well
adapted for purposes of grazing and agriculture. Gold also is
found here in considerable quantities.
Philip county lies east of Wellington and north of Roxburgh
county, and Bligh and Brisbane to the north-west of all these —
they are as yet but thinly peopled, though they contain much good
grazing land. Hunter and Northumberland counties, in the latter
of which is situated the thriving town of Maitland, to which we
have already referred, are both fast rising into importance and
opulence. They lie between the coast and the counties of Bligh
and Brisbane, and are composed chiefly of fertile undulating plains,
watered by line rivers, the principal of which are Hunter's, Goul-
burn, and Paterson rivers. Newcastle is the capital of the county,
situated at the mouth of the Hunter river, and from the excellent
coal mines in its neighbourhood, as well as the gold discovered at
the head of the river, is rising into a place of much importance.
There is regular steam communication between Sydney and the
towns of Newcastle and Maitland.
There are other counties besides the above, more remote from
the capital, but gradually being reclaimed for purposes of grazing
and agriculture.
The Great Roads of the Colony. —Mr. Mackenzie* describes the
principal roads traversing the colony of New South Wales. There
are three great roads leading from Sydney into the remotest parts
of the interior. One of these main roads runs nearly due north,
and parallel with the shore of the Pacific, from Sydney to the
river Hawkesbury, which is crossed by means of a punt, and then
the road winds through gulleys and over ranges, along the valley
of the Wollombi, into the town of Maitland, on the river Hunter.
This road has been much less used since steamers have begun to
ply regularly between Sydney and Maitland.
The second great road leading from Sydney, runs nearly in a
westerly direction, goes through Paramatta, passes the town of
Penrith, where the Hawkesbury river is crossed by means of a
* Ten Years in Australia, p. 24 ct seq.


punt; thence the road leads for many miles up, through a sandy,
miserable scrub, to the top of Mount York, which forms a part of
the immense Blue Mountains, at a distance of about sixty miles
from the coast. Viewed from the summit of Mount York, the
colony has a very imposing aspect. Here and there are to be seen
a few cleared spots amidst an interminable forest. Far in the
east, is the Pacific Ocean ; in every other direction is an endless
variety of hill and dale, of deep gulleys, inaccessible ravines, per-
pendicular rocks, and towering mountains covered with trees and
green grass and flowers, to their very summits; all displaying
nature in her wildest forms. From Mount York, the road passes
through the town of Hartley, consisting only of a few scattered
houses, situated in a beautiful valley, called the vale of Clwyd.
From this place to Bathurst, nothing of any interest is to be seen,
except Sir Thomas Mitchell’s splendid road, made at enormous
expense, across mountains, through rocks, and over gulleys - a
magnificent undertaking. From Bathurst the road leads to Wel-
lington valley, which is also on the Macquarie river. This valley
is eminently beautiful: it consists of a large plain, extremely
fertile, surrounded by high hills. Here are two missionaries
labouring among the Aborigines ; and here is situated the most
distant post-office to the west in this colony.
The third ercat road is that which leads in a south-westerly
direction to Victoria. On all this road, measuring upwards of six
hundred miles, there is little to be seen but gum trees and public-
houses. It passes through the towns of Liverpool, Campbeltown,
Berrima, Goulburn, and Yass. From Yass to Melbourne* the
road lies through the hush, out of the region of civilization. Four
great rivers are crossed between Sydney and Melbourne; the
Murrumbigee, 270 miles from Sydney, where the crossing is at
the town of Gundagai: the Hume river, 130 miles further on,
crossing at the thriving town of Albury: the Ovens river, 50 miles
further; and lastly the Goulburn river, 90 miles beyond the Ovens,
and within 65 miles of Melbourne. All these rivers abound in
fish.
CHAPTER 111.
The Bush.
Description of the Bush.—Morals of the Bash. — Hospitality.—Life
lit, the Bush.—Bush Sports.—Poverty unknown in the Bush.
Beyond the settled districts, in which the chief part of the good
land available for cultivation is already sold and occupied, or is
the property of the large grantees, who, previous to 1844, acquired
vast tracts of crown land by free grant, —beyond these districts,
lids the bush, or wild and unreclaimed country, in which the sheep
and cattle farmers are mere squatters on the soil. The cattle es-
e 49


tablishments in the bush are sometimes of immense extent, the
sheep alone of one farmer occasionally amounting to from 20,000
to 30,000. The bush land is of boundless extent, as yet unsur-
veyed and a great part undiscovered, —only the fringes of it,
around the settled districts, being occupied by the sheep farmers
and their scattered establishments. These wild lands are the
property of the crown, and the nearest parts of them are divided
into districts, under the control of Crown Commissioners, each of
these having under his Government a district almost as large as
Yorkshire and Lancashire.
This bush land is a very wild country, and the people are
almost as wild as the districts they occupy. Comparatively little
is known about it—Sidney describes it as a land in which there
are “no roads, no villages, no churches, little law, and less gos-
pel.” * And yet he regards these rude squatters as “ the heart
and soul of the prosperity of the colony,” for it is the immense
flocks which they rear that causes so steady a flow of wealth into
Australia. There is unfortunately much vice abounding among
the bush population—anything but that pastoral virtue and sim-
plicity which one might anticipate from a population of shepherds
and cattle-tenders. There is a frightful want of females among
them ; and when men are bereft of the society of women, they are
soon apt to degenerate into a state very nearly approaching to
barbarism. Drunkenness is one of the worst vices of the bush,
but there are others of a worse hue, which dare scarcely be alluded
to in print. There is, however, a brighter side of bush life. The
Bushmen are fond of reading, and of being read to, by their hut
fires at night; and kindly influences thus steal in upon them
unawares. “ The Australian Stockman,” says Sidney, “ though
of rude appearance and coarse manners, bearded like a pard, full
of strange oaths, has the germ of many sterling virtues, which
only need cultivation to ripen into all that we admire in our old
Saxon yeomanry. He is hospitable as the Indian or Highlander
of romance; frugal and industrious, courageous and untiring,
jealous of his master’s rights and name, and needs but oppor-
tunity and example to cast aside the barbarous skin he wears.”
These Bushmen are altogether engaged in tending and managing
the extensive cattle droves of the interior, in the neighbourhood
of their masters’ stations. The cattle by ranging abroad, be-
come wild and sometimes very unmanageable, so that it requires
constant care and attention on the part of the shepherd to keep the
flocks together. The Bushmen live out of doors for several months
in the year, often sleeping in the open air, and without injury,—
the climate being so peculiarly dry and salubrious, even by night
and in the winter season. Their life is diversified with hunting
and fishing. Horses abound in the bush, each shepherd being
provided with one. The kangaroo and emu—the former an ex-
traordinary beast of strange appearance, about five feet high, the
* Sidney's Australian Hand-Book.


latter a largo bird covered with hair, —afford excellent sport, and’
the former is good eating. The native dogs, much resembling the
English fox, are also hunted. The rivers abound with fish, prin-
cipally perch, bream, roach, carp, cod-fish, and mullet. There are
also in the bush, plenty of native turkeys, wild ducks, wild geese,
bronze-winged pigeons, teal, and parrots, opossums, kangaroo
rats ; —and no game laws. Such a manner of life is very attrac-
tive for young men, and accordingly Mackenzie says that £ ‘clerks
who have rambled into the bush on a leave of absence from pub-
lic offices —youngsters from school who, during the holidays, have
visited their father’s stations—shopkeepers, lawyers, soldiers, and
sailors, who have made an excursion into the bush to gratify a
feeling of curiosity have found our field sports too strong an
allurement to be resisted, and accordingly, have either remained
in the bush, or soon afterwards returned to its healthy exercises
and enjoyments.”
In addition to these pleasures of bush life, it ought to be added
that poverty is unknown in the bush. Food of all kinds is had in
abundance, and if men do not prosper and become wealthy, it is
their own intemperance or thoughtlessness which is the cause.
CHAPTER IV.
Population—Morals—Government—Churches, Schools, &c.
of New South Wales.
Population of the Chief Towns—Population of the Colony.—The
Convict Population. — Crime. — Bushrangers.—Industrious men.
— Government. — Revenue. — Religion. — Schools.
The population of the principal towns of New South Wales
in 1845, was as follows: —Sydney, the capital, about 50,000;
Paramatta, 7,500 ; Maitland 4000 ; Windsor, 2000 ; Newcastle,
2000; Macquarie, 2000 ; Wollongong, 1,500 ; Bathurst, 1,500 ;
Liverpool, 1,200; Goulburn, 1,200 ; Richmond, 1000. During
the last three years the average increase may have amounted to
from 10 to 15 per cent, of the population. The population of the
colony, on the 81st December, 1847, was 205,009, of whom 120,890
were males, and 81,119 females. The recent astounding dis-
coveries of gold, have caused considerable change in the popula-
tion of the colony, but on the whole a very great increase has
taken place.
The last census was taken in 1841, when there were 130,858
persons in the colony, of whom 87,298 were males, and 43,558
females, —or two males to one female —a shameful disproportion
as regards the female sex. The convict population, including
“ ticket of leave ” men, at the same date, amounted to 26,977, or
about one-fifth of the whole population. But this proportion of
51


convicts to free persons is fast decreasing owing to various
causes, such as deaths, many becoming free by servitude, and the
discontinuance of transportation to New South Wales. The num-
ber of convicts in the colony at present does not amount to more
than three thousand, and the chief portion of these also will
shortly become free. Iron gangs and road gangs are no longer to
be seen ; and the felon-character of the colony is gradually dis-
appearing.
Of the whole population, about one-fourth is to be found in
Sydney, one-half in the located districts, and the remaining one-
fourth is dispersed over the immense extent of territory forming
the Bush, or wild and merely grazing country.
Although, as wo have said. New South Wales is no longer a
convict settlement, it must be confessed that the immense number
of convicts sent thither by the mother country, have stamped a
character on the population of the colony, which it will take a
long time to elface. A large proportion of the colonists, if not
originally convicts themselves, are the sons or the daughters of
convicts. Vice seems to run in the blood, for crime is very exten-
sive—and of hideous enormity, in New South Wales. In one
year, as many as 116 sentences of capital conviction have been
passed for crimes of violence alone. The police-office of Sydney
is as busy as its marts ; and the punishments awarded there are
numerous, summary, and severe. Drunkenness is exceedingly
prevalent, and debauchery of the worst kinds. Throughout the
colony, bushrangers, mostly Irish, who are generally escaped or
liberated convicts, are frequently found plying their trade of dep-
redation and plunder. They ride about armed, and generally in
bodies of from three to six. This is one of the pests of the district,
—inflicted on it, like slavery on America, by the mother country,
which in this respect has proved a nursing mother of vice.
But there are also many good men in New South Wales —many
hard-working, industrious, thrifty, temperate, and religious men,
for the most part immigrants from England. They have built
numerous churches and schools, founded thriving temperance
societies, savings’ banks, and other excellent institutions ; and it
is to be hoped that in course of time this better part of the colonial
poulatiou will subdue and reclaim the more vicious. An active
and well-conducted press is also at work; and obtains extensive
and increasing circulation. The magistracy are very active, and
are imposing wholesome restriction on the multiplication of dram-
shops, which have been a great curse to the colony. A new and
a better population is streaming into the country, and in the
course of less than twenty years, we believe the moral tone of so-
ciety in New South Wales will be of a greatly improved character.
Government. —The government of New South Wales is of a
simple description. It is ruled by a Governor, appointed by the
Crown, —an Executive Council, consisting of the Governor (Presi-
dent), the Commander of the Forces, the Lord Bishop of Aus-
-52


EMIGRANT'S GUIDE TO AUSTRALIA
tralia, the Colonial Secretary, and the Colonial Treasurer, —and $
Legislative Council of thirty-six, of whom twelve are appointed
by the Governor, and twenty-four are chosen by the colonists —
the franchise consisting in ownership of land or property of £2OO
value, and in tenancy of the yearly value of £2O.
The revenue for 1847, amounted to £286,550, and there was
an estimated balance in the exchequer, over the expenditure of
the year, of about £20,000. Of the total expenditure of the
colony, £BO,OOO are reserved, over which the Council have no
control, namely £50,000 for the payment of salaries to the offi-
cials, and £30,000 for the purposes of religion and education.
All religions are alike supported out of the colonial funds—
Church of England, Presbyterian, Roman Catholic, Wesleyan, and
Baptist. Every congregation of 800 persons is entitled to £l5O
per annum for the support of their minister ; and every congre-
gation of 100 to £lOO a-year. Assistance is also given by the
Treasury towards the erection of churches and houses for the
ministers. In 1844, there were in Sydney five Episcopalian
churches, three Presbyterian, three Roman Catholic, and one each
of the Wesleyan, Independent, Baptist, Australian Methodist,
Bethel Union, Friends Society, and Jewish bodies, —in all
eighteen places of public worship. There are also churches in
all the towns of the colony, and several ministers itinerate among
the scattered population of the interior, where they have preach-
ing stations at which they regularly officiate.
Aid is in the same way afforded to schools connected with the
different bodies —so much for each pupil yearly. There is scarcely
a town of any note in the colony, but can boast of its flourishing
academy or school. The Mechanics’ Institution of Sydney num-
bers 800 members, and contains an excellent library, and philo-
sophical apparatus. On the whole education may be said to make
steady progress in the colony.
CHAPTER V.
Corn-Growing in New South Wales.
A griculture.—Land Cultivated. — Farming. — Wheat. — Maize. —
Oats and Barley.—Ploughing by Bullocks. —Requisites for a
good Farm.—C earing.- — Fencing.—Housing of the Settler. —
Settling Operations. — Expenses.
Corn-Growing and Sheep-Farming —New South Wales is not
celebrated for its agriculture. It docs not even grow sufficient
grain for its own consumption, not because the lands of the
colony are incompetent to produce the requisite cereal food for
the population, but because the industry of the colonists is
E 2 53


fjhicily attracted towards pastoral pursuits, which are more pro-
fitable. The long droughts which prevail in New South Wales,
at certain seasons of the year, are also unfavourable for growing
crops. Along some of the principal rivers and creeks, agricultu-
ral land is cultivated in considerable breadth, as in the neigbour-
hood of Hunter’s and Hawkesbury rivers to the north of Sydney,
Macquarie to the west, and Illawarra to the south of the same
place. Thirty or forty bushels of wheat, and from fifty to sixty
bushels of maize can be raised per acre. But the average yield
of wheat throughout the colony is not above twenty bushels ;
and of oats, barley, and rye, under this quantity. The quality
of the grain raised is extremely good. This comparatively small
produce of the land under cultivation, arises chiefly in conse-
quence of farming having been carried on by persons ignorant of
the principles of agriculture, and comparatively unacquainted
with the soil and the proper methods of its cultivation. Recently,
however, farming has been conducted by a more intelligent class,
many of them agricultural immigrants from the mother country
who have conducted their operations in a less slovenly manner
than the older colonists, and the consequence has been, a rapid
decrease in the quantity of corn imported into the colony, not-
withstanding the rapid increase of the population. Thus, whereas
the total value of the grain imported into New South Wales in
1839, amounted to £285,110 —in 1846 it had diminished to
£63,764. In 1847, it had further diminished to £52,740, and
grain to the value of £16,944 had been exported. The importa-
tions were principally made from Australia Felix (Victoria)
and Van Diemen's Land, which we shall afterwards find, are
eminently adapted for agricultural purposes.
In the year 1842, there were under cultivation in New South
Wales, and Victoria as follows : —acres of wheat, 57,533; maize,
26,192 ; barley, 4,817 ; oats, 4,235 ; mullet, 99; potatoes, 4768 ;
tobacco, 223; rye, 673 ; sown grass, 17,320 total, 115,660
acres under cultivation. The produce for the year wa5—746,228
bushels of wheat; 559,719 of maize ; 82,624 of barley ; 81,311
of oats ; 4,402 of rye ; 1,201 of mullet; 11,676 tons of potatoes ;
2,010 cwts. of tobacco ; and 16,676 tons of hay.
Wheat is sown between March and June, and harvested
between November and January, according to the soil, situation,
and season. Generally the wheat crops are secured by the end
of November ; and the grain is usually in such condition that it
may be led and stacked the day after reaping. When men are
hired to thrash it they are paid from 6d. to 7d. per bushel, with-
out rations.
Maize, or Indian corn, which is used for feeding horses and
pigs, is sown in October and November, and is ripe in May and
June. It generally yields a good crop of from fifty to sixty
bushels an acre. It is the first crop which the Australian farmer
raises from his cleared land, and in the course of the same year
54


after it has been got in, the same soil may be sown again, antf
thus two crops be grown in one year.
Oats and barley are sown in June, potatoes at any season, and
two crops of potatoes may be gathered from the same land in the
course of the year. It is best to plant the spring crop in April,
May, or June, and the Autumn crop in December and January.
Onions and peas may also be sown at any time of the year.
Ploughing in Australia is chiefly done by bullocks. Though
there are large numbers of horses bred in the colony, bullocks are
found better adapted to the work. They are more easily fed,
and go more steadily. A team of six or eight bullocks will
plough half an acre of heavy ground, or three quarters of an acre
of light ground in a day. The ploughs are generally made of
wood, and arc very rough, but they answer the purpose suffi-
ciently well. There is abundance of very hard wood to make
them of, throughout the country. Some of this wood is so hard
that it will scarcely burn.
Clearing Land —The settler considers the following as prin-
cipal requisites for a farm :—good soil, clear of timber ; and a
sufficient fall to allow the winter rain to run off it —if possible,
sloping to the north. Where it is necessary to clear the land,
the settler must proceed at once to cut down the wood. The
clearing process is conducted thus, —he digs round the roots of
the tree to be felled, and then cuts it through with the axe or the
saw till the tree falls, when it is got rid of either by burning or
dragging it away to some lumber spot, to be afterwards chopped
up and burnt at convenience. Very large trees are sometimes
killed by cutting the bark circularly, and also notching the wood
itself all round. This is called girdling, but it is considered a
slovenly method of clearing timber. It is always better to avoid,
if possible, taking a piece of laud that is heavily timbered, unless
some special advantages are to be gained by so doing. Abun-
dance of good land, naturally clear, is to be found in all parts of
the colony. It is also to be observed that in Australia the
largest trees generally grow on the poorest soils. The land with
the gum, oak, or other trees in small clumps is generally good,
but not superior to that which is bare of all trees and shrubs.
Fencing is another important operation with the settler, it is
necessary to fence well to keep the cattle from his growing crops.
Two, three, and sometimes four rails, each nine feet long, are
placed horizontally one above another at short intervals, with
their ends inserted into morticed posts, which stand perpendicu-
larly, being firmly fixed from eighteen inches to two feet in the
ground, and about five feet above it. This is the usual post and
rail fence of England, The kangaroo and dog-leg fences are also
used. Any of these will last about ten years. There are many
men in the colony who do nothing else but put up such fences ;
and clever, industrious men at this trade, make from 12s. to 15s.
a-day. It is paid for by the rod (5.* yards) at about 2s. Cd. per rod.
55


EMIGRANT'S GUIDE TO AUSTRALIA.
Housing of the Settler—We may here say a few words as to
the housing of the newly arrived settler of small means, who
commences cultivation of the land on a small scale ; and this
description will apply to all the Australian colonies alike. Ot
course, if the immigrant is a man of capital, he may at once take
an improved farm, with farm-buildings, &c., all
ready erected for his occupation. But if he be one of the very
numerous class that commence their career with only a smal
amount of means, then he will necessarily proceed in the most
economical style possible. And one of the first things he will
proceed with, will be the erection ot a house for himself and
family, if he have one. Very often, however, the settler does not
build his house until the land has been ploughed, cropped, and
got into decent condition ; being satisfied in the meantime, with
a canvass tent, or a hut of the rudest description. The air is so
pure and dry in Australia, that no bad effects are found fiom
sleeping in the open air at night. When he at length finds suffi-
cient time to put up a house, it is after a very homely description.
The first house is generally of turf, pise, or slab ; afterwards, as
wealth increases, a brick or stone house is erected. Ihc farmers
generally build their own cottages in the first instance, lor labour
is dear, and expenditure must be kept down at first starting.
The most usual style of knocking up a house is that called wattle
and dab , Strong uprights of wood are driven into the ground,
and long narrow sticks are then woven across these, like the twigs
of wicker baskets. Moist clay, or earth, well mixed up with
chopped hay or straw, is then plastered over this, and finished off
with a trowel. The whole is then whitewashed inside and out,
after being comfortably roofed in with slabs or shingles, for slates
are found too hot. Slab huts are also used, and when sawn wood
is easy to be had, they may be soon knocked together. A settler
and his labourer, can knock together such a house as the above,
and sleep in it within ten or twelve days from its commencement.
As the farmer gets his land into condition, he erects barns,
stables, outhouses, and other necessary buildings. The barn has
to be got ready before the harvest comes on ; and by this time
ho will probably have acquired the use of tools, and have but
little difficulty in providing the requisite accommodation for the
produce. He will also have to make pig-sties for his swine,
which multiply and thrive abundantly throughout Australia.
Accommodation for his poultry will also have to be provided ;
but these are easily kept, and he need not be nice in so fine a
climate for poultry. Indeed, they multiply so fast, that it
becomes a difficult matter to keep them under.
When he finds himself at home, and begins to save money, as
every frugal and industrious man ought to do in Australia, and
if he is satisfied with the location he has selected, he will in
course of time proceed to build for himself a more substantial
house. He will generally find good stone somewhere in his
56


neighbourhood, if not upon his farm, and will cart it to the spot
fixed on for his future dwelling, as convenience allows. Saw-
yers and carpenters, with the farmer’s own labourers, can then
be set to work, —lime, which abounds, can be burnt, —and the
masons and bricklayers then commence their operations. A good
substantial house, containing dining, sitting, bed, and store
rooms, with kitchen and lumber-room, can thus be erected, and
decently furnished, at a cost of about £2OO. A large barn may
also be built of stone or bricks, for about £OO, and other build-
ings in about the same proportion.
A good garden will in course of time be added, well planted
with fruit trees of all kinds, apples, pears, peaches, apricots,
plums, grapes, &c., all of which thrive exceedingly well in the
colony.
The expense of erecting a dwelling suitable for an agricultural
labourer in New South Wales, is from £5 to £3O, according to
the materials of which it is constructed.
CHAPTER VI
Cattle Grazing in New South Wales.
Rapid increase of Flocks. — Wool. — Cattle. — Wasted Meat. — Aus-
tralian Sheep. — Goats. —Pigs and Horses. —Pastoral Wealth. —
Land and Squatting Regulations.—Licenses to Pasture. — Direc-
tions for Squatters.—Stock Buying and Management.—Hut
Building Shepherds and Stockmen.—Practical Advice by the
Author of “ Settlers and Convicts .”
Thus far of the agricultural settler. But the great wealth
and resources of New South Wales must ever consist in its flocks
and herds. In this respect, it bids fair to become the greatest
wool growing country in the world ; and, before long, England
may be entirely supplied from it, without needing to resort to any
other market. For quantity as well as quality of wool, Aus-
tralia need fear no rival. Sixty years ago sheep and cattle were
almost unknown in the colony, and now there are not less than
12,000,000 of sheep and 2,000,000 of cattle in these colonies, or
about seven head of oxen and forty sheep for each person ! This
outvies even the great pastoral wealth of the patriarchal age.
The importations of wool from the colony to England, amount to
about 20,000,000 of pounds annually ; and it realizes a highly
remunerating price in our markets. The increase of the stock is
amazingly rapid, being about 30 per cent, per annum. The
number of sheep in New South Wales has been about doubled in
the space of four years ; increasing at the rate of 1,250,000 per
annum ! So rapid is the increase, that the colonists, to keep
57


down their stocks, and merely for the sake of the tallow, boil
down their cattle and sheep, and throw the carcasses to waste.
It was thus calculated that in 1847, about 64,000,000 pounds
weight of meat were wasted for want of mouths to eat it—a
quantity of meat probably greater than is consumed by the entire
people of Scotland. In 1847, 35,000 head of cattle were thus
slaughtered, and 8000 exported ; yet the cattle keep increasing
at the rate of 145,000 per annum. A large proportion of these
cattle and sheep are pastured in the bush, in the Crown Lands
Commissioners’ districts ; there being beyond the boundaries of
location about 5,000,000 sheep, and about 1,000,000 horned
cattle.
The sheep of Australia are a mixture of the Indian and the
Spanish Merino breeds. The increase they give is very great.
Mr. Mackenzie says—“ From 80 to 90 lambs reared from every
hundred ewes in the flock is considered good lambing. Some
sheep proprietors have had 100 per cent., that is, a lamb for every
ewe, reared. The greatest per centage I have ever had from my
ewes was 92 per cent.”* The average price of a flock of sheep
of all ages, in good condition, is about eight shillings per head,
with the run of the station at which they are placed. Without
a station, sheep cost about 6s. a-piece over head ; fat wethers
7s. a-head —average weight from 60 to 65 pounds. Fat stock are
worth about 10s. per cwt. in the Sydney market, of excellent
quality ; milch cows, from £2 to £4 each ; working bullocks
from £6 to £lO per pair. Wool of the average quality fetches
in the Sydney market, about Is. 3d. per lb.
Cashmere goats have also been introduced to the colony, being
more easily fed than sheep, and quite as valuable, both for their
wool and tallow. There are numerous extensive tracts of
country where the pasturage is too thin for cattle, but amply
sufficient for the pasturage of goats; and it is therefore probable
that goat breeding will yet become an important branch of
industry in this colony.
The colony not only abounds in cattle and sheep, but in pigs
and horses, which thrive equally well. In 1847, there were
about 90,000 horses and 60,000 pigs in the colony; not less
than 30,000 of the horses being beyond the boundaries of location.
The increase in horses within the last four years has been at the
rate of 10,500 per annum. The superior quality of these horses,
has rendered them an object of demand in our Indian markets,
and they are now principally used for the purposes of the
British East India cavalry. The exportation of horses is con-
sequently a thriving branch of trade. In the Indian market they
fetch from £6O to £7O each; some rare specimens bring as
much as from £2OO to £250. They are mostly bred in the
open air, not accustomed with stable nursing, and are found vigo-
rous and hardy, and admirably adapted for the service of India.
* Ten Years in Australia.


The Sydney Herald says— ‘ Good horses can now be purchased in
Sydney from £lO to £l5 each; the expense of conveying these
horses to India, including all expenses, would not exceed £25, of
which only £5 need to be paid in Sydney, the remainder being
made payable when the horses are sold. The value of the horses
in India may be estimated at from £6O to £7O, so that there
would be a clear profit of about £3O on each horse. We have
now sixty thousand horses (since increased) in the colony—a
thousand or two exported annually, would not be missed.’ The
Australian horse is a very fine animal, being a mixture of the
Indian, South American, and English breeds. He is fleet,
strong, and capable of great fatigue. A good Australian horse
will run sixty miles a-day in the bush, for days in succession, liv-
ing only on such pasturage as he can pick up by the way. A
great number of horses are necessarily used for doing the work
of the colony. Almost everything in the interior is done on horse-
back. At some stations, a dozen saddled horses are always kept
ready for the work of the place. Every stockman and shepherd
is furnished with one, and some have two or three at their service.
All travelling is done on horseback—from place to place, from
station to station, even from the hut to the stockyard. There is
the same rage for riding on horseback at Sydney, and in all the
towns and villages in the colony. Very few of the cattle stations
are now without their herd of horses.
This great pastoral wealth of Australia arises from the abun-
dant pasturage which the country affords all the year round, as
well as from its delicious and highly salubrious climate. The
supply of water being uncertain in New South Wales, it Ts much
better suited for pastoral than agricultural purposes; when a
drought occurs the stock can be removed to another district where
good water and grass can be found in abundance ; but it will be
seen that in the case of growing crops, this is not possible.
Nevertheless, as we have already stated, there are extensive dis-
tricts where crops of all kinds will thrive quite as well as in Eng-
land. Even the pasturage is not always to be depended upon;
“you may ride,” says Sidney, “for a hundred miles in New
South Wales over ground that will only afford pasture for a few
months in the year, or once in two years; then you may arrive at
a rich alluvial patch, well watered, fit for anything. Then comes
another uncertain pasture, or perhaps a stony desert, and so on.”
It is the boundless extent of territory which renders pasturage
for all the stock a matter of certainty ; only some industry has
occasionally to be exercised in finding it out.
Land and Squatting Regulations. —For a considerable time
after the formation of the colony of New South Wales, land was
granted to almost any person who chose to ask for it; and by
paying £1 a-year to the government for each convict, the settler
could have as many convict labourers as he chose. Large grants
of from 10,000 to 20,000 acres were made to government
59


favourites, and by them sold out to retail buyers. This system of
free grants was abolished seventeen years ago, and the Crown
lands were then offered for sale by public auction at a minimum
price of ss. an acre, the smallest section sold being 640 acres.
About ten years ago, the minimum price was raised to 12s. an
acre ; and finally, in four years after, in 1842, it was raised to £1
an acre ; the latter arrangement was in conformity with what is
known as the Wakefield plan of emigration—the produce of the
land sales being devoted to the importation of labourers to the
colony. The first effect of the Wakefield plan, however, was to
put an almost entire stop to the sale of land in New South
Wales. The amount thus derived from land sales fell from
£313,052 in 1840, to only £10,997 in 1846, notwithstanding the
rapid progress of the colony in wealth in the meantime. It will
be observed that the price of land being £1 an acre, and the
smallest quantity of land sold being 640 acres, it was put com-
pletely out of the power of the small capitalists, who are the
chief colonizers, to buy and cultivate new land in this colony;
the smallest sura required thus to commence operations, being
about £lOOO. There are, however, other methods of commencing
operations on the land at a smaller cost, as we shall afterwards
see: for we are now speaking of the operation of the Govern-
ment arrangements as regards the new and unsettled lands of the
interior.
The government land being thus in a great measure locked up
against the buyers of land, the resource of the colonists is Squat-
ting—a system of occupancy which answers the pastoral purposes
of the colonists remarkably well. The richest and most prosper-
ous men in New South Wales —the great sheep and cattle
owners—men who count their herds by tens of thousands, are all
Squatters on the soil. By squatting is meant taking possession of
a district of country beyond the limits of location, for the pur-
pose of pasturing sheep and cattle thereon. Squatting is, how-
ever, subject to certain government limitations of considerable
importance. For a long time after the settlement of the colony,
the enterprizing explorers of the remote and trackless districts of
the interior, were accustomed to squat down upon such spots as
were most convenient and attractive. But as the population ex-
tended, disorderly characters became gradually intermixed with
them, and it was found necessary from time to time to adopt certain
protective laws and regulations on the subject. Up to the com-
mencement of the year, 1848, the regulations were as follow :
No person was permitted to pasture stock (in other words to
squat) on Crown lands without a license from the Commissioners
of the district, renewable every year, on the Ist of July, and sub-
ject on each occasion to a fee of £lO.
This license, and £lO occupancy fee, entitled the squatter to a
run of 25 square miles or 16,000 acres; his stock pastured
thereon being limited to 4,000 sheep or 640 cattle, or in such
60


numbers at those proportions as the settlers may determine.
£2 10s. extra was charged for every 1000 sheep (or cattle in
their proper proportion) above the 4000 estimated to correspond
to one station, of the limits above given.
A squatter might, however, possess as many distinct stations
as he pleased, within one or more adjacent districts, paying
license for them on the terms above-named.
These regulations were intended to proportion the amount of
the fee to the extent of the land and the productive qualities of
the station held—or, in other words, to commence the principle of
a rent. The terms of redemption of these quit-rents is stated in
the notice of the Colonial Secretary, of October 9, 1846, given in
the Appendix. A set of new regulations (also given in the
Appendix) has since been promulgated, respecting all new , as
well as forfeited or vacated runs, entered upon subsequent to the
first of January, 1848.
In addition to the license charge, the squatters are also
required to pay a yearly assessment laid on all live stock, for the
purpose of providing a rural police. This assessment is as
follows:—for every sheep one halfpenny, and for cattle and
horses threepence each.
The course to be adopted by persons intending to squat, or
settle down as a sheep farmer, will be somewhat as follows :
Ife must get some friend, or person acquainted with the district
where he wishes to have his station, to accompany him beyond
flic limits of location, and also beyond the furthest out-stations,
making all necessary inquiry on the way as to the most desirable
spot. It is also usual, and it is good policy, to stipulate to give
a trifle to some stockman or shepherd connected with one of the
furthest out-stations, on condition that he will accompany you
and find for you some suitable place for your flocks and herds.
The chief requisites are thus given by Mackenzie : —“ A reason-
able distance, say seven or eight miles, from your nearest neigh-
bour,—either plains or open land,— plenty of good grass,—and
above all, plenty of water in the driest season.” Application
should then be made to the Commissioner of Crown Lands for
the district, in the manner specified in the “ New Regulations”
given in our Appendix ; to which are also added the regulations
for the transfer of runs licensed previous to the promulgation of
the new law.
It is not, however, indispensable that the sheep farmer should
either buy land or become a squatter. It is usual to buy sheep
and stock, and entrust them to a respectable stockholder, who
pastures and tends them for halves— that is, for his trouble ; he
takes half the wool and increase, the owner receiving the other
half, either in Sydney or elsewhere, as he may arrange. This is
a very good way of commencing operations before taking a run
on one’s own account; and is now extensively adopted. It gives
a settler time to look out for a suitable place, and enables him to
f 61


acquire the necessary experience before he begins to form a sta-
tion for himself.
When he has settled about his run, he will then buy his stock.
The proper number of breeding ewes for each flock is from 500
to 700, and 10 or 12 rams will be sufficient; none but young
ewes should be bought. 500 ewes at 6s. a-head will cost him
about £l5O. This is amply sufficient for a commencement,
though he will be guided by his own circumstances in the matter.
To keep a smaller number would scarcely pay him. Not more
than two flocks should be kept at each station. The number of
men requisite to watch this station is three—two shepherds and
one watchman. The watchman is hut-keeper by day, and watches
the flocks by night. The shepherds, at sun-set, drive their flocks
into the hurdles, when the watchman goes on duty, generally
sleeping in a wooden box placed near the folds, to prevent the
attacks of native dogs, &c. Each shepherd is allowed one dog,
and the watchman generally two. Some large stock-holders,
however, will not allow a dog to be used, as it makes the
shepherds less watchful.
To accommodate yourself and men, two huts require to bo
built, —each about 20 feet long, and 12 or 14 feet wide, with the
walls 6or 7 feet high. In the rough and ready style in which
things are done in Australia, these can easily be knocked toge-
ther by the aid of your men, in three or four days, for about
thirty shillings a-piecc. The huts are generally covered on the
roofs and walls, with large and tough sheets of bark, found in
most neighbourhoods, which make a very comfortable dwelling in
such a climate as that of Australia. The watchman’s box is
constructed of the same materials.
r The furniture of the huts is of a very primitive description.
The articles usually provided by the stock master, are as follow :
an a frying-pan, a bucket, a spade, a wood-axe, a
beef-cask, a sieve, a steel hand-mill with which to grind the
wheat, a weighing machine to serve out the rations, a hammer,
one or two gimlets, and a few hurdle nails. The shepherds and
stock-men find their own bedding and other necessary furniture ;
but generally they are not over particular in these matters.
Sheep-hurdles are bought at about £5 to £7 the 100; and 48
hurdles, which form a square of 12 feet, are sufficient for a flock
of 800 ewes. These hurdles require to be shifted daily to a clean
place, especially if the weather is wet or the ground soft. Some-
times the sheep are kept in folds, in which case they require daily
to be well swept by the hut-keeper; dirty yards being a prolific
source of disease.
Shepherds are paid from £3O to £35 a-year at present, with
board and lodging; watchmen from £2O to £25 ; sheep-shearers
can make from 6s. to 9s. a-day, with board and lodging. The
weekly rations allowed are as follow : lO lbs. beef or mutton ;
10 lbs. flour, or one peck of wheat; 2 lbs. sugar; lb. tea, with


some salt. They are generally allowed the use of a milch cow.
Most of the shepherds and hut-keepers have also poultry, and
gardens well stocked with vegetables. Some of them are stock-
holders to a small extent. It will be seen from this, that most of
these men are in a position to save money, if they choose to do
so.
Another part of the squatter’s business is the rearing of cattle.
A commencement is generally made with a mixed herd of from
300 to 500—this herd consisting of cows, heifers, bullocks, steers,
and calves, and they should be in about equal proportions. One
bull for every forty or fifty cows and heifers in the herd, is about
the usual proportion. A mixed herd of 300 may be bought for
about 255. per head, and two good bulls for £lO or £l2 a-piece,
—or a total cost of about £BOO.
A stock-keeper will be required to look after these cattle, fur-
nished with one or two riding horses to follow them and drive
them ; the wages of the stock-keeper are from £3O to £35 a-year.
If the master of the station acts as his own stock-keeper, this
expense will of course be saved.
There is generally a good deal of trouble in getting the cattle
to take kindly to their run. With sheep there is no difficulty ;
but with cattle it is quite otherwise. It takes several months to
reconcile them to a new run—they will wander sometimes hun-
dreds of miles back to their old place, no matter how fine be the
pasture of the new settlement. Hence, for the first six months,
the cattle require a great deal of attention on the part of the
stock-keeper, and much hard riding to keep them all together.
But when they are once fairly broken into a new run, they will
keep to it with little farther trouble.
For the purpose of keeping the cattle safe at night, a stock-
yard has to be erected, consisting of a stout three or four-railed
fence, inclosing about an acre of ground in a dry situation.
The stock-farmer further requires to erect a stable, barn, and
storehouse, to prepare a wheat paddock, a large heifer paddock,
and a small paddock near the huts for the riding horses and
working bullocks. A paddock will also have to be prepared for
the purpose of raising hay and green barley for feeding the
horses, so as to have them always conveniently at hand, without
needing to stray to a distance in search of fresh pasture. For
particulars as to sheep and cattle rearing, and the course to be
pursued in forming a station, with estimates of the cost thereof,
we refer the reader to Mackenzie’s Ten Years in Australia,
which is the most complete little book on the subject that we
know of. Some practical advice is also given in a cheap little
book published by C. Knight (now Cox) entitled Settlers and
Convicts, and from which we make the following extract: —
“ I now proceed to a statement of the course which a new settler should
pursue; and I am confident no man of ordinary talents, possessing a few
63


hundred pounds, and guiding himself in its outlay and management as I sug-
gest, could fail to realise in a few years the return of a handsome fortune.
1. I know of nothing in which the axiom of “ More haste worse speed"
is so true as in the approach of a new settler to his undertaking. My advice
to him would be on no account to neglect, in the first place a tour of inspec-
tion. He should put his knapsack on his back and penetrate to the farthest
limit of colonization. He should travel as unpretendingly as possible; up
the country every hut door is open to the traveller. If he likes to make the
lower orders any little present of tobacco, &c., it will generally be accepted ;
but if not offered it will not be asked for—indeed it is seldom looked for. By
thus stopping a great deal at the labouring men’s huts he will hear the prices
of labour, of stock, of land and of goods, from individuals not interested in
deceiving him; whereas I am afraid, if he trust for his information on those
points to landowners, he will often be misled. I cannot deny that it is much
too common a practice with old stockholders to try to sell refuse or other stock
to new-comers on very unfair terms. However, on the other hand, it will be
well enough to correct the men’s views by afterwards hearing the masters’.
But the conversation that passes in the labouring men’s huts, when the pipes
are lit, after tea in the evening, is certainly both the most varied and the
soundest as to facts. They have no pecuniary interest in the matters they
talk about, but each relating his observation and experience in different parts
of the colony, incites others to do the same. If anything is exaggerated,
there never wants some one able and ready to correct it. On such a journey,
the new settler will often be disgusted by the conduct and expressions of indi-
viduals; but the general tone of what he hears will amply repay him. In
short, he will learn more in one three months thus occupied than in seven
years spent in the usual routine of life among those ol his own station. That
three months I would earnestly urge him, as be values his subsequent suc-
cess, not to omit taking advantage of.
2. The next general principle I would lay down is this:—To make his
undertaking, whenever it does commence, as much as possible a series oj ex-
periments, rather than one experiment. Let him go on by degrees, feeling
his way. The banks will give him very high interest for his ready money—at
least double what he could get in England ; and up-country living really costs
next to nothing. Alter he is well settled in a hut on his land, his personal
charges for food can hardly be above X'lo or X‘lß per year: and having no rent
to pay, clothing need be his only other fixed expense; and on that again a
bushman seldom spends more than £lO a-year. Well, then, so situated, he
should lay out, in the first place, a third or so of his capital. As that seems
to prosper, he may go on to a second fraction, correcting any error and sup-
plying any deficiencies in his second experiment, which he may by this time
have detected in his first. By-and-bye, with added experience and security,
he may complete his purchases.
3. Another advantage the new settler should by no means set light by, is his
credit. Eor there is really not any such difference between the prices he must
give in ready cash and those he may give on credit when purchasing his stock
as to warrant the nervousness which some persons feel about taking credit. In
fact, there is a perfectly definite feeling in the minds of large stockholders,
that they would not think of turning away a good bill for £SOO at twelve
months for a flock of sheep or herd of cattle, though for the same flock or herd
they would “ rather of the two" have the .£SOO in cash. But when the new
settler, by merely pressing the point firmly, can turn the £4O interest of the
sum into his own concern, he would be very ill fitted for business if he neg-
lected to do so. Such a man had better not begin business in New South
Wales.
4. On settling, and always afterwards, till your circumstances and arrange-
ments have become such as to place you beyond all danger, look after every
thing yourself: join in all the farm operations yourself; it both ensures their
being well done, and makes you so acquainted with them that you can instruct
others. ■
5. If your concerns are extensive enough to permit your having an over-
seer, take care to have a good one; il not, get a better sort of working hand,
and give him £0 or £lO a-year higher wages. An adviser of some sort you


must have, or you will Call into mistakes, often of a very expensive and per
nicious character ; and to have an ignorant weak-minded man in such a capa-
city is worse than to have none; for your own mistakes alone will be prefer-
able to your own and his together.
6. Treat your hands rather better than worse than your neighbours. The
damage to a settler's concerns that arises from the neglect of his people (the
intentional revengeful neglect) is beyond all estimate.
So much for matters of general conduct. To them may be added these
directions upon the more immediate business of settling a farm ;
The outskirts of the colony are the best tracts for occupation ; the laud is
less picked ; the expenses of fencing, &c., do not come so suddenly on you;
and there is much more unoccupied land adjacent to you which you get the
benefit of for some years, In making your selection, see to it that you com-
bine high and low lands; the high for wet seasons and the low for times of
drought. Take care to have a constant supply of water. It should be either
a creek or river, or holes that never dry in any season. I have known persons
sit down at what seemed good water-holes even in a dry time, and put up ex-
tensive buildings and fence in paddocks; and then when a herd of cattle and
a couple of flocks of sheep came to drink out of the reservoirs for a few
months, find that it was a supply formed entirely by superficial water-courses
without any subterranean increase; and be compelled, after submitting to
diink mud for some weeks and to see scores of their stock die, to abandon all
their erections and move away in search of a site for a new homestead.
Lastly, take care that adjacent, at least if not on your land, is good timber for
splitting and sawing—if on your own land best, as no subsequent comer can
then take it: but if not on your own land, at least let it be in the mountains
where nobody is likely to purchase. You may venture to draw your split
stuff and sawn stuff five or six miles, but farther would be inconvenient.
Buy your sheep and cattle, if possible, of your neighbours; if not, of some
person of known probity. An individual who is to meet you face to face for
years will not be nearly so likely to take you in as a settler of some distant
part. The same may be said about the purchase of your horse and working
bullocks. There is also this additional reason—the less distance your stock
have to be driven to your farm the fewer of them will be left on the road."
The cash profits of sheep-farming on a large scaltrare usually
estimated at about 20 per cent., exclusive of the increase ; and of
cattle-farming about 25 per cent, per annum. The latter, how-
ever, is the heavier trade, and requires considerably more capital
to work it to advantage.
CHAPTER VII.
Demand for Labour, and Wages of Labourers in New
South Wales.
Short supply of Labour in the Colony. — Mr. Weslgarth's Report. —
Wages of Labour. —Petition of the Colonists Jor more Immi-
grants.— Wages of Shepherds, <fec. —Caution to Labouring
Emigrants.—Must be prepared to go into the Bush. —Demand
far Mechanics.—Classes who should not Emigrate.—Demand
for Females as Servants, &c. —Prices of Living in the Colony.
From what we have already stated, some idea may be formed
of the eligibility of New South Wales for the purposes of emi-
F 2 65


grants from this country. It is a fine new country, thinly popu-
lated, with a boundless territory, full of natural productions of
great value, possessed of great agricultural capabilities, but
abounding, above all other things, in its immense pastoral
resources.
The supply of labour in New South Wales, has been so short
of late years, that the legislative council has been inviting
German and Indian labourers, and even petitioned the home
government to resume the practice of penal transportation for
the purpose of supplying the necessary shepherds and stockmen
for the cattle proprietors in the interior. In a paper of Mr.
Westgarth, some time a settler in the colony, delivered in before
a committee of the Lords in June, 1847, that gentleman states
that “ the large supply of labour poured into New South Wales
several years ago is already entirely absorbed, and for the last two
years there has been a gradual accumulation of difficulties in
every department of industry. It has been estimated, and I
believe correctly, that the pastoral occupations of the colony
require, for each succeeding year, an increase of one-third of the
whole labouring population that was employed during the pre-
ceding season. In fact, the urgency of the pastoral demands
withdraws nearly all the disposable labour of these settlements.
I have seen the harvest standing uncut in the fields long after its
maturity, and daily shedding to the winds its over ripened crop,
owing to the enormous expense or the absolute want of labour.
By the latest accounts from Australia, reapers were receiving, in
some places, as much as 1 Os. per day ; the wages of agricultural
and pastoral labourers ranged at from £2B to £4O a-year, besides
lodging and rations ; gardeners received £45 a-year; housemaids
and other domestic servants were scarcely to be had at even any
price ; and a circumstance, if possible, still worse to employers
than this ruinous scale of wages, was the quality of their labour,
arising from the idleness, irregularity, and dissipation, that are
the usual attendants upon high wages and a short supply of the
labouring classes in Australia.”*
Wages of Labour. —The wages paid for labour in New South
Wales, at the end of the year 1851, were as follow :—Agricul-
tural labourers, £26 to £3O a-year, with rations, consisting of
board and lodging, 10 lbs. of meat, 10 lbs. of flour, 2 lbs. of
sugar, i lb. of tea, or milk in lieu of sugar and tea, per week.
Bricklayers £5O a-year, with rations as above, or 6s. per day
without rations. Blacksmiths £5O a-year, or 6s. a-day. Car-
penters the same a-day. Common labourers 4s. 6d. a-day.
Masons £55 a-year, or 6s. a-day. Shepherds £25 a-year, with
rations (the rate has since risen to from £35 to £40.) Wheel-
wrights £5O a-ycar, or 7s. a-day. Female servants are also in
great demand, in consequence of the great scarcity of women in
the colony, as compared with the male population. Cooks get
* Colonization from Ireland, Pari. Paper 727, ISI7,
66


£2O a-year in the towns. House-maids and house-servants, £ 18.
Laundresses, £l9. Nursemaids, £l6. Dairymaids in the coun-
try, £l7, and female farm-servants, £l7. The government emi-
gration agent at Sydney says—“ The want of domestic servants
is felt in every family throughout the colony. Many families are
constantly without the servants required by them and this
complaint is reiterated from numerous other quarters. The same
report was made by the government in 1851. The demand for
labour continued very great throughout the colony, and had been
much increased by the circumstance of so large a number of
labourers of all kinds having gone off to the gold diggings.
Towards the end of 1851, wages generally rose not less than 25
per cent, in all departments of labour.
In January, 1847, a large number of the most influential colo-
nists—landowners, merchants, bankers, graziers, traders, and
others —petitioned the representative of the government there,
immediately to renew the systematic emigration from this coun-
try. The governor. Sir C. S. Fitzroy, in enclosing the petition to
Earl Grey, states that in the course of the last two years the
money wages of agricultural labourers and shepherds have in-
creased from £l5 to £2l, and it was expected that by the end of
the year they would average £27 per annum. This was actually
the case, as high as £35 to £4O per annum having been paid.
The want of domestic servants continued also to be very much
felt.
In this state of things the home government consented to send
out 5,000 statute adults to New South Wales, and all of these
who have yet arrived have been eagerly engaged —single men
at from £2O to £3O per annum, with rations ; single women at
from £l6 to £25 ; married couples, (for stock farmers) at from
£35 to £45, besides food and lodging. Even the 5000 adults,
though all sent off forthwith, are stated by the colonists as quite
insufficient to supply the great want of labourers which prevails
in the district.
It is only right, however, to guard the working-classes of
emigrants against relying on the continuance of such high rates
of wages in this or any other of the colonies. As labourers flock
into the colony, the wages of labour will necessarily fall; and
where the general population is yet so comparatively small, it is
very probable that there may be so great an influx of one
description of labourers or mechanics, as greatly to reduce the
rate of wages, or even leave many of them idle unless they are
ready to turn their hands to other pursuits.
The emigration agent at Port Philip makes the following judi-
cious observations: —“ Immigrants are always disheartened if
they find the money wages less than they had been led to expect ;
and it would be desirable that the expectations of the poor at
home should be directed to the abundance of all the necessaries
of life which a removal to the colony would insure, rather than
67


to the receipt of any given rate of money wages. It is, of
course, desirable that they should have a knowledge of the rate
of wages given in the colony at certain periods, but it would be
expedient that they should be made distinctly to understand that
considerable changes may have taken place during the twelve
months which must have elapsed between the date of the infor-
mation from thence and their arrival in the colony.”
It is always well for emigrants of this class to be prepared on
an emergency to go into the bush as shepherds or hut-keepers,
where they are always certain of employment at good wages.
Any person with common sense and ordinary activity will do for
these purposes—a town-bred artizan, a mechanic or day-labourer,
will soon adapt himself to the circumstances of such a position.
Town-bred men arc quicker, more intelligent, and more likely to
prove active shepherds, than mere country labourers. Though
they have been accustomed to in-doors occupations, the climate
of Australia is so genial that they will find it no hardship, but
the contrary, to live in the open air the life of a shepherd, or
stock-keeper, or that of a hut-man.
Blacksmiths, masons, carpenters, joiners, bricklayers, butchers,
bakers, painters, and glaziers, plasterers, sawyers, tailors, and
shoemakers, wheelwrights, saddlers, coopers, and other similar
trades, will almost always be in demand in the towns ; and those
who are the readiest to turn their hand to any occupation in their
line that offers, will be certain to make the most money. At all
events, the emigrant may make sure of some kind of employment
in the bush, where food is abundant and existence easy. Black-
smiths, saddlers, carpenters, wheelwrights, bricklayers, &c., may
always feel certain of getting profitable employment of some
kind or other in the interior. Any working man who would
thrive in Australia, as elsewhere, must above all things avoid the
grog-shop, which has proved the ruin of thousands of emigrants.
Without sobriety and economy, an emigrant has little chance of
success.
Among the class of persons who should not go to New South
Wales, are clerks, shopmen, professional men, &c., with whom
the towns of the colony are already over-stocked. If such
persons go out there it must be with the intention of going into
the bush, and taking part in the labour most in request there,
such as is above described.
The general want felt throughout the colony for domestic
servants of all kinds, points to the advisableness of young women
who can conveniently leave England, emigrating thither ; and if
steady and well-conducted, they are certain to succeed. The
last female emigrants who reached the colony, were eagerly
engaged at from £l6 to £25 a-year.
It is also an advantage to go married, and a small family will
bo found no incumbrance. A wife makes a man steady, and
greatly adds to his comforts.


EMIGRANT'S GUIDE TO AUSTRALIA.
Prices of Food, &c., in New South Wales The prices of food
in the colony, are as follow. In Sydney, they are generally
lower : —Wheat, ss. per bushel ; best bread, lijd. per lb.; second
quality, 1 id. ; hour, 2d. per lb. ; oatmeal, 6d. per lb.; maize,
Is. Bd. per bushel; tea, Is. lOd. per lb.; sugar, 3jd. ; coffee,
Is. Id.; sago, Bd.; fresh meat, per lb.; salt meat, 2d.;
geese, 65., ducks, 45., and fowls, 2s. to 3s. per couple; fresh
butter. Is. to Is. 2d.; salt butter, Is, ; English cheese, Is. Cd. ;
colonial cheese, 6d. ; milk, 3d. per quart; salt, 1 id. per lb. ;
potatoes, 6s. 3d. per cwt. ; eggs, 6d. to 7d. per dozen ; wine-
colonial, 4s. 9d., and imported, 9s. per gallon ; brandy, 225. per
gallon ; beer—colonial, 2s. 6d., imported, ss. 6d. per gallon ;
candles, 6gd, per lb.; lamp oil, 4s. per gallon ; soap, 6d. per lb. ;
starch, Is. 3d. per lb. ; tobacco—colonial, 25., imported, 4s. 9d.
per lb. ; peaches, 6d. to 2s. per basket ; water melons, 2s. 6d. to
4s. per dozen ; grapes, to 4d. per lb.
Prices of Articles of Clothing in the Sydney District. —Coloured
shirts, 2s. 6d. each ; flush trowsers, Bs. 3d. per pair ; moleskin,
Bs. 6d. per pair ; moleskin coat, 12s. 6d. each ; moleskin jacket,
Bs. 6d.; straw hats, 4s. 3d. each ; boots, 9s. per pair ; shoes,
6s. 9d. per pair; socks, lid. per pair; vests, ss. 6d. each;
shepherd’s coats, 18s. each ; handkerchief (common), 9id. each ;
flannel is about Is. 9d. per yard ; blankets, 16s. per pair ; cotton
sheets, Is. per yard ; rugs, 4s. Bd. each ; mattresses, 7s. 4d. each.
Women’s dress in about the same proportion.
The Rent of a Town Lodging for a mechanic’s family in Syd-
ney is about 4s. per week.
Continued Demand for Labour in Sydney. —The last Sydney
papers state that the outcry for labour continued throughout the
Australian colonies. From Sydney we learn that the want of suffi-
cient labour and capital to work the coal seams in the district is
daily becoming more and more apparent, the present supply
being no way adequate to the demand. Should steam communi-
cation be extended to Australia shortly, steps must be taken to
supply the requisite quantity of coal. A manufactory of japanned
leather is being most successfully prosecuted in Sydney.
Mr. Macarthur is of opinion, “ that during the next eighteen
months, were the immigrants to arrive continuously, not less than
20,000 working hands might be introduced without lowering the
rate of wages, so as to operate injuriously to the labourer.”


CHAPTER VIIT.
COLONY OF VICTORIA.
Capabilities of Victoria, formerly Port Philip.
Description of the Colony.—Abundant Rains. — Climate. — Popula-
tion. —Imports and Exports.—Grazing Stock. —Land Sales. —
Counties and Towns. —Bourke and Grant Counties. —Description
of Melbourne. — Morals. — Fine Scenery in the Neighbourhood of
Melbourne. — Crops. — Geelong. — Vine Land. —The New Cotin-
ties in “ Western Plains.’’’’ —Normanby Comity. —Portland. —
Tracts of Grazing Land in the interior,— Gipps Land. — Alber-
tan—The Lake District. —Unsettled Districts to the West.
Victoria, or Port Philip, has recently become a favourite
resort for emigrants from this country, more especially since the
wonderful discoveries of gold in the colony. It is situated at the
southern extremity of Australia, on the south-east coast, to the
south-west of New South Wales, and to the east of South Aus-
tralia. It abuts upon the northern shore of Van Diemen’s Land,
from which it is separated by Bass’s Straits. The capital, Mel-
bourne, is 300 miles distant from the nearest settlement of New
South Wales, and 600 miles from Adelaide, the capital town of
South Australia. The river Murray forms its northern boundary.
The province is about 400 miles from east to west, and 200 from
north to south, comprehending an area of about 100,000 square
miles. On the south it has a fine line of navigable sea coast, ex-
tending in a continuous line from east to west, and containing
several good ports and inlets. The finest and most capacious of
these is the bay of Port Philip, in the neighbourhood of which
are situated, Melbourne the capital of the colony, and Geelong,
one of the most important and thriving of its towns. This bay
measures from 20 to 50 miles every way, and is land-locked on
all sides, affording excellent accommodation for shipping of all
sizes.
The district was first-named Australia Felix, by Major Mit-
chell, its first explorer, from a consideration of the uncommon
natural beauties and advantages of the district The droughts
which have scourged the northern parts of Australia, have very
rarely occurred in the Port Philip district ; accordingly the crops
have been much more abundant, regular, and to be depended on.
The situation of the colony being more southerly, the climate is
more temperate than in New South Wales j and the south west


wind prevailing there for about nine months in the year, blowing
off the great Southern Ocean, genial showers very often fall, to
the refreshment and increased fruitfulness of the soil. June,
July, August, and September,—the winter months there—are
the wettest season of the year.
The winters are remarkably mild ; very little snow falls ; only
an occasional hoar frost in the early morning. Even in winter
it is warm at noon-day, and a fire is scarcely needed.
Another excellent feature of the colony is its healthfulness—
endemic diseases being unknown.
The few hills in the country are for the most part wooded, and
many of them are calculated to form fine grazing grounds.
Major Mitchell describes the interior of the colony as “ of vast
resources, of the most various and fascinating description, more
extensive than Great Britain, equally rich in point of soil, and
ready for the plough.” Sidney describes the Victoria district as
“ one of the very finest agricultural and pastoral countries under
the sun.” The proportion of the land available for agricultural
purposes is much greater than in any other part of the Australian
territory. This superior description of land extends in all direc-
tions throughout the colony, producing excellent wheat crops,
maize, and potatoes ; the vine, tobacco, mulberry, and castor-oil
plants, also thrive remarkably well.
Victoria is now an independent colony, having recently been
created such, with its own governor, council, and house of repre-
sentatives. It was so constituted, in consequence of its distance
from Sydney, as well as its great internal resources, and the
rapid increase of its population.
It was only in 1837 that Sir Thomas Mitchell first visited the
colony, at which time the population did not exceed 300 persons ;
in 1845, it amounted to 32,879 ; a large proportion of this in-
crease consisted of immigrants from Van Diemen’s land, who
resorted thither in consequence of the superior advantages for
agriculture, grazing, and industry, afforded by the district.
In the same year (1845) the imports of the colony amounted to
£205,390, and the exports to £342,624, or upwards of £lO per
head of the population ! The population and wealth of the
colony have since vastly increased ; the number of persons em-
ployed at the Victoria gold diggings alone, in the beginning of
1852, being computed at not less than 20,000 !
Counties and Towns op Port Philip. —Bourke, Grant, and
Normanby counties, are the oldest settled districts in the Victoria
colony. Melbourne, the capital, is situated in Bourke county ;
Geelong, the town next in importance, is situated in Grant
county, and Portland is the principal town in Normanby.
The situation of Melbourne is at the head of Port Philip Bay,
near the mouth of the Yarra-Yarra river. Only small crafts,
however, can come up the river to Melbourne, the shipping being
at the port, which is opposite William’s town, about six miles
below the capital. 71


The situation and appearance of Melbourne are very fine. It
is built along the side of the valley through which the Yarra-
Yarra flows —on the right bank of that river. The town consists
of a series of wide streets, chiefly built of brick, and running par-
allel to the course of the river. It already extends over a space
of more than a square mile, and contains numerous handsome
public buildings. Many of its shops would not do discredit to
the most fashionable streets in our English metropolitan towns.
The population of Melbourne already amounts to upwards of
15,000, and they are kept in a state of constant activity, from the
thriving condition of mining, trade, and agriculture, in the
colony. It boasts of no less than four newspapers, one of which
is daily. Many steamers belong to Melbourne, several plying
to Geelong, and others up the Yarra-Yarra river. Steamers
also sail several times a-week for Sydney. Regular communica-
tion of the same kind is also established with Hobart Town,
Launceston, and other places in Van Diemen’s Land.
Victoria has never been a convict colony, consequently the
state of morals is much higher here than in New South Wales.
There are numerous places of worship in Melbourne and the
other towns. Savings’ banks, benefit societies, mechanic’s insti-
tutes, and schools of all kinds, have been established, and are in
a prospering state. Mr. Mackenzie says—
“ To me it was truly delightful to witness the appearance of the town on a
Sunday: the places of worship all well attended, the people dressed in their
best attire, the shops shut, and the streets quiet as in an English town, and
no visible symptoms of riot or drunkenness.’'
The land in the neighbourhood of Melbourne is rich and pic'
turesque; and recently it has been discovered to be extremely
rich in gold. Along the banks of the Yarra the scenery is
beautiful, and many fine villas are already built at different
places near the river. What is better, the land all around
Melbourne produces splendid crops. For wheat, maize, and
potatoes, this neighbourhood is unrivalled. There are instances
of the potatoe crops for one year alone, paying the whole original
cost of the land, and also the expense of the cultivation. The
gardens in this district also, are remarkably prolific in all kinds
of vegetables and fruits, and are nicely cultivated. For forty
miles north of Melbourne the country presents the same aspect of
green and fertile land, occasionally expanding into extensive
plains naturally cleared and thickly covered with grasses of
different sorts. Thousands of acres may be found in one block,
quite ready for the plough. Numerous large rivers flow through
Bourke county into the Bay, the district being remarkably well
watered throughout.
The adjoining county of Grant, situated to the westward of
Bourke, and also on the shores of Port Philip, present the same
general external features.
Geelong, the chief town of this county, is situated on a bay
72


which forms the western arm of the great inlet of Port Philip,
and is about fifty miles across the bay from Melbourne. The bay
of Corio, as the portion of the bay of Port Philip is called on
which the town is built, is remarkably picturesque, and the land
in the neighbourhood is extremely fertile. The situation of Gee-
long, its healthiness, and local capabilities, are in some respects
superior, and on the whole quite equal to those of Melbourne.
The town has been laid out between the beach and the inner
harbour of Corio and the banks of the river Barwon, one end
resting on the cliffs of the port, the other spreading along the
river side. In front, the basin of Corio affords a secure and ca-
pacious anchorage, while in the rear the stream of the Barwon
supplies an abundance of the purest water; the situation is
possessed of one general fault —the space between the river and
the bay is too great, the two extremes of the town being connec-
ted by a road over a mile in length. In order to secure, how-
ever, at the same time, the advantages of the port and the river,
this plan was indispensable.
As a picture or a scene, the Bay of Corio, with the town
of Geelong, studded over the green wavy cliffs forming its
northern boundary, is the completest probably that the gene-
rally beautiful and lake-like harbour of Port Philip presents;
the low dark land of Point Wilson sinking away into the
deeper shades of Indented Head, contrasting on a summer
evening with the sun-lit peaks of Villamanata, when once viewed,
are not easily forgotten by the traveller. The greatest attraction
of Geelong is its easy steam communication with Melbourne,
which makes it a delightful summer day’s visit. The town con-
tains about 5000 inhabitants; it already has a twice-a-week
journal of its own, several churches, schools, and public institu-
tions. It bids fair to become an important place, being the out-
let to a large grazing district, stretching upwards of 200 miles to
the westward, in which space there is much fine land, containing
the Barrabool hills, the Barwon river, a beautiful stream, and a
series of lakes, variegated with islands and headlands. A con-
siderable extent of land in the neighbourhood of Geelong has
been planted with vines, by Swiss and German settlers, who
were encouraged to emigrate to the district by bounties offered
by the Government. The vineyards thrive well, and produce a
large quantity of wine of good quality.
Geelong also promises to be the capital town of a very rich
gold district, the Australian Pyrenees, which run across the
country towards the north-west, having recently been ascertained
to be full of the precious metal. The rich diggings of Buniuyong
and Ballarat are only fifty miles to the north-west from Geelong,
and Wardy Yallock (whose rich gold fields have very lately
been discovered) are about the same distance to the west. At
the beginning of 1852, 7000 men were digging at Golden Point,
Buninyong, and gathering at the rate of £lO,OOO a day. Of
g 73


course, this must eventually greatly promote the prosperity of
Geelong.
West of the district in which Geelong is situated —the terri-
tory has been laid out into the nine counties of Grenville, Talbot,
Polworth (all adjoining to Grant county), Ripon, Hampden,
Heytesbury (situated farther west), and Follet, Dundas, and
Yilliers (still more westerly, contiguous to the settled district of
Portland, next to be described); which counties have recently
been proclaimed. This extensive territory is known as “ The
Western Plains.'’ It contains about 3,200,000 acres of land, of
first-rate quality for cultivation. The natural beauty of this
district is great: it is picturesque and park-like through almost
its whole extent. This part of the country is generally level, the
extensive plains being covered with a carpet of rich velvet, with
an occasional tree here and there. The scenery is diversified by
numerous conical hills, rising from 500 to 800 feet in height,
their peculiar shape evidently indicating a volcanic origin. There
are also numerous beautiful lakes found throughout this region,
the northern part of Yilliers county, near the western limit of
the district, being known as “ The Lake District.” The soil of
this extensive tract is generally a rich black mould, and that of
the hills, consisting of decomposed lava, is of a deep chocolate
colour —both descriptions of soil being excedingly fertile, and
suited to the growth of all kinds of European grain. Some of
the lakes arc salt, and supply the inhabitants of the surrounding
country with that indispensable article of subsistence in very
great quantities. On some parts of the plains the grass is so
rich and the climate so mild, that a single acre of ground in its
natural state is capable of maintaining a bullock or heifer, with-
out artificial food of any kind, all the year round; and from fifty
to sixty bushela of wheat have been reaped per acre, although
the general produce is thirty-five. The western part of this ex-
tensive district is admirably adapted for the growth of flax, of
which an indigenous species grows wild, and covers hundreds of
acres of ground with its beautiful blue flowers every year. This
country is already occupied by numerous squatters, with their
extensive flocks and herds; and towns and villages, with places
for the holding of Petty sessions, have been planted at different
parts. Port Fairy, a young but thriving place, is situated in
Yilliers county, on the shores of the Pacific, about 45 miles east
from Portland.
The county of Normanby lies near the western boundary of
the colony, about 200 miles overland from Melbourne-its chief
town, Portland, having been settled since 1840. Portland Bay,
on which the town is situated, is a capacious natural harbour :
for four months in the year it is exposed to the heavy swell from
the Southern Ocean; but in the remaining months of the year,
during which the wind generally blotvs off the land, the bay is
perfectly safe. The town is well situated for trade, being the
74


port for all the rich district lying iu the interior. It has a large
shipping trade for so young a place. The first allotments of
building ground were sold in 1840, and in the year 1847, we find
by a statement in the Portland Guardian (for it already has two
newspapers), the ships entered inwards were 51, of 5369 tons (
burden : it was also engaged in ship building and other trades
of the same kind ; vessels loading at the port direct for England.
The exports for the year named amounted to £50,301 value,
and the imports (chiefly from Britain) amounted to £18,127.
Vessels regularly load there, direct for England. The little town
of Belfast is situated in the same county, and Grange is on the
northern boundary of the county, about 50 miles in the interior.
The country to the north and east of Portland, for 70 miles
back, is a rich and fertile district fit cither for agricultural or
grazing purposes, and offering great inducements to settlers.
Large flocks of cattle are already depastured in the district.
There is also a splendid tract of laud 50 miles square on the
Wannon and Glenelg rivers, to the north-west of Portland, which
is rapidly becoming settled. The centre of the county is finely
diversified with hill and dale. This county lying near the
Southern Pacific Ocean, it enjoys abundant rains, like the other
southern parts of the colony near the sea-coast.
We may mention here, that a railway 200 miles long, has been
projected between Geelong and the river Glenelg, through the
level and fertile country above described —for the purposes of
facilitating the conveyance of the produce of the district to the
shipping ports, and otherwise leading to the development of the
resources of the country.
Extending far into the interior towards the north-west of Nor-
manby, is the immense Wimera district, well watered by the
Wimera river and its branches, and to the north of Bourke and
Grant counties, is the western district, watered by the rivers
Lodden, Campaspe, and their tributaries, which have already
been occupied by squatters, whose flocks and herds already ap-
proach the river Murray at its furthest point within the Port
Philip territory, verging on the confines of the neighbouring
colony of New South Wales.
Lying immediately contiguous to Bourke county, on its north-
ern border, is Dalhousie county ; to the north-west Anglesey
county; and, to the east of Bourke, Evelyn and Mornington
counties, all of which it is proposed to proclaim in the course of
the present year. Mornington county lies rather to the south-
east of Bourke, on the shores of the Pacific, and is penetrated far
into its interior by Western Port, eastward of Port Philip—a
noble inlet, protected towards the ocean by a large island, and
affording safe anchorage for ships of any draught of water, in all
weathers. Coal exists in this district in large quantities, and it
is reported to bo of good quality, but owing to the distance over-
land to Melbourne (1 4 miles) and the want of roads, little of it
75


is yet consumed there. The low price of firewood, in fact, pre-
vents the consumption of coal in this district.
Gipps Land is an extensive district lying along the sea-coast,
due east of the districts already described. It has been laid out
ip counties which will shortly be proclaimed, namely—Bass,
Douro, Haddington, Bruce, Abinger, Cotnbermere, and Howe
counties. This district is also well watered, and has numerous
fine bays and inlets along the coast. One of the best of these,
Corner Inlet, is in Bass and Douro counties, where a good port,
available for vessels of 200 tons, has been established and named
Port Albert—the proposed capital of the district of Gipps Land,
in the immediate neighbourhood, being called Alberton. This
great tract of land, which in the main resembles those districts
of the colony which we have already described, opens out an ex-
tensive field for emigrants to the colony. The country is not too
heavily wooded —in the richest tracts of land it is quite clear.
Numerous rivers meander through the country in all directions.
The Emigration Commissioners report that the wheat grown in
the neighbourhood of Corner Inlet surpasses that of New South
Wales and Van Diemen’s Land, both in its prolific growth and
quality; and immense tracts of land are there said to be available
for agriculture. Droughts have not been known during the
settler’s experience ; and the district is well-watered, being
bounded to the northward and westward, and south-west, by the
Australian Alps, the summits of which are covered with snow,
and give rise to six considerable streams, or rather rivers, each
of which is navigable from ten to fifteen miles from a very large
fresh-water navigable lake, called Lake Victoria. These streams
run perpetually, in the driest seasons, in consequence of the
melting of the snow in the mountains. The extent of this district
(the greater portion of which is fit for agricultural purposes,
containing rich alluvial land without either a tree or stone on it,
and immediately fit for the plough, without any expense of
clearing, exclusively of large tracts of bush land of the richest
description), is estimated at from 70 miles in length by from 30
to 40 in breadth. About 300,000 acres of the land in Gipps Land
are considered of excellent quality for cultivation. The depth of
alluvial soil has been found in some parts fourteen feet, and the
products capable of being advantageously raised in the district
are wheat, oats, barley, rye, &c. Gold has also been discovered
in great abundance in Gipps Land.
Fresh water lakes abound, both east and west of Melbourne —
the country in the neighbourhood of the lakes in Villiers county
is called the Lake District. But every variety of scenery may
be found in Victoria, from the lofty alpine region to the rich
alluvial district, from the densely wooded to the grassy plain of
a hundred miles in extent. The fine county of Bourke probably
presents the richest combination of all these features. Forest
and hill ranges, open downs, extensive plains, fertile valleys occur
76


in various parts of this beautiful and inviting settlement. The
larger part of it is of rich land, fitted alike for pastoral and
agricultural purposes.
"Westward of the district of Victoria lies an extensive territory
stretching towards the boundary of the colony of South Australia,
a large portion of which is already occupied by squatters with
their flocks and herds. The lands in the neighbourhood of
Mount Gambicr and Rivoli Bay. are highly spoken of, and emi-
grants are fast flowing into the district.
CHAPTER IX.
Buying and Leasing Land in Port Philip.
Sales of Land. —Prices of Land. —Regulations as to Land Sales
and Leases. — Settled , Intermediate , and Unsettled Districts.
The Squatters. —Leases and Quit-Rents. —Growth and Export of
Grain—Land under Cultivation.—Superiority of Port Philip
as an Agricultural District. — Crops.—Its suitableness for Gra-
zing.—lncrease of Flocks and Herds.—Attractiveness of Pastoral
Pursuits in this Colony.—Prosperity of Colonists. Prices of
Live Stock. —Right of Nominating to a Free Passage..
The rapid influx of emigrants into Port Philip during the last
few years has caused a great demand tor land on sale or lease.
The sales of land have considerably exceeded those in New South
Wales; 4577 acres having been sold in Port Philip, and only
3105 acres in New South Wales, in the year 1846. Up to 1852,
417,141 acres had been disposed of, or ‘‘alienated.” The several
quantities of land sold, and the prices realized, in the former
colony, have been as follows: —87 town lots, of 42
acres, have realized an average price of £142 7s. 6*d. per acre ;
90 suburban lots of 4075 acres, have realized £3 Is. per
acre; and 3 country lots of 459 acres, have realised £1 an acre,
or the upset price. The government regulations as to tne piice
of land offer serious obstacles to its sale in any large quantities,
the large majority of the settlers preferring to take leases, and to
squat on the land without any previous purchase or even regular
license. ~
The practice adopted in this colony as to the sale or lease ot
lands, is the same as that in New South Wales. The colonial
lands aro divided into three districts —Ist. The Settled ; 2nd. Ihe
Intermediate ; and 3rd. The Unsettled districts.
In the Settled districts the land, at staled times and places, is
advertised in the Colonial papers, and offered for sale by public
auction, the upset price being £l, or upwards, according to cir-
o 2 77


cumstanccs; those portions which are not sold being leased for
not more than one year, at a price also to be determined by
public auction.
In the Intermediate districts, leases are given for eight years,
but the land is liable to be sold at the end of every year. At the
end of the lease, however, the lessee is entitled to a renewal,
unless one fourth of the run be sold by auction, when the upset
price is £1 an acre and the value of the improvements.
In the Unsettled districts, every holder of a licence is entitled
to a lease at a price to be fixed by tender submitted to the colo-
nial authorities ; and for such length of time as may be agreed
upon, not exceeding fourteen years; nobody else can buy the
run during the lease ; but the lessee may buy, without auction,
any portion of it not less than 160 acres. For more detailed
particulars, we refer to the regulations given in the Appendix.
That the prosperity of the colony of Victoria depends on the
Squatters, who, with their flocks and herds, are scattered over
every part of it, may be obvious from the fact, that of 2,996,000
sheep which the colony contained in 1846, not less than 2,642,000
were grazed under squatting licenses beyond the boundaries of
the settled districts ; these sheep affording exports from the col-
ony in that year of not less than £500,000.
Tho regulations as to leasing, are a great source of heart-
burning in the colony; being frequently altered, so as to cause
much annoyance to all parties. The regulations as to the sale of
land, especially the minimum upset price of £l, are also con-
sidered to have a mischievous operation, and both prevent tho
sale of land, and check the emigration to Australia, sending it in
the direction of Canada and the States, where the prices of land
are so much less. The regulations as to Quit-rents have also
caused much annoyance ; and altogether, the Home Government,
which knows very little about the colony, has succeeded in
stirring up a general feeling of discontent among the unoffending
colonists. The amount realised by the colonial government, from
leases and licenses, in 1846, was £16,305 —the revenue both from
sales of land and licenses exhibiting n steady increase from the
year 1842.
As a great part of the land in this colony is a rich alluvial
deposit, and remarkably favourable for the cultivation of grain,
considerable attention has recently been directed throughout tho
colony to this branch of industry. Hence the colony has exported
grain largely during the last year or two, supplying the wants of
the neighbouring district of New South Wales ; and also export-
ing considerable quantities to Great Britain and New Zealand.
There are regular rains, and the crops rarely fail, being also of
fine quality. Fertile land, of great extent, suitable for the same
purpose, is found in all parts of the colony—in the neighbourhood
of Melbourne and Portland, it is particularly fine. 12,000 acres
of land were under cultivation in Bourke county in 1846, 6,000
78


acres being in wheat. In Grant county, 4700 acres were under
culture, mostly wheat and potatoes. And in Normanby county,
in the same year, 6500 acres were under tillage—-the crops
raised being principally wheat and potatoes.
Many of the shepherds, in these districts, when they have
saved a little money, which most of them can easily do, turn
farmers on their own account, and do well. Indeed, the great
superiority of Port Philip in respect of its agricultural capabili-
ties, has induced large numbers of persons from the neighbouring
colonies to flock into this district. No fewer than 2751 emigrants
came over from the colony of Van Diemen’s Land to Port Philip
in the three last quarters of 1846.
Beside wheat—maize, oats, barley, potatoes, tobacco, the vine,
the mulberry, and the castor-oil plant, thrive equally well in this
colony, and offer every inducement to the enterprising and indus-
trious cultivator. Flax is found, growing indigenous in the
western part of the colony—an article the cultivation of which
may yet be turned to considerable advantage. Sir Thomas
Mitchell, the Surveyor-General of the colony, has indeed aptly
described it as “ a region more extensive than Great Britain,
equally rich in point of soil, which now lies ready for the plough
in many parts, as if specially prepared by the Creator for the
industrious hands of Englishmen,”
The methods employed in effecting a location on the soil, in
erecting huts, and cultivating the land, are the same as described
under the head of New South Wales, and need not here be
repeated. The observations already made as to sheep and cattle
grazing, and the operations of the settler, apply in all respects to
this colony. And from what we have above said, it will be
obvious that the Victoria district is no less suitable for grazing
than for agricultural purposes. The increase of the flocks in this
colony has been quite unprecedented—and the wool they have
yielded has been of excellent quality, bringing a high price in the
market. We are of opinion, however, that greater care must be
taken to keep up the quality of the breed of sheep in Australia
than has been employed of late years. The practice of breeding
“in and in” is leading to deterioration. The wools of Australia
have rather declined in price in the London market, in conse-
quence of a falling off in the quality. This must be rectified by
judicious crossing with new breeds of sheep, otherwise the high
prices of Australian wool in the English market will not continue
to be realized.
Horned cattle are also very numerous in the colony, and thrive
remarkably well. At the end of 1846 there were in Port Philip
district, 290,439 horned cattle ; 2,996,992 sheep; 11,400 horses ;
and 5,867 pigs. The population of the colony in 1846, being
32,895, there were thus 9 cattle and 90 sheep for every person
in the district, including men, women, and children. The whole
stock is computed to double itself every three years. This rapid
79


increase is owing alike to the fineness of the climate, and the
richness of the pasture, which is all the year round in a state
sufficient to feed and fatten cattle without other aid —and the
stock thus fattened are of a quality said to be surpassed by none
other in any part of the world.
The beauty and richness of the country in the interior, where
the grazing districts are situated, render pastoral occupations
highly attractive as well as profitable. There is a charm in the
pastoral life which draws all classes towards it—the rapid flight,
well mounted on a fleet horse, across the country in search of
stray cattle'—the unsophisticated and hospitable life in the bush
—the daily business and adventures—the constant variety of
scene where the run is large and situated in a good district—the
increase of the flocks, which grow daily under the master’s eye,
—contribute to give a remarkable degree of interest to the life
of the squatter in the Australian colonies.
The same field for the profitable employment of capital, and
the same methods of employing it, occur in Victoria as in New
South Wales; and the estimates which apply to the one colony
will equally apply to the other. Many of the smaller capitalists
do well by stock and sheep grazing in Victoria. Mr. Malcolm,
an extensive stock-owner in the colony, when under examination
before a Committee of the Legislative Assembly of New South
Wales, in 1845, stated that “he had known many immigrants
who had saved money and taken farms: he had also known not
a few instances of persons of this class clubbing together for tho
purchase of sheep or other stock, till they were able to divide it,
and go each upon his own land : in one instance two brothers
joined together and purchased a few sheep ; one shepherded,
whilst the other kept the hut; they thus managed the sheep be-
tween them, and they are now men of property.” This is a good
instance of what might be done by men of very small capital, and
of steady habits of industry.
The prices of live stock in Victoria colony are as follow;
fat bullocks, £2 10s. to £3 10s.; working bullocks, per pair, £7
to £9 ; milch cows each, £2 to £3 55.; steers, £2 to £3 ; mixed
herds of all ages, under six months given in, £1 7s. fid. to £2 ;
the same with right of station, £1 12s. to £2 10s.; fat wethers,
fis. to 10s. each ; clean ewes, prime, in flocks, 7s. to 9s. each ;
mixed clean flocks, fis. to Bs. each; the same with right of
station, fis. to 10s.; well bred rams, £2 each ; draught horses,
£l7 to £22 ; harness horses, £l4 to £2O ; good hacks, £lB to
£25 ; colts, £l5 to £l7 ; inferior stock, £8 to £l2.
The purchaser of land in Victoria is entitled by the regulations
of the Colonial and Emigration Commissioners to nominate per-
sons for a free passage in proportion to the number of acres that
he purchases; but it is always better to defer the purchase of
land until its quality of soil and situation arc inspected on the
spot. Several joint stock companies have recently been formed
80


for the purpose of colonising Port Philip, the most promising and
reliable of which is that set on foot by Dr. Lang, entitled the
“ Port Philip and Clarence River Colonization Company.”
According to the regulations of that society, the purchaser of a
farm of eighty acres, paying £lOO alogether, will be at liberty to
nominate for a free passage out five adult persons; and so, in
like manner, one additional person for every £2O he pays for
land. But we have not recently heard anything of this society,
and suppose it must be at a stand still.
CHAPTER X.
Demand fob Labour, and Wages of Labourers in Port
Philip.
Scarcity of Labour. —Petitions of the Colonists for renewed Emigra-
tion.—Great increase in Wages. The hind of Labourers in de-
mand.— Wages of Labour. —Prices of Provisions, Clothing, and
Lodging.
Labourers are probably more in request at Victoria at present
than in any other of the Australian colonies. The complaints of
want of labourers, have of late been constant and reiterated.
Shepherds and farm labourers, with their wives and families, are
urgently invited to come thither and settle, by the inhabitants of
the district; and they have repeatedly pleaded with the govern-
ment to keep up a continuous stream of emigration from the
mother country to their territory. The mayor, aldermen, and
councillors of Melbourne, recently forwarded a petition to Her
Majesty on the subject, in which they state —*
“ That in the opinion of your Majesty’s petitioners, any num-
ber of immigrants not exceeding 5000 statute adults, to be sent
periodically in the course of each year, would receive immediate
employment in this district at remunerative rates of wages.
“ That since the existence of this district, labour has been so
scarce as to command a large rate of remuneration.
“ That for the last four years no immigrants have arrived,
while by an annual addition of at least one fifth in the numbers
of the flocks and herds, and the extent of land under cultivation
in the district, such an increased demand for labour has arisen,
and its remuneration in consequence become so excessive, that
the producers of the staple exports of the district and articles
for home consumption find it almost unprofitable to prosecute
their occupations.
Mr. Westgarth says,—The rapid development of the industry
of the colony proceeds with an uninterrupted pace, so long as
Parliamentary Papers on Emigration, No. 50.
81


additional pasturage can be discovered for the annual increase of
the live stock, and the necessary supply of labour can possibly
bo procured by the colonists. When I mention (says he) that
the rate of wages is 12s. 6d. for shearing 100 fleeces, besides
lodgings and provisions, and that a practised hand will clip this
number in a single day, you may form some idea of the scarcity
of labour, and of the expense and difficulties which surround the
production of the Australian staple.
In the Eighth Report of the Colonial Land and Emigration
Commissioners, presented to Parliament in May, 1848, referring
to the great want of labourers in Port Philip and New South
Wales, in consequence of the rapid increase of the grazing
stock, they state that “ the consequence has been a scarcity of
labour which has not only raised wages in the Sydney district
from £l5 to upwards of £2O, and in the Port Philip district to
£25 and £32, exclusive of rations, and with the prospect of a
still further increase, but it is stated to have had a still more
prejudicial effect in deteriorating the character and efficiency of
the labourer. To meet this want, from which the most disastrous
results are apprehended by the colonists, it is stated by several
witnesses of authority that 2500 working men might be profitably
introduced into the Port Philip district alone, while the Immi-
gration Agent is of opinion that for the whole colony an immi-
gration of 20,000 souls in the next twelve months, including
about 7,000 working men, would not be too large.”*
Mr. Merewether, the Government Immigration Agent at
Sydney, in his report of October, 1847, stated that in addition to
shepherds, farm servants, agricultural labourers, and female
domestic servants (the scarcity of which was severely felt by
almost every family in the colony), there was also at Port Philip
a considerable demand for mechanics, such as carpenters, masons,
bricklayers, blacksmiths, and wheelwrights. In his subsequent
report of January 31, 1848, Mr. Merewether states that the de-
mand for the above descriptions of labour continued unabated.
Mr. Westgarth, in his report on the capabilities of Port
Philip, delivered to the Committee of the House of Lords on
Colonisation from Ireland, says,—“ The fineness of the climate,
and the high rate of wages that usually prevails, are commonly
considered as the chief ground of preference for Australia. But
a far more important reason exists in connection with masses of
the emigrating poor. Australia can employ any description of
labour. The male or the female, the skilled or the unskilled, can
alike be made available on her pastoral stations ; and a country,
whoso produce consists chiefly of a readily available export, is
susceptible of a progress and extension in the employment of
labour which cannot be suddenly communicated to colonies of
a different character. Extension and improvement here only
await an adequate supply of labour.”
♦Kcpon ol Commission. Pari. paper, l. g lB.
82


The want of labour has been still more severely felt, since the
gold discoveries have drawn away so many of the labouring
classes in Victoria from their ordinary occupations.
Wages of Labour. —The following were the rates of wages in
January, 1852: —Married couples (without family) per annum,
with rations, £45 to £5O ; ditto, with family, £4O to £45 ;
shepherds, with rations, per annum, £3O ; hut-keepers, per
annum, £26 to £2B ; general useful servants, with rations, per
annum, £36 to £4O ; bullock-drivers, with rations, per annum,
£4O to £5O, or £1 to £1 ss. per week ; gardeners, per annum,
£33 to £36 ; cooks, 14s. to 18s. per week, or per annum, £35 to
£4O ; bush carpenters, ditto, £35 to £4O ; carpenters, weekly
20s. to 255., or per annum £5O to £6O ; grooms, £35 to £4O ;
stock-keepers, £3O to £35 ; milkmen, per annum, £2B to £3O ;
reapers, £1 4s. per acre and rations ; stackers, £1 10s. to £1 15s.
per week and rations ; horse-shoers and wheelwrights, £1 per
Female Servants.—' Thorough servants, per annum, £lB to £2O ;
housemaids, ditto, £l6 to £lB ; cooks, ditto, £2O to £22 ;
laundresses, ditto, £lB to £22 ; nursemaids, ditto, £l2 to £l5 ;
nursery governesses, or needlewomen, ditto, £l5 to £lB.
According to the accounts received in this country previous to
the gold mania, the building of houses in Melbourne was going
forward with great activity—“everywhere we turn,” says the
Port Philip Herald, “ the bricklayer is seen busily engaged.”
The demand for carpenters and other building operatives, is con-
sequently great, and their labour is well remunerated.
The weekly scale of rations in the colony is,—l2 lbs. best
flour ; 12 lbs. fresh meat ; 2 oz. tea ; \ lb. moist sugar; and
vegetables and milk at will. At the distant stations, however
vegetables and milk are rare commodities.
Prices of Provisions in the Port Philip District. The following
were according to the last accounts, the prices of food in the
colony ; wheat, 10s. 6d. per bushel; bread, 3d. per lb.; second,
quality, 2id. ; flour, 2£d. to 3d. ; rice, 4d. ; oatmeal, 5d.; pota-
toes, 3s. Od. per cwt.; tea, Is. lOd. per lb. ; sugar, 3.}d, ; coffee,
iOAd. ; fresh moat, 2d* ; salt meat, l£d. ; fresh butter. Is. 3d.,
cheese, 7d. ; salt, Id. ; candles, Cd. per lb.; lamp oil, 4s. per
gallon ; soap, 4d. per lb. ; starch, Is. 3d. All kinds of fruit and
vegetables are to bo had in abundance in the Melbourne markets
at a cheap rate, as at Sydney.
The Prices of Clothing are rather higher than in the Sydney
district, but only in a small degree. In some articles the price
is rather lower.
The rent of a town lodging in the Port Philip district for a
mechanic’s family is about Bs. per week.
Extract from a private Letter from a Resident in Geelong Dis-
* At some seasons, when the boiling down process is going on, fresh meat can
be bad for next to nothing.
83


trict, Port Philip , dated 25th March , 1848.—“ The labour market
here is as ill supplied as formerly. When I was last in Mel-
bourne an emigrant ship arrived from London, and I with several
others went on board. They were a good looking set, mostly
English. They were all engaged in a few days : married couples
without incumbrance at wages from £45 to £5O, single men £26;
and single women, as nurse-girls, &c., from £2O to £3O. The
wages of the single women doubtless surprise you. One of the
persons with whom I went on board wanted a nursemaid, to
attend on two children and do a little sewing ; she said she had
never been in service at home, but thought she could do it, but
required £3O a-year. He did not hire her, but got another girl
of fifteen for £2O. The Emigration Commissioners agree to keep
them a fortnight after arrival, so they were in no hurry to hire.
With these wages they receive a ration of 10 lb. of flour, 12 lb. of
meat, i lb. of tea, and 2 lb. of sugar, per week each. I only
hope they will send out plenty more, as it will benefit all parties,
and we are glad to get anything in the shape of labourers.”*
CHAPTER XT.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Capabilities of South Australia.
Description of the Colony,—Extent. — Adelaide, and Port Ade-
laide.—The neighbouring Country.—Supply of Water.—The
Soil.—Counties and Districts. —Rich Tracts of Gracing Land in
the Colony.—The land on the shores of Spencer’s Gulf. —Port
Lincoln.—Sir T. Mitchell’s splendid Discovenes in the Lnterior,
—The River Victond.
The colony of South Australia lies to the westward of the
Victoria territory, on the southern shore of New Holland, and
contains an area of not less than 300,000,000 acres, or about
double the extent of Great Britain and Ireland. Of this im-
mense tract of country, only 460,000 acres had been sold at the
end of 1346, 26,213 of which were then under cultivation.
The colony was founded in 1836, by Captain Hindraarsh, the
first governor, who then landed with the first body of emigrants.
The population already amounts to about 25,000.
*For further information as to the great scarcity of labour in Victoria, see our
account of the Gold Fields, Src,
84


The coast line of the colony is very irregular at the point first
settled, being broken by two large gulfs, called Spencer’s and St.
Vincent’s Gulf, and by numerous other indentations and deep
bays. The access from the sea to that part where the population
is chiefly concentrated —namely, on the eastern shore of Spencer’s
Gulf, is through two passages between the mainland and the east
and west of Kangaroo Island, which lies across the mouth of the
gulf just named,
Adelaide is the capital of the colony, and Port Adelaide,
which is situated on a narrow inlet running inland for about
eight miles from Spencer’s Gulf, is the principal port. Adelaide
lies about six miles inland from Port Adelaide, and is situated on
the river Torrens, which divides it into two parts —North and
South Adelaide. The river Torrens is very shallow in summer,
and no stream runs in its bed, which, however, contains numerous
deep water holes, fed by underground springs. Some of these
holes are very capacious and contain sufficient water for the uses
of the inhabitants during the summer months. The water is
brackish, but wholesome, and after the colonists have got ac-
customed to it, they are said to prefer it to purer water. In
winter, the Torrens becomes a respectable stream, sometimes
overflowing its banks from the rains suddenly descending from
the hilly district to the west of the city.
South Adelaide is pleasantly situated on a gently rising
ground, and contains many large, and even elegant buildings.
There is the Government House, the residence of the governor,
standing opposite to North Terrace, the space in front of which
is neatly laid out, and affords a pleasant promenade for the
inhabitants of the city in the cool of the evening. Near to the
Government House, is the Legislative Council House, and other
buildings. North Terrace has many neat villas, with handsome
gardens and cool verandahs attached. There are also many of
the public buildings of the colony here—the Australian Banking
Company’s offices, the Bank of Australia, Trinity Church, &c.
King William street is a fine street, lined on one side with com-
fortable houses and shops, and on the other with the stock-yards
and other buildings belonging to the Auction Mart. Many of the
principal government offices and store establishments are also in
this street. Hindley-street, is, however the principal place of
business, and presents a very bustling appearance, the street
being often filled with heavy drays drawn by bullocks, laden with
wool and other produce of the interior. The houses are of stone,
brick, and wood, and would do credit to any English town.
There are numerous other streets, built and occupied, or in course
of erection. These are laid out at right angles to each other,
and being from one to two chains in width, are broad enough for
all necessary purposes. Six public squares have been laid out
in the city, and twenty-two principal streets, leaving room enough
for growth and increase at some future time. Many of the houses
h 85


have from a quarter to half an acre of free ground surrounding
them, laid out in gardens and shrubberies, containing also many
varieties of European and tropical fruit trees. There are also
places of worship of all kinds at Adelaide. The total number of
houses in the place in 1846, was 1,547 ; the population of Ade-
laide in 1846, was 7,413 (5,57>! in South, and 1,843 in North
Adelaide) ; and these consisted of landed proprietors, merchants,
bankers, and stock-holders, 66 ; and their clerks and overseers,
37 ; professional persons, 60, and their clerks and assistants, 22 ;
manufacturers, brewers, and millers, 43, with their clerks and
assistants, 23 ; shopkeepers and retail dealers, 284, and their
clerks and assistants, 141 ; mechanics and operatives, such as
bricklayers, masons, carpenters, blacksmiths, miners, tailors,
shoemakers, saddlers, tanners, cabinet-makers, &c., 1,500. Four
respectable newspapers are published in Adelaide.
The immediate neighbourhood of Adelaide is very pleasant ;
and care has been taken by its founders to reserve large parks
all round it for the recreation of the inhabitants. These spaces
have much the appearance of English parks, being adorned in
many places with large native trees growing in clumps, which arc
the favorite resort of native birds of many kinds ; gay-coloured
paroquets are very numerous.
The country around Adelaide is an extensive and fertile plain
—the city being six miles from the waters of St. Vincent’s Gulf
on the west, and about three miles from the foot of a range of
high hills on the east. The highest of these hills is Mount
Lofty, the summit of which is 2334 feet above the level of the
sea, and is covered, like most of the neighbouring ranges, with
a dense forest of timber. To the north and south of Adelaide
the level land stretches away in all directions —southwards, for
about eight miles, when the range of hills above-named, ex-
tending in a westerly direction towards the gulf, terminates in a
steep bluff coast; northwards, the level land extends as far as
the eye can reach, and continues for hundreds of miles without
any extensive hills occurring to break its surface. Occasional
valleys slightly wooded occur in this extensive district, with here
and there chains of water-holes. In the north, a few springs of
water occur at occasional intervals ; but the chief supply of
water throughout the district is from these water-holes, which
are fed by numerous underground springs. When the wind blows
from the north in the summer season, over these extensive plains,
the parched state of the soil renders it easily convertible into
dust, which is a great nuisance to the inhabitants. These hot
north winds are, however, generally followed by winds from the
south-west bringing abundant showers, which refresh the parched
earth, and cause the vegetation to spring forth luxuriantly.
The principal part of the level land in the neighbourhood of
Adelaide is composed of a rich red loamy clay, well adapted for
agricultural purposes. Between the city and the gulf, a large
86


portion of it is under cultivation, and many of the houses and:
cottages of the settlers are scattered about in different directions,
forming a pleasing and animated scene. There is abundance of
excellent farming and grazing land near Adelaide, in some
portions moderately wooded, but in the greater part quite clear
of trees and ready for the plough.
The colony of South Australia, like the other Australian
colonies, is divided into counties and districts. The counties at
present are these—Stanley, Light, Eyre, Gawler, Adelaide,
Sturt, Hiudmarsh, Russell, Grey, and Robe. There are nume-
rous villages throughout these counties, which are all in the
neighbourhood of Adelaide, of much the same appearance as
English rural villages. The most important are Gawler Town,
Hindmarsh, Goolwa, Thebarton, Bowden, Victoria, Islington,
Walkerville, Noarlimja, Angaston, Mount Barker, Nairno, Mac-
clesfield, Strathalbyn, &c. A considerable town has also sprung
up recently at the Burra-Burra mines, about ninety miles from
Adelaide.
There arc numerous tracts of fine land in this colony besides
that in the neighbourhood of Adelaide. A fine tract of about
300 square miles of good land has recently been discovered at
Rivoli bay, some 200 miles south-east from Adelaide—on which
about 100,000 sheep are already depastured, although about
three years ago the district was quite unknown.
On the western shores of Spencer Gulf also, which is divided
from St. Vincent’s Gulf by a long tongue of land called Yorke
Peninsula, there are fine tracts of country, more particularly in
the neighbourhood of Port Lincoln, the port of the district,
about 300 miles from Adelaide by water. Considerable portions
of good land immediately in the neighbourhood of Port Lincoln
are still unoccupied. A fine tract was discovered about 150
miles in the interior a few years ago, which presents great attrac-
tions for graziers as well as agriculturists. The land at the
head of the same gulf, in the neighbourhood of Mount Remark-
able, is also described as abounding in beautiful pasturage, and
promising great mineral wealth at some future period. On the
overland route from Adelaide to Port Lincoln, several fine tracts
have been explored, sufficient to supply abundant pasturage for
the colonial sheep-owners for centuries to come. Numerous rich
discoveries of the same kind have recently been made by Sir
Thomas Mitchell in the course of his journeys of exploration
into the interior, when he has traversed immense tracts of fine
grazing land, capable of pasturing flocks and herds to any extent.
In the course of the expedition, he fell in with the course of a
large river, along whose banks he travelled for ten days towards
the north-north-west. In some parts, he says, this river forms
splendid reaches, being as broad and important as the river
Murray. In several places it spreads into four or five separate
channels, some of them several miles apart; and the whole
87


country is better watered than any other portion of Australia
that Sir Thomas Mitchell had yet seen, numerous tributaries to
the river, flowing towards it through the extensive downs to the
district. The soil consists of rich clay; the grass is chiefly
panicum, and several new sorts, one of which springs green from
the old stem. The plains were verdant, and the luxuriant pas-
turage surpassed in quality, as it did in extent, everything of the
kind yet known in the country. There was abundance of myall
tree and salt-bush, which are considered essential to a good run.
The river flowed towards, and was supposed to empty itself into,
the Gulf of Carpentaria, the country being quite open for a
direct route thereto. “ That this river,” says Sir T. Mitchell, is
the most important of Australia, increasing as it does by suc-
cessive tributaries, and not a mere product of distant ranges,
admits of no dispute ; and the downs and plains of central Aus-
tralia, through which it flows, seem sufficient to supply the whole
world with animal food." To this fine river the discoverer gave
the name of Victoria. There were other large rivers in the same
district, some of them capable of navigation—the most important
of which were the Cogoon, the Maranoa, the Warrego, the
Salvator, the Claude, the Belyando, and the Nine Rivers.
CHAPTER XII.
Farming and Grazing in South Australia.
State of Agriculture in the Colony. — Crops. — Rains.—Time of
Sowing.—Garden produce.—Expenses of Farming, with Esti-
mate. —Profits of Farming. — Ploughing.—Buying Land. —
Sheep and Cattle Grazing.—lncrease of Stock.—How to pro-
cure a run for Cattle and Sheep.—Regulations as to Depastur-
ing.—Expenditure required in Gi'azing.—Estimate of Capital
required.—Sheep Farming.
For several years after this colony was founded, the land was
not considered competent for agricultural purposes, but only for
grazing. Consequently, a large quantity of the wheat consumed
in it was imported from Victoria and Van Diemen’s Land.
Experience has, however, proved that the lands of South
Australia are eminently qualified for the cultivation of wheat,
and now, instead of importing this article, it exports it yearly to
a considerable extent, to Great Britain, Mauritius, and the Cape
of Good Hope. In 1845, after supplying the domestic wants
and shipping, wheat and flour were exported to the value of
£24,898. The wheat is of remarkably fine quality, and has
fetched the top price in the English market. Some wheat that
88


obtained the prize at the Australian agricultural show at Adelaide
in 1845, weighed as much as 67 lb. 6 oz. to the bushel. From
twenty to twenty-five bushels per acre is considered an average
crop; but on superior land, where proper attention has been paid
to its cultivation, from 40 to 45 bushels are realised.
The wheat crop rarely fails in South Australia, as it occasion-
ally does in New South Wales in consequence of the droughts j
showers being much more frequent and certain on the southern
than on the eastern coast. According to a rain gauge kept at
Adelaide for seven years, not a month elapsed without a fall of
rain—the greatest quantity generally falling in June, July, and
August, the winter months there. From the native richness of
the soil little manuring is required ; lands being cropped without
manure for four or five years successively; and the crops continue
as good as at the first. A settler in South Australia gives the
following brief but graphic description of the agricultural capa-
bilities of the colony.
“ With regard to the productiveness of the soil, I have seen three harvests
—the one at my arrival was gathering in. I have ploughed and reaped two
years and am now ploughing the third. There are three distinct soils —black,
red, and white: the black and red are preferred. Many of the flats are from
a quarter to three quarters of a mile broad, and many miles long with no lim-
ber; at other places more or less large gum-trees. With a moderate quantity
of rain they are full of beautiful grass and flowers. Some of the slopes and
hills contain a deep and rich soil of black and red loam, with more or less
timber. Lucerne grows natural, and in the broken up land many of the
English w'eeds arc making their appearance. Swedish turnips and mangel-
wurzel grow well.
“ Coni, the great staff of life, grows well; where the land is ploughed deep
and sown in season,the corn grows long and stiong, both in stalk aild ear;
yet it does not corn as well as I have seen from some of the best land in
England; but on the average much better and more quantity than the general
crop in Devon. We have no rust or mildew—the stalk is bright and the
samples very fine when not cut too green. The barley resembles chevalier in
England. Oats have not generally done so well. Potatoes have been but
partially good; I think we have but seldom broken the ground deep enough
for the root. No doubt remains with the experienced men here of the capa-
bilities of this colony for grain With regard to cattle and sheep no country
can be better; we scarcely hear of a disorder in cattle.”
In addition to wheat, the South Australian farmer grows
barley, oats, Indian corn or maize, potatoes, &c. Indian corn
yields a crop of from 50 to 60 bushels an acre. Barley yields a
large crop, of an average weight of 56 lb. to the bushel: it is
much in request for the purpose of malting. Potatoes yield two
abundant crops in the year, being planted in January and in
August; the produce averages about nine to ten tons to the acre.
Wheat is sown in May or June ; the harvest commences in
November in the plains, and in the hilly districts not until De-
cember or the beginning of January. Reaping by hand costs
from 12s. to 15s. an acre ; but a reaping machine is now exten
sively in use in the colony, by which the expense of cutting the
crop has been reduced to about Bs. an acre.
Indian corn is sown in September or October, and ripens about
u 2 89


High Price.
Low Price.
Eighty acres of good clear land ... .
. £100
£80
Fencing tho whole, employing all labour
. 40
20f
Six bullocks, at £5 each
One dray, plough, and harrow
.. 30
30
.. 18
18
Carpenter’s and farming tools
.. 10
10
Building a cottage
.. 30
5
Seed wheat at 6s. per bushel
.. 36
36
Twelve months provisions for two persons
.. 30
20
Two labourers at £25 each per annum
.. 50
50
Provisions for labourers
.. 20
20
Extra expenses, including reaping ...
.. 60
20
Four cows for milk .
.. 20
10J
March; barley is sown in August, and is cut down about the
same time as the wheat crop.
There are other crops raised, which yield a good profit to the
farmer—such as hops, tobacco, olives, grapes, and other plants.
Tobacco is becoming a source of increasing profit to the farmer,
being much used in the colony for making a decoction for sheep,
as well as for the purpose of being smoked.
Almost all kinds of garden produce thrive well. Delicious
melons, figs, peaches, plums, and grapes, ripen in the open air ;
vines and fruit trees of all kinds grow their fruit to perfection.
Kitchen vegetables yield large crops.
The expenses of farming are not great. Land costs about £1
an acre, the colonial price ; and good land may be rented for
2s. 6d. per acre. Land of all kinds and qualities may be had,
from the light sandy to the heavy loam and clay soils.
The following is given by Mr. Wilkinson* as a correct calcu-
lation of the sum required to purchase and cultivate lit) acres of
land in this colony. We give two prices, one high and the other
as low as the colony generally affords :■ —
Ploughing the whole quantity, by contract 50 10|1
£494 £329
The return from 80 acres of wheat, at 20 bushels to the acre,
and at 4s. per bushel, realises £320. Hence, at the end of the
first year, the produce realized will, it is calculated, pay for all
the land, buildings, and cattle, and also for labour, within £174
(taking the highest calculation of expenditure) ; and at the end
of the second year, the farmer will have cleared all his first
expenses, and besides have land, cattle, and plenty of wheat,
with barns and outhouses, which will be erected by his men at
no extra cost. To do all this, however, will require hard work
on the part of the farmer, and considerable frugality in the course
of the first year. In England £lOOO is required to farm properly
* Wilkinson's South Australia, p. 81.
+ Working himself. t Two cows. II Employing his team.
90


100 acres, and even with this outlay, the profit is much less,
compared with the smaller outlay in Australia, and the anxiety
much greater. Mr. Wilkinson is of opinion that no person
should commence farming in Australia unless he is possessed of
£5OO, except he have grown-up sons able to work and save him
the expense of labourers, in which case from £3OO to £4OO would
suffice.
Ploughing in Australia is almost entirely performed with
bullocks, six being required to turn up new land. All kinds of
farming implements are to bo had in the colony at reasonable
prices, and none of these articles should be taken out from
England.
The intending farmer will have no difficulty in finding suffi-
cient land for sale in this colony. When he lands, the first thing
he ought to do is to look out for a proper location. But he
should be careful in striking a bargain, and avoid being taken in
by designing knaves, of whom there are too many in all new
countries. Land is frequently to be had cheap at the auction-
marts in Adelaide, and he ought therefore to take an opportunity
of attending the sales. But before buying the land put up for
sale, he ought to see and examine it with his own eyes. He
mnst take nothing that is said about it on trust; but examine it,
make every inquiry about it, ascertain why it is sold by the
present owner, whether there be sufficient water on it or near it,
what buildings it has on it (if improved land), and all such
particulars as these. He must not dispense with a personal visit
of inspection to the place. Indeed, a little time expended in
travelling about the colony (if he can at the same time aflbrd it),
for the purpose of obtaining information, and observing the
various modes of farming employed, may be very profitably
bestowed. If the emigrant have a wife and family, they may be
comfortably lodged in town till he has fixed on the spot he
intends purchasing ; and when he has built his house, they may
then follow him.
The upset price of government land in this, as in the other
Australian colonies is £1 per acre ; but land belonging to private
owners is frequently had for less at the public auctions. The
regulations as to the sale of laud are given in the Appendix.
Sheep and Cattle Crazing —This colony is equally well adapted
for pastoral as for agricultural industry. The grass, as in the
colonies already described, possesses the peculiar property of
fattening cattle without the aid of artificial food. An intelligent
settler in South Australia states that “ on his first arrival, he was
surprised to see the good condition which cattle and sheep sus-
tained while feeding on grass pasturage only adding that
“ many of the ordinary breed of cattle in the colony would pass
for stall-fed in Salisbury market.”
The rapidity of increase of stock in the colony shows how well
suited it is for grazing purposes. In 1338, it contained 28,000
91


sheep ; and in 1847 these had increased to 620,000. At the
Same time there were in the colony 38,000 horned cattle ; 19,000
pigs and goats ; and 2,600 horses. The wool exported from it
in 1846 was of the value of £114,665.
The operations of the sheep and cattle grazier in South
Australia, are much the same as those already described under
the heads of New South Wales and Port Philip.
In order to procure a run for sheep or cattle in the unsurveyed
districts, a squatting license may be taken out, and the sum
agreed upon paid (about £5), for which a block of land two
miles square is allowed. The squatter finds out the land for
himself, gives a description of it to the colonial officers, and offers
to take the use of the land within the boundaries which he des-
cribes. When this has been done, and the license money paid,
the tract of land will belong to the settler so long as it remains
unsurveyed and unsold; but when once put up to auction, the
person possessing the run has no greater right to bid, and no
more privilege, than any other individual.
The owner of an 80 acre section, in the district in which the
run is claimed, can take the tract of laud without the above
license ; as, for every such section, a run is allowed on payment
of 10s. only, if such run can be found by the person purchasing
the section. This is a privilege allowed to the owners of laud
over those who are not proprietors.
On a run of two miles square, two flocks of sheep, of 600 each,
can be depastured, if the grass is good ; and this will keep the
sheep for at least two years, when the increase in their numbers
will require increased pasturage ; then the stock-owner will
strike out an off-station, and divide the flock between the two
places. One shepherd will be competent to look after each flock
of about 600 sheep.
In the case of land to be purchased in the unsurveyed districts,
the person wishing to buy it, gives notice to the Surveyor-
General that he wishes to buy such or such a block, describing
its locality, and the number of acres wanted. In this case, it is
surveyed, advertised in the colonial papers for three mouths, and
then sold to the highest bidder.
Comparatively little expenditure is required to form a sheep
or cattle station. Two huts are required for yourself and men—
each 20 feet long 12 or 14 wide, and 6or 7 feet high. These
can bo put up in a few days’ time, at a cost of about £8 a-piece.
Hurdles can be bought for £5 or £6 per thousand : 48 will
accommodate a flock of from 600 to 800 breeding ewes. A stock-
yard has also to be knocked together, of stout paling, or a good
large paddock enclosed. This may cost about £lO or £l2. A
watch-box for the night watchman has also to be provided. The
whole expense of a cattle station need not exceed £4O. The
wages of shepherds are at present from £3O to £35 a-year, with
rations the same as in New South Wales.


In January, 1847, the prices of cattle and sheep in the Ade-
laide market, were as follow; —fat cattle of 100 lbs., 18s. each ;
working steers, each £4 to £6; dairy cows, each £3 10s, to £4 ;
young stock, each £1 15s. 6d. to £3 ; fat sheep, each 10s. to 155.;
breeding ewes, each 10s. to 12s. These prices were nearly the
same up to the last advices.
To commence cattle grazing with advantage—for which pur-
pose a mixed herd of not less than 250 cows, bullocks, heifers,
and steers, is necessary —a considerable capital is required, of
say not less than £ 1000. The cost of sheep-farming is less,—a
capital of about £5OO being requisite to begin with a flock of
say 600 ewes.
The best plan for the intending cattle-owner to adopt is, to
arrange with the person he buys his cattle from, to allow his
cattle to run among his herd, till he has acquired the necessary
experience and knowledge of the country, and also to enable him
to make the necessary arrangements for a station, shepherds, &c.,
until he can comfortably commence on his own run. There will
generally be found no difficulty in arranging this matter.
Suppose that the sheep-farmer has expended £5OO on 600
sheep and the necessary expenses of a station in the coarse of his
first year ; at the end of the weaning and shearing the produce
he will have realized will be somewhat as follows ;—550 lambs
at 4s. each, £110; 580 ewes’ fleeces at 3s. each, £B7 ; 550
lambs’fleeces at Is. 6d. each, £4l ; total £238. If he refrain
from selling the lambs till they have reached a better age,die will
get for them (instead of 45.) a price of Bs. each, or £220 ; which
after paying the expenses of herding, watching, &c., will leave
him a profit of about £l6O the first year.*
Cattle pasturing pays equally well, if not better, and £lOOO
well invested in this way, with good management, ought to yield
a profit of from £2OO to £250 the first year.
CHAPTER XIII.
The Mines of South Australia.
Mineral Productions. —The Mines.—Mining Companies.—The
Burra-Burra Mines. —Koorianga Profits of the Mines. —
Wages.—Great Demand far Mining Labourers.
The rich mineral productions of this colony have excited so
much interest of late, and caused so rapid an influx of capital
into the colony, that we cannot omit a brief notice of them in
this place.
Wilkinson, p 140.
93


The copper mines of Australia are the richest yet discovered in
the world, the ore yielding from 50 to 75 per cent, of pure metal.
The principal mines are situated at Burra-Burra, and in the
neighbourhood, about ninety miles to the north of Adelaide ; but
there arc other rich mines in other directions, of copper, lead,
and iron, containing also silver and gold. These mineral pro-
ductions were principally discovered at a time when the colony
was in a very prostrate state, about the year 1843 ; and the
effect was, at once to rouse the colonists to renewed exertions,
which have been crowned by the most successful results. No
sooner was the working of the mines commenced, than wealth
flowed in upon the colonists apace. One firm shipped 1,200 tons
to England the first year, which realized a profit to them of
upwards of £7OOO. The land in which the mineral products were
situated, rose in value, and large blocks of laud were sold to
mining companies by the government. Numerous such com-
panies are now in existence, and the only difficulty they have to
contend with is, the want of a sufficient supply of labourers to
work the mines to advantage. The want of coal is also felt, so
that the native ore is shipped chiefly to Swansea in Wales, to be
there smelted. Even as it is, the ore is worked and conveyed to
Adelaide faster than it can be shipped for England.
By the Adelaide papers of April 7th, 1848, we are informed
that “ The South Australian Mining Association had upwards of
4,500 tons of Burra-Burra ore lying on the wharf, at Port Ade-
laide. The only vessel loading Burra ore was the Minerva,
which would take from 50 to 100 tons ; and as there were still
hundreds of tons coming down weekly, there was little prospect
of the heaps being for a long time materially reduced. As the
ore is worth at least £ 100,000, the interest of which is no trifle,
it is of great importance to the association to get a supply of
shipping. The Burra-Burra shares were up to £135 each.”
This Burra-Burra company has paid a profit to its shareholders
of not less than 200 per cent. ! In one year they raised no less
than 7,200 tons of copper ore, worth, on an average, at least £25
a ton, equal in value to £lBO,OOO, at a cost, including all
expenses of preliminary charges, and also buildings and improve-
ments, of £16,624.
A thriving town, called Koorianga, has sprung up at this mine,
consisting of substantial buildings, and containing a population
of from 400 to 500 persons. The cottages are mostly of stone,
with good garden grounds attached. Miners can always obtain
here and throughout the colony about 6s. a-day. Many of them
take tribute, that is, receive so much in the pound (from 2s. to
3s. 6d.) for the value of the ore they raise. When these men are
fortunate in their mine they make money fast. At the Burra-
Burra, five men on one occasion earned £375, or about five
guineas each per week, in nine weeks. A Cornishman is men-
tioned, who earned £5O by himself in two months.
.94


The South Australian papers arrived in England in October,
1848, state that —The mining interest has received the greatest
encouragement; new lodes are almost of daily discovery. The
Burra-Burra yields from 20 to 30 tons of copper ore weekly ;
aggregate length of the levels open in the mines, 3 miles, 4
chains, 52 links. On June 1, the Burra-Burra directors made
the quarterly dividend of 200 per cent, (or £lO on every £5
paid up.) From a census taken at the Burra there were, on
May 13, 1848, no less than 913 males and 573 females. Dr.
Rankine has purchased the Strathalbyn mines, which are likely
to turn out very profitable ; a large and promising main lode has
been opened, giving excellent ore. The mines of the Port Lin-
coln company have been opened, showing one lode perfectly
regular at the surface, nearly 30 inches in width of solid ore,
yielding 51 per cent, of pure copper. Other lodes have been
found. The late accounts of the Bon Accord mine are en-
couraging. The Adelaide Smelting Company for working Dr. E.
Davy’s patent have made extensive arrangements for the estab-
lishment of their works. The smelting works are named Yatala,
after the hundred in which they are situated. At the Greenock
Creek mine fine ore in large quantities is being raised. The
affairs of the Royal Mining Company are very promising north
of the Kapunda.
CHAPTER XIV.
Demand for Labour in South Australia—Wages and
Prices of Living.
The kinds of Labour most in request. — Mr. Mundy's Reports. —
Wages of Labour. — Mechanics , Agricultural Labourers, Female
Servants.—Prices of Food and Necessaries.—Rent of Lodging. —
Prices of Clothing.—Call for more Labourers.—Latest intelli-
gence as to demand for Labour.
The recent rapid advances in prosperity—mining, grazing, and
agricultural—made by the colony of South Australia, have led
to a large and steady demand for labour of almost all kinds.
The best evidence of this is to be found in the despatches to the
home government of Mr. Mundy, the secretary for the colony.
In his despatch of April, 1847, he writes—
“ Miners, shepherds, agricultural labourers, mechanics of
almost all grades, can scarcely be sent out in sufficient numbers
to satisfy the great demand now existing for people of their
callings. Many important works of considerable magnitude,
both public and private, have been retarded in consequence of


the scarcity of artificers now available for the purposes of build-
ing ; and, owing to fhe same cause, it is only with great diffi-
culty that contracts for works of the most unpretending cha-
racter can be obtained.
“ The want of female domestic servants is felt to be a great
drawback to the comfort and happiness of families in this colony.
Exorbitantly high wages are already given to the females of this
class, but unless a considerable addition be made to their num-
bers, it is difficult to conjecture to what extent they may raise
their demands.
“ In addition to the several callings above expressly specified,
I may state that journeymen tailors and shoemakers are in great
request.*
In his subsequent despatches, Mr. Mundy again and again
specifies labourers, shepherds, miners, female domestic servants,
masons, carpenters, sawyers, bricklayers, and mechanics of all
classes, are in great request ; and he says “ they can scarcely
arrive either too quickly or in two great numbers to exceed, or
even to satisfy, the daily demands of the colonists.”
In his report, dated October Bth, 1847, the same writer says—
‘‘Notwithstanding that recent arrivals have increased our
population 1610 souls, chiefly of the working classes, the demand
for agricultural labourers, shepherds, miners, mechanics, and
female domestic servants, continues equally urgent as before and
the same high rate of wages is maintained.” Mr. Mundy
remarks, however, that although no reduction has yet been
effected in the rates of wages by the arrival of immigrants, it
must be anticipated that their continued influx may produce a
change in this respect; and that it would be well, therefore, in
order to prevent the disappointment which would, in such an
event, be naturally felt by those who may be induced to emigrate
with expectations founded on the present scale of wages, that
they should be warned, before leaving England, of the proba-
bility of such a contingency.
Mr. Mundy adds that young unmarried females who emigrate
to South Australia without friends or relations on board are, on
arriving in the colony, at once removed from the vessel bringing
them to a house in Adelaide, where every necessary comfort is in
readiness for their reception. They are placed under the imme-
diate control of a matron ; and a committee of ladies have bene-
volently undertaken to assist them in finding suitable employ-
ment.
By subsequent information, up to August, 1848, it appeared
that the demand for labour continued to be very urgent.
Wages of Labour. —The following were the wages of labour
up to the last advices :—blacksmiths, 6s. a-day ; brickmakers,
10s. to 125.; bricklayers, 7s. a-day ; bakers, 4s. to 65.; butchers,
3s. a-day, with board and lodging ; printers, 7s. to 10s. ; carpen-
♦Parliamentary Papers on Emigration, Dec., 1847, part 11., pp. 80-1.
96


tors, 7s. ; cabinet-makers, 75.; carriage- makers, 75.; coopers,
(is,; day labourers, 4s. ; masons, 7s. per day ; millers, 6s. ;
painters and glaziers, 4s. 6d. ; plasterers, 7s. to 10s. ; quarry-
men, 21s. to 255. per week ; sailors, £2 14s. per month ; saw-
yers, £4 10s. per 1000 feet) saddlers, ss. 6d. to 7s. per day;
shopmen, £6O to £lOO ; shoemakers, 6s. to 75.; tailors, 75., or
Bd. an hour ; tanners, ss. 6d,; wheelwrights, 7s. ; miners,
ss. 6d. ; upholsterers, 425. per week ; male domestic servants,
£2B a-year, with board and lodging.
Agricultural Labour. —Bullock-driving, 4s. a-day ; shepherds,
12s. a-week, with board and lodging, or £2O to £3O a-year;
agricultural labourers, £3O to £4O a-year married ; single man,
£2O to £3O ; —both with board and lodging.
Female Labour. —Servants, £l4 to £22 a-year ; nurses, cooks,
dairy-women, laundresses, and other female servants, are also in
great request, at high wages.
Prices of Food and Necessaries. —At the beginning of the pre-
sent year, the prices of food were : —bread, 3d. per lb. ; flour,
2d. ; rice, 3d. ; oatmeal, 6d. ; tea, 25.; sugar, 3d. ; fresh meat,
4d. ; fresh butter. Is. lOd.; salt butter, Is. 9d. ; cheese, lOd. ;
salt, Id. ; potatoes, Id. ; candles, 6d.; lamp oil, 4s. per gallon ;
soap, 3id. per lb. ; starch, lOd.; blue, 25.; tobacco, ss. 6d.
The rent of a town lodging for a mechanic’s family at the same
time was from 6s. to Bs. a-week ; this high price was in conse-
quence of the rapid influx of emigrants to the colony ; but large
numbers of brick houses were in course of erection for their
accommodation.
The Prices of Clothing. —Coloured shirts, 3s. Bd. each; duck
trowsers, ss. 6d. per pair ; moleskin coat and trowsers, 18s. ;
straw hat, 2s. 6d. ; boots, 14 s. per pair ; worsted stockings,
2s. per pair; handkerchiefs, Bd. each ; calico, Bd. per yard ;
print gown, 6s. ; bonnets, 2s. each ; shawls, 10s. each ; women’s
stockings. Is. 6d. per pair ; women’s shoes, 7s. per pair ; flannel,
2s. per yard ; blankets, 15s. per pair.
Female Servants in South Australia —A private letter, dated
Finnesflat, near Adelaide, South Australia, states that the sea-
son, which was about closing, had been a very good one, but the
scarcity of farm servants, of both sexes, especially females, had
been a serious drawback to farm operations. The writer, Mr.
M‘Harg, had offered as much as 15s. per week with rations for
female servants, without being able to engage any; the conse-
quence was, that out of 200 milch cows, he had been obliged, for
a period of six weeks, to turn out between 30 and 40 every
morning without milking them. His servants, he adds, were
quite knocked up with being overworked, and the whole neigh-
bourhood was in the same state. Eventually he engaged an ordi-
nary seaman, a hardy Highlander, who had never milked a cow
before. He, however, turned out remarkably well. Cheese was
selling at £6O per ton, or 6£d. per lb., and salt butter at lOd. per
i 97


lb. Draught horses were in demand, and fetched as high as £lO
each for good ones.
CHAPTER XV.
WESTERN AND NOR T HERN
AUSTRALIA.
Swan River or Western Australia.
Description of the Colony.—lts early Difficulties — Extent.—Pawn
and Freemantle Gladstone— Cockburris Sound— Austrahnd.
Leschenhault. — Vasse Inlet.—Winder's Bay Whale Fishing.
—Climate of Western Australia—Lands occupied.—The inte-
rior.—Mr. Von Sommer's Discoveries.—Agriculture and Grazing.
—Sandal-wood Exported.—Demand for Labour.—Wages and
Prices of Firing.
Tins colony is not so great a favourite as the other Australian
settlements, though its capabilities are equal to any ot them. It
has from the first been very badly managed, and its progress dis-_
turbed by the repeated bunglings of the homo government, ot
which, generally, British colonists have strong reason to com-
plain. When the colony was founded, immense tracts ot the best
land were given away-a brother of Sir Robert Peel had the
grant made to him of a very large district, of 250,000 acres, along
the banks of the Swan River, where the first settlement was
effected. The progress of the colony was very slow, and tor
some time the settlers laboured occasionally under the severest
distress. For the purpose of compelling the emigrants to buy
the land, squatting was prohibited ; but this absurd regulation
was found to have so bad an effect that it was shortly repeale ,
and now Western Australia is advancing steadily in prosperity,
like the other Australian colonies. The recent discovery of seve-
ral rich seams of coal in the district, points to it as the seat ot
great maritime and commercial importance at some future day.
The growth of wool has recently increased, and in 184 b, the
colony imported into Great Britain 340,267 lbs. of this article.
Western Australia comprises the western coast of JNew Bo -
land ; it is in length 1200 miles from north to south, and 800
98


from east to west. The portion of this area yet settled, does
not, however, exceed 300 miles along the southern extremity,
and, excepting in the pastoral and grazing establishments, only
a very small part of the population is located in the interior.
The colony now comprehends Swan River and King George’s
Sound ; the former on the western coast at nearly its southern-
most point, the other on the south coast at about its most west-
erly extremity. 'There are numerous fine bays and inlets all
round the coast, which is, in some places, remarkably well
timbered.
Freemantle is the principal port of the colony, and is situated
at the mouth of the Swan River—it is a very thriving place.
Perth, which is situated about 12 miles inland from Freemantle,
is the seat of government. The site of Perth is well chosen,
being situated on a picturesque spot on the north bank of the
Swan River. The society here is of a more superior, refined,
and quieter kind, than is to be found in the other colonies. The
original colonists consisting principally of respectable middle-
class families from the provincial districts of the United King-
dom ; they have retained much of their rural and hospitable
manner of living, and if they are less enterprising, are equally
happy with the more bustling and go-a-head colonists of New
South Wales and South Australia.
About 12 miles south of Freemantle, is Cockburn’s Sound, a
secure place for vessels throughout the year, and near it the new
town of Gladstone is forming, in a capacious bay, well situated
for shipping.
Eighty miles south of Perth is the new town of Australind,
founded a few years ago by the Western Australian Company,
on the large estuary which receives the waters of the Brunswick,
Collie, and Preston Rivers. Between Australind and Gladstone,
also on the coast, are the port of Lexenhault and the town of
Bunbury. More to the south of Australind, is the Yasse inlet,
in the neighbourhood of which is some fine grazing land, remark-
able, among other productions, for its famous butter and cheese.
This place is in the county of Sussex, which extends southwards
to Cape Lenwin, which is the most south-westerly point of New
Holland.
Keeping round this point, on the southern coast, is Augusta
station, situated on the shore of Port Augusta, or Flinder’s Bay.
The Blackwood, a very fine river, discharges its waters into this
bay. More to the south-east is Nomalup, and next comes Tor-
bay, afterwards King George’s Sound, and then Princess Royal
Harbour. These two last inlets are considered the best places
of resort on the Western Australian coast. They are much fre-
quented by black and sperm whales, and considerable whaling
establishments are generally to be found along their shores. In
1340, as many as 20 British and 32 foreign whalers entered the
port of Freemantle ; 33 British and 35 foreign went into King
99


George’s Sound, and 39 foreign into Vasse and Leschenhault, —
total, 154. The furnishing of supplies to the whaling ships affords
a good trade to the colonists.
The climate of Western Australia is highly favourable to the
European constitution, though it is hotter than South Australia.
In summer, the nights are very cool and pleasant, enabling the
labourer to rise refreshed from his rest, in cheerfulness and
health.
The principal land yet located by the settlers is situated in the
districts just described ; the chief portion is in the valley of the
Swan River, where the land is rich and fertile, growing all sorts
of crops. In some places the soil is light and sandy, well adapted
for garden and rotation crops ; while other portions are stiff' and
strong, suited for plants of longer growth.
As in New South Wales, the finest land is found in the inte-
rior—where it is both richer and better watered, and in all
respects more suitable for grazing as well as agricultural pur-
poses. On exploring the inland country, it was found generally
open, well watered, and luxuriant in grass. It was discovered
that beyond the Darling range of hills, extending from north to
south, in a line parallel with the coast, and varying in breadth
from ten to forty miles, there was abundance of undulating
grassy lands, which were soon occupied by the thriving flocks
and herds of the colonists. Still further beyond, lay even more
inviting regions, which have recently been explored, and ascer-
tained to present rich tracts of pasture land, sufficient for the
purposes of the colony for centuries to come.
An extensive geological survey of the interior in the neigh-
bourhood of Jurien Bay and Champion Bay, was made in the
course of last year by Mr. Von Sommer, the Government Sur-
veyor, who found indications of extensive coal fields in all direc-
tions ; and coal is already being worked in different parts of the
colony. He speaks of a tract of very good, well watered, and
wooded pastoral land, stretching away to the south-east from the
points named, and which he traversed for more than 200 miles ;
he adds, “ I think it very probable that the good land continues
in that direction, with the coal formation, down to the south
coast.”* Other districts of excellent land were traversed by
him, “as finely and richly grassed as the best parts of South
Australia.” Numerous thick seams of coal were found in the
district.” Valuable ores of quicksilver were also found in the
Darling range.
The occupations of the colonists are partly agricultural and
partly pastoral. In 1847, the land under cultivation comprised
5767 acres, the chief portion being in wheat, which produces a
good crop : wheat, barley, maize, and millet, still continue to
yield abundantly on land not manured for eleven or twelve years.
* Eighth Report of the Colonial Land and Emigration Commissioner
(1848) p. 43.
100


800 acres were devoted to the culture of the vine and olive, which
in parts of the colony, grow with great luxuriance. The quality
of grapes grown in the neighbouroood of Perth, the capital, is
very fine, and include nearly every species. Currants are likely
also to be general. The Zante currants thrive as much as the
grape, but none have been yet produced for exportation. A
great deal of wine has been made for consumption in the colony,
and projects are entertained for procuring a number of German
vine-dressers. Potatoes yield a good crop, a native yam found
in the colony having proved very useful. A great deal of barley
is also grown.
Sheep and cattle grazing are prosperous, the number of sheep
in the colony being about 150,000. The other kinds of stock
thrive in the same manner as in the Australian colonies already
described.
But a small quantity of land was sold last year in the colony,
the settlers preferring to squat, as in the other colonics. Owing
to the enormous grants originally made, land may be obtained at
a low price in the colony, and the Government are without a
land fund for immigration purposes. In 1844, a million acres
could have been purchased at Bs. an acre, and this is at present
about the market price. The fact that the system of legal con-
veyance of land is the same as in England acts as a great
obstruction. In the neighbourhood of some of the towns, allot-
ments are leased at very low rents.
A new article of export has recently been found in the Sandal
wood of the colony, which promises to prove of great conse-
quence. This tree grows chiefly in the country, beyond the Dar-
ling range, at a distance of about 60 miles from the coast. The
settlers bring the wood to the sea-coast at a cost of from £6 to
£8 per ton to the merchants, who, in their turn, have disposed of
it to the masters of vessels at £l2 per ton ; and it is supposed
afterwards to fetch at Hong Kong and the Chinese markets as
much as £BO per ton. In the exports of 1846 only 32 tons
appear, but it was anticipated that in the year 1847 as many as
500 tons would be exported.
Demand far Labour m Western Australia. —A committee of
the Legislative Council of the Colony, recently appointed to in-
quire into and report upon the means to procure a supply of
labour, thus report:—
“ There exists in this colony a great and increasing demand for labour,
arising chietly from the following causes:—
*• Labourers establishing themselves as tenants or landowners upon new
farms.
Shepherds having invested their wages in stock, and having thus become
flock-owners. (Both the above not only withdraw the old but themselves
require an additional supply of labour.)
The increase of Flocks and Herds. —This is much retarded by the scarcity
of labour, and consequent losses from want of sufficient attendance. Such
Josses are, in proportion, as injurious to imperial as to colonial interests
i 2 101


" The increasing cultivation of the Vine, Olive, See.— The remarkable fitness
of this colony for this object, and for ‘ Mediterranean produce’ in general (a
soil and climate suited to which has hitherto been a desideratum among the
resources of the empire), renders it particularly painful that such efforts
should be, as at present, paralyzed from want of labour.
“ The new and increasmg export trade in Sandal-n ood, which, although a
most important benefit to the colony, especially as affording employment at a
time of year when tillage is suspended ; yet necessarily, from its considerable
and immediate profits, and the facility of undertaking it without capital, with-
draws many persons even for the whole year, from labour on the farms, while
it causes a demand for labour to supply food to these persons in their new
pursuit.
“ To these causes for increased demand of labour may be added several
minor ones, as the increase of enterprise in Fisheries, both whaling and other-
wise, such as the new company for preparing cured fish, turtle, and trepang,
as well as sealing, at the Abrolhos, &c. &c.
“ Several new enterprises are also on the eve of commencement, and only
await a supply of labour. Among the chief of these promise to be—
“ Timber for exportation.
“ Coal.— The great seams of coal recently discovered, from five to seven
feet in thickness, of first-rate quality, and requiring neither sinking nor drain-
age, will doubtless soon draw both capital and labour to work them for supply
of steamers, engines, &c.
“ Mines.— Vast quantities of the richest possible iron, pronounced by an
experienced geologist to be the finest he had ever seen, and containing in the
ore a natural fiux, which renders it easy to smelt, are to be found in various
parts of the colony. Zinc of rich quality has been found, though the quantity,
expense of working, &c., are not yet ascertained ; and several other ores, as
copper, lead, quicksilver, &c., appear to exist, scattered over a large extent of
country. To these may be added slate, abundant, and of superior quality.
“ The quantity of valuable gums will, it is to be expected, soon attract a
large share of labour to their collection; a work at present committed chiefly
to the aborigines, and almost in embryo, no attention having been paid to it
until very lately.
« The peculiar adaptation of this country for breeding large herds of horses
and mules has already attracted much attention both at the Mauritius and in
India, where the importance of forming in our vast horse-pastures extensive
studs for the supply of the Indian cavalry and artillery has been repeatedly
discussed ; a project rendered particularly desirable by the peculiar charac-
teristics of the Western Australian horses, gentleness, endurance, and fleetness,
the two first of which the) possess to a degree perhaps w ithout parallel. The
high prices realized by some exported hence to Mauritius, and now favourites
there on the turt, have already directed some portion of labour to this object,
and one establishment has also been sent from India for the purpose.
“ To these may be added a variety of other valuable resources, for the sup-
ply of which Great Britain is nowin a great degree dependent on foreign
nations, and which could more abundantly be produced in this colony by the
present inmates of English workhouses. Among these may be reckoned
cotton, hemp, hides, tallow, bark, the indigenous ‘ phormium’ for cordage of
the strongest texture, and many other products by which England would not
only render her empire more independent of foreign powers, but would obtain
for her own shipping the carrying-trade enjoyed by theirs.
“ From these and other causes, such as the increasing necessity for roads,
piers, bridges, canals, and other public works required by an increasing pro-
duction and export, there is an increasing demand for, and an increasing defi-
ciency of labour, to an extent which actually threatens, if not remedied, to
paralyze enterprise, to deter capital from investment, and even to cause the
abandonment of some existing cultivation and improvement, and a relapse in
such from civilisation to the wilderness ; an event the more serious since from
the rapid growth of vegetation, and the stimulating effects of former tillage,
arable land, if neglect, d for a few years, becomes more densely encumbered
with brushwood, and even timber, than the adjacent wilds."
Wages of Labour and Prices of Living.- According to the
102


most recent advices, labourers, sbeplierds, and female servants,
were in great request throughout the colony. The wages of
agricultural labourers were from £24 to £3O per annum, with
rations ; butchers, brass-founders, bakers, bricklayers, brick-
makers, blacksmiths, carpenters, and cabinet-makers, received
6s. a-day ; masons, millwrights, millers, and miners, 6s. a-day ;
common labourers, Bs. a-day ; good sheep-shearers, £3O to £4O
a-year, with rations ; sawyers, 14s. per 100 feet. Female ser-
vants of all kinds were getting from £l5 to £25 a-year, with
board and lodging.
The prices of living were somewhat higher than in some of the
other colonies. At the end of 1051, wheat was selling at ss. per
bushel; bread, per lb. ; flour, 325. Bd. for 196 lbs.; rice,
2d. per lb. ; tea, 2s. to 3s. ; sugar, 3d. ; coffee, Is. ; fresh meat,
3gd. ; fresh butter, Is. 6d.; salt butter. Is. 4d. ; potatoes, £9
per ton ; brandy, Ills, per gallon ; beer, 2s. per gallon ; tobacco,
2s. 6d. per lb.
The rent of a lodging for a mechanic’s family was about ss.
a-week.
A recent Adelaide paper says that—“ In the district of Perth, Swan River,
W.S„ shepherds, it is said, can readily obtain £5O and £6O per annum,
besides the usual liberal supply of rations, and labourers ss. per day. The
Perth Gazette contains an advertisement for between 200 and 000 labourers.
The mining operations were proceeding very favourably, and the demand for
miners is represented to be as great as for any other kind of labourers and
mechanics. Great preparations were making lor the boiling down of sheep,
when legs of mutton could be obtained for the extraordinary low price Of 6d.
each.”
It is calculated that about 1,500 or 1,600 labourers annua ly,
might here be provided for with as much advantage as in any
other colony.
CHAPTER XVT.
Minor Fields of Emigration in Australia.
Moreton Bay, or Cooksland. —Its Capabilities. —The great Cotton
District of Australia. —Aspect oj the Country.—The Clarence
River District.—Facilities for Settling.—Demand for Labour,
Port Essington. — Victoria. —Natural Productions.
There are other eligible fields for emigration in Australia
above-named. Among others, Moreton Bay, or Cooksland, on
the northern boundary of New South Wales, has been the sub-
ject of high encomiums.
Cooksland is situated to the north of the thriving colony of
New South Wales, on the same line of coast along the Southern
103


Pacific Ocean. The coast line of Cooksland, or the Moreton Pay
district, is five hundred miles in extent from norfii to south. The
entire inhabitants do not exceed five thousand souls.
Being nearer the equator than New South Wales, it is warmer
in summer than the more southern colonies; the soil is also
better, and such productions as the cotton plant, sugar cane,
vine, tobacco, &c., arrive at perfect maturity in this season.
The winters of Cooksland are mild, and of short duration; the
cold being scarcely of such intensity as to check the tendcrest
vegetation. Field labour can be prosecuted in the district all the
year round with perfect safety and ease.
The external aspect of the country is mountainous —a chain ot
hills running parallel to the coast about sixty miles inland up-
wards of 4000 feet in height. Many streams run down from
these mountains, and intersect the country in all directions.
Some of these contribute to form large rivers, which arc navigable
for steamers of a hundred tons burden for from 20 to 50 miles
inland. The most important of them are the Clarence and
Brisbane rivers. Along the banks of the rivers, land of the
finest quality is found, possessing the advantages of water car-
riage, immense supplies of coal, and a climate ot unsurpassed
salubrity.
The Clarence river flows through a peculiarly rich and fertile
district. The soil is alluvial deposit, in some places of great
depth. The river is navigable for a groat distance inland : and
the navigation is very beautiful. It runs into the sea at Shoal
Bay, which is an estuary of considerable extent, abounding in
fish. The river is half a mile broad at the point where it enters
Shoal Bay. On each side the banks present a deep belt of
luxuriant forest brush upon soil of the richest description.
About fifteen miles above Shoal Bay, the river divides into two
arms, both of which are navigable. Between these two arms a
rich and fertile tract of country is enclosed of about 40,000 acres,
in which, a few years ago, only two families were located. The
whole of the land is of excellent quality, and possesses numerous
advantages for the settlement of industrious colonists. Further
inland and higher up the river, the land becomes better adapted
for grazing—the soil is still excellent and water is abundant.
The grass is thick and highly nutritious. For thirty miles from
the junction of the two branches of the Clarence river, the land
is of the best quality, and admirably adapted for cultivation for
many miles on either side of the banks. It produces excellent
crops of maize ; wheat of good quality is also grown, though not
in great quantities. . .
The description we have above given of the land in the district
watered by the Clarence river, mainly applies to that traversed
by the Richmond river. The country, is, however, here level to
a much greater extent —the Richmond flowing for about forty
miles through an almost perfectly level valley, seldom less than
104


twelve miles wide. The soil is alluvial, and very rich; —the
greater beauty and diversity of country on the Clarence river,
and the better navigation of the river, will, however, always
render the Clarence the favourite district. There are no
epidemics, and few diseases of any kind known in these districts.
There are at present about 150,000 sheep, and 30,000 cattle in
the Cooksland colony.
The Emigration Commissioners in a late report say that u there
is land at Moreton Bay, which is known to be of first-rate
fertility, and capable not only of producing wheat and maize,
but every other grain. The district too, is well supplied with
water.” As exemplifications of the fertility of the land in the
neighbourhood of Moreton Bay, Mr. Mackenzie says that 80
bushels of maize have been repeatedly raised from one acre ; and
not less than ten tons of onions have been raised from a single
acre of land.*
The prices of land are the same as in New South Wales, and
the terms of occupancy are the same.
This locality is 500 miles north of Sydney, on the route to
Torres Straits, and already it has a weekly steam communication
with Sydney. The Bay is an extensive basin, accessible for
ships of large size by two different channels ; and it commands
a range of country now rapidly settling, of boundless extent, and
of extraordinary capabilities. The principal settlement is at
Brisbane Town, on the banks of the principal navigable river.
There is already a local newspaper, and many highly respectable
inhabitants. Considerable quantities of wool are already im-
ported into Sydney from this district.
There is a great demand for labour at Moreton Bay. Several
ship loads of emigrants have recently landed there, but have had
scarcely any perceptible effect on the high prices of labour, and
many such importations will be similarly absorbed with scarcely
any visible result. In consequence of the great want of hands it
was anticipated that a large majority of the lambs would have to
be destroyed—no labour being available for their rearing. The
Moreton Bay squatters were even worse off than their fellow
colonists in this respect. Most of them are young men of family
connexions, and it was thought they would have lost the
greater part of the stock long before the arrivals referred to.
Female servants were receiving from £2O to £25 a-year at the
period of Dr. Lang’s visit to Moreton Bay, and were not to be
had even on these terms. Dr. Dorsey’s family, at Ipswich, had
had one for three years previous, a respectable young woman
from the north of Ireland, at £lB a-year. She had drawn £ll
during her engagement, for wearing apparel, etc., and had £43
to receive when she returned to Sydney, at the desire of her rela-
tives, who were residing there.
Mechanics, especially of the following classes, namely:—
* Tea Year »’ Vractval Experience in Australia, p. 9.
105


carpenters, joiners, wheelwrights, cabinet-makers, stone-masons,
bricklayers, plasterers, blacksmiths, saddlers, shoemakers, tailors,
etc., will find ready and remunerating employment in Cooks-
land.
Port Essington is another very attractive locality, though at
present of comparatively minor importance. It is the only point
of Northern Australia at which a settlement has yet been effected.
It is 2300 miles from Sydney, and 1800 from Singapore; and
forms the northern link between our possessions on the eastern
and western coasts of Australia, thus securing the north and
north-west coasts, and closing the ring fence with which we have
girt the island of New Holland.*
The most striking feature of this portion of Northern Australia
is an excellent harbour, sufficient to hold the largest fleet, and
since the establishment of the settlement, it has been frequently
of service to vessels in distress, and the surviving crews of ship-
wrecked vessels. Good teak and oak for repairing ships are
found at the same place.
A station was first formed at Port Essington in 1838. The
township, Victoria, is situated 16 miles from the harbour; the
object of this selection being to secure the advantages of a good
soil, fresh water, and an easy approach for the ships in port.
Lieutenant Stewart, with a party, explored the Cobourg Penin-
sula, on which Victoria is formed, shortly after his arrival there ;
and on the second day of their journey, they crossed several
running streams, with grassy patches, fine cedar trees, while
thick woods of mangroves appeared on all sides. Their observa-
tions extended over about 80 miles. Lieut. Stewart says —
“ There is abundance of fresh water on the Peninsula ; the south
side is the best locality ; the trees are free from the white ant;
and the cabbage palm abounds.” Captain Grey says “ the
productions for the growth of which the country and climate
seem best adapted, are cotton, sugar, indigo, and rice.”
* Martin, “On the British Possessions in Europe, Africa, Asia, and
Australia.


CHAPTER XVII.
PRACTICAL INFORMATION FOR
EMIGRANTS.
What Classes might Emigrate to Australia with Advantage.
Advantages of Emigration to Australia.—Starvation unknown. —
Classes fitted to Emigrate with Advantage, Capitalists, Men of
small Capital, and Labourers. —Conduct on arrival in the
Colony.—Hints to Men of small means. — Co-operation.
The Australian colonies present an almost boundless field for
the industry of man. All who are willing and able to work may
live, and live well, there. The country is in most places in a
state of natural pasture, growing food sufficient for flocks and
herds without limit. A large proportion of it is fertile open
land, fit for the plough; where a man with a hoe, and the labour
of a few days, may “ chip” into the earth sufficient maize or
Indian corn to sustain him for the entire year. Starvation, is
unknown in Australia; the temperate mildness of the climate
renders starvation from cold unknown, and the fertility of the
soil, and the immense superabundance of animal food, renders
starvation from hunger equally improbable. Of course, a man
who goes to Australia to better his circumstances, must be pre-
pared to work, and ready even to work hard. Nothing is to be
accomplished anywhere without industry. Labour, there as
hero, is the price that must be paid for food, clothing, housing,
and the comforts of life. But there one may always make sure
of this at least —that labour will always maintain existence
comfortably, and in most cases enable the labourer to save suffi-
cient money to enable him shortly to become a proprietor on his
own account.
There are three classes of emigrants fitted to do well in
Australia, by the exercise of diligence, sobriety, and daily over-
sight and industry. These are —
Ist.—Large capitalists, who look to a profitable investment
for their capital, and an active and honourable career of industry
on a large scale.
2nd. —Men of moderate means who look to the proprietorship
of a small piece of land with a comfortable subsistence for their
family, and the subsequent easy settlement of them in business
for life.


3rd. —Labourers, mechanics, and others of the humbler class,
who look to the wages of their daily labour as a means of com-
fortable living.
For the first class—the capitalists—there is a field for the
profitable employment of wealth, to any extent. The capitalist
may engage in sheep-farming, in cattle-grazing, in coal-working,
or in manufactures, with almost the certain prospect of advan-
tage. Like the other classes of emigrants, however, such an
one must lead a busy, working life. Ho must avoid dissipation,
and steadily pursue industry, else as in this country and every-
where, his life will be a failure. The capitalist with ,£5OOO
would commence sheep or cattle-farming with great advantage-
that is, always supposing he has first acquired the necessary
experience in the colony—and he may live as well, and bring up
his family as well, as a man with four times the sum in England.
Then, the man of moderate means, of from £2OO to £3OO, may
also invest his money with advantage in sheep-farming, com-
mencing on the system of halves above referred to, until he has
acquired colonial experience, and his stock has increased and
his profits accumulated so as to enable him profitably to com-
mence with a stock-farm of his own. Or he may buy a piece of
cleared and cultivated land, with a house and other improvements
on it, in the neighbourhood of a town ; he will find such lots
often offered for sale by private individuals, at prices considerably
below the government rate of £1 an acre. Several good farms
of this description have recently been sold in good localities in
the different colonies, at about 10s. an acre. This would be a
good beginning, and if the neighbourhood be a thriving one, he
might settle comfortably for life. It is always well to postpone
effecting any purchase of land until a personal inspection lias
been made. As a rule, never bargain for land in a colony, or
pay any part of its price in this country. It is a foolish and
reckless practice. Purchasers should also be careful to ascer-
tain that the titie of the land they propose to buy is good; this is
more particularly required in New South Wales; for the moral
character of that colony is not yet of the best. There is another
important consideration—let them ascertain that in their con-
templated location, there is a plentiful supply of water in all
seasons, as otherwise their farm will be comparatively valueless.
They ought to make particular enquiry into the reasons of the
previous occupiers leaving the place.
Young men of small capital would do well to hire themselves
out as assistant stockmen for the first year or two, to obtain the
requisite experience, should they intend to pursue cattle-grazing.
Or. if they will not let themselves out to hire, they would do
well to give their services for their board for a twelve-month to
some respectable stockholder, who will generally be glad of their
services on such terms. Three or four such young men might
club their means together, say to the amount of £l2OO or £l5OO,
108


and commence with great advantage to themselves, saving the
expenses of stock-keepers, shepherds, &c., which is a great tax
on the beginner, in consequence of the high rate of wages in
these colonies. Sidney even says— ‘‘ A cattle establishment might
be started with £2OO by four countrymen, each putting down
£25 for the purchase of cattle, and they would not only be able
to live and bring up families after the first six months, but in
the course of years would each be in possession of a small herd
of cattle and a snug farm. Indeed the principle of association
for cattle breeding might be carried to any extent, by the union
of colonial experience with capital, on a system in which all
engaged should have an interest in the success of the establish-
ment, instead of being mere hired servants.”*
Persons, on arriving in the colonies with capital, whether
great or small, should be exceedingly circumspect as to the
persons they associate with, and take no advice which involves
the outlay of money, unless their information comes from a
respectable quarter and is to be relied upon. It is always best
to deposit any large sum of ready money in a good banking-
house, of which there are many in the principal towns.
To labouring men—shepherds, mechanics, and others—Aus-
tralia offers numerous advantages. It has been called “ the
poor man’s country.” There is abundance of food at a very low
price, and much demand for labour. There are indeed very few
labouring men there who have not the means, besides living well,
of saving money. If the working man do not, he is generally
either indolent, profligate, or drunken. Distress of the labouring-
classes, in the sense that term conveys in England, has never yet
been known there. There has always been plenty of food and
clothing for all.
To this wo may add, that all who have strength for out-door
labour, joined to energy of character, and a determination not
to shrink from temporary difficulties, may confidently turn their
attention to the Australian colonies as the scene for their future
industry. Those who have been accustomed to a country life are,
of course, more fitted to succeed in agricultural pursuits than
persons who have been brought up as artizans and manufacturers,
but we believe that any individual who, to youth and health,
joins perseverance and industry, will be certain of success. A
man must be ready to turn his hand to anything that offers fair
wages. Above all, the jack-of-all-trades will be found the most
useful of all men in the new settlements of the interior. In the
bush, every one plies away for himself; and if he work “ with a
will,” he will be a prosperous, and we should hope, a happy man.
If two or three families in the humbler classes were to join
their means together, to take a farm or run of grazing laud, at
first starting they would get on much better than singly. They
could help each other in clearing it, in erecting huts, in culti-
* Australian Hand Hook, p. &6.
k 109


rating the land, and in getting in the harvest, saving the outlay
in labourer’s wages. They would also have the advantage of
each other’s society, which is of no slight importance in the bush.
If such partnerships cannot be formed in this country before
leaving, they may be formed, as they often are, during the
voyage ; but caution requires to be exercised in this respect.
Intending settlers will find it advisable to sacrifice some of their
own views as to the district in which they mean to settle, in order
to have the assistance of steady companions elsewhere. Work-
ing men who intend to adopt the settlors’ life might often club
their means together in this way. A method of doing this offers
itself in a large way, by means of the emigration societies and
clubs already started in most of the large towns of England.
Those joining such ought, however, first to satisfy themselves as
to the responsibility of the parties setting them on foot, as well
as the soundness of the plans proposed.
There are also great attractions now for gold-diggers, in New
South Wales and Victoria, of which we have treated in another
place.
CHAPTER XVIII.
How to Emigrate.
Ships to Australia.—Eoqpense of the Voyage.—Articles not to he
taken for Sale.—Food to be taken , and other Articles. — Books. —
Government Emigration Agents, their Duties.
WheiN a man has made up his mind to emigrate to Australia,
he begins to look out for the best way of getting there. Some,
who can afford it, go at their own expense; others as free emi-
grants at the expense of the colonial emigration funds. The
former will have no difficulty in finding a proper vessel. The
best of these sail from London ; vessels also leave Liverpool and
Plymouth for Australia, but London is generally preferred as the
shipping port. In these Australian vessels the cabin passage is
from £4O to £BO, according to the quality of the vessel and the
accommodation given ; the intermediate passage between the
cabin and the steerage, is from £25 to £BO ; and the steerage
fare, from £lO to £l5. In all these cases, provisions are included
in the fare. Children from one to fourteen years of age, are
charged half the price of adults ; when under one, no charge is
made, though there are occasional exceptions to this rule. Ves-
sels about to sail are well advertized in the London and other
papers.
It is, of course, always better for those who have only
moderate means at their disposal, to take the steerage passage ;
110


and on no account should they overburden themselves with lug-
gage. If they can conveniently expend from £l5 to £2O on the
following articles, they w r ill find them of use when they settle in
the colony ; bedding, chest of drawers, washing-stand, chair,
lamp, glass, and a few articles of pottery ; and let the articles of
furniture be plain and strong, of good seasoned wood. These,
however, are not indispensable, and if the emigrant can put up
with inconveniences, he need not take them—the money, in most
instances, will be found more convenient. Nothing is more use-
ful than ready- money in the Australian colonies, where British
sovereigns always pass for their full value. When the emigrant
is in possession of any considerable sum of money, he ought not
to take it about his person, but to remit it to the colony for which
he is bound, through any of the colonial banks, most of which
have offices or agencies in London. The Royal Bank of Austra-
lia, Moorgate-street, may be named as one instance.
The mechanic will of course take his tools ; and all will take
a reasonable supply of clothes in proportion to their means.
For Outfit, &c., see Appendix.
As a general rule, money should be taken in preference to car-
rying a stock of articles for sale. Sometimes money is to be
made by so doing ; but the risk had better be avoided. Possibly
the articles taken, may not be in demand when the emigrant
arrives in the colony, and merchants and tradesmen are generally
very watchful to procure a supply of everything that is in -gen-
eral demand. Even though the goods which the emigrant may
require on landing are somewhat dearer than he could have
bought them for, yet in the long run it will be found the wiser
economy to buy them there as he needs them—using his spare
money for more profitable purposes.
As the voyage is tedious—lasting for about four months , and
the ship diet may require some variety, intermediate and steer-
age passengers, who can afford it, should take the following
articles, to allow them, at their pleasure, the requisite variety of
diet: —For each person 100 lbs. of flour ; one pound of tea; two
pounds of coffee ; three pounds of cocoa ; 100 eggs, (first rub-
bed with butter and then wiped clean, turning them frequently) ;
a few dozens of bloaters ; some cured tongue and ham, and a
few pots of preserved meat. Eight pounds of candles may also
be taken, and a good ship lamp. These articles will be found
very useful in the course of the voyage.
There are other articles, such as brushes, shaving tackle,
combs, soap, a pair of blankets and stout coverlet with two pairs
of sheets for each person, which will be required—each steerage
passenger furnishing his own berth. For each person also, a
knife and fork, a spoon, a strong tin or wooden plate, will be
necessary. A tin quart and pint pot, so made as to hang on the
stove or grate, with a tin two-gallon vessel, to hold the daily
allowance of water, will also be required.
11l


Wc should also recommend emigrants to take what useful and
interesting books they can procure, for reading during the voyage
and afterwards when they have settled in the country. These
are excellent companions, are always interesting and instructive,
often bring many friends together, and will never quarrel with
you, or lead into temptation. They are always better than bad
company, and after a day’s hard work, are altogether much more
agreeable and amusing. Interesting books from home are very
much sought after in the Australian bush.
Agents have been appointed by the Colonial Land and Emi-
gration Commissioners, in our principal sea-ports, for the purpose
of giving every necessary advice and protection to intending emi-
grants, whether free emigrants or emigrants on their own account.
They see to the observance of the salutary provisions of the
Passengers’ Act. In all that relates to emigration, they con-
stitute, as it were, in every port, the appointed poor man’s friend.
They take notice whether the ship offered for his conveyance is
safe, and fit for its purpose ; they see to the sufficiency of the
provisions on board ; they prohibit over-crowding ; and they
make every effort to avert or to frustrate those numerous and
heartless frauds which are but too constantly attempted, at the
moment of departure, upon the humble class of emigrants.
They also see that there is proper surgical assistance provided on
board. These officers have been the means of accomplishing
much good in all these respects.
The names and addresses of these Government Emigration
Agents, are as follow Capt. Lean, R.N., 70, Lower Thames-
street, London.—Capt. Patey, R.N., Liverpool.—Lieut. Carew,
R.N., Plymouth.—Capt. Brownrigg, R.N., Glasgow & Greenock.
—Lieut. Henry, R.N., Dublin.—Capt. Friend, R.N., Cork. —
Lieut. Stark, R.N., Belfast.—Mr. Ellis, R.N., Limerick.—Capt.
Kerr, R.N., Sligo, Donegal, Ballina, &c. —Lieut. Smith, R.N.,
Londonderry.—Lieut. Griffiths, R.N., Waterford.—Lieut. Saun-
ders, R.N., Galway.


CHAPTER XIX.
Free Emigrants.
Emigration of Fiee Labourers at the expense of the Colonies. —
Parties Eligible. — Qualifications of Emigrants.—Application
and Approval.—Payments towards Passages. —Conations to Ap-
plicants.—Clothing required.—Regulations on Ship-board.—
Landing in the Colonies. —Regulations for Protection of Fe-
males. —Best time to arrive in Australia.
A very efficient system of regulations has been provided for
the free emigration of labourers to New South Wales and South
Australia, which, so far as they have gone, are found to work very
satisfactorily. The class of labourers who are provided with
free passages are, in our opinion, much too limited, being con-
fined to shepherds, agricultural labourers, female domestic and
farm servants, and a few descriptions of country mechanics, such
as blacksmiths, wheelwrights, carpenters, &c. There is no reason
why the classes should be limited ; all able-bodied men, willing
to labour, ought to be equally eligible ; at least should have an
opportunity of so emigrating, those who are less in request pay-
ing some portion of their passage as a compensation. To be a
shepherd in Australia requires no special education ; chiefly ac-
tivity and attention are required, and these are possessed oy the
town-bred artizan quite as much as by the inhabitant of the
rural districts. Sidney even says, ho would prefer the town-bred
weaver or mechanic as a shepherd, to a clod-hopper ; as they
have more education, adapt themselves more easily to circum-
stances, and have fewer prejudices. Let us hope that these regu-
lations will shortly be relaxed in respect to the selection of the
labourers eligible for free passages.
The most eligible class of emigrants are married agricultural
labourers, shepherds, or herdsmen, and women of the working
class; and these are taken up to the age of 45 at £1 per head ;
between 45 and 50, at £5 per head; and between 50 and 60
(when they are comparatively useless to the colony), at £ll per
head. The next best class are married mechanics and artisans,
and these, with their wives, are taken up to 45, at £2; between
45 and 50, at £6 ; and between 50 and 60 at £l4. The children
of both these classes, under 14, pay 10s. a-head.
But single men, if accompanying their parents, are required to
pay £2 a-head, and if not accompanying their parents, £3 a-head;
and of the latter very few are taken, both because they arc the
most likely at once to resort to the gold fields, and because there
is already so great an excess of males in Australia, and the
unassisted emigration is so certain to add to that excess, that it
113


EMIGRANTS GUIDE TO AUSTRALIA
becomes a matter of great importance to avoid as much as
possible any thing which would increase the disparity. Families
with more than four children under 12 are also considered
ineligible, both because a number of young children interferes
with the engagements of the parents in the colony, and because
their presence on shipboard tends to engender sickness and
increase mortality.
The following are the most recent regulations published by the
Commissioners on the subject, and as they are very important,
and necessary to be observed by all applicants for a free passage
to Australia, we give them at full length :
Qualifications of Emigrants. —l. The emigrants must be of
those callings which from time to time are most in demand in the
colony. They must be sober, industrious, and of general good
moral character, of all of which decisive certificates will be re-
quired. They must also be in good health, free from all bodily
or mental defects, and the adults must in all respects be capable
of labour and going out to work for wages. The candidates most
acceptable are young married couples without children.
2. The separation of husbands and wives and of parents from
children under 18 will in no case be allowed.
3. Single women cannot be taken without their parents,
unless they go under the immediate care of some near relatives.
Single women with illegitimate children can in no caso be taken.
4. Single men cannot be taken except in a number not exceed-
ing that of the single women by the same ship.
5. Widowers, and widows with young children, persons who
intend to buy land, or to invest capital in trade, or who are in
the habitual receipt of parish relief, or who have not been
vaccinated or had the small-pox, or whoso families comprise
more than four children under 12, cannot be accepted.
Application and Approval. — 6. Applications must be made
to the Commissioners in a Form to be obtained at their office, to
be duly filled up and attested, as explained in the Form itself.
The filling up of the Form, however, confers no claim to a
passage, and implies no pledge that the candidates, though
apparently within the regulations, will be accepted.
7. If approved of, the applicants will receive a printed
“ Approval Circular,” calling for the contribution required by
Article 8, and pointing out how it is to be paid. After it is paid
they will, as soon as practicable, receive an embarkation order
(which is not transferable), naming the ship in which they are to
embark, and the time and place of joining her. They must not
leave their homes before the receipt of this order.
Payments towards Passages. — B. The contributions above-
mentioned, out of which the Commissioners will provide bedding
and mess utensils, &c., for the voyage, will bo as follows :


Age. *
Classes.
45 and
under
50 and
I. Married agricultural labourers, shep-A
herds, herdsmen, and their wives and f
children under 18; also female domes-f
tic and farm servants—per head I
11. Single men between 14 and 36 of any of!
the above callings, and whether part of [
a family or not, each j
111. Country mechanics, such as blacksmiths, \
bricklayers, carpenters, masons, saw- 1
yers, wheelwrights, and gardeners, and
their wives; also females of the work- h
ing class, not being domestic or farm
servants—(when they can be t aken) — I
per head /
IV. Children under 14—per head
Passages to the port of embarkation from Dublin, Cork,
Granton Pier, and Hull, are provided by the Commissioners for
Emigrants proceeding through those ports; all other travelling
expenses must be borne by the emigrants themselves.
Cautions to Applicants. —9. No preparations must on any
account be made by the applicants, either by withdrawhtg from
employment or otherwise, until they receive the “ Approval Circular .”
Applicants who fail to attend to this warning will do so at their
own risk, and will have no claim whatever on the Commissioners.
10. The selecting agents of the Board have no authority to
promise passages in any case, nor to receive money. If, therefore,
applicants wish to make their payments through the agents, Instead
of in the manner pointed out in the “Approval Circular,” they
must understand that they do so at their own risk, and that the
Commissioners will be in no way responsible.
11. Should any signatures attached to an applicant’s paper
prove to be not genuine, or should any false representations be
made in the papers, not only will the application be rejected, but
the offenders will be liable, under the Passengers’ Act, 12 and
13 Yict. cap. 38, to a penalty not exceeding £5O.
12. Should any applicants be found on personal examination
at the depot, or on board, to have made any mis-statement in
their papers, or to have any infectious disorder, or otherwise not
to be in a fit state of health to embark, or to have any mental or
bodily defect likely to impair their usefulness as labourers, or to
have left any of their young children behind, or to have brought
with them more children than are mentioned in their Application
Form, or expressly sanctioned by the Commissioners, or to have
attempted any deception whatever, or evasion of these rules, they
a 2 115


will be refused admission on board the ship; or, if embarked,
will be landed without having any claim on the Commissioners.
13. If applicants fail to attend at the appointed time and place
for embarkation, without having previously given to the Com-
missioners timely notice and a satisfactory reason, or if they fail
to proceed in the ship, or are rejected for any of the reasons
specified in the preceding article, they will forfeit their contribu-
tions, and will have no claim to a passage at any future time.
Outfit, &c. —14. The Commissioners supply provisions,
medical attendance, and cooking utensils at their depot and on
board the ship. Also new mattresses, bolsters, blankets, and
counterpanes, canvas bags to contain linen, &c., knives and
forks, spoons, metal plates, and drinking mugs, which articles
will be given after arrival in the colony to the emigrants who
have behaved well on the voyage.
15. The emigrants must bring their own clothing, which will
be inspected at the port by an ofiicer of the Commissioners, and
they will not be allowed to embark unless they have a sufficient
stock for the voyage, not less for each person than —
For Males.
Six shirts
Six pairs stockings
Two ditto shoes
Two complete suits of
exterior clothing
For Females.
Six shifts
Two flannel petticoats
Six pairs stockings
Two ditto shoes
Two gowns.
With sheets, towels, and soap. But the larger the stock of
clothing the better for health and comfort during the voyage,
which usually lasts about four months, and as the emigrants
have always to pass through very hot and very cold weather,
they should be prepared for both ; two or three serge shirts for
men, and flannel for women and children, are strongly recom-
mended.
16. The emigrants should take out with them the necessary
tools of their trades that are not bulky. But the whole quantity
of baggage for each adult must not measure more than 20 cubic
or solid feet, nor exceed half a ton in weight. It must be closely
packed in one or more boxes, but no box must exceed in size 10
cubic feet. Large packages and extra baggage, if it can be
taken at all, must be paid for. Mattresses and feather beds will
in no case be taken.
17. On arrival in the colony the emigrants will be at perfect,
liberty to engage themselves to any one willing to employ them,
and to make their own bargain for wages; but if they quit the
colony within four years after landing, they must repay to the
Colonial Government a proportionate part of their passage-money
at the rate of £ 3 per adult for each year wanting to complete four
years’ residence.
18. All applications should be addressed, post-paid to S.
116


Walcott, Esq., No. 8, Park-street, Westminster. —Colonization
Circular, 1852.
A series of regulations to be observed by emigrants while on
board, is hung up in a conspicuous place between decks ; these
regulations being carried into effect for the purpose of promoting
the health and comfort of the passengers and crew during their
voyage. The scale of diet allowed on board is also hung up in a
conspicuous place ; and for details as to this and other matters,
we refer the intending emigrant to the Circular, price 2d., issued
by the Commissioners.
Landing in the Colonies. It is not necessary for us to enter into
a detail of the life of emigrants on board ship. They of course
look forward with anxiety to their arrival in the colony, which is
to be the scene of their future labours. When the vessel arrives
there, excellent arrangements are made for the benefit of the
emigrant arrivals. The vessel is immediately boarded by the
health-officer and the agent for immigration, and afterwards by
the Immigration Board. The latter make careful inquiries into
the circumstances of the emigrants, the several employments for
which they are fitted, and furnish them with such directions and
information as they may stand in need of, —protecting them also
against frauds, and advising them against connections with im-
proper parties.
Arrangements have also been made in the colonies for the pro-
tection and direction of female emigrants. At Adelaide, a com-
mittee of ladies has been formed with this object, who have
issued the following notice to female arrivals at that place :
“ The committee of ladies appointed to watch over the interest
of the unmarried female immigrants newly arrived in the colony,
offer their protection and encouragement to every respectable
young woman who, landing on the shores of South Australia,
feels the want of a home. The governor has kindly promised to
supply rations, and to provide rooms for present accommodation.
Ladies will visit the young women, and assist them to procure
desirable situations.”
These various arrangements are found to work advantageously,
and to the satisfaction of the various classes of emigrants ; and
they have generally no difficulty in soon getting settled down to
profitable employment.
The best time for labouring people intending to engage them-
selves in agricultural or grazing pursuits, to arrive in any of the
Australian colonies, is between the months of November and
February, consequently the best time to leave England is from
May to August. During the months named, the settlers from
the interior arrive in the sea-port towns with their wool-drays,
and return with hired labourers, who are usually engaged from
year to year. Such is the demand for labour, that emigrant
labourers are generally engaged on ship-board, and start at once
for the interior, or are set to work in the town at which they
land. 117


APPENDIX.
Rights of Commonage and Leases of Pasture Lands in
Australia.
New South Wales. —The following is the substance of the most
important provisions of the regulations in force for the disposal
of land for pastoral purposes :—lst, in the settled districts ; and,
2ndly, in the unsettled and intermediate districts. These regula-
tions were established by the Governor, in pursuance of an Order
of the Queen in Council, dated 9th March, 1847, and issued
under the Act of Parliament 9 and 10 Viet. c. 104.
I. As to the Settled Districts :
1. All purchasers of crown lands, or grantees who have com-
muted their quit rents, are to have a right of commonage over
vacant Crown lands in their neighbourhood until disposed of.
2. Persons holding in fee simple not less than 640 acres of
land will be entitled to claim of Government a lease of the adja-
cent lands, to the extent of three times their own property, at a
fixed rent of 10s. for each section of 640 acres.
3. Any person may require Government, or the Government
may proceed of its own accord, to put up to auction leases of any
vacant lands at a minimum upset rent of the same amount.
4. The leases will, as a general rule, be renewed, unless the
land is wanted by Government for sale, or is required under the
above provisions by the owner in fee of the adjacent property.
5. The leases are to be annual, and for pastoral purposes only,
with a limited right of cutting timber. They are not assign-
able ; and if the land is required for sale, it must be surrendered
at one month’s notice, without any compensation for improve-
ments.
11. As to the Unsettled and Intermediate Districts :
1. The Governor may grant leases of runs for 14 years in the
unsettled districts and eight in the intermediate. These leases
confer the right to use the land for pastoral purposes, and to cul-
tivate so much as is necessary for the consumption of the lessee’s
own establishment, but not for sale.
2. Each run must be capable of carrying 4,000 sheep, or an
equivalent number of cattle.
3. The rent is at least £lO per annum, with £2 10s. additional
for every 1,000 sheep (beyond the first 4,000) which the run
will carry.
4. During the currency of the lease the lessee may buy por-
tions of the land, not being less than 160 acres in extent, with-
out competition. The ordinary price will be £1 an acre ; but in
peculiar cases the Governor may require a larger sum. The
118


Governor may also resume any part of the land for public
purposes.
5. Leases of vacant runs are disposed of by tender. Leases
are forfeited, if the lessee neglects to pay his rent or is convicted
of certain legal offences.
6. At the expiration of the lease in the unsettled districts, or at
the expiration of each year of the lease in the intermediate dis-
tricts, any part of the land may be sold by Government, subject
to a right in the lessee of preemption, and of compensation for
improvements. Unless the land itself is brought within the
settled districts, or one-fourth part of it is sold, the lessee is
entitled to a renewal of his lease as to the unsold part ; but if
any part of it be sold, the Governor may raise the rent to an ex •
tent not exceeding 50 per cent.
7. If during the lease the land has been brought within the
intermediate districts, it will only be relet subject to the rules
applicable to land in those districts.
For the regulations themselves as to the settled districts, vide
Parliamentary Papers (No. 994) presented by command in 1848,
and Appendix No. 7. to the Emigration C ommissioners’ General
Report for 1849 ; and for the regulations as to the unsettled and
intermediate districts, vide Parliamentary Papers (No. 252) ol
1847, and Appendix No. 7 to Commissioners’ General Report for
1847.
South Australia.— The following regulations respecting rights
of commonage have been established by the Governor s Procla-
mation, dated Adelaide, sth January, 1850, and issued under the
Colonial Ordinance No. 10, of the 17th November, 1848
1. All persons claiming common of pasturage on the waste
lands of the crown within the hundreds, shall deposit at the office
of the Commissioner of Crown Lands in Adelaide, on or before
the 31st day of January in each year, a declaration, according to
the form required by the Ordinance, of the number of acres of
purchased laud of which they may respectively be the occupiers,
within the hundred or hundreds in which such commou of pas-
turage is claimed.
2. The Commissioners of Crown Lands shall cause an abstract
of the particulars contained in such declaration to be published
in the Government Gazette as soon as practicable after the said
31st day of January in every year.
3. One of the Commissioners of Crown Lands shall, as soon as
practicable, after the expiration of 14 days from the day of the
date of publication of the declaration as aforesaid, attend at cer-
tain convenient places within or near to the several hundreds
respectively, whereof due notice shall be given in the Govern-
ment Gazette, and shall there hear and adjudicate upon all dis-
putes which may arise respecting such declarations ; and shall
determine the number and description of cattle to be depastured
on the commons of the hundreds, and shall apportion the com-
-119


mou of pasturage among the respective claimants pursuant to
the Ordinance.
4. No person shall bo entitled to raise any objection to any
such declaration, unless ho shall have given to the claimant three
clear days’ notice of such objection before the day of adjudica-
tion hereiu-before mentioned.
5. Every person, whose declaration of acreage shall have been
admitted at such hearings aforesaid, shall be entitled upon ap-
plication, at the Crown Lands Office in Adelaide, to receive a
certificate, specifying his proportionate right of commonage in
the hundred therein mentioned, and the sum payable to the
Colonial Treasurer in respect thereof, which certificate, on pay-
ment of such sum, shall be countersigned by the officer receiving
the same.
6. All persons entitled to such certificates as aforesaid, must
apply for the same and pay the sum due in respect thereof before
the Ist day of April in every year, otherwise their claim to com-
mon of pasturage will become forfeited.
7. If, on the Ist day of April, it shall appear that the number
of cattle for which certificates have been issued in any hundred,
is less than the whole number which has been determined in the
manner aforesaid, additional certificates shall be issued for such
hundred, to any persons whose declarations of acreage shall have
been admitted, and who shall make application for such addi-
tional certificates on or before the 14th day of April, the addi-
tional right of commonage in each case being in proportion to the
number of cattle for which the several applicants have already
received certificates.
8. No certificate shall be issued to any person who shall be in
arrears in respect of any assessment or other payment imposed by
the present or any previous Ordinance relating to the waste lands
of the Crown.
Western Austral.a. —Throughout the whole colony the Gover-
nor is authorized to grant tillage leases for 8 years certain, of lots
not exceeding 320 acres of land. The annual rent is not to bo
less than £lO in the whole, or 2s. per acre, and the lessee, during
his term, is to have the right of purchasing any part of his land,
not less than 10 acres in extent, at its unimproved value. The
lease may contain a clause giving the lessee a right to renew his
lease once, on such conditions as may be thought fit. Failing
such renewal the land, with all its improvements, will revert un-
conditionally to the Crown.
For the purpose of pastoral occupation the lands are divided
into two classes, denominated Class A. and Class B.
Within the limits of Class A. the rule with regard to pastoral
leases is identical with that which has been applied to the settled
districts of New South Wales, omitting the provision with regard
to commonage.
Within the limits of Class B, the Governor may grant pastoral
120


leases for 8 years, at an annual rent of not less than £5, with an
addition of 10s. for every 1000 acres of land comprised in the
lease. At the expiration of each year any part of the land may
be sold by auction, subject to a right of pre-emption in the lessee,
and to the obligation of compensating him for any improvements
effected on the land. Existing occupants, or applicants for land
which has never been occupied, may receive leases without com-
petition ; but leases of lands which have been once occupied,
whether they have become vacant by abandonment, forfeiture, or
by expiration of a previous lease, are to be disposed of by auction,
without any claim for improvements on the part of the lessee.
The lease may also give a right of renewal under conditions
which, in the case of pastoral as of tillage leases, are to be fixed
by the Governor.
Regulations for the Sale of Land in the Colonies of
Australia.
The following are the regulations now in force under the pro-
visions of the Australian Land Act, 5 and 6 Viet., c. 36, for the
disposal of the Waste Lands in the colonies of New South
Wales (including the Sydney and Port Philip districts, and any
other districts that may hereafter be opened), South Australia'
and Western Australia.
1. All lands will be disposed of by sale alone, and must have
once at least been exposed to public auction.
2. The lowest upset price will not be less than £1 per acre ;
but the Government will have power to raise the same by pro-
clamation, though not again to reduce it.
3. The lands will be distinguished into three different classes,
viz.. Town lots. Suburban lots, and Country lots.
4. Upon town and suburban lots, as well as upon a proportion
not exceeding one-tenth of the whole of the country lots offered
for sale at any auction, the Governor will have the power of
naming a higher than the general or lowest upset price; the
country lots on which such power is exercised to be designated
“ Special Country Lots.”
5. Town and suburban lots will in no case be disposed of
except by public auction, but country lots which have already
been put up to public auction and not sold, may be disposed of
afterwards by private contract at the upset price.
6. No lands will be sold by private contract except for ready
money. When sold by public auction, one-tenth at least of the
whole purchase-money must be paid down, and the remainder
within one calendar month, or the deposit will be forfeited.
121


7. Lands will be put up for sale in lots not exceeding one
square mile in extent.
8. As an exception to the general regulations, and subject to
certain restrictions laid down in the Australian Land Act, the
Governor will have it in his discretion to dispose, by private
contract, at a price not less than the lowest upset price for the
district, of blocks comprising 20,000 acres or more.
9. Persons will be at liberty to make payments for colonial
lands in this country, for which payment or deposit they will
receive an order for credit to the same amount in any purchase
of land they may effect in the colony, and will have the privilege
of naming a proportionate number of emigrants for a free
passage, as explained in the next article. The deposits must
be made in one or more sums of £lOO each at the Bank of
England, to the account of the Colonial Land and Emigration
Commissioners; and the depositor must state at the time the
Colony in which the land is to be selected, and give notice to
the Commissioners of the deposit. Upon production of the
Bank’s receipt for the money, the Commissioners will furnish
the depositor with a certificate, stating the amount which he has
paid, and entitling him to obtain credit for that sum in any
purchase which he may effect in the colony, subject to all rules
and regulations in force in the colony at the time such purchase
may be made.
10. For every sum of £lOO deposited as above, the depositor
will be entitled, for six months from the date of payment, to
name a number of properly qualified emigrants, equal to five
adults, for a free passage. Two children between one and four-
teen are to be reckoned as equal to one adult. The emigrants
are required to be chosen from the class of mechanics and
handicraftsmen, agricultural labourers, or domestic servants, and
must be going out with the intention to work for wages. They
are to be subject to the approval of the Commissioners, and
must, in all respects, fall within their general regulations on the
selection of labourers, for the time being in force. The pur-
chaser and his family cannot receive a free passage under this
privilege.


HINTS TO EMIGRANTS TO AUSTRALIA.
1. Length of Voyage— The usual length of the voyage to the
Australian Colonies is about four months, and to New Zealand a
little longer ; and as, at whatever season of the year it may be
made, passengers have to encounter very hot and very cold
weather, they should be prepared for both.
2. Outfit.— The following is a list of the principal articles re-
quired ; but it cannot be too strongly impressed, as a general
rule, that the more abundant the stock of clothing each person
can afford to take, the better for health and comfort during the
passage :
Single Man's Outfit to Australia.
2 beaverteen jackets, 1 to be
warm lined.
1 Brazil straw hat.
6 striped cotton shirts.
1 pair boots.
1 pair shoes.
4 handkerchiefs.
2 beaverteen trowsers, 1 to be
warm lined.
1 waistcoat with sleeves, to be
warm lined.
1 waistcoat without sleeves.
2 duck frocks.
4 worsted hose.
2 cotton hose.
1 pair braces.
3 towels.
2 duck trowsers.
1 Scotch cap, or thresher’s hat.
Razor, shaving-box, and glass.
For use on the voyage, shoes or slippers are much more con-
venient than boots. The following is a cheap and excellent
composition for preserving leather from the bad effects of sea-
water Linseed oil, 1 gill; spirit of turpentine, 1 oz. ; bees’-
wax, 1 oz. ; Burgundy pitch, £ oz. ; to be well melted together
and kept covered in a gallipot; lay it on boots or shoes, rubbing
it in well, and set them in a hot sun or before the fire.
Single Woman’s Outfit to Australia.
1 warm cloak, with a cape.
2 bonnets.
4 pocket handkerchiefs.'
2 net ditto for neck.
1 small shawl.
1 stuff dress.
2 print ditto.
6 shifts.
3 caps.
4 night caps.
4 sleeping jackets.
2 black worsted hose.
4 cotton ditto.
2 flannel petticoats.
1 stuff ditto.
2 twill cotton ditto.
1 pair of stays.
2 pairs of shoes. *
6 towels. 'Wf
' fxyt su
Each person would also require,-
1 knife and fork, 1 deep tin plate, 1 pint tin drinking mug, 1
table-spoon, 1 tea-spoon.
123


£)l&UO EMIGRANT'S GUIDE TO AUSTRALIA.
2 lbs. of marine soap, 1 comb and hair brush, 1 pair sheets, 2
41 7 5'2-P o^s blacking.
I j.. brushes. \
1 pair of blankets. I A married couple require only
, _ . 1 counterpane. ( one set of these articles.
”f i 1 strong chest, with lock. )
Cost of above Outfit for a Single Man, about £4 10 0
Ditto ditto Single Woman „ 5 0 0
Ditto ditto Married Couple „ 9 0 0
The cost of an outfit for children varies with their size.
Generally speaking, three children under 7, or two between that
age and 14, may be clothed for about £5; but a well grown girl
or boy of 13 years of age will cost nearly as much as an adult.
3. Expense of erecting a Dwelling suitable to an Agncultural
Labourer.
New South Wales, from £5 to £3O
Victoria, from £5 to £3O
according to materials, &c.
Country labourers are always provided with dwellings rent free,
by their employers.
Western Australia, about £2O
South Australia, from £lO to £2O
Country labourers are provided with dwelling-houses, rent free,
by their employers.
Van Diemen’s Land, a hut fit for a labourer £lO to £l5 ; a slab
hut in the bush for shepherds for £5 ; in the towns, a building
of brick or stone for £2O or £25.
New Zealand, a cottage built of rushes, in the native manner
(which can be made very comfortable,) £4 to £6 ; of timber,
£2O to £4O ; of scoria, or brick, £3O to £5O.
4. Rent of a Town Lodging for a Mechanic's Family.
New South Wales 4s. per week
Victoria, about Bs. „
Western Australia, about ss. „
South Australia, from 6s. to Bs. „
Van Diemen’s Land, from 25., ....average ss. ~
New Zealand 3s. to ss. ~
5. Caution not to linger in the Towns. —Emigrants to the Aus-
tralian colonies are strongly advised, with a vew to their own
advantage and health, to look immediately on arrival for employ
ment in the country, and not to linger in the crowded dwellings
of the towns. — Colonization Circular, 1852gr25 =:::; ''-—
/> v — ; —•£
A. MANN, PRINTER, ' 1992 oo


util
(■(f
Ficaaa
K)
00636971


Wf
2> 10 U O EMIGRANT S GUIDE TO AUSTRALIA.
2 lbs. of marine soap, 1 comb and hair brush, 1 pair sheets, 2
X £2.pots of blacking.
2 shoe brushes. 1
1 pair of blankets, I A married couple require only
_j 1 counterpane. I one set of these articles.
I 1 strong chest, with lock. )
Cost of above Outfit for a Single Man, about £4 10 0
Ditto ditto Single Woman „ 5 0 0
Ditto ditto Married Couple „ 9 0 0
The cost of an outfit for children varies with their size.
Generally speaking, three children under 7, or two between that
age and 14, may be clothed for about £5; but a well grown girl
or boy of 13 years of age will cost nearly as much as an adult.
3. Expense of erecting a Dwelling suitable to an Agncultural
.... £5 to £3O
... £5 to £3O
ings rent free,
. £lO to £2O
ses, rent free,
o £l5 ; a slab
ms, a building
native manner
6 ; of timber,
Family.
. 4s. per week
Bs.
ss.
Bs. „
ss. „
ss. ~
ts to the Aus-
v to their own
r al for employ
'•ded dwellings


(- -f v i& * wa. i irai
Fiaxaa
M t^j
- ■
00636971


Just published , embossed doth, price Two Shillings.
riIHE FLAX AND TOW SPINNER’S COMPLETE CALCULA-
-1 TOR ; a clear and concise system of calculating through every pro-
cess of Line and Tow Preparing and Spinning. With Rules for Drafting
and Twisting ; to find the Set ; to calculate in Changing from one Count
to another ; to find the Weight to be laid on the Feeding Sheet of Card
for any Count; with Table of Twists for Yarn ; Circumferences ; and
all information required respecting the latest improved Machinery. By
Wm. Pickles. London : Simpkin Marshall, & Co. ; Mann, Leeds.
Important to Mill-Owners, Manufacturers, and others employing large
numbers of Workpeople.—Just published, embossed cloth, price 2s.
NEW AND COMPLETE TABLES FOR THE CALCULATION
OF WAGES upon any Sum from 2s. to 40s. per week, and for
any time from a quarter of an hour to nine days ; showing at one view
the exact amount of Wage to be paid: l Calculated for Ten and Eleven
Hours per Day.— By William Nichols.
In embossed cloth, price One Shilling, (sent postage free to any part
of the United Kingdom for 1 s.-6d.)
MANN’S COUNTRY VISITOR’S GUIDE TO LONDON, a
Valuable Companion to all who Vislt the Great Metropo-
lis ; containing an Account of London, its Streets, Sights, Parks,
Public Buildings, &c. ; an Alphabetical List of the Principal Exhibi-
tions, with the Hours and Terms of Admission ; the Omnibus Routes ;
Cab Fares ; Departure of Steamers, &c., with a well-executed Map
of the Streets of London.
Now ready, price One Shilling, and may be had of the Booksellers.
MANN’S EMIGRANT’S COMPLETE GUIDE TO THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA: Containing Emigr-
ation to the United States. —Emigration to the Settled States.—Emigra-
tion to the Far West, or New States. —Wages of Labour in the States.
—Preparation for Emigration.—Fares, Routes, &c. —Co-operative Emi-
gration.—Books to be consulted by Emigrants, &c.
Now ready, price One Shilling, and may be had of the Booksellers,
MANN’S EMIGRANT’S COMPLETE GUIDE TO PORT
STEPHENS, (New South Wales), Van Dieman’s Land, New
Zealand ; the Cape of Good Hope and Natal ; Canada, New
Brunswick, and Nova Scotia ; with full information as to the Capa-
bilities of these Colonies for Emigration, the Prices of Land, Wages of
Labour, and all other information requisite for the intending Emigrant
Pnce 10s., demy B vo., cloth.
DR. SMILES’S HISTORY OF IRELAND AND THE IRISH
PEOPLE, UNDER THE GOVERNMENT OF ENGLAND.
Now Ready, 36 pages, Royal 18 mo,,
A CATECHISM OF PRACTICAL PHRENOLOGY. By John
Mill. Price Twopence,
London: T. W. Grattan, Amen Corner ; A. Mann, Leeds.
