

"THE HOPE OF THE WORLD"
... THE ...
Education of the Adolescent
Report of an Address delivered by request to the
Victorian State School Teachers' Union,
at the Town Hall, Melbourne, on
April 23rd, 1919,
By
LIEUT.-COLONEL SIR JAMES BARRETT,
K.8.E., C.B. C.M.G., M.D., F.R C.S.




Education of the Adolescent.
Report of an Address delivered by request to the Victorian
State School Teachers' Union, at the Town Hall,
Melbourne, on April 23rd, 1919,
LIEUT.-COLONEL SIR JAMES BARRETT,
K.8.E., C.8., C.M.G., M.D., F.R.C.S.
I returned to Australia three weeks ago after an ab-
sence of nearly four and a half years. The impression
made on landing was one of abounding prosperity and
abundant food. Many people speak and behave in such
a manner as to convey the impression that they do not
realise what the war was, or what was its significance.
For them it has been in general a far-off abstract thing.
Their attitude is not dissimilar to that of the Americans
in 1763. Protected by Great Britain, the sense of respon-
bility was not called into existence, and a belief grew up
that in some unknown way they would be permitted to do
what they liked with their own continent indefinitely, an
attitude not wholly unlike ours to-day. We may later
suffer an awakening by experiencing what H. G. Wells
calls "deferred shock." Of the issue I have no anxiety
once 1 am assured that the problems which confront Us


are properly, fully and courageously submitted to the
Australian people. What I do fear is "the policy of the
ostrich."
I am grateful therefore to the Victorian Union of State
School Teachers for their kindness in inviting me to ad-
dress them this afternoon. 1 am glad indeed to have the
opportunity of conveying to such a body the ideas which
have been rising in my mind, during the catastrophic
changes of the last four years, because they of all people
are in a position to play so important a part in what I
believe to be the chief remedy for the social disintegra-
tion with which we are threatened.
The world at present is faced with disorder and anarchy
in very many directions. We have taught the nations for
the last four and a half years that law and order have
ceased to be, and we have been committed to the rule of
organised force. Law and order are not too deeply
ingrained in any people, and the reversion to barbarism
has been effected with greater ease than may be the return
to the previous condition of stability. Once men have
learned that they can get what they want by force they
are apt to try and repeat the undertaking.
During the war much has been said about the accursed
gospel of Prussianism, but comparatively few people stop
to think that Prussianism is not confined to Germany.
Professor Treitschke is responsible for the definite
formulation of the German attitude. To him the State is
everything. Within the State there must be law, order,
obedience to authority, and, in general, morality. But in
its external relationships the State has no moral obliga-
tions. It may make treaties intending to break them, it
may murder; in fact, there is no limit to the nature of
its activities provided that they have for their one aim


the salvation of the State. If you put to an independent
German your criticism of this infernal attitude he may
reply, "You adopt Prussianism within your State, your
work-people refuse to obey the Arbitration Court or
Wages Board when the award does not suit them, your
profiteers do not hesitate to bleed your people when they
get a chance of applying the gospel of force, and your
monopolists never hesitate to fleece your people to the
extent to which they dare. You are simply hypocritical.
You know that force is the sole basis of civilisation, but
you pretend that you do not believe it. We, on the other
hand, freely recognise the fact and intend to apply
it in an organised way to the whole of the civilised world,
to whom we are superior in capacity and in clearness of
thought."
For only one century in the world's history so far as
we know was peace ever maintained, and that was be-
tween the first and second centuries A.D., when the
strength of Rome kept the rest of the world in order.
Geirnany intended to impose a similar peace 011 us, but
1 fancy that the Roman rule would have been preferable
to the German rule. There are but three States in the
world whose political beliefs are in complete antithesis
to those of Germany. In the remaining States the policy
is modified. The three are the United States, the British
Empire, and France. In these three States the political
principle adopted, though often dimly seen, is that the
adult individual is the responsible unit on whom the fabric
of government rests, that he has a right to choose his
own form of government, and having chosen it to stand
by the consequences of that government. In other words,
it involves the doctrine of personal responsibility. Most
people are aware of the forms of government —the auto-
cratic —adopted in Germany and elsewhere, but they do


not, as a rule, understand that not only is our method not
adopted, but that the people of these countries in the main
do not believe it either possible or desirable. Great
Britain has now won four successful wars in defence of
this principle with its modifications as it has descended
through the ages from the time of Edward the First. The
first was waged against Phillip 11. of Spain, when the
Armada was defeated by the British Fleet. The second
was waged against Louis XIV., during which our Colonial
Empire was founded. The third was against Napoleon,
and the fourth and greatest against the highly educated
and unscrupulous Prussian Bureaucracy. We have now
to be careful that a fifth struggle is not rendered certain.
The German people have been overwhelmed by the
forces brought against them, but above all by the charac-
ter of their enemies. In my judgment, nothing but steady
common honesty has enabled the war to be brought to a
successful issue. This quality implies the necessary persist-
ence. It would have taken very little to enable Germany to
be victorious. I do not know a senior military or naval
officer but entertains the most wholesome respect- for Ger-
man efficiency and for a form of character—it may be
the ferocious character of the wild animal; nevertheless
the Germans have not hesitated to sacrifice themselves in
vast numbers in defence of or in endeavouring to enforce
a mode of government on the world which they believe
to be essential. It must be evident to all those who
survey the world at present that civilisation has received
a rude shock, and that the catastrophy represents the
partial breakdown of a civilisation which, while containing
much to admire, has been based too exclusively on personal
self-interest, and in which the finer developments of
morality have been too often buried under the glamour
of material success. It is for such an audience as I


address this afternoon to carefully weigh the facts and
to see, if they agree with me, what may be done to de-
develop a race with somewhat different ideals and aspira-
tions. Let there be no mistake about my attitude. Men
must eat, they must sleep, they must live. They rear
families, and they must work in order that this may be
done, and the fundamentals o'f human nature will not be
altered. They have not altered since the days of Mena,
but the way in which activities are employed, the outlook
on the world, and the social aims of men are capable of
profound alteration. The League..of Nations an s d other
pieces of machinery for preventing the recurrence of the
horrible conditions we have witnessed are all good in their
way, but war will only be prevented by an alteration in
the attitude of men and by the adoption of a dif-
ferent view point. When the Trades Union determines
to observe a bargain even at a loss to itself, when the
profiteer refuses to charge improperly, and when the
monopolist refuses to take advantage of his position, then
I shall say the days of war are at an end.
What, then, is the problem which lies immediately to
hand? Before 1 joined the army I thought the expression
"an officer and a gentleman" was a bit of antique flummery.
After four and a half years' active service I came to the
conclusion that no man should be an officer who was not
a gentleman, and that I should prefer to use the expres-
sion "a gentleman and an officer." In the army men
are so absolutely dependent on the good faith of those by
whom they are surrounded that they soon come to value
character more highly even than capacity. The note of
contempt in the reference to one who, though capable, is
untrustworthy is almost universal. And the problem lies
before us in training those who are coming on, how to
impart those habits which are usually described as evi-


dences of character, together with capacity of a high
order, for there is no reason why a man should be a fool
because he is dependable. It is quite clear that neither
of these requirements are possible at present on the
scale that they should be. If all forms of training are
to cease at 14 years of age as they do at present, and
men pass immediately into occupations and employ their
leisure in a casual way, I have very little hope for the
development of those high ideals which are essential if
our civilisation is to be properly developed. And so we
find at present that in every part of the world forms of
adolescent education (usually compulsory) are being
adopted and advocated. The famous Kerchensteiner
schools 111 Munich are familiar to you all. You may not
all be aware of the extreme care that Kerchensteiner took
with regard to the moral training of the boys who at-
tended those schools from 14 to 18 years of age. It is
true that his object was to turn them into fine German
citizens, but nevertheless the moral element was never
lost sight of, and his work has borne fruit in the devotion
of the Germans to their country through the recent war.
In lecturing to an audience of soldiers in Egypt, a ques-
tioner put it to me whether now we had adopted a similar
system some one might not give it a political twist similar
to the wicked twist that was given it by the German
Government. I replied that there was nothing to prevent
it being given a twist, but the twist would be given not by
a camarilla, but by people like himself, who were respon-
sible for it.
In this connection, may J draw attention to a recent
utterance by the President of the British Board of Educa-
tion, the Right Honorable A. L. Fisher: —
"It is a mistake to be too specific. We must rid
ourselves of the fallacy of the particular end, if we


are to do any good in education. I do nbt deny that
it is possible to put a stamp upon a generation by the
powerful impress of an educational machine, inces-
santly descending on the same point and with the
same momentum. The Germans appear to have
done something of the kind. Their education is in-
deed not what it is portrayed to be by hasty orators
in the House of Peers and the House of Laymen. It
is not, as often supposed, undenominational or irre-
ligious, but very much the reverse. On the contrary,
the education in Germany is denominational, and con-
siderable pains are spent on the religious teaching.
Nor is German education conspicuously materialistic,
seeing that it assigns a larger space to the study of
classical antiquity than is accorded in England. But
it is political and governed by a theory of Statecraft'
served by an army of State teachers and dominated
by the overshadowing and universal obligation of mili-
tary service. Such a system of education, framed in
the Spartan mould, with a constant view to the stern
extremities of war, is capable of producing great feats
of social coherence in times of patriotic stress. We
must not underrate its virtues because it does not
convert a savage into a saint, for it is those virtues
which make Germany so formidable and tenacious an
opponent. But the system is clearly open to one grave
abjection. It is Blighting to the spirit of political
liberty, and for this reason we may safely predict
that slips from the German tree will never flourish
on English soil. In our English view it is not the
business of a public system of education to manufac-
ture opinions. What we can and should do is to give
to young people some impression of the wealth and
splendour of the spiritual inheritance which belongs
to them as members of our nation, to train them to


acquire knowledge, to weigh evidence, to think for
themselves, justly, temperately, and wisely, and to
keep their faculties of self-criticism alive. Indeed,
there is too much humour in the stuff out of which
aui young people are made for grosser forms of direct
political edification to succeed among us."
In Great Britain a revolution has really been effected by
Mr. Fisher. The passage of the Education Bill through
the Legislature has remodelled the entire system of educa-
tion in Great Britain. It has done justice to the teachers,
to the taught, and to the science of education. It provides
for compulsory continuation schools from 14 to 18 years
of age. But the initiation of the compulsory system of
continuation schools, but not of continuation schools, has
been deferred for sveen years for two reasons, viz.—as a
concession to some local opposition, and because schools
and teachers will take some considerable time to produce.
In France, Mr. Viviani has proposed compulsory continua-
tion schools from the age of 14 to 20, that is two years
longer than either the British or German system. From
14 to 17 instruction is to cover 300 hours a year, and from
17 to 20 200 hours a year.
As regards the status of the teacher, the following ex-
tract from Stephen Leacock is much to the point, and it is
the more interesting as many people have misunderstood
him and imagine that he is simply humorous:
"I wish that I had time to organise a school, and
that some good fairy would stand the expense of it
till it got started. I mean, of course, a real fairy like
Carnegie or Rockefeller, not the imitation one of the
picture-books. I would undertake to show to the
would what a real school could be and, more surpris-
ing still, what a harvest of profit could be made from


it. For the buildings and apparatus 1 would not care
a straw. I wouldn't mind if the gymnasium contained
a patent vaulting horse and a pneumatic chest exer-
ciser or whether it just had wooden sides like a horse
stable. These things don't matter at all. But I would
engage, regardless of cost, the services of a set of men
that would make every other school look like—well,
look like what it is. I would select the senior masters
with the same care and at the same salaries as if 1
were choosing presidents of railway companies and
managers of banks. Let me try to give the reader
an idea of what the staff of a first-rate school would
look like. The list would read something after this
fashion: —
RESIDENTIAL SCHOOL FOR B.OYS.
''Beautifully situated in the Ozark Mountains, or the
Adirondacks, or the Laurentians, or any place fifty
miles from a moving picture.
Headmaster—Mr. Woodrow Wilson.
Treasurer & Bursary—Pierpont Morgan, Esq.
Instructor in French —Mons. Poincare.
Russian Teacher—Nich. Romanoff.
Military Instructor —T. Roosevelt.
English—Sir James Barrie and Mr. R. Kipling.
Piano —Ig. Paderewski.
Other Music—Al. Jolson.
Deportment—Sir Wilfred Laurier and Miss Jane
Addams.
Matron —W. Jennings Bryan.
Chaplain—The Rev. W. Sunday.


"There! that looks pretty complete. I have not
filled in the customary office of janitor and messen-
ger. I admit that I might fill that myself.
"Readers who are unacquainted with the subject
may think that the above list contains an element of
exaggeration. If so, it is very slight. Jf the profes-
sion were what it ought to be these are the very men
who would have been drawn into it. If the list sounds
at all odd, it is only because we have reached a stage
where it seems quite comic to make out a list of
eminent and distinguished men and imagine them
schoolmasters. The reader, if he did not appreciate
it before, can easily estimate, by his attitude towards
this list, what he thinks of the status and importance
of the school teacher.
"But behind this list are facts. All of the instruc-
tors above, or people of their class, could be engaged
at salaries ranging from thirty to fifty thousand dollars
a year. 1 I am not quite sure of the Czar and Al.
Jolson. But we may let them pass. A school with a
staff like this would easily draw a thousand pupils
at a yearly fee of two thousand dollars a head. There
is not the slightest doubt of it. That would give an
income of two million dollars a year. The salaries
of the junior teachers would cut but a little figure.
They would serve, and be glad to 1 , on the same terms
as young lawyers or doctors entering on their pro-
fessional life. With such a staff the simplest of build-
ings would serve the purpose as well as marble colon-
mnades and Greek porticoes. School buildings, as
things are, are chiefly used to cover up the school-
master. They are like the white waistcoat and three-
inch collar of the feeble-minded man."


Lately three instructive incidents have come under my
notice.
REPATRIATION.
On my return to Australia I found, to my astonishment,
that the Repatriation Department, which it seemed to
me was endeavouring to do more than any similar depart-
ment elsewhere, was being bitterly attacked for reasons
which I found it difficult to understand. I have ascertained
since that the department is constitued as follows: —-
MINISTER.
COMMISSION— 7 members, Minister as Chairman.
The body includes two returned soldier repre-
senatives.
STATE BOARDS —7 members, including 2 returned
soldier reoresentatives.
LOCAL COMMITTEES —Executive of 7 members.
Committee may consist of any number.
I understand that the Commission contains two distin-
guished citizens, a representative of the Trades Union, and
representatives of the returned soldiers. The personnel is
entirely honorary. I can imagine no better constitution
for any public department than this association of de-
partmental with extra-departmental honorary officers.
Now I do not doubt that this department, in common with
other human institutions, has made mistakes. It would not
be natural if it had not done so, but the question which
interests us to-day is not so much its intrinsic efficiency,
but why such attacks are possible. If a citizen decides
that something is wrong with a public department (par-
ticularly a department so admirably constructed and staffed
by men of high character), is it not his clear duty to call and


interview the administration and try to effect a rectifica-
tion? Public attack is surely only justifiable when an
honest attempt to effect betterment has failed through
wilful departmental opposition. In all such matters it is
the motive which counts, and the habit of irresponsible
press criticism can only be successful when the emotions
and prejudices of untrained readers are skilfully excited.
Is irresponsibility with its many attendant evils to con-
tinue for ever, or will an educated" democracy grasp the
nettle and insist on more orderly conduct? In other words,
the problem which lies before us is how to produce an
educated and responsible democracy.
SOLDIERS' EDUCATION.
Again in January last Bishop Long gave an in-
teresting address to the Royal Colonial Institute in
London. He directed attention to the efforts that were
being made to provide education "for soldiers who_ had
served their country, and he laid particular emphasis on
the case of a soldier 22 years of age who pathetically
complained that though he was a good machine gunner
he had never been taught anything since 14, and conse-
quently had 110 outlook. The tragedy of the business im-
pressed Bishop Long. In addressing the audience briefly
afterwards, I pointed out that I entirely sympathised with
Bishop Long and with the soldier, but if it was a tragedy that
a soldier of 22 should find himself in that position, how many
tragedies of the kind exist in normal life, and what efforts have
been made to prevent their recurrence ?
A HEALTH CONSCIENCE.
Whilst serving with the Imperial Army 111 Egypt and
Palestine, one of my duties was to act as President of a
Standing Medical Board, an important function of which
was Physical and Industrial classification. In a highly


efficient army it takes two men at the base and on the
lines of communication to keep one man fighting. The
supporting men are used for medical work, for Army
Service Corps work, ordnance, railway traffic, etc., and
fhe business of the Board over which I presided was to
decide on medical grounds what men were fit to do and
recommend accordingly. A card index system was adopted
by the Records Department, and an honest attempt was
made to push the round man into the round hole. In
order to obtain the necessary medical information, the
Board employed not only ordinary medical officers, but
physicians, oculists, aurists, X-Ray officers, pathologists
and dentists, many of them men of the first rank in civil
practice. All this was done for the benefit of a man who
was receiving 1/4 per day, and it was done in order to
win the war. Now medical officers in thousands are re-
turning home. They are asking themselves if it was right
and proper to take all this trouble for such a man to fit
him to fight, is it not equally right to take such trouble
to fit a. man for his civil occupation?
Now instances such as these will make very little im-
pression on the ignorant, because, as Archdall Reid pointed
out, the real difficulty in effecting great social changes is
not ignorance, but the habit of mind born of ignorance,
but they will impress the thoughtful. A sound education
produces mental flexibility and tolerance. In fact, toler-
ance is one of the flowers of education.
What, then, is it that we should try to do?
Surely to see that all men and women in their
adolescent period are adequately trained, not only with
a view to increasing their earning capacity, but with
a view of enabling them to properly employ their leisure
and to take a sensible part in that portion of our activities
which looms so large and is really so important, namely,


politics in the wider sense of the term. Can any member
of this distinguished audience tell me of a school in this
State in which political instruction forms part of the
curriculum, and if not, can they tell me why it is missing?
Now what are the results that we are likely to obtain
from such a reconstruction? I take it the production of
better ideals, because men will better understand the struc-
ture of society, and the possibilities and difficulties of effect-
ing changes. I take it that men will become more efficient,
they will earn more money because they are worth more
•money they will be invested with increased responsibility
and power because they are able to carry it, and above
all things, are likely to have a higher sense of morality
and a sense of responsibility to their fellows and to the
State which associates them with their fellows.
During this war it is estimated that some five millions
of men have given their lives to save us, and from Aus-
tralia alone 60,000 men left who will not return, since they
lie in distant graves. Of those who have returned a cer-
tain number will be permanently disabled. Is it sufficient
to say to these men, "We are very much obliged; you
saved us," or is it not obligatory that in recognition of
the sacrifice they have made we should strive to so alter
our social structure that the savage proceedings of the war
may never be repeated? Let me put the position in the
words of the greatest Greek of ancient times, Pericles,
uttered on the occasion of the funeral of the Athenians who
fell in the Peloponnesian war, words rendered into beauti-
ful English by Professor T. G. Tucker.
It is fitting that we should dedicate in this spirit our
efforts in reconstruction to the memory of those who fell
to save us, our Empire and its institutions from complete
and final destruction.


APPENDIX.
THE FUNERAL ORATION OF PERICLES'.*
Most of those who have previously spoken here give
praise to the man who made such a speech part of the
order of the day. They think its delivery at the burial of
our fallen soldiers an admirable thing. For my own part,
when men have proved their worth by deeds, I should
have been content to see our respect for them also proved
by deeds, such as you now behold in the magnificence of
this public funeral. Otherwise there is the danger that
your belief in the merits of many may depend on one
man's right or wrong expression. It is a difficult thing
to speak with due measure where one can hardly be sure
how tiie truth will be accepted. The hearer who knows
the facts, and whose feelings are warm, will perhaps find
the statement fall short of what he knows and asks for;
the ill-informed, when told of anything of which he is him-
self incapable, will be led by jealousy to find in it some
exaggeration. Fox the praise of others is endurable only
so_ far as a man fancies himself capable of doing some-
thing like the things lie hears; when they transcend him,
he is jealous, and begins at once to doubt.
Since, however, the custom was sanctioned long ago, it is
my own duty to follow it, and to do my best to meet
your several desires and fancies.
I have translated the speech, not paraphrased it. A translator has
no right to add either florid or emotional touches of his own. The
massive dignity and almost austere plainness of the style of Pericles
are those of the sculptures of Pheid.as, and have the same artistic
claims. We are far from being able to improve upon the artistic
principles of Periclean Athens.—T.G.T.


THE ATHENIAN STATE.
1 will begin with our forefathers, for both justice and
seemiiness demand that on an occasion like this we should
pay to them the tribute of such remembrance. From
all time this country has been theirs and theirs alone, and
it is their valour from generation to generation that has
bequeathed it to us, a free land until now. And if they
are worthy of praise, still more are our own fathers; for
it was by hard labour that, over and above what they
inherited, they won and left to us of to-day all the empire
which is ours. In general, too, we ourselves, who are
here and for the most part in the vigour of life, have ad-
vanced that empire, and have furnished our country with
everything that makes for perfect sufficiency whether in
war or peace. On the military achievements by which
each gain was won, on the ardour with which we our-
selves or our fathers drove back the assaults of Greek or
foreigner, I have no wish to dwell. You know them, and
I will pass them by. But it is to certain principles of
action that we owe our progress; it was with a certain
form of polity and with certain ways and habits that great-
ness came. It is after pointing out what these were that
I will proceed to praise these dead; for I believe not
only that such a statement is fitting to the occasion, but
that a gathering so fully representing both citizens and
strangers is a right and proper one to listen to it.
In our form of government we do not emulate the
institutions of our neighbours; we prefer to be ourselves
a pattern to others, not their imitators. Because our
government belongs to the many, and not to the few, it
bears the name of a "democracy." But though in their
private differences all are equal before the luw, there is
-recognition for any individual form of distinguished
merit. Public preferment does not go by class, but by


worth; nor is a poor man barred .by obscure position, if
he has any good service to render to his country. The
spirit of our system is free: free in public matters, free
also from captiousness concerning the daily practices of
social intercourse. We are not angry with our neighbour
for behaving according to his pleasure; we do not in-
flict upon him black looks which annoy, although they
may not positively harm. While easy in our private asso-
ciations, in public matters we have a peculiar fear of doing
wrong, obeying those in authority for the time being as
well as the laws, and especially those laws which have
been made to help the wronged and those unwritten ones
which carry the penalty of recognised disgrace.
Meanwhile we have made the largest provision for
mental relaxations from toil—games and festivals spread
through the year, and refined resources of private life,
which delight us day by day and banish discontent.
Our city is so great that everything from every land
comes pouring in, so that we enjoy the blessings of other
men as naturally as those produced at home.
In military policy too we have this superiority over
our opponents. The doors of our country are wide open.
We never expel the stranger or exclude him from any
sight or lesson which an enemy might be benefited by
seeing without disguise. It is not in schemings and deceits
that we mainly put our trust, but in our own courage for
the day of action. And so with education. While they
from early youth seek after courage by laborious training,
we, with a free breadth of life, are quite as ready to meet
danger on the same plane with them. Do you ask the
proof? Our enemies do not invade our country in
separate nations, but with all their league, while we attack
our neighbours all by ourselves, and though they are fight-
ing for their own, and we on foreign soil, we mostly win


with ease. Never yet has an enemy met our total strength
at once. At one and the same time we have our navy
to keep up, and on land there is many a field to which we
must despatch our people. If they come to blows with
some portion of our forces and beat some of us, they
boast that they have routed all; if they are defeated, it
was all of us who beat them.
Well, if our easy-going way, rather than laborious prac-
tice, if the courage of character rather than the force of
law, makes us ready to face danger, we have this ad-
vantage. We do not distress ourselves beforehand with
future hardships, yet, when we meet them, we show our-
selves as brave as those who punish thmselves all the
time. Moreover, while our country earns admiration in
this respect, it earns it in others also. We cultivate the
beautiful without extravagance; we cultivate things of
the mind without" weakness. While we treat wealth as
meant for some apt use. not as a thing to talk and boast
of, poverty is no disgrace for any man to acknowledge;
the disgrace is rather in doing nothing to escape it. The
same man at the same time can tend private business and
affairs of state; another, whose work takes up his time,
can be an adequate judge of public questions. When a
man takes no interest in such questions, we stand alone
in regarding him not as inoffensive, but as useless. We
think for ourselves, and are competent critics of
affairs, if not originators. To our minds, it is not
discussion which does harm to action; it is the failure to
have enlightened ourselves by discussion before proceed-
ing to act when action is required. For we are distin-
guished by this also, that our peculiar courage is com-
bined with a peculiar calculation as to what we shall at-
tempt; whereas, in the case of others, audacity is the re-
sult of ignorance, while calculation makes them timid.


And we may fairly call those the most stout-hearted, who,
while mostly clearly recognising what is dangerous and
what is pleasant, do not shun perils on that account.
put it shortly, I assert of our country as a whole
that it is an education to Greece. Of its individuals I be-
lieve that you would find in the same person from Athens
a physical capacity for more kinds of action, and in a man-
ner more easy and attractive, than you would find in any
other. And that this is not a mere boast of the moment, but
a sober fact, the power which our country has acquired
through these practices of ours is sufficient in itself to
show. For alone of countries to-day, Athens, when it
comes to the test, transcends its reputation; it is the only
one which causes an assailant no disgust when he thinks
of the kind of people who have made him suffer; the only
one which leaves a subject people with no complaint that
its masters are unworthy of it.
THE PRAISES OF THE FALLEN.
Such is the country to which these men asserted their
indefeasible claim; for which they nobly fought and died;
and for which, we may be sure, everyone who survives
them is ready to toil and suffer.
It is for this reason that I have spoken at such length
about the state. I have sought to show that we have
more at stake than those who possess no share in the
same advantages; I have sought to ,base my praises of
these men on the convincing ground of proofs.
The chief part of that praise is said already, since, for
all the glories which I have rehearsed, our country is in-
debted to the virtues of these men and their like. Put
facts into the scales, and few states of Greece could show


that what is done answers to what is said. Yet it is so
with these. The end they have just met proves a man's
quality, whether it be the first thing to reveal it or the
last thing to make us sure of it. However a man falls
short in other ways, it is but just that valour for his
fatherland should be set above his faults; he has wiped
out bad with good; he has done more public good than
private harm.
Some of these men had wealth, but their first thought
was not of living to enjoy it; they did not flinch for that.
Others were ooor, but not for any hope of someday es-
caping poverty and growing rich did they put off the day
of danger. More dear to their hearts was the punish-
ment of the foe; they thought no risk so noble a risk as
this, and they resolved to take it, and to punish the
enemy at any sacrifice. Success might be uncertain ; they
could but hope and take their chance; their task was
facing them, and they felt the call to trust in their own
prowess. When action came, they chose to fight and die
rather than yield and save their lives. There was some-
thing for which they fled —the mere word coward ; but
their bodies stood firm and bore the brunt, and in one
brief moment, in the height of their glory, they were be-
yond the reach, not of any fear, but of change and chance.
So much for these dead. Such did they prove them-
selves, men worthy of their country. The rest of us may
pray to meet less harm, but we must not be content with
less courage against the foe. We need not theorise upon
its value. You know yourselves, as well as a long speech
could tell you, all the blessings that depend on driving
away the foe. No; look about you any day and let facts
speak. Behold the might of your country; become her
ardent lovers, and, when you find that she is great, be-
think you that all this was won by men of courage, who


lecognised their duty and in the day of action knew
where honour lay; men who perhaps might fail in some
endeavour, but who never deigned to deny their country
the valour which was its due, but lavished on her the finest
contribution man can give. Ihey gave their bodies. For
that public gift they severally received a praise which
never ages and a tomb most glorious— not so much the
tomb in which they lie, but that in which their fame sur-
vives, to be remembered for ever when occasion comes
for word or deed. The sepulchre of illustrious men is all
the world: they are blazoned not merely by epitaphs on
monuments at home, but even in foreign lands their un-
written record lives in each man's mind, though on no
monument. Do you to-day make them your patterns.
Decide that happiness is freedom, and that freedom is
courage, and face frankly the perils of war.
It is not the unhappy man with nothing to hope for
who has most reason to be unsparing of his life; it is
those who, if they live on, may haply meet reversal of
their lot and feel the difference most keenly if disaster
comes. To a man of spirit there is more "bitterness in
ruin helped by cowardice than in the death which comes
unperceived while his resolve and patriotic hope are
strong.
TO PARENTS AND RELATIVES.
And therefore I do not so much lament for you
parents of these dead who are here to-day. I will rather
offer consolation. You know how changeful have been
the happenings of your lives. Happy is the lot of those
who find the most honourable form, whether of death, as
these have done, or of sorrow, as you do! Happy those
whose life has been so fitly measured that their day of
death is the day of their success! I know how hard it is


to convince you, and how often you will be reminded of
your loss, when others are happy with the happiness you
once yourselves enjoyed. For grief means this —not that
we are denied those blessings which we never tasted, but
that we are bereft of one we always had.
Those who are young enough may find more cau,se for
patience in the hope of other children. At home their
later-born will help them to forget those that are gone.
Meanwhile the country will be a double gainer; h will be
better peopled; it will be more secure; for 110 man's policy
can be fair and just if in time of danger he has 110 chil-
dren to stake on equal terms.
But some of you are past that age. Then look upon
that greater part of your life when you were happy as
so much gained; bethink yourselves that the present part
will be brief, and find your comfort in the glory of your
dead. For the only thing that never ages is the love of
honour, and when we are past service, we do not find our
pleasure, as some say, in the gains we make, but in the
honours we receive.
To you children or brothers of these dead, if any of
you are here, I see a great task set. It is the rule that the
man who is no more has all men's praise, and even sur-
passing merit will hardly make them think you I do
not say as good, but even little worse. For the living
have their rivals, and these are jealous, while that which
is in 110 man's way is honoured with a goodwill none dis-
putes.
And, if I must speak at all of high merit in a woman,
for those who will from now be widows I will put all
I have to say in one short piece of counsel. Great is your
glory when you reach the best level of your sex, and when
your merits or your faults are least bruited among males.


Well, I too have followed the ordinance, and said all
I could aptly say. But as for deeds: first those we are
burying have already received due honours ; and, next, their
children will from this time on to manhood be the
nurselings of the state, which bestows on these men, and
on those they leave, a serviceable crown for contests
such as this. For where the greatest prizes are proposed
to merit, there do the best men serve the state.
And now, when you have each bewailed your kin, go
your ways home.


00 ■ 1 1
>
C HH
4^4
■ —^1
>0
52:
m=sm
*—1
i>
— itmnj I
ri| wamSj&
> r*
-^(


I i
'•
'


L I
H : i . . ■
v.- . ■ - .• ••.. .v. ... -
;:#c lf r v :>t: : '■
% + .
/ pfmrtRS A
\ nasQUftaf. J
i-iC ;
vi iU," . ''hi :«- ■,»' tr *f " * * r.- , } "> w x
i
