

No. CCCCLII. JUNE, 1853. Vol. LXXIII.
THE PARADISE IN THE PACIFIC.
! * It was a chosen plot of fertile land,
Amongst wide waves set like a little nest,
As if it had, by nature’s cunning hand,
Been choicely picked out from ail the rest,
And laid forth for ensample of the best.” —Faerie Queen:
WHERE IS IT ?
This is the glorious Fikst of
June !—and it is set like a gem in
the centre of the London season. Oh,
mighty, multitudinous London, how
thou art enjoying thyself! All thy
bravery is on, all thy misery is hid-
den ; and here are youth, beauty,
age, wisdom, valour, genius, loyalty,
all surrounding Queen Victoria, giving
them enchanting reception, dispens-
ing regal hospitalities—ay, not to her
own loving subjects alone, but to the
representatives of all the great poten-
tates and people of the earth; for,
vast as is her empire, she is at peace
with all the world. ’Tis often said,
and it has become splendidly stereo-
typed in English phraseology, that
the snn never sets on her empire; and
the Queen, much as her anxieties are
occupied with north, south, east, and
west, had recent reason to muse, not
unpleasingly, on a certain little speck
in the Southern Pacific Ocean, where
she is specially loved, and where, after
their humble fashion, they celebrate
her natal day with flag fluttering gaily,
and bell-ringing, and singing and danc-
ing—the only day,itseems, in the year,
in which Terpsichore can find time
from her other engagements to show
her merry face and foot, with feathery
touch, for a moment —and, hark! the
boom of a gun, forsooth, all on the
same day, and to glorify the same
occasion J But what a gun 1 In the
language of the inhabitants of this
little paradise, of which we are about
to speak, that gun “ for fifty-five years
had been deposited at the bottom of
the sea, on a bed of coral, guiltless of
blood, during the time so many thou-
sands of mankind became in Europe
food for cannon!” Her Majesty, amidst
all the splendour’s which surround her,
may hear with pleasure how her royal
name was used at a certain tiny speck
in the Pacific Ocean, with all the
aforesaid accompaniments, on Tues-
day the 24th of May 1853 : —
“ The Queen! the Queen ! our gracious
Queen!
Come, raise on high your voices,
And let it by your smile be seen
That every heart rejoices !
Her natal day we’ll celebrate
With ardour and devotion,
And Britain’s festal emulate
In the Pacific Ocean!
This quotation is taken from the motto of a little volume which will be men-
tioned in due time.
VOL. LXXIIt. —NO. CCCCLII. 2 U
BLACKWOOD’S
EDINBURGH MAGAZINE.


“ Now let Old England’s flag be spread—
That flag long-famed in story ;
And as it 'waves above our head,
W e’ll think upon its glory !
Then fire the Gun —the Bounty’s gun —
And set the bell a-ringing,
And then with hearts and voices one,
We’ll all unite in singing—
“ The Queen! the Queen ! God bless the
Queen,
And all her royal kindred ;
Prolonged and happy be her reign—
By faction never hindered!
May high and low, the rich and poor,
The happy or distressed,
O’er her wide realm, from shore to shore,
Arise and call her blessed ! ”
These are words that come echo-
ing cheerily from the Pacific, and may
fitly find their way to the regal soli-
tudes of Osborne and Balmoral. Both
Queen and Prince know who wrote
these lines of simple loyalty and love;
nay, they have seen and spoken with
him, and that within these last few
months, and at Osborne aforesaid.
But he has since travelled from the
royal presence, exhilarated with its
cheering brightness, ten thousand
miles and more, and doubtless joined
in singing these same verses at that
speck in the Pacific, on the 24th of
May, now immediately last past. The
news has come rather quickly, to be
sure; but there is the fact—and it has
also come without the aid of the sub-
merged electric wire!
Well! where is it? ’Tis Queen
Victoria’s—but somewhat out of the
reach of her gay little Fairy , and,
therefore, the Queen may never take
a trip to see it! Pour years ago, a
French military gentleman made his
appearance there, with a party of
friends, all in military uniform, and
politely asked, through our poet, of
■whom more anon, in broken English,
“ Veder de people had heard of Prince
Louis Napoleon and de French Re-
publique ? and would dey enlist dem-
selves under it?” And then he took
out a paper for their signatures; but
our poet aforesaid quietly pointed to •
the little English flag waving over
their heads at that moment, assured
the complaisant visitor that they knew
all about Louis Napoleon and the
French Republic, but that all the
people there were faithful subjects of
Victoria, Queen op England; on
which the polite Frenchman bowed,
begged pardon, returned the paper to
hiss pocket, and said, that “ he did not
kmow it was a colony! ” Nor is it;
brat its inhabitants are entirely Eng-
lish! ; and, says their recent historian,
“ .“such a loyal and united community,
aas a whole, cannot be found in any
of the colonies or dependencies of the
British empire I The English union-
jack is hoisted on all grand occasions,
and to England the people would look
for protection, should any attempt be
made to disturb their position.” Ay,
and as fast as steam or sail could bring
their protectors, they would go ! And
one of them—as brave and good an
admiral as ever strode quarterdeck—
has recently been to this mysterious
place, and speaks of it as we do. “ I
stayed,” says he, “ four days upon
that speck on the ocean, but rising
like a paradise from its bosom 1 ” . . .
“ Away! away 1” says one who ac-
companied him, “ we are off to the
world again, truly sorry to leave this
island; their happiness in this life
consists solely in virtue, and their
virtue is their truest pleasure!” Ay,
admiral! as you stood on the quarter-
deck, while your noble ship fired
twenty-one guns in honour of her
Majesty’s flag, they said, in thunder-
ing tones, “ Queen Victoria will pro-
tect you,” as far as she can ; but, dear
islanders, you are safe under the pro-
tection of a higher Power, who listens
well-pleased to the voice of prayer
and praise ever ascending the heavens
from your swelling wilderness of
waters.
But where is it ? If we had an
eight-thonsand-mile boring iron, after
it had passed through heaven only
knows how many miles, as Humboldt
would tell us, of boiling granite, and
vacant space, or water, or whatever
else constitutes the globe which is
favoured with the existence of Lon-
don (at which point the boring iron
would enter), it would come poking
out at the antipodes, not so very far
from our little paradise. We say, not
so very far—but, in operations on so
grand a scale, we must be allowed
literally a little latitude —and longi-
tude. But our island (for island it is)
is to be found in the waters which con-
tain the island-home of immortal Ro-
binson Crusoe! No gold has been
found there, but a much more remark-
able article. Yet it will tempt none
648
The Paradise in tthe Pacific. [June,


of our venturous Californian and Aus-
tralian emigrants to go in quest of it—
it is, Virtue grown out of Vice !
Innocence out of Guilt ! All! what
a thrilling page of man’s history chron-
icles that same little spot! Let us
read it off in our way, and take our own
time in doing it. We ought all to
take pains with our task; for—shall
we say it ?— Maga is no stranger to
that little paradise ! And well we
knew, from that same poet of whom
we have been speaking, and whom we
ourselves saw shortly before he was
seen by Majesty, that they have read
—and perhaps they are at this moment
reading—what has been given to the
world from these pages. And, patient,
confiding reader, rarely have they con-
tained anything to compare, in interest
and instructiveness, with the events
which we shall try now to present to
you as some of them have recently
come under our own notice ; and we
shall, for a reason of our own, reserve,
till somewhat advanced in our story,
all indication of the source from which
we have taken it. Those events are
of a nature to arrest the attention, and
occasionally to agitate and excite the
hearts and imaginations of all classes
of readers. Some of them are old,
others new, and both thoroughly
authentic ; but the former acquire a
vivid and charming air of novelty
from their connection with the latter.
THE MUTINY.
Lieutenant Bligh had been for se-
veral years sailing-master in the Re-
solution of the celebrated circumnavi-
gator, Captain Cook; and in the year
1787 was intrusted with the command
of his majesty King George the Third’s
armed ship the Bounty , on an inte-
resting expedition to the South Sea
islands—namely, acting on the sug-
gestion of Sir Joseph Banks, who had
visited Otaheite with Captain Cook
in 1769—t0 try the experiment of in-
troducing plants of the bread-fruit
tree, which supplied their food to the
Otaheitans, into the “West Indies. The
Bounty set sail from Spithead on the
23d December 1787. Mr Bligh was
then in the very prime of life—about
thirty-three years of age. He re-
turned to England and landed at
Portsmouth on the 14th of March
1790; having experienced, during
that brief interval, such a disastrous
adventure as will, with its incidents,
always associate his name with one
of the most painfully interesting pas-
sages in our naval history. How
little he thought of it as he issued in
buoyant spirits from Spithead! The
Bounty was of 215 tons burden, and,
including Bligh, a botanist, and a gar-
dener, carried forty-six persons. Oh
the 26th of the ensuing October, they
reached Otaheite (now called Tahiti),
and met with a very friendly reception
from the natives, who supplied them
in abundance with roasted pig and
bread-fruit during a delightful stay
of six months, during which Mr Bligh
succeeded in collecting upwards of a
thousand plants of the bread-fruit tree.
With these they quitted Tahiti in the
spring of 1789, on their way to the
West Indies. Mr Bligh, though an
able commander, seems to have been
of a somewhat hasty temper; and it
is possible that he and the master’s-
mate, Mr Fletcher Christian, lived
not on the best terms together. The
latter was a young man, only twenty-
four years old, of respectable family,
of talent in his profession, and pos-
sessed of a daring and adventurous
spirit.
On the evening of the 27th of April
1789, the commander invited him
to supper, but he declined; having,
doubtless, by that time conceived the
audacious purpose which he after-
wards so quickly carried into effect.
This memorable night was one distin-
guished even in the tropical regions
for its tranquil loveliness ; and we
may conceive the commander of the
Bounty , as his vessel softly clave the
sparkling waters, and his sails glistened
in the silver moonlight, pacing the
deck, and enjoying the beauty of the
hour. But who can tell what an hour
may bring forth ? He was woke out
of sleep at break of day by a startling
vision—his cabin full of men armed
with pistols and cutlasses, headed
by Mr Christian ! On his calling out
to know what they meant, a voice
sternly exclaimed, “ Hold your tongue,
sir, or you are dead this instant! ”
With oaths and great violence they
649
1853.] The Paradise in the Pacific.


tied his hands behind his back, with-
out giving him time to dress; and
then, hurrying him on deck, forced
him, with eighteen persons, chiefly
officers, superior and petty, into the
ship’s launch, flinging to them about
82 lb. of pork, 150 lb. of bread, 28
gallons of water, 6 quarts of rum, 6
bottles of wine, 4 cutlasses, a quad-
rant, a compass, and a small quantity
of canvass, twine, and cordage. The
heartless mutineers then sailed away,
leaving their unfortunate commander,
and almost all his officers—nineteen
persons—in a boat on the Pacific ocean
only 23 feet long, and 6 feet 9 inches
broad, heavily laden, and without
any awning! Could the mutineers
have foreseen what was in store for
them, they would not have dared a re-
tributive Providence, and might have
reflected a little on an old English
maxim—“ Begin nothing of which you
have not well considered the end."
Which fared worse, the mutineers or
their victims, remains to be seen.
Wo shall rapidly follow the course
of each.
THE BOAT ADRIFT.
Here is scope for the imagination,
and for sympathy. What will be
thought of a slight open boat, thus
crammed with human beings, per-
forming a voyage across the ocean of
nearly four thousand miles? AVell
indeed, and often, might they have ex-
claimed, on their lonely and perilous
voyage,
11 Yc gentlemen of England, that dwell at
• home at ease,
Ah! little do you think ujjoii the dangers of
the seas! ”
The ship left the hapless boat’s crew
at about thirty miles distance from
Tofoa, one of the Friendly Islands,
and the first thing the latter attempted
was to land at the island, to procure
bread-fruit and water. The savages,
however, received them barbarously,
attacking them with stones, and beat
them off the island, where they left
dead one of their number, who had
gallantly remained last on shore to
push the boat off. The savages sur-
rounded and killed him on the spot,
and others pushed off in canoes to
attack the unfortunate boat’s crew,
who, it must be remembered, had not
been vouchsafed a single piece of fire-
arms for their protection. Some cloths
thrown into the water to amuse their
pursuers, however, diverted their at-
tention ; and Mr Bligh and his friends
escaped massacre. But what was now
to be done? Whither were they to
direct their course ?
a The world was all before them, where to
choose
Their place of rest, and Providence their
guide! ”
After much consideration, Mr Bligh
obtained his companions’ concurrence
in a proposal to make for a Dutch
settlement on the island of Timor (of
which they knew nothing but the
name), a distance of 3618 miles ! The
gunwales of the boat were only six
inches above the water, and it is easy
to imagine the misery to which eigh-
teen people were to be so long con-
signed, even regarding only their
cabined, cribbed, confined condition :
they were to traverse the ocean by day,
by night, in all weathers, over a space
of comparatively unexplored ocean,
equal to nearly a sixth of the entire
circumference of the globe. They
started upon their voyage on the 2d of
May ; all Mr Bligh’s company having
solemnly promised him to be content
with one ounce of bread and a quarter
of a pint of water per day a-piece.
One half of them were to be on the
look-out, while the others lay down
in the boat’s bottom ; and not having
room to stretch their limbs, and being
exposed to constant wet and colds,
they suffered, poor souls ! quickly and
severely from cramps, which almost
disabled them from moving a limb.
What a look-out by day and by night!
One can imagine them often gazing
down into the depth beneath them—
within a few inches from its surface,
and watching the dark shadows of the
sharks flitting around them, waiting
for a banquet, which any sudden
caprice or accident might bring them!
Afterfive days’ sail, they were startled
to find two large canoes, filled with
cannibals, making toward them at top
speed from the Feejee Islands. The
canoes continued the chase till within
two miles’ distance, when they gave it
up. Sharks beneath, cannibals behind,
650
The Paradise in the Pacific. [June,


storms above and below ! what
sources of fear and misery! what long
hours of loneliness and terror must
have been theirs ! They encountered
tremendous thunder-storms —by one
of them, shortly after starting on
their voyage, they were very nearly
swamped; yet these brave and good
souls placed their hopes in God, to
whom they often addressed a devout
prayer, composed for them by their
commander, partly from his recollec-
tion of the Prayer-book. He wrote
it in a small blank signal-book, now
extant; and it contains a humble con-
fession of sins on the part of those
suffering under the divine chastise-
ment, invokes the protection of the
Almighty in their misery and danger,
and returns thanks to Him who spared
their lives from day to day. Poor
Bligh tried as long as he could to note
a few observations, chiefly of places
he passed, in this book; and this
blotted and weather-stained document,
an affecting relic, is now in the pos-
session of his daughters. “ It is with
the utmost difficulty,” he says, “ that
I can open a book to write; and I
feel truly sensible I can do no more
than point out where these lands are
to be found, and give some idea of
their extent.” It was fortunate, in-
deed, that no quarrels or dissensions
seem to have broken out among the
little crew. Had it been so, what
might not have been the conse-
quence ? As early as the Bth of May,
the allowance of food to each was
necessarily reduced to one and a half
ounce of pork, half a pint of cocoa-
nut milk, an ounce of bread, and a
tea-spoonful of rum, Bligh measuring
out the allowance very accurately, by
means of a pair of scales which he
made out of two cocoa-nut shells,
while a pistol-bullet (of twenty-five
to the pound) served as a weight to
fix the allowance of bread to each.
The half pint of cocoa-nut milk, how-
ever, was soon further reduced to a
quarter ; and as for the bread, wetted
and decayed as it was, and doled out
thus by bullet-weight, it was eaten
with the utmost relish. A fearful
storm of thunder and lightning
drenched them to the skin, yet proved
a timely godsend, for it produced
them twenty gallons of water. This
was dealt out three times a-day, in a
small horn cup two inches deep and
two in diameter, and round it was
written by Bligh, “ Allowance of
water three times a-day.” He took
his own meals out of a small gourd,
round which he also wrote, “ The cup
I eat my miserable allowance out of.”
The bullet was afterwards set in a
metal plate, on which Bligh inscribed,
“This bullet, l-25th of a lb., was the
allowance of bread which supported
eighteen men for forty-eight days,
served to each person three times
a-day, under the command of Captain
William Bligh, from the 28th April
1789 to the 14th June following.”
All these deeply-interesting relics are
now in the hands of his daughters.
From the 10th of May they encoun-
tered a succession of storms, with fre-
quent thunder and lightning, the sea
constantly breaking over the boat,
and nearly filling it with water, which
they had to bale out as quickly as
possible to prevent being swamped;
of them were seriously weak-
ened and ill, from cramps and spasms.
Theygained some slight relief by adopt-
ing a suggestion of their thoughtful
commander, —viz., they all took oif
their clothes, steeped in rain- wet, and
wrung them in the salt water, which
produced some little warmth to their
shivering limbs. What a sight these
unfortunate beings, thus engaged on
the lonely ocean, must have presented
to a pitying beholder! To aggravate
their disastrous condition, their little
store of bread had become soaked
in the salt water, which had broken
over them incessantly; and even of
their sorry fare, their pittance, by the
24th May, was reduced to l-25th of a
lb. for breakfast, and the like quantity
for dinner, omitting supper! On the
25th, they succeeded in capturing one
or two sea-fowl that came so near
the boat (which must have been in-
deed a novel sight to them) as enabled
the mariners to catch them with the
hand! They were of the size of a
pigeon, and each was cut into eighteen
pieces, and eaten, of course, uncooked.
About this time the heat of the sun
became so intense that it caused a
languor and faintness which made
them weary of life. On the morning
of the 29th they found themselves
within a quarter of a mile of rocks on
which the sea was breaking furiously,
651
1853.] The Paradise in the Pacific.


but they contrived to haul off, and so
escape instant destruction. They were
able to steer through an opening in the
reef, and found a small island within
it, which Bligh named “ Island of
Direction.” “ We had,”says he, “re-
turned _ God thanks for His gracious
protection ; and with much content
took our miserable allowance of a
25th of a lb. of bread, and a quarter
of a pint of water (with which they
had been furnished, it will be remem-
bered, by the thunder-storm). At
length they began to near New Hol-
land, and landed on a fine sandy bay
in an island near the main, where
they luxuriated on oysters , water, and
berries, and slept comfortably all
night; but as they were preparing in
the morning to leave, they found a
large party of natives armed with
spears, running and hallooing to-
wards them—whether friendly or not,
Mr Bligh and his companions did not
pause to ascertain, but put off safely
to sea. On the 81st they landed at
another little island, where they again
found oysters ; and it may be said, in
a_ sad way, that they indeed “ asto-
nished the natives,” on whom they
supped heartily. On the evening of
the 8d June they succeeded in thread-
ing their way through a most difficult
and dangerous passage (the Endea-
vour Straits), and were again in the
open ocean ; but here again they had
to encounter long-continued wet and
stormy weather, from which their ex-
hausted frames suffered very severely.
Incessant fatigue, and exposure to
cold and wet, overpowered the strong-
est among them, and several seemed
at the point of death. During all these
terrible trials, the noble-spirited com-
mander contrived to support their
sinking spirits by every exertion to
distract and amuse their attention,
he himself all the while as exhausted
as themselves. At length, however,
his fortitude and constancy were re-
warded ; for, behold 1 at 3 a.m. of
the 12 th June, their eyes were ra-
vished with a sight of their long-
sighed-forpoint of destination! Timor!
Timor ! —the island of Timor was in
sight! Ah, who shall tell the thrill of
ecstasy that shot through the hearts
of the weather-beaten and all but
prostrate boat’s crew, as they first
saw the island, and found themselves
nearing it! What pious gratitude
filled them towards their good God,
in whose hands are all the waters
of the earth, and who had con-
ducted them through such unex-
ampled perils!
On the 14th June they landed at
the Dutch settlement of Coupang,
after having been forty-eight long days
and nights in this open boat on the
ocean, and received a most hearty and
hospitable welcome from the gover-
nor and all the other residents. On
the 80th of August Mr Bligh sailed
with his surviving crew (for one died
of fever at Timor), taking with him
the launch in which they had crossed
the ocean,for Batavia; and afterwards
homeward with eleven out of the ori-
ginal eighteen, the others having died
or preferred remaining in Batavia.
He landed safe at Portsmouth on the
14th March 1790. His cruel case
was instantly made known, and at-
tracted universal sympathy. He was
quickly promoted, served with great
distinction at the battles of Camper-
down and Copenhagen, at the latter
of which he commanded a ship under
Lord Nelson; and was afterwards
appointed governor of New South
Wales, and ultimately became a vice-
admiral. Thenceforth he lived hap-
pily in the bosom of his family, and
died in London, in the year 1817,
aged sixty-three.
RETRIBUTION.
The atrocious act of mutiny and
piracy excited, as may well be ima-
gined, universal indignation in Eng-
land ; and a frigate (the Pandora ),
under the command of Captain Ed-
wards, was forthwith despatched to
the site of it, with orders to visit the
Society and Friendly Islands, and
seize and bring home all the mutineers
they might discover. The Pandora
arrived at Matavai Bay, off Otaheite,
on the 23d March 1791; and three of
the offenders immediately came on
board, surrendered themselves, and
were instantly put in irons. Eleven
more were seized at Otaheite, and
also put in irons. Two of the origi-
nal mutineers, who had landed at
652
The Paradise in the Pacific. [June,


Otaheite, were dead—after one of them
had become a king, and been shortly
afterwards murdered by the other,
who was himself instantly stoned to
death by the natives. No tidings
could be gained of the remaining nine
mutineers, nor of the Bounty; and
after making all possible efforts to dis-
cover them, the frigate, with her four-
teen mutineers lying in irons in a cage
on the after part of the quarterdeck,
only eleven feet in length,called “Pan-
dora’s Box,” set off homeward. She
was wrecked, however, on a coral reef
off New Holland, on the 29th August
1791, and the crew had to navigate
a thousand miles, in open boats. Four
of the mutineers went down, in their
irons, with the Pandora; others of
their companions succeeded, with des-
perate efforts, in disengaging them-
selves from their irons. Thirty of the
crew also perished. Captain Edwards,
and his surviving men and prisoners,
succeeded in reaching a sandy quay,
only ninety yards long by sixty wide,
—a miserable spot, where they all
were nearly consumed, under a vertical
sun, from the insupportable heat of
which the wretched prisoners had no
other defence but to bury themselves
up to their necks in the burning sands!
The captain and his men had tents
made of boats’ sails; but he deemed
it consistent with duty, to refuse the
slightest shelter or protection to his
wretched prisoners 1 One of them was
a young gentleman, named Peter Hey-
wood, not sixteen years old at the
time of the mutiny, in which he
had taken no voluntary part. The
only article he saved from the wreck
was a Common-Prayer Book, which
he held between his teeth as ho
swam to shore for his life. He,
with his guilty surviving compa-
nions, reached England, heavily
chained and almost in rags, on the
19th June 1792. On the 12th Sep-
tember, he and his nine fellow-muti-
neers were brought to a court-martial
at Portsmouth, on board the Duke ,
the president being Lord Hood. On
the sixth day the court acquitted four
of the ten, and found the remaining
six guilty of the capital offence of run-
ning away with the ship, and deserting
His Majesty’s service. Among these
latter was poor Peter Heywood. They
were sentenced to be hanged by the
neck on board one of His Majesty’s
ships of war ; bat two of them, Peter
Heywood and another, were recom-
mended to His Majesty’s mercy. Two
days afterwards, the unfortunate young
gentleman wrote a letter to a clergy-
man, a friend of his family, containing
the following remarkable and affecting
passages:—
“ On Tuesday morning the 18th
inst., the dreadful sentence of death
was pronounced upon me, to which
(being the just decree of that Divine
Providence who first gave me breath) I
bow my devoted head with that forti-
tude, cheerfulness, and resignation,
which is the duty of every member of
the church of our blessed Saviour and
Redeemer Christ Jesus. To Him alone
I now look for succour, in full hope
that perhaps a few days more will
open to the view of my astonished and
fearful soul His kingdom of eternal
and incomprehensible bless, prepared
only for the righteous of heart. I have
not been found guilty of the slightest
act of the detestable crime of mutiny,
but am doomed to die for not being
active in my endeavour to suppress it.
Could the evidences who appeared in
the court-martial be tried, they would
also suffer for the same and only crime
of which I have been guilty. But I
am to be the victim. Alas! my
youthful inexperience, and no depra-
vity of will, is the sole cause to which
I can attribute my misfortunes. But,
so far from repining at my fate, I
receive it with a dreadful kind of joy,
composure, and serenity of mind, well
assured that it has pleased God to
point me out as a subject, through
whom some useful, though at present
unsearchable intention of the Divine
attributes may be carried into execu-
tion for the future benefit of my coun-
try. Then why should I repine at
being made a sacrifice for the good of
perhaps thousands of my fellow-crea-
tures ? Forbid it, Heaven! ”
On the 24th October 1792, he and
another received a free, uncondi-
tional pardon; another was respited,
and ultimately pardoned; and three
were hanged at the yard-arm, a
miserable spectacle, in Portsmouth
harbour, on board the Brunswick.
When Captain Montague, two days
before the execution, read young Peter
Heywood His Majesty’s gracious par-
653
1853.] The Paradise in the Pacific.


don, the youth addressed him in the
following noble strain
“ Sir, when the sentence of the law
was passed upon me, I received it, I
trust, as became a man; and if it had
been carried into execution, I should
have met my fate, I hope, in a man-
ner becoming a Christian. Your ad-
monition cannot fail to make a lasting
impression upon my mind. I receive
with gratitude my sovereign’s mercy,
for which my future life shall be faith-
fully devoted to his service.”
And faithfully his future life re-
deemed his pledge. He immediately
re-entered His Majesty’s service, rose
in it rapidly to high station, greatly
distinguished himself, and died in hon-
ourable retirement, in the year 1831,
in his 58th year. His considerate and
discriminating judges, after weighing
all the facts of the case, regarded him
as having been more unfortunate
than criminal, from his youth, the
coercion under which he had laboured,
and the absence of any proof that he
had taken part in the outrage inflicted
on his commander, or his fellow-vic-
tims. His early misfortunes saddened
and sobered him for life ; he became
the idol of those who were placed
either over or under him; and it stands
recorded of him by one of our naval
annalists, “ that his king and country
never had a more faithful servant, nor
the naval service a more worthy and
respectable member.”
It seems difficult to assign ade-
quate motives for the mutiny of the
Bounty , or at least to imagine the
ulterior objects of its perpetrators.
Fletcher Christian, the ringleader,
was a gentleman by birth and educa-
tion, brother of Professor Christian,
the annotator of Blackstone's Commen-
taries, and Chief-Justice of Ely; while
Mr Young, one of the midshipmen
who shared his desperate venture, was
the nephew of a baronet. What could
such men have imagined would be
their destiny? What, for instance,
could they do with their king’s ship ?
What pleasure could they have in
spending the rest of their lives among
savages ?
It was twenty years before the
slightest trace of them could be de-
tected, but then their deplorable fate
became known. It seems that as soon
as they had turned adrift their com-
mander, Christian sailed for an island
500 miles south of Otaheite, intending
to land there; but the inhabitants re-
fusing to allow them, they returned to
Otaheite. Once more they went to
the island in question, were again re-
pulsed by the natives, and once more
repaired to Otaheite. It was now ne-
cessary for them to consider seriously
how they were to dispose of themselves.
All but nine resolved to settle at Ota-
heite, Christian and his eight com-
panions resolving to try their fortunes
elsewhere. It so happened that he
had found in the Bounty , among its
THE MISSING MUTINEERS.
commander’s books, a copy of Com-
mander Carteret’s Voyage round the
World; and among his other dis-
coveries, the author mentions a very
little island which he first saw on the
2d July 1767, in the South Pacific
Ocean ; “it appeared,” he said, “ like
a great rock rising out of the sea,”
and was so high as to be visible at
more than fifteen leagues’ distance.
. . . . Its highest point roselOOS
feet above the level of the sea, and
in clear weather could be seen at forty
miles’ distance. As it was first seen
by a young gentlemen named Pitcairn,
they gave it his name, “Pitcairn’s
Island,” and tried to land on it; but
the surf was raging so violently around
it as to render near approach impos-
sible. It is at a distance of 1200
miles from Otaheite, and is in latitude
25° 4' south, and in longitude 180° 8'
west. It is only four miles and a half
in circumference, a mile and a half
being its greatest length. It is of vol-
canic origin, having been elevated from
the bed of the ocean by some tremen-
dous convulsion caused by the action
of fire, which has given a vertical
character and a jagged outline to the
stony mountains, and rendered the
scenery wildly picturesque. It is
covered with trees the cocoa-nut,
plantain, bread-fruit, and —
and its climate is favourable to the
growth of vegetables. There are no
venomous reptiles. There is only one
point, called Bounty Bay, where ac-
654
The Paradise in the Pacific. [June,


cess is possible, and that only in calm
weather; and even then, great care is
requisite to avoid the breakers. There
is scarcely any beach; and almost in-
stantly on landing the visitor com-
mences a precipitous ascent. This was
the desolate spot selected by the muti-
neer and his companions for their future
residence! They sailed in the Bounty;
and when it arrived, there landed from
it twenty-eight souls; viz., Chris-
tian, Mr Young, a midshipman, and
seven seamen; and all these nine
Englishmen had married Otaheitan
women! who accompanied them.
There were also six Otaheitan men,
three of them with wives ; and a child
ten months old. Let the reader rea-
lise for a moment the feelings of a
gentleman—of two gentlemen, mar-
ried to savages, doomed to spend the
rest of their days on that forlorn spot,
ten thousand miles away from home,
where were their anxious families and
friends, and where also resided those
who doubtless were sending forth
scouts to scour the ocean in quest of
the guilty occupants of that island,
and bring them home to suffer a just
and ignominious death!
Christian and his friends were not,
however, the first occupants of the
island, for they found indubitable
traces of ancient predecessors, savage
and idolatrous; hatchets; spear-heads
of hard stone ; a large stone bowl;
carvings of the sun, moon, and stars;
four images six feet in height; and a
number of skulls, buried, each having
a pearl under it. The new-comers
found no other traces of man on the
island; they were the only living
human occupants.
MURDERS.
Fearful times awaited the mutineers
and their companions. Christian re-
tained for a while the position and
authority of head of the community ;
and his mind seems to have been
occupied with efforts to preserve
order and peace, which were hourly
interrupted by his turbulent and
savage companions. Much of his
time, however, was spent on a spot
on the top of a high rock, which he
called his “ look-out, ” whence he
would anxiously survey the ocean, to
see whether it bore along its bosom
the coming avenger! What thoughts
must have been his on these occa-
sions of mournful solitude! What
would he then have given to undo all
that he had done !
Shortly after their landing they broke
up the Bounty , and so condemned them-
selves to perpetual imprisonment in the
island. There were sanguinary frays
incessantly arising between the Euro-
peans and the savages; and at length
the Otaheitan men entered into a
plot to destroy their European com-
panions. The wives of the latter,
however, discovered it, and disclosed
it to their husbands on the eve of the
projected massacre. The result, how-
ever, may be anticipated. Within a
year’s time, Christian and four of his
companions were murdered by their
Otaheitan companions, all of whom
w r ere in turn slain the same year!
One of them was killed with an axe by
Mrs Young , the midshipman’s Ota-
heitan wife! As soon as she had done
this, she signalled her husband, ami ho
immediately shot the sole surviving
Otaheitan ! In the year 1791, there
were only four of the Englishmen
alive, one of whom was Mr Young;
and the five skulls of the murdered
Englishmen, including Christian, were
kept by the women of the place as
trophies ; and they were afterwards,
only with much difficulty, prevailed
on to give them up to be buried.
One of the survivors was unhappily
acquainted with the art of distilling;
and having converted a copper boiler
from the Bounty into a still, he made
ardent spirits from the root of a plant
in the island. How strongly this
cause operated in promoting turbu-
lence and bloodshed may be imagined.
He himself, in a fit of delirium tremens ,
committed suicide —throwing himself
from a rock into the sea; another was
killed by Mr Young and one John
Adams, in self-defence; and of all
the fifteen unhappy men who had
landed from the Bounty , only two
died a natural death —Young, of
asthma, in 1800; and Adams, in the
year 1829. The last survivor of
those who had come in the Bounty
was Mrs Young, who died at an
655
1853.1 The Paradise in the Pacific.


advanced age in the year 1850.
Prom all this it may appear that the
mutineers must have found the bar-
ren rock to which they betook them-
selves, become a very hell upon
earth.
THE ISLAND PATRIARCH.
The last male survivor was the John
Adams above mentioned, a seaman ;
and marvellous, indeed, was the change
which reflection and merciful expe-
rience contributed to effect in his
mind and character. He had lived
not only among scenes of violence
and blood, but in constant terror of
being discovered by some ship ap-
proaching the island, and taken home
to be hanged. As a sample of his
sufferings on this score, in the year
1795 a ship was seen coming near
the island, on which he and his
brother mutineers hid themselves in
the bushes, in great terror. When
at length they dared to venture out,
they stole cautiously to the landing-
place, and found that the ship had
disappeared; but as a knife and some
cocoa-nuts were lying near the water’s
edge, it was clear that some one had
landed, but doubtless, not having seen
any traces of occupation, had left, and
the ship had proceeded on its voyage.
In the year 1800, Adams, then only
thirty-six years old, found himself
the only man in the island—his com-
panions being twenty of the children
of his deceased comrades; but they
had come to regard him as their com-
mon father, with reverence and affec-
tion. He was providentially possessed
of one solitary copy of a Bible, and of
a prayer-book, which had belonged to
the Bounty , and of these he made un-
ceasing use. Two remarkable dreams
occurred to him in the year 1810,
which he always regarded as having
been designed to awake in him reflec-
tion and repentance ; and he became
a very devout man—training up in
Christianity the young semi-pagans
who surrounded him. He had con-
stant morning and evening prayers,
and was never tired of reading to them
the Scriptures, in which they took
such a delight, that on one occasion,
two of the lads having earned a little
present of gunpowder—a very pre-
cious commodity there—as a reward
for their labour in preparing the ground
for planting yams, proposed that, in-
stead of the present, he should read
them some extra lessons from the
Bible! He became, in truth, as he
has since been called, an island patri-
arch.
In the year 1808, an American cap-
tain landed at the island, not a little
to Adams’ alarm, and, on quitting,
took with him a chronometer and com-
pass which had belonged to the Bounty ,
and forwarded them to the Admiralty
—being, of course, acquainted with
the story of the mutiny. Ho steps,
however, were taken by the British
Government; but six years afterwards,
Adams beheld with dismay two men-
of-war approaching the island, and
he reasonably apprehended that at
length his hour was come, for the two
captains, with some officers and men,
were seen descending the ships’ sides,
and immediately landed. Adams made
no attempt to conceal himself—-re-
signed to his destiny ; but was quickly
comforted by the tidings that he was
not to be arrested; that a quarter of
a century had passed away, and his
presence was considered useful to the
young islanders. Then, indeed, a mill-
stone fell from his neck. How the
weight of it had worn him may be
guessed from the fact, that Sir Tho-
mas Staines, one of the captains,
styled him, in his despatch, “ a vene-
rable old man”—whereas he was then
only fifty years old! Sir Thomas
added, “ His exemplary conduct, and
fatherly care of the whole little co-
lony, could not but command admira-
tion. The pious manner in which all
those born on the island have been
reared —the correct sense of religion
which has been instilled into their
minds by this old man, has given him
the pre-eminence over the whole of
them—who look up to him as the fa-
ther of the whole, and one family.”
When Sir Thomas and his companions
saw the island they did not suppose it
inhabited, and were greatly surprised
to observe, as they approached, plan-
tations laid out, and very neatly-con-
structed huts and houses! When
within two miles from the landing-
place, some natives were observed
656
The Paradise in the Pacific. [June,


bringing down their canoes on their
shoulders, in which they dashed
through a heavy surf, and pulled off
to the ships. What was the astonish-
ment of the sailors to hear one of the
two savages exclaim, on approaching
the ship, “ Won’t you heave us a
rope, now ? ” And who should these
prove to be, but a son of Christian,
twenty-five years old, and of Young,
eighteen years old ! “ They were
fine handsome fellows, tall and well-
proportioned, and their features were
those of an honest English face.”
Their only dress was a piece of cloth
round their loins, and a straw hat
ornamented with the black feathers
of the domestic fowl. When they had
got on board, Sir Thomas Staines took
them down into his cabin to give them
lunch, and was moved with sudden ten-
derness on seeing one of them rise up,
place his hands inaposture of devotion,
and distinctly and solemnly say, “ For
what we are going to receive, the
Lord make us truly thankful! ” On
accompanying them back to the
island, and accomplishing the land-
ing with no little difficulty, Sir Tho-
mas was charmed with the scene
and the reception which awaited him.
Poor old Adams and his wife, who
was blind and infirm, conducted their
great guests to his snug and neat
house, and spread out for them a
little repast of yams, cocoa-nuts, and
fine fresh eggs. They found the
settlement to consist of forty-six
grown-up young people, with a num-
ber of infants. The young men were
all fine athletic fellows, their faces
full of frankness; but the young
women excited great admiration.
They were tall and finely formed;
their faces beaming with smiles, but
wearing an air of modesty and bash-
fulness that would do honour to the
most virtuous nation on earth. “ Their
teeth like ivory, even, regular, and
beautiful, without a single exception;
and all of them, both male and female,
had the most marked English fea-
tures.” Their little houses were
models of comfort and cleanliness,
and the grounds all around were
carefully cultivated. They were very
systematic in conducting their little
affairs. Old Adams, for instance,
kept a careful register, containing the
times and account of their work, and
what each had acquired by it; and
they had a regular system of barter —
as of salt for fresh provisions; vege-
tables and fruit for poultry, and fish,
&c. All were engaged in the cultiva-
tion of the ground (growing chiefly
yams) and fishing ; and when one
had cleared a sufficient quantity of
ground, and had stock enough to
maintain a family, he was allowed
to marry—but always with the con-
sent of Adams. The utmost harmony
prevailed in their little society. They
were simple, sincere, affectionate, and
pious, and most exemplary in dis-
charging their religious duties.
These matters continued till the
year 1825, when Captain Beechey
visited the island, in the Blossom,
and has left on record an affecting
picture of their primitive simplicity
and happiness. They were still under
the care of their old patriarch Adams.
“ These excellent people,” said Cap-
tain Beechey, “ appear to live to-
gether in perfect harmony and con-
tentment ; to be virtuous, religious;
cheerful and hospitable even beyond
the limits of prudence ; to be patterns
of conjugal and parental affection;
and to have very few vices. We re-
mained with them many days, and
their unreserved manners gave us the
fullest opportunity of becoming ac-
quainted with any faults they might
have possessed.” Their reverence
for the Sabbath would shame many a
highly-civilised Christian community.
It was, indeed, “ kept holy”—a day of
rest, in truth, and of cheerful rever-
ence towards the Most High. Their
services were conducted in strict con-
formity with the usages of the Church
of England, the prayers being read
by old Adams, and the lessons by one
appointed by him for that purpose.
Their only intercourse with the
great world was on the occasion,
few and far between, of ships of war,
whalers, or others, touching at the
island. “ These seas,” says a travel-
ler on them during the last year
(1852), “ are but little frequented. To
give an idea of their vast extent, not-
withstanding the thousands of ships
that are trading on them, we have
seen only one ship at sea, and our
track measures some 4500 miles !
What a little spot this island appears
in the vast Pacific ! a mere rock,
657
1853.] The Paradise in the Pacific.


apparently incapable of resisting the
mighty waves of so vast an ocean.
The mutineers might well deem them-
selves secure on so small an island! ”
At length,
“ Declining gently to the last, this good old
man, he died.”
Old John Adams expired on the sth
March 1829, in the sixty-fifth year of
his age—a sad day for the little com-
munity which he had trained into one
so exemplary; thereby offering the best
atonement in his power for the guilt
which had stained his early years.
THE PASTOR OF PITCAIRN.
Not quite four months—viz. on the
15 November 1828—before the death
of the island patriarch, there arrived
at Pitcairn a remarkable man des-
tined to be his successor in the con-
fidence, affection, and government of
that little community. He seemed
really to have been marked out for
the post by Providence. The per-
son here spoken of bears the by no
means aristocratic name of George
Hunn Nobbs. He was born in this
country in 1799; went to sea at the
early age of eleven years, when he
became a midshipman in the British
navy. He afterwards held a com-
mission in the Chilian navy, under
the present Earl of Dundonald (then
Lord Cochrane), and in consequence
of his services became lieutenant.
He was at length, after a gallant and
desperate conflict with a Spanish gun-
brig, taken prisoner by the troops of
the piratical Spanish general Bene-
vedeis, who was a very fiend incarnate
of cruelty. He shot all his prisoners,
except Lieutenant Nobbs and three
English seamen, all four of whom lay
under sentence of death, and in hourly
expectation of being shot, for three
weeks; during which Lieutenant
Nobbs daily saw his fellow-prisoners
led out to death, and heard the re-
ports of the muskets from which they
suffered. This monster Benevedeis
would invite the captive officers to
an elegant entertainment; immedi-
ately after which he would have them
marched into the courtyard, and shot
—their host standing at the window
to enjoy the spectacle! Such was the
man at whose mercy poor Lieutenant
Nobbs lay for three weeks; at the
end of which he was suddenly and
unaccountably exchanged for a priso-
ner; Benevedeis himself being soon
after taken prisoner, sentenced to
death, tied to the tail of a mule, so
dragged to the Palace Square, and
there hanged. After many adven-
tures and much dangerous service,
Mr Nobbs quitted Chili, and returned
to England in 1822, in a vessel which
had touched at Pitcairn. The cap-
tain gave such a description of the
happiness of the little community,
that Mr Nobbs became irresistibly im-
pelled to go and settle there, anxious
only to pass the remainder of his
days in peace and usefulness among
his fellow-creatures. Early in 1826,
having then been four times round
the world, he quitted England, with
the intention of going to Pitcairn.
He went by way of the Cape of Good
Hope, India, and Australia, and at
length reached Callao, in Peru, tvhere
he met the owner of a launch, who
agreed to accompany him in it to
Pitcairn, provided Mr Nobbs would
fit her out. This was done; and
these two persons—as if emulous of
the feat of Bligh and his companions
—went alone in this frail launch to
Pitcairn, a voyage of three thousand
five hundred miles, which they ac-
complished in forty-two days—arriv-
ing in November 1828. Soon after
their arrival the owner died; the
launch was hauled ashore, and her
materials were used to build a house
for Mr Nobbs. Old Adams, on hear-
ing his errand and his motives, and
doubtless beginning to be apprehen-
sive for those from whom death must
soon release himself, received him
with kindness, and he became a sort
of schoolmaster in the island. On
the death of Adams in the March
of the ensuing year, Mr Nobbs con-
tinued at his post, and soon succeeded
in establishing himself in the affections
of the people, then onty sixty-eight
in number, serving them in the three-
fold capacity of pastor, surgeon, and
schoolmaster. Three years after his
arrival, however, there occurred a
sufficiently ridiculous but vexatious
affair. A person named Hill came to
the island, professing himself autho-
658
The Paradise in the Pacific. [June,


rised by the British Government to
reside there as its representative!
He soon sowed dissensions among
the simple-minded inhabitants, whom
he also terrified into obedience by
the fear of giving offence to the Go-
vernment. Honest Mr Nobbs soon
saw through the swaggering stranger,
by whose intrigues, however, he was
■compelled to quit the island, leaving
the new-comer boasting from time to
time of his splendid rank and station
at home. He said he was “ a very
near relative of the Duke of Bedford,
and that the Duchess seldom rode out
in her carriage without him! ” Whilst
the people were listening with awe to
these magnificent statements, who
should arrive at the island—posi-
tively as if for the purpose of discom-
fiting imposture —but Captain Lord
Edward Russell, a veritable son of
the Duke of Bedford! Mr Hill was
thunderstruck. Lord Edward would
have made short work of it, and re-
moved him imtanter from the scene
of his impudent and mischievous in-
trusion and imposture. Lord Ed-
ward, however, would not do so with-
out orders. But in the ensuing year
another ship of war arrived, her cap-
tain armed with the requisite autho-
rity, and removed Mr (or, as he seems
to have called himself, Lord) Hill to
Valparaiso. He never made his
appearance again in the island; and
Mr Nobbs having received a pressing
and unanimous entreaty from the in-
habitants to resume his old station and
duties, complied with it, having been
absent for the period of nine months,
occupying himself as a teacher at the
Gambier Islands, which were about
three hundred miles’ distance from
Pitcairn.
It may be remembered that a child,
ten months old, accompanied the
mutineers from Otaheite to Pitcairn.
She afterwards married a son of the
unhappy Christian, by whom she had
a daughter, and that daughter became
the wife of Mr Nobbs, by whom she
has now eleven children. Since his
A PITCAIRN DAY.
It may be pleasing to have an idea
of a Pitcairn day. Let it be borne in
mind that there is a difference of nine
hours between their time and ours ;
return on the occasion last referred
to, this excellent man has never been
interfered with in pursuing “ the even
tenor of his way,” but has evidently
conciliated the ardent affection of all
classes. He acted from the first as
their chaplain (as far as, being a lay-
man, he could), their schoolmaster,
their physician, and, in fact, did
everything that could be expected
from a man of kindly feeling, of no
little experience of varied life, of
sound education, and devoted piety.
His duties were constant and labo-
rious, for all his arrangements were
very systematic, and he adhered to
them with punctilious exactness.
Thus every hour of his time was de-
voted to the service of the islanders
and of his own large family. But how
was he himself supported all the
while? it may be asked. Indeed, his
remuneration was for years of the
scantiest possible character, for the
Pitcairn Islanders were, as he knew
when he first went, very poor. In
1841, he thus explained, in a letter
to a clergyman at Valparaiso, some
of the straits to which he was driven;
“ My stock of clothing which I brought
from England is, as you may suppose,
very nearly exhausted, and I have
no friends there to whom I can with
propriety apply for more. Until the
last three years, it was my custom to
wear a black coat on the Sabbath;
but since that period I have been
obliged to substitute a nankeen jacket
of my own making. My only re-
maining coat, which is quite thread-
bare, is reserved for marriages and
burials; so that it is customary to
say, when a wedding is going to take
place, ‘Teacher, you will have to
put on your black coat next Sunday,’
which is equivalent to informing me
that a couple are going to be mar-
ried ! ”
Some little time afterwards, how-
ever, this grateful people placed him
on a level with themselves, by assign-
ing him sufficient land for his sup-
port.
•—when, for instance, it is oui four
o’clock in the afternoon, it is their
seven o’clock in the morning. They
rise with the light; and the first duty
659
1g53.j The Paradise in the Pacific.


in each house is to read prayers, in-
cluding two chapters in the Bible.
After a slight refreshment, thebusiness
of the day begins. Children are forth-
with despatched to the school, during
play-hours amusing themselves with
kites and ball; but limited space—less
in extent than Hyde Park and Kensing-
ton Gardens put together—necessarily
curtails the diversions of young and
old. The men’s employment consists
in cultivating their land, looking after
their gardens, building and improving
their little houses, fencing-in their
plantations, and making hats out of
palm-leaves, and fancy boxes for bar-
ter with the crews of such ships as
may call there. At twelve o’clock
they have a plain substantial meal of
yams and potatoes, made into bread,
saying grace before and after meals
with scrupulous reverence. Both by
day and by night they fish in the
deep waters for a kind of cod, grey
mullet, and red snapper, which, how-
ever, are scanty, and obtained with
some little hazard. The second meal
of the day (they have but two) occurs
at seven o’clock in the evening, consist-
ing of yams, sweet potatoes, and such
humble fare as may have been pre-
pared by the females of the family.
Once or twice only in the week can
they afford the luxury of fish, meat,
or poultry. The occupations of the
women are their household duties,
including especially making and mend-
ing clothes; and when they have
leisure, they manufacture a sort of
cloth out of the bark of the paper
mulberry. There are no servants in
the island, therefore the wives and
daughters do all that is necessary for
the family. They do not cook in the
house, which, being of wood, might
be often endangered, but in ovens at
a little distance, let into the ground,
big enough to contain a good-sized
pig, an animal of which they have but
few. They have no candles, but use
oil, and torches made with nuts of the
dodo tree. They have no glass for
the windows, but only shutters, which
are closed in bad weather. They
occasionally have a modicum of tea
as a luxury, but their ordinary drink
is pure water, neither wines nor
spirits being allowed in the island,
except for strictly medicinal purposes.
On high days and holidays they treat
themselves with cocoa-nut milk, and
water sweetened with syrup extracted
from the bruised sugar-cane. They
retire early to rest, after having per-
formed their family devotions. They
sleep secure without the protection of
locks, bolts, or bars : there is not such
a thing in the island! Think, then,
of a moonlight night at peaceful Pit-
cairn, Londoner, jaded with the up-
roar and dissipation of a London day
or night! See the moon walking in
her brightness, and stars shining,
vividly as you never saw them, and
both reflected on the illimitable ocean,
all calm and beautiful! Not a soul
is slumbering there that has not closed
his eyes—her eyes—after offering the
heart’s incense to their almighty
Guardian !
The Pitcairn people are all well
educated, and very fond of reading;
but only books of sterling interest,
and moral and religious character,
chiefly supplied to them by one of the
noblest societies which England can
boast —that for Promoting Christian
Knowledge. And now has arrived
the time for explaining that ourreaders
are indebted for all the interesting
facts which may appear in this paper,
as well those which have gone be-
fore as those which are yet to follow,
to a little volume only just issued by
that Society. Its pious and accom-
plished author * is the Secretary of
that Society, and, as we learn from
its pages, has personal cognisance of
many highly interesting facts narrated
in it, pledging himself to the authen-
ticity of all, as far as careful inquiry
has enabled him to do so. To us it
has proved a delightful little volume,
and we heartily express our obliga-
tions to the reverend author. It
breathes throughout a pure spirit of
_ Pitcairn: The Island , the People, and the Pastor; with a Short Account of the
Mutiny of the Bounty. By the Rev. Thomas Botles Murray, M.A., Secretary of
the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge; and published under the direction
of the Committee of General Literatui-e and Education appointed by the Society.
Loudon: 1853. Pp. 280.
660
The Paradise in the Pacific. [June,


manly sympathy and piety. We
should like to be at Pitcairn, when its
simple and affectionate inhabitants get
their first copy—let us hope as many
copies as there are islanders —of the
volume which has presented so en-
dearing a picture of that distant but
really happy little family ! How they
will hang over its pages, by day and
by night! But we must proceed. The
great events in the Pitcairner’s day is
the arrival of a ship, for which they are
always—not, as were those before them,
with terror, but with eager hope —on
the look-out; and the volume before us
contains numerous touching little epi-
sodes connected with these few-and-
far-between ocean-island visitings.
The crews are received with affec-
tionate greetings, and the utmost
hospitality which very limited means
admit of; and not only has there
never been an instance of Jack for an
instant misbehaving himself in this
sweet scene of peace and innocence,
but he has himself often shed tears of
sympathy and respect on receiving the
civilities of this lonely but confiding
little community, and returned their
humble hospitalities with such libe-
rality as his captain felt authorised to
admit. It is, however, on the arrival
of a Queen’s ship that the enthusiasm
of the islanders is naturally most ex-
cited : and who can think unmoved of
the twenty-one guns’ salute from the
stately structure on the bosom of the
ocean, returned by the single solitary
gun in the island ? If anything could
raise in our estimation the character
of British naval officers, it is the ac-
counts of their doings in these distant
regions, to be found in this little
volume. The tears have several times
quivered in our own eyes, when read-
ing the extracts here given from the
journals and despatches of captains
and admirals, all of whom have ex-
hibited a noble spirit of tenderness and
dignity in dealing with this little com-
munity. We would have every young
officer in Her Majesty’s navy read this
record of manly sympathy and piety
on the part of those intrusted with
high and distant commands by the
Queen of Great Britain—symbolling at
once of the authority and power of the
sceptre which she wields, and the
gentle spirit of benignity and piety
which animates her heart. But we
shall let our admiral speak for him-
self.
THE ADMIRAL ON THE ISLAND.
Before, however, we come to this
great event, we must return for a
minute to the pastor of Pitcairn. On
the 20th July 1847, a memorial was
addressed to the chaplain of H.M.S.
Thalia , signed by seven of the islanders,
including the chief magistrate! and the
two councillors! (for such they have,)
explanatory of their position and their
wants. Their prominent want they
shall themselves explain.
“ One thing more, before we con-
clude, we earnestly present to your
consideration; and as it comes in an
especial manner within the province
of your holy office, we would indulge
the hope that our application will be
attended with success. The case in
question is this : Our teacher, who has
been with us for nineteen years in that
capacity, and whose services to us are
invaluable, has never received the
license or sanction of the proper au-
thority in that Church of which we
are a component part. This circum-
stance is a source of much anxiety,
both to him and us ; and as our num-
bers amount to 138 (71 males and 67
females), and are rapidly increasing, we
do most urgently, but most respect-
fully, solicit your application to the
proper quarter for a pastoral letter,
inducting or sanctioning our teacher
into the holy office he has for so long
a space of time unceasingly, untiringly,
and worthily filled on this island.
That he is deserving such a mark of
ecclesiastical approbation and favour,
is justly and cheerfully acknowledged
by the whole community ; and of the
great benefit which will accrue to us
therefrom,| no one can be more com-
petent to judge than yourself.”
Eear-Admiral Fairfax Moresby,
commander-in-chief in' the Pacific,
had long felt a deep interest in the
welfare of the Pitcairn Islanders, and
in the month of July 1851, received
the following beautiful and affecting
invitation to visit the island, signed
661
1853.1 The Paradise in the Pacific.


by thirteen female inhabitants, in the
name of all their sex on the island:—
“ Pitcairn, July 28 th, 1851.
“ Honoo rable Sib,— From the kind
interest yon have evinced for our little
community in the letter which you
have sent our excellent and worthy
pastor, Mr Nobbs, we are emboldened
to send you the following request,
Which is, that you will visit us before
you leave this station ; or if it is im-
possible for you to do so, certainly
we, as loyal subjects of our gracious
Queen, ought to be visited annually,
if not more, by one of her ships of
war.
“ We have never had the pleasure
of welcoming an English admiral to
our little island, and we therefore
earnestly solicit a visit from you.
How inexpressibly happy shall we
be, if you should think fit to grant
this our warmest wish! We trust
that our very secluded and isolated
position, and the very few visits we
have of late had from British ships
of war, will be sufficient apology for
addressing the above request to you.
With fervent prayers for your present
and future happiness, and for that of
our Queen and nation,—We remain,
Honoured Sir, your sincere and affec-
tionate well-wishers.”
Signed by thirteen females, “ in the
name and on behalf of all the rest
of the female sex on the island
Who could resist this ? Hot an admiral
in the service of the Queen of England
—least of all good Admiral Moresby;
and a year afterwards—viz., on the
7th August 1852—at noon a ship was
descried in the far distance, which at
sunset was suspected to be a ship of
war. The brief night passed in feverish
excitement. Before sunrise the people
were on the look-out from the preci-
pice in front of the town, waiting for
the report of a gun to confirm their
hopes. By and by, hark ! the boom-
ing of a cannon electrified the little
town 1 And as the stately ship drew
near, behold—an admiral’s flag wav-
ing proudly in the wind! Would we
had room for the description of this
signal event given by Mr Hobbs, and
the official despatch of the admiral
containing an account of his landing,
and three days’ stay. It was Sunday
morning, and he took his chaplain and
several officers with him, all attending
divine service, the chaplain preaching
in the afternoon. _We will, however,
give the good admiral’s own account
of it, in a subsequent letter to a friend,
describing the impressions produced
by his visit.
“ The Pmtland,
At sea, August 1852.
“ Of all the eventful periods which
have checkered my life, none have sur-
passed in interest, and, I trust, in hope
of future good, the last—our visit to
Pitcairn ; and surely the hand of God
has been in all this, for by chances
the most unexpected, and by favour-
able winds out of the usual course of
the Trades, w r e werd carried in eleven
days to Pitcairn’s from Borobora. It
is impossible to describe the charm
that the society of the islanders throws
around them under the providence of
God. The hour and the occasion
served, and I have brought away
their pastor and teacher for the pur-
pose of sending him to England to be
ordained, and one of his daughters,
who will be placed at the English
clergyman’s at Valparaiso until her
father’s return. The islanders de-
pend principally for their necessary
supplies on the whaling ships ;—they
are_ generally American. Greatly to
their credit, they behave in the most
exemplary manner, very different from
what I expected. One rough seaman,
whom I spoke to in praise of such con-
duct, said, ‘ Sir, I expect if one of our
fellows was to misbehave himself here,
we should not leave him alive.’ They
are guiltless and unsophisticated be-
yond conception. But the time had
arrived when preparation for partial
removal was necessary, and especi-
ally for the ordination of their pas-
tor, or the appointment of a clergy-
man of the Established Church. They
are thoroughly versed in Bible history,
which has hitherto kept them from
listening to the advances of some over-
heated imaginations. I stayed four
days upon that speck in the ocean, but
rising like a paradise from its bosom.
I believe there was scarce a dry eye
in the ship when the islanders took
their leave. We ran within hail of
the settlement, hoisted the royal
standard, fired a salute, and cheered
them."
662
The Paradise in the Pacific. [June


Here is Mr Nobbs’ own vivid pic-
ture * of the noble old admiral’s de-
parture from the island :
“ And now comes the leave-tak-
ing. The venerable and benevolent
commander-in-chief of Her Majesty’s
forces in the Pacific, standing on the
rocky beach at Bounty Bay (the very
spot where the mutineers had landed
sixty years before) —himself the old-
est person there, by fifteen years, sur-
rounded by stalwart men and ma-
tronly women; youths, maidens, and
little children —every one in tears, and
most deeply affected, formed a truly
impressive scene. The boat was some
time in readiness before the admiral
availed himself of an opportunity
to embark. Some held him by the
hand, the elder women hanging on
his neck, and the younger ones en-
deavouring to obtain a promise that
he would revisit them. As a number
of our men went oh board with the ad-
miral, a similar scene occurred there;
and as the last boat pushed off from
the ship, some of the hardy tars, stand-
ing in the gangway, were detected
hastily brushing away a tear. The
frigate now stood in for the last
time ; and, hoisting the royal stand-
ard, fired a salute of twenty-one guns.
The tars manned the rigging, and gave
three hearty cheers, and one cheer
more. The islanders responded; the
band struck up “ God save the Queen,”
and the stately Portland started on
her track.”
We said that this is a picture, as
vivid as words can paint it, and wor-
thy of the richest pencil at the com-
mand of the Koyal Academy.
The islanders could only be induced,
with extreme difficulty, to part with
their pastor for a while, when it came
to the point, ardently as they had de-
sired that he should be invested with
the character of a clergyman of the
Church of England. On the admi-
ral’s promising, however, to leave his
own chaplain at the island till their
pastor’s return, they allowed him to
go. Listen to the testimony of the
admiral’s chaplain as to the people
among whom he had been placed for
a while.
“September sth, 1852.
“The accounts of the virtue and
piety of these people are by no means
exaggerated. I have no doubt they
are the most religious and virtuous
community in the world ; and during
the months I have been here, I have
seen nothing approaching a quarrel,
but perfect peace and good-will among
all.” He also found Pitcairn, as did
his admiral, a “ Paradise 1 ”
THE PITCAIRN PASTOR IN ENGLAND.
Poor Mr Nobbs had not fitting
clothes in which to face the great
world, when he quitted the island,
except those with which the admiral
furnished him. Having carried him
to Valparaiso, the admiral then sup-
plied him generously with the means
of obtaining a passage thence to Lon-
don, and presented him with £IOO to-
wards his expenses in England; and
also gave him very strong letters to
the Bishop of London (urging the pro-
priety of his ordaiuing so exemplary
a person), and to various other per-
sons, among whom was Mr Murray,
the author of the little volume before
us, in which it appears ; and a very
interesting document it is. All hon-
our to Admiral Fairfax Moresby!
We have seldom seen more moving
traits of unaffected and unassuming
goodness than this volume contains,
on his part. He cannot yet know that
the public is thus made acquainted
with them.
On Saturday the 16th October 1852,
after an absence of twenty-six years,
spent at Pitcairn’s Island, this excel-
lent person arrived in London. What
a Babylon it must have seemed to one
so long accustomed to the profound
silence and solitude of Pitcairn ! Wo
ourselves saw him, and sate beside him
for some time in the month of Novem-
ber. He was indeed an interesting
stranger—very modest, and with a sort
of sad and stern simplicity (with a dash
of rough quaintness) in his manner,
which comported well with the life ha
had led, and to which it was evident
* Pp. 106-8.
663
1853.1 The Paradise in the Pacific.
vox., lxxiii. — ko. ccccm.


he was pining to return. He looked
the age he was, viz. fifty-three. His
features were characterised by a quiet
decision; and he spoke with gravity
and deliberation. Nothing seemed
to surprise him—the result of a long
life of anxiety, suffering, and labour.
None of the attractions, says a friend,
or absorbing topics of interest—not
even the great Duke’s funeral, which
he witnessed—seemed to excite him.
So sustained, and built up, and built
round by previous experience of won-
ders and escapes amidst the battle of
life was this wonderful man, that he
had literally reached the point of Nil
admirari!
IS ORDAINED BY THE BISHOP OF LONDON.
The Bishop of London, yielding
cheerfully to the strong concurrent
testimony of Admiral Moresby, and
many others who had enjoyed ample
opportunities of learning the character
and claims of Mr Nobbs, during a
long career of twenty-six years at
Pitcairn’s Island, acceded to his re-
quest to be admitted to holy orders.
On the 24th October 1852, he was
ordained deacon in the parish church
of Islington, by the Bishop of Sierra
Leone, under a commission from the
Bishop of London, who himself or-
dained him priest at Fulham church
on the 30th November; his descrip-
tion, in the letter of orders, being
“ Chaplain of Pitcairn’s Island.” He
was warmly welcomed and hospitably
entertained by the greatest and best
in the land; and a number of them
subscribed towards raising a little fund
for defraying the expense of his return
to Pitcairn, and his outfit—a service
of communion-plate, and also various
useful articles for the inhabitants, a
bell for the church, two or three clocks,
medicines, clothing, labourers’ and car-
penters’ tools, simple articles of fur-
niture, cooking utensils, and stores of
provisions.* These benefactors of the
distant little community wisely deter-
mined to send them such articles only
as shall contribute to their comfort,
without communicating a taste for
luxury; than which last, nothing could
be more absurd or cruel. Since he
left this country, we may mention
that an excellent little church-organ
has been despatched to the pastor—
we must now call him the chaplain—
of Pitcairn, set to such of our plain
and hallowed old English chants and
psalm tunes, as he appeared, when in
this country, best to like. By this
time, it may be that our noble evening
hymn, which is one of them, has
ascended, from that little rock to
heaven’s gate, a grateful offering!
The Society for Promoting Christian
Knowledge granted £lOO towards the
fund for the purpose above mentioned,
and the Society for the Propagation
of the Gospel placed him on its list
of missionaries, with a salary of £5O
a-year. In short, all parties who be-
came acquainted with him during his
two months’ stay, and with his story,
seemed to vie with each other in pay-
ing attention to him, and exhibiting
their interest by their liberality. At
the Admiralty he experienced, through
the Duke of Northumberland, and
other eminent functionaries, the ut-
most kindness, and assurances of the
watchful interest with which the small
settlement should ever be regarded
there ; and the Directors of the Koyal
Mail Steam Navigation Company pro-
vided him with a free passage in the
La Plata to Navy Bay.
HIS INTERVIEW WITH THE QUEEN AND PRINCE ALBERT.
It was a matter of reasonable am-
bition to the Pitcairn chaplain, before
quitting England for ever, to be ad-
mitted to the presence, though for but
a moment, of his Queen ; and as Her
Majesty’s interest in her distant sub-
jects, especially as connected with the
spread of Christianity, is well known,
* “ H.M.S. Virago,” says Mr Murray (p. 85, note), “left, calling for Pitcairn,
in January 1853, having on board singing-birds, rose-trees, myrtles, &c., for the
islanders.” A touching circumstance.
664
The Paradise in the Pacific. [June,


and the humble chaplain of Pitcairn
had made many friends in high quar-
ters, his wish was gratified. On the
15th December 1852, two days before
he quitted England, the Royal Fairy
conveyed him, by appointment, to
Osborne. He was first introduced
into the presence of the Prince, who
took an evident interest in him, ask-
ing a great many questions concerning
Pitcairn and its people, and appearing
greatly pleased with his answers. In
a letter dated the next day, to the
Rev, Mr Murray (the most hospitable
and zealous of his friends), through
whose kindness it is now lying before
us, he speaks of this as “ the eventful
day! . . . Prince Albert was very
urbane, and asked me many questions
about our island, and appeared much
pleased with the answers I gave him.
He then inquired what he could do for
the community ? I said ‘ Her Ma-
jesty’s community had supplied us
■with all we had need of at present;
but that, if he would present us with
Her Majesty’s picture, including him-
self and the royal children, we should
consider it a great favour.’ * He
smiled, and said I should have it.
After a little more conversation, I saw
he was designing to withdraw, and
not a word had been said about seeing
Her Majesty! No time was to be
lost; so I screwed up my courage, and
said, ‘ Will your Royal Highness per-
mit me to pay my duty to the Queen?’
He replied, 1 1 am just going to in-
quire if Her Majesty will see you.’
After a few minutes, I went into the
room where her Majesty was ; ” and
worthy Mr Nobbs proceeds to say,
that he was instantly set at ease
by the affable condescension of Her
Majesty. We regret that he has not
left any written account of this inte-
resting interview, for the worthy chap-
lain of Pitcairn had a little world of
matters to attend to during the few
remaining days of his stay in England.
We have reason, however, to believe
that the Queen exhibited a lively in-
terest in his account of this distant
family of her subjects, who, by this
time, no doubt, have heard from their
chaplain’s own lips what Her Majesty
asked and said of them. He received
pleasing little mementoes from the
ladies-in-waiting, and other distin-
guished persons in attendance, and so
took his departure from the residence
and presence of Her Majesty of Eng-
land, to commence his ten thousand
miles’ journey.
RETURN TO PITCAIRN.
He sailed from Southampton in the
La Plata on the 17th December,
and reached Valparaiso in safety on
the 12th February. A letter from
him is lying before us, dated Val-
paraiso, 6th March, where he was
w'aiting for the Portland to convey
him to Pitcairn. “ Oh, how I wish,”
says he, “ to be at home! ” He
was then dividing clerical duty with
the chaplain of Admiral Moresby
at the church on shore, and also on
board the man-of-war stationed there.
He says that he had “ a sufficiency of
money to meet his expenses, and a
trifle to spare, without trenching on
my salary (£5O a-year), which I shall
endeavour to preserve intact for the
benefit of my dear wife and children,
whom God preserve! ” He complains
sadly, however, of the expenses of
passing the formidable Isthmus of
Panama. It cost him £5O. There
a dismal mischance befel him ; he lost
the box containing his communion-
plate. “ Oh, what anxiety of mind
its absence cost me! and, I believe,
this was the exciting cause of the fever
by which I was attacked.” Fortu-
nately, however, after a week’s sus-
pense, the precious box was recovered,
thanks to the indefatigable exertions
of Mr Perry, the British Consul at
Panama. After many fervent expres-
sions of piety and gratitude towards
his friends and well-wishers in Eng-
land, he concludes by hoping that his
next letter will be dated Pitcairn’s
Island, when the thanks of the com-
munity will be appended to his own.
* “ This highly-valued gift,” says Mr Murray, “ was taken out in February 1853,
in H.M. sloop Rattlesnake , Captain Trollope, the commander, being instructed to
leave it in the charge of the commander-in-chief in the Pacific, for conveyance to
Pitcairn.”—Pp. 219, 220.
665
1853.] The Paradise in the Pacific.


“From Valparaiso,” says Mr Mur-
ray, towards the close of his little
history, “ should all go on prosperously
with Mr Nobbs, Admiral Moresby
will convey him to Pitcairn in the
Portland , and the islanders will
probably -welcome him home before
the end of March. May it please
God to guide him, in health and safety,
to his distant flock ! Who can ade-
quately imagine the scene which will
be presented on his landing among his
friends in the island, to be parted from
them no more on this side the grave! ” *
We can picture to ourselves, on read-
ing this passage, the scene to which
we formerly alluded of their reluctant
parting with their pastor to come to
England—to encounter the dangers of
twenty thousand miles’ travelling—
perhaps never to return —following
him down to the water’s edge, em-
bracing and sobbing over him; and
it may be that he said to them in
faltering tones, and in the moving lan-
guage of the Apostle Paul on a similar
occasion—“ What mean ye to weep , and
to break my heart ? ” f
THE PASTOR’S PEOPLE —WITH A GLIMPSE OF PITCAIRN STATISTICS.
The number of persons now living
on this little island is one hundred
and seventy—viz., eighty-eight males
and eighty-two females. When the
nine mutineers established themselves
there, they divided the island into as
many parts, which are now subdivided
into twenty-two, that being the num-
ber of families. Misunderstandings
now and then arise on the subject of
boundaries, as was the case in patri-
archal times; but those misunder-
standings engender no animosity, and
are soon settled by the chief magis-
trate and the two councillors; for, as
we have seen, such august function-
aries have for several years existed in
this little community. The chief ma-
gistrate is elected on the first day of
the new year by a general vote of all
males and females eighteen years old;
but if any of either sex be married
under that age, they are entitled to
the suffrage. On the same day the
two councillors are chosen, one by the
magistrate, the other by the people.
The present chief magistrate is a son-
in-law of Mr Nobbs. His office is
rather shunned than coveted ; and
sometimes exemption is purchased by
killing a hog for the public good.
Should any dispute arise which neither
the magistrate nor he and the two
councillors can settle, a jury of seven
is called to decide it; and if it be so
surpassing knotty as to defy the efforts
of the seven sages, it stands over till
the arrival of a British man-of-war,
against whose decision there is no
appeal—a fact not very pleasing to the
gentlemen of the long robe practising
in the privy council, to whom, doubt-
less, a crumb from Pitcairn would, in
these times, be far from unacceptable.
During the interval—that is, till the
arrival of the Naval Court of Appeal—
“ the matter drops, and no ill feeling
remains ; for it is a principle with
them not to let the sun go down upon
their wrath." X Happy Pitcairners !
would your border was enlarged, and
one could come and cast in one’s lot
with you!
The powers of the magistrate are
pretty fairly defined, but of a very
simple nature. So are the public
laws, the principal of which are as fol-
low : —As to landmarks, the first duty
of the new magistrate, and that on the
day of his election, is, with a com-
petent number of the heads of houses,
“ to visit all landmarks on the island,
and replace those that are lost. As
to spirits , or intoxicating liquors of
any kind, their purchase from ships is
peremptorily forbidden, except under
a very strict condition— i. «., for medi-
cinal purposes alone. No female is
to go on board any foreign vessel of
any description, without the magis-
trate’s permission, who must either
accompany her on board, or appoint
four men to do so. In the matter of
“ The Public Anvil,” &c., the law is
as follows : “ Any person taking the
public anvil and public sledge-ham-
mer from the blacksmith’s shop, is to
take it back after he has done with
it; and in case either should get lost
through neglect to do so, the loser is
* P. 221. f Acts, xxi. 13. J P. 133.
666
The Paradise in the Pacific. [June,


to get another, and pay a fine of four
shillings.” And as to money , its equi-
valents are these: —
s. d.
One barrel of yams, . . .80
„ „ sweet potatoes, . 8 0
„ „ Irish ditto, . . 12 0
Three good bunches of plantains, 4 0
One day’s labour, . . .20
A shilling, or its equivalent as above,
is to be paid for each child per month,
between the ages of six and sixteen
years; if Mr Nobbs’ assistant attend
instead of Mr Nobbs, the former re-
ceives the salary ; and be it observed,
that as Mr Nobbs is godfather to
many of the children, all of them he
instructs gratuitously. In respect of
Cats —if ours knew the store set by
them in Pitcairn, few ships bound for
the Pacific would quit our ports with-
out more on board than had been
bargained for, or the captain was
aware of! Tims stands the law :
“If a Cat be killed without being
positively detected in killing fowls,
however strong the suspicion may be,
the person killing such cat is obliged,
as a penalty, to destroy three hun-
dred Eats ! whose tails must be
submitted for the inspection of the
magistrate, by way of proof that the
penalty has been paid.”* The strin-
gency of this law is referable to the
great number of rats in the island,
which do much damage to the sugar-
canes, t Fowls are toe-marked ; and
if one be discovered destroying yams
or potatoes, the owner of the planta-
tion may shoot the fowl, and retain it
for his own use; and may also de-
mand of the owner of such fowl the
amount of powder and shot so ex-
pended, as well as the fowl. As for
a Pig, if he get loose and commit
depredation, his case may be sub-
mitted to the magistrate; taken from
him to a jury of seven ; and finally to
the captain of the next man-of-war
coming to the island 1
In features, dress, manners, and
appearance, the Pitcairners seem to re-
semble the inhabitants of oneof the bet-
ter order of our own villages; but some
are rather darker than Europeans,
partaking of their half Otaheitan
descent. As for dress, the men wear
short trousers, coming down to within
two or three inches of the knee, a
shirt, and a cap or hat; shoes and
stockings being reserved for Sundays.
They are, however, badly off _ for
clothes, depending on the precarious
supply afforded by ships touching at
the island. The women wear a petti-
coat, from the waist downwards; and
over that a loose gown, with a hand-
kerchief sometimes thrown over their
shoulders. A wreath of small white
fragrant flowers, with others of a
bright red, is often worn round the
head; the hair being worn in bands,
and twisted in a very becoming man-
ner into a knot behind. “ Though,”
says Captain Piper, of H.M.S.
Tagus , “ they have had the in-
struction of only their Otaheitan
mothers, our dressmakers in London
would be delighted with the simpli-
city, and yet elegant taste, of these
untaught females.” As we have seen
that these young creatures are finely
formed and handsome, their appear-
ance must be both engaging and
picturesque.
In the year 1850, the inhabitants
of Pitcairn realised the truth of the
old adage, that it is an ill wind that
blows no one any good. Five gentle-
men —one of them was Mr Brodie,
who afterwards published a very in-
teresting account of his stay in the
island —landed on the island, whose
ship was blown off during the night,
leaving them prisoners for a period of
three weeks 1 They had nothing but
the clothes they wore—with the ex-
ception of one, the Baron de Thierry,
who, being of a musical turn, had a
tuning-fork with him. He proposed
to teach his hospitable hosts music,
noticing how imperfectly they got
through the vocal parts of divine ser-
vice. They made remarkably rapid
progress, being passionately fond of
music; soon learning, as a visitor in
August last testified, “to sing in
parts, beautifully.” He adds, that he
accompanied the chaplain of the ship
to the island on Sunday the Bth
August; “ the hymns were sung in
regular parts by the whole congrega-
* P. 227. t P. 85.
667
1853.1 The Paradise in the Pacific.


tion. I doubt much whether any
church in England, excepting cathe-
drals, can boast of such a good choir.”
Imagine them, good reader, on Sunday
next, the sth instant, perhaps singing
to the accompaniment of their organ,
and with their beloved chaplain in
the reading-desk and pulpit!
Fearing a dearth of water (which
would now appear to have been chi-
merical), the British Government, in
the year 1831, removed the whole
community, then only eighty-seven in
number, to Otaheite, when Queen
Pomare, since become a historical
character, received them with great
kindness, though herself harassed, at
the time, by civil war. The licentious
manners of the place disgusted almost
all the virtuous visitants from Pit-
cairn ; but some few were overcome
by the temptations to intemperance.
The unhealthiness of the climate then
carried off twelve by sickness, and
five more died almost immediately
after their return. It is to be regret-
ted that humanity should have been
so hasty on this occasion, and to be
hoped that such a step will not be
taken again without grave considera-
tion. They have ever since expressed
their deep sorrow at having been re-
moved, and their passionate love of
home, from which they will never
again be willingly severed. One of
their Records states that, within three
months after their removal to Tahiti,
on one or two of their number return-
ing to Pitcairn, “ During our absence
our hogs have gone wild, and destroy-
ed our crops; and after our return
we employed ourselves in destroying
the hogs.” *
Though the climate is generally
charming, the island is subject to be
visited by terrible storms. One is re-
corded as having burst over it on the
16th April 1845, occasioning extreme
terror to the inhabitants, and devasta-
tion. What a scene! Thunder and
lightning bellowing and flashing in-
cessantly over the desolate little rock
—a deluge of rain falling—the hurri-
cane howling around, and tearing
down the precious earth from the
rocks into the sea—tearing up by the
roots, and casting into the roaring and
foaming ocean, three hundred cocoa-
trees. A yam ground, with a thousand
yams, entirely disappeared. Several
fishing-boats were destroyed—all the
plantain patches were levelled, four
thousand plantain-trees being destroy-
ed, the one-half in full bearing, the
other designed for the year 1846; “So
that,” continues the Record , “ this
very valuable article of food we shall
be without for a long time. The fact
is, that from this date until August,”
— i. e., four long wearisome months, —
“we shall be pinched for food! ” How
bore the terrified little community
this dispensation? Let us hear, for
the Record thus proceeds: “ But God
tempers the wind to the shorn lamb:
and we humbly trust that the late
monitions of Providence—namely,
drought, sickness , and storm, which
severally have afflicted us this year—
may be sanctified to us, and be the
means of bringing us, one and all, into
a closer communion with our God.
May we remember the rod, and who
hath appointed it; always bearing in
mind, that our heavenly Father doth
not willingly afflict the children of
men.” We envy not him or her who
can read this without sympathy and
admiration.
Here is a letter from one of the Pit-
cairn women, which, in our opinion,
cannot be surpassed in the solemn
simplicity and beauty of its piety and
gratitude. It is from Miriam Christian ,
and addressed to the Rev. Mr Arm-
strong, chaplain of H.M.S. Basilisk ,
who had been very kind to them
all
“ Pitcairn’s Island,
“ South Pacific Ocean,
“ Lat. 25° 4' S., Long. 130° 8' W,
“ Sept. 26, 1844.
“ Rev. and Honoured Sib, —
Please to accept my humble thanks
for the interest you are pleased to take
in our welfare, and also for the pre-
sents yon and our other friends in
Valparaiso have sent us; and may
they and you be rewarded a thousand-
fold both in a. temporal and spiritual
sense. And may the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of
* P. 280. f P. 199.
668
The Paradise in the Pacific. [June,


God, and the fellowship of the Holy
Ghost, be with you all. Amen.
“ I am, Rev. Sir,
“ Your grateful servant,
“ Miriam Christian.”
The community, as we learn from
Admiral Moresby, * “are strictly
brought up in the Protestant faith,
according to the Established Church
of England ; ” and Mr Nobbs stated,
in a sermon which he preached in
London shortly before his return, that
“ there is but one form of church go-
vernment, that of the Church of Eng-
land. The Holy Bible and the
Church Prayer-Book are their chief
rules of guidance ; their motto —‘ One
Faith, one Lord, one Baptism.’ ” t
Divine service is performed in the
school-house, a substantial building,
fifty-six feet long by twenty wide,
with a pulpit at one end. It is amply
supplied with desks, forms, slates,
books, and maps.
These worth}' people, happy in so
many other respects, are by no means
exempt from the ordinary ills of hu-
manity, and suffer occasionally very
severely from prevalent illness, chiefly
the influenza, and also the more for-
midable diseases. There is a painfully
interesting account given of the death
—perfectly resigned, and even happy
—of one of the women, from cancer.
On all these occasions, for now a
quarter of a century, this exemplary
man has acted both as physician and
chaplain.
How long this singular and inte-
resting community may be able to
remain at Pitcairn, is problematical;
for Admiral Moresby tells us, in Au-
gust 1852, that “ the crops on the til-
lage - ground begin to deteriorate ;
landslips occur with each succeeding
storm ; and the declivities of the hills,
when denuded, are laid bare by the
periodical rains.” f Symptoms in
reality appear of an evil sometimes
chimerically apprehended at home —•
population pressing on the means of
subsistence. It will thus become the
duty of the British Government to
deal prudently and tenderly with the
little community; not tearing them
all, with bleeding hearts, from the
land of their birth, and the seat of
their sweets, and sympathies, and
associations, but assisting them from
time to time, as they themselves per-
ceive the inevitable necessity for so
doing, to migrate to the numerous
islands in that remote locality—each
family, and each member of it, be-
coming a radiating centre of Chris-
tian civilisation. At present, they
themselves fondly declare —• but it
must be often with a heavy sigh, as
they behold their steadily diminishing
resources —that “ they will not re-
move elsewhere whilst a sweet pota-
to remains to them; ” and as for
their chaplain and pastor, he is rooted
to the spot. As he told Mr Murray,
“ as long as two families shall remain
at Pitcairn, I will remain also.”
We know not how our readers may
have been while perusing the_forego-
ing pages, but we ourselves, in writ-
ing them, have felt as though fresh-
ened and cheered in spirit, by a brief
sojourn in this little paradise in the
far Pacific; as though we had glided
for a while out of the glare and hub-
bub of the great world—its fierce
rivalries, ambitions, covetousness, and
ostentation —and been at peace in
Pitcairn. It is a small type of a state,
having its laws and constitution ap-
propriate to its position and exigen-
cies; but, at present, almost neces-
sarily free from those subtler and
fiercer temptations which so inces-
santly, and only too successfully, assail
highly civilised communities. Both,
however, have had the pure_light of
Revelation to guide them—with what
different results, while man conjec-
tures, God knows. But no thinking
person can read the history of Pit-
cairn, without being profoundly af-
fected by contemplating the results
flowing directly and indubitably from
the presence of the Holy Volume in
which is enshrined the Revelation of
God to man. It sufficed, indeed, to
make the rough places smooth, and
made the wilderness blossom as the
rose.
We cannot part with the little
* P. 261. t P. 199-
669
1353.1 The Paradise in the Pacific.


volume,* to which we have been exclu-
sively indebted for so much instruc-
tion and gratification, without again
expressing our thanks to its excellent
author. We feel as if we had been
suddenly led by him out of a thick
cloud into the blessed sunshine, and
walked hand in hand with him through
a sort of happy valley.- It is a book
written without pretence of any kind,
but breathing throughout, as we have
already said, a spirit of manly piety
and benevolence. The style is plain
and vigorous—admirably adapted for
its writer’s purpose. It is calculated
to do great good among all classes;
and as for sailors, had we our wish,
half-a-dozen copies should be pre-
sented to every ship in Her Majesty’s
service, that Jack might see what
coraes of mutiny, and that captains
and admirals may see how their
brethren manage matters in the Pa-
cific.
Mr Murray truly states, in his pre-
face, that “ the eventful history con-
nected with Pitcairn, proves that real
life may bo as romantic as fiction.”
We have, in these few pages, the ro-
mance of reality, and many shadow-
ings, in the annals of this distant
speck amidst the waters of the Pa-
cific, of the grandest truths which can
concern nations or individuals, as re-
lating to the sources of vice and vir-
tue, with their attendant misery or
happiness.
And thus we say, in a kindly spi-
rit, adieu to the Paradise in the
Pacific!
LADY LEE’S WIDOWHOOD.
PART VI, —CHAPTER XXIII.
The Curate was now at the summit
of human felicity. To have suddenly
raised him to a bishopric would have
been a mere distracting impertinence.
Ah, would Time now but stand still,
satisfied with his work, and content
to rest on his scythe and look at it 1
For the summer was come, warm and
glorious—and the Curate was as full
of out-door plans and pursuits as the
fields were of flowers, the trees of
singing-birds, the grass of creeping
things;—pursuits which he need not
enjoy without full sympathy, for they
were shared by his friends male and
female; and the Curate was never
visited by an idea that was not com-
municable to one or other of them, or
both. Since Fane had come, his hap-
piness was complete. Though so dif-
ferent, they had much in common;
and the Curate’s reflective mind de-
rived great benefit from contact with
the masculine one of his friend. Com-
munion with a too gentle and comply-
ing nature is like walking on a feather-
bed, but from a firm uncompromising
spirit you bound with vigour.
Fane, too, felt these new scenes in
charming contrast with the life he
had hitherto led, which had been too
changeful and eventful for much re-
flection.
“ I never did believe, Josey,” he
said one day at the parsonage, “ that
these enervating influences could ever
have gained such power over me. I
find myself constantly impelled either
to visit that Castle of Indolence, the
Heronry, or else this smaller branch
or offshoot from it—this Sleepy Hol-
low, of which you are the Archimage.
Masculine attire is a reproach to a
man who leads this sort of sauntering
life: next week you will see me in
robes and a chaplet.”
In fact, there was something seduc-
tive about the atmosphere of the
Heronry which it was difficult for any
but very strong-minded people — i.e.,
the petrifactions of humanity—to re-
sist. Setting aside the enchantresses
whose abode it was, and whose fasci-
nations, I trust, I need not enlarge
upon at this time of day, the place
itself had a touch of dreamy enchaut-
* It contains several plates, including an excellent daguerreotype likeness of Mr
Kobbs, and another of John Adams, the last of the mutineers, and finally the patriarch
of Pitcairn. There are also several views of the island, and of the houses, school-
house, &c. &o.
670
Lady Lee's Widowhood.—Part VI. [June,
