

o
I ST~
Jbife
tPoetry
of . .
George Besex &vai}s
ESSAY
JfriWen for the Brisbane 1913 Eisteddfod
BY
HENRY A. TARDENT
AUTHOR OF
“ Reflections on an Australian Literature,” a propos
of J. E. Nicholson’s “ Haled: and Almoni” ;
“ Influence of Poetry on Modern Life ” ; “ Art and its
Value as a National Asset ” ; “ Functions of the State
in Relation to its Commercial Life ” ; “ Arbitration v.
War for the Settlement of International Disputes ” ;
“ The Teaching of Agriculture in the Public Schools
of Australasia” ; “The Future Development of
Western Queensland”: “Science as Applied to
Agriculture,” etc.
PRICK
SIXPENCE




THE LIFE AND POETRY
OF
George Essex Evans
ESSAY
Written far the Urishane 1913 Eisteddfod
BY
HENRY A. TARDENT
Brisbane :
JT. yoiß & (Jo.j CrEOROE STREET,


GEORGU ESSEX EVANS


George Essex Evans
HIS LIFE
POETRY
ON the morning of the 10th of November, 1909,
the live wires, which circle the Globe like a very
sensitive nerve system, carried with lightning speed
to all the English-speaking communities of the World,
the sad news of the sudden and unexpected death
of George Essex Evans.
The response was instantaneous and general.
It was everywhere felt that someone great and, what
is perhaps better, someone good and dear to the
race, had gone to that bourne whence no one has ever
returned.
The leading magazines and newspapers, not only
of Great Britain, but also of the sister dominions of
South Africa and Canada, as well as those of the United
States of America, published eulogistic necrological
notices. From the Yice-Regal Palace of Khartoum,
the then Sirdar of Egypt, Sir Reginald Wingate, wrote
a letter expressing his deep sorrow at the loss of such
a great and good man. Similar messages were received
from Allahabad in India, and other distant parts of
our huge and scattered Empire. In Australia, the
land of adoption of the departed poet, the shock
was intense and the feeling of regret universal. Flags


were everywhere flying half-mast, and messages
of condolence kept pouring in from every part of the
country. The then Prime Minister of the Common-
wealth, the Honourable Alfred Heakin, voiced the
sentiments of the whole nation in wiring to the
disconsolate widow :• —
“ Deeply grieved at sudden and unexpected death, of your
greatly-gifted husband. Australia will mourn the loss of her
national poet whose patriotic songs stirred her people profoundly
in the arduous campaign for union.”
But nowhere was the sorrow so general and so keenly
felt than in Toowoomba, the poetic Flower City of
the Darling Downs, where the Poet had spent the
last few years of his life and written some of his best
works. It must be remembered that he had died
in the midst of one of the most successful Musical
Festivals ever held by the Austral Association, An
Emergency Meeting of the Committee came to the
conclusion that it was neither possible nor desirable
to postpone the Competitions in Music, Art, Literature
and Science, and thus disappoint the thousands of
competitors and spectators who had congregated
for the occasion from almost every corner of our vast
Island Continent. Besides, the Committee-men were
all aware that, had he been able to express an opinion,
the deceased Poet would have protested with all his
might against any adjournment of a Festival which
was the realization of one of his most cherished schemes
for the advancement of Music, Art and Literature
in Australia. They all knew that there was no title
he was more proud of than that of “ Founder of the
Austral Association.”
The grieved citizens of Toowoomba found a
better way of giving public expression to their sorrow
at the loss of one who had died, so to say, in harness
on the very battlefield where he had fought so bravely
for the conquest of a national ideal.
Like the Creeks of Salamina and Marathon, who
would glorify their dead between two battles, the
4
GEORGE ESSEX EVANS


people of Toowoomba listened at one of the morning
sessions, to a feeling reference to the departed one
by the President of the Association, Mr. W. Hodgem
But the main glorification took place in the evening
when the Music Adjudicator, Mr. Henry John King
—one of the most fluent and most eloquent orators
of Australia—began a lecture on Music with the
following ardent panegyric, which has hardly ever
been equalled, and which brought what a great Poet
once called “ the thrill of the sublime ” over the vast
spell-bound audience :
“ Before I commence my address to-night, I want to remind
you that the flag is flying half-mast high in this city. A great
Poet is no more !”
“ Stand, please ! ”
Then in an impressive voice, and with the large
audience standing in mournful silence before him,
Mr. King continued :
“ Thou hast conquered once more, Thou pale Galilean ! Thou,
the player of the great organ, whoso music is of the thunder ; Thou
who playeth upon the ocean, as upon a harp—the ocean, the harp !
Thou, God ! Who art in its murmur as it breaks over the yellow
sands, Who art upon the waters as the waters rise to the freshening
breeze ; Who art in the tumultuous breakers as they dash fear-
lessly upon the naked rocks ! It is He Who took the coal of Divine
Fire and touched the heart of our brother, George Essex Evans.
It is He who touched him and made him a genius of great and
fine beauty. It is He Who has now conquered him on whom He
had bestowed the Divine spark, this genius with which he wrestled
and struggled. It is He, Who has caused this ‘ Crown of Pain,’
this mystery of the mind with which he wrestled and struggled.
Our lives are like leaves. Our lives are shed like the rain. Presently
the mortal remains of Essex Evans will be amidst the ripples of the
leaves. They will hear nothing, though the winds will list whore
they will, and the breezes flow to and fro. But see ! There in the
Kingdom of Light, through the fields eternal, his spirit is fanned
by the airs of Heaven; lustrous and soft as the chords of the
harp, his heavenly spirit lives. We mourn not for him, but for us„
who linger behind ! As for him—
“A -deathless name.
'unset in the noontide, of his fame !
Peace be with thy servant who sleep 3st! ”
GEORGE ESSEX EVANS


And who was this man, whose death, is thus
deplored far and near, by the exalted and the lowly,
by the rich and the poor ? Had he been possessed
of great riches or endowed with the lustre attached
to power and its pomp ?
None of those suppositions are correct. The
reverse would be nearer the truth. His life had been
on the whole that of a good ordinary citizen, struggling
for a living, and singularly devoid of any sensational
events.
He came, it is true, of a distinguished lineage.
His father was the late John Evans, a Q.C. Bencher
and a Treasurer of the Inner Temple, who had been
for many years a Liberal Member of the House of
Commons. It is recorded of him that he had refused
a Judgeship for fear of having to pass some day a
sentence of death. He was fond of poetry, and had,
in his student days, won several prizes for poems
of his composition.
The mother of Essex Evans was one of the Bowens
of Llwyngwair, an old and well-known Welsh family.
She was a highly cultured lady, who knew Greek and
Latin, besides being possessed of a wide knowledge
of the English and Welsh literatures.
Although the family seat is situated in Haver-
fordwest in Pembrokeshire, where the eldest brother
still resides, the young George Essex was born in Lon-
don (on the 18th of June, 1863).
He was educated first in the Haverfordwest
Grammar School, and later on in the St. James
Collegiate School of Jersey.
From early youth he was greatly handicapped
by an increasing deafness, which no doubt partly
accounts for the fact that his teachers considered him
a dull boy from whom very little could be expected.
Still he was lively and active and could always
hold his own on the play ground, distinguishing
6
GEORGE ESSEX EVANS


himself especially in footracing and football, a circum-
stance which no doubt greatly helped in endowing
him with a robust health and an almost athletic
constitution.
His father, who died when George Essex was
only one year old, had left a fortune of over £60,000.
But through various causes it had gradually dwindled
away, and the younger members of the family decided
to look for fresh fields and pastures new. Thus it is
that in 1881, the young George Essex, in company
with his two sisters and his brother, J. B. O. Evans,
now a Land Commissioner in Roma, emigrated to our
sunny Queensland.
The two plucky youths soon made up their minds
to have a try at farming, and took up some land at
Allora, on the Darling Downs. But shortly after-
wards, a severe accident in which George had been
heavily thrown against a tree by his horse, com-
pelled him to renounce at least temporarily, all heavy
physical work on the farm. For a while he earned
his living as a teacher in a private school. He soon,
however, accepted the more congenial occupation
of Agricultural Editor of the Queenslander, a position
which he subsequently relinquished to join a Survey
Party with whom he travelled from the Darling Downs
right up to the. Gulf Country.
On his return he joined the Civil Service of
■Queensland, being for many years a Registrar of Births,
Deaths and Marriages, at first in Gympie, and then
in Toowoomba.
The last few years of his life he was connected
with the Queensland Intelligence and Tourist Bureau,
being the author and compiler of numerous excellent
pamphlets, describing various parts of Queensland,
and our principal primary industries.
In 1899, when already 36 years of age. he married
Mrs. Blanche Hopkins,- the young widow of the late
E. B. Hopkins of Goodar Station, near Goondiwindi,
7
GEORGE ESSEX EVANS


and a daughter of the late Rev. William Eglinton,,
a Church of England Clergyman.
In that noble and distinguished lady and her-
two brilliant daughters, the Misses Lorna (now Mrs.
Thompson) and Beryl Hopkins, Essex Evans found
not only true and devoted friends, a happy and con-
genial family life, but also sincere admirers of his-
genius, and, at times, expert critics of his productions.
Many a time he has on their enlightened advice
re-cast a poem, altered or re-shaped some of his
verses.
With a view to providing for them and for the-
little Bowen, the promising young scion and only
issue of the marriage, he had taken up a selection
of a few hundred acres on the eastern slope of the
Dividing Range, within three miles of Toowoomba,
building on it a cosy home, where the whole family
resided together until the tragic death of the Poet
took place in the Toowoomba Hospital as a result of'
several unsuccessful operations for the removal of
some internal complaint.
Though of a rather reserved disposition, and at
times impulsive, moody, blunt, impatient of opposition
and contradiction, as is often the case with sensitive
natures, George Essex Evans was eminently a gentle-
man. He was a staunch and true, friend, and was
always possessed of more than his share of the milk
of human kindness and forbearance. There was,
nothing of the reckless “ Boheme ” about him. He-
was on the contrary imbued with a keen sense of self-
respect and honour, which made him fulfil, con-
scientiously, the humblest every-day duties of an
average good citizen, model husband and father.
But, meritorious as were his solid domestic and
public virtues, they cannot possibly account for the
undeniable fame which he had yon throughout the
English-speaking World.
8
GEORGE ESSEX EVANS


That fame had come to him for other reasons,
the principal being perhaps the fact that, like Aewton,
Jean-Jaccpies Rousseau and many other great
geniuses, he had had a sudden revelation of his talent
and of his mission in life.
He has himself related how, being once at Allora,
sitting on the verandah on a bright moonlight night,
pondering over life and things in general, he had a
sudden vision of the task which Providence had
allotted to him, and how he, then and there, resolved
to devote his life to literature, and to do all that lay
in his power to help along Australian Letters. He
would add that ever since he has unswervingly followed
up that resolve, in all circumstances, and in any time
which he could spare from the necessity of earning a
living, and through all the ups and downs of a
-Pioneer’s life.
We thus find, combined at the debut of his
literary career, at least two of the principal attributes
of genius—inspiration and perseverance.
It could hardly be argued that this was on his
part a presumptuous resolve. He had undoubtedly
inherited from both parents literary talent and
inclination, especially from his mother, who acted as
the connecting link with the so poetic traditions of
the Welsh literature, so noticeable in all Essex Evans
productions. The dull boy of the early school days
had developed into a highly-cultured young gentleman.
He had found in Poetry the Secret Key ”
which opened the avenues to his intellect in spite of
the fact- —not uncommon with children of exceptional
talent —that his teachers had declared it hermetically
closed and incapable of development.
Being possessed of an excellent memory, especially
for verses, he read all the poetry he could lay his hands
on, learning much of it by heart. He had also tackled
high-class novels, travels, history, and even some very
abstruse' philosophical works. Few men were his
9
GEORGE ESSEX EVANS


equals in the knowledge of English, American and
Australian Poets. He had also a great liking for
some foreign writers, his favourites among them
being—the Frenchman, Victor Hugo, the Germans r
Goethe and Schiller, also Lessing and Heine, the
Russian. Leo Tolstoi, to whom was added later Maxim
Gorki. But above them all, he enjoyed, as a most
congenial mind, the Swiss Philosopher, Henri Frederic
Amiel, whose “ Journal Intime ” was for many years
his “ livre de chevet ” and inseparable companion,
day and night.
His daily contact with nature had singularly
developed an innate sense of observation, and a
beautiful gift of vision and expression, especially
when spurred on and assisted by the rythm and
rhyme of the verse. He had in addition a personal
experience and knowledge of the Bush and of country
life in general, an ardent love for his adopted country,
its genial climate and sunny skies, its so original
Fauna and Flora, the free life and spirit of independ-
ence of its sturdy people. He felt that in our land
and in our people there lie hidden inexhaustible
treasures of Poetry and Art, which need only to be
tapped to start flowing in jets of crystalline purity
with the force and abundance of an artesian well.
He had a clear notion of what should be the
of Australia, and he boldly asserts that—
‘ Not as the songs of other lands
Her song shall be
Where dim Her purple shore-line stands-
Above the sea !
As erst she stood, she stands alone ;
Her inspiration is her own.
From sunlit plains to mangrove strands
Not as the songs of other lands
Her song shall be ! ”
In the carrying out of the plan he had traced to
himself and the heavy task he had assumed, Essex
Evans was often wisely advised and always greatly
encouraged by his old friend, Colonel Spencer Browne ;
10
GEORGE ESSEX EVANS


also later on by other valued friends, such as Mr. J. V.
McCarthy, the racy writer and capable late Editor
of the Toowoomba Chronicle, Mr. Reginald Roe, M.A.,
Mr. 13. Owen, M.A. (a great authority on Welsh
Literature), the Hon. L. E. Groom, M.P., and other
good judges and. lovers of high-class literature.
If it is remembered that Essex Evans’ official
duties were of a very absorbing nature, that most of
his few leisure hours were devoted to family life
and to an irresistible hobby for farming and dairying,
in which he was a proficient expert, one cannot help
being amazed at the amount of literary work per-
formed by him in the twenty years extending from
the Allora resolve right up to the time of his lamented
death.
Besides innumerable contributions in both prose
and verse to a great many Australian and English
Newspapers and Magazines, he published in London
in 1891 his first volume of verses, under the title of
“ The Repentance of Magdalene Despar, and Other
Verses,” a book which elicited considerable attention
and favourable comments. Among others, the “ West-
minster Review ” commended the Poet “ for richty
imaginative poetic diction, united to great power
in the expression of passion and pathos,” the “ Black
Knight ” being compared to some of Sir Walter Scott’s
productions. This was followed by “ Loraine , and
other Verses,” published in Melbourne in 1897, all
critics agreeing that the work disclosed a noticeable
progress in the talent and art of the Poet. In 1906
he published a third volume of poetry under the
title of the “ Secret Key, omd Other Verses,” which was
the crowning of his growing fame—the work being
very favourably reviewed by the leading English
and American magazines.
His literary activity was by no means limited
to the writing of poetry. In addition to the short
stories and other varied articles, contributed to the
Press, he founded and edited in conjunction with
11
GEORGE ESSEX EVANS


Messrs. John Tighe Ryan and A. B. (Banjo) Paterson
the “ Antipodean,” a magazine of considerable literary
merit and artistic excellence.
As a critic, he was a keen, but always just and
equitable, judge of the merit of other Poets, his best
effort in that line being perhaps an exhaustive study
of the life and work of another Queensland Poet, his
friend and emule, the late Brunton Stephens.
Although a man of stern purposes, who always took
life as something serious and to be accounted for,
he possessed a fine strain of humour, as is well known
to those who lived in his intimacy, and to the assiduous
readers of his weekly contributions to the Toowoomba
Press under the titles of “ Paracrams ” and “ Devia-
tions,” in which he reviewed in light bright prose
and sparkling verses current events and the men of
the day.
In religion he was a firm believer in an Eternal
God, whom he conceived as the Immanent Soul of the
Universe —
“ The gods ye fashion perish one by one.
The Living God endures Avhen all are gone,
Always respectful of all sincere religious sentiments,
he had a perfect abhorrence of all forms of cant,
hypocrisy and narrow-minded bigotry, vices which
he mercilessly castigated in his “ Ode to the Philistines,”
as perfect and biting a satire as has ever been written
in any language :
! Six days shalt thou swindle and lie !
On the seventh—-tho’ it soundeth odd—
In the odour of sanctity
Thou shalt offer the Lord, thy God,
A threepenny bit, a doze, a start, and an unctuous smile.
And a hurried prayer to prosper another six days of guile.
You have judged by the rich man’s rule !
You have treated your thinkers as dust !
You have honoured the braggart and fool.
Whilst Genius has starved on a crust!
•;. ■// ■■«*.nv ';e .VLy.r t Snt om'.mud 1 ■ J
12
GEOBGE ESSEX EVANS


For the spirit of old remains
That nailed the Christ to the tree ;
That brought Galileo to chains
And Bruno to tragedy.
For the Philistine altereth not—unchanged since the world began,
He has hindered the march of progress, and murdered the thinking
Lo, whoever shall stand and light
With the tongue, or the brain, or the pen
For a larger measure of Eight
For the mass of his fellow men
He is nearer the unknoAvn God than the chiefs of a priestly line,
His life is a deeper prayer than the cant of the Philistine.
Nowhere, however, is his thought nobler and
loftier, nor clothed in more perfect language than in
some of his philosophical poems, such as for instance
“ The Sword of Pain,” written in the midst of great
sufferings during a protracted sojourn in the Too-
woomba Hospital.
Being unable to unravel the awful mystery of
Pain, the Poet abandons himself, like Job, to a sombre
despair, which draws from him those terrible words :
“ Peace masks a secret war on every side,
There is no rest from travail: God is dead ! ”
Better counsels soon prevail, however. The Poet
recovers his serenity. He emerges triumphant from
that ocean of doubt, and he sings, like the true pro-
phet that he was :■ —
‘ And Science, with her torch, unconsciously
Through strange new realms may lead men back to God.
He knows not life who hath not felt the breath
Nor gazed once in the mocking eyes of Death.
The purest springs, the waters without stain,
Well upwards from the burning heart of Pain.
Behold, I saw in purest air afar , ;
A great light dawn and widen and increase.
With white flame ‘ crested like a perfect star,
Above the Sword' of Pain ' the Crown of Peace ! ”
13
GEORGE ESSEX EVANS


It is of course too soon yet to assign to George
Essex Evans his place among the Australian Poets,
as we lack the perspective necessary for an equitable
appreciation. Still it is not too presumptuous to
think that he stands very high indeed among the best
of them. Mr. Archer, the great literary critic, thinks
that Essex Evans has written some of the finest
lines of descriptive verse ever penned in the Southern
Hemisphere.” It cannot be disputed that his verse is
almost invariably of faultless make and intense artistic
perfection. “ Essex Evans’ verses.” says the South
Australian Register, “ are always full of suggestion,
pregnant with meaning and devoid of all empty
wordiness.”
It can be legitimately claimed for him that he
is one of the few well and truly laid corner stones of
our young and promising Australian Literature.
What a pity that such a man should have died in the
prime of his life, before he had given to the world the
best that was in him* for, great as are his achieve-
ments, they are insignificant compared with the master
works he had in contemplation, but which the exigen-
cies and brevity of life did not permit him to execute !
But, whatever may be his shortcomings, he is
sure to be always found on the threshold of our
national literature as a reliable finger-post for Poets
of subsequent generations and schools, having success-
fully demonstrated that both our Australian land-
scapes and our Australian life can be sung and
described with an intense realism in the purest English
language without any recourse to the “ Slang ”
expressions which mar the works of too many of our
best Australian writers.
But above all, Essex Evans is a patriot in the-
fullest sense of the word. Although he is in many
respects a broad-minded cosmopolitan, the essence
of his w T hole literary work is British mentality in both
bloom and fruit. He is permeated with an intense
14
GEORGE ESSEX EVANS


love for and pride in everything pertaining to the
Biitish race and British institutions. He manifests
his imperial patriotism in such poems as the “ Crown
of Empire ” and the “ Lion’s Whelps.” In “ The
Irish Dead,” he sings :
“ To Ireland set in the silver water
Tc the fightmg blood that is proved and tried—
Our sharpest sword and our fairest daughter—
Who saved the Empire and turned the tide !
And Wisdom comes as the days grow older,
W e are done with the faults of the past, I ween,
Standing together, shoulder to shoulder.
The Thistle, the Rose, and the Shamrock green
He celebrates the beauties of his adopted city of
Toowoomba :
“ Enthroned, apart, serene,
Above her vassal hills, whose voices greet her
The Mountain Queen.”
He dearly loved that Queen city, and strove to make-
of her one of the “ Athens ” of Australia, an ideal
in good way of being realized, especially in the Annual
Musical and Artistic Festivals held there under the
auspices of the Austral Association, an institution of
which he was one of the most enthusiastic promoters
and founders, of the most earnest and indefatigable
workers.
He exalts his adopted State, not only in his
“ Garden of Queensland ” and other extremely well
written and carefully compiled pamphlets of the
Intelligence and Tourists’ Bureau, but also in such
poems as the “ Jubilee Ode ” in which the “ Queen of
the North ” is celebrated in verses of rich harmony
and extreme beauty. Above all he loves Australia,
whose birth as an united nation he heralded in his
famous “ Ode on Federation,” with which he won—
against keen competition—the fifty guinea prize offered
by the Government of New South Wales. This is-
not only the work of a Patriot, but of a true
who in his seer’s mind has distinctly perceived
“ The wings of Dawn beating at the Gates of Day ! ”
15
GEORGE ESSEX EVANS


The Poet has clear notions of the dangers looming
-ahead, and he warns us to—
Prepare ere falls the hour of Fate,
When Death shells rain their iron hate
And all in vain our blood is poured,
For dark, aslant the Northern Gate
I see the shadow of the Sword ! .
His oft repeated advice is—
“ Fill up thy frontiers, man the gate !
Before, too late ! ”
In other places he deplores the tendency of our people
to congregate in huge cities. He bids the young
men to follow his example, by settling on the land
where the race grows up healthy and strong.
How shall we make Australia great
And strong when danger calls
When half the people of the State
Are crammed in city walls,
And the wide heritage we hold
Lies empty and unmanned,
And the strength that makes a nation is not rooted in the
land.”
‘ Break off ! Strike out! Oh ! Come away !
Be master of your life !
A home for every heart to-day
That fears not toil or strife.
There is music in the axe’s ring
Swung by a strong right hand
And the men that make a nation are the men upon the land ! ”
In his beautiful poem of the “ Nation Builders ”
he sings of all the pioneers, who have helped to con-
quer and subdue this vast continent, reserving a splen-
did poem all to themselves to the heroic women,
who go pioneering in the Bush : —-
“ And we have hearts to do and dare, and yet o’er all the rest
The hearts that made the nation were the Women of the West !”
'The Poet forgets no one of those who perform bravely
their share of the national work, however modest
may be their calling. He sympathises with the
Average Man ” of the City who,—
“ Day by day as the seasons go
follows his duty to arid fro
16
GEORGE ESSEX EVANS


Although :
“ His hat looks worn, and his coat sleeves shine,
As I see him step from his ’bus at nine.”
He sings also of “ humble women ”
“Fighting fearful odds,”
who go about their daily duties with—
“ Thick-soled shoes and shabby bonnet,
Dingy cotton gloves.
Old turned dress with darns upon it
(Not what woman loves).”
Toil has touched the lines of beauty
And the curves of grace.
Comeliness is good, but duty
Rules the commonplace.”
Sing, O Poet of the Morrow !
Cheer the weary face
Where brave women moil and sorrow
In the commonplace ! ”
He knows the causes of that poignant daily
poverty of the masses, for he has seen the “ Wheels-
of the System ” :
“ crushing through the human hives”
and he has no patience for those who think that there-
is no remedy for it :
“ Where weak women starve and sicken, dying in the paths they
trod.
Where strong men are bent and broken underneath the System’s
rod,
Will you smile and prate and tell me, ‘This is still the will of
God’? ”
That broad sympathy for all human sufferings
and that intense patriotism, which prompted and
enabled Essex Evans to give the form divine to the
innermost. sentiments of our people at the most
momentous hours of its existence, both as individuals
and as a nation, no doubt accounts in a great measure
for the fame to which he had attained while he was
alive, and which is steadily growing since his untimely
death, for the circles of his admirers are constantly-
17
GEORGE ESSEX EVANS


widening like the ripples caused by the fall of a pebble
in the waters of a pond.
Among others, the Authorities of the National
Library of Wales have started a collection of his
writings and of everything relating to his life and
works. The Departments of Public Education of
our various Australasian States, including New
Zealand, are frequently asking for the privilege of
■quoting some of his works in their School Publications.
Nearer to us, his fellow citizens of Toowoomba
■contemplate erecting to his memory a monument
on the top of the Range, at a place commanding a
superb panorama of mountains and dales and over-
looking his picturesque property of “ Glenbar,”
where he had—mostly with his own’ hands—hewn a
home out of the wilderness and spent the last few
years of his earthly pilgrimage.
Excellent and sincere as are no doubt the motives
of the subscribers, I have good reason to believe that
this is hardly the form of recognition which the
Poet would have approved of, had he been consulted
about it.
He had no liking for stone monuments, as is
evidenced by many a passage in his writings, among
others, being the following, written about the Poet
John Parrel —
“ Build him no mockery of stone.
Nor shame him with your idle praise ;
He liveth in his work alone
Through all our days.”
On another occasion he had written—“ The Song of
the Australian Dairyman which is, perhaps, in all
the English Literature the nearest approach to the
perfection of the Virgilian Georgies as relating to
modern farming and dairying.
18
GEORGE ESSEX EVANS


After describing with an admirable simplicity
and a singularly intense realism the joys of the old
dairyman—
“ When the cows are calling in the morning,
the swish swish of the milk which conies purling down,
the buzzing of the separator, the girls feeding the
s ’ poddies ” crowding fast along the trough, etc.,
the Poet comes to the evening milking and says :
' The milking pails are clinking, and the sun is sinking low,
It’s parting rays the distant hills adorning ;
My Sun of Life is sinking too, soon I shall have to go
Where there isn’t any milking in the morning.
I don’t want any blessed fuss, nor lies carved on a stone.
When the Separator gives me final warning :
Just plant me by the stockyard, so I won’t feel quite alone
When the cows are calling in the morning.”
I have often thought that if that perfect little
poem was set to proper music by some Australian
composer, imbued like the Poet with the true spirit
of country life, it would soon become one of the
-favourite songs throughout the rural districts of
Australia. Who knows, but I might live long enough
to see yet my suggestion taken up some day by the
Prize Committee of some of our future Eisteddfodau.
In any case, the few quoted lines emphasize a
fact well known to the intimate friends of the late
Poet, viz., that his ambition had never been to have
erected to his memory stone monuments, which always
mean either too much or too little.* But, Oh ! How
he longed to live in the heart and in the live memory
of the people he loved so well !
By his very nature the man of genius is com-
pelled to live in exalted regions, among the stars of
idealism, on a plane far above that of the multitude.
He may enjoy for a time his lofty loneliness, but he
is soon yearning again for the congenial society of
*Since the above lines were written the monument has been
erected and the unanimous criticism of the Press more than justifies
the writer’s misgivings.
19
GEORGE ESSEX EVANS


his fellow men. Moseses may live for forty years in
the deserts and spend weeks at a time among the
stormy clouds of Sinais, but they invariably come back
to their people to share in its sorrows and its joys,
and to free it from oppressions and bondages.
And so it was with George Essex Evans. Like
all strong men, he was conscious of his strength, he
had faith in himself, in his genius, in his mission as
one of the architects entrusted by Providence with
the building up of this young nation. But, being
human, he had also his moments of despondency
and doubt, his cruel hours of Gethsemane-—especially
when confronted with coldness and indifference. At
singing alone, the Poet, like the soloist, gets soon
tired and he longs for the whole chorus to, at least
occasionally, join in the singing, and thus uphold and
supplement his failing voice.
The question naturally arises : Could we not do
now what we have done only partially, and very
imperfectly while the Poet was alive in our midst ?
Much is being talked now-a-days about the
nationalisation of all the great public utilities. It
remains to be seen whether, however, the greatest
of all public utilities for a young nation, wdiich aspires
like ours at occupying a place of honour in the Temple
of History, is not perhaps the cultivation of ideals
in the higher realms of Music, Art, Literature, and
Science \ Why should the conquests made by an
Essex Evans in these exalted regions be available
only to a privileged few 1
Why could not, for instance, the Federal and
State Governments of Australia combine to publish
a popular edition of his selected verses, some even
set to proper music, and have them widely distributed
among the schools, nay, among all the homes pf our
young Commonwealth ? The expense would only
be a trivial one when compared with the unfathom-
able influence for good which such a publication would
20
GEORGE ESSEX EVANS


exercise over the present and future generations
of our people, feince Kings have their Poets Laureate,
why should not modern Democracies have also their
National Poets ? And this being so, who would be
more worthy of being the first one than George Essex
Evans, the bold pioneer, the lofty idealist, and the
ardent jmtriot, whose whole life and genius have been
spent at blazing tracks towards the highest summits
of an ideal manhood and nationhood ?
Whether my suggestions are acted upon or not
by those entrusted with the destinies of our young
nation, it shall redound to the lasting credit of the
Committee of the 1913 Brisbane Eisteddfod to have
conceived the idea of associating the name of that
great Poet with the celebration of our Easter Festival.
Essex Evans was heart and soul in the Eisteddfodic
movement, of which he had been one of the most
ardent promoters and ablest advocates. He had
greatly contributed to its extension, and co-ordination
in Queensland. It is ho who had first suggested the
Inter-State visits of Bands and Choirs, now a by no
means rare feature of our Annual Festivals. He has
also advocated the sending of Australian Choirs and
Bands to Great Britain, a departure now on the eve
of being realised by some of his old associates in
Eisteddfodic works and direct heirs to his thoughts
and noble ambitions. Were he still alive, he would
be found in the front rank of those who worked so
hard to ensure the success of our Festival.
But, if he is here no more, he left us the example
of his noble life, the shade of his genius soars like an
aegis over us, and his spirit still animates every
worker in the cause which was so dear to his heart.
For, as he himself once wrote :
“ The burning thought is living still;
Onward it speeds with gath’ring power
To strengthen and fulfil! ”


Not alone in Poetry did Essex Evans excel, but
also in Prose.
Throughout the major portion of his writings,
we find that QUEENSLAND, “ QUEEN OF THE
NORTH,” was his theme, and the future welfare and
continued advancement of the GREAT NORTH-
EASTERN STATE OE THE AUSTRALIAN COM-
MONWEALTH his cherished hope and aspiration.
The ethereal mind of Evans’, linked with that
of Nature’s, soared high above things mundane, as
instanced by the following purple passages so vividly
descriptive of the natural beauty of some of QUEENS-
LAND’S many favoured localities.
THE BUNYA MOUNTAINS.
(35 Miles from Dalby.)
SOUTHERN QUEENSLAND
The wide plains and grass lands around Jimbour and Dalby
run like a green sea to their base, from which they rise dark and
splendid against the sky. Belts of silver-plumed brigalow, with
their black branches showing in charming contrast, relieved by
the waving tresses of the myall and the sombre foliage of the belar,
are passed through as you draw nearer to the hills. Now and again
you enter a tiny green plain or natural paddock which the brigalow
has fenced on four sides with walls of silver, or drive through some
rushing watercourse, with the current eddying round the horses’
girths.
Here, there falls on the soul the hush and awe of a great
cathedral. In these lofty temples of Nature, which the Great
Architect has fashioned, man feels only his own insignificance in
the presence of a vast design. Centuries old, and towering 200
feet above you, their topmost branches massed with orchids and
lichen, rise the huge russet-brown columns of the bunyas, the ringed
majestic heights of the hoop pine, and the smooth white pillars of
the beech, a hundred feet without a limb. Festoons of brilliant
creepers and the thick cordage of the scrub vine swing overhead.
From the limbs of grey dead trees flakes of brown and sage-coloured
moss droop pendulous. At times you pass down avenues of white
and yellow orchids, past beds of arum lillios, and between dark
green walls of scrub myrtle or through a miniature forest of graceful
tree ferns. The broad emerald leaves of the stinging-tree rise at
intervals against a dark environment. (Shafts of variegated light
strike across the green forest glooms like the soft rays from hugo
22
GEORGE ESSEX EVANS.


oriel windows. Here, the moss-covered stump of some fallen
cedar giant shows amid a rambling mass of wild raspberry bushes;
there, a huge Moreton Bay fig-tree spreads a leafy shade over the
track, its hollow trunk a network of grey cable, inside of which a
man can climb for 40 feet. Suddenly the woods will end abruptly
and you will find yourself on a grassy promontory looking down some
precipitous timber-shoot, with a stretching vista of purple hill
and yellow plain beyond. Then you plunge into the scrub, and
climb upwards once more. The soil in these scrubs is a deep
volcanic red, of great richness, eminently suitable for agricultural
purposes. Anyonc bent on sport will here find flock and wonga
pigeons and scrub turkeys, the curious humus towers which the
latter build being constantly met with. The summit of Mow-
bullan is a gigantic emerald, treeless mound, with outcrops of black
basalt —a mountain billow towering in might above its fellows.
Indeed, standing on Mowbullan, with the grey eagles wheeling slowly
far above, the keen mountain air beating on your cheeks, and the
panorama of two great pastoral districts spreading in flowing purple
on either hand, the mind is invested with the mystery of a grey
antiquity older than all the castled heights and verdure-clad valleys
of historic Europe. The bold green summit of the mountain
rises out of a girdle of magnificent forest, rich with variegated folia o-e
rimmed with a belt of yelloAV wattle, behind which, in huse masses
and serried lines, the great bunya-trees stand like some titanic
army that in silence mourns around the sepulchre of its fallen chief.
Here, from time immemorial, whilst the tide of empire ebbed and
flowed afar, the dusky millions of a primitive people have come
and gone, unknown, unheeded. Here, they were wont to hold
their feasts and festivals when the bunya-trees wore heavy with
harvest.
MEETING OF THE STANLEY AND
BRISBANE WATERS.
WEST MORETON DISTRICT, QUEENSLAND,
Around you spreads a glorious panorama of wide pasture
lands, some of it alluvial river flats, some gently undulating ridges,
studded with enormous gum trees, their grey trunks weird against
the verdant green, whilst on every side rise the rims of the moun-
tains which frame the picture in walls of ethereal blue. Through
tin centre of this wonderland of varied tints, gleaming like burnished
steel in the early sun rays, shines the broad breast of the combined
rivers. The waters pass there, right beneath your feet, not now
lashed into blind fury of flood and carrying huge trees, fences, and
struggling stock on the terrible bosom of their turbid brown torrents,
but placidly, in lazy mood, crooning a lullaby as they sing their
way to the sea. From the great knoll on which Gaboonbah stands
23
QEOROE ESSEX EVANS.


you look up and down the river at two wide highways of silver
light. A few miles from where you stand, the Stanley, coming
down with bright speed from his high mountain cradle, meets the
Brisbane, winding a way along the Cressbrook hills and cutting
deep into the bases of the mountains, its narrow rocky-floored
ravines luxuriant with ferns and palm trees.
BOONAH & THE FASSI FERN DISTRICT.
SOUTHERN QUEENSLAND,
Onwards from Munbilla the train gets into the region of hills
and valleys, and you find yourself travelling through scones of
ravishing beauty until you arrive at Boonali. It is impossible to
reproduce these scenes with a camera. You loose the remarkable
variety of tones in the colouring. Only a great painter could do
justice to such a wonderland. You can never imagine that some-
thing like thirty years ago all this district was an almost impassable
region of trees, corded vines, undergrowth, and creepers. Imagine
a landscape of gradual hills and gently undulating slopes covered
as far as the eye can see on either side with neat squares of ploughed
land, yellow corn, green lucerne, waving sorghum and imphee,
and neat white homesteads surrounded by orchards and vineyards
glittering in the sunshine. Hero and there stand little isolated
clumps of scrub, giving a fairy-like touch to the scene. Every-
where at intervals rise rustic churches and schools. In the little
grazing paddocks, clothed with rich couch grass, are dotted a few
of the heavy-foliaged scrub trees which have been left for shade.
Afar in the distance to the south rise sheer the huge purple
walls of the mountains, silent sentinels which dwarf with careless
majesty the picturesque beauty of vale and hill that creep to their
feet. So intense is the silence of their guard, and so clearly defined
are their noble brows, rugged scarps, and timbered slopes in the
golden air, that you find yourself listening as if for some great
authoritative voice from the mother-heart of Nature herself. Above,
in a sky of palest blue, a trail of snowy clouds —mere fairy films of
gossamer —sails slowly by.
24
GEORGE ESSEX EVANS.




'l'
'lt
' 4 :
■ •I i
J
