

9j
’tT’CO
C '%:
SMITH AND SON. Print ro Royal Lane- Melb




SMITH AND SON, Print 10 Royal Lane. Melb


TO THE READER.
At the earnest solicitation of many friends, after forty-five
years’ speaking and answering questions in public, I consent to
place on record, for the benefit of young students, questions and
answers to a variety of small debatable subjects.
A gentleman (at a meeting) came to me, and he sa:d : “If I
had only exercised my common-sense, I w r ould not be as I am.
I spent three years in studying for a preacher.” Another sent
me forty objections why he could not receive the Bible as a
revelation from God. I am happy to say that I convinced him
of his errors. He also studied for the Church.
A sceptic (a lecturer) said: “You are right! My desire is to
believe and be a Christian, but the creeds and dogmas cause me
to reject that which my conscience is inclined to receive—that
is, the Bible as a historical and revealed will of God, by and
through human agency.”
I could multiply cases in this direction that demand my con-
sideration. Ido not say lam infallibly right in my answers. I
give them to the best of my ability, right or wrong; and if you
have better, then reject mine.
Trusting that it may help the student of the Bible to under
ALLAN STEWART, The Author.


Biography of the JTutJjor,
In one of the States, before the Registrar-General of Births
was, .1 was born. I am, therefore, unknown to such. At the
early age of eleven, I was indentured for seven years to the
trade of a cabinet-maker; my master was an elder in a
Church. The gold discoveries unseated my mind, and I ab-
sconded off to the goldfields. I had served four years, three
of which no wages were given, the fourth as. per week. My
father was on his death-bed; there were nine in our family,
and life was a struggle in the home. My father was a slave
to the Church, and during his illness I acted as janitor, light-
ing the lamps, opening the pulpit door, then opening the
vestry, followed the minister to the pulpit, and closed the
door, haying previously carried up the hymn book and Bible,
after which I showed strangers to the pews. In my class,
I took first prize for Bible statements against the’ sin of
lying. This elder (a pillar of the Church) claimed for
my absconding. My father went into debt to pay for my
foolish act. I sat one day on the kerbstone of the city—an
unsuccessful miner, my father dead, and in debt.
What could I do? I went to my master, and pleaded with
him for forgiveness, and I would serve him for time lost and
compensation; he spurned my offer. This rebuff made me
despondent—l almost cursed God in my lost state of mind!
The Church and brotherly love was to me a sham, Christi-
anity degraded by its professors. I got work, and after
many months’ toil paid my mother £l2O, also for my board.
I devoted my spare time (after working ten hours per day)
to such works as Mirabeau, System of Nature, The Wander-
ing Jew, Tom Pain, etc., till my mind and life seemed an
enigma. I reasoned —I must live, must work, must die, and
why not die at once? Why wait for death to come?—why
not meet it? But after death! What? I looked into the
heavens, gazed on the beauties of nature, till poetic effusions
seized my mind. For a long time I had not read the Bible,
and my previous readings were done by a Reference Bible,
finding the passages for the prize; so can safely say I scarcely
knew anything of the Bible. I knew the Catechism. At this
time (about 1853) Wars and Famine, Dr. Cumming’s End of
the Word, Baxter’s World’s Destruction, Wroe’s Ingather-
ing of the Lost Tribes of Israel, Christ’s Return, seemed as
a thousand voices proclaimed 1862 the end of our mundane
things, and the reign of Christ for one thousand years.


4
On the opposite side to where I lived was a Wroeite; he
took a great interest in me till he led me to see the claims of
the Prophet Wroe. This person was on a visit to Australia.
An illiterate, decrepit old man, the followers trembled in his
presence; they said the power of the Spirit was so great in
him. He told me before the audience I w r as to go and
preach the gospel for the ingathering of the lost ten tribes
of Israel. 1 may state here I was not the only person this
imposter fooled; master engineers, timber merchants,
artizans, and well-to-do men believed him to be God’s
prophet, the sign of Jonah. I believed his silly nonsense,
lost my head, and leaving home as the early disciples did,
took nothing but my tracts, a few slices of bread, and no
money. I travelled from Melbourne to Ballarat, sleeping in
barns, begging a meal in the name of Christ. Many of the
townships at this time were small, and I stood at the corner
of a street and preached to it (for not a soul came to hear
me). Hungry and tired, no money, at night I sought the
hospitality of a farmhouse. Being a “Jew,” some strange
incidents happened at meal time —pork, anything unclean,
puddings with suet in, I must reject! I cared not, I was
doing God’s service. I roamed the country, and my life
at this time would need a book to itself. I left Victoria and
travelled South Australia in the same way.
I will state here just what the preacher’s life is like: —
Arriving in Adelaide, I sought a spot to hold forth, near a
Roman Catholic Church, when a shower of garbage of all
kinds deluged me. I heeded it not; they persecuted my
Master, and I counted myself unworthy of the honour ac-
corded me to suffer for Plis sake. Travelling one hundred
miles into the interior, God only knows what I endured.
A young minister asked me to call on him. I did; and he
talked with me. He read my tracts, and explained Chris-
tianity, not Moses and the Law. The scales fell from my
eyes—l was under the Law —the curse, and not under grace.
I pitied my own stupidity and blind infatuation, and after all
my trials, I am trusting in the claims of a pure and sublime
Christianity as the only hope of mankind.
After 50 years in the open air, answering questions to all
and sundry as a man of the street, I am just what pure and
unsophisticated nature has made me. I here record on these
pages my foot-prints on the sands of time, that if there is
anything true, lovely, or of good report, the Bib’e and the
Bible alone is the voice of God to the soul of humanity. I


3
give my life’s history to the traveller over the thorny path
to the goal of eternal rest. The papers were originally
written to my son by his desire.
A. STEWART, The Author.
Jntroductioq.
Away in the back blocks of an Australian forest, where the
crack of the boundary rider’s whip resounds through the lofty
gums, at the foot of the mountain’s declivity by an everflow-
ing stream, was the homestead of the pioneer of that primeval
forest, snug and complete. No sundowner was ever refused
shelter or a meal. It had earned the name of the “Good
Samaritan. ”
There was a grown-up family of nine, the youngest being
15 years old. The older part of the family had been debarred
the opportunities of a school, and the parent had to be their
pedagogue. The parents, with some concern, considered
the matter of education for the youngest boy, who had shown
an earnest desire for advancement, as he went among the
men to hear them debate upon sundry topics and questions
where angels would fear to tread. The father spoke pri-
vately to his son Horace, asking him how he would like to
leave home and go to college to study in order to understand
these questions, and become a minister. He replied, “Father,
my secrets thoughts you seem to have discovered. To be
able to explain these great and grand questions would be my
delight. Dear father, with your and God’s help, I would
willingly leave home to learn how to make men happy and
wise in time and for eternity. It is dreadful, father, to hear
some of them! They deny the existence of God, and curse
Him. Strange they deny Him, yet curse Him because they
have to work. They do want a teacher. I can come home
again, and work with them, and help even the black as well
as the white to know about God. I am ready to go where
you please to send me. Christ said, Follow Me; I want to
learn of Him, and to walk in His steps.’’ The father wrote to
a professor relative to the boy’s education, and made ar-
rangements for his son’s departure. He had been a great
reader in his youthful days and realised the needs of scholastic
attainments.


That night in the vision of sleep the mind of Horace wan-
dered : he was in the city—crowded streets, the din and
bustle of life everywhere. The school and all its surround-
ings in panoramic view passed before his vision. Pangs of
sorrow at the thought of leaving home and joyous cincipa
tions were in his dreams; and between the two extremes, he
awoke at the break of day, his feelings being as though sleep
had forsaken him. On rising, he knelt in prayer, asking
God to direct his pathway in his studies. Then he gathered
his books, Bible and clothing, and packed his travelling
bag. The sound of the gong announced breakfast. The
mother did not seem so cheerful, a heavy care seemed to
rest on her mind ; her heart was full. The Scripture lessons
read and prayer for God’s care, then silence reigned. After
breakfast they all retired to the drawingroom; the father
commended their boy to God and His grace; the tramp of
horses and waggon, and then the farewell took place. The
mother from the window watched the waggon till it was lost
in the distant glen.
Horace arrived at his destination, and wrote his first letter
to his parents: —Dear Father and Mother.—l arrived in the
city, and was met by one of the teachers. After leaving my
bag at the college, he took me out to see the city; all places
seemed strange —men and women hurrying on in extreme
haste, as though some important transaction was depending
upon them. The college is a splendid building, replete in
every respect. There are a number of students for the min-
istry. I retired to my room and made the acquaintance of
four of the students. One of them has a book called “The
Problem.’’ It impeaches God’s benevolence in creating
man, sin, and misery, also the planets. The author is a
lawyer of considerable ability, and we could not reconcile
why God did permit sin and misery, and then the planet with
its destructive agencies, earthquakes, blizzards, etc. I will
send it to you. Dear father, do try your best to reconcile it
for me. On my awaking the next morning, I missed the
warble of the magpie and the wild birds’ clatter. It seems
a new world to me. I suppose I will get accustomed to my
new environment. —Your affectionate son, HORACE.
My Dear Horace, —I comply with your request and reply
to the author of the pamphlet “The Problem,’’ trusting it
will help you in your investigations for truth. —PATER.


/-other's JTnswer to or ace ,
To the Author of “The Problem.’’
Sir, —Having frequently heard of you and your lectures on
religious topics I had a desire to hear for myself. I attended
the lecture at the Footscray Hall, Permit me to express my
pleasure to you that while you are an administrator of justice
to the evildoer, on the other hand you dispensed to me and
others noble thoughts. I obtained copies i, 2, and 3of your
pamphlets on “The Problem,’’ and have read them with
considerable satisfaction; and though a working man, if I
am the only “leper” cured, I “return” to express my grati-
tude as a tribute to that lecture —the power of truth on the
mind.
“THE PROBLEM.”
In reading it, I found this statement: “If God be omnipo-
tent He cannot be beneficent; because, were He omnipotent,
He would never have created such a world as this with its
existing potentialities of destructive agencies of every descrip-
tion of vice, misery, and disease.”
Startled, my mind looked at the proposition thus: that God,
to be such, must be absolutely absolute! This would make
Him omnipotent, by which He could make His beneficence in
degree, according to the life of the subject living under His
laws, man being a creature diverse from the world (the
planet), which certainly is created in beneficence in seasons,
minerals, timber, fruit, and metals; its orbit centripetal and
attractive forces; still, in summer it is too hot, in winter too
cold ; spring is too uncertain for our prosperity, which are
against His beneficence. Neverthless, the inexorable laws of
nature demand such in carrying out His beneficent laws to
create food for man and beast.
This world presents design and forethought that it was
created for such a being as man, from the chaos to his in-
auguration upon the planet. Why, the seasons, the sun,
moon, day and night show God’s foreknowledge of man’s
mortal and moral condition to be the state of his existence
under Divine laws, and tor man to be a mortal moral agent
(a subject of this government) he must be just what he is,


8
for, if he were different to what he is, his environments
would require a planet different to this. The creature and the
planet is founded by omnipotence and displays His benefi-
cence in an absolute degree.
The real question stated is: What relation has His benefi-
ence to His omniscience, if He be omnipotent? That
implies that He can restrict or curtail His beneficence in all
His acts. Surely if He has all power He can limit His benefi-
cence, or extend it absolutely to His creation in any degree
He pleases, but subject to His laws! Jump into the sea and
you will probably drown, cut a vein and you may bleed to
death, live in an insanitary state then disease and death will
result. Yet the sea, the veins, sanitary laws are the acts
of His beneficence! And right here is the foundation pf
man’s responsibility to His beneficence. Abuse God’s benefi-
cent laws, then vice, misery, disease are man’s production,
being related as effect to cause.
I therefore conclude that man, and not God, produces vice,
misery, and disease by the abuse of His beneficence; and
His omnipotence gives to His beneficence the limitation qf
His benevolence in the laws observed and not violated. His
beneficence cannot oe extended to violated law in an abso-
lute sense, only in degree to the crime. Any subject violat-
ing the laws of his government forfeits its beneficence and
meets its reward in degree of his crime. Justice, it is true,
demanded the forfeiture of the life God had given by virtue
of His omnipotent power, and man’ sinful nature demands
its forfeiture. But death is not misery or vice; it is the
effect of man’s vice, it being man’s omnipotent powder of will
to restrict evil, cultivate the good; and God’s omnipotence
could not make a man to be a moral agent w r ith such power
in its fullest degree, and yet restrict that freedom to an abso-
lute curtailment. Man has all power over his own acts. God
said, Thou shalt not eat of the tree of knowledge. Man
used the vanity of his mind and reason in opposition to God’s.
His state being one of trial of his moral responsibility, on it
rested the evolution of vice, misery, and disease, or immor-
tality, sin, disease. These were the result of his own acts,
which showed that God was beneficent in creating him, and
that man could not blame his Creator, for it was by his own
act that he is what he is—a mortal, moral agent, and (as
before stated) he must be just what he is.
I therefore conclude that vice or misery is not chargeable
to God in any sense, for one of His immutable laws is—what


9
we sow we shall reap This applies to natural and spiritual
law. You showed this very clearly when exercising the
power of the mind at Footscray. To think on evil things
begets evil acts. I was in the County Court the other day
when a man was sued for He and his two daughters
had not slept for weeks, and were wasting away. Now,
the law is omnipoent and beneficent; did it cause the misery
in mind and body? You will say No, it was not the law, for
it is founded on equity and justice. And when you are on the
bench you are the omnipotent and the beneficent administra-
tor of the law. We uncover our heads and rise to our feet,
and keep our heads uncovered until out of court. Could your
beneficent mind (for I judge you have a benevolent one)
overcome the omniscience of law and let justice go by de-
fault? You will say No, justice demands that vice must pay
the penalty; she stands with the scales, and from yourself to
the culprit all must suffer the misery they bring upon them-
selves, and any beneficence extended will be in degree to the
crime. God has done the same: He demanded the death of
the culprit. There is no pain in death —it is disorder. Man’s
transgression of natural law and God’s justice cannot set
this beneficence aside and permit man with impunity to
transgress law and restrict the misery and disease —it would
be a licence to his liberty. We cannot set His justice aside.
God has confined sin and misery to this planet —it cannot
reach any other.
Permit me to say we sometimes are in God’s court, and
we ought to keep our heads uncovered and shorn of deeply
speculative things, remembering that His ways are not our
ways, nor our thoughts His thoughts. I got good from your
lecture, and as a thinker I write this. You may discover
my weak points. I only desire to give my thoughts on these
great subjects, and to return good for the benefit I received
at the Footscray lecture.
In conclusion I affirm that God is absolutely beneficent;
but that His omniscience can restrict His beneficence to nis
creatures in degree, and that the existing potentialities of
vice, misery, and disease are the violated laws of order by
man, for which God’s beneficence is only extended when
keeping His laws, and it ceases when His laws are disre-
garded. To restrict God’s omnipotence to make His benefi-
cence in degree is to dethrone Him as an omnipotent and
beneficent Creator. He has, in the creation of this planet


and man, notwithstanding vice, misery, and disease, dis-
played beneficence in all His works. —Yours truly,
ALLAN STEWART.
23 Chapman street, North Melbourne.
SON’S REPLY TO THE FATHER.
Dear Father, —My companions are delighted. Your paper
has removed a cloud of difficulties. We can get a mental
impress from the Bible fact that God created man a pure and
holy being, gave him eternal life upon his accepting His pure
and holy laws. That life knew no vice, sin, or misery, dis-
ease, or death if lived in conformity to law, and man, free in
the action of his governing power by his will, if exercised,
for good or evil, could produce either. He was a perfect
being in this respect —untrammelled. He had reason and
volition ad libitum. Then God could not restrict either.
Man could do the good or the evil. He was not of the brute
creation, chained by instinct. He violated law, spiritual and
physical, by rejecting God and doing contrary to the law
of our nature —he evolved sin, disease, misery, and death
was his doom. That he does not live eternally here in dis-
ease and misery shows the beneficence of God. We also
see the need of keeping man from the intercourse of other
planets, and the final destruction of sin; and that the forces
of nature is the voice of God in the Book of Nature. We are
delighted.
We are on the first chapter of Genesis. I want you to
give me a very lucid exposition of it. Was our planet created
or evolved; i.e., by God’s power (let it be special fiat)
or did it come into existence by nature’s laws without God
in six days of 24 hours 6000 years ago? Love to all.
Yours affectionately,
HORACE.
jTnswer fo problem] —pari //.
Sir, —I consider one of the greatest blessings that can be
bestowed upon man is to get his mind in that condition of
certainty which shall ensure him against doubt. It is pos-
sible for the beneficence of the Creator to exist in fact, even
in the creation of this planet, though it may not be perceptible
to the mind. In reviewing God’s omnipotence and benefi-


cence let us look at it thus: —The laws which control our
planet, in its construction —a vast fire enclosed by a crust
from the igneous to its outer crust —a planet doomed to
have an end. There must exist the agencies by natural laws
to bring it to the end designed. Then take man, with all his
failings, a rebel against God’s law and order —a mixed
community, some good, others bad. They should know that
they are in a locality that nature may execute her designs at
any time. How are her laws to separate them? It must
either save all, or destroy all; or men must exercise their
mind upon her laws, and keep as far from danger as possible.
Man, like the earth, is being driven to his end by the irresis-
tib’e forces of his environment. The sun rises, man wakes,
partakes of his frugal meal; hunger compels him on to toil;
a rest, a s'eep, whether he will or not, it compels him. It
knows no abatement, year in and year out, till his end comes.
The final tidal wave—death—ends his existence here.
Sir, I look at this state of things as being founded in
wisdom in man’s relationship to our planet. He cannot dis-
cover anything by his reason, but the fleeting and the tran-
sitory in himself and nature; and yet even nature speaks to
him by her acts in the blizzard, tidal wave, and the volcano,
-or he would be living in a more defiant state; whereas the
conflict in nature keeps him in a humble state and reverence
to nature’s Creator. He must know that he and the planet
will have an end; and in order to avoid its destructive
agencies, man must not try how c’ose he can live to them,
but make all preparation to avoid them.
I find there is an analogy in nature and mind. There are
mental blizzards and volcanic eruptions of thought. \ou
have experienced some of them. The same mystery pervades
the mind, as to why God has permitted minds to go to the
extremes in persecution in creeds by man against his fellow
man. Our experience, as in nature, should teach us to avoid
them.
Permit me, therefore, as a humb’e man —a brother travel-
ler —to express my thoughts upon the state of the re igious
un : verse of mind on the re'igious matters of our day. 1 will
cal! it Re Ligo—to God. In my peregrinations of thought
upon Churchanity, I was forcibly struck with a remark made
by G. Higinbotham. He told a deputation of reverends —Go,
agree among your own selves; and when you have solved the
problem of your want, come in unity upon the question.


first Chapter of genesis,
RECONCILED TO SCIENCE.
Dear Horace, —
The pathway to the goal of knowledge is a thorny one. When
in the city, I attended a debate upon the question— (< Was
the Planet Created in Six Days of Twenty-four Hours 6000
Years Ago?” Hence, I give you up-to-date information.
. T^e affirmer denied creation by special fiat, and that the
six days was 6000 years ago, and placed evolution (natural
laws) without a creator. He stated that man and the planet
have existed for over 10,000 years.
I shall assume here that this is correct. The Bible gives no
date respecting it; any statement that is incorrect is man’s mis-
take. We have taken the year 4001 as the starting-point of our
chronology, and assumed retrospective and prospective data.
The negative side maintained that the Bible was inspired by
God (2 Tim. 3 : 10), What the Bible said, God said —that the
six days were 6000 years ago—and God could do it. He was
desirous of letting the Bible explain itself.
Then followed various speakers. The third speaker said
light could not exist without the sun, and the sun was created
on the fourth day, and light on the first day, was a scientific
blunder. Then, on the third day, God in twenty-four hours
produced fruit-bearing trees in full bloom and fruit; this was
as ridiculous as light before the sun. Others said, How could
Moses be the writer of the books and mention about his own
death and interment?
One young man rose and said, God’s honour and wisdom are
impeached. The Holy Bible I love. It says God did it in
the beginning; but what even that means, I question not God’s
inspiration. So that debate closed without any unity of the
proposition being manifested.
On returning home, I reflected on the speeches of that night
till the mysterious charm closed my eyes in sleep; and now, in
the sunlight of day, I pen my thoughts upon this sublime sub-
ject, and how the difficulty is to be reconciled. Many persons
ask, Why did not God make it plain, so that we all could
understand it ? What ! Do they mean that God should tell
them all the secret operations of an Absolute Power? Absurd !
God said those secrets are His; the revealed things are man’s.
Is not this plain? Then rest there, vain man (Deut. 29 : 29).


13
Let me take the first—the objective world. Man has all
that God has permitted us to know, and what He has revealed.
There are two sources whence man derives his information—the
science of geology and the science of ideology. The one treats
of objects, the other of language—a mind expressing itself.
Let me take the first, the objective world. Man has all the
power at his disposal to analyse and investigate this field.
Looking at his mechanical and intellectual genius in every
department—telephone, wireless telegraphy, electricity, steam,
phonograph, navigation in air and on ocean. Still all is a dead
language. He discovers God’s hidden secrets by his skilful
mind. But there is no speech only by the progress of reasoning;
and geology’s study points to millions of years in the evolution
of our planet.
The second —the science of ideology—ideas expressed from a
mind, either by revelation from a higher or its own mind. If the
human mind gives expression of truths, concerning facts creative
or historic, they stand in the ideal as synonymous —they cannot
be truer than truth revealed or historic. Euclid lays down
this axiom—a point has position, but not magnitude. The
Bible says, “In the beginning.” This is plain speaking. The
beginning is not the planet’s magnitude; it is the first point
or act in the production of the vast universe called heaven or
expanse. It is a point in eternity’s duration —an indefinite,
undefined period in any chronological date: it is simply in
eternity, designated a beginning ! God !
As I intend treating on God’s existence, I shall refrain here
save saying, you cannot have the object without a beginning, or
a beginning without the actor (the beginner). So God lets
our mind, as in geology, discover the secret of revelation by
reading and studying His ideas (2 Tim. 2 : 15), rightly divid-
ing it.
Created. —This means, in the primary sense, to cause; and in
Heb. 11 ; 3 it was said to be done from that which is not seen.
Some men try to make it foolishness, by saying, how could
God create something out of nothing ? Query : What is spirit ?
Mind: it is not a thing; then it is no thing! The Heavens
and the earth —(that is, in eternity, the vast universe, two million
suns and satellites, including our planet, of which Mr. Mitchell
says, “ Lo ! behold to God’s creation there is no end!) —the
earth, in its embryonic stages, was shapeless, whether atomic or
nebula, as a ring thrown off the sun —it was neither round,
oval, nor square —a shapeless mass. It was devoid of all
objective animated existences ; darkness surrounded our planet.


H
Stop, reader! Do you want God to tell you more? If so r
how much more? Where would you stop? Echo says, Where?
THE FIRST DAY’S WORK.
Light came from the sun. It is not the planet; it is for the
eyes and vegetation; the astronomer’s measure line 186,000
miles per second; a triune, a mystery to man, three colours in
one. This was God’s setting up time from one event to another.
It is evening, morning, noon —twelve o’clock noon to twelve
midnight, evening; twelve midnight to twelve noon, morning;
the evening and the morning were the first day’s work. God
said, Let it be, and it was. Reader, is this plain enough ?
SECOND DAY’S WORK.
THE EXPANSE. —Air for man, vegetation for animals —•
three gases —the media of sound; keeps man erect (a fluid
presses his body on the planet). It did not come itself. God
said, Let it be. Like light, the elements were there, and it was
the second event in duration. The planet was millions of
years evolving. The light and air introduced time, twenty-four
hours intervening between each creative fiat. Reader, tarn up
your Bible and read, then ask this question, How can God
make it plainer ?
THIRD DAY’S WORK.
Grasses, fruit trees, rivers and seas, the briny ocean, for
man’s use. Here I heard a sceptical person say, Just fancy God
making a fruit tree in full bearing in twenty-four hours ! The
verse says, He made the tree. Do not stretch your ridiculous
assertion. Remember, Balaam’s ass said something more to the
point.
FOURTH DAY’S WORK
This verse has been the sport of the infidel. They ask, How
could there be light on the first day, seeing that the sun was
not created till the fourth day ? The verse says, God made
(not created on the fourth day, because they were created in
the beginning in the word heavens). The sun is the centre of
our solar system; it was first created, and God took what was
created and made (if you please), not created, it as the potential
power over the planet. How ? By the law of attraction and
the centrifugal forces for the orbit ninety-three millions of
miles; 365 days constituted the year. Read the verse : He gave
on this day the fixed diurnal and centripetal force, and the in-
clination of its axis for seasons. He placed the moon to light


15
its orbit by night. The Polar Star, Southern Cross, for sign-
posts. Read, vain man, and understand when you read. Do
you want God to do more than He has done? A simpleton
said, What credit is there in the sun shining when it is light?
Look at the moon, it shines when there is no light.
The fourth event of twenty-four hours is not the planet —the
sun, moon, stars, seasons, orbits are not the planet; they are
God’s wisdom displayed in design for man and animals.
FIFTH DAY’S WORK.
BIRDS, FISHES, ANIMALS.—If God could create a per-
fect fish, bullock or peacock, why not a fruit tree? Reader, is
this not simple and plain ?
SIXTH DAY’S WORK.
MAN. —God’s masterpiece, in God’s image, after His like-
ness ! In man —not man’s body, that is not the man. I live
in the body, and will (like the lesser insects) cast the cumbersome
body oft' and change (Phil. 3 : 21).
As I shall have more to say on man, I will refrain further.
My purpose is now accomplished —the planet created in an
eternal duration, populated by God, and all provisions prepared
in six events of twenty-four hours or six days. The seventh
day is man’s rest.
The last chapter of Deuteronomy was added —the first eight
verses by Joshua; and the last four by either Samuel or Ezra.
How has all this misunderstanding of the account by Moses
come about ? Two thousand five hundred years after the crea-
tion Moses introduced the law of labour, and in Exodus 31 : 17
the six days’ labour and the seventh day rest was his speech
to Israel. Rest and labour is the subject in his mind; and to
confirm it, he refers to the vast creation and the six days’ com-
pletion of the planet’s drapery ; and He rested and was re-
freshed. This in brevity. The whole created universe must be
explained by reading of the first chapter of Genesis.
Dear Father, —
Your paper on the debate you heard must have proved a very
interesting time to you. To me, it is a new book : light has
entered where darkness reigned. How inconsistent it is to
make the six days’ creative fiats the same as the planet’s creation,
when they were (so to speak) the earth’s drapery. Our teacher
tells us there is nothing in the Bible to contradict —even geology
—the life of animals, or beasts, and vegetation before the six


days’ creation; that the animals were huge monsters and the
vegetation mosses, conifers, lichens, and ferns : they were not
suited to the requirements of man or beasts. Six hundred and
seventeen students of the sciences say there is no contradiction,
and I think the same since reading your letter —that God, in the
eternal duration, had fixed a beginning to every planet, and
that our planet (per-se) was millions of years developing. Then,
in six days, He furnished it; and last, the animals and man
were installed in their homes. We are still saying, Why does
not God make it plain to us? It puts me in mind of an old
lady in court. The judge said, What is your name? She
replied, Watt is my name. He sharply said, Yes—what is your
name, madam? She again replied, Watt is my name. The
judge requested a constable to enquire what was the lady’s
name. The constable; She says, your Honour, Watt is her
name. Well, said the Judge, why did she not say so? God
makes it plain—it is our ignorance in not asking for the wisdom
to comprehend it (James i : 5).
I long, dear papa, for this elixir of the soul ! I do not
wonder at the expression of David’s thirsty soul (Ps. 43 : 1).
I will wait with patience the next paper on the New Theology —
the fall of man. There is much speculation on the subject ; and
many consider it a fable, like the creation in Genesis.
Your affectionate son,
HORACE.
P.S.—Will you, dear papa, send me a paper on evolution and
creation —that is, did matter, without any other power, cause
itself ?
CREATION BY SPECIAL FIAT.
This proposition meets evolution, and says it is not a question
who of the six evolutionists is the orthodox party —Darwin,
Tyndal, Huxley, Helmholtz, Haeckel, or Mayer, or Spencer.
It affirms that their books (as scientific) are grand books; but
that they have overshot their science, which knows nothing of
an Absolute. So that, as objective science is their experience, it
rises no higher than their knowledge by experience in the investi-
gation of matter, and cannot go higher than the intuitional.
Concepts of the subjective knowledge we all possess, and we
reject the theory in all its length, breadth and depth, and
relegate it to the realms of speculation and hypothesis, till it
proves there is no God immanent; and we demand science to
prove, it —not false science or theory —for our God-given reason
to analyse.


In investigating the Special Fiat, like Sir W. Hamilton, vve
say, God is knowledge, but incomprehensible. I am a crea-
ture ; I cannot comprehend my Creator : He is an Infinite, I
am a finite. lam a manufacturer, an artist, or artisan, my work
cannot know or comprehend me. The matter I shape neither
knows, or can comprehend itself or me, and I am lost in the
incomprehensible mystery of nature. I stand the monarch of all
I survey till the chilly blast of death lays me down, and I return
to mother earth, past solving all contentions of time and eternity.
The Special Fiat fact bases its faith on that which pseudo
science rejects—faith, the bed-rock of the Unseen. Science
bases on sense. Science has no hope; faith has: it is the
foundation of hope for the unseen. This is the past-mastership
of science. Science is limited to sense; faith penetrates beyond,
and grasps the things of eternity —it has to do with man’s
spirituality; mind, not matter. You may experiment on his
body (gross matter), but his ego who can fathom ?
First, then, it affirms there is a God. Nature proclaims Him;
the heavens declare His glory. If you are a Negationist, prove
there is no God. I cannot waste time on foolish questions.
It affirms He is Absolute —I am that I am; there is no God
beside Me. It declares man an incompetent critic. Before
any creature can criticise nature or an absolute, he must be
equal to or greater than the subject under his criticism : he must
be an absolute or greater; he must make or show a greater
wisdom than the object or system he condemns. If he cannot
produce a better tree, sun, moon, planet, let him at once tell
us how he can make an improvement on himself —reconstruct
himself ! I wipe you out ! You have brains, to begin with.
Now do not copy the work you condemn. Where will you put
your own brains, your eyes, your legs. I cannot allow a critic to
copy ! Construct your man, and you will find a brainless
anthropoid monstrosity, called a fool !


7}ible JTccouqt of the fall.
Dear Father, —Your letters are becoming deeply interesting,
and are looked for by others in my class. The clouds of doubt
are disappearing, and the sunshine of the Divine lighting the
pathway in which doubt cannot exist. There is quite a clatter
about the New Theology and the Fall of Man. Will you give
me a surprise by sending me a paper on it? I feel almost in-
spired with progress: the great questions being answered
give stability to us.
Dear Horace, —Theology is a human discourse about God.
Sir W. Hamilton says, When we attempt to discourse on God —-
that is, His personality, or His secrets —we begin to display our
own ignorance. He is only known in His creation and revela-
tion. The greater our sense-impresses by science, the more we
know of His wisdom and grace.
I will attempt to explain the fall of man, and x'econcile it
by reason and revelation. The account in Genesis is consistent
with reason and revelation. Revelation is making known what
man by his intellectual powers could never have discovered.
THE FALL OF MAN.
The Bible is a book of figures of speech—allegorical, meta-
phor, irony, parable, similitude, types, shadow, hyperbole. My
proof is in the Bible itself —Hosea 12 : to; Gal. 4: 24: Peter
3: 20; 1 Cor. 10 : 1 ; Mat. 13: 34; 2 Cor. 4:6; John 17:
4> 5> 6 -
This (the 17th of John) records a remarkable utterance of
Christ —a work to accomplish. It leads along the vista of ages
to the eternity of God, before time began—Jehovah on His
throne, angels, archangels, the retinue of heaven; the Christ of
Jehovah as the Lamb of God (1 Peter 1 : 19, 20) to creation,
diverse from Jehovah’s vast domains (Is. 45 ; x 8).
This creation must be one to inherit immortality by love and
obedience to law, strictly contingent to its sacred observance;
and any violation of that law would cause justice to revoke
immortality, and mortality reign ; freedom of will absolutely
so, and dignity of the mind given to vanity (Rom. 8 : 20).
This ennobling factor was not designed or given to cause his
fall. Other provisions were also made (x Peter 3 : 20) ; by
grace (Eph. 3 : 11; 2 : 8-16).


• T 9
Special Fiat. —Let it be done* Come, let us make man : his
floating home his grave; but his life (his spirit) returns to
Jehovah (Eccl. 3 : 21 ; 12 : 7).
Ether gases produce meteors (the igneous crust) millions
of our time of duration; the coal beds, the reptile age, saurians,
the paleozoic age, the evolution of minerals, and the fiery heat
of the sun. Man could not exist on the planet under such
conditions. Creation must move on ; the reptile and. saurian, the
mosses, conifers and ferns, cryptogamoue-—all these must give
place to a genial sunlight adapted to the as yet uncreated eye.
The atmosphere needed to be purified, the fruit trees and herbs,
the phanerogamous, the orbit, and the seasons fixed before either
man or beast, or their requirements, existed. For whom was
all this done? There is no other or higher than man here.
Jehovah gave him dominion over creation; he became God’s
representative (Gen. 1 : 26).
Pause, critic. Open the windows of your mind, and let your
conscience say that this is not a fact cognisable to every sane
mind ! We have the planet. God, through our toil, feeds and
clothes us, and vanity is still the enemy of God, thrusting away
the kind hand that supplies (Ps. 23), and man disgraces his
Creator and degrades himself —a drunkard, a liar, a thief, a
murderer ! Ask, Is man a fallen being? and how did he fall?
The Bible account will tell him by rejecting God under an
allegorical representation of a conversation between Eve and a
serpent. Let us first understand what is an allegory : a story
or figurative discourse in which the direct and literal meaning
is not the real or principal one; but is designed to convey the
real meaning with greater vividness (Ps. 80).
Let us turn to Genesis 3 : 3. The tree of life, Jehovah’s
immutable law ; the tree of knowledge, God in law; man in
and under it was there (v. 9). The tree of knowledge had two
qualities —good and evil. Now, as mind is the tree that grows
by its sense-impresses, it is man’s experience, his knowledge, in
the subjective—the only true knowledge. I ask, Who is the
tree of knowledge? Man (ch. 3: 16, 17). All the trees of
the garden freely given for food —monarch of all you survey-
go, eat; but remember, the tree of your mind (its vanity, Rom.
8 : 20), if exercised against my benevolence (the tree of life),
my immutability of law (justice) demands that (if transgressed)
life eternal, life immortal, is revoked, and mortality end thy
-days : in dying, thou shalt die.
Pause ! Could justice compromise? No ! Who is to blame
—man or God? Answer: man! In chapter 3 the allegory is


continued. The vain principle is introduced as a' serpent, the
helpmate is made; there was no need of the introduction of
the serpent till Eve came on the scene, and vanity, in a
soliloquy : Eve, we can eat of the fruit of the trees of the
garden, yet I must not know why God leaves us alone here,
or what is His motive in telling us to look after it and toil in
it. Why not make it supply ray wants (Ps. 23; Phil. 4 : 19)?
and then to intimate, upon the pain or peril of such, I am to
die ! The serpent (Eve’s vanity) said, You will not die I Here
is the devil the serpent. Eve made God a liar (John 8: 44;
Rom. 8 : 7; 9 : 20). The tree of life removed, toil and death
result —Adam has been a partisan in the guilt. If one alone
had to suffer, and the other to live, would be food for specula-
tive theology and new thought. Man, to be a creature under
law, must be what he is; and if he was not what he is, he
could not be as he is. What that other state would be is open
thought for new theology. If not a free agent, man must
be led by brute instinct, and that is not enough for a being in
God’s image in the finite, for with God there is no law con-
trolling Him—He is the Absolute. Law is a rule given by
authority for a line of conduct; an Absolute requires no law.
We die, being the fallen progeny of dying parents; not an
infliction for the overt act of Adam and Eve, but the law
of like begetting like; so by being born again (re-created), we
are made the recipients of eternal life in Christ, the sanctified
Lamb of God, through the portals of death, robbed of its sting
or fear, we enter into the new Eden.
Dear Horace, —Ponder over these thoughts. They may not
be perfection; I give them as an auxiliary to your study. Be
steadfast, immovable; there is nothing new under the sun.
I will continue my papers to you. Adieu.
PATER.
THE NEW THEOLOGY—THE FALL OF MAN.
My Dear Son Horace, —
At your request, I send you my views on the fall of man.
Like the creation account, let me state the simple facts. God
creates man a free-will agent in the government of self-control.
He is not to call in question his Creator’s right to circumscribe
his reasoning faculties as to God’s secrets or governmental
rights, or even His personality. The earth and all its produc-
tiveness is His sovereign dominion, over brute and nature ; this


is His prerogative. But God’s eternity and His environments
are His absolute rights—man must not "intrude.
A choice spot —a garden ! The planet was a garden (it is a
figure). Of all the trees of this garden he could eat—the only
restriction being the tree of knowledge of good and evil. There
was one tree —the tree of life —God’s immutable law of life
(obey My law and live, Deut. 30 : 19, 20). There was another
tree called the tree of knowledge, that, by its exercise, produced
good and evil results (Eph. 4 : 23) —the vanitv of mind (Rom.
8 : 20).
A helpmate (Eve) is created; together they roam in the garden.
No climatic influence is known; no sin or sorrow there : life
is depending upon law for its continuity; by the law of life,
thou shalt not violate it. They commune together. Eve said,
God has said Why, dear Adam, has God left us here? Why
not let us ascend to the abodes of His other beings? Is there
love in His designs towards us, or benevolence, to seclude us
thus ? I question His love towards us. He told you if you
exercised your mind against this law or tree you would die.
That was eating of the tree of man’s vanity (Rom. 8 ; 20) as
far as he had lived his experience. Adam did also eat —called
in question God’s love —His benevolence. The serpent —the
mind’s revulsion of God and His so manifested love : I deny;
oh, it’s a lie; I will not die; I do not know what death is !
God has no right to thus crush us; I will act as I please.
God knows I will then be equal to Him, having the eyes of my
mind open and knowing good and evil, whatever that is !
The tree of life thus ruthlessly destroyed, love outraged,
immortality (its fruit) rejected; the tree of knowledge and its
fruit (man’s mind evil) chosen; the flaming sword (justice) re-
moved the tree of life, and the consequence of the fruit of the
tree of knowledge reigned in death (the wages of violated law)
over man (nakedness and shame). He fell from eternal life
(contingent on obedience to the law of life) to a mortal, sinful
creature.
Here we have the simple narrative of man and the sad cause
of his fall. The question is raised, Is this allegorical or a
literal account of it? The prophet Hosea (12: 10) asserts
that God, by the prophets, used similitudes (see Gal. 4 : 24).
Christ spoke in parables (see also Ps. 78 : 2). If there is no
human creed to contradict, or condemnation (Rom. 8 : 1) by
Christ, then the most rational exposition of its reconciliation
will glorify God and humanity. Let all new theology be heard
and read , truth—pious, holy truth —cannot suffer. The law


(Heb. io : i) was typical; the ark (i Peter 3: 20) a figure;
baptism (1 Peter 3 : 21; 1 Cor. 10 : 1-3) a figure; and numerous
others. I put this question, Does there exist to-day a soul in
God’s garden—an Eden, where the tree of life is blooming
(Rev. 22 : 1-17) —that does not know (is ignorant of) that God’s
law of longevity, notwithstanding the fruit of hereditary trans-
mission by man’s sin of nature’s law, is the living up to the
purity of holiness of mind and sanitary conditions, or that has
not experienced the serpent in the soul’s dictation of thoughts.
I stood in a court, and heard a man on two> occasions commit
perjury. Is there one whose mind has never experienced its
insidious temptations to do wrong when conscience rose above
the temptation, as Christ set the example?—Get thee hence,
serpent. The immutable law of God says, Thou shalt not!
That was the highest point in the mountain top, or the temple
of mind, when He was tried and tempted in every particular
as we are. The tree of life is Christ. There is no flaming
sword; He suffers us not to be tempted above the power of our
mentalities, but provides the way of pardon. As the serpent is
to be seen lifted up, so Christ is to be seen lifted up —the curse
and the cure.
My pen, my dear son, could, if space did not forbid, put
your feet in the narrow path of life in God’s paradise —His
garden, where now the tree of life (Christ) is blooming, the
river of life flowing, millions of Bibles given away; where all
can come and drink freely.
PATER.
Dear Father, —Your paper on the fall to hand. You think
the fall is an allegory like Gal. 4 : 24 —each of the terms
garden, tree of life, tree of knowledge, eating, flaming sword,
etc. ? Some say the book of Revelation is an allegory. To
my mind your exposition may not be orthodoxy, whatever that
may be. According to some dogma or creed, every other fellow’s
creed is heterodox, as orthodoxy is his doxy. I have, dear
father, felt this serpent. My mind has revolted against the
state and being of our existence here; and funny sentiments have
arisen, such as Saul, it is hard for thee to kick against the
goads; that was, the plough had sharp spikes, and if the
bullock kicked he suffered, and not the plough. So I find
God does not feel what I feel I suffer, so the tree of our know-
ledge brings evil to us. Nature or God heeds us not. I cannot
comprehend w r hy it should not be accepted as an allegory. Is
it that Rome, or any other designated infallible church, wants


23
their own definitions, which are human after all said. Many
of our class agree with yours, as a splendid exposition; also
your allusion to the temptation. One of them said, to suppose
that a serpent talked, or a devil took Christ up in the air and
sat him on the pinnacle of the Temple, is absurd. It is more
consistent when he said, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God,
but serve Him with the mind; this is the pinnacle of man’s
temple (Rom. 7 : 25). I shall, dear father, keep your papers
for reference and strength, not forgetting that the mind’s love
of God is by grace, not the disputations of texts and definitions
(Gal. 3 : 20).
Yours,
HORACE.
Dear Horace, —You desire a paper on the Merits of Creation
by a Creator, or did our planet evolve itself without any aid
save the potential forces inherent in nature of matter ? Two
negroes, reasoning on matter and the Bible, said that concrete
on rocks was needed for the earth’s foundation. The other
said, what is under the rock? The first said, Anybody knows
it is rock all de wa down. He only knew matter! The other
replied, There is no rocks in de sky. I didn’t say there was, the
other said. It rested on law, not matter, and law was the
fiat of a mind having power to rule a subject. Did matter
evolve law ? was asked. Yes ! Then it had mind. Could the
mind give a fiat before it was evolved? No. Then matter and
life must have existed for a law. Matter and life is an organic,
an intellegent law-giver.


Survey of the Universe crrjd
Jtfind’s Empire Restored.
(John 17: 1-3; Genesis 2).
Away in the dim ages of the past, I wandered in and among
the universe of men’s minds. From the earliest discoveries,
they were not of the silurian or triassic, or the paleozoic, or
nature’s objects in granite, sedimentary, igneous, stratified,
or unstratified matter. I was seeking to discover a deposit
of mental recognition of man in all his wonderful structure,
as a phenomenon of books and sciences. These are many.
The order of my mind’s dictation was one book at a time —
The Bible, the Koran, the Vedas.
Well, let us take the most persecuted book. There are
good points in old Cloutei, if we could find them out. Before
I can fix my microscope to test matter, I must have some
matter to test: so in the universe of mind. lam indifferent
as to who wrote the Book; it is here. I cannot go outside
this universe, so I exegetical from its centre. Here is a
specimen. “I have finished the work Thou gavest Me to do.
Now, O Father, glorify Thou Me with the glory I had with
Thee before the world was.” “We have not been redeemed by
corruptible things such as silver and gold, but by the
Who verily was ordained before the world was.”
Away along the vista of ages let us haste. Nations have
come into existence and perished, like visions and dreams.
Arrived at the earliest chronological data of time (man’s
domain of events), I look into the past and survey, with the
mental telescope, eternity. I begin to seek for a point —a
position ; I do not expect to discover its magnitude. I am
lost —all is dark, my perception mocked. I am; whence
came I ?
The answer comes from within: You are! What more
do you want? Like the astonomer, I speculate; as one planet
affects every other planet in its orbit, I am correlated to
like. These words (John 17: 1-3) become my sense-impress,
and by the mind’s eye, I examine them: “Before the world
was or Abraham, I am;” “In the beginning, was the Word;”
“In the beginning, God created.” I ask myself, can I, a
creature of time, deny this, if it took place in eternity? De-
cidedly not! Can I reason upon it? Yes: you can survey
it—a throne, a law-giver —the fullest definition of what a


2 5
law is (Austin). In the opening council, the law-giver con-
templated a creation diverse from all others created : A planet
and inhabitants correlated to free will, and power given for
all the requirements of life. A dignified axis is fixed around
which the mental world must revolve; attraction, gravitation
must not lose their power; that axis is Love, it never fails.
1 here must be the law of liberty in the centripetal and cen-
trifugal forces of the attracted for the full display of the
mental world in its tree will’s jurisdiction, and to fix its
orbit. That force, or energy, or principle was the centrifugal
vanity in the free will—this entity arises out of man’s mental
universe (vanity). It is not given designedly that man must, by
its exercise, necessarily fall and revolt’ against the axis.
Nature obeys in the stellar planets, so the mind of man’s
mental universe must obey, as God never designed it to
cause his fall (that is, cast God aside). It had rightly and
discreetly to be exercised. God knew man would violate
His mandates. Do you, vain man, say, Why did he so create
man? Because He placed under the vain principle the rock of
hope. Contrition builds on it; it is the returning prodigal—
“ Father, I have sinned! Bring the robe, and place It on
my child.” So I have discovered the revealed portions oy
my surveying, but not matter; all was dark in the secret
chamber of eternity’s Ruler. The planet and myself exist—
I know it, I see it, I feel it, and I survey my empire, books
and mind: books inspired by man’s vanity, and I desire to
solve both self and the unknowable. What for? Absolute
knowledge. It is like the rays of the rainbow, man
can never, never, bathe in them! Ihey are in the heavens;
we get the reflections; this Book, the Holy Bible! I can-
not put you in the chemical laboratory, so I must put you
in the crucible of reason. And here let us understand the
evolutionary process of this gigantic power of man’s reason!
F:rst, what are its sense-impresses, the mental auxiliaries (as
in our universe of matter in action)? I cannot reason on
two perceptions diametrically opposite or antagonistic to
each other, if they are not the direct result of the objective
universe. So I have intuitional mental impresses, and
reason settles the conviction, because it is a question beyond
the province of reason, and conscience demands it to yield as
a reasonable problem—that, while my mind surveys the uni-
ve-se of mind, there is an infinite problem, and reason (being
a finite power to solve matter and mind) cannot exercise its
power, but vainly tries to hide its defeat. It says it knows
D


nothing by science; that is his reason, his sense of a God!
Foolish man, ponder thy vanity! Your science is your see-
ing, your hearing. Do you say what you mean; do you
expect to take God’s hand and feel it? You are a Didymus.
Let us survey the universe of mind; then go on to perfec-
tion, not returning to books or matter, but seek the light, if
God permit. In this mental universe, before we enter it, I
offer a reward for an ounce of mind, or life, or any of them
from the inorganic universe. Here, on this sheet, is an ex-
hibition of mind on matter, both on paper as the ground ; and
of mind in the matter of the mind’s universe of mind in writ-
ing. The Holy Bible is paper, and printed mind matter. Be-
fore the printer set the type up, there must have been a
manuscript. You say there are no originals; neither are
you the original Man: you are a prototype. Are you ex-
istent? Yes; you do not deny that you had a father and
mother —oh, no ! Then you believe in a series of prototypes
like you? oh, yes. Then a series is numerable; no matter
how great is that series, there is a first and last. You are me
last of your family; do you dispute that? You are not a true
copy of them? oh, no! Then, why reason that a copy is not
equal to the original? No one knows who wrote them; no
one knows as to whether you are the son of the parents you
claim. So the authors of the Books only know they produced
them. You are as the books are, ergo, you have no con-
viction on any subject. In its extremity doubt reigns, and
reason is dethroned —a mental wreck, an empire self-over-
thrown and ruined !
This Book opens without a preface from the author; you
can take it or leave it. Condemnation or Salvation is con-
tingent upon reason’s justification —it has none. The justi-
fication of the mental world is by faith. Faith! What is
it? It is a foundation for the mental universe of the un-
seen ; matter is for the sense and science. Faith is not creeds
or dogmas; it is believing that which is easier believed than
disbelieved —that there is a God, and faith His first law.
Is it inspired? what do you mean? —The man that
penned it.
If you were hungry, and bread set before you, would you
ask who baked it?—No; I go for the bread; then in like
manner I go for the book. The first chapter tells me of
Creation, which is given through a human agent. The fact,
not the human words, are the inspirational evidence. Can
you prove a Creator did not create?


2 7
No; but it is not scientific. Neither are you, you cannot
disprove it.
N es, I can—it was evolved. Then there was an evolver?
Oh, yes; but it was evolution! Evolution! you say; was
it a person, or spirit entity? Did it possess organic proper-
ties to comprehend how to evolve?
I do not know that; but it is believed to be the outcome
of a process (not a person) called evolution. You believe
this? you have absolute faith in it! Yes. Yet you laugh
at others believing there is a God! when you have no proof
whatever for your faith. Consistency, thou art a jewel! You
believe a process, not an entity, but a combine.
Mr. Bloodless Consanguinity and Mr. Nothing went into
space one day; they had neither brains nor sense-impresses,
reason or designing capabilities; they picked up electrons,
and some particles, and gemmules, and then they met Mr.
Spon. Generation, who set them in motion, and energy began!
Yes, go on! How do you know all this? This is the uni-
verse of mind gone mad —theorising ! Give facts ! How could
all this be done without intelligence?
You say inte'ligence is an attribute of matter, and declare
evolution a theory, an hypothesis. (Riddle of the Universe,
p. 106).
You mean intelligence as displayed by a reasoning person-
ality called man, is an attribute of matter —his bioplasm ; and
instinct too in the brute creation is an attribute of matter?
Yes, that is so.
Why did not matter give the attribute of reason to the
animal and instinct to man? We would then have been irre-
sponsible creatures; and as far as the animal conserves
man’s interest now, so man would have to conserve the
rational brute. In my opinion, matter surely misplaced its
attributes. I would sooner be a dog or a monkey to have
no higher attributes .than they have and no higher
aspirations and clearer views of a God in a revela-
tion than have an attribute of matter and be devoid of reason
that gives instinct alone. Can you tell me why matter should
have given it to one class and not to all alike?
Oh, I see what you are driving at. Fancy a pig telling me
to “Come at once, and clean my stye,” or a dog telling me
he was hungry, therefore to go and get some food for him
or he would bite me !
You admit man is a higher creation than the brute; and
that his vanity must be restricted.


Oh, yes; he cannot absolutely understand matter and its
functions.
Just so; then why expect him to comprehend the absolute
by reason?
The second account in the Bible is trial of the free-will;
given the continuity of a life now, in and of itself indestruc-
tible—save by sin, transgression of the law of reason, right
or wrong use. The conditions clearly stated, the responsi-
bilities told, forewarned, and then left to the freedom of
vanity, it can be exercised two ways —for good, result life,
for evil, result death. Choose thy lot —God or thyself. Self!
self! separation from God. Take the planet, toil in the sweat
of thy brow, sorrow till death ; the wages of sin terminates
the mental universe of man. We have the Creation and the
fall of created man.
The fact is now and here; the inspiration is in the fact —
in self, not the allegorical language of the account. Can a
more rational view be found for the survey of the mental
universe? if so, let us have it. I am here; death is here;
did evolution evolve death? The “growth of the nation, only
two of the family named (Cain and Abel), the rest of the
family omitted. Vanity (Cain) kills Abel —facts. x'Wother
(Seth) takes the place of Abel. Why so ; the family of God’s
Son he is the progenitor. His sons forsake God, they take
wives among the idolatrous nations. The patriarchal age—
Noah, the deluge; history affirms the fact —the fact, not the
verbal account, is the inspiration. History of the Tower of
Babel, Abram and his biography, Isaac, Jacob and Esau;
Jacob chosen before the twins came into life; the inspiration
is the infinite acts in history—Jacob chosen. Historv of the
nation Israel, their wars, reign of kings, their evil and good
lives recorded during the period, God gives proof of His
existence to sense. Humanity’s slowness to recognise that
they had given to them the religious, sanitary, judicial, muni-
cipal laws. They attributed all their successes and failures
to God, whether God decreed them or not. They were neither
for God or humanity; they seem to have lived a life of se'f-
devotion. God forsakes them, and then a line of history, and
of visions foretelling Israel’s fate till the coming of Christ.
Such is the Bible authenticated in the persons and the places
of the history of the survey of the universe of mind. Then
comes


29
THE NEW TESTAMENT
It begins with four author biographical historians —Matthew,
Mark, Luke, and John. They record the genealogy of Christ.
Fol owing is “The Acts” —the historical acts of the Apostles.
Their writings convey an inspiration in doctrine, and the
government of man’s spirituality —the Empire we are now
surveying. No longer a theocratic government, but anthro-
theos —a model ideal for man to survey.
Man’s intellectuality of the empire he rules wants to see,
not to be told, of the power that leaves to him the governing
of his mind. That power has decreed, not that the human
eye shall see him, but the eye of his spiritual nature. “The
mind shall be man’s empire; and the first law is to love its
Giver with all our affections, and conserve that mind to its
proper sphere in the empire of life’s environments : God first,
ourselves afterwards. How many neglect this principle in
their empire; God never comes into their mind. The mania
of life —its will-of-the-wisp (instead of true joy) the theatre,
the racecourse, the dram bottle ; get rich (honestly if you can ;
if you can’t, get it somehow), forgetting the ruin of the
empire, body and soul, physically and mentally; when, by a
proper survey, life could nave been prolonged, true enjoy-
ment of life in the empire being directly under man’s control.
The Holy Bible takes the place of the Giver of Life. There
is no need of the divine presence; for how many millions
would have to visit Him for an assurance that He is! We
would be like a person looking in a glass and forgetting
what he was like. By His voice in revelation I can discern
Him; it abides with me; I can commune and hear His voice
in response—if it be —Why art thou cast down, my soul?
the response is—Hope in God.
Despair in trial. —We shall not be tempted beyond our
strength. If passing through the valley of death, He
is our staff to lean on, He will never leave nor forsake us. If
our empire in life is so cared for, and in death an assurance
of an eternity of a life to come, should not this empire have
something solid? Take away the Bible —take away God and
Christ, then the keystone of our humanity is gone —a wreck,
not a vestige of hope or certainty remains, unless a new re-
velation took place.
Not all the Blatchfords or evolutionists will ever be able
to blot out the God of the Bible by their puny rush lights of
sun gods or mythology. Paul’s speech to the Athenians we
recommend to them; not their garbled nonsense about the


30
Bible. Christians have not gone mad ; if they have, we say
you have thrown too much mud, it won’t stick. We see in
your books your weak points, as you can see ours. We say
you have gone out of your way to curse Christianity, to ruin
its empire (man’s mind), but every intelligent Christian
will be driven firmer on to the Rock of Ages ! We hesitate
not to say, your empire of mud is in ruins. Survey your
universe according to ancient re’igion and modern science;
any school-boy could to-day plagiarise from science a.l that
is in it. It may be inconsistent to believe that every word
in the Bible is the word of God ; the Bible does not say it
it, thousands do not believe it. Why pick out the weak
points, and then hold them up as ridiculous? Our forefathers
believed (according to the light of their age) the heavens as a
plate, the sun and moon going around our earth, God creat-
ing the heavens and earth in six days. The Bible does not
contain such trash; it is in your own ruined empire of mind.
Why do you charge the book with that which is not in it,
and say you are called infidel? Men who do not speak the
truth, are called prevaricators, perjurers, etc. Your modern
science cannot send a shot into our camp; they fall short
of their mark. Ignorance may glory in your books; but the
foolishness of the Bible is superior to your worldly-wise
wisdom.
She -Existence of ffod.
This is a subject of profound reverence. It has to do with
the noblest existence that the mind can conceive oi, and in
Whom, and by Whom we live, and move, and have our
existence. It is our intention to summon the highest intel-
ligences in the annals of history to give us their convictions
of God’s existence.
Sir W. Hamilton says, “Directly we begin to define God
we begin to display our ignorance. Defining God is not
demonstrating His existence. I do not like the word ex-
istence. I would rather say God is.” There are two modes
by which man formulates his ideas: the first is material
forms, which the senses can test in the highest degree, viz.,
seeing, hearing, smelling, and feeling; the second, by intui-
tional mental culture —that is, direct understanding or know-
ledge by our experience, independent of our reasoning facul-
ties. The first can only be exercised on matter; the second


31
on postulates and axioms. This paper is matter. It is,
therefore, an object for the senses. But there is the word
paper: the word paper is not matter —it is when in print or
spoken to the sense of sight and the hearing, as true as feel-
ing. The intuitive principles of the mind perceive the
reasoning process lam now engaged in. It is the mind that
sees the reflex of my mind and recognises my logic, the
equality of the mind determining that hearing is equal to
feeling; that things equal to their sign-concepts are equal to
each other.
Illustration,—Words become ideas or object as spoken,
and not the object itself. The mind perceives the object in
the word, for without speech no ideas could be communi-
cated. Words therefore are equal to the object —they are the
spoken concept of them. Before a word can be formulated
in the mind, there must exist the object or ideal object upon
which the mind is desirous of expressing in language the
object described to a being competent to comprehend it.
Ideas are the first act of the mind by a perception. No
objective ideas, no subjective language: man would be a liv-
ing mute. We therefore have the word God. But no one
has ever seen God as a sense-impress. How do you reconcile
this apparent contradiction? The Bible says they (Adam
and Eve) heard His voice as they were walking in the Garden
of Eden in the cool of the evening. I have explained to you
that hearing is equal to feeling. We are olten met by this
plausible argument: the idea of God is a flimsy figment of
the imagination. Put in a more definite form it woidd read —
1 he idea of a God originated in the faculties of the imagina-
tive. How are we to meet this sophistry? Imagination is
the faculty of the mind that is dependent upon the objective
world by perception—it cannot originate or create; It cannot
imagine anything contrary to fact without conflict of a con-
sciousness of its weakness. There are three primary powers
in the mind—perception, consciousness, and memory. There
are five others called secondary powers—recollection, reflec-
tion, imagination, comparison, judgment. The first three
the will has no will over; the others are under the control of
the will, and cannot absolutely create a new idea or perceive
a causation. You will see this clearly if I say mankind per-
ceive their ideas by their imagination, when you understand
that the first act of the mind is a perception, by the senses,
not imagination. All things which exist are the effect of
some cause, and bear a relationship in degree to their mag-


32
nitude and power of the cause. There are two known causes
differing in degree —nature and art or manufacture; the
latter cannot absolutely produce nature, for itse’f is the pro-
duct of it. Manufacture is dependent upon nature, the
primary cause, which in degree excels art, being in the
highest degree the creator of the lesser the created. Man’s
work is finite, and is limited in power and degree. God’s
work is infinite, and absolutely bound ess. God creates with-
out the exercise,of a reasoning faculty. He sees the end
from the beginning. Planets and their laws He spreads out
upon the darkened canopy of the heaven’s plane, shining
and glittering like diamond dust. Mho taught Him wisdom?
He rides in majesty on the storm ; He holds the sea in the
hollow of His hand, and we exclaim, What is man in com-
parison to the vast universe?
We are sometimes told that all this has existed through
eternity by an eternal series of cause and effect —caused
by natural laws [this is an unmeaning assertion], not by
supernatural laws.
Matter and potential forces —spontaneous generation, en-
vironment —and there was no necessity for any God. This
has been the drift of Agnostic thought—first, an eternal
series is a contradiction. A series, however great, is numer-
able ; that which is numerable is not eternal, as there is a
first and a last: each individual in a series is a unit, and
every collection of units, however great, is with intuitive
certainty numerable, and therefore cannot be eternal.
Let me conclude by what is called demonstration : —Words
are sign-concepts of ideas. Ideas are sense objects; without
sense objects there cannot absolutely be either ideas or
words. Man is indelibly and fatally fixed to this law of his
being. If there is no God, how could man, in the name of
common sense and reason, have formulated the word “God,”
if God had not spoken and man heard, and God revealed
Himself? Let anyone sit down and try to talk of things he
never absolutely had seen, heard, felt, or smelt, and I will
show you a lunatic.
TESTIMONIES OF GREAT MEN.
R. Ingersoll, Finney, T. Pain, Voltaire, Renan (I might
say here I have not touched on the heavens). George Seaton,
M.A., once an atheist, wrote three volumes, composed “While
I draw this fleeting breath,” “Rock of Ages,” and “Theo-


dore Parker.” A philosophic Atheist is as impossible as
a round square or a square triangle.
T. Pain—“As several of my colleagues and citizens have
made a profession of their faith, so will I: —I believe in the
existence of God. Difficult as it may be, man believes it
easier than its denial.”
Professor Huxley—A denial of God is logically absurd.
H. Spencer—Of all the mysteries that science cannot in-
vestigate, it is the unknown. Science knows nothing of
God, chance, or supernatural events.
Charles Darwin declared God breathed life into the first
forms.
THE FIRST CHAPTER OF GENESIS.
Lastly, I know God in my soul: it is the sou! that com-
prehends. The eye, the ears are sense organs —they see
not, hear not. The soul comprehends its Creator as the child
its mother. His existence is seen in creation and revelation.
There’s not a star whose twinkling light
Illumes the distant earth,
And cheers the solemn gloom of night,
But Mercy gave it birth.
There’s not a cloud whose dews distil
Upon the parching clod,
And clothes with verdure vale and hid
That is not sent by God.
There’s not a place in earth’s vast round —
In ocean deep, or air,
Where skill and wisdom are not found,
For God is everywhere.
Around, beneath, below, above —
Wherever space extends —
There Heaven displays its boundless love,
And power with mercy blends.
I will continue these papers to you, my dear son, Horace.
MATERIALISM IMPEACHED.
'The materialistic Atheist proclaims there is no necessity
for a God; that nature is the result of natural laws, the
operations of matter by an inherent power. Epicurus, an
ancient philosopher, said it was a connatus. Prof. Haeckel
said spontaneous generation was the force or energy that
£


gave motion to matter. But where did matter come from,
and how did it come? They ask us to grant this. But we
say, No, we grant you nothing; prove your case. We de-
mand an answer. How did matter get into space? Answer
it, not by reasoning, but by that test you demand all sub-
jects of enquiry to be settled, viz., science.
It is affirmed that matter is eternal (this is begging the
question), that life is a property of matter [do not dogmatise;
tell us how you know it is property], and that aril life (from
the lowest forms to the highest) has, by a gradual develop-
ment, evolved by natural law [this is a meaningless asser-
tion, without an entity behind the law], and not supernatural.
The motive is plain —to invalidate the Bible and the Creation
by special fiat by an Infinite cause. We ask, if science
knows nothing of the supernatural or chance—and that it
(science) is the known fact of the subject under our in-
vestigation—we demand an answer. As you are a finite,
and your knowledge cannot rise higher than your science
(sense-impresses), how can you talk so glibly of an infinite
subject and the eternity of its duration, when you and all
around are fleeting and transitory? What do you know of
things eternal? You only know duration. The eternal is
unthinkable. Then, the assertion that matter is eternal
is simply to cover ignorance. That life is a property of
matter! How do you know? All your knowledge is ob-
tained by experience—sense-impress. Were you in eternity
and watched matter from its primeval source? Give facts —
not dogmas. Can you tell by what chemical process life was
incorporated with matter, seeing one is tlffi substance, the
other the spirit? Inform us what was matter and life before
it consolidated into animated substance or bioplasm. How
could two entities (the. extremes) become unity when they
were each homogeneous—the one motion, the other inertia
of rest? There is only mind and matter —motion and the
inertia of rest. If matter moves, mind must move it. Where
was mind and life before it incorporated with matter? Again,
how do you know that life is a property of matter, and not
matter a property of life, seeing it is the connatus or moving-
power? If you cannot comprehend the mysteries of life and
matter, admit it is the existence of the incomprehensible
power in the object!
Lionel Beale, Dr. Sterling, Dr. Carpenter, and others de-
clare there is a gulf that cannot be bridged between the
organic and inorganic. In the inorganic, the dead silence


prevails. From Huxley’s Bathybius to Haeckel’s Bateybius
Hackelic or the homogenity of living matter, the funda-
mental laws of like alone produce like; and, no organic
structure being homogeneous, places a gulf between your
dogma of life a property of matter as erratic as matter is
dead protoplasm and not bioplasm. It cannot give what it
does not possess, and the logic is equal to trying to extract
the sunbeams from icebergs. Can you by any science (not
talk) extract an atom of life from dead matter? I can extract
from a solution of nitrate of silver by science the metal silver.
Why not you extract life from the matter? Gas is pro-
perty in coal: it can be extracted. There is a gas called
speculation that neither science nor reason can reach. When
we begin to exercise the functions of the mind upon the in-
comprehensible, it is a fact that i't (the incomprehensible)
exists. The Christian philosopher seeks to discover between
the two extremes of Deism and Atheism the true cause
of the rejection of the dogmas on either side. First, the
materialist’s mind, deeply imbued with the Bible anthro-
pology, and not realising that the highest mental concept
of Deity is man, we are compelled to express ourselves by the
term we employ of man to God. Then there is another mis-
take we teach —that God in six days 6000 years ago created
our planet, when the scientist proves by geology this is in-
correct ; it is our interpretation that makes it ridiculous,
as it has been in existence millions of years.
Then the miraculous birth, the resurrection, and the
miracles of Christ stand in the way of the great minds re-
ceiving the only source of man’s mental progress in com-
prehending God, time and eternity. I have conversed with
many who declare my simple method of exposition as beau-
tiful. Students and persons who have rejected the Bible say,
“If I had comprehended as you see it, what difficulties I
would have escaped!” One said, “While professing to be
a Christian, I doubted the existence of God. I now no more
doubt. las firmly believe God Is as I am.”
It is not my intention to enter on an elucidation of the Book
of Genesis; permit me to say it is much misunderstood. My
purpose, as a Christian Scientist, is to show cause why I
receive the Bible as superior to evolution, notwithstanding
the apparent discrepancies. To this I now direct your atten-
tion. Is it more rational to believe that God created the
primordia 1 nair (Adam and Eve) or that they were evolved?
The evolutionist asserts that man, through the embryonic


process, has all the phases of the animal and fish forms, also
the caudle appendage (a tail); and strange, in due time it is
neither monkey, fish, or instinct in any degree. The evolu-
tionary dogma is a twin theory and hypothesis—that is, a
doctrine or scheme of things which terminates in specula-
tion—.-something not proved, but assumed for the purpose
of argument —a theory assumed to account for known fact
or phenomena. The facts are the embryos of man, fish, fowl,
animal up to the anthrophoid ape, resemble only in the foetus;
then comes the missing link. Did the Creator make
man a special creation? If not, how could the ovum of the
ape be incarnated or fertilised by a human spermatozoon that
did not exist and the ape give birth to two human specie
babes, who fed and taught them to speak? The ape could not
(impossible). Were they evolved as two adults? Then the
theory of this hypothesis is a god of the evolutionist creation
by the imagination, and as such is a flimsy figment, not of
true science, and therefore truly pseudo science!
My Dear Horace, —I am pleased to hear from you; and
also glad to find you are of an enquiring mind. I promise
that your propositions shall be duly answered.
It is a very bold assertion to make that science knows
nothing of a supernatural. First, what is science (know-
ledge, fact, experience) and its legitimate field of operation?
Matter and phenomenon, which any person can by sense in-
vestigate, resolve back into tkeir elements and determine
their uses. Qualities: it measures the planets, their speeds,
growth and properties of planets, rocks, all objective life,
or dead matter. God is none of these ! He is the Author of
the secret operations in nature. The objects are created for
us to investigate by the mind called science, and its limita-
tions are fixed like the ocean—thus far and no farther! So
the supernatural is ultra-science: It has its limitations. God
is not a phenomenon. He is the infinite barrier to the human
powers of mind. He fixes its limitations. So you perceive
it is true that science knows nothing of the Supreme without
a revelation. Revelation says it is by faith (Heb. xi. 6) we
know Him. “ I am that I am !” and “There is none other
beside Me!’’ No supernatural! These words defined give
the answer—Science would be the supernatural if it could
prove there was no God. Nature is birth, existence; super


over or above existence. If science could analyse God, then
prove His non-existence, it would be supernatural. He could
not be the Supreme. Did this planet cause itself? then cause
the residue of nature? If so, then it was supernatural—it
was greater than the power we designate God that created
the planet, as It created itself, and the residue, and man!
It was a Creator that gave existence to all nature! Darwin
admits this in his Origin of Species —the Creator gave life.
But how did the planet cause itself? There are millions of
planets greater —the sun, Jupiter, etc. Did they cause them-
selves? then fix the laws for their orbits without a lawgiver
—an entity? The Bible lays down this proposition—Every
house is builded by some man ; but He that made the man that
builded the house is God (Heb. iii. 4). This is the super-
natural —only known through revelation: the secret things
belong to God (Deut. xxix, 29).
Your first question is respecting matter and evolution.
What is matter? Substance in a visible, tangible form; ele-
mentary substances of which the earth and all living bodies
are composed.. It is divided into inorganic and organic, or
dead, inert protoplasm and bioplasm—living and dead matter
—divided again into molecules, atoms, particles, or elec-
trons ; some add gemmules. Here the scientist is lost: no
sense-impress can be got by speculation or hypothetic reason-
ing. Thus divided, the mind (the seat of true science, which
is knowledge or experience) utterly fails, there being no
sense-impresses to carry it to a scientific issue as to what
matter is. Prof. Haeckel says it is homogeneous; other sci-
entists deny this. Wolford Hall, D.P., has made them con-
tradict each other to an alarming extent. They say matter
is eternal! This is speculation. Do they mean in duration,
or extension—an infinite duration? Then it is metaphysics
and not science. Knowledge knows nothing about it, as
no sense-impress can be gained of an Infinite duration: time
has Its limitation. Then it is said to be eternal in extension.
Matter is an extension: extension has dimensions, length,
breadth, depth. The planet, the sun, have limitation of ex-
tension —they cannot be infinite in extension; matter is not
therefore eternal, for that which is eternal Is infinite and
absolute.
You will see mentally that this logic is true: science, the
mind’s knowledge, by experience of facts and truths, must
have God imminent. Evolution is a theory. Before there
can be evolution, there must be involution, or an involver.
Ex nihi-o—out of nothing, nothing can come.


Js ffod’s existence Objective or
Subjective Science?
By scientific knowledge I know that God is an actual fact.
Q.- —What is knowledge?—A.—A sense-impress; sense-im-
presses are perceptions received through the sense-organs.
Scientific knowledge is demonstrated by the syllogisms, axioms,
facts and truths.
Q. —Is the knowledge in the object, or in the subjective
mind ? —A.—ln the • subjective, because a perception is the
eye of the mind. Let me explain. Can the eye see that 9 and
8 are 17? Yes, both in the objective numerals, and in the
words nine and eight are seventeen; the words and the numerals
are synonymous. Why is 8 eight, and 9 nine? It is the science
that lays down the law of their relative value in commerce, and
it must be accepted by every person.
Q. —Then the word eight and the figure 8 are seen in the
mind as a fact, by this scientific process; but the whole sum
total is in the mind? —A. —Yes.
Q. —It perceives from the words and figures that- 9 and 8
are 17? —A. —Yes; and it is the true scientific knowledge in
the mind, and not in the figures j and, if doubted, it is the mind
and not the figures that settle the question by syllogistic reason-
ing : nine is 9 when divided into 9 ones; 8 is also 8 singles
when divided; therefore, conclusion, 9 and 8 singles added
are 17, seen in the mind by a perception in the intuitional
subjective, also in the numerals. We use reason here—its
province on reading this question and answer. We find that
the eye is the organ of sight. The eye of the mind-organ is
the perceived sense-impress, that it is the mind that sees by the
constituted law in the numerals 9 and 8 that they are 17.
The mind utilises the objective symbols 9 and 8, and demon-
strates they are 17 when combined, which is the conclusion of
the law of arithmetical science, that the fact of such is in the
mind and not in the figures.
Q. —What has this to do with a demonstration of how God
is perceived?—A.—As 9 and 8 are 17, and is not subjective
knowledge till the mind is exercised upon it, it cannot (it is
a mental impossibility) have the subjective knowledge. Every
person must mentally in the mind repeat 9 and 8 are 17, and
by his mental powers j if not exercised, he will be ignorant of
the fact of the relative total of the 9 and 8. He may think


of the moon, or the speed of light. The question is, Is the
mind scientifically reasoning out the perception? No other
subject will bring conviction of the subjective knowledge. The
relation of this to God is tested in the same way, as nine is the
figure 9 the word nine is synonymous. God is a word ; a word is the
sign-conception of an idea; ideas are the perceived objects by
the sense-organs, such being objective sense-impresses, but in
reality they are subjective knowledge in the perceived ideas by
sense-perceptions and exist in fact only in the mind; and as
words to the mind give a sense-impress as the relation of 9
and 8 are 17, so the word God gives a sense-impress of an
objective existence apart and external to sense-organs, and
must be perceived by a scientific demonstration entirely bv the
subjective intuitional sense-impresses. First, there is the word
God. No person can formulate a word or sign-concept with-
out an object. God is not an object of the eye, the organ of
sight; He is, to the mind, by an act of revealing Himself once
and for all through the ages, by speaking to man in his own
vernacular. Man has received the perceptive idea of God by
hearing, not by sight. No man has ever seen God; the subjec-
tive knowledge rests on the testimony which requires faith, not
sight, that God is, by the science of subjective intuitional rea-
soning. As the intuitional numeral 9 and 8 are 17, so the
word God is_ the sign-concept of God; and no man could
think it out in any other way without receiving the idea by
hearing God's voice and Go.d’s declaration, “ I am.” It is the
mind that perceives the reasoning, and the conclusion that as
9 and 8 are 17, so the word God is correlated to the subjective
intuitional perceptive faculty that it sees,'not by the organ of
sense nor by matter, the bioplasm of the eye, but by the inner
man or eye of the mind, which is not matter —it is intellectually
discerned. The eye or the mind sees in the words nine and
eight the objective 9 and 8 ; so from the word God, man mentally
sees and knows just as assuredly as in the 9 and 8 that
God exists, it being the mind that perceives, either in the sub-
jective or in the objective, the ideas received and the reason
and the Consciousness of the conclusion God is. Or the planet
and the universe is an enigma !
-€C-KXX-5S


J7je Origirj of J/iart.
This is an age of scientific and intellectual advancement.
We are said to be in the heavens of wonders —discoveries,
whether by radium or helium, wireless telegraphy, talking
machines, etc. I do not wonder at the mind’s research. I
once thought of travelling to the world’s end to look over its
edge, and in imagination, when I got there, a delightful sen-
sation like an electric shock passed through my nervous system.
We love the mysterious. How many have lost their lives to
reach the North Pole, and to put the Union Jack on it? The
German philosophers are ahead of us : they have discharged
God —paid Him off —because He does not look after man and
animals as He ought! He made sharks and crocodiles, and
the sea for them, and put them there. When I want to find
one, I have only to go where they are, and (as the pork and
bacon curer said to the porker) go in and get cured. So the
shark says, ‘ ‘ Come in out of the wet ’’; and God does not
trouble Himself to save either the porker or the man.
We all like to be a discoverer. Look at Australian history—
Burke and Wills, Stuart and others, to find green pastures.
Yes, I want to find man’s origin. That is, we and us. God
does not tell us straight out; He only says He created us :
that is not enough for me. We are not all doctors, we cannot
carve a body to discover evolution. Do not cut me up; I am
the only original of my own individuality.
I start on the search and find a man, and ask him, “ Whence
earnest thou?” He’ replies, “ I have no country — I am a
cosmopolitan.”
“ Oh, Ido not mean that. How did you get into this life?”
He said, “ I had a mother, and my mother had a mother.”
“ But they could not be all mothers. Our planet was a
molten mass; no mothers or fathers could exist.”
“ You are evidently trying to raise a debate.”
“ No; I am trying to find man’s origin. I do not want to
go to a mothers’ meeting.”
“ Well, go to Professor Haeckel.”
“ Oh, he begins with a woman and an embryology. Any
fellow knows that if you have an egg and a hen, you can
hatch a chicken; but which was the original ? The egg must
have had a hen to lay it. Did the egg or the hen originate
itself, then lay an egg? or the egg hatch the hen?”
“Go and find out; lam no philosopher. Good day.”


41
To analyse and scrutinise the ovum of fish or ape is not
"hat we want; it is all very well in its place, but do not rush
over the precipice of intellectuality, and fall into the valley of
metaphysics. Mr. Haeckel, what is behind the embryonic
process? and how is it that the fetus of every animal, bird or
fish, or man, by a natural law like only produces like? Why
talk of embryonic process or its evolutionary stages being bird,
fish, and—-but ! —but !—this species alone develops species and
cross fertilising produces sterility. We give you the honour of
l>eing a painstaking scientist. We admire you, but I want more
than you give. You are led by sense-science in matter; lose
that, and declare there is no cause or design behind the man
and the woman, is to repeat the hen and the egg. I am now
in a bog, sinking fast; I must get out, and travel to discover
man’s origin. I have discovered that from the ovum of every
species or genera all like alone can come, and that out of
nothing ex nihilo fit.
I have an old book. I take it up. 1 read of a Moses, and
desire a conversation; he grants it. I ask, “ Are you the
writer of the Book of Genesis?”—“ Yes.”
“ Do you know anything about ontogenity or phylogeny?”—
“ No, Adam and Seth are the only gentry I know; thev w r ere
men; but ontogeny and phylogeny are his scientific relations,
not the originators of Adam or Seth; I do not know r —l mean
that none of them originated themselves. In my book, I have
traced man back to a First Cause —in one w r ord, to God !
which is the Supreme, the Infinite, the Absolute !”
“Can I find Him? I w r ant to find the origin of man.
Then, as you say God created, I want to find the origin
af God.”—“Do you think, my friend? Don’t you know an
Absolute is beyond you; a Supreme is over you; reason and
the dissecting knife are useless.”
“ What do you mean, Moses, by reason’s knife being useless?
Reason is the faculty of the mind, analysing sense-impresses;
and as God is not objective, matter of sense, the organic
structure cannot get a perception of a Supreme, an Infinite, an
Absolute! by sense seeing.” “Just so, because He could not
be the Absolute and at the same time the sense-object and
reason’s speculative play-toy ! There is another law that rules
the faculties of reason. When it has no sense-impress to reason
upon, it is faith. I do not mean men’s creeds or dogmas in.
theology or standards of faith. I mean grasping the unknowm
by sense, impresses in nature, and making faith the foundation
of the things of the mind. When I cannot get a sense-percep-


tion ; for instance, there is the moon. I see it, but the other
side I never see. T therefore have faith that it is there. Then
there is this side of self and creation. I see myself, my mind I
cannot see; I know I have it it is a supreme to me, an infinite,
undiscovered mystery. Then there is the other side—God and
eternity unseen. That I am looking for and cannot see. I
know the other side is, although incomprehensible.”
“It is, I exclaim ! It is.”
But it is the science of faith, the foundation of the mind,
when it perceives, intuitively, something it cannot, nor ever will,
be able to comprehend, after it has discovered its own origin,
that is, discover the origin of God the Absolute !”
Thank you, Moses ! What a fool I have been.
“ I am like Dan O’Rook, who went on a voyage to the
moon. When he knocked, the man in the moon knocked him
down, and he is still somewhere floating in the regions of eternal
vacuity, looking for fresh discoveries. I must travel further
yet. I go to Mr. Darwin, an evolutionist, and he settles my
mind a little; he gives me a dose of common-sense, and tells
me a Creator did it. I go back to Haeckel. He says, Of
course there is a something behind all this, but it is not the God
of the Bible. He is death on religion, but great on mental
philosophy. Where God has left a clear road, go, discover—
the way is clear; but the Me, the incomprehensible I Am,
is as high as the heavens are above the earth—that means, the
infinite of space, and incomprehensible utterance. So is God
above us —that is, past our comprehension.”
But I want to know what right man has in his claims upon
the Divine to keep harping a discordant tone; he claims his
right to reason.
Let us sit down and reason over the words “ Origin of
Species.” A series of persons is a negotiable quantity, it has a
first and a last, and is therefore numerable. By history, I can
discover the earliest known of the race of man all the way. I
say human species, for without the first one I cannot reason.
I must catch my hare before I can cook it. I therefore admit at
once that I find species and genera by investigation, and that
they have existed before me; that by the evolution theory
of development of all species from a single cell, through the
vast ages this theory of development has been by accretion of
power inherent in the various transformations, deriving all the
forces to evolve, being like and unlike even man. I reflect.
Why was all this evolutionary process needed in the production
of man and animals? I can understand that, as the planet


is of such a vast magnitude, and variety of objects, it may
have required ages for its perfection; and that this planet could
have l>een inhabited by monster saurians before man’s existence,
also vegetation. Still the mystery remains unsolved. We have
to begin with man, and, retrospectively, go through his embryo-
logical ovum; and in our investigation of human and animal
ovum we find general laws, and from them we make deductions
in order to prove that man was evolved, and not created by a
special fiat by a creator. We therefore leave the evolutionist
with the last of the species, and all his evolutionary discoveries,
and admire the intellectual powers by the intelligence we
possess, be it evolved or a special gift of creation by a creator.
But can I go over the precipice of intellectual scientific research
into the vacuity of metaphysics? How can matter be eternal
and self-existent from eternity if all is evolved from a single
cell of matter, whether of eternal duration or by a self-existent
or an infinite creator? If all life is evolved from a single cell
concurrently with matter, not having inherent properties, then
matter must have been evolved before life. The life was or
began to be ! From what was it evolved ? To tell me matter
was eternal in an eternity of duration reason revolts. I have
nothing to reason upon save unmeaning words and the last of the
series. lam lost looking for its progenitor. I admit the same
logic applies to God as a theory, but I see in myself a higher
relationship to a species, and although I cannot explain God by
definitions (the infinite species), not being an infinite, I bow my
head in faith to Him by Whom I came, and realise that He
doeth all things well. He is too wise to err, too good to be
inconsistent; and as we are still in our evolutionary stages, in a
few more years the cistern will be broken, and the spirit set free;
and if revelation be true, we shall know the grand secret of
after-death, whether it ends all, where the microscope and the
dissecting knife will not be needed to discover the evolutionary
process, having developed into an immortal species. We can-
not discover the metamorphic power that changes the grub into
the winged moth or butterfly, so the power is inherent in the
human soul to evolve out of this mortal species the immortal
and divine. There cannot be a higher state of existence for the
soul, to my mind, in the evolution theory, if without God, is
purely of an hypothetical character. I cannot have a man with-
out a woman, or vice versa. How did the man or woman come?
From what species? By what process? Was the design a
complete man or woman ? Here we have the ontological secret
complete from like to like in the series. When creation is


, . 44
admitted embryonic, and by the sciences, we Can get the human
ovum, and give all the changes during the evolution into life.
How and whence did the first pair come? Man is now, and
here we can account for the creation of our species before the
embryonic stage, the eternity of matter by gradual development
of the planet, maybe; but man does not surely require it. The
first pair without their species is an enigma ; and as I reflect on
the mysterious nature of the question, like my boy ideas, I am on
the edge of a precipice called speculation, when I may deny
any creative power beyond the natural laws of sexual con-
nection for the production of our species, and declare there is
no supervision over nature —that all has come from the eternity
of matter, which is beyond the region of sense or reason —
spoken words without an idea-concept, and in its proper terms
is gibberish. Our true field is the fact of the imponderable
mystery that it exists, that it is infinite and absolute to us.
Right here Mr. Darwin settles in his mind the question that
a creator is needed for life in all existing species and genera.
I want to go into the region of man’s speculative philosophy.
Matter, is it eternal in duration or extension ? Which ? Matter
is electron, particles, molecules, atoms; atoms in the congregate
is an extension ; extension is dimension ; that which has limita-
tion by dimensions cannot be eternal in extension. Matter is
eternal in duration; duration is time extension; an eternal
duration is a contradiction, for its duration has a starting
point and a termination. To say it is of an eternal eternity is
tautology. I conclude, matter is not eternal in extension ; it
is therefore limited, as duration is the extension of time.
Matter is neither in time or eternity of solids; therefore it
cannot be eternal in duration or extension. That it is, is all we
can say, and our ignorance is contemptible in trying to rid
the world of a priori cause, known to exist in us as this creation'.
And although incomprehensible to a finite mind, to link man
in the absence of the missing link to the brute creation, evolu-
tionists, rather than believe that man is a special creation, and
that the brute creation is evolved species from species, seeking
to degrade man and his Creator. Employ all the science at
your command to establish it, and after all and by all yo&
establish the Evolver of man; you cannot rid this earth or
universe of Him. Abolish, if you can, the Bible statement of
special creation, and substitute what you name evolution ! Can
there be the possibility of a further stage in our evolutionary
progress toward the higher stage of the metamorphic life? and
if so, how can man be a participant in it ? or does death end


, 45
the state for which he was destined and predestined ? Religious
progress has not kept pace with secular progress. The mind,
for want of stability on the Bible, is like the restless ocean.
We can draw lessons from the natural order of life, and apply
it to the spiritual. We can learn that in the natural life the
heart is the first in the germ cell, so in the spiritual the heart
is the first —Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart (Deut. 6 : 5). The second is the eyes and brain; as
the eye organ is for the object world, so the eyes of the mind are
for the spiritual life —The eyes of your understanding being
enlightened (Eph. 1 : 18). The brain is the seat of the
soul, so knowledge, being sense-impresses by the brain through
the eyes of the mind, or the sense-organ, has to grow—The
mind clothed (Eph. 4 ; 15); but speaking the truth in love,
grow up into Him in all things which is the head, even Christ.
Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ (2 Peter 3 : 18). So far in the embryonic
stages of the spiritual there is an agreement. When fully de-
veloped, put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be
able to withstand in the evil day (Eph. 6: n). Here is the
germ cell of the soul into which life must be evolved. Let us
take this question a little deeper. The first act is the fertilisa-
tion (James 1 : 18). Of His own will begat He us with the
word of truth, that we should be a species of first-fruits of
His creatures. They were already born of the flesh, but now
begat in the spiritual by the word of truth. This is confirmed
by 1 Peter 1 : 23 —Being born again, not of corruptible seed,
but of incorruptible, by the Word of God (special fiat), which
liveth and abideth for ever. Note : an immortal life imparted
to the ovum of the mind —(Rom. 12 ; 2) But be ye transformed
by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that
good and acceptable and perfect will of God. Note, in this
fertilising ontogenesis, the mind may prove that the perfect
will of God in begetting us is good and acceptable—(Titus 3 :
5) By the bath of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Spirit.
I think 1 have now the human soul without any knowledge
of a God unfertilised in a state as yet in the embryological
fetus —no life, the mind is there, as in the womb the matter is
there; the life of the human embryo will come by Nature’s
laws, but the birth in the spiritual must come from the will of
the Divine ; that will is the means He employs to convert the
sou l—(Heb. 4: 12) For the Word of God is quick and
powerful, even to the dividing asunder the soul and spirit.


46
(John 1 : 11, n) All this operation is independent of the will
of man or his fleshly nature —it is of God. Just as in tfhe
first God created the fleshly body, so it is God in the spiritual
(John 3: 1-6), That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and
that which is born of the Spirit is spirit—(l Cor. 4:15) Though
ye have 10,000 instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many
fathers : for in Christ Jesus have I begotten you through the
Gospel; (Rom. 1 : 16) Jhe Gospel of Christ is the power of
God unto salvation to everyone that believeth; (John 1: 12)
lo as many as received Him, to them He gave the power to
become the sons of God; (Rom. 10 : 17), Faith comes by hear-
ing, and hearing by the power of God-God’s will, the
Sword of the Spirit, the gospel of pardon, and the soul is con-
verted. A living, immortal quickening takes place—a typical
death (Rom. 6:2); dead to sin (ver. 4) ; buried in a typical
grave (ver. 6); a likeness of the Divine Master; born again
under the quickening influence of the Spirit; (John 3 : 6), Born
of the Spirit and water; Titus 3 : s—The5 —The bath of regeneration ;
1 Peter 3 : 21 —Baptism saves us; Acts 2 : 38-41 —Pardon, sins
remitted, the Holy Spirit’s work done, man’s acceptance,
grace through faith. Eph. 2 : B—For by grace are ye saved
through faith; and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of
God, the spotless Lamb, Christ.
1 desire to recapitulate the ground I have gone over : —First,
that the evolution of man begins in a cell in the embryonic cham-
ber ; the first formation apparent is the heart, then the eyes and
brain, and a gradual development of the fetus till birth of
the child of the flesh, milk being its proper food. I have
avoided all the scientific terms for simplicity. There the evolu-
tion of man or the origin of man begins, but beyond these stages
we want a further revelation. It begins in embryology, and
ends in the perfected babe. This the Psalmist David (139 : 16)
witnessed within himself —“ Thine eyes did see my substance,
yet being imperfect; by substance was not hid from Thee when
I was made in secret.” I look at a man in the state of absolute
ignorance as a man born deaf; he has the dual nature, physical
and pyschological; the latter controls the former by reins,
motor, and afferent nerves. Reason is his highest faculty ; it
cannot create anything ; it cannot see or hear; it has an environ-
ment of its own. The idea of a supreme power by virtue of the
magnitude of creation around him ! He reasons from observa-
tions to conclusions, and an inherent part of his nature idolises
something. Reason says there is a Supreme; but where is his
mind in the ocean? What are the wild waves saying? It is


47.
the voice of the Creator in the mighty deep, A book is found
—it tells man of an evolutionary probation from the cradle
through the portals of death to a life where all care and sorrow
ends; that this life has to be regenerated and fertilised by two
agencies—his will and his Creator’s will blending. God will
do His part, and man must do his part. The first step is con-
fidence —faith in God. (Heb. u : 6) —Without faith it is im-
possible to please God, for he that cometh to God must believe
that He is, and that He is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek Him. Here is man’s place, his duty, his privilege; he
comes within the reach of God’s power—His will. It is preach-
ed or read, his heart is the first in the flesh formation, his
heart first in the spiritual, which is his mind; he hears the
Word (the Gospel), he believes it, the Spiiit is the Word (Eph.
i : 13, Acts 18 : 8, John 6 : 63), and the Spirit of truth (John
4 : 24). Here is the evolution of man in the spirituality from
darkness to light (2 Cor. 4 : 6), God, Who commanded the light
to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts to give the
light to the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ. We have reached the stage of the fully-developed
babe, no matter as to age, in the spiritual evolution; all are
babes, and grow in knowledge (Heb. 6: 1); they go on to
the perfect development, till the transformation, and the spirit
enters its rest (Ps. 23). To many this view will be heterodoxy,
to some orthodoxy ; but as orthodoxy is my doxy I do not give
it as a creed or dogma. I seek to place on a reasonable basis
this theory of spiritual evolution of man from darkness in the
soul to Christ the Light of the world, and to show that if there
is a natural body evolved, there is also a spiritual one yet to
come; and as through the natural line of descent the child is
part of the parent, so in the spiritual the new born babe in
Christ must partake of His nature, whereby are given unto
us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these ye might
be partakers of the Divine nature, etc. (2 Peter 4 : 5-13; John
8 : i-3)-
THE VIRGIN BIRTH.
The subject of the birth of the Christ is a Bible one, and
can be reasoned on like all other questions in revelation. No
matter however strange or contrary to science or reason, the
one thought is God in revelation and redemption. Nature is
incomprehensible; revelation claims our faith and reason in both
To the pure in mind all things are pure (lit. 1 : 15)- 4 he seed
of the virgin had to yield the Spotless Lamb; the life was to


48
be given as an at-one-ment, and it was to be the good news or
gospel of reconciliation to man that the life of Christ on the
cross paid justice and freed the sinner. The proud mind of
man looks too high (2 Kings 5 : n); thinks God is above any
such strange action in redemption, while thousands cannot see
any other mode more in harmony with God’s dealings with man.
It is affirmed that He was the Spotless Lamb of God —the seed
of the woman —the Christ, Who verily was ordained before the
foundation of our planet to redeem man. In Gen. 1 : 27 man
created; Gen. 2: 17 the law of obedience; 3:19, penal guilt
for sin; 3 : 15, Christ to be bruised; 49 : 10, Christ come from
the tribe of Judah ; 49 : 10, He is to be a law-giver; Rev. 5 :
5, the Lion of the tribe of Judah; Deut. 18: 15, Isa. 63; 1,
Acts 3 : 22, a prophet like Moses; Ps. no : 4, Heb. 5 : 6-10,
Heb. 6: 20; 7 : 17, a priest after the order of Melchisedec;
Sam. 14: 14, God devised means to restore from death; Job
19: 25, Christ our Redeemer; Ps. 14: 7, the salvation from
Zion; Jer. 50: 34, Christ the Lord of hosts; Ps. 40: 7, Lo,
He comes; Is. 42 : 7, the prisoners to set free; Heb. 10: 7,
He comes to offer His body; Ps. 24 : 7-9, lift up your heads,
ve everlasting gates; Isa. 63 : 1, Who is this that cometh, etc. ;
Isa. 53 : 7, Jer. n : 19, He is led as a lamb; 1 Cor. 15 : 1, He
died for us; Isa. 52 : 6, it is to be known I am He; Hosea 12 :
13, to redeem us from death ; Isa. 52 ; 1, put on thy beautiful
garments; Mai. 3 : 1, the Messenger to come; Mai. 4: 2, the
Sun of Righteousness; 1 Peter 1 : 19, the Spotless Lamb; John
1 ; 36, the Lamb of God; 1 Cor. 5: 7, Christ our passover;
Rev. 15; 3, Moses and the Lamb; Jer. 31: 31-34. Heb. 8:
6-13, the old covenant abolished; John 17: 4, Mat. 5: 17,
Christ’s work finished, the law fulfilled; 1 Peter 3 : 18, the
just life given; Acts 2 : 23, this was the foretold prophet; Acts
2: 27, it was not David; Acts 2: 41, the new covenant_ in
force; 2 Cor. 3 : 13, death abolished, the vail removed; 2 Tim.
1 ; 10, death (the law) abolished, life and immortality restored;
John 17: 2, eternal life in Christ; Rom. 8: 14, made sons
of God; 1 John 3 : 2,3, Son of God; Ps. 23 : 4, safe in death;
1 Cor. 15 : 55, death no sting; Eccl. 12: 7, spirit returns to
God; John 17 : 21, universal unity.
I affirm that these are a few of the links in the chain of
God’s wonderful acts—the axis of the spiritual universe. That,
if I be lifted up, will draw all men. There is no other. You
may spurn the Christ, i-nsult God, Jaugh to scorn the scheme of
redemption; and when you have blotted out the sun in the
solar system, and Christ in the universe of redemption, then


it will be time to desire death than life. Not a ray of hope,
a ray of light across the valley of death; our spiritual eyes
taken out, darkness and death alone remains. But when we
see the life-line from the throne of God, bridging time and
entering the vail, the eye of faith, by hope, sees and longs
for the blessed eternity—longing and desiring with a full ex-
pectation of receiving eternal life in the paradise of God’s
Eden, where the Tree of Life is blooming, and the earnest of
the blessings are now and here. God created the primordial
pair (the progenitors of our race), when there was no specie
to incarnate; and from the specie, by the power of His omni-
potence, by the same process as the first pair by special fiat:
Thou shalt conceive and bear a son, His name be Jesus.
I now quote Ernest Renan :—“ Repose now in Thy glory,
noble Founder; Thy work is finished; Thy divinity is establish-
ed ; fear no more to see the edifice of Thy labour fall by any
fault of Thine own. Henceforth, beyond the reach of frailty,
Thou shalt witness from the heights of divine peace the infinite
results of Thy acts, at the price of a few hour’s suffering,
which did not even reach Thy soul. Thou hast bought the
most complete immortality; for thousands of years the world
will be dependent upon Thee. Banner of our contest, Thou
shalt be the standard about which the hottest battle will be
given, a thousand times more alive, a thousand times more
beloved since Thy death than during Thy passage here below.
Thou shalt become the corner stone of our humanity so entirely
that to tear Thy name from this world would be to rend it to
its foundation ! Between Thee and God there shall be no
longer any distinction !”
Jtfr. JjlcrtcJj/ord.
“ WHAT I CAN AND CANNOT BELIEVE.”
Good morning, Mr, Blatchford, I do not think for one
moment that you are hostile to the Church, or have any animus
towards parsons or the Church of the New Testament. Oh,
no! How is your liver? Was the black pipe free from
nicotine when you were ruminating on religion in the New
Testament? You know a lot of persons, priests, nuns, Church
of England clergy, and they are really a live lot. But you
are the devil among the parsons. Your book has come South.
These parsons believe a lot of stuff; I cannot take it in. You


50
are not one, are you? Oh, no! I go for the Church, Br, B.
This is an ambiguous term. Church is a building of bricks,
stone, etc. Is it the creed, or the parson, or the congregation,
church, or all the churches? I see, you mean the priests, nuns,
etc.; yet you say they are a splendid specimen of gentility.
Kind words for you to say before you floor them. If the
animated portion of the Church, you say they are a splendid
specimen of gentility. (Are you like the viper slimmering them
over before you swallow them); then you say you do not like
the Church if it is not the priests, etc., the genteel; then you
have the bricks and mortar, etc., please be particular in your
language, I am so simple, I may mistake you. You state you
were not always an agnostic. Yes you were. You do not know
anything absolutely. I call you a truth - seeker; never mind
what people call you. It was no infidel book that caused your
mind to change. Once you were orthodox; now you find you
were not such. How do you know that you will always be as
you are now? You have changed your belief once; may you
not change it again by reading other books? As a child you
were thoughtful, and you asked yourself many questions, as
all children do to-day, and answer them. You can see as a
child; you were wiser than all the church parsons. What a
prodigy you must have been ! You eclipse Christ in the Temple;
no one could to-day answer you. What need for any phil-
osopher? your own child’s brain could do it. Are you the only
one in the family ? You state you have ceased to believe what you
were taught as a child ; what was it ? Out with it, and shame your
mother. You have grown up wicked. Now, do not blackball your-
self ; remember you are of age now ; you have ceased to believe it.
What was it? because, “after twenty years’ hard I
cannot believe it, therefore I am going for the Christian
religion.” Beware! it will knock you out, Bob, if you cannot
believe it; there is no criterion that you are the infallible
dictator. Then, “ I cannot again believe the Bible is the Word
of God.” Just so; God’s Word is His spoken concepts of
God’s own speaking. You cannot speak of God only as an
anthropomorphic. You say His Word would be above the
critic; not necessarily so; you may be doing it now uncon-
sciously, so you say God’s Word no one could disprove. You
are in a fog. How can you disprove it is not God’s Word
by human agency ? Are you trying your hand at a syllogistic
point—God and the Bible are criticised by me, therefore it is
not the Word of God? Mr. B. is not a competent critic,
therefore he is disqualified. Mr. 8., do not skin your hare


5 1 .
till you have caught it. Your logic is faulty—never mind your
“ I cannots,” therefore you are an inconoclast; others can
believe if you cannot. ' Study T. Pain and Mirabeau —one
could not believe in a' God, the other could not disbelieve it;
you cannot believe that any religion has been revealed to man
by God, then to you there is none. Evolution is a science,
not a belief. History and. science 1 show that men and animals
have been evolved the same as religions, or borrowed from older
religions (?). Mr. 8., God is a Word, Who ever had a
mental percept of a self-existing priori cause when the mind
cannot formulate the spoken sign-concept of it without an idea.
Never mind the Bible science and history of the Bible. Is the
science correct if it says they heard God’s voice, and history
records the fact. Never mind the human element, it is the fact;
can you prove no person ever heard God’s voice? Never mind
your “ I cannot believe it.” A blind man can say I cannot
see, still his mind can perceive it. You cannot believe that
the God of the Bible is the Creator of the universe. What
other God have you? The Bible says Tie is. \ou are
right, Mr. 8., Moses is wrong. Go up top. The world has
been asleep; you have come to take the scales off our eyes.
You seem a perfect bundle of cannots; you forgot the old
adage, Try, try, try again ! You may object to the historical
account of our race, their acts done in God’s name; though
believers in Him under Moses, they exhibited their misguided
zeal ; they did as they thought right, and said it was God’s
decree. The Bible tells us that God is pure and holy ; man is
false. You cannot believe the Old or New Testament to be
historically true; you think they are fables and myths; then,
fables and myths have their foundation in facts. I cannot
believe in the existence of Jesus Christ, or Moses,, or Buddha;
millions do believe. Are you the only sane reasoner? are
they mad, and you truly the rationalist? Put out your hand
and feel if you are awake. I cannot believe that the relation
of God and man is true. What do you mean by relation? That
he is co-related as a creature to a Creator. It is in man being
sinful; and in God, a pure and holy Bemg, you have good
evidence. All religions say it is so. Now, Mr. 8., vou
are putting buts, not cannots. But if God made man, then
God is responsible for his actions. Good; go on. He cannot
be sinned against ; He created our thoughts, therefoie man
cannot sin against God. let us try it. Your fathei hi ought
you into existence; your father is responsible for your thoughts
and acts. Do not try to be funny. Have you a mind or will


r 52
ot your own? Then stand by it. Do not be a renegade and
put it on to God. Do you want the freedom of your mind
chained? You are now and here responsible to God. You have
been a hard thinker for twenty years; I can put forty on
top of it. I was once creedal blind. The Bible is not what
you think it is. Your mind is biassed, or you would have found
a rushlight in evolution; your dogmas are as illiberal as the
creeds of churchanity. You are giving us “ ifs ” ; we have
had “ buts ” and “ cannots.” If man could not sin against
God, he was compelled to act as he was ordained to act! Now,
Mr. 8., none of your old Aunt Sally games. Just prove
that God made you to act independent of your own will and
consciousness; just steal something, and tell the judge God
made you do it. He would send you to the lunatic asylum.
“If ” (again) man could not sin against God ! Just so, Mr.
8,, man had to sin in order to display his God-like qualities;
why do you not carry it out? Because you believe you were
evolved, and evolution (not God) gave you freedom of will,
but to his saints sin ! I cannot believe that man has forsaken
God. What has Haeckel, Wolsley, Nero, Alexander done?
History is my authority. Wolsley said, “If I had been as
faithful to my God as I have been to my king, He w r ould not
have forsaken me.” Then you say, the human race are a
God-forsaken lot; they are like the Jews, they want their own
way. Stick to it, they are a God-forsaken lot; and you cannot
believe what you say they are. Do not contradict yourself, it
is wicked. But you say you have grown wicked by your own
acts. Judge Christianity fairly; never mind whether He
raised Lazarus from the dead, or Himself; took at the spirit
of it, nowc Mr. 8., I appeal to your good sense; note the
millions spent in His name for good; not bigots, fighting for
creeds. There is too much of “cannot” in the soup; you
spoil it; you cannot believe anything but evolution —you cannot
believe that man has a free will, that he is not responsible for
his acts and sayings. Did you ever read of a dying Scotchman
who said, Betsy, Mr. Johns owes me £l. The old lady
said, He is retaining his mind to the last. He said, Betsy,
I owe Mr. Jackson ten shillings. She replied he has no will;
his reason is failing him. Are you ever like that, Mr. B. ?
Do you will to pay it? do you ever go to church? No. Then
you have to stop away. Did you say, w’hen you took a wife, I
will? Now, Mr, 8., no shuffling. Did you say, I will?
Yes, I did, yet you verily believe you could not help it —you
must have been bad —your wfife got a bargain ! A man that


53
had no, will, and yet said ** I will take you,” has so many
thoughts that he cannot believe that God is a loving Father in
the slums, cholera, consumption, earthquakes, horrors of war.
You cannot see in sciences, or in your experience, or history, any
signs of such a God. Then you are stone blind with bigotry.
My cat caught an innocent bird and ate it; the tidal wave and
the blizzard are evolutions; product, science, leprosy, cancer,
the dirty slum is man’s free will, disorder; evolution is order, so
is God s law order. Violate law or order and you pay the
penalty. God is not mocked. Act according to Nature’s order,
infringe it not. God’s first law is order; retribution is disorder
to all who disobey. Do you think God should stand by every
man and keep him right ? As regards this planet, its agencies
w r ill terminate man’s existence here, and whether they come up
to your standard of what you like or do not like, Mr. 8., it
is a doomed planet—you know it. You say we are going to
fall into the sun, Mr. B. I object on the ground that it is
too hot. But if I evolve at the other side with my bald pate
scorched, I may lose my hair here in what I do and do not
believe, but there I shall not lose much, for I have none. You
cannot believe God created man by the word of mouth. (Why,
you are making your own god in a moment.) Who savs He
did? Now, Mr. 8., be straight, it says a day; speak the
truth. Your evolution took millions of years to produce man.
The next job it gets will be by contract or piecework. Do
you know what an absolute can and cannot do? If so, tell us
how you know it. The supernaturalist stands by creation ; the
rationalist by evolution. Mr. 8., you are hot in decimals.
Awake, old man ! Reduce decimals to the lowest denominator.
We are reducing a rationalist into Tom Paine, and also into
Darwin’s theism—still the lowest is God. Now, look here,
Mr. 8., you are a rationalist; I will let you down easy. The
Book says, Let God be true and man a liar. Where does any
authority say (in or out of the Bible, sanctioned by God) that
the earth, sun, moon, man, and animals were created by God
instantaneously out of nothing, like a greased flash of lightning?
I read, there was a day for each creative fetus, and for that
day twenty-four hours. As you are reducing God from the
sublime to the ridiculous (the lowest terms but one) you have
it. How many nothings in the numerator reduced to nothing
in the quotient give the decimal worked out? Mr. 8., you
ought to be a professor of vulgar fractions. You stand by
evolution. Poor Mr. Supernatus, where was matter before
it became matter; how did matter come into space? Was it


~ . 54
outside or inside ? How much was there of it ? Was it organic
or inorganic? homogeneous or bioplasm? Where was life
before matter took it on board ? Why did matter, seeing it, take
so long a time to produce such a stupid planet, with earthquakes,
blizzards, tidal waves, cholera, fever, slums, disease, and death,
and give, after millions of years, the key to such as you? Do
not laugh at Peter. Look here, just you let me know, how
did evolution plan the universe, its laws, without as much Brains
as you have ? You stand by evolution ! The captain’s first
signal is stand by, and one man turns on the steam, and it moves
like a thing of life, nothing supernatural. An unseen hand
for millions of years drives the universe; it is God, and if this
is supernatural, it is God over all. Evolution is a theory of
how God may have evolved man and the planet. He is the
Supernatus. We stand by God right through, and stand or
fall by an absolute Creator. In conclusion, Mr. 8., what
you can and cannot believe, you declare you are a rationalist
evolutionist! That is so; you reject the Bible in toto, and
stand on your own principles of reason. Decidedly so. Tell
me, can reason reason on an unperceived objective object?
No; reason’s province is everything reduced to a rational con-
cept, from the perceived to the sense-impress, by organic means
into the subjective. That is so; no perception, no ideas or
subjective knowledge; reason is the faculty of mind. Yes.
In fact, all objective existence? Yes. The limitation of reason
is subject knowledge? Yes. There are objective existences that
have never been perceived? I cannot say. Now, be candid.
Are there existences that the eye has never seen? You admit it;
and you believe it? Yes. Did you ever see a natural law : —an
unmeaning expression without God? Nature is birth existence;
law-authority by one having power to give the rules to be
observed. Tell me by reason, is it a coporeal or an incoporeal
entity, and reason out to a rational conclusion its properties,
dimensions, whether organic or inorganic. What is a natural
law—not its manifested operations to sense —what is it, per-se ?
All vour bluster about God and the Bible to me as a rationalist
is irrational ! I use my reason; you dethrone yours. You try
to shame the God of the Bible by a want of a little common-
sense, and when your gas is exploded, it remains. God did
create the planets.


W/jo is ply Jfeiyhbour ?
Dear Horace, —I have received your papers, also the work
of Mr. Blatchford, and send you my thoughts thereon.' I
look upon such works as an expected outcome of the crude
and antiquated ideas held by some religious people. There
are two sides to every question, and when calmly reviewed,
the religious element will lose some of its dross; it will stand
refining. Your paper on the “Riddle of the Universe ” I
will carefully read.
I once attended a lecture. The speaker said he
had consulted a doctor, who told him he must go
through a course of medicine. He got two bottles
of medicine and put them in a drawer. “My word,”
said the doctor, “you are improving under it!” Just so,
when we have bottled up much doctrine in theology, and dis-
tilled it in the mind, we would have been better to have put
it in a drawer. Mr. Blatchford, do not kill the Bible be-
cause men misrepresent its teaching; try to discover the
true paths, leaving the new-fangled notions. There are two
modes of intellectual advancement of thought; the mind is
the custodian of all our ideas. It is the seat of subjective in-
tuitional and objective knowledge. The last is derived by
the sense-impresses, the other from axiomatical problems,
and the mind perceives the idea, just as clearly as the sense
idea by the object. Goo could not be a wise God if he did
nor reveal Himse f in language to mind as He has done in
matter and in the stellar worlds. Let us (men like you,
Messrs. Blatchford and Haeckel) work to right the world, not
make it darker. If a ray of light has flooded your soul, put
forth the light; if more luminous, the other must pale; put
forth the truth. There are a hundred sects preying on the
mind of humanity, some are priests, made, it is said, not by
hands, but by the power of God the Holy Ghost, and what
hands could not do, hands cannot undo. This may not be
taken very seriously, but, in all their creeds and dogmas,
thev belittle the God of truth. It is their means of liveli-
hood. Let us speak the truth in love to them. Your quo-
tations of the opinion of Mr. Gladden, respecting Moses being
an inspired prophet, infer that all the teachings of the Pen-
tateuch are infallible. No, not necessarily so. Moses _ (as
a legislator, made the laws needed) was no more inspired
than the author of “ Who is My Neighbour.” Moses was


5 6
versed in the arts and laws of Egypt. Inspiration is making
known a revelation; a revelation is something man could not
know by all the power of the mind. Revelation came by
the creative power inspiring the mind of Moses. For the
no*-4nspirational parts, he had intelligence enough for gov-
ernment laws. The inspiration passes through the evolu-
tionary stages of the historic events in development in the
Divine and fulfilment of the prophetically-inspired parts.
“The seed of the woman, etc.,’’ or “God in the vast eternity
and creation.’’ If these statements are true, then an in-
spiration was required, for man could never have known of
them by reason. Two modes must be used —a sense-impress
or an inspiration, and once obtained (either of them or both)
man’s history would convey all the revelations of the Divine.
This old Aunt Sally style won’t do; to declare it, is what
any person might say, then knock it down. It is not the
Bible that says it. The Bible says, “All scripture given by
inspiration,’’ etc.; the word “is’’ is no part of the original
text. Let us account for this wonderful book; give the
same respect as for any other book, but condemn the man-
made dictators (said to be made by God the Holy Ghost)
who bought their livings with the almighty dollar! Mr.
Gladden does not doubt that some are historical facts ; then
the prophetical requires the facts recorded in history. His-
toric facts are synonymous with inspired utterances, for it is
truth, and truth cannot be truer, whether historic or in-
spired, they are synonymous. What you can and cannot
believe belongs to your modes of thought. Tom Pain was
no simpleton. Put the Bible in the crucible of reason; blot
out sectarianism, bigotry, dogmas, creeds; let God remain
as the sunlight of the religious system. Found a brother-
hood on the principles of the first Christians, and land laws
as given by Moses (or better, if you can); try to inculcate
principles of the Divinity in the rising generation. But, alas,
our experience of man’s heart is wickedness, who does not
know it! Coercion there must be, if a life of honesty is not
lived. You say the Christian religion stands or falls by the
practices of the life taught by Christ—Christ living in me;
except we have His spirit, we are none of His! Do not, for
Heaven’s sake, call Calvin’s deeds, or Rome inquisition, or
faggots to burn people, Christianity! Do not besmear
that good name that brings joy to living and dying, that
is the keystone to the philanthropic arch of humanity!
Renan says, “to take the name away, would be to rend our


57
world to its foundation.” Mr. Blatchford, men differ from
you. You are no infidel; you are seeking for that goal that
the heart of man is throbbing for —peace on earth and good
wil . Shall this stand or fall by your critical strictures on the
Bible? No; it has great roots; all you say will be as the
blast upon it, making it firmer in the divine soil of love,
first to God, then to man. You say the author of the Book
and date are unknown. That puts me in mind of the argu-
ment that there is not an original copy in existence. If we
have a copy of the original, why talk nonsense, as the copy
is a fac-simile of the original. No one knows who wrote it;
it did not write itself. We have it, it is here. You prove
they were not written by the authors imputed. Write a better,
blot out every idea in it, but none of your plagiarism. Let us
see your work; try and construct a man in ideal; there must
not be a particle of God’s man in him; where will you put
his brains? Yes, we may go on inculcating dogmas about
the Bible. Rememoer, there is but one thought —one God,
one faith, one hope, one baptism. GotJ never laid down the
dogma to believe it to be inspired or that Moses wrote it,
or he did not write it. It is the evolution of Christ through
the ages of historical development; just as evolution per-
fected itself in nature, so the evolution of history. God in
both evolved the bread of life. Man has a soul that wants
feeding; history speaks to us of the people without God. Do
not tell us what our grandfathers believed; we are of the
20th century. The first chapter of Genesis is an inspired
book; the second and third a beautiful allegorical represent-
ation of man’s freedom and government; the remainder, the
due course of deve'opment historical—great and good men
prognosticated events, and in them the one thought is God —
for man to be pure and holy; they were human, their lives
are given, nothing hid, in order that we that read might
avoid an unrighteous life. Do not tell us of a Christian
nation or a Christian government. We discover you are
throwing, mud, in order that some may stick. We decline
both.. A Christian is a follower of Christ; governments are
secular; they have tried hanging and prisons, and yet all has
failed to make humanity angels. They, for revenue, permit
drink-poison, gambling hel s, to destroy man. Did Christ
teach this? Your will-o’-the-wisp’s determinism to change
man’s nature will fail, and lam no prophet. Let man study
the purity of the Bible; look at our hospitals and homes for
the fallen ; train our children in Christian virtues, and in a


58
thousand ways, give the good news free to the poor. Give
us Christians credit for something, then give that credit to
God and the Bible! You have been asked, “Why have you
gone out of your way to attack the Bible?” The Bible changed
my doubting mind, and for 60 years I am rejoicing in its
beautiful teachings. For 50 years I have been speaking, not
to infidels, no, to men true to principles of doubting. I
have spent part of my life among the criminal class, and
affirm that there is no book like the Bibje. Get rid of your
conceptions of the Bible, of creeds, dogmas, and men buying
livings. Tell the leaders not to cloud the light of heaven; put
off their sham sacred robes, their holy titles; they have
robbed God of His title—Reverend and Holy art Thou. You
will then be an honour to your nation. Fight for what gov-
ernment you please here; do not charge the Bible with wrong.
Let every tub stand on its own bottom. Remember, if God
be with the Bible, you can never overthrow it; there is a
mysterious charm with it our nature declares the hand of
God is with it. We could seal its testimony by giving our
life rather than part with it. This may be no proof to you
of its beauty, but you cannot disprove that thousands ex-
perience the same. You must travel a road to know r it; you
must live a life to know it. We know it is science, true
knowledge experience. I ask men to try it, be sincere and
earnest with God; He is not mocked, what you sow you shall
reap. I care not for Jew or Mahometan, get them to live up
to the light of their age, an omniscient loving God (as He
has proved Himself) will do the right. When you have for-
mulated your new theory determinism to change the
nature of man, go to Rome; begin there, let that power
grant you permission to try it. Then go to the British Gov-
ernment, and the men who brew and distil to the magsmen,
thieves and liars, and I back the salvation of Christ against
you. Converts may not all be true, but the fact stares you in
the face, the evolution of humanity remains with the energy
and potential forces of Christianity.
On the subject of ancient religion and modern science (R. 8.,
page 47), you are on safe ground; the Christian believes all
you have written on science. You ask yourself, What kind
of a creator must God be? Well, you had' better tell us. Give
us your ideas, what kind of a creator He is. I will prognosti-
cate for you. He is in religion a Socialist, a humanitarian, a
determinist in form (like R. 8.), His religion and science ideal-
ised, with the evolution theory thrown in.


x 59
\ou say the Christian believes that this God created the vast
stellar worlds (not the universe revealed in His own inspired
Bible) —the one has 20 million suns, and magnitude; but the
puny creation of the Bible is perfectly ridiculous.
To think that the word heaven or expanse is a pigmy idea of
Moses to R.B.’s 20 million suns ! Mr. Mitchell says, “ Lo,
behold, to God’s creation there is no end !” Stellar universe !
Splendid reasoning, R. 8.; keep on, plenty will believe you;
they will never find you out. God created the heavens ! What
is that, R. 8.? In a country village, when a pig was killed,
everyone got a bit, even the parson. The parson killed a pig,
and he considered charity began at home; he worried himself
that he would have to give so much away, so he consulted his
deacon, who told him to hang it in the shed, and tell everyone
that someone stole it. He did so; the deacon went and stole
it. Next day, the deacon passing, the parson called him.
He said, “What do you think? They have stole the pig.”
“Good,’’ said the deacon; “you have done it very nicely.”
God’s expanse by Moses in the Bible, which is infinity, is
stolen. R.B. gammons he knows nothing about it—he has
done it very nicely.
R. 8., you say that which proves too much proves nothing.
Your book proves too much, ergo, proves nothing. You say,
Can there be a more dishonourable object than an eloquent per-
son not telling the truth ? Are you sure you are not the object ?
R. 8., p. 106. —Have the documents been tampered with?—
Yes ! In Genesis it distinctly asserts that in an indefinite dura-
tion, called the beginning, the heaven and the earth were created
by God, and in detailed order six subsidiary creations in six
days (a day is twenty-four hours). You have tampered with
this, and then attacked your own mutilated and distorted state-
ment of Bible facts. This, R. 8., will not pass; they have been
tampered with —spurious coin you are trying to pass.
P. 12. —You say the creation theory (why do you say
“theory’"?) —It is a statement of fact; you should state just
what is written.
P. 106. —It gives you pain to know any person acting dis-
honourable. Yet you do it, and are so infatuated as not to
know it.
Page 12. —You say the Bible says —(no, I impeach you; it is
your tampering again) —that God created all instantaneously
out of nothing. Surely your liver must be out of order. The
whole of your reasoning lacks a well-balanced mind. You say
the authority that the Bible is the Word of God rests with the


Church. Which one? Please be particular. Well, the autho-
rity that it is not the Word of God rests with R. 8., and his.
beloved brethren Huxley, Haeckel, etc.
Page 2. —The sin of unbelief. Is the Bible the Word of
God? You give reasons why you do not believe it to be. The-
question is, Are your reasons perfectly valid, or are you speak-
ing for your own self? If you are the pedagogue, be sure you;
are an infallible one. To me you are a little foggy.
The evolution of the Bible or religion, which do you mean?
A book or a code of religious forms of worship ? How has;
your book been evolved ? It contains evolution, Socialism,
humanism and determinism ; and as gods are supreme persons,
your book, “ Who is My Neighbour?” puts Moses and God in>
the shade of intelligences. Every tree is known by its fruit —
time will prove your isms.
R.B. : Can man sin against God (p. 133)? I have said',
several times that man could not and cannot sin against God.
Egoism. lam an authority.
A.S. : I have said several times that man could and does smi
against God. My say, my opinion, is as good as your say.
Can your determinism say which is orthodox ? Say, Yes !
Right you are, R. 8., both says are the production of two great
thinkers !
R.B. : This is a theory of determinism. I will explain.
A.S. : Until determinism explains our say which is orthodox,,
I do not desire your clarion blowing your own trumpet.
R.B. : If God is responsible for Man’s existence, God is.
therefore responsible for his acts.
A.S. : You confound language, existence and responsibility.
Existence is a state of being, having form and life; respon-
sibility is the accountability for the acts of the will. There
are existences having form and life, but not accountability for
what they say or do —idiotic statements like I am reviewing.
Therefore God is responsible for the dog’s act, according to
god determinism ! No ! They are responsible to man, a*s man
is responsible to God. Of these two existences controlled by
instinct and free volition, which act does god-determinism
declare God to be guilty, for it says neither has any will —the
Maker of the object is responsible for the object.
A.S. : Mr. 8., man is not a thing; he is an animated being.
You say the maker of a thing is responsible for the qualities
and powers of the thing. You are reasoning in a circle; why
not impeach God at once ? Why all this ambiguity ? \ou are
trying your powers and qualities to make the God, the Creator


•of man (a sane reasoner), responsible for man’s volition indepen-
dent of his will and power by reason’s jurisdiction to guard his
actions. You say, Who is responsible for the qualities and
power of the thing which is made but the maker?
A.S. :As man is not a thing, he is a rational, free agent. By
the law of a finite environment, he must be responsible to the
law (not his Maker) —it will punish him. Why, you are trying
your powers and very best qualifications by the freedom of
your will-power to impeach the God of the highest order, and
to impale Him on the responsibility of His own penal verdict
to suffer for all the crimes of man. You would send God to
the regions of the damned, and set man free to laugh at his
Creator ! But some men, reasoning men, will say —they will
reason—have you abused your powers, your liberty —gone be-
yond the qualities of mind, and become the brainless object of
your imagination—an existence without responsibility, trying
to put on God your own acts and you go free —God to suffer !
And if —if —if you fail, the powers and the qualities of the
thing made has been made a lunatic! R. 8., the civilised
world is against you.
PATER.
Jngersoll.
IS THE GOD OF THE BIBLE THE GOD OF NATURE?
The opening pages of the Bible begin with creation, as far
as our knowledge goes of it. The nebula theory is spoken
of in lurid words of thought. As the rosebud blooms, bathed
by the dews of heaven’s distillation, the pure crystal drop of
truth brings the bloom of fact to perfection. Nature is the
laboratory of an unseen hand, jewelled with the ring set with
the philosopher’s stone. From its magic touch, diamonds,
emeralds and gems spring, as sparks from the smithy anvil fall
on the floor, worthless to the power that produce them. There
is gold, silver, radium scattered in wild profusion among the
dust of nature. The air is filled with the fleeting and the
transitory, with their variegated plumes, from the sparkling
firefly and the humming bird, to the peacock and the birds of
paradise. The sea teems from the infusoria to the leviathan of
the deep. On the mountain, the herds of cattle of every
specie display design and adaptation. The meadows are clothed


in variegated garments of beauty, and the delicate touch of the
Designer’s magic hand. The monarch of the forest towers in
majestic grandeur, making melody by the rustling breeze or
bathed in the silvery beams of the frost of the wintry chill and
the moon’s silvery light. The clear, blue vault of heaven, with
the stars shining like diamond dust sprinkled in the vaults of
space. The scene changes, the fleecy clouds paint and baffle
the hand of the artist to hold up the mirror to nature; the
whole displays the greatness of the Creator. Notwithstanding
all his brilliant display, the clouds gather, the summer’s blast,
the ruthless thunder, the vivid lightning, the blizzard, tidal
wave, the tornado, the earthquake, volcanoes, destroying life —
they heed not the crv of man or beast, destruction and death
is in their pathway ! Then there is the lion, the serpent, the
wolf, nature struggling with nature, death, destruction, a chaos !
On the one picture, creation is a fairy land of magnificence and
beauty, everything in its place, nothing useless. On the other
picture, death, wanton destruction, clouds our vision; we bloom
and fade as nature. This is God in nature. We ask, Where is
the wisdom or designer of this? Where does it begin and end —
in creation, nature, or in man? He comes forth as a flower,
is cut down at a short notice, just as he begins to know that
he exists, in sorrow, in pain and anguish. Is there no other
source in the vast realms of infinitude to illumine this dark and
gloomy scene, not a ray of hope? Tell me not of the beauties
of nature. Say, is there another book that can tell me I shall
meet loved ones again, when the death pallor has closed my
speech ; or am I mocked by nature’s silence, deeper than the
abyss ? I ask, is there any balm for my sorrow ? and I, like
Job’s wife (Job 2 : 9), say, Let me curse Nature and die !
Life without knowing God or having a revelation is a perfect
enigma. Let me soar to some other field, seeking to discover
the author of nature, not in rocks or the depths of the ocean ;
let it be near me, in my heart, that the voice will speak to my
soul !
A traveller, crossing a desert, got lost. He came on a beauti-
ful flower ; he viewed it, then exclaimed, Shall He that has
brought this to perfection in this desert forsake me ? We
cannot separate man and nature; all is for him to use; it sup-
plies the wants of man to a greater degree than any other
object. The Bible opens with creation, and the author of it
tells of an absolute power, incomprehensible, spreading out
the heavens and creating the earth; that to His power there
is no end —He rides in majesty on the storm (Nahum 1 : 3),


63
and holds the wind as by reins in His hands (Prov. 30 : 4), and
hangs the stellar universe on nothing (Job 26 : 7). R. Ingersoll
and others have fallen into an error. They say the God of
nature is not the God of the Bible j that in the Bible He is a
bloodthirsty God, and that they are upholding God’s character
by denouncing the God of the Bible. That is to say, there
are no incongruities in nature—they are all in the Bible. R.I.
flies at creeds and dogmas like a madman, crying out Moses’
mistakes. He knows Moses is dead; dead men cannot reply.
After the account of creation is sacred history and revelation.
What is history ? The course of events that transpire during
a nation’s existence. It was the childhood of man. Take a
retrospective glance from the twentieth century to the first
century, and reason on the mechanical and intellectual progress,
and speak of that age as it speaks itself. It gives the early
progenitors of our race their biography till the death of Abel.
Then Seth was born ; his family was called the sons of God—
he came in the line of progenitors of the Christ. His family
married into other people, and forsook the religion of their
father. They were called the sons of God, the chosen family
for the revelation and prophetic utterances concerning Christ.
R. 1., you scoffer ! You say the God of heaven had sons, and
they came down from heaven and married women. Then the
ark meets your sarcasm —one window 21 in. square ! The
window was finished twenty-one inches above the deck, being
a fanlight the whole length and breadth of the ark (Gen. 6 :
16) ! Moses’ mistakes ! You mean your ignorance of a common-
sense interpretation. You say the sun was created on the
fourth day. Shame on your ignorance ! Any schoolboy could
correct you ! You are a lawyer; can you not see God in juris-
prudence in the Bible and in nature? Can you not read how
the nations like you forsook God, and still claimed God; carried
out their own will, and said God is with us? And when God
was not a party in any way, then all was the devil —the disease,
disorder, is the curse of man.
Moses was the leader of the Jews, and not the slightest
doubt, though under Divine influence the Children of Israel
were erratic; they were left to their own ways. King after king
they choose, and they were erratic as well as the people. Then
there was a reign of prophets, foretelling the coming of the
Messiah, and the destiny of the Jews till the Christ came.
■E.
During the period of 4000 years, different nations existed,
who practised the most diabolical abuses of their manhood.
The Jews, under the guidance of their rulers, affirmed the


64
authority of God for all their acts. The writers of those acts
impute the Divine authority.
My opinion is that if the Jews were cruel, they exceeded God’s
decree in destroying the Midianites. Death soon comes when
the body is injured.
What is all this sham mockery about slaughtering men, women
and babes? The God of nature is just as cruel. I dare you,
R. Ingersoll, to draw a line of demarcation. There were more
brutal scenes in Pompeii, Herculaneum, Fort Royal, Mar-
tinique, Rotomahana, than all the slaughter by the Children of
Israel.
Yet man paints in lurid rhetoric the beauties of the God of
nature that bathes the land in the smiles of sunshine, and causes
the dewdrop to embrace the opening bud and clothe the moun-
tain with the mantle of verdure, drinking in the prismatic
colour of the general sunshine. Such wor# painting can never
produce in the soul of man the link of God’s voice down the
stream of time in rocks of nature; only in the Rock Christ
can that voice produce response in the soul. This power has
travelled through the ages —it is the evolution of religion, God
being in and through all till the soul is captivated. It enters
the dark heart of man by his senses —faith comes by hearing.
Hearing what ? The voice of God in Christ.
R. Ingersoll, what has the five points of Calvin to do with
God, or the Thirty-nine Articles of Faith, or the standards of
Rome or Scotland? You say, Let it be understood once for
all, you have a profound respect for Christ. If He came again
you would fall at His feet and do Him homage in tears !
Consistency ! And you would blot out the book that moves
your soul. Why not put the simple facts, not misrepresenta-
tions? You may get dollars for vilifying God at the expense
of your judgment; but what will it profit if you lose your
eternal happiness ? Do not take any risks; the road is a dark
one where there is no light. You may take it; better get some
oil in your lamp. Let God alone; you may be wrong; safety is
in not risking. The God of the Bible is God in and through
humanity and their acts. God in many cases never endorsed
their acts; in others it was God’s duty to destroy root and
branch a people sunk lower than the brute creation. His long-
suffering is now beseeching men and women to live holy, virtuous
lives —not creeds, or churchanity, or dogmas —but Christ living
in us (Gal. 3: 20, 21). Renan says, “To take name
from our world would be to rend it to its foundation. R.
Ingersoll, you have said as much as this, yet tried to destroy


65
the Book that proclaimed His coming and His mission. You
must be worse than your imaginary god that you paint so black !
“ Oh, for the gift that God would gee us,
That we could see ourselves as others see us.”
You use figures of speech as the Bible writers did. Here is
a sample. The air of liberty, the sunshine of thought. Com-
pare Moses and the windows of heaven opened. You want
men to prophesy the destiny of America. I suppose vou mean
the people, not the local land lines which define it. The
Bible prophecies concerning you (2 Peter 3 : 3), and all lawyers
like you. \ou are an able man. Why do you want someone
else to prophesy for you? Are you afraid of it being said
of you what was said of a client who conducted his own
case —a fool ! You are not in the same boat as David : he leaves
you in the distance. You are only fit to play second fiddle to
Solomon and Christ, for comparisons shame you. Solomon in
all his glory was not arrayed as the lily of "the field. David
said, He spreads out the heavens, and hangs them on nothing ;
makes the winds His chariot; He gathers the waters of the
sea. together as a heap ! Here is Bible word painting for your
dollar lectures! You want ministers not to talk like parrots;
and they want lawyers not to talk like an animal Balaam had, or
Thomas Smith sold in London. You want professors to tell
all they find in the world. I am a professor of humbugism.
I have found vou. Let all the world know that R. Ingersoll
O' O
says the God of the Bible and the Bible are not fit to go into
any school; and yet he saysjaf Christ, the Alpha and Omega
of it, that he would in tears' fall at His feet and give Him
homage. The devil tried the game—to overthrow Christ. Your
crocodile tears ! Christ is your doormat for dollars. One world
at a time your doctrine. You are right for once, Bob —you
cannot injure God. Oh, no; but you would (if you could)
blot out the only book that declares Him. I remember some
doggerel lines :
“ Cursed is that man—may he never grow fat —
That carries two faces under one hat !”
Here is a portrait of someone; who will fit the hat better
than you? Napoleon said, I have lived to get a name that has
brought sorrow to many hearts. There is a name that gives
joy and peace; it is Christ! x
HORACE.


£vo/utioij.
In 1858, C. Darwin’s work, “ The Origin of Species,” was
issued from the press, and for some time remained a subject of
interesting study to the scientific and religious students, out
of which arose press and verbal discussions. The work caught
on the public mind, and a war of controversy by the opposing
forces of the two extremes aroused the attention of clergy, laity,
and science. Some of the clergy were unable to answer the
scientific question; and hundreds accepted the theory, as a
scientific fact, with the proviso that God’s method of creation
was by evolution, and gave up the idea of creation by special
fiat. My brother, a scientist, thought he had discovered the
connecting link —in the vegetable and the organic kingdom. It
was a grub and a plant growing out of its mouth; and for years
the war has been going on. It has been discovered that this
grub, in its transition, frequently gets a seed of some plant into
its body, which grows out of it. The question : Did a Creator,
by the inherent power called absolute, command it to be, and it
was done (of course the matter was in existence) ? or did matter
exist from eternity, and by inherent potential forces produce, by
spontaneous generation, organic existence, and life, without
any intelligent cause, and the effect evolved? The conserva-
tion of this energy, by transmutation of species from one specie
advocated by Darwin, Huxley, and Spencer, became the
foundation stone in the theory evolution ! I may state, here
C. Darwin parts company with Haeckel —the one says a Creatoi
breathed life into the primordial germs, the other that it came
into being by natural laws without a creator —that matter and
mind are developed concurrently.
From this point the war of to-day (after the mature con-
siderations on the subject) begins, and the. question is : Can the
inorganic dead, lifeless matter, by any law inherent in itself,
produce life and organic existence? Again, the question is
asked : How can any inorganic cause produce, as a first cause,
life —that which was not eternally existing in itself? for life
must be the force to move. There is mind, force, matter ;if
matter moves, mind moves it; if spontaneous generation did
not inherit it, how could it evolve it as a cause to produce the
effect (life), which never had it in itself? To me this is a per-
fect enigma. Who*ls there that can give a concrete explanation
of the law that caused spontaneous generation, and gave to it
the power of transmutation of life, and organs of mind, thought,
speech, language? Can it be possible in the name of reason,


for that which has not to give to something else what it never
had? Talk about creating out of nothing is foolishness to this
philosophy ! Evolution demands involution—involved demands
an involver before there can be anything evolved. And as
spontaneous generation is a process, and evolution a theory,,
there is not any scientific fact that ever such a process existed.
It is like the Gill and Caudle theory—that after eight weeks
the one vanishes, leaving seven months for the progeny to
exist without the gills. Lional Beale, Stirling, say the gulf
cannot be bridged—life from dead matter cannot come.
Twiddle of JYlmd and after.
Is man a finite organic existence, without any correlation to
an Infinite? Is the inorganic universe without any correla-
tive force for its existence? Which of the two is the greater
riddle of our age? There are facts, mind, force and matter,
common to all men. Our knowledge is by our experience;
and this is expressed in axiomatical terms. I exist, the world
of matter exists, this is self-evident; it and I are objects
diverse, organic and inorganic, dead and living matter. I am
conscious that I am holding a portion of the inorganic in my
hand, dipping it in ink, and on the paper my subjective ideas
are being written in words by an unseen cause (called the
I or ego) controlling and directing' the will to record ideas
from the past intuitional percepts, and it can be read as the
I’s direction of its ideals from its experience. Here is
unanimity of experience—knowledge. I am thinking as I
am writing of my individuality. I cannot change it or my
personality, or become incarnate in another. I carry my
cares and joys; I alone know them. Engaged on this work,
I see my mind unfolding from the ego through the brain
corpuscles to the nerves. They write from the mysterious
depths of bygone years, but now present; and as there is a
correlative power over the matter (brain) and a mystery of
the reproduction of the past by an entity (neither matter or
the ego, something infinite), I see them not by the organ of
sense, yet I know they exist —the fountain source of the con-
trolling influences of my personality. I see by sense and per-
cept the motion of the pen, and reason to the phenomenon
that moves it. If I doubt this, it is my consciousness that
impeaches consciousness. I reflect on the written ideas, and


say, if I had spoken every word, then the ear would have
heard sounds created by the motions of the lips and tongue,
by the same entity that controlled the pen. I am now in-
volved in a mystery —mind spoken, mind written, the same
power directing dead, inert matter to record words, and
directing mind to make sounds, language to the same end.
As therefore the correlative force exists in the phenomenon
man, and his forces are seen in directing dead, inert inor-
ganic matter to record its ideas and directing mind to ex-
press in sound-language; so there must exist a relationship
to a higher than the I (ego) that imparts to it its functions.
Every house is built by some man, but He that built all
things is God, or the world and man is an inexplicable riddle.
As man is not self-created or self-existent, he is of a series
of like begot by like: they are a numerable quantity, having
a first and last in the series.
I here enter into a soliloquy. The ego, conversing with
itself. I say, know thyself, as knowledge is experience.
How can I get a sense-impress of the vortex movements of
brain to self. I want a starting point. I seek advice—l ask
someone, whence came 1? who am I? They look at me, and
in the subjective surmise mad, and say to me, Mad ! I am
insulted,, my insanity impeached. I determine to read Dar-
win, Blatchford, and Haeckel about a philosophic view of a
God. Darwin says, a Creator breathed life into a few forms
(p. 195 “Origin of Species”), Haeckel (p. 13 “Riddle of the
Universe”) would grant that the causator is an infinite and
eternal cause; like Lord Kelvin’s God. Mr. Blatchford (p.
47 “Who is My Neighbour?”) “This speaks of a Creator, I
shall not contradict. What kind must He be to create such
a universe as this?” Blatchford, what a misfortune you
did not exist before you were born to give advice to God, the
Infinite and Eternal, how to create! We want men-gods
like you, with great powers. Mr. Blatchford, you ask what
kind of a God can He be to create a universe like ours. There
is no need to criticise; act the superior, make a better,
create a trial one, hang it up to dry in your study, or better,
on the clothes line. No plagiarising ideas of the botch uni-
verse or its laws: it must be original. When it and you are
ready for a trial I will charter Mr. Stewart, the air king,
and his balloon to take you up and put you on it; please
invite some of your school to go with you. Have you any
faith in your bombastic utterances? if so, act the man
superior to the God-botch. If you do not act, you are like


6g
the man who found fault with God for making his stomach
to hold one meal. He was like R. Haw, the Glasgow glut-
ton, who could eat a calf. So some minds are gluttons—
they understand more than they know. I have discovered
by the scientists that they agree in the existence of the
infinite and eternal, also mind, matter and force. I must
now discover their correlation to some cause, as these three
form the character that at the beginning conversed with self.
Am I self-existent, my own causator and effect? I am of a
series of like —a negotiable quantity, a first and last. Every-
where I see law and order in the objective world; and in the
mind, force and matter, myself is order. A series of
sequences is law. I inquire, is there any law whereby I can
discover God? If so, where, in mind or in matter? Matter
is dead inert; mind is from mind; two books, mind on matter
(created objects), mind in language. I read (Heb. xi.) with-
out faith it is impossible to please God; that he that
cometh to Him must believe that He is, also a rewarder to
those who diligently seek Him. This is as true as any law
that rules and directs the universe of matter. These words
were originated in some mind as the link that connects the
divine and the human, like the telephone. I now ask Mr.
Haeckel, Is this true science (p. 106 “R.U.”) “Faith in
the scientific sense is indispensable.’’ Why do you, Mr. H.,
claim faith for science, and then turn on theological faith
(p. 107), and declare it means a belief in miracles and is
superstition? Yours is rational faith in anthropoid apes;
evolving men and women, gemmules, electrons, particles,
atoms, molecules, evolving apes out of homogeneous matter,
the inorganic evolving the organic; life evolving from chemi-
cal atoms without mind, force or matter. Where was matter
before it became matter? Was there light then? How,
pray, do you know all this? Be rational, knowledge is ex-
perience ; were you there? Do not postulate miracles and
iDecome irrational! You call Bible faith superstition. Physi-
cian, heal thyself, for on page 13 your faith is rational in
the belief of an Infinite Eternal, and on page 107 it is a
superstition. The legs of the lame are unequal. I have dis-
covered the connecting link that binds man to God. Reason
fared, and upon this divine law (Heb. xi.) rest science and
revelation. No man can show God in His person; He is
seen by faith, an individual act of mind and responsibility;
easier believed than disbelieved, it being the mind’s basis—
the only foundation of things hoped for. In the scientific


7<\
light of faith, we walk not by sight, for it (faith) is the evi-
dence of the unseen, the enduring and the eternal.
Dear Father, —I send you a copy of Mr. Blatchford's book,
“Who is My Neighbour?” I consider it unworthy of the
paper it is printed on. Give me your views on it.
HORACE.
Science proves Tjooks aqd jYfircrcles,
“WHO IS MY NEIGHBOUR?”
Science is all the facts of observation—knowledge. Every
science has its own court, its laws of testing the validity of
claims in dispute: in commercial trading, scales, weights,
measures, rules; in books, the science of ideology, history,
archaeology. Supposition and imagination have no place in
court. Suppose the moon was a big cheese, imagine the
sea milk, the judge would send the witness for medical ex-
amination. As there is the science of botany, astrology,
ideology, so there is bibliology. Its court is history, anthro-
pology and theology. Absolute knowledge does not exist
in anthropology. It exists in Theos; comparative know-
ledge must be as pertaining to the anthro. In the mental
world, our dictionary defines the use of words, such as books,
miracles; the first is the anthro, the second the Theos. If
we prove a miracle we prove a Theos; if a book Is, it is self
evident. The word miracle defined is the Theos’ interposi-
tion or exercise of His almighty power; and when the anthro
discovers it he writes it in a book. R. 8., where were you
before the Theos interposed, and your bioplasm was not an
animal or vegetable? You are what you are by divine inter-
position in bioplasm —a talking, conscious reality unseen by
sense, unseen by consciousness, and you are conscious that you
exist, and positively know you are incomprehensible. You
are a living miracle, and your book, “ Who is My Neigh-
bour?” proves the two. Why not permit the Theos to have
a book? Men have, in translations, mutilated it ;do not try
to blot out your neighbour’s book. Note this: —As all ideas
come by perception from the object’s existence, how could
man formulate the idea of an uncaused cause, and give the
sign-concept in the word God, without either seeing or hear-
ing the object? No being known as man has in all his


7i
psychological science the power to formulate the spoken
sign-concept or idea without seeing or hearing or a per-
ception by sense. Imagination could not supply it. This is
science absolute. I once read of a bee hunter finding a hive
in aho low tree. He forced his body up to the hive, but
got snagged by his pants. The bees stung him, a bear took
shelter in the tree, and between the bees and the bear he
had a lively time. lam afraid the moral of prove the miracle,
the bees and the bear science will prove a moral to you.
We take your supposition and imagination into the court of
reason and justice:—
Mr. Blatchford.—Before you can prove your miracles you
have to prove your book ; suppose the case to come before
a judge; try to imagine what would happen.
Judge.—Call R.B. Te lus how you know miracles are im-
possible?
R.B.—No person can perform a miracle; it is opposed to
science. It proves there is a law for all phenomena.
Judge.—Sir, you confound . language, and contradict
yourself. Law proceeds from a law-giver, from authority to
rule by the law; it is absolute power whether by a legis-
lative body or an infinite authority.
R-B.—We agnostics do not believe in absolute persons,
because we have never seen them; we cannot believe in
that which the mind has no perception of.
Judge.—Are you now conscious that you are speaking and
reasoning about miracles and proving a book?
R.B.—Yes, your Honor, I am.
Judge.—Can you see your conscience or your reason are
controlling your mind by law, the intuitional knowledge?
You are conscious of their power, and you have never seen
them —a miracle !
R-B.—Your remarks are true, your Honor. We say it is
all nature.
Judge.—Then you are a miracle, for the existing con-
scious object cannot comprehend or discover the law or
cause that gave existence and consciousness to it; still, by
the mystery of speech, you are darkening the power of the
mirac e worker (God) and His book. The existing miracle,
man, proves the Book.
Judge.—Mr. Huxley, you published a scientific work,
Ihe Physical Basis of Life,” In 1868, Cook Biology,
Page 1.
Huxley.—That is so, your Honor.


72
Judge.—Please tell us what you know about miracles.
Huxley.—Science knows nothing of miracles. It investi-
gates causes and qualities of matter, and tries to discover
their laws of operation. The unseen law of matter is
miraculous to me.
Judge.—The miracle being supernatural, makes it a divine
act?
Huxley.—That is so, your Honor, in the absence of the
law.
Judge.—Can you tell us how a law in the abstract can be
a cause without the matter to be the basis of its operation, or
how it influences itself to move inert matter? and how matter
could exist without the law that created it? Matter is an
effect, it is correlated to law; if there be no law-giver, as
you say science knows none, to science it is a miracle!
Judge.—What are you, Mr. Darwin?
Darwin. —An evolution scientific philosopher.
Judge.—Tell us what you know about miracles.
Darwin.—(p. 195, “Origin of Species.’’) The view of
life, with its several powers having been originally breathed
by the Creator into a few forms, -is most beautiful and
wonderful.
Judge.—What are you, Mr. Haeckel?
Haeckel. —I am an evolution scientist.
Judge.—Please tell us what you know.
Haeckel. —(p. 10, 12, “Evolution of Man”) How muck
more dreadful must it have seemed to deal with the em-
bryonic body still enclosed in the womb, which the Creator
himself has hidden in secret! God created on the 6th day
200,000,000,000 beings stored in Eve: this eclipses 2,000,000
suns in our universe.
Judge.—What are you, Mr. Fleming?
Mr. Fleming. —I am an atheistical anarchist. I repudiate
all law and God. No person has ever seen God, or returned
from the dead. I defy any person to show me one —there is
none, it is all moonshine.
Judge.—The fact of your saying you are an anarchist re-
pudiating all law, does not free you from all law. We see
only one side of the moon, the other side assuredly exists;
you see only this side of life, the other side exists. To law
you must yield —eat what law supplies, sleep by law or go
mad, die by law, it is supernatural—that is, over nature.
Your repudiation is all moonshine. Refuse to think, to
speak, to walk, and the penal sentence is complete.


73
Mr. B latch ford is non-suited. The miracle proves the
Book, and the Book proves God, the miracle of mind and
.matter. Costs to be costs.
yarra J>arl
Along the Alexandra Parade, that picturesque avenue that
skirts the banks of the ever-flowing Yarra Yarra, is one of the
most pleasing sights to be found in or around Melbourne. As
you walk along, and commune with your own heart, your soul
pours out a flood of rapture that approaches to divine praise
and adoration to God for His goodness, having bounteously,
prodigally lavished these beautiful gifts to beautify that spot,
once the scene of quagmires and reedy swamps, truly a veritable
wilderness, now made one of the most enchanting pictures
the eye could wish to see. Just beyond this lies the Yarra
Park, notable for the wordy battles which are constantlv being
fought for reform in religious and political liberties. Men
argue their opinions about time and eternity, the existence of
God. The Church or Parliament hears them not, nor are
their statements about work and poverty heard. The churches
are thronged; they sit in fine linen, faring sumptuously every
day—they hear not the voice of discontentment. These facts
came under the author’s eye. A publican gave for a
stained window ; a defaulter, for a bell; a grocer pays
for a church paper on certain conditions; a member said. Is it
right to have heaven on one side and whisky on the other ? The
grocer and reverend heard, and he said, You will have to
apologise; don’t you know he often puts a guinea in the plate?
Their conscious liberality must not be touched; publish it not
in Gath, nor tell it in the street of Askelon. In the Morgue
close to (the receptacle of the outcast and lost of humanity)
lays in calm repose, the bodies self-destroyed. The teeming
crowd hurries along, on the Yarra Park, beside the dead. ’Tis
here we find the natural outflow of the men of the street, the
unsophisticated sentiment of humanity, the cry for liberty,
freedom of expression, of thought; here we gain, independent
of creedal or religious bias, the mind of the illiterate, and
erudite —they are all seeking for a leader or teacher.
The first one we meet is a medium-aged gentleman with a
map called the self-existent and the created universe. One
time the vast infinitude was a solid mass, and out of this
came the created by evolution


74
A voice : How do you know that ? —A. : It has been communi-
cated to me.
Q. : V\ hat about the created, who created it? —A. : I dis-
covered it by my brains.
A second voice; Who was the communicator to let you
know this ? and if you discovered it by your brains, there
must have been a brain-impress. As it took place many
millions of years ago, where were your brains then? No answer.
This person claims to be King David incarnate; he is a pro-
phet, seeking a people. Here is a chance for someone wanting
a prophet.
The next we meet in person holds his audience in good
humour by his gesticulations and genuflections, roaring like a
lion or imitating a bear, causing great mirth among young and
old.
Next we meet a speaker who holds his audience in good
He is evidently a Christian. He speaks several tongues, and
explains the Parsee religion; he is very sincere.
Then there is an intelligent group called the Humbug Society.
They are members of the R.C. Church, who discuss all topics,
religious and political, and permit free and fair discussion in a
very orderly and Christian spirit.
We notice an aged lady with a sweet voice singing. She
pauses, and hands you a tract. She is doing what she can ;
her reward is in her act.
We notice a group with an organ, conducting a religious
service. A person has just given his heart to Christ; they are
all kneeling and praying to God to keep him. The scoffer
is there. I turn away in disgust; the brutality of man to scoff
at a man aiming at a holier life !
We see two aged persons, snow-white, shining like frosted
.silver in the glittering sunbeams. They sing, they pray, then
talk, to the crowd in a true evangelical spirit.
Then we see the red flags of the Socialist, and the L.P.A.
propounding new theories for man, one world at a time. They
get a patient hearing.
Then we hear an advocate of Zoroaster, proclaiming the
Bible allegorical, taken from mythology, the sun god, Virgo the
virgin, Aries the Lamb Christ. He denies that such a being
ever existed, and invites anyone to his stand to contradict him.
Then we have an atheistical anarchist. He denounces God,
kings, parliaments, churches. He truly has the patience of a
Job. For some twenty years, wet or dry, his enthusiasm
never burns out. He is a strict teetotaler, and of unimpeach-


y “
ault; character. He is a perfect iconoclast. The greatest injury
is done to our rising generation, for he is immodest in his
remarks.
He is the leader of anarchy in Australia. Here is his testi-
ngoll} in his speech. He denies and challenges any proof of a
God or His laws. He denounces all law as tyrannical, and
proclaims liberty absolute, _ which is licentiousness. Then he
contradicts himself by saying, all anarchists are compelled to
obey Nature’s laws; Nature is God in creative law correlated
as _ the created to the Creator. He therefore admits God’s
existence in law by it compelling him to obey His infinite laws !
Consistency, thou art a jewel ! You challenge proof of a God,
then declare you are compelled to obey Him in law, committing
verbal suicide! Take him to the morgue; hold an inquest—a
felo-de-se !
We take a second Sunday to study the traits of the human
mind. We follow the groups of pedagogues. We notice an
agitator who was before the court for liberty. He has the
Biole, and is giving his reading of Ezekiel. He has a young
convert. How he flourishes in his ignorance, and plays on his
victim ! Then another of his school interjects : Yes; God in-
spired Luke to lie. He said Cyrenius was Governor of Syria
at the birth of Christ, and it was not till twelve years after.
Theres a lying book; look at all the writing from Genesis to
Revelation. Why, it says Gospel according to Luke, not God
the Holy Ghost. There is not an original manuscript in exist-
ence. No one knows who wrote them. They are frauds, and
your sky-pilots are fooling you.
Pages of this claptrap is listened to by our rising generation.
Youths from the country go and listen; they carry the sickly
germs with them and become scoffers. All this is tolerated in
this free country; and they are crying for liberty and freedom of
speech when they have it.
Let me try to answer the many questions that I heard : —ln
the first place, for sixty years I have never found anything to
change my convictions of the ethics of the Bible. I say live
it simply in that state of mind of a pure and holy God; and
as Tom Paine believed in a state of rewards and punishment
hereafter, live the man, act the man to men ; never mind the
creed of your great-grandfather’s beliefs. “ Work out your own
salvation in fear and trembling.” Study the New Covenant.
Dear Father, —
I paid a second visit to the Yarra Park; there were several
hundreds of persons present, either for fun or food for serious


. . T
contemplation, I know not. I wondered why there was not a
Paul or a Barnabas there. This is the plague spot of our
cmhsation. A Socrates is required. The speaker maintained
that Professor Haeckel had proved that evolution had dispensed
with God; and in order to give proof he called on Him to
strike him dead. This was spoken before many of the young
men. I felt a chill pass over my soul: I shuddered at the
defiant statement. He held a Bible in his hand, and read
the Midianite massacre. How few understand this : —A theo-
cratic government, God-ruling; a people so degenerate, as being
unworthy of life: they offered sacrifice to Moloch, they in-
dulged in sodomy, incest, and bestiality (read Rom. 1 : 26-29);
and the Children of Israel were drawn into their practices
(Num. 25 : 8), and God ordered their destruction.
. Like the antediluvians, and Sodom and Gomorrah, all civi-
lised nations do the same —we hang, France decapitates,
America electrocutes, the more civilised methods of putting to
death. No one complains; and our health officers burn and
destroy every plague out of .existence. This was a moral
plague, as is the Yarra bank a disgrace to our civilisation.
The orator painted in lurid colours the destruction of men and
women. He forgot Fort Royal, Rotomahana, Vesuvius, Cali-
fornia, the thousands slaughtered by his so-called pious nature.
The whole affair to me seems like seeking notoriety. If this man
knows there is no God, why charge that which is not with
doing what his own creed affirms Haeckel’s evolution has done?
As man has no will, why make all this fuss if man is not
responsible for his actions, is their dogma. If he has no power
over actions, then he ceases to be responsible. The will’s dicta-
tion is, to the mind, what life is to the body —the power of
motion. The mind wills, therefore the body acts ; and without
a will, man is an irresponsible being —a lunatic. This is a
favourite theory of this person; he plays much on it. Man
has, he says, no free will; he therefore is insane.
A person in one of the groups put a question ; Do you believe
that Balaam’s ass spake? —Yes, was the reply ; there are talking
magpies and laughing jackasses in every department of life.
Question : What are the foundations of the earth mentioned
in Psalm 104: 5? Reply: The immutable laws of God. If
ever there was a display of our Creator’s power, it is in the
planetary system. Light, travelling 186,000 miles a second,
would take a million years to reach some of the planets in
space, and they all are hanging on nothing (Job 26 : 7). Here
is a definition of nothing. Immutable law.


77
Question : What kind of a body will we have in the future
state? Reply : A spiritual (Phil. 3 : 21; Mat. 17 : 2; 1 Cor.
15 : 44; Rev. 22 : 8,9; Eccl. 12 : 7 j 2 Sam. 14 : 14: 2 Cor.
3 •* i 3- .
Question : WhaQ is the impress of the Divine in man?
Repl\ . Man s spiritual nature —his ego. It is finite in degree
to the Infinite, but bears a contrasted power upon the lines of a
constituted free will —self-control. Under the Spirit of the
Infinite Modeller, God, man is spirit and matter : the spirit
immortal, the matter mortal.
HORACE.
Question : Is the idea of a beneficent and Almighty God—a
Creator—reasonable in the face of the fact that evil exists in
the world ? Reply : Your question reads, There is evil in the
world, therefore (a conclusion) the idea of an Almighty Creator
is contrary to the province of reason. Are ideas contrary to
reason's environment because they seem to clash with the idea
of the existence of an Almighty Creator? I answer, No.
The idea is that God cannot be beneficent and almighty, be-
cause man has sinned; he desires to know is it reasonable.
Reason demands the existence of a First Cause, then reasons
on the objective coming under its cognitions j and reason comes
to the conclusion a beneficent God made man t and man made
the evil. Reason then reasons—how could a beneficent God make
him free to act and yet restrict the freedom ? God’s beneficence
made provision for his fall j and if man will brutalise himself,
God makes His laws to punish in this life and the life to come.
The idea of a beneficent Almighty God is not contrary to
reason : it is reasonable.
Question: Can a perfect God create an imperfect work ?
Reply : I am not a God or His prophet to know what He can
do or not do. I might ask someone if you could make a yard
square of water stand up without freezing. They would say,
I do not know what he could or could not do; and you are a
man like me. How can you expect me (a finite) to tell you
what an Infinite’s powers are? Use your reason.
Question : God made man in His own image. Why did He
not make him perfect?—Reply: From the simple fact that
God could not make him as he is, and yet be different to what
he is. Man is a rational being, having the freedom of the
mind and reasoning faculties. He is not a chained slave by
instinct, as you would have God keep him by restricting the
freedom of the will given. He can, and will have to, keep him-


78
self by observing God s laws, or be responsible for breach.
Question : Why should I be condemned for the offence of
Adam or any other person? Reply: “Why should,” etc.
I do not care for whys; give me facts. Your question is as
baseless as the fabric of a vision of the night—it only exists
in imagination, not facts. Adam sinned; he was responsible;
he suffered death. We are the progeny of Adam, dying by
natural law, like begetting like. Neither you nor I are responsible
for the act of Adam.
Question : Lucifer, or the devil, being described as a fallen
angel from heaven, where does the Christian hope to be safe?
Reply ; I expect to be safe wherever I am, under the conditions
I now state: Where there is no law, there can be no sin; and
if there is law, and I keep it inviolate, ergo, I am safe —justice
Las no charge against me.
REMARKS ON THE ABOVE ANSWERS.
The answer to No. i question, stating that ideas are not con-
trary to reason because they seem to clash with something else, is
an evasion; and then you proceed to ask me another question.
Please, sir, remember I am asking for an explanation. —Answer :
Your strictures upon my answer and explanatory note are in
keeping with your school. Nothing suits you. My answer
was an emphatic no ! and you got an explanatory note with it,
and, forsooth ! now you do not want an answer to the questions,
but an explanation, which also you got. Yet again, you want an
-explanation explained ! Consistency, thou art a jewel \
Question No 2. —You attempt answer by putting another
question as to whether A could tell if B was able to perform
that which every sane person knows is an impossibility? This,
sir, is absurd. You then admit that there is no analogy between
my question and answer; and you illustrate and wind by
admitting plainly that you are unable to offer any solution.
This is certainly very candid. —Answer ; I am greatly pleased
to read critical objections (to my candid reply). Now, did it
not appear to you that you were the greater simpleton by pro-
pounding a question which every sane person of careful thought
knows to be a mental impossibility to answer. A could not
tell what B could do, although it may appear to be a physical
impossibility. This to you is absurd. So is your question,
brother ; you are in the trap of your own setting. Give me your
hand while I pull you out !
Question No. 3. —Do not play your tricks with the personal


XT 79
pronoun. Not that it matters in any case; you limit the power
of God by admitting He can do certain things. Does not
the fact of man having gone wrong necessitate the pre-existence
•of an imperfection, so far as having mind and reason free :
both are restricted by environment. Keep what law ? Did
you ever know a man to break natural law? If so. where?
Ambiguity may pass for reason or logic, but does not answer
plain, straightforward questions.—Reply : Do not measure my
corn by your bushel. “ Evil be to him who evil thinks.”
Where does my trickery come in? Is it where you ask me, Can
man break natural law? In Luke i : 37 you got mv answer;
and now you add another question. 1 was too long in your
school—drawing a herring across the trail by putting another
question, and avoiding my candid answer! That won’t do; it
may pass as logic, but I call it evading the question. Read
my answer again, friend. Do I know of anyone breaking a
natural law ? Yes. I knew a man that tried to fly :it was not
his nature —he came down. He violated natural law : paid the
penalty. You are now violating the law of a finite by assuming
to know God’s follies (1 Cor. 1 : 25). Mind you do not fall.
Question No. 4.—Evidently investigation is not your line.
Remember, I am not advancing a plan of salvation, but interro-
gating one which I anticipated you would explain —if you
could. —Reply : You are growing eloquent, and seem as though
you could preach to me a sermon upon what is not my line.
Do not be rash; you may have found a mare’s nest. Give me
what I asked for—viz., facts, and not your whys and whims.
You are, writing to a man—not a fool. You are interrogating a
plan of salvation. I declared it to be as baseless as the vision’s
fabric of a night’s dream. It may be your imagination.
When I ask you for facts, you verily anticipated I would
•explain. Explain what? Read my answer, friend.
Question No. 5. —More ambiguity ! A point may receive a
core of definitions. I do not know anyone who would describe
a suitable resting-place for any individual. I assume that the
Christian strives to enter the kingdom of heaven. All that I
know, and profess to follow, and not any particular point that
I may choose to indicate to them. —Reply : You wanted to
Enow where the Christian could be safe, if Lucifer came out of
heaven. I pointed out that whether under law or no law,
safety is certain by keeping law. Your stupidity I cannot help,
nor your score of definitions, or a point of locality —your am-
biguity —a resting-place ! It was safety from the consequences
of violated la\v in a certain place called heaven; and I said.


if I was there, and there was no law, I was safe, and if there
was law, and I kept it inviolate, justice could not charge me.
Not a question of resting the weary body. As for your assump-
tion that the Christian strives to enter heaven while here is no
business of yours. I interrogate your school and your phil-
osophy, and make aggression on you. Ido not allow anyone to
impeach my convictions until he openly declares what his creed
is. I am a truth-seeker and a believer in the book called the
Bible. You appended, lastly, my final effusion re law and
justice, implying that the two were synonymous. Just reflect a
moment, and ask yourself if that statement is tenable: try
again, it will not do any harm.
Question No. 6. —Reply : I missed part of your hypercritical
criticisms on my pedantry. Ask yourself if these are not in-
sulting words. Visions are baseless fabrics of “my party,”
for on them they are dependent for all their success; and then,
my law and my justice ! Your pedantry ! I have, perhaps, as
much as yourself, and can follow you. Then, “my party,” do
not be hard. My dear friend, we know that you do all the
solid thinking, and are no visionary or fanatic. You have been
dependent upon “ don’tknowism ” too long for it to be a
success. Tell me what you do know more than us : act the man
superior, teach, but do not insult —we are all learners. Try
your hand again; you have only convinced me that you have
nothing to give, that you are a negationist. If not, let us have
the deepest thoughts "of thy soul; enlighten world. We
require such men as you that can see the light of intellectuality
and the depth of our ignorance : the human mind is panting for
it. Could you exercise your reasoning faculties upon an unper-
ceived idea ? God —the word is a sign-concept of God : it is an
idea by the perceptive organs. All His works are stamped with
perfection and order. Man is the word for man ; it is the sign-
concept of him. All his works bear the impress of imperfection ,
and because he is not as wise or wiser than his Creator, he is
evil in his mind continually (read Micah 6 : 8), resisting God.
£ A £■


Spiritualism and Jyfejnjerism.
About the year 1830, Dr. Gail discovered phrenology, the
science of reading the head. He divided the head into sec-
tions, and gave definitions to each part, such as philoprogeni-
tiveness, combativeness, etc. He affirmed where certain
organs were fully developed, the man was under their influence
and power, that the mental world was one of continual
warfare, each organ conflicting with the other to keep man in
the path of righteousness. It was said there ought to be
Government inspectors, and where they found a suspicious
head, it ought to be removed from the public. Then a further
discovery was made —mesmerism, a magnetic power in
every person which, by the exercise of the will-power, the will
of a person acted in conjunction with the mesmerist, and
wonders were performed by men and women. They became
hypochondriac; credulity seized them, and they fancied they
were the slaves of a magnetic power. A glass of water was
milk, salt was poison, and acting like persons bereft of reason.
Then it was discovered that the developments on the head
could be so manipulated when in this state of magnetism
that the person would respond to the organ. When a per-
son was in a trance, the audience would send up
on a piece of paper a question. The organ touched
would respond like the key of a piano. This was
proof that the person was under mesmeric influence, as
the mesmerist did not speak to the person under its influence.
Then again it was discovered that such persons were clair-
voyant, and they sent their spirits wherever told, and
messages from the dead came, and the sick prescribed for,
large audiences paying to see it. Like all wonders, it ceased
to be. . The public, the ladies cried out we will be the victims,
and our virtue destroyed, as the villain, man, will not stop
at anything. Being an investigator, I find spiritualism has
sprung into existence like the other discoveries, and here
they profess to have Divine authority. Christ was a media of
the highest order, and did not the Witch of Endor call
Samuel from the dead, and get a message for Saul? Thus
a new religion was said to be founded on the Bible. Monied
men and poor persons with credulity seized hold of it, as their
heart’s affection for the dead was never divorced from their
mind. They became the victims of the mediums. jQ s. d.
was in it. Audiences gathered to hear, ana messages from
the dead from six pennyworth to half a guinea ; consultations


by appointment; and to catch all country people, they could
send hair of the dead or any article to these revealers. Two
spiritists had a written controversy. One said it was a re-
ligion, the other a science (Mesmerism).
I now relate my own experience, which is true science; and
then add newspaper reports. I attended a sitting at Dr.
Poyser’s study; being late, had to stay outside, as the lady
had just gone off into a trance. When let in, was told I
had missed a treat —the lady had read the title page of a
book from the caps of her knees! The son of Dr. Cutts was
present. He was put off into a supposed trance, and was
asked, “Will gold evpr be found in Australia?” He said,
“Yes; when they bring it!” Some said that is a funny
answer. Another was put off. He was asked to send his
spirit to Government House, and give a description of the
drawing room. He did so. Here is the solution or sequel.
A Mr. Robertson said, “If it is true, I will give £2O to see
it done.” The club room was taken. The lady put into a
trance, then blindfolded; a book brought by the gentleman
held to her knees, and lo! Mahomet had to go to the moun-
tains : she failed.
Come with me to Castlemaine, in a seance: mysterious
things took place. A chamber article and a wheel-barrow
wheel came into the room. Did not Christ go through the
door or the wall? Why not pots and wheels do the same?
Here Is the sequel: a detective, a platform scales, a challenge
to the spook to come again. The room was carefully
searched, and just before the time every visitor put on the
scales. The seance began, the light removed, a ruffle, the
light! the light! the light! a glass of water! —not to bring
any ladies out of a faint, but to correct her standard weight.
Oh, ladies! After this you shine. As many as twenty ad-
vertise every Saturday this calling. I went to one of those
who advertises regularly. After the spooks had given a
message that spiritism is to become a mighty power, and
the media was to propagate it by all her ability, we were
asked if we would like to commune with our departed
friends. I was known to her, also my relations dead and
living ; I was wishing for a message, and it came : the spooks
would communicate with me, she said. Put yoar hand as
lightly as possible on the planchette. She said I was an
unbeliever, and was to pray for more faith. I said, humbug;
faith does not come by praying for it; it comes by seeing
and hearing. I was told no controversy was allowed, or the


8 3
spooks wou’d not correspond. After another communica-
tion from her friends that the whaling ship Runnymede was
wrecked at Port Chalmers, and her brother was in her, we
retired ; no such wreck took place. She also prescribed for
a sick horse, and poisoned it, and was sued for damages.
Mr. Walker, the great lecturer on spiritism, after fooling
people for months with his eyes shut, told us they said he
was in a trance. It was not true. Mr. Tyreman, spiritist.—
Telegram in “Age,” Mr. Tyreman drunk in street and
arrested.—Mr. Owen driven mad, deceived by the materi-
alisation of the spirit Katey King.—Boston Press in Gor-
don’s threefold test: the spiritualists are building an image
on the rock East Lynn, to be miraculously endowed with a
soul to be called the wonder of the Age.—The relics sent to-
the Sandford Museum in America, and said to have been
brought to Melbourne by spirits from the regions of an-
tiquity, was a deception.—l could fill pages. See Carr’s
pamphlet, “Spiritism self-condemned.” It is a state of mind
credulity ; the person is hypochondriacal, and many strange
things take place in this state of mind. History furnishes
accounts of this fact, whether by religion or credulity. A
person came to see me. He said, do you ever see spirits?
I replied, No. He took my right hand, and placing his other
on my head, he prayed that I might see them. Removing
his hand he said, There they are; can’t you see them—red,,
blue, green? I did not see anything. Another came and
said I was to come to them, God had sent them to me; and
that I might as well say that I could not see the lamp post
before me as to deny his message. Go to Yarra Bank every
Sunday. King David of Israel is there, both as King David
and Theophilus of the New Testament. God has told him
that He (God) was evolved out of a universe called the self-
existent as a finite personality; that He lived the good, be-
came God, and otherwise if He had not done so would
have been the devil. The half of the world is mesmerised by
clap-trap religions and scientific humbugism, telepathy, clair-
voyance. spiritism, mesmerism, incarnation, etc., till he that
teaches what is not a truism when he is tried for it must go-
to prison.
Human magnetic power! The world by such wisdom
knows not God. It flows, they say, from the body at the ex-
tremities of the fingers and toes. Why not collect it and
store it for driving the railways? I can by a piece of sealing
wax or by a magnetic battery produce more than all the


84
human magnetic power combined, telepathy —one mind in-
fluencing another —is correct, one fool makes many fools;
the world is looking for it, running after it. Go to a meet-
ing before the door is open, talk to some of them, they are
like tinder, they catch a spark and ignite and explode. I
went with a lady to a meeting; she became very nervous,
and trembled like an aspen leaf. The medium had not
arrived or was near the building: she had to be supported
out of the building. Mr. Carr and Professor Nash! Oh,
that people would read and learn. Mr. Carr was sued for
half profits in x tour in Melbourne and New Zealand; the
plaintiff lost his case, as he was only a fraud deceiving the
public. In an exhibition of will-power, Professor Nash said
to a boxer, I defy you, sir, to hit my nose! Bang ! and down
went Nash, his nose broken. This took place in a hall in
Bourke street. One more case. At a large gathering of
men and women a predominant was a lady decked with
jewellery and flowers. She mounted a platform, remarking
about Christians and what they believed. Whether as creedal
or the teaching of Christ it all goes down as Christianity.
Then spoke of God permitting us to commune with the dead.
Christ went to the spirits of the dead, and we can go too.
Did not the case of Saul prove it? The sermon ended, she
proceeded to give messages from articles of all kinds which
had been sent up. Scientifically placing these at the head,
messages were given and received with breathless anxiety.
Another change, a message for some one in the room. I
see, said the medium, a dark lady, gives the name of Jane !
(Imposters!) She goes on. The spirit is moving down the
right side of the building. Has any one got a relative of
that name; it is in the middle of the hall; anyone there got
a relative Jane? Up goes a hand —found a Jane friend!
Your relative is happy in the spirit sphere, and so on spook
after spook comes. Jack or Joe; and if any body knows him,
or won’t confess to knowing him, she says the spirit has de-
parted out at the door. A person says, why did the fool
come here, when it knew no one here, and no one knew him
or was related! The “Herald” had a paragraph —I have
five sovereigns sent me. Any spirit that will give me the
dates on them can have them. You imposters, give proof of
your unlawful profession, and also you that keep it up ! In
the name of our dignified manhood, go study nature in the
heavens and earth, and try to use humanity instead of feed-
ing human spirit ravens, or being fed as gulls gulled. See


8 5
Haeckel’s “Riddle of the Universe,” p. 108, Appeal to
Humanity.
Spigrant] to JVtar^
JYforctl Union of Tjelievers.
Away in the vast expanse is the planet Mars. Its distance
from us is about 62 million fniles. Its day is 24 hours 40
minutes. Its speed in its orbit 55,000 miles per hour. Its
diameter 4,109 miles.
Mr. Tesla proposes by electricity to send ethergrams. We
have our doubts. Anyhow, we will put it to a practical test.
Some of the prospects of man’s power may at first thought
be considered as impossible; but since the inauguration of
electricity as an auxiliary to his projects, we need to halt in
expressing an opinion on what can or cannot be done. For
moral’s sake we are going to talk to Mars. In the first
instance is Mars inhabited? Yes! How do you know? By
analogical reasoning and on hypothetic grounds. When
Neptune was discovered it was by these two aids. The as-
tronomer predicted the spot in its orbit and demonstrated the
unseen planet.
Let us take the same principles in our enquiry respecting
Mars. In Is. 45 : 18 we find God created the planets, also
the earth, that they were not created in vain. It must be
inhabited—not an empty, vain project to float in space. As
the earth is inhabited so all the other planets can also be.
This is solid analogical ground based on known experience
and revelation.
There is a fair field for the evolutionist to prognosticate
what kind of a personality in form the Martenans arei they
must not take any of their known experience to describe the
persons in Mars. Is their language similar to ours? Let us
try them, and see what language will suit best —French or
British —which will best be understood. A gentleman told
me his experience of a spirit meeting—he was a French-
man. The media said to him, the spirits of your father and
mother are present. He spoke in French to the spirits. The
media said, Sir, in the spirit world they speak English. He
replied, My father and mother could not speak English. The
British must have taken Heaven and Hell. It has been
reported that they are digging canals ; we had better wait
til! we get more information, and in the meantime get a


royal commission to prepare questions.
A message just received:—“People on Earth, what’s your
trouble? Why do you trouble us? We are anxious to know
are any of you scientist evolutionists?”
How many sects are there in your religion?
Have you a Bible, a Heaven, Hell, a Devil?
Have you any good boxers, race horses, footballers?
Mr. Tesla, please send answer prepaid.
Answer from Mars. —Our nation is one. No racial dis-
tinctions or religious differences (Zeph 3: 8,9). A Bible?
Yes. Our planet and its environments and our hearts. A
Heaven? We make that ourselves. A hell and a devil?
Nowhere on Mars. Do you mean Mercury? It’s very hot
there —perhaps the devil you speak about is there. Any
evolutionists? Yes; we evolve from nature all that it has
evolved. If you mean anything else, No. We know only
God the Involver. As for boxers, racehorses, footballers,
etc., we have none. Here are a few particulars:—We are
a united people in the holy bonds of love. We are com-
munistic in our principles. We work for one common pur-
pose—for the good of the whole community. Six hours a day
labour; all our work is equal, from the plough to the engine
shops there is work for all, and no money. There is no desire
to accumulate wealth; the highest aim is contentment. Our
work is a pleasure; no competition, we work for each other
—the farmer grows grain, the miller grinds the corn, we
share alike, and we give him our products, a mutual reci-
procity. All our houses are free. Such terms as rich and
poor are not in our language—quite foreign terms. Our
railways are free, as all other things. When we get to
understand each other I will give more Information.
Question from Mars.—Do you believe in God? Have you
a Bible or revelation? and how do you agree about it? Do
}ou teach it and enforce it? Give particulars.
Answer to Mars. —Some of our people believe in a God.
Many reject it. We have a revelation; though said to be
perfect, we are sadly divided in opinion about it. Some say
it does not tell us how to grow crops, or how to cure cancers;
others believe God has written every word, others it is a
fable: the beliefs are legion, called heterodox, orthodox,
heretics, dissenters, sects, bigots, fanatics. Some sell com-
munications from the dead from sixpence to ten shil.ings,


87
you can get them at any price for cash —no discount. I
will give you a few of them, Spiritists, Universalists, Con-
gregationalists, Quakers, Jews, Independents, Baptists, Par-
ticular Baptist, Calvinists, Lutherans, Catholic Apostolic,
Roman Catholic, Church of England, Church of Scot.and,
and many others —they all hold different creedal beliefs and
seem to work in a spirit for the union in a very disunited way.
Very many reject God and the Bible on the grounds of their
religious differences. I may tell you that the Bible condemns
them—they know it; they say we are in a boat out on the
ocean; who will be the first to go overboard out of sec-
tarianism into unity? This Bible teaches, “How good and
how pleasant it is to see brethren dwell together in unity,”
that it is as perfumed ointment on the head, and as dew on
the tender grass—a blessing from God, and life evermore.
Their Lord and Master and St. Paul they heed not. Christ
prayed for their union; Paul admonished them that they
were ministers by whom they believed that, if they called
themselves after the names of men, they were carnal-minded
and fighting against God; that all their creeds and dogmas
were built on foundations of wood, hay, and stubble, that the
fire which purifies would burn them up. Denominationalism,
sectarianism, Chhrchanity, is rampant. But where have
they placed their Lord? All this passes down here for Chris-
tianity. If they could only look and see the Christ praying
that they might be one! Who will be the first to get out
of the sectarian boat; it is sinking? When this takes place,
the State schools will teach it. I dare not give you all par-
ticulars upon this question.
Answer from Mars. —Send no more of your grams. If
the half of what you state is true, you must be a very
strange people. We will pray that the Bible, your rule of
faith, may lead and direct your minds towards the glorious
consummation of union, when there will be one God, one
Faith, one Baptism, one Family Name, Fatherhood God,
Brotherhood, the Hypostatical Christ, Brethren, Sons, and
Daughters. Read 133 Ps. ; Zeph. 3: 8; John, 17th ch. ; 1
Cor. 1 ; 11 to it*. 3 John 12. Tell Tesla the door is closed;
800,000,000 v<' open til you are united!






Some of Our Processes.
LETTERPRESS PRINTING, SHOW POSTERS, (in colors)
LITHOGRAPHIC, ALMANACS,
BOOK PRINTING,
BOOK BINDING,
ACCOUNT FORMS
OFFICE STATIONERY,
ENVELOPES,
WRAPPERS,
LABELS, (all kinds)
PAMPHLETS,
CIRCULARS,
WEEKLY PAPERS,
MONTHLY MAGAZINES,
And Anything that it is
possible to Print.
Let Os Hear from You.
