

It is needless to reprint the libel
itself, already so widely circulated,
and which, being merely a tissue of
falsehoods, admits of no designation
but that of the simple monosylla-
bic—a LIE>
THE ADELAIDE LIBEL
'*o %
for SC
PUBLISHED BY BEQUEST.
From the Sydney Gazette, transacted. So much for tho veracity
of the libeller.
SATURDAY, APRIL 4, 1840. . Having mentioned the name of Mr.
Milne, I may remark, in passing, that a
The Fuhlic Press. gentleman possessed of a mind and con-
" duct so spotless, requires no defence.
The sword of the magistrate is a ter- There is not on the face of the earth, a
ror to the evil doer, it is a defence—a man of more unsullied honour and in-
guard, a support. The power of the tegr.ty-a testimony publicly borne to his
public press is, when legitimately used, character by those who know him inti-
precisely the same. To the evil doer, lately, years before I had the pleasure
it is a scourge; to the upright and bis acquaintance,
honorable, it is a strong lower, an ira For s ever al months after I landed in
pregnable fortress. South Australia, I looketl in vain for
In our last number, we republished ordeFS from the Directors. No intelli-
an arliclefrom the Port Phillip Herald, S ence - however, during this tedious in-
copied by that journal from a South l erva l reached me, either from them or
Australian paper. brother At length, the arrival of a
The article in question is replied to vessel which I had been long expecting,
in a letter to the Australian signed by without my appointment, caused me to
the individual impeached, at whose re- CoDC l u de that the commencement of
quest we give it insertion in our columns. °P era H° n s had been, for some reason or
Mr. Boucher has placed before us otller > deferre <l. Circumstances over
letters and other documents, which w ! llc b I bad no control would not per-
prove most satisfactorily, that the nle 1° remain any longer. Severe
charges laid to iiis door, are without a ( i° mes ‘ic affliction, issuing in an irre-
shado.v of foundation. Wo fake no parable loss, obliged me to convoy the
blame to ourselves for having copied the rc!n ains of the dead to the Mauritius
article complained of; because, if its interment, and at Ihe same time,
statements had been as true, as we now P'acc a child just become motherless,
believe them to be false and malicious, un( Dr the care of her female relations,
we conceive that in warning the public, On my way to Adelaide, after the dis-
we were only discharging an obvious ibis melancholy duty, I find
duty. here letters containing my appointment,
That motives the most base snd in- ‘?S et ber with drafts upon me to a con-
famous ere to he ascribed to the writer 3 '^ era ble amount, which I am making
of the atrocious calumny, any one who arrangements to meet,
has read Mr. Boucher’s letters,cannot I need not enlarge, I leave you to
fail to believe. Most sincerely do we form y our °' VQ opinion of Hie character
regret having been tho innocent means Hie man, who, at the moment he was!
of circulating the scandalous libel, he- levelling his envenomed shafts, was not
cause there is no doubt that our having 'S“ oraD f> either of the painful circuni-
doue so, has had a very injurious effect. Mancos in which Diijne Providence had
The only compensation in onr power to placed me, orof tho sympathy expressed
make Mr. Boucher, is to state freely lj y both the Governor and the colony on
and fully our conviction that he has been ll) ? sad occasion, which, originating in
made tho victim of a villain’s wrath, shipwreck, was all but tragical in its
We shall be happy to afford Mr. Bou- character,
CHER the use of our columns, should ho is ira pcBsible to account for the
be desirous of publishing any further n, aHceofone with whom I never had
statements calculated to remove the aDy dealings, and whom Ido not know
imputations of his Bo'ulh Australian even by sight. But the public will find
enemy, no difficulty in forming a right estimate
- of this unprincipled writer, when in-
To the Editor of the Sydney Gazette. fo,moil ‘bat R is the man who has been
g [R again and again convicted of libel in the
. ’ , , courts of justice—the man who involved
As a gentleman. I have no doubt the Captain Hindraarsh in disputes with
perusal of my letter to the Ed.tor of the Hie settlers, and made him lose his eo -
Avstrahan will cause you to regret that vernment a few months after he had cn-
tl.e columns of the Gazette should have tered upon the dulics of his office-Hie
been polluted with a libel so foul as ma „ who. like Satan escaping from the
lha which you have inserted: andlrnst infernal regions and bent upon michief
that you w.ll counteract Ihe effect of the made tho colony, with his broils
comment into which you have been in- laughing-stock to the world, caused H,e
advertently betrayed. Commissioners to tremble for its S (a-
Enolosed you will find a correct copy bilily, and turned ihe expected paradise
of my letter to the Editor of the Aus ofSonth Australia into a hell of strife
trahan, for publication in your next and contention. j
mini er, His character is thus portrayed by a S
I am, Sir, brother to one of the Judges now on the
X ours respectfully, Sydney Bench. “ Mr. George Steven- &
C. BOUCHER, son! tho man, whose envenomed pen
Sydney, 2nd April, 1840. lias assailed the reputation of almost .
every public or private man whom the
British and Australasian Bank, colonists respect, and whoso malignant
machinations have driven many a father
To the Editor of the Australian. from the employment which gave his
Sir, children bread 1” 11
In your paper of this morning, under To the correctness of this description, p
tho head of “ South Australi'a,” you Mr. Fisher, the late Commissioner, Mr. d
have copied one of the grossest libels longer, the Colonial Secretary, Mr. 1
perhaps ever published upon the cha- Mann, the late Advocate-General, Mr.
racter of private individuals. Smart, the late Sheriff, Mr. M’Laren, 11
My brother. Mr. Frederick Boucher, tlle M ana ger, and Mr. Stephens, the 1
on his return from this country to En<x-' Cashier of the Soutli Australian Bank,
land, some years ago, set himself to having all been stung by Hie viper, can
combat strenuously the prejudices ex- b ear testimony ; and so could the late (
isting ag inst New South Wales. respected and lamented Surveyor Ge- c
With him the Bank of Australasia ueral > Colonel Light, were he alive. u
originated; and to fiim Australia is in- .How applicable the words of Can- e
debted for that public introduction of nin S °n a similar occasion ;—“ You are a
British money which dispelled every a liar and a slanderer, and only want d
doubt relative to the safe investment of courage to be an assassin.” 1
capital in what, till then, were sarcas- Such is the character of the man who ‘J
tically termed convict colonies. seems anxious to write himself into
Cn retiring from tfie secretaryship of coHmiety, by libelling the Directors and “
that establishment, which, under his ‘ r ' et)( H °‘ Hie British and Australasian ‘ 2
care had attained a prosperity unex- l' at) k lan Institution, the benefits of P
peeled and unprecedented, he formed wb ' c ‘ l W ’U cbeer tl.ousands in the pall. 01
the Australasian Loan Company, with a °‘ honorable industry, when tho name
capital of £300,000. Such however and tl)e fame °‘ H eor g e Pinto Steven- si
was the demand for shares in this new" son he alike unknown and unre- m
concern, that it was found necessaryno g r > ar(lei) - * c
enlarge the capital to £1,000,00 0; on Your sense of justice, I have no doubt, 53
which it assumed the designation of the will induce you to give publicity to a d
British and Australasian Bank. vindication, which would be perfectly al
The object of the company is to assist unnecessary in Soutli Australia, where
honest and industrious persons, whose tlie libeller is well known, but which si
poverty, or peculiar circumstances, may ma y be necessary beyond the bounda- m
Shut thept out from the accommodation pies pf that province. t-i
usually afforded by mercantile banks. J am, Sir,
JVleasiires are in progress for the fop Yours respectfully,
niation of branches in all the Austra- C. BOUCHER. «
I . .. Yj. DOULULii.
lastan settlements, to carry out tbe views Sydney, 31 st March, 1840.
of the parent institution, now in a very
flonrishiug state, owing to the confidence _ _ . tb(
reposed in it by the British public, and From the Sydney Gazette,
the conviction that its advantages will „„ , T . r, aD-
fie duly appreciated in the colonies as dUESDAI , APRIL 7, 1840. to
well as in the mother country. His
Here I may pause for a prnment, and dri
usk, is there apy thing in such an insti- BANK. itsi
i "“» ** Sydney Gae.ay. £
With regard to myself, there is not a 8ln » de ’
plan in these colonies, or in the world, Though convinced, by the independ- ba '
to whom I am indebted. Nor is there ent principles on which your journal is vef
ppe who can prove that I ever wronged conducted, that the highest reward at enc
him one farthing. But to be more ex- which yonr aim, is the satisfaction of
pliclt. faithfully discharging your duty to Qod,
It was intimated to me, when at the your Sovereign, and your country, I Insf
Mauritius, without apy solicitatipn oa cannot but return you thanks in the
pty pari, that I was to be appointed the name of the Directors of the British T
agent or director of the South Austra- Australasian Bank, for the manly
Ban Branch. Mr. Milne (whose name expression of your sentiments on the j
has been dragged in and also foully infamous attempt to libel them and mis- o |j S
calumniated) at my particular request represent their proceedings. fj t |,
agreed to accompany me, and assist in The following extract from the Times rcc
this and the investment of my own ca- w iH show the respectability of the Com- Rre
pital. A prospectus was partially cir- P an y, and the extent of its connexions. j
ciliated on our arrival, proposing to By giving this publicity, you willen- j le
designate the Adelaide branch, the lighten the public relative to tlie pro- sa y
Australian Agricultural Bank, conceiv- ceedings ot an institution, which is likely g ol
ing that this would be the best way of very soon greatly to promote the pros-
carrying inio effect the objects of tlie parity of these colonies, anil respecting ( ra |
parent institution, then known to me which, the people of New South Wales jjj s
only under the nr.me of the Australasian appear to be unaccountably in the dark. p ac(
Loan Company; at the same time, AH information . concerning this ini- 0 p <
stating, that no business would be done porfant Banking establishment, seems t( la !
till the arrangements with the motfier ‘° have been studiously suppressed. tra j
country were complete. It is needless But the period is not far distant when jyj r
to add, that it was utterly iriipossible *‘ will be better known and duly apppe- j or
that any improper transactions could Stated. anx
take place in a bank, tho formation of I remain, Sir, exa
which was merely proposed, and jp Yours respectfully, et|u
which, not being established to this day, C. BOUCHER, desi
UO public banking business was ever Sydney, 4th April, 1840. ‘lshoi
C. BOUCHER
Sydney , 4 th April, 1840.
Messrs. Stephens and Co , bankers, Reading. from the commenccnent, have left the
R. Curtis. Ksq.'Liverpool. entire conduct aud nanagement of the
business tome. Under all tho circum-
narry Elughlmgs, tsq , Halifax. . - .. . ,
Messrs. It. B. Watson and Co.. Leeds. stances of the case, it has been, as yon
W. H. Reece, Esq.. Biimingham. may well conceive, a most arduous, aux-
hol'!! D Hoyle, Esq., Newcastle-upon-Tyne, ions, and difficult enterprise, but it is
tarres r'Vhi’oS > B atl >• most satisfactory to reflect that 1 have
James t. Hughes. Esq., Bath. , , ,
d. B. Cox, Esq., Taunton. succeeded therein, ami when I look back
Robert Allan, Esq .Edinburgh, upon the difficulties an I obstacles which
Irancis Beid, Esq. ; Glasgow. 1 have contrived to overcome, I cannot
bul ' u, p ri ‘' c ! « “J
P. Just, Esq., Dundee. perseverance and industry, but shall not
Messrs, G, Studder and Sons, Dublin. further advert thereto.
Sir Anthony Ptnier, Cork, or to The Directors, who are all men of
FREDERIC BOUCHER, Managing Director very high character and standing, have
6? ftJwr B ga?e.st«et. London. * signified their approval of my services
vr , . , , l, y appointing me their Necretary, and
and fn“.hp ir be . a PP o,n ! e,i for ot , ,,er ,( > wns b y assigning me a liberal salary— a pro
ana places in the United Kingdom; rind applies- „i ■ i • • e . 1 ,
t.onfrom Brake or Bad-ken. w.ll ba preferentially ... S J h J cl | ,S Ver ‘- satisfactory, and
considered. wnich, if I know myself, will prove
FROM THE AUSTRALIAN OF SATURDAY, advantageous to the concern, for the
prosperity of which, independently of
To the Editor of the Australian. an Y personal considerations, I feel the
Sir—l observe, in your paper of this ; U "’° St solicitude - Be | n « uncertain as
morning, a letter signed “C. Boucher ” |; 0 y our receiving this, I have abstained
which states that his broiher, Mr Ere- f a matt ers of detail; you will
derick Boucher, originated the Bank of h t e ( reforc re S ard '* » a "‘ere business
Ausiralasia, and that on his retirin<r ,et er> wrl . t , ten * n the mldst of bustle
from the Secretaryship of that estab- tu *: mo . l aad tb e pressure of oocu-
lishment, he formed the Australasian f 3 lncl,len t to a new concern. Be-
luniiuu me :
Loan Company, with a capital of V 6 “ le vs' C ’
£300,000. r
(Signed) F. BOUCHER
(wLfi mnst befo tnTl ,ODS EXTRACT OF ANOTHER LETTER. ol
6 ception rf T, 6 "" SC ° n ' London. Q'h Dec., 1837. H
- unc ntra lill l .1 ! n S) to , r , et I nam “ I mast not fail to inform you, that a.
ZTt S heiS/.i . W °k 1 resigned my appointment in the A
‘ and l H be ‘7° = Bank of Australasia. The Directors C
e , distinctly I to Zn’ v Tt M ,t r-’ ny i dU 7 halC a «' arded a gratuity in conside-
-11 Blcht y ration of my services; aud Lm heartily to
tralasio nr ilia. Ko DKotaus glad to escape from the excessive and of
° Secretary of H a| H ,o, " te mill horse sort of drudgery which I have M
tr Ue 2 lt y 7e a! l e f stablldimen ‘- c 8 13 endured, without remission, for nearly in
J lrue juat he acted for a time as Secre- five years ” y
n tary in the early formation of the com- 3 TSiirnp.n P RmiPIIPP
, k b .' f s" k ‘tf,” p E ,r T e ?' i“: T “« lEi.,
Imus conelnde H.a 7. g and ; but ' n de tcr,nining which is the correct state-
sid red „ ‘, *“ not COn - lnan ‘. H>at of Mr. Griffiths or mine. i„
‘ mentnernianenl op° f . TT'? ‘ Mr ’ Gril,Ulls ’ comment on my absence In
' les”havo received *<7 l" Wol,ld doubt : from Adelaide after he was informed of ac
Secre a ? v of t7u !; , ail f o,nte<l “ le ca " so '>y H' e Perusal of my letter to so
’ l f Australasia in the Editor of the (I.
3 „7 n ’° ntl,ofJuDe ’ 10 i^."' ben H>ccob. anything but amiable feeling; ami would al
f 7 t£ e .le S H er 7“ point of leaving lead one to suppose that he knows not st
9 rau7t, , T S; and as held the wbat it is to be either a husband or abe
*!v , ? few weeks previous to f alher . The people of England expected be
’ i-rv ift-qn “r r ° m 'M gan m ln Ja “ u much from Lord Nelson; but they never th
spec tor 7’ (1 !T“ 1 10 0t V' su PP osed Hiat even the hereof the Nile (ii
tisn.7 e l “It n S me “ ! ; bad ' ,ower 01 ' er tbe dements ;or that he
o rTire fPnl e t. r B °, U ? herd ' d could prevent the storms which often, at in
not retire from the Secretaryship of the Hip i .
• Ranir nf AnoG i • . J . lue most critical moment, scattered our te
oank or Anstrala.«ia, when he formed (leeK tn «!!
*i,_ f n . . , _ hccis io an points or the compass. in
the Loan Company, m the early part of iu v orriv-Tl T a 1 v T i >
the vpnr J in Van Diemen s Land, wl
If ia f , m y embarkation ""or South Austra co
it is out ot my province to advert to Lo « h .. f j , 4 ,
qnv nurf n f o 1/ i , , .. , I,a » *vere known in London ; but the in
any part ot C. Boucher s letter, except ealnmifxr . , .. .
tn «fnfA d.nf * 1 f . • . * . calamity which afterwards betel me was to
10 state that the fact is quite certain, no t Unum . *l. *. t x
that a large amount of bills have been u nn 7 S ''°' *•'
: drawn by the Establishment, calling H.J'"IP 'TV'T* ‘
itself the British and Australasian mLSs i„ „ , n m S “
B an b 1 .1 A 1 Mauritius tor interment. Does Mr. nu
i>ank, on Adelaide; and that there Griffifha 1 .1 . .
hpinrr . .• c mean to persuade tlie people ot str
being no agent or representative of any New Snnti. wj a L .1 ~i ia- . r •
description there to lake then, up, they the Britis !ml I' , be . D "if lO . rS ° f
. have been returned to England, to the a „v o 1,7 . Bank, or N
, very serious detriment and inJonveni- Zt lev 7 ° ° n,n,S | C,ent i
I ence of tho holders. a ‘ ‘bey can comraaad the winds and bu
. c . ‘“ e g eas, and that they Lave power to fie;
t I am, Bir, Your obebient Servant, control the operations of Divine Provi- Mi
’ G. R. GRIFFI THS, Inspector, dence ? Harsh and uncharitable as men al>i
Inspector’s Office, Sydney, April 2,1849, sometimes are, I have formed a very oil
erroneous estimate ol human nature, if bei
lo the Editor of the Sydney Gazette, even those who have suffered inepnre- he
8ir > nience, do not ratlier sympathise than pe;
In tho Australian of (his morning I blame, when they learn the painful cir- bet
observe a letter signed “ G. R. Grif- cumstances in which the misfortune of dei
fiths,” attempting to invalidate the cor- shipwreck placed me on my arrival in wh
redness of some of my statements in the South Australia. The) will feel satisfied she
preceding number, that neither L nor tho Directors are in cor
Had Mr. G. read my Idler attentively fault. Accidents by fire and even by his
he would have perceived that I did not water may sometimes be prevented Cai
say rvlun ray brother, Mr. Frederick by care and attention ; but no man can sun
Boucher, withdrew from the Bank of control ihe elemenls or contend with crii
Australasia, nor that he formed the Aus- Deity. If Mr. Griffiths think that he dea
tralasian Loan Company immediately on b as power over tlie ocean, [ would re- ton
his retiring. 1 merely stated two simple commend him at orici lo resign the In- Bte
facts, that he had discharged tlie office spectorship of the Bank of Australasia, the
ot Secretary to that establishment, and return to England, and at the next elec- ope
.that he afterwards formed the Aus- tion propose himself as Chairman al Jnd
tralasian Loan Company, both of which Lloyds. {le will be a valuable acquisi- all
Mr. Griffiths himself admits; but seems, tion to that establishment. the
for some reason or other, unaccountably The public may now be left to form ley
anxious to inform tlie public of tbe their own opinion of Mr. Griffiths’ letter; pie,
exact dales of these occurrences. It is a production which bis own friends, if bei
equally unaccountable that, when so candid, will allow, is characterised by wic
desirous to enter into particulars, he nothing but bad taste and bad feeling, on
I should have omitted to state that my Careful as I was in myVefutation ot the was
THE BRITISH I my brother took part in conducting the. infamous libel published in the Austra- 1 missed, without calling on Mr. Milne | BanV ; nor will it be able to prevent that Company
business of the Company till the end of lian, not to use a single expression to say a word in his defence. from carrying their beneficial operations into effect
AUSTRALASIAN BANK, 1037 > and that on J*‘* resignation, the likely to give offence to any one, except- One would imagine that the parties, " u ‘ c ’£s£JespectfuUormsJdsannoinc'ement
b> MOORGATR STREET lONDON Directors presented him with a testi- mg the libeller, 1 was not a little sur- ashamed of the affair, would now attempt of Mr, Boucher’s retirement from the Bank of Aus-
' ’ ’ mony of their respect for his services. prised at the appearance of Mr. Griffiths an apology, and express their regret, fralasia— a gentleman, to whom that estab'ishment
Ull .. Mtwuj VI wivai . vuf/w-m I If ~ " ' T Cl J ’ I n . . , J C • f v "»
ice. Capital, One million Sterling:, With regard to Mr. Griffiths’ denial on thearena. Far from it. Mr. Stevenson is not much «indebted for-its formation, and the success to which
>, a , . —— . . that the Company t) which he belongs Since therefore lie considers it with- troubled wilh qualms of conscience. He obh'^u^ons^
in- ba°n™m '’'■'S' lllll6 ' l with my brother, I repeat, m his •' province” to sit in judg resembles those who can laugh at the nnd many, for having opened the "eyes of the
his kind upon llje principle of the Scotch banks' 7 that but for Mr. Frederick Boucher, menton the proceedings of the B ritlshand calamities they inflict, with this dif- British people to the vast field which presented
3ti- Current accounts kepi with individuals or bodies the Bank of Australia would have had Australasian Bank, there may bo no im- ference, that the most daring sometimes th ? employment of capital in Australia,
“re ate nS,a u l intereB ‘ a ‘ 'Wf pe ; cen [- 110 existence. Tho.gh not in England propriety in giving him a hint to be more relent and blush; but he, at no period own eolonLTfhrmillions lCh“her were'either
acetttf^g 011 tie averag * moa,hy balance of such myse if at the time, [ believe that of all prudent in the exercise ot his censor- of his career, manifests either remorse sinking in ruinous speculations in foreign countries.
in Deposits of money received of any amount, and those who assisted in the arrangement, ship, or the Directors of his own Com- or shame. Like the reckless bandit, or dealing out in loans to foreign despots to enable’
f or for any time or term ; upon deposits to be with- prior to its being proposed to the public, l>any will have little occasion to thank after passing the boundary which sepa- tbem to tyrannize over their own subjects, or mak»
|jj_ drawn at a short notice, interest at the rate of 3 l le wa s the only one who had any local him for his services. He has let out a rates virtue and vice, his motto is, mis- U1 ’° a ne '£ hbour3 ~' Soulh
; n per -. ce . n f p f r annun ?. ,s , allo ' veJ ! u P on su y is d( -- knowledge of these Colonies, and conse- secret that there is a lurking wish some- chief still. Defeated at law, he betook December vi, 1833.
tn- posited for terms a libber rate of interest is paid, , , , ’ , , , , „ lf , ~ . . *
, or viz: quently the only one on whom tbc bur- where to prevent the introduction of any himself to the press; and excepting
3 f a 4 per cent, for cash to be withdrawn after 3 den and iheresponshility of its forma- British Capital into the Australian Co- such intervals as are common in volcanic What will your readers say to (he
„„ months’notice. > lion rested. But the following extract lonies, or any accommodation to those eruptions, he has, from that day to this effrontery of the man who could coolly
. to ’ ” " 12 months’ notice* a l® tler From him t° me, clatetl 38tl» who require it, excepting through the poured forth libels upon me and those and deliberately, without a shadow of
of Discount accounts opened March, 1834, and which was never in- medium of the Bank of Australasia. Tl*is who never gave him any cause of offence, provocation, encourage his relation to
or may be respectably introduced. tended for any eye but my own, will de- is an untoward move. It reflects nocredit Latterly, however, he has taken new insult the remains of the dead, and
ver Gash eredits granted on the principle of the cjdo the question. either on himself or his connexions. ground, and appears as the champion of wound the feelings of a stranger just
er. T.l “ ank9 - . i ■ f ... , , , It would also be well before he again the Bank of Australasia, coupling that escaping from shipwreck ;or who could
ere other count™ individual 18 ’ iontZon, SO pointedly insinuates his qualifications championship with the misfortune which while penning his infamous libels, affect
or bodies of persons, residing in the country or Zoth jSiQjTchy lo« 34» ior othce, were ho to learn to write recently me, and tlie consequences to be ignorant of the events that gavo
!j le abroad, undertaken. My dear Charles English grammatically, and not commit therefrom resulting to myself and others, rise to tbe above documents, which ap-
ins I Advances of mom-y gtrnted upon the secu.ity of After the most e>,( t ordinary and in- errors for which a school-boy would bo I therefore hand you for publication the peared under his own eve in the v «*rw
„ e meats TOK °u P ™ sraITLT cessant excrtio " 3 for nea . r, y two y Ga «. 3cnt l '*o lowest form. following documents, which, had not paper of which he is Editor. 7
;ss u P on consignments of merchandise to or from the 1 have at length accomplished the pur- Upon his assumed fitness to discharge the facts to which they relate been mis- After this glance at the character and
' ’ colonics, upon the shares of the bank, and gene- pose for which I returned to England the duties of Secretary to the Bank of represented, distorted, and suppressed conduct of George Pinto Stevenson the
lis- approved°of a ° y ° lher secur ‘ ties tbat m!,y be from Australia; namely, the formation Australasia, after its establishment, for the worst of purposes by Mr. Ste- people of N. S. Wales will be able to
„,i Exchange business of every kind transacted. of a joint stock banking company for the coupled with the intelligence that Mr. venson. would have been satisfactory appreciate the outpourings of the South
nt Bills and letters granted as may be requir'd on Aqstt alasian Colonies, under a royal Frederick Boucher was Secretary only and sufficiently explanatory tp the world Australian volcano, whenever themoun-
’ tbe Branch Banks of the Company in the Australa- charter of incorporation. during the formation of the Company, and to all concerned. tain again begins to heave.
sian Colonies; bills, notes, drafts, &c., upon parties I send herewith sevtral London news- I merely remark, that a child or a fool NO. I r
g remitted fo" collection. 1 * COl ° n ' eS Cashed ’ ° r P a P ers in which the prospectus of the may, with advice and instruction, regu- Despatch to Lieut. Field, in command Yours respectfully
t 0 Suras of money invested by the Bank upon the Company is inserted and commented late a watch, manage an institution, or of the Rapid. r nmi urn
, security of landed property in any of tbe Australa- upon, and from the piospectus you may even govern an empire; but to create IT I ’ BOUCHER.
sian Colonies for account of parties resident in the derive a tolerably coirect idea of the requires a master mind, to which Mr. trovernment House, Adelaide, [We have published the above letters
lot Any transact in relation Da £ r ° »"«> e » tent of tie undertaking. Griffiths. in the case under consider- Dear g Sunday, 8| a. m. at the request of Mr. Boucher conceiving
to tbe Australasian Colonies may obtain in informa- You will, lam sure, be highly gralt- Uon at least, has not the slightest pre- _ ’ . mat in doing so, we have only done our
. tion and advice regarding ibe same from ibe Ma- fied to learn that it sin every respect tention. Is Mr. Griffiths aware of the 1 a,u desired by His Excellency, to c ' u, y *° that gentleman. We should have
at naging Director, who has resided in Australia, and successful beyond eten my most san- report, long in circulation, that he ob- en °l° se you a loiter just received by been better pleased, however, had Mr.
0( bnmediate aiiention reSl,eCliU ° busmess meel3 Wllh guine expectations, aid that it is sane- tained ofijoe, not o i account of his ‘V r ‘ P rom a passenger on board Boucher explainad more fully, why the
‘I” The remaining shares will be issued at a premium at last, by the tearty approbation abilities, but through the influence of a Pa f se f> a fine vessel from Van Company he represents did not take mea-
. until further notice, of £l 10s. per share ; applies- of the mercantile comiuuuily of London, cabal? Lltemen s Land, which lias been unhap- sllrcs to secure the acceptance of its own
1 s 'ions for the same, or regarding business may be and the British public generally. His declaration of my brother’s in- P'ly wrecked in the gulph on Trowbridge bills. We are perfectly satisfied with
1,0 ™ The P< Norib Pa 'Ai It may be a pardonable vanity to say, competency, contrasted with the com- 8 „.*• Mr. Boucher’s private explanation, but
■ Branches. ’ Lr ' n an ' that nearly all the [iroceedings of this pliment Mr. Griffiths pays to himself, “ ls Excellency directs that you will the parties most interested, require to bo
a Royal Bank, Liverpool. affair have been devise 1 and arranged by is really amusing. The public must P ro Ge ed ' n the Rapid with the utmost 3g ttsfied also. We hope, however, that
ibe Oxford Bank, Oxford. myself. The Direclors have done little laugh heartily at his pronouncing the “ es P a l to the spot to take off from the Mr. B. will make arrangements to meet
! ibe t piopoi^tlirT^", s , Cora PS ny ’ w a,!e fie ,d - else than sanction ray arrangements with Manager of the British and Australasian ' M f - >»nd Mrs. Boucher, and any demands upon the Company.—Ed.
0 Cornwall. D lng omi>any ' cvon their approval from time to time, and. Bank incompetent to the Secretaryship l h o other passengers who may wish to y D. Gaz.]
From the Sydney Crazatte,
TUESDAY, APRIL 14, 1840.
BRITISH AND AUSTRALASIAN
BANK.
To the Editor of the Sydney Gazette.
Sir,
o’ 1 remain, V ‘ lb refere uce to your note in the
0 Pear Sir, Gazette of Saturday, enquiring “ Why
Yours truly, Hie Company I represent did°not take
GEORGE HALL, meas . Ul i? s i° secure the acceptance of its
Private Secretary. °'/! > 1 s " J b e S ‘° sa y. that a number
of letters, oi the contents of which I
NO. 11. am ignorant, are at Adelaide wai(in<-
T 0 ms excellency the Governor, I >ly a T lval - ‘ su ’ one of those I fin 4
&c. &c. &C. b ? re ’. la,orma me lhat a Hrge quantity
20, isos. 5
South Australian Branch. In H ia
Never will I forget, I will not say the meantime, I am ordered by the Diree-
humane, but the angelic promptitude tors to draw on London to the amount
with which yonr Excellency ordered the n l £lO,OOO, in order to meet any claims
Rapid on Sunday mornihg to the wreck H.at may be made upon them prior to
of the Par see on Trowbridge Shoal, in ‘be arrival of the specie,
order, if possible, to save the life of tho The Direclors, therefore, believing
lady of Mr. Boucher. me to he upon the spot, took every
, The wind and tide setting against precaution which the business re-
us, after getting under weigh, we were ffuired, op that prudence could sug-
obliged to drop anchor inside the bar; B e s‘, to secure the acceptance of
0 ant l »ext day a contrary wind, in spite tbeir bills. No man can foresee tho
1 of the persevering exertions of Mr. accidents that issue from the womb of
j Field, the officers, and men, we were Divine providence. The holders of
T doomed to another anxious night at bills on the Adelaide branch have suf-
-3 anchor under the lee of Yorke’s Pe- f ere( l itjeonyemence merely in conse-
ninsula. quence of my absence,—a circumstance
t Tlie day following we reached the or which the Directors were entirely
wreck in time only to receive the me- ignorant, when my appointment and
( lancholy information that our arrival instructions were forwartied. The pro-
J was too late. Mrs. Boucher was no testation of these bills is therefore not
more. She had survived the disaster lll e result of the want of either means
9 almost a week Qn a small sand-bank in or prudential measures, but a mere
the midst of the ocean, but it was too accident of waves and storms, against
3 much. While hep earthly frame was sink- which no body of men could guard an-
ing under the combined effects of ill. less they were mope than men. *
’ ness anil shipwreck, her spirit disem. Those contemptible animals who
r bodied itself, and took its flight to SQ eer at “ Bill drawing,” betray the
another world, about twelve o’clock on g ros sest ignorance both of money and
‘ Sunday night. mercantile affairs. The millions that
! Your Excellency will easily conceive are constantly passing and repassing
, that, at a moment so trying, myfiiend bet ' veei J the colonies and the mother
. is utterly unable to give expression to u . utr y’, even including that in Her
' those sentiments of gratitude, which Majesty’s treasury, is all transmitted
. neither he nor 1 shall ever cease to feel. and re-transmitted in hills of exchange!
I have the honor to be, Specie very seldom changes either hands
1 Your Excellency’s °r places. Ihe whole is done in paper;
obedient humble sen ant ann nothmg would cause greater incon-
i (Signed) R. J,. MILNE ’ cn'ence—nothing would produce a
Sputh Australian Gahte. Judden universal stagnation in
commerce—than the prohibition of bills
NO. 111, exchange. Such a prohibition would,
AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURAL BANK. m . a lno P l ent, involve the empire in
An advenisement having appeared in the ‘ nlS . ery and ru 'U. ’I hey are more es-
Sydney papers of last month, informing the public P ec l a Hy necessary in a new colonv
that a prospectus of the Australian Agricultural which, destitute of exnorts Ins nn.il/ ’
Bank, establishing itself at Adelaide, was in circu- way of making remittances 14? V
latton ; that the Bank of Australasia, has no con- rec tors • 1 Dl *
nexton whatever with it; that no deposits will be , et ' lors i meretore, in ordering me to
received for it at any of th ir colonial establish- (,raw upon them to the amount of
ments ; and that Frederick Boucher Esq., is not £lO,OOO, were actually conferring „
the Secretary of the Hank of Australasia. boon upon South Australia, which most
IT IS HEREBY notified IN REPLY, remit in this form for years, till sho
that the prospectus of the Australian Agricultural possess herself of wool and oil* or some
Bank IS not in general dreuiation-a few copies only other exportable productions ’
having been given to a few private individuals, Trn.tiLihi.
and to some of the neighbouring Banks with a f rusting tUls explanation will be satis-
strict injunction printed in the body of the pros- ‘ actor y both to tlie public and to those
pectus, not to suffer it to be hawked about; that if who have suffered inconvenience—lint
the” Inspector” had read the prospectus through, owing to anv neodeci . ,■ ,
he would have found in it these words : “The g n . th P" 1 ° f th °
Australian Agricultural Bank, let it be borne in • V p° rS , °* " rl tlSll and Australa-
mind, is a distinct establishment from, and totally ® ,an Lank, but solely to the aflliotion
unconnected with, the Bank of Australasia,” it into which I was plunged hv shinwrert
would have saved him the trouble of announcing or rather bv Hip wi« P 1.../; F ...
to the public a thousand and one times over, that n ovi,l , L „f Hi! Inscrutable
the Bank of Australasia is "Incorporated by Royul , ° . m w ‘ lose ways to mor*
Charts' that jf tho Bank of Australasia can dis- ‘ a ‘ S are P as t finding out.
pense with deposits of money for transmission to I am Sir
Adelaide, the Australian Agricultural Bank, though A ’
not " Incorporated by Royal Charter.’’ can very + OUps, respectfully,
easily dispense with their services—that two long Q BOIIfH PP
circuitous and disastrous vovaves which the mnna. ’ J ' uudEn.
British ami Australasian Sauk,
London.
LL Persons in Launceston, Uoharfc
A* Town, Port Phillip, and New Zealand, hold-
ing Letters ot Credit, or Drafts, issued by this
Bank on the Adelaide branch, are iiereby informed
that the same will be honored on presentation, by
the undersigned, at No. I, Terry’s Buildings.
Pitt-street, Sydney.
Hours from Two till Four.
C. BOUCHER.
Printed by Kobert Howe,
Sydney Caiette Oflice, George.street, Sydpey,
O IMJ ext 1113 pi IUG ‘ I
Manager of the British and Australasian wre . Ck ’ , r " and Mrs - Boucher, and any
Bank incompetent to the Secretaryship 0 . 6 ot “er passengers who may wish to
of the Bank of Australasia—a Bank <h?njselves of the opportunity,
which, as I have already observed, is ° U iw• * Colirss instantly engage
indebted to him for its very existence. any a(1( liHonal seamen who may be ne-
But this is a discussion for which I cessar y to navigate the Rapid, and ren-
have neither taste nor time, having cc such assistance way as may be
matters of greater importance to pccupy la y our power, according to your jndg-
tny attention. ment, and report as early as possible for
I merely add that whatever may be k x o® l j enc ) , ’ s information,
my brother’s talents in Mr. Griffiths’ M| lne and a medical gentleman
estimation, he has no wish to change wl S° on hoard the Rapid to accom-
eitber place or character with him; P au y you to the wreck,
and that the only reply he would make remain,
to such a proposal may be found in the ear ® lr >
epigram of Garrick to Hill. Yours truly,
If it be, as you say, that I’ve injured a letter, GEORGE HALL,
I II change my note soon, aud I hope for the better ■ Private Secretary,
May Ihe right use of letters, as well as of men, U
Hereaf er be fixer! by the tongue and the pen. Nf) , r
Mo>t devoutly do I wish that each may have its due,
Aud that I may never he taken for U." TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE OOYEIINOII,
1 am. Sir, &e. &c. &c.
Yours respectfully, Stephen's-vlaco, Nov. 26, 1838
C. BOUCHER ’
Sydney, 4 th April, 1840. " :n T T _
From the Sydney Gazette.
SATURDAY, APRIL 11, 1840
Sritlsh and Australasian Sank
To the Editqr qf the Sydney Gazette ,
Sin,
I again avail myself of the gentlemanly obl ! ge(1 ‘° dro P anchor D.s ? do the bar ; I
offer of the use of your columns to refute aad next da y a contrary wind, in spite <
. the evil imputations recently attempted ° r f ‘ lO exertions of Mr. ‘
t against the Directors of the British and bleld > the officers, and men, we were
3 Australasian Bank in a neighbouring d °°: ,led tO , anodiei ; anxious night at
s Colony. anchor under the lee ot Yorke s Pe- *
It is only discharging a common duly n ' , !. 9 . u^a ‘, ~, , , , C
fto society to give the public some account 1 lle . day following we readied the <
lof the famous South Australian libeller. ! Vre , t,D ! c onl y lo reoeiv c Hie me- >
J When a wild beast makes his appearance lanchol y information that our arrival
i in a country oradistrict, everyone should Waa t 0 - , Mrs * Voucher was no
be admonished of the dangerof approach- "!° re ’ She , had surv, v ed the disaster 1
ing the lair or the haunts of the ferocious al most a week Qn a small sand-bank in «
I animal. Let a single instance suffice. tho I ln,d9t ° f the ocean, but it was too a
- Mr. Milne, whose name has been so much. While her earthly frame was sink- <
infamously traduced by this desperado. ,ng Under , the combined effects of ill. 1
t had hired a house in Adelaide for the " es , s . and s, ''pwreck, her spirit disem.
f accommodation of nje and my family bod ‘, ed ,tsel , t : and took its H'S I ' l to s
) some months before our arrival. In- pother world, about twelve o’clock on 8
s lluenced by motives of charity, he u u. da y Ufo b ‘’ .. .
1 allowed a couple in straitened circum- x our Excellency will easily conceive a
I stances, together with a young man who .at, at a moment so trying, my fiientj
i boarded with them, to occupy partof the '? ut'crly unable to give expression to c
I house, with the strict injunction that tb °' 1 6 se,l Hu>ents of gratitude, which
• they were to quit immediately on the ne ' l her he nor I shall ever cease to feel. a
s first intelligence of our approach. I have the honor to be,
! Not then knowing a single individual Your Excellency’s °
t in the settlement, on entering my in-1 obedient bumble servant, j
tended habitation, l sat down to indulge (Signed) R. L. MILNE '
in silent sorrow in one of the rooms, Spulh Australian Gateite. ' °
, while Mr. Milne was depositing the -
coffin with tlie remains of Mrs. Boucher, NO. 111, F
i in another, till they could be conveyed AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURAL BANK. 11
I to the Mauritius for interment. Before Au advenisement having appeared in the 11
I ten minutes had elapsed, a v isiter made %d" e y papers of last month, informing the public P
hia xr 1, ~ that a prospectus ot the Australian Agricultural w
his appearapee. You Will naturally Bank, establishing itself at Adelaide, was in oireu. w
suppose, that It was some one calling to lation ; that the Bank of Australasia, has no con-
manife<t that respect which is due to a nexion whatever with it; that no deposits will be .*
stranger, and to condole with me on the received f ° r i . t at ® n y of th ir colonial establish- ( '
' irrpnavohla I i i • , . • , ments; and that Frederick Boucher Esq., is not £
irreparable os. I had just sustained, ffie Secretary of the Bank of Australasia. q b,
JNotlungof the kmd. It was the cousin
\j „ r* n n. . rj. . IT IS HEREBY NOTIFIED IN REPLY, F€
ot Aii. George Pinto Stevenson, who, ~ , n . .. A 9
bursting open the door, rushed in and la ‘ tbe prospectus of the Austral.au Agricultural pt
1 , , ’ eu in, anu Bank is not in general circulation—a few copies only ot
ai j 3 ' l J° sa ‘ u ‘ e me—or rather Mr. having been given to a few private individual?,
Milne in my presence—with a volley of and to some of the neighbouring Banks with a
abuse. You will ask for what? for no 3,riot in j unction printed in the body of the pros- ,a
Otbi r reason (1.„,t.„ u I pectus, not to suffer it to be hawked about ; that if w]
p y e , h3 , d tbe “ biJ d read the prospectus through, ot,
een requesteu to leave a house in which he would have found in it these words : “ The f)
he had ho right even to make his ap- Australian Agricultural Bank, let it be borne ill
pearance, haying been warned a week mind . is a distinct establishment from, and totally sl£
before to quit. Mr. Milne instantly or- unct ;" n . eoted with the Bank of Australasia,” it ID)
,j prp .i l ; . | | • , . would have saved him the trouble ot announcing or
' Bim out, and directed the room totbepublic a thousand and one times over, that nr ,
where the body lay to be locketl, lest he the Bank of Australasia is “ Incorporated by Royal
should enter and vent his rage on the cllarte ‘ that jf the Bank of Australasia can dis- ‘ a ‘
corpse, which his looks, his words and pcns.e with deposits of money for transm.ss.on to
1.- , ,| , ’ Adelaide, the Australian Agricultural Bank, thouvh
treats gave reason to apprehend, not ” Incorporated by Royal Charter.’’ can very
Can it be believed, that Mr. Milne was easily dispense with their services—that two lono- I
summoned into Court to answer for the circuitous and disastrous voyages which the mana”
crime of protecting the remains of the ger a " d ca3bie . r . we ( re D , b .lis ed to t underuko on their ~
dead ; lieil it 9 it TVI • * , Ax way to Australia, together with the return oi the
n insult a Her Majesty s At- Colonial Secretary of South Australia to England,
torney-General was employed, Mr. prior to (heir arrival at Adelaide, to whom °many
Stevenson and his worthy cousin made .of their letters bad been enclosed, caused a gap A
their appearance just before the Court in correspondence of nearly twelve months, i\
„„„„„ I * , J -ii and left them entirely ignorant ot Mr. Boucher’s ; n o-
opened, and promenading with the having retired from the Bank of Australasia, J
Judge in front of the Court-house, did when the prospectus first appeared ill print; aud that
that, so soon as they learned the circumstance of ,{.3
his withdrawal, the error into which they had thus pj tt
innocently fallen, was immediately corrected by a
reprint of the prospectus.
The feeling manifested in the quarter where Mr.
Kinnear’s connection lies, notwithstanding the
all they could to gain his sanction of
their infamous conduct. But Mr. Wig- v
1 • „, - - „ . ® mno<
ley is a gentleman possessed of pnnci- re p r j
pies too honourable and independent to Tf
be influenced by the machinations of the
wicked. The prosecution broke down'®, 1 ™"
strong desire evinced by the parties to monopolize
the banking business of the Southern Hemisphere
, . • tue banning uusmess oi me aouiuern riemispuere
on tlieir own showing; the prosecutor has not prevented the triumphant establishment ol
was sharply rebuked, and the case dis- the Australasian Loan Company by the agent of this
