

YEARS


.




■4 4
Pr |
, ' J
'far
o^jh'* % 0%


Hugh Victor McK a y
C. B. E
1 8 6 5 ' 19 2 6
Sunshine is one of the best known names in Australia.
The inventive genius, business acumen and Scottish determination of Hugh Victor
McKay, overcoming a multitude of obstacles, changed the face of Australian
wheat-growing, and in doing so contributed immeasurably to the economic
development of this country; gave us our first great secondary industry; and
pioneered the sale of Australian manufactures in the markets of the world.
This story, which was to reach its climax in the Sunshine Harvester Works, began
in 1884. So much was accomplished in the lifetime of one man that by the time of
H. V. McKay’s death in 1926 the enterprise had already taken its present form
and a great plant had arisen on the windy plains of Braybrook. The work has gone
steadily on, new lines of manufacture have been developed and the tiny village ol
Braybrook Junction has become the City of Sunshine. But the story is still H. V.
McKay’s, and the log hut in which he made his first experiments, now bodily
transported to the shadow of the modern factory, stands as a vivid symbol of an
epic of pioneering in our own time.


To appreciate the story of H. V. McKay we shall need to take a long journey, back to
Inverness in the northern Highlands of Scotland, a couple of centuries or so ago. In
Australia so large a contribution has been made by Scots to our national life that perhaps we
do not need to emphasise the qualities that made for Scottish success. One was the Scottish
love of learning and the uniquely high educational standard of the time; another was the
Scottish determination and integrity, a pride in work done to the utmost ability of the doer.
The McKays shared in this Scottisli heritage; but about six generations ago, in the
convulsions of the time, they found it necessary to migrate to Glasslough in Monaghan (now
one of the three Ulster counties which form part of the Republic of Ireland). They were
skilled workers in stone and the family business w T as carried on at Glasslough for several
generations, in the course of which a number of important public buildings were erected.
An amusing anecdote relates that when a couple of potential customers conducted what they
thought was a secret conversation in Latin about beating down the price quoted by one of
the McKays, McKay startled them by replying dourly in Greek that he would not accept a
penny less.
The failure of a local authority to honour its contract for the building of a bridge finally
persuaded William McKay to continue the family wanderings. The thoughts of many people
were turning to Australia and in 1851 William, with his wife, their three sons, Nathaniel,
Hugh and William, and their four daughters and some family friends took passage to
Melbourne, arriving at Port Phillip after an eventful voyage of five months. It was the year
that marked the end of the old colonial period; soon Victoria was to be transformed by the
cold discoveries.
4


Nathaniel McKay (who was to become the father of Hugh Victor) turned his hand to the
family craft and built the stone fencing around the new Scots Church, Melbourne, and in the
manse then attached to it he was married. Several bridges on the coach road to Bendigo
attest to the strength and symmetry of his work.
But soon such peaceful occupations were overwhelmed by the rising tide of excitement which
swept the goldfields. Almost every able-bodied man who could do so was off to try his fortune.
The three young McKays were no exception. As experts with tools they had great advantages
in the sinking of shafts and the making of drives; their fortunes waxed and waned as the
thousands swept over the fields —Ballarat, Stawell, Myers Creek, Inglewood, Raywood.
Nathaniel McKay was a man of great strength and courage, but, like many others, he found
that when the rushes at last petered out he had sacrificed both his fortune and his health.
The easy gold had been won and the army of diggers had to turn elsewhere. By the time
his fifth child, Hugh Victor, was born in 1865, he realised that his digging days were
over. He decided to settle on the land and selected an area at Drummartin, 16 miles
north of Raywood, and about 27 miles from Bendigo.
William McKay 1791'!866
SCOTS CHURCH
IvlA
Nathaniel McKay 1826HSS8


'W&> «*,
The D rummar tin Family 1906
COMPLETE EXCEPT FOR THE FATHER
Left to right—back row:
Of the eight sons, six, including HUGH VICTOR, were
connected with the business. SAMUEL, who too\ the first
harvesters to the Argentine, later became managing director
at Sunshine, and was largely responsible for the merger
with the M assey'Harris interests in Australia. GEORGE was
factory superintendent at Ballarat and Sunshine.
NATHANIEL, a journalist and founder of Mildura’s first
paper (the “Cultivator”), spent many years at Sunshine,
including a term as advertising manager. Two of his sons,
Ralph and Victor, were later factory superintendents.
WILLIAM was in the accounts department after a career
as ban\ manager, and his son William became plant engineer.
jOHR[, who helped to build the first harvester and to
establish the original McKay Harvester Co., became the owner
of stores, a butter factory and sawmills at Pyramid, Mincha
and Leitchville in northern Victoria.
The farm at Drummartin was carried on first by James,
then by Gavin, and is now operated by Ronald McKay,
GAVIN, JAMES, NATHANIEL,
SAMUEL, HUGH VICTOR, GEORGE
MARY (Mrs. T. Clarke) and ESSIE;
in front are ALICE (Mrs. T. Matthews),
WILLIAM, Mrs. McKAY, Senior,
HANNAH and JOHN.
a son of James.
6


Life in the country, especially in such comparatively closely settled States as Victoria, has
changed so gieatly that it is now difficult to realise the conditions which the pioneers had
to face —and willingly faced —less than a century ago. Nathaniel McKay started from
scratch by building the home in which he was to rear 12 children. He built it from
materials on the site —slab sides, bark roof, earth chimney, slab doors hung with greenhide
hinges, wooden pegs doing duty for nails and locks. About all he bought was two small
windows. Later he added two rooms of wattls-and-daub with a galvanised iron roof.
This background is important to the story. In our own age of specialisation we are apt to
expect technological advances only from people trained in technical schools and universities.
\et until comparatively recent times a multitude of plain men was trained in the use of tools
and accustomed to pit their wits against problems with no more to aid them than the simplest
of appliances and as much inventiveness as their faculties afforded. Many of the greatest
engineers of the late 18th and 19th centuries were such men.
Life was hard, if good, for the McKays. What they had was what they could wrest from the
land. As fast as it could be cleared it was turned over with a small two-horse plough. The
first crop of wheat was hand-sown, cut by the scythe, threshed in the age-old manner with the
flail, cleaned through hand sieves and carted by dray the long slow journey for gristing at
Raywood mill. As the nearest school was also at Raywood the children were educated at
night by their parents. Airs. McKay, as the true wife of a pioneer, was equally adept in
managing the home, driving the horses and quelling the disturbances inevitable in a large
and spirited family.
As the children grew all were allotted their duties. Hard work and co-operation were
beginning to win their rewards. Gradually the farm was equipped with such machinery as
was then available. Some, at least, of the back-breaking toil was eased. Mr. McKay himself
built a thresher powered by a horseworks. With the purchase of an imported reaper and later
an Australian stripper, Drummartin became mechanised to the standard of those days.
At this stage it will be worth while to take a look at the background of harvesting methods as
they were when young H. V. McKay was working from sun-up to sun-down on the farm which
his father had hacked out of the Victorian bush. Harvesting methods had developed along
different lines in the northern and southern hemispheres. The reaper, developed in the
United States chiefly by Cyrus McCormick in 1831 from earlier English patents, had become
by 1872 the reaper and binder. This delivered the whole crop —straw and head grains—
cut and tied into sheaves which had to be carted to a central point and fed manually to the
huge threshing machines which travelled at harvest times from farm to farm to thresh the
crops by contract.


John Ridley
RIDLEY’S STRIPPER
Original invoice for the stripper and the winnower which
Hugh Victor McKay worked at the age of sixteen, and which gave
him the incentive for his own invention of complete
machine harvesting.
89 « n SMEAS&Wm STBSBT HOSTS,
Melboonre, £/ < 187^
BoogW of T. iEJf»EBSO« & €6., .
Agricultural Machine Manufacturers.
HARROWS, HORSE-WORKS, CHAFF-CUTTERS, CORN-CRUSHERS, WROUGHT-IRON ROLLERS, &c.
tcf-cJiv
Y V°
-M // \ a
Mv d^iVt vjy /&
V&jh M


In Australia's drier climate, however, even the first efforts were toward direct harvesting.
Among those who gave long thought to the problem was John Ridley. Ridley had set up as
a flour miller in Adelaide, but he found that current methods demanded more harvest labour
than the young colony could supply. He solved the problem very practically in the following
year (1843) by making the stripper. The ancient Gauls had had the germ of the idea with
their stripping cart in the first century A.D. An ox, harnessed "‘wrong way round in the
shafts, pushed into the crop a two-wheeled cart, described by the historians Pliny and
Palladius as being fitted with teeth to tear the heads from the crop and drop them into the
box behind.
Ridley, who appears in a surviving portrait as a patriarchal figure with long whiskers,
designed a machine which combined the collecting cart, the stripping comb (as used for
centuries in the East) and a set of revolving beaters which knocked the heads into the
large box. The resulting mass had to he dumped in heaps on tarpaulins as the box filled.
Ridley had thus made a big step forward, combining several processes in one sequence of
mechanical operations. There was an important omission, however. The “heaps" had still
to be winnowed, a highly unpopular job, both because of its arduous nature and because it
wasted the labour of two men. While one fed the winnowing machine with a shovel the
other turned the handle to work the sieves that graded the clean grain and the fan which
blew away the chaff and husks. It was hard work, done in the heat of summer before rain
could damage the grain.
At Drummartin, meanwhile, events were running less smoothly. There had been a run of
droughts and poor seasons, and Nathaniel McKay was now showing signs of the illness,
contracted from working waist-deep in water at the diggings, which was to end his life a
few years later.
The sons were taking over a bigger share of the work. Hugh had inherited much of his
father's physique and at 16 was driving the stripper and taking his turn at the winnower. He
had inherited, too, it was to prove, the skill of a long line of craftsmen of the first quality.
How great was this skill was soon to be shown on a problem which had baffled countless
others or seemed to them insoluble.
This problem, literally, lay under his own hands, as he drove the stripper and worked the
winnower. Like everyone else he detested the winnower, but he disliked it the more because
he felt it an unnecessary factor restricting grain production. Why, when everything else had
been brought into one sequence, should this primitive isolated operation continue to plague
farmers? McKay approached the problem as men of natural genius in engineering have
always approached such problems, and as production engineers approach them today because
men of McKay’s calibre have shown them how. It was obvious to McKay that the winnower
should logicallv be incorporated in the horse-drawn machine; and he felt that he could and
would do it.


The Fa r m Smithy at Sunshine
An early demonstration of
the new stripper harvesters,
from a photograph ta\en in 1885
The drivers are
Hugh Victor and his brother John.


Others had tried and failed, certainly. But McKay was sure that a “combined” harvester was
a practical possibility. Many people around the district had a good laugh when they heard
of this project of young McKay; hard-headed men knew better than day-dreaming boys . . .
or so they believed. In the McKay family circle they thought otherwise, McKay senior felt
that Hugh had something, and so did at least one of the neighbours. The McKays had been
used to facing practical problems and overcoming them. They saw no reason why Hugh
should not overcome this one. They determined to give a helping hand wherever they could.
In 1883 brother John, who had been running a store at Terrick Terrick, came home to help.
The job began.
So much to do and so little to do it with, you might have said —thereby overlooking the
capacity of genius to make do with little and to improvise when even that little is missing.
Their father's forge was the young McKays” basic piece of equipment. But they needed a
proper smithy and they went into the bush for the logs and bark sheets and built it. They
rummaged among discarded farm machinery for parts wheels and axles from an old
reaper, sprocket wheels, chains, spindles and other oddments from another old reaper and
binder. Pulleys they cut out of a red gum log, split with gunpowder. They had no lathe or
drill and only the simplest tools.
There is a story of a great sculptor who was asked how he produced a finely carved head out
of a square block of stone; he remarked simply that the head was there all the time he
merely cut away the stone from around it. So you might say that McKay's invention was
there all the time in this mass of old iron, wood and junk generally you merely had to
modify it and put it together. But only Hugh McKay knew how to put it together. He had
no blue-prints, but in his mind he had a very clear idea of what he wanted, and with the
simplicity of a great engineer he drove straight toward it.
It was good team work. John worked on the wooden parts while Hugh made the iron ones.
Th eir father showed them how to square and set the frame and parts, made pulley blocks and
even special tools that became necessary as the work went on. For one particular job they
paid 10/- to a blacksmith in Elmore, but otherwise some screws, bolts, rivets and small
oddments were all that came from outside the farm. For all the difficulties and unexpected
setbacks the job went well ahead. It would be fine if it could be ready for the harvest; but
that proved an impossibility. The harvest ripened with the machine still standing unfinished
in the hut.
But there was a compromise which faith in the machine seemed to justify. Though most of
the crop was taken off in the old way, two acres were reserved and stood well until the end
of February, 1884. Hugh Victor McKay’s stripper harvester was complete and ready for
its test.
It was small but it was symmetrical and it was well and truly built. With what high hopes its
young inventor must have seen it start on its way, and with what jubilation found that it


One of the first McKay Harvesters
Built in 1885, it was purchased by Mr. Wm, Anderson,
of Pine Hills, near M oama, and returned to Sunshine for
its historic interest value 43 years later. still capable
of efficient wor\.


wcorked successfully! The months of toil were crowned, from the humble resources of a
fairm smithy had come what was to prove one of the key inventions of oui time. Here, at
laist, was a complete, practical and profitable harvesting machine which poured a fine sample
off good marketable wheat direct into the bag from the standing crop. A new era opened that
daay at Drummartin . . . an era of which even the far-seeing McKays could scarcely have
grasped the full significance.
From the beginnings of agriculture man had harvested his crops wholly or in part by hand.
Nww the machine had taken over. Here was one of the great leaps forward in technology,
typical of the Nineteenth Century. From the ancient stripping cart to Ridley s stripper had
taken 1,800 years; but the problems which Ridley left had been solved in a generation, and
solved by an 18-vear-old youth. This must rank as one of the great achievements of Australian
history, for its significance was not only upon a national but a world scale.
Ridley’s stripper had made Australia self-sufficient in wheat. McKay s stripper harvester
brought such an increase in production at such comparatively low cost that the surplus could
be sold profitably half the world away. The w "combined harvester indeed is officially
recognised as the machine which led to Australia’s rise as an exporter ol wheat and flour out
of all proportion to the smallness of our population.
McKay did not achieve perfection in a day. Two of the most difficult problems in combining
the stripper and the winnower were to give the correct agitation to the box containing the
cleaning screens or riddles and to keep the riddles always level while the front ol the machine
was raised or lowered to suit the crop. These problems, like others, were surmounted as they
occurred. At least six other people had worked with the same aim in view and had
encountered the same problems and had not surmounted them. Hugh Victor McKay was
different. He knew the answers; and the youngest, and probably the least equipped
mechanically of all, he strode forward and placed his machine in the hands of the farmers.
As all industrial experience shows, it is one thing to make an invention and another to mai ket
it. The Edisons and Henry Fords are few and far between. H. V. McKay was one of these
comparatively rare people who are gifted not only with the idea but with the business flan
and the determination and courage to put it over in a highly competitive world. So we hud
him, a very young man, poor and obscure with a revolutionary invention. What can lie do
with it ?
The McKays raised enough money to take out patents and with these and enthusiasm McKay
set out to conquer the agricultural implement world. He had all the expected setbacks
which beset innovators and those who challenge well established methods. A number ol
factories had taken up the manufacture of the stripper. McKay approached them to
undertake the manufacture and marketing of the new harvester on a royalty basis. Ihey were
not interested. From innate conservatism, or a wish to protect existing lines, they rejected
McKay’s proposals out of hand. But in the end persistence was rewarded. McKay came to
an arrangement with McCalman and Garde, a Melbourne firm of plough makers, to build
five machines. They were ready and sold for the 1885 harvest. Production of the McKay
harvester on a commercial basis had begun.


SUNSHINE HARVESIER WOM
PStlSlttll iWWf.«!
'"v p
Presentation from Ballarat and Braybroo\ employees
14


Bly 1886 a small public company, the McKay Harvester Co., had been formed with an office
alt Ballarat to handle manufacturing contracts and sales. The company had no plant of its
own manufacture was “farmed out" to various contractors. Thus a number of machines
vwas made by Henderson & Co., North Melbourne, and at their works, unfortunately from the
hiistorical point of view, the original model was broken up and lost. Pickle’s of Bendigo and
tlhe Ballarat firms of Munro and Sons, Harrison’s and Quale and Williams turned out the
irncreasing numbers of harvesters sold in the following years.
With 1892 came the bursting of the famous “land boom” and the McKay Harvester Go., its
fHinds frozen with the failure of the banks, was forced into liquidation. Many businesses went
umder, but the trust of a few friends in a position to help and Hugh Victor McKay’s own grit
amd tenacity were demonstrated when he bought back his own assets and made a fresh
Beginning.
In a small shed in \ uille Street, Ballarat, McKay again turned his own hands to the job,
making harvesters out of strippers. He found time as well to design an improved machine,
including an elevator to take the grain to a peg drum, ensuring complete threshing and
cleaning. The stripper manufacturers were spreading tales that the harvester would scatter
weeds to ruin the farmers’ lands, so a screen was placed on the top to take out the weed seeds.
Seeking a name for his new machine McKay found it in the theme of an address given in
Ballarat by a visiting evangelist, Dr. Talmage. “Sunshine’ became the name of the new
harvester and later the name "'Talmage was given to the street in Sunshine where Hugh
Victor and his brothers lived for many years.
So 10 years of struggle went by. With 1894 we come to another crucial date in the history
of the organisation. By this time the building in Yuille Street, Ballarat, had grown to measure
100 ft. by 20 ft. A nucleus of employees had been brought together with a plant made up
of two lathes, a drilling machine, hand punch, grindstone, forge, bellows and, for power,
a horseworks powered by two grey ponies. This year saw the end of the phase of converting
strippers into harvesters. An early record says that '"Mr. H. V. worked in the factory, in
the office and travelling for the firm. The remaining years at Ballarat are full of significant
figures, names and facts. The first 12 of the new harvesters were built in 1895, made under
a contract (now framed in the Sunshine board room) by Jack Bult, George Bult and William
Hopkins.
Thence onward production expanded rapidly and in 1905 it reached the Ballarat record
of 1,926 harvesters for one year. In the early stages when work was beyond the small
factory’s limited plant it was taken out to local engineering works, but general expansion
provided problems even here. When steam power was introduced the factory area was too
small to take the boilers and the problem was solved by carrying the steam through
galvanised pipes under the road from the opposite side. Ihe difficulties, even then, of
obtaining sites or premises suitable for expansion are shown by successive purchases of
cottages to accommodate the blacksmiths, cutting up, woodmill, offices, storage and testing
departments. A disused brewery became the painting and despatch departments.


Line of Ballarat Harvesters
for Argentina
H. V. McKay had survived one disaster, the financial collapse of the early ’nineties. He was
now faced by another, the great drought which beset Australia in 1902 and which left the
firm with more than 200 machines for which there was no immediate prospect of finding
buyers. It was typical of McKay that he seized at once on the bold solution —the creation of
an export market, and in a foreign country at that. Even today many manufacturers of
Australian products look almost wholly to the domestic market. More than half a century
ago McKay’s venture overseas was a startling innovation, denoting the highest commercial
enterprise.
Because of its similarity of climate and its big wheat areas, McKay selected the Argentine
as his field of operations, and thither he despatched 200 harvesters with his brother Sam


The start of a long journey. A line of harvesters being ta\en through the
streets of Ballarat to be railed to Melbourne and shipped to Argentina
McKay to sell them and the experts to start them. The venture was highly successful. It
was the beginning of an export trade that was to send more than 10,000 Sunshine harvesters
overseas until it was stopped by the shipping difficulties of the First World War. From
Drummartin to all Australia and thence to South America the Sunshine harvester had
proved itself.
Ihe solution of one problem, however, created another. The rapid expansion of the export
trade put a heavy strain on the still makeshift accommodation at Ballarat. Freight had also
become an important consideration freight on materials brought from Melbourne and on
the finished product railed back there for shipment. The business itself was increasing in
variety as well as in volume. Other lines had been added to the manufacture of harvesters,
17


bta /fcaicotfs rtSt»(4fcr« of State rot tlx Commonwealth of Huettalt*
uctvtii UK bonout of ibc «)ieoence of dfe’’ <!s>■ & tJCxy'
m ttx Ejbtbition Jtotibfng. itsdbourne. on Cbur#f>««. ptb 1001, to wltneoo
iills.
tte Opening of tbc parliament of tbc Commonwealth.
S Vn
jU **£•
wjss. ...
\ Mi
j*. EOmunt jsart^n,
» * *• > i v V <Kntlt<t
ff W /fifSffpflloa:::,i :; PjgS fMki
t J ' _ ' $|L-'? V ') '
if/ '
/ ,/
_ ;J
r- ■ o
te'f,.. Cbe voung Qseen.
Jbt fxr b*»> arts »nU c« wr 9*Of ft fe»» -l*« #Wif *tt *■
»tu net «M *K» &♦««<•* «f ff«f #»«l i f
Ou** vftHit (MtMt. tKifttifol. M%. anfr {**«»«*. ■]***«*
“%m s*'**>*<*** 'Ht «f tfcc NitU. tU ?<?«"$ Qbc« f#*< tofrttfwrnlfc.
.X! i«v«i it* D*t tb< r«8»l t*tt &***<* hit % |
|PP C*v*q "Crwn m<. m* motfKf," »*> «** *
Co»*a9wtm,fn om. qt
L
Invitation to First Commonwealth Parliament
BRAYBROOK 1904
BRAYBROOK 1906
Two views showing the extensions already made when the move from Ballarat was started
18


notably horseworks and chaffcutters. The new harvesting method had brought an increasing
demand for seeding machinery, but only a small quantity could be manufactured and
supplies were still being imported to meet the farmers’ needs. There was every reason to
leave the now outgrown premises and to move nearer to the port of shipment.
The chance presented itself in 1904. The Braybrook Implement Co. Ltd., which had shared
the palmy days with the other stripper makers, was now in difficulties and was offered for
sale by tender. It too bad its links with the past. The building had originally been an annexe
of the great Melbourne Exhibition. The founders of the company included two sons of
Joseph Mellor, a Yorkshireman who arrived in Adelaide in 1840 and became a leading
stripper maker. Ironically this was one of the factories which turned down McKay’s early
approaches to manufacture the machine which was to outmode theirs.
The Braybrook building was small but there was land to satisfy the vision of the industry and
the city to come. McKay decided to buy, but time was running short and transport to the
Junction (of the Ballarat and Bendigo lines) was poor. To lodge the tender in time McKay
took the train to Footscray, a cab as far as the cab could go and did the rest of the distance
over the stony paddocks on foot. The tender was accepted. Until the transfer from Ballarat
in 1906 Braybrook provided castings and made seed drills. In the meantime a building at
668 Bourke Street, close to the site of the present Melbourne showrooms, became for a short
period the head office of a trade now spreading throughout Australia and abroad.
Progress at Ballarat had been a true reflection of H. V. McKay’s character and capabilities.
The major obstacles had been overcome by 1894; the many minor ones were disposed of so
effectively that only seven years later his status as a manufacturer brought an invitation with
the historic signature of Edmund Barton to the opening ceremonies of the first Commonwealth
Parliament. His popularity with his men was great. He worked side by side with them “in
the factory, office and travelling”. When the technicians of the early years went forth on
bicycles to start the harvesters, H. V. McKay was one of them. He was president of their
sporting clubs and an active patron of their social activities. The greatest number of
employees at Ballarat was 466 and in the move to Braybrook, begun iu 1906 and completed
the following year, no fewer than 235 followed him, some taking their homes with them.
At the time of the move there were fewer than 20 houses within a mile radius of Braybrook
Junction. With the industry came a community of workers who settled close to their work.
By 1910 there were already 1,300 on the payroll. Mr. McKay built a number of houses in
the vicinity of the works for employees; numerous others were encouraged to build on
generous terms. Services were provided, roads and channels were formed, water was laid
on, and, at a later date, street and house lighting was supplied by the Works. So a thriving
community sprang up on the Keilor plains and soon after the transfer of the works the
name of the station and of the settlement was, very appropriately, changed from Braybrook
Junction to Sunshine.
Freed from the restrictions which had hampered it in its old quarters, the enterprise was
transformed with amazing speed. Under the leadership of H. Y. McKay the plant began


The first three 'machines below were produced fo r our expanding wheat areas soon after the
transfer to Sunshine. The last three started present-day methods of grain farming from their
introduction in 1916-17
SUNFLOWER ONE-WAY CULTIVATOR
SUNRAY DISC PLOUGH
EARLY SUN DRILL
SUNDERCUT


to pour out, in addition to the basic products, new implements to mechanise Australian
wheatland preparation and seeding as never before. Four new mould-board and three
disc ploughs were produced in quick succession; they were large by the standards of those
days and one of each type represented the most effective stump-jump plough produced to
that time.
Sun grain and fertiliser drills were made in great numbers from 1907, to stand the test of
time almost unchanged, except for mechanical improvements, until replaced recently by the
latest tractor type machines. In the same period McKay introduced the one-way disc culti-
vator (hailed in the United States as a great “discovery’ when manufactured there more
than 35 years later) and the first of the big disc cultivators to bring stony or stumpy land into
quicker production of grain.
This was a period of continuing innovation. In 1909 McKay brought out his first self-
propelled harvesting machine. Cutting a width of 24 feet, it worked well in held trials, but
was judged too costly to sell in practical production quantities and was discontinued. Regular
sized self-propelled and engine-functioned harvesters were made and sold in 1916 when
horses were being taken from the farms for service in the First World War.
Meanwhile, the Sunshine Harvester had been continuously improved and enlarged to cope
with the increasing areas of our wheat farms, characteristically keeping ahead of the
competition which developed when other makers turned out harvesters as the McKay
patents expired. By 1910 agents had been appointed in the main country towns with
branches and distributors in every State and in Argentina, Chile and South Africa. About
the same time Sunshine Motor Cars Pty. Ltd. was formed with a body building works at
South Melbourne; it sold many of what were then the leading makes of cars but it was later
given up as irrelevant to the main line of business.
The record of Sunshine is notable in two ways. It pioneered large scale secondary produc-
tion at a time when the Australian manufacturer ran a very poor second to the importer
and Australians were continually being told by advocates of free trade and by overseas
interests that they should be content to be hewers of wood and drawers of water. Secondly,
within its own held, Sunshine pioneered practically all the main machines and methods on
which so much of our agriculture is profitably based. Three of the most important to grain
farmers were introduced in 1916 and 1917. They were: —
The Sundercut, combination of stump-jump cultivator and plough that rapidly brought
thousands of acres of Mallee scrub country under cultivation.
The Suntyne, combined grain and fertiliser drill and tine cultivator, which quickly
became and remained Australia's most popular seeding machine; and
Headlie Taylor’s Sunshine Headers, recently acknowledged by an American technical
journal as the basis of modern world harvesting practice.


George B ult
D . B
Ferguson
First railway ticket from West Footscray
to Sunshine, 6th August, 1907, the
day Braybrook Junction was renamed
Sunshine.
OF THE ‘TOTAL BAND”
TWO
D. B. FERGUSOFf is credited with much of the early sales
and agency organization and supervised the selling activities and
policies throughout his long association. He was chairman of
directors of the present company, and a son, D. H. Ferguson,
is now wor\s manager. GEORGE BULT was one of four of this
family who joined H. V. McKay in the first manufacturing years
at Ballarat. Starting in 1893, most of his forty-eight years wor\
was in the supervision of production. The family name is still
well represented by the younger generation now at Sunshine.
22


Of tins extraordinary achievement the development of the header is the most interesting
aispect of all, and we shall give some attention to its background.
hor 30 years the Sunshine stripper harvester had held undisputed leadership. It had given
Australian farmers a 30-year lead, with a saving estimated both here and in America at lOd.
a bushel from the cost of 14d. for separate cutting and threshing. In areas with suitable
climatic conditions it was completely successful and on many such farms its modernised
version is still the favourite harvesting machine. But in other parts it sometimes happened
that good crops were flattened by storms on the eve of harvest and the whole year’s work and
income were lost. The challenge therefore was to produce a machine which would harvest
profitably in conditions good or bad alike.
From 1905 three Australians Charlton, Chapman and East connected with the Massey-
Harris Company, worked to combine the essentials of the threshing machine with the
American reaper in a farm-sized machine. Their reaper-thresher was first sold in 1910, being
made in Canada for some years for the Australian market only. It was claimed by the
manufacturers, in a verbal and printed “cold war”, that here was the perfection to which
the McKay harvester had been but the stepping stone but this soon proved to be somewhat
optimistic.
Meanwhile other events were pending. Another Australian, Headlie S. Taylor, horn at Henty,
New South Wales, in the year preceding the invention of the McKay stripper harvester, had
developed his own ideas on the subject. By 1911, a young man with farming experience and
engineering knowledge gathered avidly from books, he was ready to begin to solve the
problem in his own way.
In the next three years Taylor completely used up his limited capital, making altogether
three machines. The second showed, in a badly flattened crop, that he was on the right track.
His third header-harvester was still more encouraging; it aroused wide interest at the Henty
show in 1914 and was used successfully in the heavy harvest later that year.
Armed with enthusiastic reports in the local paper, Taylor invited manufacturers to held
demonstrations the following year. Included was his real “target”, Hugh Victor McKay, who,
as he watched, must inevitably have been reminded of his own early struggles and triumph.
But where the stripper makers had been self-satisfied and short-sighted, McKay recognised
a man of the same cast of mind and met him not with a rebuff but with enthusiasm and
magnanimity. H. S, Taylor was promptly installed at Sunshine, not only in control of
production of his machine but with every facility for its development. That confidence was
entirely justified. Taylor’s first horse-drawn machines, popular from the beginning, were
proved beyond dispute in 1920 when fine wheat crops were flattened by widespread storms
throughout eastern Australia. Working night and day the factory produced more than a
thousand headers equipped with special croplifters and these machines, driven into apparently
hopeless crops, amazed and delighted the farmers by rescuing excellent returns of 30 bushels
and more from every acre.


Headlie Taylor (right) at the Sunshine 10'year Exhibition with Mr. A. J. Kendall of Henty,
7\[.S.W., on whose property this early Header was demonstrated to Hugh Victor McKay.
The Sunshine auto'
header, which established
a world record in 1938
by harvesting 3,300
bushels of wheat from
seventy'six acres in one
day at St. Helens Plains
near Horsham, Victoria.


Given the “freedom of the works”, H. S. Taylor followed success with success the first
one-operation harvesting of held peas; engine-functioned headers that gather and thresh a
great variety of difficult but profitable seeds; Sunshine rice headers; and the famous auto
header of 1924. The Sunshine auto, incidentally, was the first completely successful self-
propelled header and although superseded here by the present power drive (tractor oper-
ated) machines, was yet another Australian innovation taken up later by several
American manufacturers. All the new American “parents” vied in loud claims to have
pioneered it, conveniently forgetting the development of the Australian machine 20 years
earlier and its successful performances as far afield as their own country.
The constant growth in size and scope of the Sunshine Harvester Works brought its own
problems, notably those of materials supply. These McKay proceeded to solve by making
the works as self-sufficient as possible. A section was equipped to produce the astronomical
totals of bolts, nuts and rivets needed for Sunshine machinery. Printing and stationery
requirements became so large that a printery was set up which now produces all the
stationery for the head office and branches, vast numbers of catalogues, parts books and
service manuals, the wheat project books distributed to ten thousand children each year
and among many other items more than 100,000 calendars annually. Before the First World
War cut off supplies of shafting, plant had been installed which made Sunshine not only
self-sufficient but a major supplier of this important material to other industries. Shortages
of brass and copper tube were also avoided by manufacture in the works.
H, V. McKay was never deterred from any project which he believed would benefit
Australian agriculture. As long ago as 1916 tractors were being built around imported
motors at Sunshine but be soon realised that he was years ahead of his customers and the
project was put aside. On the other hand his sense of timing was often akin to prescience.
The great business, registered so long in his own name, was turned into a proprietary company
and organised to go on without interruption some five years before his death on Mav 21,
1926.
He had seen the two acres with its secondhand building bought in 1904 grow to 80 acres
with more than half the area in roofed workshop buildings. The full fruits of his active life
are plain for all to see, not only in material things but throughout and beyond the once
primitive settlement which in 1951 was to be proclaimed the City of Sunshine.
If Hugh Victor McKay had been interested only in his own advancement Sunshine would
probably have resembled the uglier settlements that grew up around it, but seldom has any
town received so many benefits from its leading industrialist. His early actions in providing
beautiful gardens, housing, streets, hue avenues of trees, water and electricity were followed
by many generous gifts from himself and the Company. The whole upkeep of the gardens was
paid for 44 years and tennis courts and a bowling green were added. Four acres of ground
and £2,000 were given to establish the Sunshine Technical School. The full cost of the Albion
railway station was met for the benefit of residents and the nine acres known as Selwyn Park


The first Sunshine'built
tractor, made at the
Harvester Worfis in
1916. The later model
below, was one of a
number sold in 1919.
“General Service” waggons leaving the HarvesterWorfis for duty in the first world war.


were given to provide a worthy sports oval for the district. From his own prosperity, FI. V.
McKay set up a fund to retire employees with long service in the days when such gestures
were rare. He, and later the Company, matched, pound for pound, a self-help fund for
distressed cases initiated by the employees themselves.
Less well known, perhaps, is his connection with the founding of the Flying Doctor Service
by that great held worker of the Australian Inland Mission, “Flynn of the Inland”. Dr. Flynn
had seen many tragic endings of attempts to bring the isolated sick and injured to medical
aid over the long distances and rough tracks of the Territory. The aeroplane, although in
comparative infancy in civil use, appealed to him as the one means to bring patient and doctor
together in time, and he devoted his life to the realisation of his seemingly impractical
dreaming. Traeger, imbued with the same spirit, developed the pedal wireless “trans-ceiver”
that gave the plan its “brain” system; the meetings between Flynn and McKay gave it flight.
Dr. Flynn later referred to “the years throughout which we studied obstacles in our path”,
and the “patient statesmanship and generosity that made it possible for my life-dream to
materialise.”
When the imminence of his death suddenly became apparent, H. V. McKay arranged the first
meeting of the Charitable Trust that bears his name, and one of his wishes carried out was the
provision of £2,000 toward the Aerial Medical Services “experiment”. This lead brought
other donations and a Commonwealth subsidy that quickly snowballed the total to £7,000
and left only details to be organised. With Cloncurry as the initial base a test flight was
made in August, 1927; the first Flying Doctor began duty six months later. Now world
famous, the Service has expanded to bring medical aid and, equally important, a sense of
security, throughout the Inland, and from the Trust further regular and substantial amounts
have been contributed to this and other richly deserving causes.
As we have seen, the Sunshine Harvester Works, comparatively early in the story, had
attained great size. Later development has lain rather in the direction of engineering progress,
enabling the Company to keep pace in its own contributions to the more efficient machinery
which has brought such advancement in agricultural practice. An incidental (although
highly important) illustration of this development is provided by a comparison of defence
requirements provided by Sunshine during the two world wars.
For the first of these emergencies Sunshine produced chiefly great numbers of the peculiarly
rigid and springless “G.S.” waggons and “Furphy” water carts, the carts complete with the
original maker’s shorthand inscription cast on the end of the tank extolling the virtues of
the contents as a beverage. When war broke out again in 1939 the full resources of
Sunshine were placed at the disposal of the Commonwealth and geared for maximum
production in the resistance of aggression.
Much of this new work was highly technical aircraft components, forgings for modern
weapons, tracks and driving parts for troop carriers and tanks, ammunition of various types


T he Sunshine Gardens, established by H. V. McKay in 1908
Cham Ma\ing Machine
One of the modern presses which
cut, form and lin\ chain from the
flat steel strip in one continuous
operation without waste.


and sizes, many of which reached totals in the hundred thousands. Tools and precision
gauges were made for Sunshine’s own work and for other factories. Complete shell-turning
lathes, intricate torpedo control gears and radar equipment demonstrated the skill that had
been acquired in the improvement of agricultural machinery. Sunshine metallurgists and
engineers earned high respect for their knowledge which was freely shared in the common
cause.
Meanwhile the men of Sunshine worked long hours to produce at the same time the farm
machinery which was now more than ever important, and from this 20,000 seed drills,
cultivators, and reapers and hinders went to England to boost the production of food where
and when it was needed most. To meet urgent demands in Australia the Company designed
and developed a full range of flax machinery which did away with the traditional manual
harvesting and handling, in addition to mobile baling equipment which turned crop residues
into raw materials for the making of special papers and cardboard. Versatile Sunshine
headers gathered and threshed great quantities of many scarce vegetable seeds; previously
imported, these were urgently needed for the huge supplies of vegetables canned in Australia
for troops in the Pacific area.
A notable example of this growing engineering ability had already been given in 1929 when
Sunshine began the first mass production of steel sprocket chain. Methods were completely
worked out by the Company’s own technicians and most of the machinery and equipment was
made in the factory itself. “Sunshine" is still the only steel sprocket chain made in the
British Commonwealth.
During the period of the “Depression” when the prices of farm products were among the first
and worst affected, arrangements were completed for the amalgamation of the Australian
interests of the Canadian Massey-Harris Co. Ltd., and the name of H. V. McKay Massey
Harris Pty. Ltd., was registered in 1930. The new Company became the distributor of a
popular line of tractors and ideas were exchanged to the benefit of both Companies.
For many years Australian agriculture, equipped by Australian inventors and manufacturers,
has provided an example for the world of the mechanised farming of large areas and the
production of a big export surplus to help feed the peoples of far more populous countries.
In this 70th anniversary year large capital expenditures are being “ploughed hack’ to
improve further Sunshine service to the farmer. At the factory extensive sections ol
buildings, plant and machinery are being modernised. In Queensland new offices and
warehouses are being built at Geebung, just outside Brisbane. The branch factory at Concord,
near Sydney, and the fine assembly depots at Port Adelaide and Maylands, in Western
Australia, are all being extended. A new branch office is being built at Maylands to replace
the existing Perth Office.


In March, 1954, the Company celebrated the 70th Aniversary of the Harvester with the
historical exhibition at Sunshine, opened by the Prime Minister, the Right Honourable R. G.
Menzies, who took the achievement of “the red-headed young man from the country”, Hugh
Victor McKay, as an example of the “indomitable spirit, infinite resource, self-reliance and
genius for construction” which had helped to make the greatness of Australia. “Never let
us lose our faith in our great country, or our pride in what has been achieved,’ he said.
Faith in Australia and pride in achievement have been and will continue to be the watchwords
of Sunshine.


■ £ ' ' .
.
L
- Jps
■






