

lllSllllllllllllPKlMll
THE WISDOPI HP GOODNESS OF GOD VINDICATED;
SOME OF THE POPULAR
THEOL OGICA L ABS URDITIE S
EXPOSED , rAMS
H. JUNOR BROWNE,
AUTHOR OF
“ROMAN CATHOLICISM 8.C.,” “RATIONAL CHRISTIANITY,” “THE
RELIGION OF THE FUTURE,” ETC.
An Address given at a meeting of the V. A. S., at Austral Buildings ,
Collins Street , Melbourne , on February 14th , 18(48.
PRINTED BY REQUEST.
Refutation by Clergymen and others invited.
>«?<
PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR,
PRINTED BY FLETCHER AND DAWES, 28 EASTERN ARCADE,
BOURKE STREET, MELBOURNE.




fIQG 3
THE WISDOIH HUD GOODNESS OF GOD VINDICATED;
SOME OF THE POPULAR
THEOL OGICAL ABS UR PITIES
EXPOSED ,
H. JUNOR BROWNE,
AUTHOR OF
“ ROMAN CATHOLICISM 8.C.,” “ RATIONAL CHRISTIANITY,” “ THE
RELIGION OF THE FUTURE,” ETC.
An Address given at a meeting of the V. A. S., at Austral Buildings ,
Collins Street , Melbourne , on February 14th, 1898.
PRINTED BY REQUEST.
Refutation by Clergymen and others invited.
■ —«-><?<
PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR,
PRINTED BY FLETCHER AND DAWES, 28 EASTERN ARCADE,
BOURKE STREET, MELBOURNE.




THE WISDOM AND GOODNESS OF GOD
VINDICATED:
Or, Some of the Popular Theological Absurdities
Exposed.
>«p<
As it is generally but erroneously considered that all who
do not uphold the popular beliefs are Atheists, I shall, in
refutation of this, preface this essay with the following lines
addressed to the divine Author of Nature :
“Oh Sacred Presence, Life divine !
We i ear for Thee no gilded shrine,
Unfashioned by the hand of art
Thy temple is the child-like heart;
No tearful eye, no bended knee,
No servile speech we bring to Thee,
For Thy great love tunes every voice
And makes each trusting soul rejoice.
We will not mock Thy holy name
With titles high of empty fame,
For Thou with all Thy works and ways
Art far beyond man’s feeble praise ;
But freely as the birds that sing
The soul’s spontaneous gift we bring,
And like the fragrance of the flowers
We consecrate to Thee our powers.”
In a former address here I gave some of the absurdities
connected with modern Spiritualism, I purpose now referring
to some of the absurdities connected with popular theology.
I am frequently asked why I am so iconoclastic in regard to
the popular beliefs, and my reply is that while I endorse all


that is true, good, and elevating therein, I feel that it is my
duty to publicly denounce whatever is false and misleading.
I am, however, well aware that it is easier to swim with the
lide of popular opinion than to stem its surging current by
running counter to prejudice, tradition, custom and vested
interests ; and that he who exposes the fallacy of cherished
opinions is, in general, looked upon as a wicked and
immoral person, worse than a robber, and not as an en-
lightener and a benefactor. This, however, has been the
case in all ages. It is reported that even the self-sacrificing
Jesus of Nazareth, the noble Judean reformer, was
denounced as an emissary of Beelzebub, and a promulgator
of seditious doctrines, because he did not endorse all the
tenets of the Mosaic law,—the system of religion in which
he had been brought up. For instance, it is reported that
he repudiated the old Jewish teaching of an eye for an eye
and a tooth for a tooth, and substituted in its place the
higher and more humane law of love for one another, even
for one’s enemies. If all, however, were to shirk from their
duty of exposing error on this account there would be no
progress, no advancement.
Another of the reasons I have for denouncing popular
theological fallacies is, that until people’s minds are dis-
abused of their cherished erroneous opinions they do not
feel the want of, and cannot receive that which is more
rational, more soul-elevating, and more worthy of
acceptance ; just as you cannot fill a jug which is full of
dirty water, with clean water, until you have first emptied
the dirty water out. To those who have rationally analysed
the popular beliefs, and who have realised how utterly un-
tenable are many of their tenets, it is truly astounding with
what tenacity the generality of people cling to time-honored
falsities, even after their erroneous character and their
irrationality and absurdity have over and over again been
exposed. As has been truly observed, “ When a lie gets a


good start it takes a long time for truth to overtake it,”
and this applies more especially to theological falsehoods.
Take as an example of this the many years it took to displace
the old fallacious doctrine upheld by the Church, that the
sun revolved round the earth, and to substitute in its place
the scientific fact now taught by the Church, namely, that
the earth revolves around the sun. “Truth,” however, “is
mighty, prevail it shall.” I may here observe that I
have no desire to be offensive to anyone who is still
attached to popular superstition, but, as has been truly
written “ better that an offence come than that truth should
be witheld.”
The fundamental, popular false dogma is, that God, who
is unchangeable, the same yesterday, to-day, and forever,
formerly inspired men to write, but has left off doing so for
the last eighteen hundred years. Let me here ask, is this
reasonable,probable or worthy of belief by anyone who claims
to be a rational being? Can the all-wise God of universal
nature be at the same time unchangeable and changeable?
As reasonably might believers therein declare that black is
white or that white is black. The truth is, that this, which
I have termed the fundamental popular false dogma, is a
priestly imposture inculcated for the purpose of retaining
the credulous in mental slavery to priestcraft. It is an
imposture which is responsible for most of the horrible
tortures, inhuman cruelties, and bloody wars of the past,
and for the strife and hatred still existing between the
hundreds of different sects,all basing their divergent beliefs on
this one book, which cunning priests have stamped with their
brand as being divinely inspired. That this book contains
many grand truths, sublime passages, and the highest
moral and spiritual teachings, I frankly admit, but these
have been introduced, diplomatically, for the purpose of
giving the semblance of truth to its many gross absurdities
and to its flagrant falsities, to which I shall presently refer.


The innumerable and palpable contradictions it contains are
alone, however, sufficient to prove to ail who are not
blinded by prejudice, that, where it is inspired, it has Hot
been so by one mind but by many of various degrees of
intelligence. To ascribe such contradictions to God is the
very height of impiety, for if God exists, as all nature pro-
claims He does, He must be infinitely perfect, and therefore
incapable of inspiring statements that are inconsistent and
contradictory, consequently one or other of them must be
untrue, many of them being diametrically opposed to
each other. I shall give a few examples of these contra-
dictions further on. If in reading the book referred to, we
substitute for “Thus saith the Lord,” “Thus saith a spirit,”
good, bad, or indifferent, the numerous inconsistencies and
contradictory statements set forth therein are rationally
accounted for, in the same way as are modern contradictory
spirit communications.
Let us now consider what is stated in this book which is
declared by priestcraft to be divinely inspired, and what
priestcraft would have us and all the rest of the world
believe ; and at the same time let us unbiassedly judge, by
the sense of right and wrong which God hath so graciously
endowed us, if we, as rational and accountable beings, are
justified in accepting as true the teachings of priestcraft,
for on its authority alone popular theology rests.
In the first place we are asked to believe, but not in the
plain language I employ, that God existed from all eternity,
but that, according to Jewish chronology, He dwelt in
chaotic idleness until about six thousand years back, when
He awoke from His lethargy and in six days created the
heavens and the earth and all that in them is. That on
the seventh day He rested from His labours and was
refreshed, —these are the words of the book. That after
there had been light on the earth for three days, he created
the sun, moon, and stars to give this planet light. 1 hat


after creating man out of nothing He had recourse to one
of this man’s ribs from which to create a woman. That
after having pronounced all that He had created good, He
found man bad, and repented that he had made him. In
consequence of this He drowned, by the flood, the whole of
the human race except a man named iN’oah and his family ;
of this He also repented, and promised never to do it again,
although in another part of the book we are told that “God
is not a man that He should repent.” We are asked to
believe that God, who is a non-respecter of persons and
whose love is over all, had formerly a chosen people called
Israelites, who carried Him about in a box called the “Ark
of the Covenant,” and to whom He showed special
favouritism, even assisting them in their sanguinary battles
against the rightful owners of lands which the Israelites
coveted. In one place, however, where the people against
whom the Israelites were fighting had chariots of iron, He
was powerless to assist them. That on one occasion He
even stopped the motion of the planetary system, at the
command of an Israelitish general, in order that His chosen
people might have longer daylight in which to slay their
enemies. We are asked to believe that God sent Moses to
Pharoah to ask him to let the children of Israel depart from
Egypt, where they were held as slaves, and that at th
same time He hardened Pharoah’s heart that he should not
let them go, and that He t hen sent a number of disgusting
plagues on Egypt in order to punish Pharoah for the
refusal which He Himself had inspired. That after this,
when the Israelites fled from Egypt, He made the waters
of the Red Sea stand as a wall on each side of a road, for
the Israelites to pass over dry shod, and that when
Pharoah’s horsemen tried to follow them He even took off
their chariot wheels to stop their progress, and caused the
waters to drown them all for daring to follow His chosen
people the Jews.


An argument frequently used by upholders of the
divine authority of the Bible is, that this has been believed
in, and the book has been viewed as God’s Word by
thousands of the most enlightened minds for centuries past,
therefore, from their standpoint, it is presumptuous for any
one to call in question the authenticity of the Scriptures.
Let me remind all who thus argue, that for many centuries
before Galileo declared that the earth revolved round the
sun it was believed by thousands of the most enlightened,
as well as by the ignorant, that the sun revolved round the
earth, but that did not prove it true, neither does the popular
belief in the divine authority of the Bible prove the truth
thereof. Truth cannot yield to men’s beliefs, but their
beliefs must, sooner or later yield to truth, for belief is
temporary, while truth is eternal. Modern Biblical criticism
has clearly disproved the infallability and the divine authority
of the Scriptures, and thereby the green spectacles of
superstition are gradually falling from the eyes of all, except
those who are completely blinded by prejudice and who
therefore cannot open their eyes to the light of truth and
reason. The great majority of the people, however, are
beginning to perceive the folly of —
“ Believe and all your sins forgiven,
Only believe, and yours is Heaven.”
I need not enlarge on the following Baron Munchausen
tales which are related in that book which priestcraft has
stamped as being divinely inspired by God, as they bear
absurdity on their very face : take for example a serpent
speaking to a woman named Eve, an ass talking to a man
named Baalam, a fish swallowing a man named Jonah, a
woman being, by an extraordinary chemical action, turned
into a pillar of salt, the walls of a city called Jericho falling
down through the blowing of trumpets, two she-bears
killing forty-two children for calling out “Get up, baldy ’
to an old man, a man killing a thousand Phillistines with


the ja.v-bone of an ass, another man having been fed by
ravens, &c. I may here add the iaole about Pharoah s
wise men throwing down their walking-sticks and 115 esc
at once having turned into snakes, and on Moses throwing
down his stick it also became a snake, which swallowed up
all the other snakes. Can you imagine for an instant an
all-wise God inspiring such childish tables as these ? I
cannot!
I shall now refer to a few of the immoral and indecent
passages in that book claimed by priest-craft as having been
divinely inspired, and which in popular parlance, is faisely
called “ God’s Word,” but which book, in many parts, is
unworthy to be called man’s word. I maintain that the
gross obscenities' in the 38th and 39th chapters of Genesis
are sufficient to corrupt the morals of all young peop.e "ho
may read them. Let me ask you to peruse these
at your leisure. Let me here remind you of the following ;
Abraham’s passing his wife off as his sister and receiving
presents of cattle for doing so, Onan’s disgusting behaviour,
Noah’s exposure of his person when drunk, Lot s committ-
ing incest with his two daughters,, the old psalm-singing
hypocrite, David, who was said to be a man after Gods
own heart, seducing Bathsheba the wife of Uriah the Hittitc*
and how he acted towards her husband, Amnons committ-
ing incest with his sister Tamar, Potiphar’s wife’s attack on
the chastity of Joseph, and many other equally indecent
stories set forth in that book which numbers of people
wickedly tell their children is God’s holy word, and who
woulJ have the same immoralities taught in our state
schools to poison the minds of the rising generation, in the
same way as their own minds were poisoned hefoie they
were capable of reasoning. Shame on all such parents !
There is an old but erroneous saying, namely, I o the
pure all things are pure,” this is probably what Lot said to
his daughters when he seduced them, and this saying may


have been relied upon as a plea of justification by the Rev.
gentleman of Oakleigh who was lately tried and convicted
for having a family by one of his own daughters. Truly,
in many cases, the heart of man is deceitful and desperately
wicked. I believe with Jesus that there is no one all good
but one, that is God, for to err is human. I also believe
that in the future life, by the equitable law of retributive
justice, everyone will be rewarded, not according to his
belief or professions, but by the deeds done in the body.
The religion of righteous action is, therefore, what I up-
hold and advocate, all else I look upon as priestly super-
stition, with its temple-worship, its inexplicable creeds
and dogmas, and its modernized heathenish forms and
ceremonies, which are simply pious mummery, by which
the credulous are deceived and kept subject to priest-craft,
and thereby in ignorance of the infinite goodness of God,
and the glorious destiny that awaits every human soul,
in accordance with the everlasting mercy of God the
divine Author of our being, whose love is over all, —
For He is the God of Humanity,
And not of a favoured few,
The God of the saint and the sinner,
Of the Gentile as well as the Jew.
I shall here refer to a few of the many glaring contradic-
tions contained in the so-called “ Word of God.” In one
part it is stated that no man hath seen God at any time,
in another that Moses saw God face to face, and in another
that Nadab and seventy of the elders saw God. In one part
it states that God dwells in the light, in another part
it states that He dwelleth in thick darkness. In one part
He is stated to be a God of love, in another that He is a
God of vengeance and a consuming fire. In one part God
is said to be a non-respecter of persons, and in another
that He had a chosen people or tribe. In one place it
represents God as dwe ling on high, and as coming down


to earth occasionally, in olden times, to see what the
children of men were doing, in another place He is re-
presented as being omnipresent and as filling all space
with His presence. In one place Moses is rtpre>ented as
being one of the meekest of men, and in another that he
was a murderer, having killed an Egyptian. In one part it
states that a lie is an abomination to God, in another part
that God loved the lying Jacob and hated his brother
Esau who was truthful. In one place God is said to have
condemned adultery, in another that the adulterous King
David was a man after God’s own heart. In one part it is
stated that God is not a man that He should lie, neither
the son of man that He should repent, in another part He
is represented as having sent lying spirits through the
prophets of Ahab, and as saying “ I am weary with repent-
ing.” In one part it states that God tempteth no man, in
another part it states that God tempted Abraham. In
one place it is stated that God is not willing that any
should perish, and in another that He made the wicked in
order that they mis>ht perish. In one place God is re-
presented as declaring “ Thou shalt not kill,” and in
another place as saying “ slay every man his brother, and
every man his companion, and every man his neighbour.”
In one part God is represented as declaring “Thou shalt
not steal,” and in another as telling the Israelites, through
Moses, to rob the Egyptians of their “jewels of gold, silver,
and raiment.” The foregoing few examples of the
numcious contradictory passages in the book claimed by
priestcraft to be inspired by God are sufficient to disprove
that claim to all, except to those who assume that God is a
God of confusion and not a God of truth.
What, let me ask, have the heathenish rites, the super-
stitious beliefs, the sanguinary wars of the Israelites, and
their impudent claim of being the special favourites of the
infinite Author of universal nature, to do with true religion?


The same claim, I may observe, has been made by other
nations. All such claims are, however, equally selfish and
totally devoid of proof or of rational probability. The
Hindoos, for instance, claim that every word of the Vedas
was uttered out of the mouth of God direct, and that the
far greater antiquity of the Vedas than that of the Hebrew
or any other sacred writings is a complete refutation of
their claim to divine inspiration. It is the very height of
superstition to believe that God, who is the same yesterday,
to-day and forever, revealed Himself to men in olden times
otherwise than He does now, namely through the works of
nature, which are His. As said of old, “1 he heavens
declare the glory of God ; and the firmament sheweth His
handiwork.” He requires not the praise of men or of
angels, for all his works glorify Him ; He suppheth our daily
wants, and hath endowed us with the sense of right and
wrong if we would only be guided by it. He hath given
us the evidences of a life to come if we only but seek it.
Then what more do we want ?
An earthly father requireth not his children to ask him
for their daily bread, neither doth he require his children to
sing praises to him, then why suppose that our heavenly
Father is less good or rational than earthly fathers? The
only way we can serve God is by unselfish acts of kindness
to our fellow beings, for if we love not those whom we have
seen how can we love Him whom we have not seen ? Can
God be less just or less reasonable than man ? Selfish
prayers are evidence of want of faith in the goodness of God
who ordereth all things well and wisely, therefore, rather
trust in the Lord and say “not our will, but Thine, be
done,” in the full belief that all that happens tends
(eventually to good, and that our greatest misfortunes are
but blessings in disguise. Thus only can we show true
faith in God and resignation to His holy will.


In the Bible and the Churches doubt is diplomatically
held to be sinful, whereas it is not only the right but the
duty of all to doubt all statements which appear im-
probable, and which are not borne out by reason, by
analogy, or by experience. Doubt is the Nemesis of priestly
faith, which is in reality pious credulity. It is the grand
lever by which mankind have been raised from savagery to
civilization. Any statement that cannot stand being-
doubted and investigated is unworthy of acceptance by all
who claim to be rational beings. We should therefore
prove all things mid hold fast that which is true,
irrespective of the authority claimed for any statement,
since authority bears no relation to truth.
Good, like light, is absolute, while evil, like darkness, is
relative. As soon as light is admitted darkness disappears,
in like manner, as soon as true righteousness leigneth
supreme evil ceaseth in the case of the good, for it hath no
attraction for them. Gcd hath given us the power to
chocse between good and evil, between truth and error,
but He does not compel us to follow the right course. If
He did so we would be mere automatons, and not
responsible beings, as we are ; responsible not to a Power
Outside cf us, but to the divine and deathless spirit which
is within every sentient being.
“Tis ours to follow good or ill pursue,
And what we are depends on what we do.’ !
Geological discoveries in modern times have scientifically
proved that the outer strata of the Earth have taken
millions of years in their formation. Let me ask upholders
of the Biblical accounts of the six days creation, are we, as
rational and accountable beings, justified in accepting the
childish tables set forth in that book, written in ignorant
and superstitious times, and in rejecting, in place there' f,
incontrovertably demonstrated facts? Can Gods works
contradict His word ? The word-torturing and quibbling of


the supporters of popular theological absurdities in their
futile attempts to reconcile the Bible and Science are so
palpable to all who are unprejudiced, and who are truly
animated by the love of truth, that the subject is unworthy
of a moment’s consideration. If Moses wrote the
Pentateuch, as claimed by theologians, he must have been
the cleverest man that, ever lived, for therein is given an
account of his death,and burial, and if he was a meek man
he would not have written that he was the meekest of men,
as stated in the Pentateuch. Most people seem to ignore
the facts that antiquity cannot cause truth to be a lie or a
falsehood to be a truth, and that truth is an essential
requisite of religion. As a writer has wisely observed, “We
should have but one desire to know the truth, but one fear to
believe a lie,” which is said to be’* an abomination unto the
Lord.’ Those who uphold the divine authorship of the Bible,
must, if consistent, bid farewell to science, and those who
accept the facts brought to light through scientific research
cannot consistently continue to view the Bible as having been
inspired by an all-wise God. Take for example modern
astronomical discoveries. As said of old, “ Why halt ye so
long between two opinions ?” and “ Ye cannot serve two
masters,” —choose, therefore, between truth and error,
between scientific facts and Biblical fables, that is, if you
admit truth to be an essential requisite of religion. Let
not prejudice, the outcome of erroneous teaching, continue
to enslave your minds to time honoured falsities regarding
the wisdom and goodness of God. Behold the uniformity
of His laws as disclosed in the great book of nature, which
all can translate for themselves without the aid—and
which requires not the misrepresentations—of self-interested
priests or parsons. Those who really love God love truth,
for He is the divine author thereof.
God’s holy truth in Nature, vvhere’re my lot be cast,
Shall be my daily theme and aim, my glory to the last.


Had the Bible been inspired by an all-wise God we may
rest assured that it would have contained no contradictions,
and would have been harmonious in all its parts, and not in
conflict, as it is, with science. The varying sects, all basing
their beliefs on this one book, are clear evidences of the
inharmonious character thereof.
Objection may be taken thatj have confined my remarks
to the Old Testament chiefly. This is true, for I always
like to go to the foundation of a matter. The New
Testament rests on the Old, for it was on account of Adam’s
transgression that Jehovah is represented as having cursed
with an eternal curse all mankind yet unborn, which made
the sacrifice of Jesus necessary, in order to appease God’s
holy wrath and satisfy His divine sense of justice. In
other words it was the Fall that necessitated the Atonement.
The doctrine of vicarious sacrifice is as absurd as it is unjust
and God-dishonouring. To impute to God the cruel
murder of the innocent Jesus is, in plain language, utter
blasphemy. I do not know which is the more absurd, the
Fall or the Atonement. If Adam had been perfect he
could not have fallen, and it would be as reasonable to
expect that having a tooth drawn of one man would afford
relief to another suffering from toothache, as to believe the
vicarious sacrifice doctrine, namely, that the crucifixion of one
man would atone for the moral wrong-doings of others.
Two wrongs cannot make a right ! Having proved the
rottenness of the foundation, the superstructure erected
thereon is rendered valueless, consequently it requires no
refutation.
I may, however, observe that although the New Test-
ament does not contain such obscene stories as does the old,
still it is not free from indelicate passages, such as that
relating the seduction of a Jewish maiden by a ghost or
spirit while she was the affianced bride or betrothed wife of
a respectable tradesman, and the account of what happened


to Elizabeth, mother of John the Baptist, when she heard
the salutation of her cousin Mary, also the description of
the illness from which the father of Publius suffered, etc.
The contradictions in the New Testament are, however,
almost as frequent as those in the Old, as is proved by the
following : In one part Jesus is said to be the son of a ghosl,
in another that he is the son of man, and two genealogies
are given in support of this, only they differ, one of these
tracing his descent from a different son of David to that
stated in the other, and one contains the names of some
forty progenitors while the other gives only twenty-five.
In one part it is stated that Jesus came down from Heaven*
in another that God raised up Jesus. In one place it is
represented that Jesus* mission was confined to the Jews*
and ii; another that it was for the Gentiles as well as the
Jews. In one place that Jesus came to bring peace upon
earth, and in another that he came not to bring peace but
a sword, to set a man at variance against his father, and the
daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law
against her mother-in-law. Were one to do this now, we
would call him a bad man, an evil disposed person, but
through prejudice people as a rule cannot see the wrong in
such conduct on the part of their cherished hero, who is
reported to have said that if any man hated not his father
and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren and
sisters he could not be his disciple, yet in another part we
are enjoined to love one another, even our enemies, far less
our near relatives. Can anything be more unreasonable
and more inconsistent than this? As a poet has truly
written : '
“ By education most have been milled,
So they believe because they so were bred,
The priest continues what the nurse began,
And thus the child imposes on the man.”
In one part we are told that Judas burst asunder
and his bowels gushed out, and in another that he went


and hanged himself. In one place Jesus is represented as
having promised one of the thieves crucified with him that
he would meet him in Paradise that day, and in another
part it states that Jesus descended to Hell for three days
and three nights after having been crucified. In one place
it states that the body of Jesus was embalmed before it was
buried, in another it states that it was not, owing to Jesus
having risen before preparations for embalming his body
were "completed. It is stated that Jesus was crucified on a
Friday and on the Passover Day, while according to the
Jewish calendar the Passover could not then or now come
on a Friday. In one part it is stated that one woman came
first to the sepulchre and found the body of Jesus gone, in
another that two women came first to the sepulchre, in
another that three women came first to the sepulchre, and
in another part it states that .a number of women with
Joseph of Arimathea came first to the sepulchre. In one
part it states that there were two angels seen inside the
sepulchre by Mary, in another part that there was one
angel seen outside the sepulchre who spoke to the two Marys,
in another part that a young man was seen inside the
sepulchre, who spoke to the three women , and in another
part it states that there were two men seen inside the
sepulchre who spoke to the number of women who were
present. In one place it is stated that God chasteneth
those He loveth, therefore He must love those He is re-
presented as sending to Hell to suffer eternally. In one
part it states that everyone shall be rewarded according to
the deeds done in the body, “ as ye sow, so shall you also
reap,” whereas in another part it is represented that however
wicked one may have been, if at the eleventh hour he will
only repent, turn from the evil ot his ways, and believe an
absurdity he will thereby escape from the just consequences
of his wrong-doings. The absurdity I here allude to is that
the humble Jesus, the half-brother of James, Jose, Simon,


Jude and their sisters, who was so humble that he reproved
a young man for addressing him even as “ good master,”
was the fullness of the God-head bodih', “ The Word ” by
whom all things were made, and without whom nothing
was made that was made. If this were true he must have
made his mother, an absurdity equal to the fable of bis
ghostly paternity. According to the scientific axiom,
namely, “ like produces like,” if Jesus was the son of a
ghost he must have been a ghost, but it is popularly held
that all things, however absurd, arc possible with the Bible
God. In no place in the Gospels, however, is Jesus re-
ported as having claimed to be the son of a ghost, but it is
frequently represented therein that he declared he was the
son of man.
I think the foregoing examples of contradictions and
absurdities are enough to prove to you the untrustworthy
character of many of the New Testament statements, on
the other hand I admit that both the Old and the New
Testaments contain many sublime and soul elevating
passages, which, as I have already observed I cordially
endorse and uphold, but these in no way validate
the numerous erroneous, immoral and contradictory
passages set forth therein.
“ Let him that hath ears to hear, hear,” add to your faith
knowledge, and to knowledge understanding, as said of
old, “ Why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right ?”
What does the Lord require of man, but to do justly, show
mercy and walk humbly ? Doubt not the divine faculty
with which God has so graciously endowed you, in religion
as in everything else, and let no priest or parson warp your
judgment or influence your divine sense of right and wrong,
also let no book, church, or man enslave your conscience.
You, not they, are alone responsible for your opinions, your
thoughts and your actions, which constitute your character
and your deathless individuality. Faith or belief in that


which rests not on a scientific basis is mere pious credulity
unworthy of our acceptance, and only retards our spiritual
progress. Our faith, as a rule depends entirely on the
circumstances of our birth, whereas our actions are our own,
which, as I have said, constitute our deathless individuality,
our eternal ego, by virtue of our sonship from the ever-
lasting Author of our being, —the God of universal nature,
in whom we live, move and have our being, who is in all,
through all. and above all, —the intelligent energizing
Power behind all the phenomena in nature, —besides whom
there is none else. After a lecture I delivered in Exeter,
England, I was asked if I were an atheist. I replied “so far
from my being an atheist,. I was a defender of God from
the blasphemous accusations brought against Him, not only
in the churches, but also in the Bible.”
The clergy, with few exceptions, of the various sects
styling themselves Christians, dwell continually on the
moral precepts and sublime passages of the Bible, but they
take good care, diplomatically, not to refer to its incon-
sistencies, its contradictions, its immoralities, or to its
absurdities, consequently the facts I have here stated are
almost totally unknown to, and are not realized by the
generalit}' of people. As a consequence of this, the plain
statement of these unpalatable facts grates with harshness
on the ears of those who have been accustomed to listen
only to one side of the question, and who consequently
look upon all the statements of the Bible as being divine
verities which are totally above suspicion. Such minds
generally judge of statements made, not on their intrinsic
merits, but on the popularity of the author by whom they
have been made. This being the case, I shall proceed to
quote a lew authorities in justification of the course I have
followed in submitting, for the consideration of all who are
truly animated by the love of truth, the foregoing con-
tradictions and absurdities


Bishop Marsh declares that “ The Bible must be examined
by the same laws of criticism which are applied to other
writings of antiquity.” Dr. Hampden, Bishop of Hereford,
wrote, “ Before we admit any proposed Revelation we mu-t
explore its nature from an actual survey of it in all its
parts.” Bishop Butler wrote, “ Reason can, and it ought
to judge —not only of the meaning, but also of the morality
and evidence of Revelation. It is the province of reason to
judge of the morality of the Scriptures.” Archbishop
Fenelon wrote, “ None are worthy of the name ot men but
those who walk by the dictates of eternal reason.”
Bishop Gleig wrote, “It is indisputable that no
doctrines which clearly contradict any truth which
lias been demonstrated by the light of nature can
have been revealed by the Father of Light. The
Rev. Dr. J. B. Dodds declares that “Truth is immutable,
and cannot bend to circumstances, it must stand in-
dependent of the belief or unbelief of men ” Evanson wrote,
“ A creature giving birth to her creator, is a blasphemous
impiety.” Beltham wrote, “The miraculous conception ot
Jesus is an equally absurd picture as that ot Jupiter and
Danae.” Luther designated the doctrine of the Trinity as
“ a mere human invention.” Calvin held the doctrine of
the Trinity to be “ barbarous, insipid, profane —a human
institution, grounded on no testimony of God s word.
Jerome wrote, “Those who confess the 1 rinity must bid
farewell to science.” Herbert Spencer wrote, “Science is
simply a higher development of common knowledge. It
science is repudiated all knowledge must be repudiated wi.h
it.” The Rev. Baldwin Brown wrote.“ln so many Christians
the idea of God has been degraded by childish and little-
minded teaching.” Principal Taylor wrote, Ihe Bible
stands before us as a simple piece of history, interwrought
with its contemporaneous literature, —often curious^
romantic, beautiful —not seldom, also, repulsive and


terrible.” The Rev. Dr. Gilbert Elliot, Dean of Bristol,
wrote, “ The more I examine the whole question for my-
self the more certain I become that in the Bible legend is
mix'd up with history,...and that the Bible is, therefore,
not infallible.” The author of “ Supernatural Religion ”
wrote, “ The Bible is totally without literary or historical
evidence, and cannot for a moment be upheld upon any
such grounds as the revealed word of God.” Dr. J. W.
Draper wrote, “ A divine Revelation must necessarily be
intolerant of contradiction ; it must repudiate all im-
provement in itself, and view with disdain that arising
from the progressive intellectual development of man.
But our opinions on every subject are continually liable to
modification from the irresistable advance of human Know-
ledge.” The Rev. E. Garbett wrote, “If the belief in the
infallibility of Scripture be a falsehood, the church founded
upon it must be a living fraud. In all consistent reason
we must accept the whole of the inspired autographs, or
accept the whole as from end to end unauthorised and
worthless.” I do not. however, agree with him m the
latter remark, as the Bible illustrates the superstitious
ideas and barbarous conceptions of God which prevailed
at the time it was written. The Rev. S. Bashe, writing
on the Bible, states, “ Our present authorised version
appointed to be read in churches, contains thousands upon
thousands of inaccuracies awaiting correction. Hence the
absurdity of talking about an infallible Bible is patent to
all who think for themselves.” The Rev. A. W. Momerie
has the candour to state that the three primary doctrines
of the creed of Christendom are the Atonement, the
'Trinity, and the Resurrection. The first of these he
declares to be grossly immoral and the other two as being
palpably ridiculous. A. E. Stanley writes, “ The world
pronounces him a brave man who in battle gallantly leads
the charge and faces the cannon ; but it requires a


sublimer courage and greater honesty to proclaim an
unwelcome truth--to defend an unpopular cause.” As
a poet has truly written :
“ The man who dares to think—to live true to his soul’s divinest light—
Will to the world an impulse give for truth and right:
That which is crucified to-day the distant future shall adore ;
And Truth, which Error seeks to slay, live evermore.”
In conclusion I may observe that in the Old Testament
the one and indivisible god of the Jews is represented as
a jealous, cruel, and blood-thirsty being, and in the New
Testament the triune god of Paul’s inventive imagination
is represented as a son-murderer, —the attributes of the
infinite and all-wise Author of universal nature being,
however, inconsistently ascribed to both of these wicked and
imaginaiy gods. According to the barbarous conceptions
of God set forth in the Old Testament, He was wicked in
having cursed with an eternal curse all mankind yet
unborn, merely for an act of disobedience on the part of
a couple of their fore-parents ; as cruel in aiding and
abetting the Israelites in their sanguinary wars against the
various tribes whose lands the Israelites coveted, and in
the ruthless butcheries perpetrated on the women and
children of these unfortunate tribes after their defeat by
the cruel marauding Israelites; and as untruthful in
having promised the land of Canaan to Abraham and to his
seed forever, which promise He has failed to carry out..
Then as to the triune god of the New Testament, he was
an unjust god in requiring the cruel death of the innocent
for the guilty, as if two wrong aefts could make one
right aeft; a partial god in electing some to everlasting
happiness, and in foreordaining the great majority of the
race to eternal suffering fur wiong-doings committed dur-
ing a few years of earthly existence ; and as a wicked god
in having created a place called Hell of everlasting
torments, with a wide path easy of descent leading thereto,
and a place of bliss called Heaven, with a narrow path


difficult of ascent, into which comparatively few of
the race enter. How different are such atrocious
conceptions of God to those entertained by the wor-
shippers of the great God of Nature, who is the intelligent
animating Power manifest in all things, whose love is over all
and whose mercy truly endureth forever. I, for one, cannot
even reverence, far less worship a cruel, unjust and wicked
god, but such are the absurd conceptions, in plain
language, popularly enteitained of the divine Author of
our being, lam aware that my statement of the case will
be repudiated by most people, but facts are stubborn
things which no amount of sophistry or word-quibbling
can gainsay. Let me ask those who would repudiate my
plain representation of the case, was their god omnipotent,
consequently he could have forgiven the sins of the world
without the cruel and unjust murder of Jesus, but would
not, if so, he was wicked, —or was he willing but unable to
forgive man’s sins without the shedding of innocent blood,
if so their god was not omnipotent ? Which horn of the
dilemma do they choose? I maintain that God is good,
and that any book or church which represents Him other-
wise cannot be true or worthy of our acceptance. The
doctrine of eternal torments for a few short years of wrong-
doing on Earth is enough to condemn the whole of this
popular priestly superstition. No wonder that material-
ism is so prevalent, not only outside of the churches but
also among many of their regular attendants, when such
God-dishonouring doClrines are still taught by the people’s
self-constituted spiritual instructors. The only wonder is
that they do not cause all their listeners, who are capable
of reflection, to turn materialists.
A good God and a rational faith resting on a scientific
base, is what I uphold and advocate, regardless of the frowns
and sneers of those who are prejudiced, and who have not
given the amount ol earnest and prayerful investigation


and study to the subject that I have during the last quarter
of a century. I hold that belief in the popular theology,
with its immaculate conception, its man-god, and its
vicarious sacrifice, is a standing disgrace to the intelligence
of the age in which we live, when we have made steam our
galley-slave, the sun our portrait-painter, and electricity our
post-man and lamp-lighter.
I also hold that all systems of religion should be
judged, not by what their advocates claim for them,
but by their results after a reasonable trial. Now, what
are the results of the various systems of religion based on the
Bible as a special revelation from God to man, after a trial
of many centui ies ? Do we find their votaries, as a rule, are
even honest and truthful, to say nothing of righteous?
Do they love each other, far less their supposed enemies ?
Past and current events, known to all who are able to
read, are sufficient answers to these questions. It is there-
fore clearly evident that belief in the popular theological
absurdities which I have here pointed out has been a
complete failure, and that more rational and truer views
regarding religion, and more reasonable and higher con-
ceptions of God and man’s destiny are greatly needed and
much to be desired by all who are animated by the love ot
truth.
Having explained many of the external evidences against
the Bible having been inspired by God, and having shown
the sources from which most of its fables were derived in
rnv late publication entitled, “ Roman Catholicism Before
Christ,” I have in the foregoing, confined my statements to
some of the internal evidences against its divine authority
as claimed for it by priestcraft. I maintain that if the
Bible is true then God is not good, and if God is good He
would not have inspired the many God-dishonouring
statements set forth therein. Mankind has been graciously


endowed with reason, but in regard to religion they, as a
rule, have trampled this divine faculty under foot, and have
consequently ignored the palpable fact that what is
nonsense on a principle of reason cannot be sense on a
principle of religion. Kveryone has a mission to perform,
however humble it may be, mine is to expose time-honoured
falsities and to proclaim the infinite goodness of God and
the glorious destiny that eventually awaits every human
soul, in defiance of popular opinion to the contrary. As
a poet, referring to the infinite goodness of God, has truly
written :
“ I may not look where cherubims or seraphs cannot see,
Uut nothing can be good in Him which evil is in me ;
The wrongs that pain my soul below I dare not throne above,
I know not of Ilis wrath or hate, I know but of His love.”


“Come now let us reason together,”—lsaiah i., 18
“Has God revealed His will to man
In words of human speech ?
And written after human plan
His works and will to teach ?
Or has He filled the brains of men
With His celestial tire,
And held in guidance every pen
Man thinks He should inspire ?
Ask Brahman, Buddhist, Greek or Jew,
And each will scripture show,
Inspired by God to save the few,
And guide His sons below.
Each nation has its sacred lore
Exclusive of the rest ,
God gave them theirs —He gave no more,
And theirs alone is best.
In ages dark, when knowledge beamed
But feebly on mankind,
The wildest dreams to mortals seemed
God-workings in the mind.
Then incoherent fables took
The place to knowledge owed,
And men unto a man-made book
Knelt prostrate, over-awed.”
“Reason is the still small voice of God in man."
may be ignored but it can never be annihilated.
t'lereher & Dawes, Printers, 28 Eastern Arcade, Bourke St„ Melbourne.








