

mB v ■ \
B | *
1 H gt H I X^s^
VHr ntBWR / / - ■ m
B hB
B ll \ I
r >✓
■ '-JM ■
M H BBBiBBIB
j i JHr*#r s 5*.&
gl 1 / f \ { /*"» F m -•'*■6 A m J m Bb m
\ \ \ / / \ M m M U


his family away
camping in the country for tbeir holidays and for weeks
beforehand they were all very excited, rushing about
preparing for their trip. At last the great day arrived,
and they all jumped into their old car to start on their
way. Soon they were well away from all the noise and
a
bustle of the city. They intended to keep on driving until
«
they found a really nice place to make their camp. The
children were enjoying themselves very much for they
had never been to the country before and they saw many
strange new sights.


C 16697
Eventually they came upon a beautiful spot which they
all agreed would be an ideal place to make their home
for the rest of the holidays. W illie pulled up the car and
they all tumbled out. Willie and Waddles got out the
tent and soon had it erected in a nice little clearing
beside the river, while little Winnie helped her mother
unpack and make everything comfortable for their stay.
Now, Winnie was really a good little girl, but she had
one very bad fault; she was always telling untruths, and
no matter how hard they tried her mother and father
could not stop her.


As soon as they were settled, Winnie went for a walk
into the bush to see if she could find some flowers to
decorate the tent, for that was one of her jobs at home to
keep the house bright and gay with flowers, and she
thought it would be nice to do the same at their camp.
Although her mother had told her not to go away from
the clearing without telling them, she was so busy look-
ing out for pretty flowers that she wandered a little
further than she had intended. Suddenly she saw a
lovely lily, and as she picked it she thou ght how nice it
would look in their tent.


But she was not aware that a nasty-looking gipsy
woman was watching her, until she heard a voice ask
if she would like to have her fortune told. At first she
was frightened and wanted to run back to her mother,
hut then she thought that it would be rather nice to
hear about the future, so she let the old gipsy lead her
to a rock where she sat down and held Winnie’s hand as
she read it. She told her that she was away on a holi-
day with her mother, father and little brother. She said
she could see them travelling along a road in a car just
as they had done, and Winnie thought she was very
clever.


■'--QAi
Of course, Winnie did not know that this wicked old
gipsy had seen them arrive, and knew very well that
they had driven there in a car. She then asked the little
girl if her father had much money, for she said the lines
in her hand showed that he had. This made Winnie
tell one of her untruths, and she said her father certainly
was very rich, and that they all lived in a wonderful
big house with maids, butlers and everything she
could think of that a wealthy man would possess. On
hearing this the old woman immediately took Winnie
away to the gipsies camp, where she and her nasty
band prepared a note to the little girl’s father.


Back at the clearing Willie and the rest of the family
were very worried when they found Winnie missing.
They were just about to go on a search for her when a
dagger came flying through the air above their heads and
stuck in a tree nearby. Attached to it was a note on
which was written: “PAY £5,000 OR WE WILL KILL
YOUR DAUGHTER.. GIPSY LOO.’ After reading this
they did not know what to do, for Willie certainly did
not have five thousand pounds and would never be able
to get such an amount. Why, he did not have five
thousand halfpennies. They were all very sad and poor
Mother Wombat was crying hopelessly. But Willie and
Waddles were not going to give up hope; they decided
to see if they could find where Winnie was hidden.


Poor Willie and Waddles walked for hours through the
trees and scrub but could not find a trace of little
Winnie. At last, just as they were feeling too exhausted
to go any further, they heard voices not very far away
and, creeping over to a clump of bushes nearby, they
gently pulled the branches aside a little, and there they
saw the gipsies’ camping ground. There was poor
Winnie tied to a big tree in the centre of the ground.
She was crying heartbrokenly but the gipsies did not
appear to be taking any notice of her, for they were all
sitting around their tables playing cards and talking
amongst themselves.


Willie and Waddles were very upset. They had to rescue
Winnie somehow, but there were only two of them, and
they would never he able to fight the big band of
gipsies that were there and would only be captured as
well. Suddenly Waddles had a wonderful idea, and
pulling the dagger out of his father s pocket he immedi-
ately started tying it to a long pole he found close by.
When Willie asked him what he was doing he told him
that he thought they would be able to reach over to the
tree where Winnie was tied with the pole and cut the
lope around her without the gipsies seeing them.
Willie thought this very clever and began to help
get the pole ready right away.


As soon as they were ready, Willie whistled softly to
Winnie, and as she looked up he put his finger to his
lips and motioned her to keep quiet and not say any-
thing. 1 hen he pushed over the pole and when it was
resting on the rope he started pushing it backwards
and forwards. It seemed an endless job but gradually
the ropes began to fray as the dagger cut into them.
Luckily the gipsies were so busy talking amongst them-
selves that they did not notice the pole. When at last
the rope fell to the ground Winnie was able to run to
her father and brother before they saw what was
happening.


Hi
But just as she reached Willie and Waddles the gipsies
looked up and discovered that she was missing and set
chase after them. With Willie and Waddles holding her
hands, Winnie ran as fast as she could, but the gipsies
knew the bush tracks better than they and gradually
gained on them. Their daggers only missed them by
inches, but these made Willie and Waddles run faster.
Winnie was being carried through the her little
«
legs could not keep up with them. Soon they were
within sight of the clearing.


r cr>
At last they reached the camp where Mother Wombat
had already jumped into the She started it up as
soon as she saw them coming, they all leapt in after
her. The old car must have known that they had to
get away as quickly as they could for it had never
travelled so fast and well before. They were soon too
far away for the gipsies to catch them. All the way home
Winnie kept saying: “HI never tell another story. 111
never tell another story as long as I live/* She must
have learnt her lesson very well, for from that day to
this she has been a very truthful little girl.
(Copyright)
FRANK JOHNSON O SYDNEY
Printed by The Pinnacle Press, *3l B Kent Street, Sydney
1508
01389110
