







THE ORIGIN, ORGANIZATION AND CEREMONIES OF
THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
(With Map.)
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L. S.,
CORRES. MEMB. ANTHROP. SOC., WASHINGTON.
•(Bead October 5, 1900.)
In this article it is proposed in the first place to give a short out-
line of the probable origin of the native tribes of Australia. Then
will follow the evolution of their social laws regulating intersexual
relations. A cursory reference will next be made to the initia-
tion ceremonies, but only so far as to suggest their development.
A comprehensive map will be added showing the geographic dis-
tribution of the different systems of intermarrying divisions through-
out Australia, together with the boundaries within which the customs
of circumcision and splitting the male urethra are in operation.
Having traveled very largely in all the Australian colonies during
the last quarter of a century, in the avocation of a surveyor, as
well as in grazing and mining pursuits, I have had unusual facilities
for observing the customs of the aborigines, and it is hoped that
the result of my researches may be found of some value for ethno-
graphic and geographic purposes.
Origin.
The origin of the aboriginal races of Australia is a subject of high
and enduring interest to students of anthropology in all parts of the
world; and for this reason lam tempted to submit, in as brief a
form as possible, certain views at which I have arrived in regard to
the peopling of the mainland of Australia and the adjacent island
of Tasmania.
In attempting the solution of this difficult problem it necessary
to call in the aid of different branches of science, among which
geography, comparative linguistics, zoology, botany and geology
take a prominent part. Owing to the antiquity of the Australian
continent, and the consequent absence of written history, it becomes
necessary at the outset to propound a theory which will hold the
ground, reaching far back into prehistoric times, and then to exam-
ine how this hypothesis fits in with facts observed at the present
REPRINTED FROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC. VOL. XXXIX, NO. 164.


1900.] MATHEWS —THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
It will be assumed that in a former period the physical geography
of the Australian continent was different to what it is now. Geo-
logical investigations show that different portions of Australia have
been under water in succession more than once, or have been alter-
nately sea and land. The mainland of Africa and Asia at one
time had a comparatively unbroken continuity southeasterly as far
as Australia, Tasmania and New Guinea. Probably the extension
reached farther to the south and east, but the limits mentioned will
be sufficient for the present discussion. A great part of this conti-
nent—which has been called Lemuria, because it is supposed that
there the lemurs had their centre of development—now lies under
the Indian Ocean, but its former existence is proved by hydrographic
surveys which indicate by the banks and shoals now under water
where this great land was situated. Dr. Blanford has endeavored
to show that it was over this lost continent that many of the older
Indian animals traveled into Africa. And it is stated by Sir J. D.
Hooker, the eminent botanist, that a large assemblage of blossom-
ing plants characteristic of the Indian Peninsula are also inhabitants
of tropical Australia.
The first inhabitants who were dispersed over the continent
referred to were a black race of the Negroid type. They were not
necessarily homogeneous, because in moving southward and east-
ward people of neighboring tracts of country would to some extent
mix with each other by conquest or for purposes of mutual advan-
tage, and their language and customs would be modified in certain
particulars. These people form the primitive stock from which the
original inhabitants of Australia, Papua and Tasmania have sprung.
It is immaterial to our present purpose whether the cradle of the
human race was in Asia, in Africa or in the now submerged region
of Lemuria.
This primitive race spread southeasterly with comparative ease,
advancing slowly because its members were not numerous and the
tropical character of the country passed through made food abund-
ant and easily obtained. It is not to be expected that the people
would all keep together, or travel at the same rate. They would
divide into clans or small communities, some moving on in one
direction or along particular natural features—others proceeding in
other directions—others perhaps remaining stationary for long
periods in favorable localities. Useful arts would be developed
more in some of these tribes than in others, resulting from the


character of the country occupied and their general surround-
ings.
Some of the southerly branches of this wave of population
marched into Australia at various places on what is now the north-
ern coast of the continent, from whence they spread over the greater
part of Australia, continuing their course into Tasmania, which at
that period formed one mainland, and became what may be called
the autochthonous race. Northern branches of the same human
stream passed into New Guinea, New Caledonia, Melanesia and
Polynesia in the same way. That the race spread far and wide is
evidenced by the extensive distribution of its remnants. In the
speech of the present occupants of these lands traces of an original
stock language can be detected. A language can adopt and create
as many words as it pleases, without changing its character or alter-
ing its peculiar construction. Comparative philology must' be
studied side by side with comparative ethnology. Moreover, in
their skeletal structure and general osteology the autochthones of
Australia resemble the African negroes and Melanesians, or perhaps
present a still more primitive type.
Such a migration as that outlined in the foregoing paragraphs
continued for a period of prolonged duration —how long it is need-
less to speculate upon here. One tide of population would be suc-
ceeded by others at irregular intervals, who would naturally follow
the pioneers, or advance guard, much in the same way that the
settlement of countries takes place at present, detachments entering
Australia at different points along the whole length of the northern
coast. It may be reasonably expected that the dialects and customs
of the later immigrants would differ in some respects from those of
their precursors, owing to their arrival at long intervals during suc-
cessive ages.
Instead of [being one race, they were probably a mixture of
several races of the same primitive type. It is likely that the
numerical strength of a clan or family would be small, and if they
kept by themselves for any considerable time the dialect of each
would be modified. A number of such small clans being distributed
century after century over such a large continent as Australia would
account for the immense variety of different dialects we find spoken
by the present inhabitants. This diversity of speech probably led
to perpetual hostility and distrust among petty tribes, and so kept
them separate. The existence of extensive arid tracts in many


parts of Australia necessitated migrations in search of water, and
this furnishes another factor in the wide distribution of the people.
In process of time the original race was followed by hostile tribes
of a more advanced type and possessing a higher degree of culture.
Depressions and elevations of the land due to volcanic agencies and
other disturbances of the earth’s crust, and the consequent incur-
sions of the sea, would in the interval have effected changes in the
relative position of sea and land, and have completely altered the
boundaries of continents and oceans. The connection between
Australia, Asia, Lemuria and Africa had been more or less sub-
merged, but there was still a comparatively uninterrupted land-
route between India and Australia via Ceylon, Nicobar and
Andaman Islands, Malay Peninsula, Java, Borneo, Celebes and
Timor.
The second migration, like the first, would continue to march
into Australia in small detached bands for a long period. In cases
where the two races met and came into conflict in regard to the
possession of country or otherwise, the new people, being better
equipped for warfare, would subjugate the local inhabitants —the
autochthonous race—and the customs, dialects and ceremonies of
the latter would be assimilated or to some extent superseded by
those of their conquerors. In this way most of the mainland of
Australia was overrun by the invaders, but they did not reach
Tasmania, because it had by that time become an island owing to
the submergence' of a tract of land now occupied by Bass’ Strait.
There is nothing unreasonable in the assumption that these in-
vaders and the native tribes of the southern portion of India are
the descendants of a common stock—the Australians, owing to their
long isolation, having retained the primitive character of their Nean-
derthaloid ancestors, while the later Indian tribes have attained a
higher grade of evolution. Philologists have, however, failed to
definitely connect the Australian tongues with the wild races of
Southern India.
The Malay race, in my opinion, never invaded any part of Aus-
tralia. During historic times they visited the northern coast in
canoes or catamarans for the purpose of fishing for trepang, but
their intercourse with the Australians was restricted to the coast and
was very slight. Even if a few individuals occasionally intermarried
with the Australians and went inland among the tribes, they made
no deep impression either upon the race or the language.


Social Organization.
In examining the structure of Australian tribes it is found that
they possess fixed laws for regulating marital relations. In some
cases these laws are of a simple character and consist of the elders
of the tribe alloting the progeny of certain women to be the wives
of certain men ; in other cases the community is segregated into
two primary groups or phratries, the men of the one group marry-
ing the women of the other, with a reciprocal obligation. In some
tribes each of these two primary groups is bisected, making four
intermarrying divisions. Among certain tribes of the northern
portion of Australia, we find that each phratry or group is subdivided
into four sections, thus making eight divisions of the community.
These tribal divisions have been called Social Organizations or
Systems, and an attempt will now be made to briefly explain their
development among Australian tribes.
In portions of Australia, widely separated from each other, among
which may be mentioned part of the southern coast of South Aus-
tralia, part of the west coast of Western Australia and the south-
eastern coastal districts of Victoria and New South Wales, we dis-
cover that the intermarriage of the individuals of a tribe is of the
simple character referred to in the beginning of the last paragraph.
In some respects these people differ in physical type, in weapons,
in language and in their ceremonies, from the natives of other parts
of Australia, but resemble in several particulars the inhabitants of
Tasmania, which favors the theory already enunciated in this essay
in regard to their common origin.
The old men assemble in council at irregular periods, and as
often as may be necessary, for the purpose of appointing certain
young married women to be what is termed tooar to certain boys,
and such boys are likewise called tooar to these women. Care is
taken that the parties appointed tooar to each other are rfot closely
related by ties of blood. The boys are thenceforth forbidden to
speak to, or even to look at, these women ; and the latter are sub-
ject to a similar ban in regard to the boys. For example, if one
of the women bears a daughter she gives such child, when old
enough, to the young man to whom she herself is tooar; and if he
has a sister he is supposed to give her to one of the woman’s sons
in exchange for his own wife. These two men would therefore
stand in the mutual relationship of brothers-in-law.


A woman who is tooar to a man may die before she bears a
daughter —or such daughter although born may die before the
intended husband gets her—therefore to neutralize the chances of a
man not securing a wife, more than one woman is usually appointed
tooar to the same man. On the other hand, one woman may be
appointed tooar to several young men. If the man to whom her
daughter has been betrothed dies before he is old enough to claim
her, she then becomes the wife of one of the other men. These
rules may be further illustrated as follows : Lizzie, a married woman,
is tooar to Sam, Tommy and Jack, precedence being in the order
named. If Lizzie gives birth to a daughter this child will eventu-
ally become the wife of Sam. Should he, however, die before the
girl reaches puberty, she would be taken by Tommy as his spouse.
But if Tommy had also died then she would fall to the lot of Jack.
Each of the young men named may have several married women
occupying the position of tooar to them, to increase their chances
of obtaining a wife.
An unmarried girl on attaining puberty may be assigned to the
position of tooar in the same manner as a married woman. On her
obtaining a husband her daughters eventually become the wives of
the men who are entitled to claim them. This tooar relationship
precludes the possibility of a man having sexual intercourse or any
intimacy with any woman who might ultimately become his mother-
in-law. A man and woman who are tooar to each other theoreti-
cally occupy the positions of son-in-law and mother-in-law, and the
same restrictions as to mutual avoidance of each other apply in both
cases alike. A man may have more than one wife, but each of
them must be the daughter of a woman who is tooar to him. In mak-
ing the tooar appointments the old men endeavor, as far as practic-
able, to arrange that the brothers and sisters in certain families shall
marry the brothers and sisters in certain other families. The off-
spring follow the lineage of the father, and also adopt his totem in
most cases.
In ascertaining what woman is qualified to be tooar to a certain boy,
A, the old men, who are well acquainted with the genealogy of the
people around them, know that A’s father is B. They next discuss
the question who are the cousins of B. These cousins, whom we
shall distinguish as C, may be the offspring either of B’s father’s
sisters, or of his mother’s brothers. There will probably be several
of such cousins, some in each of the lines of descent just mentioned,


from among whom the old men will select one or more to exercise
the function of becoming the parent of A’s future wife. Let C l ,
one of the cousins of A’s father, be a woman who has been thus
chosen ; then she is tooar to A, because he will by and by marry
one of her daughters. The old men may also appoint the mother
of A, or some other woman occupying the same position in the
genealogy, to be tooar to the sons of C l .
I am led to the assumption that the original or autochthonous race
possessed a somewhat similar organization to that just described, and
that the tribes under reference escaped subjugation by the invading
races, either because the latter were not able to overcome them, or
because they did not spread sufficiently far south and west as to
come in contact with the original people.
In going into regions adjoining those with which I have been
dealing, we encounter tribes possessing two intermarrying phratries
such as Mattiri and Kararu of Port Lincoln ; Krokitch and Kamatch
of Western Victoria ; Muckwarra and Keelparra of the Barkunjee
tribes; Koolpirro and Tinnawa of the Yowerawarrika people, and
so on. As I was the first author who reported the two divisions of
the last mentioned tribe, 1 I shall proceed to deal with them as
typical of the others.
The Yowerawarrika and allied tribes in the southeast corner of
Queensland are divided, as I have before stated, into two phratries
called Koolpirro and Tinnawa. The natives have told me several
legends respecting ancestral warriors, and I have noticed that the
most valiant and distinguished men were always said to belong to the
Koolpirro division. This led me to think that Koolpirro was prob-
ably the name of a warlike tribe or clan in the remote past which
had conquered the Tinnawa, an adjoining people, and that each of
these tribes or clans originally possessed the tooar type of marriage
laws.
If we assume that this was so, and that the victors followed the
present practice of killing all the adult males, but sparing the
women, together with the little boys and girls, the Koolpirro men,
whether already married or not, would take one or more of the
women of the vanquished Tinnawa tribe as wives. As the Koolpirro
men would already have children by their own women, their offspring
by the strange women would require to be distinguished from the
i Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. xxxiii, p. 108.


rest, and a very easy way of doing this would be to call them after
their mothers, Tinnawa. When the young lads whose lives had
been spared at the time of the slaughter of their fathers grew up to
maturity, they would take some of their wives from among the
Koolpirro women, and distinguish them by the latter name. Or in
other words the Koolpirro men would give their sisters to the Tin-
nawa men in exchange for their sisters as wives. This would
account for the origin of the two phratries Koolpirro and Tinnawa,
as illustrated in the following table:
Table No. i
Phratry. Husband. Wife. Child.
A Koolpirro Tinnawa Tinnawa
B Tinnawa Koolpirro Koolpirro
Instead of the conquerors killing off all the males in the way just
stated, it is customary in many places for two hostile families to
make peace by the exchange of wives. This practice was much in
vogue among the tribes on the Barwon river and its tributaries in
New South Wales, whose customs I had exceptional opportunities
of observing when stationed in those districts surveying government
lands during the years from 1871 to 1880. I have also witnessed
this usage among tribes in Queensland, and in the Northern Terri-
tory of South Australia.
It may be postulated that in ancient times the Koolpirro men
gave their wives to the Tinnawa men in exchange for the wives of
the latter, in order to terminate existing feuds, or for the purpose
of resisting a common foe. A man of the Koolpirro tribe, for
example, would of course have a Koolpirro wife and Koolpirro
children. He would give his wife to a Tinnawa man, and her chil-
dren by the new husband would be called Koolpirro the same as
before. This interchange of wives might be only temporary, or it
might continue during that generation. But in the rising genera-
tion the Koolpirro men would take their wives from the sisters of
the Tinnawa men, and conversely the same as at present.
It is seen by Table No. i that the resulting offspring in both
cases inherit the phratry name of their mother. They are also gen-
erally distinguished by her totem ; thus, if the mother be an iguana,
her children of both sexes will be iguanas. This rule is not
universal, however, for I have found tribes possessing a dual divi-


sion on the same principle as the Yowerawarrika, where the children
took the totem of the father.
Strength is given to the hypothesis of the coalescence of two
tribes by the fact that in an adjoining community, the Barkunjee,
we discover the phratry name Keelparra, evidently a dialectic modi-
fication of Koolpirro, which indicates that the tribe of that name in
olden times was widespread, and perhaps powerful. Among the
Barkunjee, however, Keelparra marries Muckwarra, the latter prob-
ably being the name of another vanquished or allied tribe occupying
different territory, and the two phratries became Keelparra and
Muckwarra.
We will now try to account for the introduction of the organiza-
tion containing/iw divisions. The Warkeemon community in north-
eastern Queensland, first reported by me in 1898, 1 is divided into
four sections called respectively Koopungie, Karpungie, Kellungie
and Cheekungie. Perhaps each of these names represented a small
independent tribe or clan in former times, having the tooar system
of relationship. To avoid repetition let us assume that Koopungie
and Karpungie became incorporated either by conquest or other-
wise, and intermarried on the same principle as Koolpirro and Tin-
nawa already dealt with. We will also suppose that Kellungie and
Cheekungie amalgamated in a similar manner, and intermarried one
with the other. This can be made clear by means of Tables Nos. 2
and 3, which will also show how the children were called, for dis-
tinction, by the same name as their mother in each case :
Table No.
2.
Phratry.
Husband.
Wife.
Child.
A
Koopungie
Karpungie
Karpungie
B
Karpungie
Koopungie
Koopungie
Table No.
3-
*
Phratry,
Husband.
Wife.
Child.
A
Kellungie
Cheekungie
Cheekungie
B
Cheekungie
Kellungie
Kellungie
We will now assume that the Koopungie and Karpungie confed-
eracy (Table No. 2) subjugated the ’Kellungie and Cheekungie
confederacy (Table No. 3) ; or that these two peoples thought it
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N, S. Wales, vol. xxxii, pp. 250, 251.


prudent and politic to amalgamate for the purposes of mutual defense.
This alliance could have been easily accomplished by the inter-
change of wives between the members of the opposite confederacies.
Koopungie could have taken the wife of Kellungie and could have
given his own wife to a Kellungie man. Cheekungie and Karpun-
gie could have exchanged wives in a similar manner, but there was
no alteration made in the names of the offspring in any case. For
example, the children of a Koopungie man were distinguished as
Karpungie the same as before the coalition and so on, as in the
following table, a careful perusal of which will make my meaning
more clear:
Table No. 4.
Phratry.
Husband.
Wife. Child.
( Koopungie
< Kellungie
Cheekungie Karpungie
Karpungie Cheekungie
f Cheekungie Koopungie Kellungie
l Karpungie Kellungie Koopungie
In examining the above table, together with the two preceding
ones, it will be observed that a man, Koopungie, of the A phratry
in Table No. 2 marries a woman, Cheekungie, of the B phratry in
Table No. 3, and vice versa; and that a Karpungie man of the B
phratry in Table No. 2 marries a woman, Kellungie, of the A phra-
try in Table No. 3, and vice versa. It is also seen that the people
belonging to the# two A phratries go together, and the two B phra-
tries together in Table No. 4. That is to say, the men of the
sections Koopungie and Kellungie of the A phratry in Table No. 4
marry the women of the two sections Cheekungie and Karpungie of
phratry Bin this new organization, and conversely. The men and
women of the respective phratries are therefore mutually related as
brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law. It is therefore apparent that
whether the organization consist of two divisions, as among the
Yowerawarrika, or of four sections like the Warkeemon, the com-
munity still retains the two primary intermarrying phratries, A and
B. Aggregates of totems, chosen from the fauna and the flora, are
attached to each division.
It now remains to explain the probable origin of the present
system of dividing a tribe into eight sections. If our theory is of
any value it should hold good in this system as well as in that of
four divisions already explained. The eight divisions of the


(Table No. 7)
jf |
MATHEWS—THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
Wombya tribe, which I discovered and reported in the beginning
of 1898, 1 will be used for illustration. The names of the sections
are Choolum, Palyaringie, Cheenum, Bungaringie, Chingulum,
Yacomary, Chooralum and Jamerum. We will commence with the
first mentioned four of these names.
Choolum is the father of Palyaringie, and by referring back to the
Yowerawarrika tribe it is seen that the children in that system take
the name of the mother ; therefore I shall assume that formerly the
Choolum and Palyaringie clans became consolidated by conquest or
otherwise, in the same way as the tribes we have been describing.
A Choolum man married a Palyaringie woman, and vice versa , the
children taking the name of the mother in both cases (Table No. 5).
A similar incorporation took place between the Cheenum and Bun-
garingie clans (Table No. 6). Afterward these two confederacies
amalgamated by interchanging their wives or sisters in the same
manner as the Warkeemon people, thus transposing the intermarry-
ing divisions, but leaving the names of the men’s offspring the same
Table No.
5-
Phratry.
Husband.
Wife.
Child.
A
Choolum
Palyaringie
Palyaringie
B
Palyaringie
Choolum
Choolum
Table No.
6.
Phratry.
Husband.
Wife.
Child.
A
Cheenum
Bungaringie
Bungaringie
B
Bungaringie
Cheenum
Cheenum
Table No.
7-
Phratry.
Husband.
Wife.
Child.
A /
Choolum
Bungaringie
Palyaringie
A l
Cheenum
Palyaringie
Bungaringie
/ Bungaringie Choolum Cheenum
l Palyaringie Cheenum Choolum
We will now deal with the remaining four divisions of the
Wombya tribe, namely, Chingulum, Yacomary, Chooralum and
Jamerum. At the present day Chingulum is the father of Yacomary,
and by again using the Yowerawarrika tribe as a basis, I will assume
I Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Philada., Vol. xxxvii, pp. 151, 152.


that in former times the Chingulum and Yacomary clans became
incorporated and intermarried one with the other, the offspring
being distinguished by the name of their mothers (Table No. 8).
Chooralum and Jamerum were similarly coalesced (Table No. 9).
Subsequently these two confederacies became amalgamated in the
same way as those represented in Table No. 7, the section name of
each man’s children remaining unchanged. (See Table No. 10).
Table
No.
8.
Phratry.
Husband.
Wife.
Child.
B
Chingulum
Yacomary
Yacomary
A
Yacomary
Chingulum
Chingulum
Table
No.
9-
Phratry.
Husband.
Wife.
Child.
B
Chooralum
Jamerum
Jamerum
A
Jamerum
Chooralum
Chooralum
Table No.
IO.
Phratry.
Husband.
Wife.
Child.
B {
Chingulum
Jamerum
Yacomary
Chooralum
Yacomary
Jamerum
A /
Jamerum
Chingulum
Chooralum
A l
Yacomary
Chooralum
Chingulum
From eight separate tribes we have now illustrated the develop-
ment of two communities, one represented by Table No. 7 and the
other by Table No. 10, each of which has four intermarrying divi-
sions in its social organization. At a later period these two com-
munities, whether as the consequence of war or peace need not be
considered, became consolidated into their existing form, and the
course followed in arriving at this result will now be investigated.
A man of the Choolum section in Table No. 7 took the wife of
a man belonging to the Jamerum section in Table No. 10 ; Chee-
num took the wife of Yacomary; Jamerum of Table No. 10 took
the wife of Cheenum in Table No. 7, and Yacomary took the wife
of Choolum. All these men belong to the A phratries in their re-
spective tribes. Again, a Chingulum man took the wife of a Bun-
garingie; Chooralum annexed Palyaringie’s spouse; Bungaringie
took Chooralum’s wife and Palyaringie took the wife of Chingulum.


MATHEWS —THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
These four men belong to phratry B. The intermarrying sections
of the new organization and those of the resulting offspring are as
follows :
Table No. ii.
Phratry. Husband.
( Choolum
l Cheenum
I Jamerum
Yacomary
C Chingulum Choolum Yacomary
J Chobralum Cheenum Jamerum
J Bungaringie Yacomary Cheenum
Palyaringie Jamerum Choolum
This redistribution of the wives of the men necessarily varies the
brother-in-law relationships. The men of the Choolum section in
Table No. 11 exchange sisters with the men of the Chingulum sec-
tion ; the Cheenum men marry the sisters of the Chooralum men
and vice versa; the Bungaringie men and the Yacomary men ex-
change sisters as wives ; and lastly the Palyaringie and Jamerum
men mutually intermarry with each other’s sisters. In every case,
however, the section name of each man’s offspring remains as it was
prior to the coalition —thus, Choolum’s children are called Palya-
ringie the same as they appear in Table No. 7, and Palyaringie’s
progeny still retain the name of Choolum.
According to Table No. 11 the wife of Choolum should be a
Chingulum woman, but by virtue of tribal custom he has the alter-
native of marrying a Chooralum. If he choose a Chingulum his
children will be Palyaringie, but if he take a Chooralum wife the
progeny will be Bungaringie, the section name of the offspring
being regulated by the mother’s division. A man of the Cheenum
section, whose tabular wife is Chooralum, can marry a Palyaringie
woman. In other words, the men of the pair of sections, Choolum
and Cheenum, can exercise their choice of a spouse over the same
two sections of women. Similar privileges are possessed by the
men of the other pairs of sections, namely, Jamerum and Yacomary
—Chingulum and Chooralum—and Bungaringie and Palyaringie,
who can select their wives from either of the corresponding pairs of
females in Table No. 11. Numbers of different totems are annexed
to the divisions.
The theory of the coalition of a number of small tribes within the


area where the Wombya organization obtains is supported by the
fact that in neighboring districts we discover that some of the sec-
tions appearing in Table No. n intermarry with others having an
entirely different name, and the offspring are also differently desig-
nated. For example, in the Inchalachee tribe a Palyaringie man
marries a Boonongoona, and the children are Boolangie. This
could be accounted for by supposing that in former times the Pal-
jaringie tribe became separated into two or more segments, one
branch going into certain territory, whilst another branch traveled
in a contrary direction, and that each branch ultimately became in-
corporated with different people, thus participating in the formation
of diverse communities in which many of the section names are dis-
similar. The same may be said of Bungaringie, who takes a Thim-
memill spouse, and the progeny are Warkoo. On the Victoria
river Chingulum marries a Chamaja woman and his children are
Jambajunna; the wives and the offspring in each case being quite
different to those in Table No. n.
In examining the social structure of a large number of tribes, it
is seen that certain section names seem to be more universal or per-
sistent than others. For example, the name Chingulum, or its
dialectic variations Jungulla, Changally, Kingulla, etc., is found in
nearly every one of the tribes containing eight sections, from the
Gulf of Carpentaria all the way across the Northern Territory, and
extending onwards far into Western Australia. There is at the
present day a tolerably numerous tribe named Chingalee who
occupy a considerable tract of country between Daly waters and
Newcastle waters in the Northern Territory. And although we
cannot place too much reliance on the similarity of names, it is
possible that this may be a remnant of the larger and more wide-
spread nation from which the section name Chingulum has arisen.
The section name Cheenum, or its variants Jinagoo, Chanama,
Chunainjah, Janna, etc., is also found among most of the commu-
nities in the country lying between the northwest corner of Queens-
land and Western Australia. This seems to justify the inference
that at an earlier period there were, among others, two tribes
called Chingulum and Cheenum, each of which were spread over
an immense extent of country, and that they either conquered other
tribes or were themselves subjugated, or otherwise became amalga-
mated with the people around them or with subsequent influxes
from elsewhere, in the way I have endeavored to illustrate in prev-


F 1! In
Initiation Ceremonies.
ious pages, and so became scattered among a large number of dif-
ferent communities, as we find them at the present time.
In the foregoing pages I have endeavored to give a brief outline
of the Social Organization of the Australian aborigines by tracing
it through its various stages of development by means of examples
taken from the marriage laws still in operation in different parts of
the continent. Having studied this branch of the subject for many
years, I am led to the conclusion that neither promiscuous sexual
intercourse nor what has been called “communal or group mar-
riage” has ever existed among Australian tribes. I feel equally
clear that the system of divisions into sections was not devised for
the purpose of preventing consanguineous marriages, but was
developed in the way I have attempted to explain in this paper.
In my descriptions of the initiation ceremonies of various Aus-
tralian tribes, which I have from time to time contributed to dif-
ferent learned societies, I have reported that there is a feigned
quarrel between the fathers of the novices and the men who muster
the latter out of the camp for the purpose of passing them through
the ordeal of the inaugural ceremonial. I have also detailed how
human blood is sprinkled upon stumps of trees; in other instances
how it is collected in native vessels and eaten ; and also how one
or more of the men are killed to furnish a cannibalistic feast for the
people present.
This has suggested to me that perhaps the ceremonies were con-
siderably modified, if not originated, during the wars between the
clans or tribes referred to in the chapter on “Social Organization.”
If all the adult males were killed, as at present, then it is reason-
able to expect that the young captive boys would be brought up in
conformity with the ancestral customs of their captors. For the pur-
pose of doing this it would be necessary to remove them from the
influence of their mothers, who would naturally cling to the cus-
toms of their forefathers and endeavor to bring up their sons with
the same views.
If we investigate the procedure in the initiation ceremonies cur-
rent at the present day, for an example of which the Bora 1 of the
Kamilaroi tribe may be selected, we see that certain neighboring
1 R. H. Mathews, “ The Bora of the Kamilaroi Tribes,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Vic-
toria, Vol. ix, New Series, pp. 137—173.


tribes assemble at a common meeting ground and that the men of a
distant tribe take charge of the novices of another people who are
more or less strangers to them. We also observe that the novices
are taken away from their mothers at daylight, the time that an ab-
original tribe always makes an attack on an enemy. The mothers
of the boys are led to believe that an enemy really comes into the
camp and bears off their sons in a mysterious manner. The women
are prevented from seeing what actually takes place, owing to their
being hidden under grass, bushes, rugs, bark, or other covering,
but they hear what they believe to be the awful voice of the enemy
and the trampling of his heavy footsteps.
In describing the Kamilaroi Bora I have stated that great sexual
license is permitted to the men of the visiting tribes. In ordinary
everyday life a man is restricted to women of a certain section or
totem , but at meetings for initiation purposes these rules are much
relaxed, and a man is allowed to have intercourse with women of
different sections and degrees of affinity, who would be altogether
forbidden to him on other occasions. At the Bora ceremonies, as
soon as the novices and all their own men are out of sight, some
men of the strange tribes remove the covering from off the women
and take them away to another camp, where the men remain with
them for the purpose of superintending the due performance of all
the tribal regulations. The women are, in effect, prisoners during
these proceedings.
All these elements of the ceremonial may be emblematical or com-
memorative of an earlymorning raid of one hostile tribe upon another
in the distant past, one detachment of the men taking charge of the
women, while another detachment takes the youths away to be in-
structed in the customs and traditions of their conquerors. The com-
parison becomes all the more realistic when we discover that during
their sojourn in the bush with the old men the youths are shown many
things which are entirely new to them. They are taught another
language, known only to the initiated, which may be typical of the
language of their subjugators ; and even their own personal name
is changed to another, which is kept a secret from their mothers
and sisters and all the women of the tribe.
In native warfare, as already stated, the women are always pre-
served and taken as wives by the victorious party. 1 The sexual
1 Several of the vanquished party usually escape by flight; they are chiefly
active men, but young women often get away with them.


L 8 M
■ ■lit •
Jj ((lit
572 MATHEWS —THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. [Oct. 5,
liberties to which I have referred probably had their archetype in
the libidinous orgies which took place when a bevy of strange
females was secured. The captors would make indiscriminate use
of the women for some little time, until they had leisure to effect
an individual distribution of them. This would take place as soon
as the totems of the women and other particulars were ascertained.
At the present day, when a woman is allotted to a man as his wife,
she must first submit to copulation by a number of men, whose
intercourse with her at other times would be a serious offense.
While the kooringal are marching off with the novices in their
custody, two men called buddenbelar rush out of the scrub and each
of them throws a boomerang at the aggressors. They then retreat
hastily and go away to fetch the beegay, whose participation in the
ceremony practically amounts to the rescue of the novices from the
kooringal. This is suggestive of a time when a number of small
tribes, occupying a large area, had been more or less friendly and
helped each other against a common foe. If an onslaught were
made upon any of these tribes such of the men who escaped would
seek the protection and intervention of some of their allies who
might be powerful enough to punish the offenders and liberate their
sons. Such a rescue may be symbolized by the interference of the
beegay at the present time, and the subsequent return of the novices
to the thurrawonga camp during the Bora.
All the tribes who arrived in early times were probably small
and lived in constant fear of surprisals by the people around them,
so that it would be unwise for them to confide the details of their
sacred ceremonies to the women, who might at any time be carried
off by conquerors and the secrets exacted from them by coercion.
This may have given rise to the existing custom of placing a cov-
ering over the women when the youths are being taken away.
It is a reasonable assumption that from the earliest period each
band of adventurers brought certain rites with them. Owing to a
superstitious adherence to former patriarchal customs, especially
strong in all primitive peoples, we would not expect to find that
any new system of initiation would altogether abrogate and super-
sede the older type, but would be blent or incorporated with it.
I am inclined to think that the plucking out of the hair—observed
among the Narrinyeri and other tribes of South Australia, a part
of the Barkunjee in New South Wales and among some of the Vic-
torian tribes —has been handed down from the original inhabitants,


because analogous customs have been reported among Negroid
people elsewhere.
As the Tasmanians have been assumed to be the remnant of the
autochthonous race, some items of their initiatory customs may be
mentioned. J. Bonwick, in referring to this subject, says •
“From all that I have been able to gather in my inqui-
ries among very old residents of Van Diemen’s Land it is my
opinion that the custom in connexion with yourfg-men-making
[initiation] in New Holland, existed more or less with the different
tribes of the Tasmanians.” 1
J. J. de la Billardiere, speaking of his visits to the Tasmanians
between the years 179 1—1 7 93> says:
“ We observed some in whom one of the middle teeth of the
upper jaw was wanting, and others in whom both were gone.” 2
The same author says in another place :
“ We were much surprised to see most of them holding the ex-
tremity of the prepuce with the left hand.”
In a vocabulary appended to his work he gives the native word
loira for powdered charcoal, with which they covered their bodies.
Among many Australian tribes one or more front teeth are punched
out; in others the men take hold of their genitals and exhibit them
to the youths; and the smearing of their bodies with powdered
charcoal and grease is widely practiced in connection with initia-
tion ceremonies.
Speaking of the corrobories or dances of the Tasmanians T.
Backhouse 3 reports: ’ J
In these dances the aborigines represented certain events or
the manners of different animals; they had the emu dance, the
thunder and lightning dance, and many others.”
R. H. Davies, 4 in referring to the same subject, says :
“ One is called the kangaroo dance, and is, along with some
others, most violent Some of these dances are evidently
lascivious.” 1 *
1 Daily Life and Origin of the Tasmanians (London, 1870), p. 202.
'Account of a Voyage in Search of La Perouse (London, 1800) V O l ii , m
72 and 76. ' ’ 1
3 Narrative of a Visit to the Australian Colonies (London, 1843) P 82
*° n tht Abor ig ines of Van Diemen's Land (Launceston and London’ 1846}
Vol. 11, p. 416. H


L N
Explanation of the Map.
3 op. at., p. 4 12 -
Restrictions respecting food, 1 similar in character to those in
operation in Australia, have also been observed in Tasmania, some
people being allowed to eat only the male, others only the female,
of particular animals; whilst certain kinds of fish were forbidden
to some tribes.
J. Bonwick 2 tells us of the use of the bullroarer in
“ The wise men, or doctors, .... twirled round
Tasmania:
the magic
± lit VVIOV, > . , . ,
tnooyutnkarr, an oval piece of wood with a string, • • • ' w 1C
must on no account be seen by females.” He also states, at page
192 of the same work, that “circles have been recognized in the
interior of Van Diemen’s Land. _
R H. Davies 8 reports that when “ the males arrive at the age o
puberty they are deeply scarified on the shoulders, thighs and
muscles of the breast.”
The few references herein made to the customs of the lasma-
nians have been taken from the works of early writers which were
published between thirty and a hundred years ago. It is like y
that the great secrecy which surrounds the celebration of inaugura
rites generally had the effect of precluding the white population
from witnessing or reporting what was done on such occasions.
An attempt has been made in this paper to deduce the inception
of many parts of the initiation ceremonies of Australian tribes from
their conflicts of the past by showing their strong resemblance ov
what actually takes place in internecene wars among the natives of
the present day. During the long isolation of tribes, or confedera-
racies, special characteristics have developed, and modifications
have resulted in accordance with varying circumstances among the
people of different districts, until the elaborate forms of the ceremo-
nies as we now find them have been evolved.
As already stated, a tribe is divided into sections, which are
known by distinguishing titles. If we travel through any consid-
erable extent of territory we discover that the names of these div -
t ons vary in different districts. In a certain tract of country the
1 J. B. Walker, Notes on the Aborigines of Australia (Government Printer,
'ft*. Tasmanian, (London, .870), pp. .75.


PROCEEDINGS AM. PHILOS. SOC.
VOL. XXXIX, No. 164, PLATE VII!
IIS 120
125
Aral
7150 c
ura S
Fl
J40 J45 150
n\ 1
!
-
- .. _ _ . T
■' H
Am § sm
\ h'ny/is/i Mife^
oi Of, ,
_, r *t.
Mrivilh
JgatJt.urvL jQ j
AW/foj |
v F F,v. J
CSrN.
1 •••■*»^
H'essot If.
—p 1 ' 1 ■-'— —r* t !■
W «• >«
w< f i/he/iJ*^
j
o\u t n
ro
0 tOO ZOO 300 400 1 300 GOO
§4
fJtf dull*
1 \ J tifootv /
Oo/t
s Charlotte # n /
' /
1™*?*!'*<*W
y
L , A**
-•^Fs
-]£3&!l i fc Caruen
n / 4.
IS
iW 1 A
feet* 1^‘V.
|^D
%
3 Dtitf^ate
%■ \N o rt h l , e i
'?> 2i k
L.WoodsO '{-c
* n
/JfiH/. S
kd-own-
/
J5
\
§F
STBrooiftSL
f Ft
A’ W* /
J
4
T e
2.f r
g5
4 "T""
i' 1
__ —+-
\
h*$K3g'*T A c / /’//
2 0
KI Macf,hpr
Ka ■ |
, \ J///.y
\,L.Mnif'rt , w£S£
L. Marti oi
R N J
7*
M'4
,<dc
’#■ Ronqc \
22 ;,
eiehhardiMjt Hj/.'s
1
<
ffl// / r # Par
-
ur j* J9
K 3 J ; ,L„ l( +/' /
y u ?y j'' 0,1 1
6 T
20
.3——
»>./</ Sp s
V M > /(
, v , i(i S 0 U TH
1
W C'TEr^T^-rrTr-3 '' / s I«:l.W§A/i /
25
1 Su/ltrrlontf 5
ti .
"' 3
w«. ■
“F
•”' 5W !/ r
25
lSjgQA%
£ustr|
P
SIP^?
l/
t L Karin’
|pW"
0/7
jlabi/ma South
A US T11
wsm
'XP^fHar^
20
J " ri " L
'>A R i
lU 5
**
6
v !r. ■■• i
rb,
,Fai-i]^r
Uljust/v
M4-iid
30
1
<5. '
3. x
V »
C.Calt** 1 '*^
'J7""*’' n
35
\ Sfx
rj\
Ji* 1 . ..
s °rtnr1
if
S25f*8<£» A s
Hr// , ‘ I0*" r " l(, o // /
' /
«J6
\ i\
\ \s 0 U
T
U E R ?
l
0 c
BAN J« J .
o / /1 *-J
/ A y| y y
/ r
I
-3
/
\ im— -■-—
U- "T
1
| liHtfait
v?ws dell
f
J 10 ns
120
725
J30 735
A«7
J46
150 7A5
MAP SHOWING BOUNDARIES OF THE SEVERAL NATIONS OF AUSTRALIA




sections will be known by one set of names, whilst among adjoin-
ing tribes a different nomenclature will be employed. Aggregates
of tribes holding the same divisional names may, for convenience
of reference, be called communities or nations.
I have prepared a map, showing New South Wales, Queensland,
Victoria, South Australia and Western Australia, on which is shown
the position of the boundaries of the several nations, each of which
is distinguished by a numeral, from 1 to 27. In explaining this
map I shall commence with the several nations possessing two di-
visions, then those with four sections, next the tribes with eight di-
visions, and lastly a brief reference will be made to those tribes
whose marriage laws are of the tooar type. The different systems,
with the territory occupied by each, can be readily referred to if
arranged in tabular form, as in Tables Nos. 12, 13 and 14.
Table No. 12.
No. on Map.
Nation.
Phratry.
Sections.
X
Bangarang «
[ B
Boonjil
Wah
Booandik |
' A
Krokitch
2
Kamatch
Barkunjee j
A
Muckwarra
3
B
Keelparra
4
Yowerawarrika 1
Same as
in Table No I.
Parnkalla |
A
Matturri
5
Kirraroo
6
. Ivookatha |
A
Kookoojaba
B
Koojeebinga
6 a
Tardarick j
' A
Wartungmat
B
Munitchmat
The above seven nations adjoin each other, and the total terri-
tory occupied by them collectively is distinguished on the map by
a pink edging. It will be observed that this includes nearly
the whole of Victoria, about a third of New South Wales, part of
the southwest corner of Queensland and a considerable portion of
South Australia apd Western Australia.
1 I wish to thank Mr, A. M. Helling for his valuable help.


Table No. 13
f A
Thangatty | g
Arrinda
f A
Yeeda 3 | g
ILS bit
576 MATHEWS—THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. [Oct. 5 r
No. on Map. Nation. Phratry. Sections.
7 Wiradjuri 1 Dffl) . Murri , Kubbi
9
Kurpoong, Marroong
Wirroong, Womboong
f Karpeun Barrang, Banjoora
™ 1 l Deeajee Bunda, Derwine
. r Wootaroo Moonal, Karilburra
12 Kooinmerburra < , ~ —,
l Yungaroo Kooeealla, Koorpal
. f Ootheroo Woongo, Kabaroo
&ai l Mallera Bunburri, Koorgilla
~ . f A Jimalingo, Bathingo
14 Mycoolon-; . r
3 l B Manngo, Kooperungo
f A Eratnyer, Ararer
*5 g Loora, Awonger
16 Warkemon Same as in Table No. 4.
. r A Ajeereena, Arennymung
*7 g Perrynung, Mahngale
( Jamagunda Langenam, Namegoor
18 Joongoonjie 1 j Gamanutta Packwiky, Pamarung
Koomara, 2 Penunga
Bultara, Parulla
Kimbera, Bannicka
Baljarra, Boorongo
It will be observed that each of the above fourteen nations is
divided into four sections, and therefore all belong to the same
system. The aggregate of their territory, which is edged green on
1 My best thanks are due to Rev. N. Hey for his willing assistance.
2 A variation of these four section names is found among the tribes on the
Upper Georgina river, and extending westwards into the Northern Territory, as
follows :
Phratry. Husband. Wife. Child.
f Belthara Goobilla Drungwara
A t Koomara Drungwara Goobilla
f Goobilla Belthara Koomara
® i Drungwara Koomara Belthara
3 This tribe inhabits the Fraser river, Derby, the Lower Fitzroy and south-
wards toward the Oakover river, Western Australia.


the map, comprises about two-thirds of New South Wales, the
greater part of Queensland, a wide strip through the centre of South
Australia and more than half of Western Australia.
In dealing with the tribes possessing eight intermarrying divi-
sions a table will again be employed.
Table
No. 14.
No. on Map.
Nation.
Phratry.
Sections.
21
Wombya
Same as
in Table No. 11.
22
Ulperra -j
1
A
f Ungarria, Thakamara
l Thaponungo, Jambena
B
f Jungulla, Thapongatee
l
r
A •
l Joopilla, Cubadgee
f Boolangie, Boonongoona
23
Inchalachee -{
|
A
l Warkoo, Thimmemill
, B
f Kingullaj Bungaringie
L
l Noorachee, Palyaringie
The country inhabited by the three foregoing nations is edged
yellow on the map, and comprises a large extent of the Northern
Territory of South Australia, with portions of Queensland and
Western Australia. There are several aggregates of tribes scattered
over this immense area, among each of which the names of the
sections differ more or less, but the principle of the divisions in
them all is identical. In a paper published in the Proceedings of
this Society, Vol. xxxviii, pp. 75-79, I particularized the eight di-
visions as found in other tribes, showing the variations in the sec-
tion names in different localties.
Nos. 24 and 25 on the map represent the Adjadurah and Nar-
rinyeri nations respectively, who occupied the country fronting
Spencer’s Gulf and on the Lower Murray river.
No. 26 is the small nation of the Kurnai in Eastern Victoria,
and No. 27 shows the territory of the Thurrawall and allied tribes
in the southeast corner of New South Wales.
In the nations Nos. 24 to 27, inclusive, the social structure is
after the tooar or yooumree type already described by me. Adjoin-
ing the Great Australian Bight and on the west coast of Western
Australia there are also a number of tribes possessing this organi-
zation.
After much careful investigation I have succeeded in fixing on
the map the position of the blue line from Ato B. All the tribes


[Oet. 5,
on the west of this line practice circumcision, but in the country to
the eastward of the line the custom is not in force. The line in
yellow, from C to D, and continued on along the blue line to B,
demarks the eastern limit of splitting the urethra—a genital mutila-
tion having a very wide geographic range over the central and
western portions of the Australian continent. The other blue line,
from E to F, determines the western boundary of the tribes who
practice splitting the urethra and circumcision, neither of
these customs being found between that line and the coast of West-
ern Australia. From the point F, along the coastal district to
Roebourne and Condon, the rites referred to are not now insisted
upon, and it is doubtful if their adoption by the natives there was
ever universal.


THE THOOB.GA LANGUAGE.
R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
Merab. Assoc. Etranger Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris.




THE THOORGA LANGUAGE.
By R. H. Mathews, L.S., Memb. Assoc. Etranger Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris.
Prefatory.
In the following pages an attempt will be made to supply the out-
lines of the structure of the Thoor'ga, or Thur'-ga, language, which is
spoken by the aborigines scattered along the coast of New South Wales
from Bermagui northerly to Jervis Bay.
To the north and north-west of the Thoorga are the Thur'rawal,
Dhar'rook, Gun'dungur'ra and Ngoonawal tribes. Adjoining the Thoor-
ga .on the south are the Jirringan, Thawa and other communities. The
speech of all the tribes mentioned is similar in grammatical structure,
although differing more or less widely in vocabulary, and constitute
a language which differs in several important respects from that of
the natives of other portions of ew South Wales.
The above aggregate of tribes covers the territory between the
Hawkesbury River and Cape Howe, extending inland till met by the
great Wiraijuri nation, whose speech belongs to the Yookumbill order,
which I have briefly outlined in the. Appendix hereto. It is hoped that
the two types of Australian languages described in this paper may be
found useful to philologists.
The different parts of speech will be first dealt with, showing
the declensions of nouns and adjectives, the modifications of pro-
nouns, and the conjugation of verb®. A few songs used at the initia-
tion ceremonies come next, after which there is a vocabulary containing
about four hundred and sixty carefully-selected words from the Thoorga
tongue.
Every word in this paper has been taken down by myself from
the lips of several old men and women of the Thoorga tribe on different
evasions, according as opportunities offered to make special journeys
among them. The student of ethnology will readily understand all
the difficulties and patient work appertaining to a first attempt to
reduce to writing the language of a savage people possessing no litera-
ture of any kind, where all the particulars have to be gathered orally
from the native speakers. I therefore crave the indulgence of the
reader for the incomplete form of this article, as well as for any
errors which are necessarily incident to the first edition of a work of
this character. On a future occasion I hope to complete the task
upon which a commencement has now been made.
* Read before the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland, 28th
November, 1901.
Reprinted from the Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia, Queensland, Vol. XVII.


Orthography.
The vowels used in the Thoorga language are a, e, i, o, u; and the
consonants, b, c, d, g, h, j, k, 1, m, n, p, r, t, w, y. In this treatise
every word is spelt phonetically, the letters having the same value
as in English, with the undermentioned qualifications:
Vowels have the usual short sound, unless marked, as follows:
aas in late I las in kite eas in bear
a,, ~ far | 6,, ~ vote
It is hard to. distinguish between the short, or unmarked, sound
of a and that of u, a difficulty also met with in several other languages.
Combinations of vowels are pronounced thus :
ee, as in meet; 00, as in moon; ou, as in loud.
In order to get the native pronunciation as accurately as possible,,
it has been found necessary to make certain combinations of conso-
nants when spelling some of the words.
Ng at the beginning of a syllable, as nga, has a peculiar nasal
sound, which can be got almost exactly by assuming oo to be placed
before it, as 00-nga, and then pronouncing the two syllables as one.
At the end of a syllable, it has the sound of ng in sing, but more nasal.
The sound of the Spanish nis frequent. At the commencement of
a word or syllable I have represented it by ny, as nyir, which is
articulated as one syllable. At the termination of a syllable, n is
adopted, as yoo-in.
Y, followed by a vowel, is attached to several consonants, as dya,
lvee, byoo, tya, and so on, which are pronounoed as one syllable, sound-
ing all the letters. Y sometimes follows a con son ant at the end of a
word, as in gur-ra-gaty, meaning slow. In such cases it must form part
of the preceding syllable; thus, gaty should be pronounced all in one.
Dh, whether at the beginning or end of a word, is pronounced
nearly as th in that, with a slight sound of d preceding it; thus, dhoo-
gan, a camp, and kan-na-go-badh, a porcupine. Frequently th is used
instead cf dh, when an initial t sound is substituted for that of the d.
Nh at the commencement of a syllable, as nhoor, is pronounoed as
the th in that, with the sound of n before it. At the end of a word, it
resembles nth in tenth, omitting the final hissing sound.
The final h is guttural, closely resembling the ch in the German
word joch.
T 1 is interchangeable with d, p with b, and g with k.
R has a rough trilled sound as in the exclamation hur-rah ! no
matter what its position in the word may be.
The sound of j at the beginning of a syllable is often given by the
natives as ty or dy, thus, tya has substantially the sound of ja.
Ch, which seldom occurs, is pronounced as in church.
The accent is shown thus, KuFla, and when two syllables are
accented, both are marked in the same way.


When there is a reduplication of a consonant, as in boorra, each
letter is distinctly enunciated.
To Mr. H. E. Hockey, manager of Wallaga Lake Aboriginal
Station, I wish to express my thanks for his courtesy in allow’ng me
to have free access to the natives under his charge, and for other acts
of kindness during my visits to that portion of the district while
engaged in my ethnological investigations.
Articles.
There are no articles, such as the equivalents of “ a” and “ the,” in
the language.
The usual arrangement of words in a sentence is to place the nomi-
native first, then the adjective, and lastly the verb, as Koongarangga
jiroura thunnan, the opossum leaves eat® (is eating). An adjective
qualifying either the nominative or objective, follows its noun. Space
will not admit of examples at present.
Nouns.
Nouns are subject to variation on account of number, gender, and
case —the inflexion being effected by means of suffixes or postpositions.
Number. —There are three numbers, the singular, dual, and plural.
The singular number denotes one; the dual number two, or a pair; the
plural number more than two. Generally, the dual is formed by
adding the termination burra to the word; the plural is formed by
suffixing burraga; as in the following examples:—.
(1) One opossum, Koong'ara
A pair of opossums, Koong'arambur'ra
Several opossums, Koong'arambur'raga
(2) One kangaroo, Boo'roo
A pair of kangaroos, BooToowur'ra
Several kangaroos, Boo'roowur'raga
(3) One boomerang, Warang'an
A pair of boomerangs, Warang'anbur'ra
Several boomerangs, War an g / anbu i 7 raga
In the first example the name of the animal ends with a vowel,,
and the syllable is closed by the annexure of the letter m, which is then
followed by the suffixes burra and burraga respectively. The letters m
and b are closely related to each other in sound; in the articulation of
the former the air escapes through the nose—in the latter through the
mouth. Therefore, the introduction of the m before th 2 b makes the
whole word flow more easily than if the m were not there.
In the second example the creature’s name concludes with o>, which
is closely allied to w in sound, therefore the b is dropped from the
beginning of the next syllable, and a w substituted for it, making the
whole word read boo'-roo-wur-ra—the two syllables roo-wur melting
into each other.


In the third example, the name of the object terminates with n,
and the suffix is added without modification. It appears, therefore,
that the suffixes are liable to variations which are apparently designed
for the sake of a pleasing, easy pronunciation.
Gender. —There are two modes of indicating difference of gender
in nouns ■-(1) By using different words for the male and female; and
(2) By affixing some word indicative of sex.
Yoo'in is a man, wang'gan a woman. Kum'mera means an old
man; karn r ga an old woman. GuWbogoobal, a boy; yarddabal, a girl.
The gender of animals is usually expressed by forming a compound
with another word, as Wuddhung'ur beano, a male dog; wuddhung / ur
wang'ganmano, a female dog, wang'ganmano being derived from wang'-
gan, the name of the human female.
For a few of the animals a specific word represents the male, with-
out naming the animal, but in the case of the female the animal name
must be stated, followed by a distinguishing word. For example, the
male of the opossum., is called kumburroo'ga, whilst the
female is spoken of as koongara-koorooh’oo. G-umbawur, native bear,
has the single word bur'runda for the male, but the female is repre-
sented by giving the name of the animal, followed by kooroo'roo,
thu3—gumbawur-koorooroo. A female kangaroo is called immer, as
booroo-immer.
When the name of any animal or inanimate object is mentioned,
without some word specifying the sex, the masculine gender is
invariably understood.
Case. —The principal cases are the nominative, nominative-agent,
possessive, accusative, dative and ablative.
The nominative is expressed in two ways, the first being called the
nominative—the second the nominative-agent. The noun is unaltered
if we merely name the object under consideration, as, wuddungur tham-
bamoolaga, a dog I saw. But if we speak of the object as performing
any act, a suffix is required, as wuddungurra koongara buddhal, the
dog an opossum bit. Koongarangga jiroura thunnan, an opossum
leaves is eating. The form of the suffix varies slightly with the termi-
nation of the noun to which it is annexed, as in the last two examples.
Frequently the agent-suffix is omitted altogether.
The possessive (genitive) is formed by adding the suffix noo, or its
variants, to the name of the object possessed, and dha, or a euphonic
modification, to the name of the possessor, as follows:
Wanggan, a woman —wurran, a child ; but wanggandha wurranyoo
is a woman’s child.
Yooin, a man —bimbia, a shield, and yooindya bimbianoo, a man's
shield.


Wurran, a child—thoogan, a camp; but wurranya thooganoo is a
child’s camp.
The possessive case of a large number of nouns is effected by a
suffix corresponding to the person and number required, thus forming,
one word, which can be inflected as under :
(Ist person My camp Thoogandhooga
Singular -j 2nd ~ Thy camp Thooganoong
(3rd ~ His camp Thooganoo
nprsnn j Our camp (incl.) Thoogangul
■p. i P n (Our ~ (excl.) Thoogangullung
uAL “ ]2nd ~ Your camp Thooganbool
(3rd ~ Their camp Thooganumbool
/ 1 , , (Our camp (incl.) Thooganyin
j s P (lson (Our ,> (excl.) Thooganyinnunga
lurai. 2nd Your camp Thoogandhoor
(3rd ~ Their camp Thoogangadhan
The native words in the above table read thus: —Camp my, camp
thy, camp his, and so on.
In the accusative there is generally no change in the noun, as,
Wanggandha wurranyoo garay thunnan —the woman’s child a snake
is eating.
The sense of the ablative case is often obtained by means of the
objective : Wuddungurra koongara buddhal —the dog the opossum
bit; that is, the opossum was bitten by the dog.
The dative case is sometimes obtained in a similar way : Eedhun-
gooroo murrawarnoo mirreejigga ngoomal—the mother her daughter
a bandicoot gave, or, the mother gave a bandicoot to her daughter.
Usually the ablative and dative oases are shown by suffixes to the
noun, and in a few instances they are indicated by modifications of
the verb.
Adjectives.
Adjectives have three numbers, and are placed after the nouns
they qualify. When an adjective qualifies a noun in the dual or plural,
the requisite suffix is attached to both :
Yooin garneena, a man bad
Yooinburra garneenamburra, a pair of men bad
Yooinburraga garneenamburraga, several men bad
The suffix is often omitted from one of the words, leaving the noun
only, or the adjective, to indicate the dual and plural.
Adjectives also take the same possessive, dative, and ablative
suffixes as the nouns with which they are used.
The comparison, of adjectives does not follow the same rules as in
European languages, but there are several ways of comparing one
quality or quantity with another. One method is to use a stronger form


of the same word, thus, birraga, large; birragambora, above the
average size; birragangoodhoo, very large.
Referring to a couple of boomerangs, which are equally good, a
native would say, Warrangan neen jummagadha—warranganwal
jinginda jummagadha, Boomerang this good—boomerang other that
good; that is, This boomerang is good, that other boomerang is good.
If a better weapon were produced, he might say, Warrangan jummagan-
goodhoo, boomerang very good.
Where one of the objects compared is smaller or inferior in any way
to the other, the speaker will use words to imply, small this, large that,
or as the case may require.
Comparison may be effected by using different words, as,
goorougoora, fast; joambadhoo, resembling the speed of a falling star.
We have seen that when used qualitatively, adjectives are inflected
for number and case; when they are used as predicates, they are
inflected for person and number, and are placed foremost in the
sentence:
1 1st person lam good (good I) Jummagambaga
Singular j 2nd ~ Thou art good (good thou) Jummagambee
(3rd ~ He is good (good he) Jummagaman
/.. , (We are good (inch)
list person i We ( \, xcl .j
1 2nd ~ You are good
(3rd ~ They are good
Juminagambung
Jum magambungulla
Jummagamboo
Jutnmagamburra •
Dual
. , (We are good (inch)
lB ‘ person lWe „ „ (excl.)
2nd ~ You are good
3rd ~ They are good
Junnnagambun
Jummagambunga
Jummagamban
J unnnagamburraga
Plural
Any adjective which is used in this way, as, I am strong, hungry,
glad, and so on, can be inflected as in the above example. They also
admit of inflection for past and future time, like intransitive verbs.
One example in the singular of each tense will be sufficient:
list person I was good
Singular j 2nd ~ Thou wast good
(3rd ~ He was good
And so on for the dual and plural.
Ist person I will be good
Jurnmagamboolaga
•T ummagamboolee
Juimnagarnbool
J ummagambobooga
Singular -! 2nd ~ Thou wilt be good Jummagamboboonee
(3rd ~ He will be good Jummagamboboon
It appears, therefore, that any adjective which describ s a quality
or attribute, which can be connected with a personal pronoun, as “I
am good,” “he is merry,” “we are sick,” can be conjugate! in the
same manner as an intransitive verb. The primary use of these words
as adjectives is exemplified in such expressions as “ A good woman,”


A ‘ a merry boy,” “ a sick man,” and they are then declined for number
and case only. Many adjectives, as bright, sweet, frosty, thick, and so
on, cannot be used as verbs.
It would be better, perhaps, to include the predicative adjectives
among the verbs, but I have thought it as well to illustrate them under
the present heading, for the purpose of keeping all the adjectives
together.
Pronouns.
Pronouns have the singular, dual, and plural numbers, and are
without gender. The nominative and possessive pronouns are as
■under:
(Ist person I Ngiaga Mine Nglagangool
Singular 2nd ~ Thou Indeega Thine Indeegangool
(3rd ~ He Jeenjulla His Jellanudda
I /We (incl.) Ng'iawung Ours (incl.) Ngiawunga-
L , | 100 l
j s P erson j \y e (excl.) Ngiawungulla Ours (excl.) Ng'iawungal-
UAL -"'j ( ' angool
J 2nd ~ You Indeewoo Yours Indeewool
3rd ~ They Jeenjullowurra Theirs Jellanowurra
/ (We (incl.) Ngiawan Ours (incl.) Ngiawunyun-
i , ! gool
| s P erson l \y e ( exc i^]^gj awan g a Ours (excl.) Ngiawunga-
Pthkat 1 l g° ol
12nd ~ You Indeewan Yours Indeewun-
thungool
3rd ~ They Jeenjullowur-Theirs Jellanowur-
raga raga
These pronouns are not much used as separate words, except in
answer to a question, or assertively. If some one ask, “ Who is going
hunting?” a man may answer, “ Ngiaga,” I am, or “ Ngiawungulla,”
we (dual exclusive) are. If an inquiry be made, “ Whose food is this?”
some one may reply, “ Indeegangool,” thine; or “ Ngiawunyungool,”
ours (plural inclusive), and so on.
There are other forms of the above pronouns, meaning “ for me,”
“ with me,” “ from me,” etc,, which extend through the three numbers
and persons. And the number of a noun can be expressed by means
of the pronoun, thus, a native could say, in reference to a couple of
anything, “Ngiagangoolowurra, ” mine both; if referring to several
articles, he might say, “ Ngiagangoolowurraga,” mine all, and soi on.
Pronominal suffixes, in abbreviated forms, are used in great num-
ber and variety in the declension of nouns, adjectives, verbs, preposi-
tions, and adverbs, examples of which are given under these parts of
speech in the present article.
The equivalents of the demonstrative pronouns, “ this and “ that/’
are declinable for dual and plural number, and also have modifications


to express possession. In these demonstratives —and also in the per-
sonal pronouns—there are two forms of the nominative case, one being
the simple nominative, and the other the nominative agent, as already
explained in dealing with the nouns in an earlier page.
The interrogatives “who” and “what” have numerous inflections
for number, person, and case, a few of which are as under :
Who art thou, wunnunggawee
Who are you (two), wunnunggawoo
Who are you (several), wunnunggawun
Who is there, wannungga nyoon
What is the matter (with thee), minyamanee
What is the matter (with them, several), minyamanha
Who is this for, wannungalool nyeen.
Other forms of these interrogatives represent, belonging to whom
and what, from whom and what, etc.
If there be any relative pronouns, they have up to the present
escaped notice.
Verbs.
Verbs have three numbers—the singular, dual, and plural. There
are three principal moods —the indicative, imperative, and subjunctive,
or conditional, with indications of an infinitive, which I have not yet
succeeded in establishing.
There are three persons and three primary tenses—present, past,
and future—and possibly a perfect is occasionally used. Conjugation
is effected by numerous postpositions, among which there is consider-
able regularity. What are called participles in English become part of
the inflexion of the verb in the native tongue.
The stem of the verb and the pronominal suffix with which it is
used, together form one! word, as, Booroo thambamoolaga, a kangaroo-
saw I; Booroo thambamoolee, a kangaroo sawest thou, and so on.
This permits of the verb, and its corresponding particle, being inflected
together throughout all the tenses. When a pronoun is poatfixed to a
verb in this way, the former is very much contracted. The following
is the conjugation of the verb Jama, “ to talk or tell.”
Active Voice —Indicative Mood.
PRESENT TENSE.
1 1st Person I talk Jamaga
Singular j 2nd ~ Thou talkest Jamanee
(3rd ~ He talks Jaman
Jaman
list Person I We talk ( incL ) Jamoong
1 1st leraon | Wetalk OXoL j Jamoongalla
)2nd ~ You talk Jamooroo
Dual
3rd ~ They talk Jamandawurra
p . (We talk (inch) Jamooin
|is erson (We talk (excl.) Jamooinga
12nd ~ You talk Jarnooroon
Plural ..
3rd ~ They talk Jamana


past tense
1 1st Person I talked Jamoolaga
J 2nd ~ Thou talkedst Jamoolee
(3rd ~ He talked Jamool
Singular
/, , (We talked (incl.) Jamoolung
jlst Person j We talked (excl.) Jamoolungulla
j2nd ~ You talked .Tamooloo
(3rd ~ They talked .Jamoolawurra
Dual
(We talked (inch) Jamoolun
1 1st P erson | \v e talked (excl.) Jamoolunga
12nd „ You talked Jamooloon
Plural
3rd ~ They talked .Tamoola
FUTURE TENSE.
( Ist Person I will talk Jamooga
Singular
-l 2nd ~ Thou wilt talk Jamoonee
(3rd „ He will talk Jamooan
v> (We will'talk (incl.) Jamooung
Ist lerson jw e wi jj ta lk ( exc p) Jamemoongulla
2nd ~ You will talk Jameemboola
Dual
3rd „ They will talk Jamoonawnrra
I |We will talk (incl.) Jameembun
l ist ierson j We w j|| ta ik ( eX cl.) Jameeminga
Plural... , 2nd You will talk Jamoonan
[g r( l tt They will talk Jamooana
Imperative Mood —present tense.
Singular 2nd Person Talk (thou) Jamoor
Dual ... 2nd
Plural 2nd
Talk (you two) Jamooroo
Talk (you all) Jamooran
FUTURE TENSE
Singular 3rd Person Let him talk Jamooya
Dual ... 3rd ~ Let them talk Jamooyawurra
Plural 3rd ~ Let them talk Jainooyawa
Conditional Mood —present tense.
(Ist Person ! may talk Jamooga-wanda
Singular 1 2nd „ Thou mayest talk Jamoonee-wanda
(3rd „ He may talk Jamoon-wanda
PAST TENSE.
) Ist Person I may have talked .Jamoolaga-wanda
Singular 1 2nd „ Thou mayest have talked Jamoolee-wanda
I Brd ~ He may have talked Jamool-wanda
Passive Voice.
There is no special form for the passive voice. The phrase,
opossum was bitten by a dog,’’ is expressed in Thoorga by saying
dog bit an opossum.


Middle Voice—lndicative Mood.
PRESENT TENSE.
Singular 1 1st Person I talk to myself Jamunjaleega
Dual ... J Ist ~ We (inch) talk to ourselves Jamunjaleeng
Plural .. (Ist ~ We (excl.) talk to ourselves Jamunjaleean
PAST TENSE.
Singular Ist Person I talked to myself Jamunjaleeoolaga
FUTURE TENSE.
Singular Ist Person I will talk to myself Jamunjalooga
Each of the three tenses in the last examples contain all the persons
and numbers, but I have only shown sufficient to illustrate their
structure.
There is a reciprocal inflection of the verb in the dual and plural,
as under:
We (dual incl.) talk to each other Jamunjaleeang
We (plural inch) talk to each other Jamunjaleean
The negative form of the verb consists of in-fixing the syallable
ngamba between the stem of the verb and the termination, as in the
following example in each tense:
Present I talk not Jamangambaga
Past ... I talked not Jamoolngatnbaga
Future I will not talk Jamoongambaga
And so on through all the persons of the singular, dual, and plural.
Various modifications of the verb are made, to convey different
shades of meaning, of which the following are a few examples, which
extend to all the persons and numbers:
I talk to thee
Jamagoon
I talk for thee
J amoonamagoon
Do not talk to me ...
J amoongambeengga
I gave to him
Ngamalaga
He gave to me
Ngamaleengga
I took from him
Moondardiilaga
He took from you two
Moondardilool
I took from you all...
Moondardillagoondhoor
A man caught a wallaby ...
Yooindyoo jarrooga dhubbagal
A man caught a wallaby for himself
Yooindyoo jarrooga dhubbagamil-
leel
A man caught a wallaby for me ... •
Yooindyoo jarrooga dhubbagamoo-
leengga
A man caught a couple of wallabies
Yooindyoo jarroogamburra dlmb-
bagalool
A man caught several wallabies ...
Yooindyoo jarroogamburraga
dhubbagalin (that is, a man
several wallabies caught)


It will be observed that the dative, ablative, and possessive cases
are often included in the verb, as “ to,” “ from,” “ for,” etc. The
number of the verb in some expressions agrees with the subject, and in
others with the object, noun.
The Thoorga natives employ a verb meaning “ to become,” or “ to
intend,” in future time, which can be used with an adjective or another
verb, and in such cases the adjective or verb need not be declined.
In the following example the adjective bulwul, strong, will be
taken:
(I will become, or intend to. Bu Uvul anyerreeooga
e j be, strong j J °
ingular j Xla oU wilt beeorae strong ~ anyerreeoonee
(He will become strong ~ anyerreeoon
/We (incl.) will become strong Bulwul anyerreeoong
t ’We (excl.) ~ ~ ~ ~ anyerreeoongulla
ual --i You ,, ~ , ~ anyerroonthoo
(They ~ ~ ~ ~ anyerroonawurra
|We (inch) will become strong Bulwul anyerrooin
Pi ttb JWe (excl.) „ „ ~ ~ anyerrooinga
i lural 1 You „ „ „ anyerrooan
They ~ ~ ~ ~ anyerroonawurraga
Prepositions.
Post-positions, or the equivalent of what are called prepositions in
English, are of two kinds, one of which compr.ses separate words, as
booroongoona, between. The other kind consists of various particles
suffixed to verbs, nouns, and adjectives, which give them a preposi-
tional meaning. Thus, instead of using a separate word for “ through/’
there is a verb, “ irreetboolaga,” meaning “ through-went-I,” which
can, of course, be conjugated for number, person, and tense.
The following are a few words exhibiting a prepositional sig-
nificance :
Booroongoona boonbalwurra, between two trees.
Bunnerwawalan boonbala, the other side of the tree.
Burreetboolaga, across came I (as across a river).
Nyirroowaga, down go I (as down hill).
Dhulleeboaga, up go I (as up hill).
Gooroomboaga, around go I (as around a camp).
Like nouns, some prepositions can be conjugated by suffixing an
abridged form of the requisite pronoun :
( 1 st Person Behind me Burgidha
Singular ] 2nd „ Behind thee Burgioong
(3rd ~ Behind him Burg'ieen
/. , -d (Behind us (incl.) Burgiangul
Ist Person Bebiiid us (excl.) Burgiangulling
'2nd ~ Behind you Burgiyool
Brd „ Behind them Burgianumbool
Dual


(Ist Person j ßeh ! nd us ( incl -) Burgagianyin
p (Behind us (excl.) Burgagianyinnunga
A i2nd ~ Behind you Burgagiandlioor
(3rd ~ Behind them Burgagieedhan
“ In front of me,” “ on my left,” etc., can be conjugated similarly.
Adverbs.
Adverbs may be either primitive words, or they may be derived
from adjectives, from, which they differ so little that the use of the
word determines what part of speech it belongs to. The numerous
inflexions of the verbs lessen the necessity for the employment of
adverbs, and hence diminishes their number in the language.
The following are a few examples of phrases containing adverbs, or
having an adverbial meaning:
Wuddha wuddungur, where is the dog?
Mullee wabboolee, why didst thou go?
Werndoong wabboolee, when didst thou go?
Jummagamanyeen will'ian, well he runs.
Yooka nannomanyee, how dost thou know?
For some other examples, see the end of the Vocabulary.
Some adverbs can be inflected for number and person, like nouns
and prepositions:
11st Person Where am I Waddunggabaga
2nd ~ Where art thou Waddungabanee
3rd ~ Where is he Waddungaban
, p (Where are we (inch) Waddungabung
s eiso (Where are we (excl.) Waddungabungulla
2nd ~ Where are you Waddungabanoo
,3rd ~ Where are they Waddungaburra
Dual
( laf Pflfonn (Where are we (inch) Waddungaban
p ] (Where are we (excl.) Waddungabanga
A 12nd ~ Where are you Waddungabanhoor
(3rd ~ Where are they Waddungaburraga
The meaning of the word “instead” is obtained by the following
expression:—Yannoon—m'iooga, goes he, stop I; that is, he goes
instead of me.
Conjunctions.
The number of conjunctions in the Thoorga dialect is very limited.
Their general absence is attributable to the numerous modifications of
the verbs and pronouns, by which means sentences are brought together
without the help of connecting words.
Exclamations.
Yi, calling attention. Wuddhou, hillo ! Yuggadya, surprise. Moolo
mooloonga, vexation. Most of these interjections have a dual and
plural form.


N UMERALS.
The cardinal numbers, which are indeclinable, are as follows:
One —mir'dindhal; Two—jirree'ba; Three—toor'oongad'ya ; Four—
jirree'bawa! jirree'bawal; Five'—mur'nawal, or a hand ; Ten —Thou'a,
the two hands; Many—thou'a-mullan.
Once, mirdindhalee. Twice, mungundhawurra. Thrice, dooreen-
gawurraga. First, murrool. Last, walleengal.
The ideas of the natives in regard to numbers, quantity, and size,
are very limited.
Aboriginal Songs at Initiation Ceremonies.
In an article contributed to the Anthropological Society, of Wash-
ington, in 1896,> I described the Bundn 1 ceremony of initiation in force
among the native tribes occupying the south-east coast of New South
Wales from the Victorian boundary to Bulli, and extending inland
from eighty to a hundred miles. Since then I have also described a
preparatory inaugural rite, called the Kudsha 2 , which is practised by
the same people. This tract of territory includes the hunting grounds
of all the tribes referred to in the present treatise.
In the papers referred to, I have given the words of certain sacred
songs used in the celebration of the ceremonies, but am now in a
position to incorporate the music of some of them in this article. The
words of one of the songs chanted by the old men in the presence of
the boys are :
Dharamooloon, Dhurramooloon
Bingilbee moondanunna
G-ummerawarawa
These words are droned monotonously ad libitum to the following
music :
Another song has the following words and music :
Dharramooloonga gale wirrahroo ganga
Ngoorungga wirraleema.
7710vn -/ftl-iui’V-OC
I’CL- ■ • ivd-
1 American Anthropologist, vol. ix., pp. 327-334.
2 Journ. Roy Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. xxxiv., pp. 276-281.


The words and music of another song are
Ngalalba waloolba jilleejilleen.
One of the songs used by the women in the morning during the
time their sons are away with the chief men undergoing initiation is:
Jihbarara mur'ragadyah/
Yam/ungad'yenah'
This is sung to the following music :
NguFleejee gawinjee mullinda
G-unilyee mong'gajee
The music runs thus, repeated as long as required :
During the same period the mothers of the boys chant songs in the
evening, of which the following is a specimen :
Millingalee kubberinya, millingalee kubberinya
Bingandabee pambeeloonya
Mirreewala pambeeloonya
Another song sung by the boys’ mothers, with the accompanying
music, is as follows:


I°—VkH'i '"i 'iJi V I'iVVi
&trvn.jan-stsL 6ee /Z*,u ~J, c e bo* m,rrcc .. »4i Ft »*><£<• btrn -i/u
These are the first songs of the aborigines of this part of New
South Wales which have ever been set to music. It may be mentioned
that the words of these chants possess no meaning to the present
natives, having been handed down from one generation to another.
They were probably in the language of conquering tribes in the past. 1
They are considered sacred, and are never used except at the initiation
ceremonies, of which they constitute an important essential.
APPENDIX.
The Yookumbill Language.
In order to add to the value of this article it is proposed to furnish
an abstract of the grammatical structure of the Yoo-kum'-bill, or
U-kum'-bil, language, spoken by the natives of the Upper Macintyre,
the principal source of the Barwon River, New South Wales.
This language is representative, in its fundamental principles, of the
speech of the aborigines of mere than three-quarters of the geographic
area of New South Wales, being one of the most widely spread of Aus-
tralian tongues. This type' extends southerly from the Macintyre and
Barwon rivers to the Murray, and stretches easterly to include the
north-east coast of New South Wales from the Hawkesbury River
northwards. It also covers a great part of Queensland.
Nouns.
Number. —Nouns have the singular, dual and plural numbers, as
follows :
Singular A kangaroo Bun'dar
Dual ... A couple of kargaroos Bun'darbu'ta
Plural Several kangaroos Bun* darmundim' ba
Gender. —ln the human family different words are used to distin-
guish the sex, as—gib'beer, a man; uk'keether, a woman; woo'nar, a
young boy; mee'kai, a young girl; gir'ri, a child of either sex.
The gender of animals is shown by adding words signifying “male - ’
and “female” respectively, as, goo'pee boo/roo, an opossum male;
goo'pee goc'nee, an opossum female. These distinguishing words are
different when speaking of birds, thus, boidhoorba is a cock and
gooneedhar a hen.
I R. H. Mathews.—“ The Origin, &c., Australian Aborigines,” Proc. Amer, Philos
Soc., Phila., U.S.A., vol. xxxix, pp. 556-578,


Case. —The principal cases are the nominative, nominative-agent,
possessive, accusative, dative, and ablative.
Nominative. —Gibbeer, a man; ing-gal, a child.
Nominative-agent.—Gib'beeroo mg'gal, u'mea, a man a child beat.
Possessive.—Gibbeergoo bur'gan, a man's boomerang; ukkeether-
goo koo'nee, a woman’s yamstick; biuPdargoo dhoon, a kangaroo’s tail.
In the Thoorga language the object possessed also takes a suffix.
Accusative. —In the example given above for the nominative
agent, it is seen that the word inggal, a child, does not change, When,
however, an instrument is the direct object of the verb, it takes a
similar suffix to the nominative-agent, as, uttha burgandoo dhoowanee,
I am boomerang threw.
Dative.—Ngoo'ra i 3 a camp; ngoo/raga munnayettee, to the camp
come.
Ablative. —Ngoo/randee munnal wandeebia, from the camp go
away.
Adjectives.
Adjectives are declined for number and case, and are placed after
the nouns they qualify.
Bundar muggan, a kangaroo, large
Bundar mugganbuta, a couple of kangaroos, large.
Bundar mugganmundimba, several kangaroos, large.
The inflexions for case are:
Nominative-agent.—Gibberoo muggandoo inggal umea, a man big
the child beat.
Possessive.—Bundargoo muggangoo dhoon, a large kangaroo's tail;
gibbeergoo muggangoo burgan, a big man’s boomerang.
Dative.—Gibbeera mugganda yetteemunna, the man big come to
(come to the big man).
Ablative. —Gibbeeree mugganidee munnal, the man large go from.
Comparison is effected in a manner similar to that employed in the
Th-oorga; and certain adjectives, when used as predicates, can be con-
jugated like intransitive verbs, the same as in that language.
Pronouns.
Pronouns have the nominative, possessive and objective cases, but
without gender. The following are the nominative :
Ist Person I
• 2nd ~ Thou
3rd ~ He
Uttha
Inda
Singular
Numbo
Ist Person 1 We ( incl -) Uttee
Ist rerson j We (excL) Utteenumbo
2nd „ You Utoota
3rd ~ They Nmnbotuta
Dual


fist Person | We ( incl o Nguninda
Plural lWe (excl.) Ngunner
Plura , 2 n( j y ou Indaner
2nd ~ You Indaner
13rd ~ They Utooldiner
The possessive and objective forms of these pronouns are as
under:
(My Ngea Me Utoo
J Thy Innoo Thee Innu
(His Numbcgo Him Utub
Singular \ Thy Innoo Thee Innunnoo
Numbcgo Him Utuluttoo
Ours (inch) Uttininnoo Us (inch) Uttinna
Ours (excl.) Uttinungo Us (excl.) Uttinunna
Yours Innoobootangoo You Inunnabuta
Theirs Ngulbootangoo Them Utoomeea
’Ours (inch) Ngananinnoo Us (inch) Nyunnunda
Ours (excl.) Ngananner Us (excl.) Nyunnuna
Yours Inanoo You Inanea
Theirs Nguldeenoo Them Utooldeena
Dual
Plural
It will be observed that these pronouns have two forms in the first
person of the dual and plural, one of which includes the person
addressed, and the other excludes him.
Interrogatives. —Ngana. woonee, who is there? Nganda bundar
umea, who> struck the kangaroo? Nganoona burgan, whose boomerang?
Nganbi, who from? Ngandoona, who did that? Minya nha, what is
that? Minyanginda, what for? Minyungi, how many? Wundha,
which or how? Wundha beepoonda, which is the best? Wundha
inda immemeea, liow didst thou do it?
Demonstratives.—These are very numerous and are inflected for
number and case, and usually follow the word qualified. Space forbids
examples.
Verbs.
There is a difference in the termination of the verb for each of the
tenses, as umunge, beats now; umea, did beat; umul, will beat.
There are, moreover, variations in the past and future tenses, to
express slight differences in past and future time, thus, umulganiba,
did beat this morning, etc.; umulnga, will beat to-morrow, etc. (See
conjugation hereunder.) These variations are the same in all the
persons and numbers of the tense to which they respectively apply.
Any required number and person in each tense can be shown by
using the necessary pronoun, as, uttha umunge, I beat; uttee umunge,
we (dual) beat; nguninda umunge, wo (plural) beat. It is apparent,
therefore, that each tense form remains constant throughout all its
persons and numbers.
In these respects the Yookumbill verb differs materially from the
Thoorga and kindred tongues, in which there is a distinct verbal ter-
mination for every person and number in each tense.


THE THOORGA LANGUAGE
• j |§
i»
Active Voice—lndicative Mood
PRESENT TENSE.
I beat
Thou beatest
He beats
I Ist Person
- 2nd ~
( 3rd
Singular
Ist Person
We (inch) beat
We (excl.) beat
You beat
Dual
2nd ~
3rd ~
They beat
{lst Person
2nd ~
3rd
We (inch) beat
We (excl.j beat
You beat
Plural...
They beat
PAST TENSE.
FUTURE TENSE.
And so on through all the persons and numbers.
Imperative Mood.
Beat thou Uma inda
The negative form is—
Beat thou not Yooka uma inda
Conditional Mood.
I may beat Umulleea uttha
Middle Voice—indicative mood.
Some of the numerous modifications of the verb will be understood
from the following conjugation of the verb “to beat,'’ The present
tense is given in full, but in the past and future the first person only
of the singular is taken.
Umunge uttha
~ inda
numbo
uttee
~ utteenumbo
„ utoota
numbotoota
~ nguninda
~ ngunner
~ indaner
utooldiner
Singular / I beat just now Umea uttha
Ist | I beat this morning Umulganiba uttha
Person f I beat some days ago Umul-byiine uttha
These forms of the verb are repeated through all the persons of
the singular, dual and plural. Thus, for the second person singular
we have' —umea inda, umulganiba inda, umulbyane inda, For the
third person singular we use —umea numbo, umulganiba nuinbo,
umulbyane numbo. They can also be applied to all the persons of the
dual, and to all the persons of the plural, in the same manner, by using
the proper pronouns, which are tabulated in a previous page.
[Singular /I will beat presently Umul uttha
Ist -< I will beat to-morrow ) TT , ..
-r, ) > Umulnga uttha
Person or some future time )
PRESENT TENSE.
I am beating myself Umungngge uttha


PAST TENSE.
I did beat myself
Umungingiange uttha
FUTURE TENSE.
I will beat myself
Umungii uttha
Imperative Mood.
Beat thou tin self Umungilieea inda
There is a reciprocal form of the verb, which is necessarily restricted
to the dual and plural:
We are beating each other, Umullella uttee.
This reciprocal has also a past and a future tense.
Many other variations of verbs could be given, but this is precluded
by exigencies of space.
Adverbs.
Yo, ves; yooka, no; yooumbange, no one; nha, here; unna, there;
nunggoa, yonder; numboo, that; dhouakal, a little; mooigeer,
quickly; boothoo, slowly; peepoon mea, well done; ngardha mea,
badly done; wanda ngea ngoora, where is my camp? wandabungga
inda munnal, where goest thou away ?
Interjections.
Ya! calling attention. Thuttea! stop! Wirro wirro! equivalent
to Oh, dear!
Numerals.
Dharrar, one; boota,’ two; bootagarar, three; dharara, once,
bootagoo’, twice; dhararmunnia, first; guttunnee, last; moolan moo-
lan, middle.
Prepositions have their place in the language, but conjunctions are
few and unimportant.
THOORGA VOCABULARY.
Man (collectively), Yoo'-in-
bur'- Old woman, Karn'-ga
rarga.
Wife, Dhun'-na-ma
A man, Yoo'-in
Girl, Yan'-darbal
Old man, Kum'-mer-a
Father, Bang
Clever man, Moo'-yoo-loo
Mother, Meeng'-a
Young man, Nhur'-ma
Elder brother, I)ha'-dha-dha
Youth, Kab'-bogoo'-bal
Younger brother, Mi-a'-ga
Small Bov, Wur'-ran
Elder Sister, Ma'-ma-cLha
Woman, Wang'-gan
Younger Sister, Mur'-nung-gan
The
Human Body.
Head, Kab'-ban
Eyebrow, Men-mir'-koon
Forehead, Goon'-doo
Eye lid, Meed-pum'-bo
Hair of head, Jou'-oor
Nose, No'-goor
Hair of beard, Yar'-ran
Nostril, Ngoor-doo-ngcor-doo
Eye, Mab'-o-ra
Jaw, Mun'-tha


The Human Body— Continued.
Back of neck, Nung'-goor
Throat, Ka.m-mee
Ear, KooP-nee
Mouth, Tha'-ga
Lips, Weel'-leen
Tongue, NguPnan
Teeth, Ee'-ra
Chin, WaP-100
Chest, Bing'-al
Navel, KoP-ree
Navel string, NcoP-reech
Stomach, Bin'-dhee
Abdomen, Moo'-roo
Rump, Mun'-jee
Anus l , Goon'-nee
Flank, Kung'-gul
Back, Barl'-ka
Penis, Burn'-da
Erection, YooP-doo-ba-ga
Testicles, MooP-ra
Vulva, Kul'-la
Clitoris, Mee'-gurn
Hair on privates, Moo'-roo-goo-
Semen, BooP-ra
Copulation, Kon'-de-ja-lin-ba
Sexual desire, MuP-100-goo-dhii-ga
Urine, Jil'-100-ow'-ga
Venereal, Bum/-bo-ra
Excrement, Goon'-nee
Arm, Ki'-kan
Elbow, DhuP-leeng
Hand, Mum'-a
Finger, WaP-doo
Finger-nail, Yoo'-100
Thumb, Koo-loong'-00-100
Calf of leg, Jab'-boor
Thigh, Boorn-dat'-ya
Knee, Ngoo'-mo
Shin, Boo'-yoo
Foot, Dhun'-na
Sole of foot, Dhun'-na-dha
Bowels, Goor-goon
Blood Jer-ra/-lee
Fat, Byoo'-wan
Skin, Wa-dhoon-gan'-yan
Natural Surroundings.
Sun, Nou'-a, or, Bag'goran
Moon, Thou'-a/ra
Stars generally, Jing'-gee
Sirius, Goon-je-ran
Alpha Orionis, Goo-nung'-a-ma
Orion's Belt, Yoo'-ih-dya
Pleiades, Wang-gat'-tee
Canopus, Mu'-rce-jig-ga
Milky-way, Kur-ray'-wa
West wind, Koo-roong'-a-ma
Cold ditto, Koo-nam'-ma
East wind, Jir-rin'-jee-ring
Cold ditto, Bee-wa'-wa
Picture, 80-an'-yoo
Clouds, Mong'-a-la
Sky, Mir-ree y -war
Thunder, MeP-ree-bee
Lightning, Goo-rang'-00-ran.
Rain, Bun'-na
Dew, Jing'-ee-a
Mist, MooP-yan
Fog, GuP-ral
Snow, Goon'-um-ma
Frost, Dhug'-gatch
Hail, Dhun'-dul-la
Water, Ngad'-yoo
Sea, near, Kat'-thoo
South wind, Mir-reeng'-a-ma Sea, near, Kat'-thoo
North wind, Pal'-ya Sea, distant, Ngur-rou'-an,
Masturbation, Kud'-da-gud'-da-ba-
Woman’s breasts, Ngab'-boo-na
Woman’s milk, Ngam'-min-ya
Shouldet, Ko'-ko
Big-toe, BiF-rargaryooloo'-dlm
Little-toe, Koo'-bee-ji-ang'-a
Heel, Tung-gul


Sparkle of Waves, Mil'-lum-ba-wa
The Ground, Koo-rat'
Mud, Nhoo-roo'-ba-ba
Stones, Boor'-ran
Sand, Ja'-jo-an
Light, Bin'-nin-gul-la
Darkness, Gil'-wa
Heat, Ngoo'-boo-lin
Coldness 1 , D hug'-gar
Fire, Kun'-bee
Smoke, Tur-ro / -wa
Day, Ngoo-roong'-a-roo
Night, Dhub'-boo-ra
Moming, 800-moo'-la^ga
Evening, Ee-re-bee'nee
Sunrise, Bug'-ga-ran kar-rick-
bung'-arleen
Sunset, Bug'-ga-ran ee'-rik-boo'-
yal
Food, Thung'-a
Kangaroo, Boor'-roo
Porcupine, Ka n' - n a-go- badh'
Native Bear, Koor'-a-ban
Wild dog, War'-re-gal
Opossum, Koong'-ar-a
Flying-fox, Kar-armon'-da
Kangaroo-rat Wang-ga'-lee
Wombat, Bung-ga'-ta
Birds.
Emu, Mur'-re-a
Eaglehawk, Mun'-yung-ga
Crow, Wa'-goo-ra
Black duck, Wom-ba'-ra
Teal duck, Goom'-bur-rarga
Wood duck, Koon-ar'-rook
Pelican, K ar'-o ong-goo'-ba
Laughing Jackass, Koo'-goom-y&-
Native Companion, Koor'-ardhoo
White Cockatoo, Ngow'-al •
Black Cockatoo, Wy'-a-lert
S«argull, Ma-ran
Natural Surroundings— Continued.
Honey, - Gou-ang'-gal
Hill, Bun'-gur-ree
Creek, Bud'-da
Camp, Thoo/-gan
Path, Bur'-doo
Mammals.
Fish hawk, Nyir'-ra
Grass, general, Wad'-dhan
Tree, general, Boon'-bal
Bark of trees, Boon'-boon
Leaves of trees, Jir-rou'-a-ra
Wood, Gou-go'-al
Home, Mung'-gur-ra
Hole, Ga'-goor
Lump, Boo'-bun-dha-ga
Egg, Gou'-a-na
Shadow of a man, Moo'-ran-jan-
Shadow of a tree, Kum'-bo-ree
Echo, Bur'-re-wur'-re-gan'-yon
A sore, Kun'-ja
Flying-Squirrel, Pong'-goo
Bandicoot (short nose), Koor'-a-
goor
Bandicoot (long nose), Mir'-ree-
jug-ga
Ring-tail opossum, 800-ga'-lee
Native Cat, Mid'dhargoon'-ee
Wallaby, Bud-dha'-lee-ma
Swan, Koon'-yoo
Pheasant, Ja'-goo-la
Bird (general), Boo'-jan
Common Magpie, Koo-rim'-ba-ga
Slate Crane, Koor-ar-ay'-ga
Plover,
Curlew, Kwee'-ir-wur'-wur
Quail, Boor'-boor-an
Brown hawk, Bib-bur-noong'-ga
Bhag, Bir-ro'-a-ra
Cormorant, Bin-ya'-roo


Fish (general), Ma-'ra
Whale, Moo'-ree-ir-ra
Killer, Mar'-nun-na
Star-fish, Tyoong'-ga
Guard-fish, Woor-am/-been
Guard-fish, small, Koo'-bee
Shark, WaFlim-boor-a
Great Shark, Dar'-lou-an
True Valley, Ba-ja
Porpoise, Dha/-wur-ree
Jew-fish, Ir-rim-ba'-goon
Schnapper, Bar-ra'-ran
Squire, Nar-ra'-wan
Iguana (tree), Bur-na'-ga
Iguana (water), Jer'-ra-burt
Jew Lizard, Jar-ra'-gar
Snake, general, Ka'-ree
Bee, Moor'-roorn
Locust, Kur'-lan
Centipede, Dha'-jar
Louse, Mool'-a
Mountain Ash, Ngan-dhou'-ur
Ldllypilly, Kul-lung'-ur-ra
Myrtle, You'-ee-a
Tree-fern,
Kurrajong, Koor-a'-man
Tea-tree, Boo'-ar-la
Ironbark,
Stringy bark, Ko'-ba
White box, Koor'-a-bar
Wattle, Bid'-dhoo-dhoo
Grasstree, Meeng'-go
P epperm int, Bur'-rum - bur-ra
Swamp Yam, Boong-ul'-la
Land Yam, Goor-am'-an
Ferns, Mung'-ga
Bui I rushes, Nyoor'-goon
Fishes.
Whiting, War'-ra-boo-gan
Toad-fish, Jir-reeh-boon
Bream, Boor'-00-my-el
Black Bream, Wa'-gal
Silver Bream, Gam/-ban
Flat-head, Dhug'-gul-la
Mullet, War'-rei-gul-la
Small mullet, Dyee'-bur-ra
Flat-tailed mullet, Gar'-ree-ba
Salmon, Bur-re-go-an
Eel, Bur'-ra
Stingaree, Gwee'-a-la
Reptiles.
Turtle, BiT-le-ma
Big Frog, Koor'-gaty
Insects.
Common fly, Na'-ka
Spider, Mur'-rar
Mosquito, Nay'-100-goo
Bull-dog Ant, Kur'-roor
Trees.
Red gum,, Ya/-la
River oak, Oom'-bul-wur-ra
Forest oak, Bil'-la
Cherry tree, MamiaZ-ja
Jeebung, Bub-bud'-dhal
Cabbage tree, Dhur-rou'-a
Blood wood, Goor'-gool
Spotted gum, Dhur-ra'-nee
Honeysuckle, Ba'-birr
A squeaking-tree, Mou'-a-rutch
Plants.
Cutting grass, Nyee'-reen
Reeds, Kum-boe y -ra
Burrawang, Bung-gou'
Nut of burrawang, Ib'-bur
Death-adder, Boo'-boo-goor'-ning
Sleeping Lizard, Bir'-reen
Swamp Mahogany, Mud-dhou'


Weapons, Etc.
Spear, hunting, Bir-ree'-wa
Koolamin, Bun'-gul-lee
Spear, plain, Jar'-ram-ba-dhee
Fishing-line, Wa-rou'-ur-ra
Spear, jagged, Kam'-ma
Fish hook, ThooMa
Fish Spear, G-ar-rou'-at
Net bag, Mud'-boo
Shield for Boomerangs.MilMe-dhoo
Yamstick, Ga'-ga
Shield for Spears, Bim-by'-a
Canoe, Kur'-ree-ja
Club, Boon'-dhee
Ribs of Canoe, Kur-bung'-a-ma
Spear thrower, Wom'-ur
Lining of Canoe, In'-nul
Boomerang, War-rang'-an
Paddle, Wa/-ree
Tomahawk, Mcon'-doo-ba
Child’s play canoe, Dha/-le-gir
Fighting hook, Bud'-dharwul
Stone or Shell Knife, Kur'-rang-
Stick to throw, Ja-jur'-na
ang'-ah
Adjectives.
Alive, Mur'-ro-wan
Dead, Warral
Large, Birraga
Small, Koo-bid'-ya
Long, Yar'-ung-am
Short, Bar'-la
Good, Jum'-ug'ga
Bad, Gar-neen'-a
Hungry, Ee-thal-a-ma'-ga
Thirsty, Ka-boot-ban-dhan'-ing-a
Distant, War'-ree-gam-ban
Near, Nyoo'-neel
Red, Mun'-yarmun'-ya
Grey, Wur'ree
White, Wur'-ra-wur'-ra
Black, Bur-ou'-ra
Full, Thood'-bun-dhool
Empty, Kar'-ra-gul-lum-bee'-wan
Quick, Goo-rou'-goo-ra
Slow, Gur'-rargaty
Blind, Med'-bo-an
Jealous, Ngoon'-a-roong-oor'-a-ga
Flat, Bil'-wur
Round, Boo'-bun-dhan
Sick, Gun'-ja-ma'-ga
Lame, Nun'nung-gar'-a-ga
Deaf, Wa-rag'-a-dhan
Strong, Bul'-wul
Light, Bir-ree'bir-ra
Afraid, Goo'-roo-ba-ga
Courageous, Goo'-roo-ba-ngain ba
ga
Sweet, Jeen-ga
Angry, Ja-joo-la'-ran
Right, Yag-goon'-a-dha
Wrong, Gur'-na-mun'-ya
Straight, Ngoo'-rum-ban
Crooked, Gang'-gool-wur'-ra
Tired, Edd-bool'-a-ga
Greedy, Ka'-roo-dhan
Silent, Jan-bub'-boor
Stupid, Warn'-boor
Ripe, Wa'-nhal
Blunt, Moor'-dooboora
Sharp (edge), Jar' ra-ran
Sharp (point), Nya'-garn
Fat man, Byoo/-wan-gee
Lean man, Yab'-bin-gee
Hot, Now'-an-ma-ka
Cold, Koo'-yoo-doo
Clear (sparkling), Kun'-dha-gun'
dha
Dirty (ae water), Burl'-gun
Glad, Ir'-ring-ga-ga
Sorry, Goor'-ngam-ba-ga
Deep, Ka'-goor
Weak, Gul-la/-bo-an
Heavy, Moon'-door
Shallow, Dhoon-bu.il/-yil


Live, MuF-roo-a-ga
Die, Moo'-boo-ral
Eat, Thun'-na-ma-ga
Drink, Ngoon'-dhoodoong-a
Sleep, Dhur'-ree-ga
Sit, My'-ee-ga
Go, Wab-boo-boo-ee
Tell, Ja'-ma-ga
Speak, You'-a-ga
Walk, Yan'-na-ga
Run, WaPde-a-ga
Bring, Mur'-ran-di-ga
Take, Wab'-bun-di-ga
Lift, Kur'-reet-bar
Carry, Edee-moo/-dhan-yaldun
Make, YaV-bun-ja-ga
Break, Gam rbooP-a-j abla-ga
Strike, By'-eelda-gug'-ga
Fight, KanP-ba-jal-la-ga
Fall, Goong^o-badeen
Observe, Thoom-ba'-ma-la-ga
Hear, Ngar'-radug-ga
Know, Narb-noo-ma-ga
Think, Boon'-jel-a-ga
Grow, Dhoo'-re-ga
Give, NgoomaMa-ga
Like (love), Ngoom'-boo-dha-ga
Sing, Yang'-galda-ga
Weep, Nyoong-go-a'-ga
Cook (as food), Kan'-na-moo-ga
Marry, Yoo'-nin-jadoong'-ulda
Sneeze, Jir-ngam'-ba-ga
Cough, G-ud'-darba-ga
Steal, Kar-rang'-adee
Burn, Gun'-na-moor
Ask, Kun-ny'-armoo-ga
Barter, Ngco'-man-jadong
Bind, Na'-ra-ga.
Bite, Bud'-dhoon-oga
Blow, hit, By'-ee-lug-ga
Blow, with the mouth, Boom-ba'-
larga
Build, Jin'-ya-moo-ga
Verbs
Catch, NmP-ba-ja-ga
Climb, KuP-la-wal-ga
Cover, Bur'-ree-moor
Cry, Nyoong'-go-an
Cut, Thur'-gan-jar
Die, Moo'-boo-ral
Drop (as rain), NgurP-wan
Fear, Goo'-roo-goon-dha-ga
Feed, Dhun'-na-ma-ga
Fly, YaF-rat-ba-ga
Hang up, Dhang'-gar-moor
Hear, NgaP-ra-ga
Hold, Gar-gang'-ar
Jump, War'-da-ga-ga
Keep, Yoo'-na-ga
Kick, Boor'-doodoo-ga
Kiss, Noom/-boodug-ga
Laugh, Ngad'-jeedee-ga
Leave off, Wun'-nar-ran
Scratch, WanP-an-jaPde-ga
Let go, War'-nud-dha
Loss, Dhoon-boong'-a-lug-ga
Perspire, Bug'-ga-ra-ma'-ning-ga
Pinch, Ny een-mool'-1 a-ga
Plunder, Kar-rang'-aldarga
Praise, Jum'-ma-gang'-oor
Be quiet, Jar-room'-boor
Rejoice, Yel'da-ga-ga
Remember, Boon'ja'-ga
Forget, Wi'-an-dha-ga
Rend, Kar'-deer-a-ga
Return, WalMim-by'-a-wan
Rise, Been'-dar-ga
See, NyulMag-ga
Search for, War-dab-100-wul'-ga
Send, Yoo'-ree-al'-oogco
Shake, Boor-un-gal-la-ga
Shine, MilMum-bub-ban'
Drop (from the hand), Ngar'-ram-
bil-lil
Frighten, Goo'-ra-bun-yarree '-jboo-
ga
Learn, Kan'-nan-dhimZ-mee-loq-ga


gp ad, Yar-ra-ran-jar'
Stand, Dhar'-ree-ga
Suck, Ngoon-dhoob-leen
Swim, Yang'-an
Talk, Ya'-woo-ga
Taste, Gan'-un-dhoo-ga
Touch, Dhoo-d hoo-gou'-ga
Turn away, Ga-rang'-a-hr
Twist, Koo-in'-moor
Yes, Nga'way
No, Thug-guy '-il
Here, Nyeeh
There, close by, Nyun'na-dha
There, a little way, Jeen'-a-boora-a
There, farther away, J een-ab-ee
bur-ra
Yonder, Jin'-na-dha •
Distant, War 7 ree goon-da
Near, M u bboom -ban, and nyun r-
il
Where? Wud'-dha
Why? Mub-lee
Late, Ka'-reen
To-day, Nhou'-i
Yesterday Boo'-gee-a
To-morrow, 800 ra'-ja
Day after that, Yar'-ra-dor-ou'-al
Vekbs — Continued.
Adverbs.
wab-lin
When? Wenb-doong
Now, Jab-100
Behind, Bur-gi-dha
OUTRIDGE PRINTING Co., Brisbane.
Wash, Boo'-100-moo-ga
Rub, Wab-bun-jab-la-ga
Spit, Joo'-joo-ba-ga
Smoll, Mir-ra gou' a-ga
Throw, Bin' gou'-00-ga
Pretend, Bur'-nang
Hunt, Kur'rum-ba-loo'-ga
Paint (ones self), Mib-ling'ba-100-
Day after to-morrow, 800-ra'-ja-
Once only, Mir'-dhan-dha'-ga
How ? Yoold-a
By-and-bye, Bub-la-boo
Hereafter, Bub-la-bo-goo'-dha
Long ago, Yer'-ra-der-o-al
Front, Bin'-dyee-oon'-ya
Outside, Dhi'-a-nud-dha
Middle, DooMa-yin
Right hand side, Dhoor-gi'-an-dhee
Left hand side, Wad'-bur ray'-an
Enough, G-oon-ja
Over, across, Burd-bo'ga




ROYAL
GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
OF AUSTRALASIA,
QUEENSLAND.
The Murawarri and Other Australian
Languages
By R H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
Associe. etranger. Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris.
itridge Print, Brisbane.


IPjOual firngra|il|ical Snrieio of
QUEENSLAND
fHIS Society has been established in Brisbane for the last eighteen years. The
Society was instituted with the view of promoting the interests of Geographical
Science, of encouraging exploration in Australasia, and of furthering the study of
Physical and Commercial Geography.
While these objects cannot fail to commend themselves to the scientific and com-
mercial classes of the community, and to many persons engaged in extending pastoral
and mining enterprise into distant parts of the Continent, of which comparatively
little is known, the great educational advantages to be derived from the establishment
of this Society will be no less apparent, to all intelligent colonists.
Any lady or gentleman may become an Ordinary Member, subject to election.
Subscription, £1 Is. per annum, due on the Ist July in each year.
Life Membership) £lO 10s.
The usual Entrance Fee will not be charged during the session
1902-1903.
Members’ Privileges.
To receive the Society’s Diploma.
The right to be present at, and to introduce two friends to, all meetings of the
Society.
The privileges of admissioiyto the meetings of the Royal Geographical Society,
London, and of the use, for the purpose of reference, of the Map Room and Library.
To be allowed to purchase copies of all the publications of the Royal Geographical
Society, London, on special terms.'
Membership of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society when in North Britain
without payment of additional fee, and the privilege of purchasing The Scottish Geo-
graphical Magazine on special terms.
Entree to the Evening Meetings, Library, &c., of the Sydney, Melbourne, and
Adelaide'Centres of the Society.
To have access to the Library and other public rooms of the Society.
To receive a copy of the Society’s official publications.
Diplomas of Fellowship.
Section IV, Clause 3, Constitution and Rules :
The Council may confer the Diploma of Fellowship upon such eminent persons
as have rendered valuable services to geographical science ; on persons of distinguished
scientific attainments ; on those who have promoted the objects of the Society ; and
on Honorary and Honorary Corresponding Members of the Society, without the pay-
ment of diploma fees. On Ordinary Members, on payment of a nominal diploma fee,
subject to the following conditions, namely:— (a) Upon written application: Those
who have compounded for life membership and are deemed worthy of the distinction
by the Council. (b) Upon written application : Those who are not in arrears with
their annual subscriptions, and are, upon the recommendation of the Council, approved
by the Society at an ordinary monthly meeting. Of the honorary class the number
of Fellows shall not exceed ten. Each Diploma, after being approved by the Council,
shall be signed by the President and by the Hon. Secretary of the Society. Members
who receive the diplomas shall have the privilege of designating themselves “Fellows”
of the Society, and may use the initials F.It.G.S.A.Q. after their names as long as
they continue to be members of the Society.
Ladies or gentlemen who wish to become Members of this Society may do so by
handing in or posting their names to the Hon. Secbetary, at the Rooms, Brisbane, or
to any Member of the Society who will arrange for their nomination.


THE MURAWARRI AND OTHER AUSTRALIAN
LANGUAGES.


- 1 •
HI
i>iii 'i
* .
(#1 ;|j
Hi i
' l ' < •
i ' *
£ i
{;
pi |
f I
LANGUAGES*
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
December, 1902.
xxxvi, pp. 71-106.
THE MURAWARRI AND OTHER AUSTRALIAN
Associe. etranger. Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris.
This Society last year published a brief article contributed by me
on the Thoorga. and Yookumbill Languages, 1 two of the native tongues
of New South Wales. On the present occasion it is intended to furnish
the principal elements of the language spoken by the Murawam, a
large tribe occupying a region of Southern Queensland, from the
Warrego River to the Culgoa, Adjoining the Murawarri on the north
are other tribes speaking dialects of the same language and reaching
into Queensland for hundreds of miles. The grammar and vocabulary
of two other native tongues of Queensland—‘ The Yualeai Language,’
and “ The Pikumbil Language ’’—were contributed by me to the Royal
Society of New South Wales. 2
I have incorporated with this paper particulars of the grammatical
constitution of the Burranbinya and Tharumba languages of New
South Wales, and the Wuttyabullak language of Victoria. A mystic
language is also referred to.
The information given in this article was carefully gathered by
myself, without the assistance of any person, in the camps of the
several native tribes whose languages are herein dealt with—a task
involving considerable expenditure of time, labour, and money.
Through the medium of this Journal, I have now contributed the
outlines of the grammar of six Australian languages Thoorga, Yoo-
kumbill, Murawarri, Burranbinya, Tharumba, and Wuttyabullak.
The Thoorga language shows the grammatical structure of all the
native tongues along the coast of New South Wales from the Hawkes-
bury River to Cape Howe, and onward along the Victorian coast to
Oape Patterson, including the whole of Gippsland 3 The Yookumbill
represents the rules of speech from the Murray River, through the
* Read before the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland, Bth
1 Queensland Geographical Journal, vol. xvii., pp. 49-73.
2 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wries, vol. xxxvi., pp. 137-145, and pp. 179-190.
3 See my “ Aboriginal Languages of Victoria,” Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol.
Reprinted from the Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia, Queensland, Vol. XVIII.


centre of New South Wales, into Queensland, at least as far as
Maranoa and Mary rivers. The Murawarri type of language extends
away up the Warrego, Paroo, and other rivers a great distance. The
Burranbinya is one of the dialects of the Darling River tribes. The
Tharumba is spoken on the south-east coast of New South Wales. The
Wuttyabullak is representative of the native speiech over nearly the
whole of Western Victoria. Languages of similar grammatical con-
stitution have also been observed by me in South Australia.
It will, therefore, be observed that I have, practically, dealt with
all the aboriginal languages of Victoria, nearly the whole of New South
Wales, and a large region of South-eastern Queensland All this work
has been the result of my own individual investigations every word
in the grammars and vocabularies having been noted down by me from
the lips of the aboriginal speakers.
It is extremely gratifying to sea that your Society is assisting me
in my endeavour to preserve, before it is too late, some grammatical
records of the speech of the Australian aborigines. The large amount
of information thus collected and published will no l doubt prove of
immense value to philologists by enabling them to compare the native
languages with each other, and also with the speech of the tribes of
Polynesia and elsewhere.
The system of spelling adopted is that recommended by the Royal
Geographical Society, London, with the following qualifications :
As far as possible vowels are unmarked, but in order to prevent
ambiguity of pronunciation, in some instances the long sound of a, e,
and u are indicated thus, a, e, ii. In a few cases the short sound of u
is shown thus, u.
G- is always hard. R has a rough trilled sound, as in hurrah!
W always commences a syllable or word. Y at the beginning of a
word or syllable has its ordinary consonant value.
The sound of the Spanish nis frequent; at the beginning of a word
or syllable I have represented it by ny, but when terminating a word
the Spanish letter is used.
Ng at the commencement of a word or syllable has a peculiar nasal
sound. At the end of a syllable it has the sound of ng in “ wing.”
Dh is pronounced nearly as th in “that,” with a slight sound of d
preceding it. Nil has likewise nearly the sound of th in “ that,” with
the initial sound of the n.
T is interchangeable with d, p with b, and g with k, in most words
where these letters occur.
Ty and dy at the beginning of a word or syllable have nearly the
sound of j. At the end of a word ty or dy is pronounced nearly as
tch in watch or hitch, omitting the final hissing sound.


THE MURAWARRI LANGUAGE.
In the Murawarri language, among all the parts of speech subject
to inflection, there are two forms of the first person of the dual and
plural —one of which includes, and the other excludes—the person
addressed. I am the first author to report this peculiarity in any
of the native languages of Queensland. It may be stated that I was
likewise the first to draw attention to its existence in the aboriginal
languages of New South Wales and Victoria. 1
Nouns.
Number. —There are three numbers, singular, dual, and plural.
Gula, a kangaroo. Gulabural, a, pair of kangaroo®. Guladhunna,
several kangaroos.
Gender. —Mugin, a woman. Men, a man. Among animals sex
is distinguished by words signifying “ male and “ female,” thus,
giindal dhungur, a male dog; giindal guni, a female dog.
Case. —Nominative: Wagan, a. crow. Kinni, a yamstick. Mulli,
a boomerang. Wungga, a bird’s nest. Ngura, a camp.
Nominative Agent: Guladyu ngunna wirrunga, a kangaroo me
scratched.
Instrumental: Mendyu wagan mullinyu bundhara, a man a crow
with a boomerang hit.
Genitive : Mugingu kinni, a woman’s yamstick.
The genitive case of some nouns is represented by an affix corres-
ponding to the person and number required:
Ist Person—My camp (camp my), Nguradhi
2nd Person—Thy camp (camp thy), Nguranu
3rd Person—His camp (camp his), Nguralugu
And so on for all the numbers and persons.* .
Accusative ; This is the same as the nominative.
Dative : Dhan yanna nguranggu, Come to the camp.
Ablative : Dhirri yanna ngurango, Go from the camp.
Adjectives.
Adjectives are placed after the nouns they qualify, and are simi-
larly declined for number and case. They are compared by saying,
Thurda nhu, Kittyu niingga, large this, small that. Superiority is
expressed by thurdaburra, very large.
Pronouns.
Pronouns have number, person, and case, as exemplified in this
table. There are inclusive and exclusive forms for the dual and
plural of the first person.:
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxv., p. 127; Ibid, xxxvi., p. 72.
2 See also my “ Wongaibon Language,” spoken by the Lachlan River and other
tribes. Journ. Itoy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. xxxvi., pp. 147-154.


SINGULAR.
Nominative.
Possessive.
Ngundi
Ist Person Ngadhu
2nd „ Ngindu
3rd ~ Yallunggo
Objective.
Ngunna
Bunga
Ingga
Ngumbuga
dual.
Bunha
p j Ngulli Ngulliga Ngullinya
Ist lerson j NgulJinyumbo Ngulligilunna Ngullinyanumba
2nd ~ Nula Nulaga Nulana
3rd „ Yallubural Bulaga Burannha
plural.
1 , p j Nginna Nginnaga Ngurrana
Ist lerson j jjginnadyula Nginnagadyula Ngurranadyula
2nd ~ Nura Nuraga Nurana
3rd ~ Yalladhunna Dliurraga Dhurrana
The foregoing full forms of the pronouns are employed chiefly in
answering questions. In ordinary conversation the natives use the
pronominal suflixes illustrated under the heading of “ Verbs.”
Who, ngannga? What, minya? This, nhu. That, nhurana. These
interrogatives and demonstratives take inflexion for number and
person. They also vary according to the position of the object referred
to. The demonstrative pronouns in their various forms supply the
place of the definite article.
Verbs.
Verbs have the singular, dual, and plural numbers, the usual
persons and tenses. The chief moods are the indicative, imperative,
and conditional. Number and person are indicated, as in the Thoorga, 1
by pronominal particles added on to the verb stem; as in the following
'Conjugation of the verb, bundhera, to beat:
Indicative Mood—present tense.
I Ist Person I beat Bundliiyu
Singular ' 2nd ~ Thou beatest Bundhindu
3rd ~ He beats Bundhibu
I p j We incl. beat Bundliili
\ s eison jWe excl. beat Bundhilinumba
j 2nd ~ You beat Bundbinula
( 3rd ~ They beat Bundhibula
( n , p t We incl. beat Bundhina
\ Ist rerson We exd beat Bundliinadyula
j 2nd „ You beat Bundhinura
( 3rd ~ They beat Bundhira
Dual
Plural
PAST TENSE.
i Ist Person I beat Bundharanyu
Singular 2nd ~ Thou beatedst Bundharandu
( 3rd ~ He beat Bundharabu
1 Queensland Geographical Journal, vol. xvii., pp. 49-73.


FUTURE TENSE.
( Ist Person I will beat Bunggunyu
Singular ) 2nd „ Thou wilt beat Bunggundu
f 3rd ~ He will beat Bunggubu
It is thought unnecessary to exhibit the dual and plural numbers;
of the past and future tenses.
Imperative Mood.
Positive Beat Bungga
Negative Beat not Wulla bungga
Conditional Mood.
I may beat Wullawurri bunggunyu
Reflexive.
Present I am beating myself Bundherriyu
Past I was beating myself Bundherriaiyu
Future I will beat myself Bundherriguyu
The inflexion continues through all the persons.
Reciprocal.
( Pres. We inch are beating each other Bumbullali
Diml i nc l. will beat each other Bumbullaguli
p ( Pres. We incl. are beating each other Bumbullana
Plur. -j i nc i. will beat each other Bumbullaguna
Indiyu appears to serve the purpose of the English auxiliary verb,.
I am. If we take an adjective or adverb as a predicate, we get the
following illustration in present, past, and future of the first person,
singular:
Present I am well
Past I was well
Murrin indiyu (well am I)
Murrin indayu
Future I will be well
Murrin inguyu
This form applies to all the persons and numbers.
Adverbs.
Yes, kaila. No, wulla. Here, nunggo. There, ngurra. Now,,
kunyegaila. By and bye, kunye. Yesterday, giinda. To-morrow,
burda. Long ago, muttyagaila, Perhaps, wullawurri. Slowly, mun'gi.
Quickly, kurdugurdu. Where (singular), dhirrungga? Where (dual),
dhirrambula ? Where (plural), dhirradhunna ? How 1 many, minyun-
gara.
Prepositions.
In front, kurbu. Behind, billungga. In rear, durungga, Inside,
mugungga. Outside, bullungga. Beside, gurgungga. Between,
dhunnungga. Down, burrungga. Up, gunda. Over or across, gur-
rundha. This side of, nhubarao. The other side of, gowurrigurrundha.’
Through, gaimyu. Towards, dhai. Away from, dliirra.
Many prepositions can be inflected for number and person, as in
the Thoorga language : —Behind me, billunggadhiga. Behind thee..


billunggabunga. Behind him, billunggabuga. Behind us, billungga-
ngurriga, and so on.
Numerals.
One, yaman. Two, kubbo. Several, murabirri.
See the Vocabulary at the end of this paper.
THE BUKRANBINYA LANGUAGE.
The territory of the Burranbinya tin be is situated on the Darling
River, New South Wales, extending from above Brewarrina down-
wards to about Bourke, comprising the lower portions of the Bokhara,
Bogan, and Culgoa rivers, for some distance above their respecti\ e
junctions with the Darling.
Nouns.
Nouns have number, gender, and case:
Number. —Kuranyi, an opossum. Kuranyigulli, a couple of opos-
sums. Kuranyigalga, several opossums.
Gender. —Bullu, a man. Men collectively are called murrin. Thum-
muga, a woman'. Bullubullu, a young boy. Thummagubbalu, a young
girl. Kirridya, a child of either sex.
The gender of animals is distinguished by the words dhulatya, male,
and ngummagara, female, placed after the name of the .animal; thus,
mirri dhulatya, a male dog; mirri ngummagara, a female dog.
Case. —To form the cases, nouns take additions by means of post-
fixes :
Nominative'—Thunta, kangaroo l . Murli, a boomerang. Kaia, a
yamstick.
Causative—Bullulu kuranyi burralaru, a man an opossum killed.
Thuntallu lanu mara, a kangaroo me scratched.
Genitive—Bulluwu murli, a man's boomerang. Thummagawu kaia,
a woman’s yamstick.
The other cases are omitted to* economise space.
Pronouns.
Pronouns are inflected for number, person, and case, and contain,
two forms of the dual and plural in the first person. The following is
an example in the singular number:
Nominative. Possessive. Objective
{lst Person Ngutthu Ngunnu Lanu
2nd ~ Hinta Ingga Luggunni
3rd ~ Nuanara Ngurrani Larunni
Although there are numerous differences in the vocabulary, the
grammatical rules governing the other parts of speech in this language
are the same as in the Murawarri, and are, therefore, omitted on the
present occasion, for want of space.
Numerals. —One, muggu; two, bulagar; several, wulliwal.


THE, THARUMBA LANGUAGE.
The Tharumba language is spoken on the coast of New South
Wales, between the Shoalhaven River and Ulladulla, reaching inland
to the Dividing Range. This tongue is a dialect of the Thoorga,
spoken to the south of Ulladulla, the grammatical structure of which
was explained by me last year. 1 South of the Thoorga is the Dyirringan
tribe, whose speech I have also dealt with.- 3 The T'hurrawal-speaking
people adjoin the Tharumba on the north.
The initiation ceremonies of the Tharumba and other tribes men-
tioned consist of the Bunan and the Kudsha, which have both been
fully described by me elsewhere. 3 The social organisation of these
tribes, and their intermarrying laws have also been already explained
by me. *
Nouns.
Number and gender are substantially the same as in the Thoorga
language.
Case. —The principal cases are the nominative, causative, instru-
mental, genitive, accusative, dative, and oblative.
Nominative —Yuin, a man. Wanggan, a woman. Mirriga, a dog.
Warrangan, a boomerang. Gaga, a yamstick.
Causative —Mirrigandi gurawara buddhal, a dog an opossum bit.
Wanggandi wurran barilla, a woman a child beat. Gurauri dyirra
thunnan, an opossum leaves eats. Yuindyi warrigulla dhubbagal, a
man a mullet caught.,
Instrumental —This case takes the same suffix as the causative.
Yuindyi wagura bingala, warrangandyi, a man at a crow threw a
boomerang.
Genitive —The proprietor and the property are both declined, but
the suffix to the former differs from that of the latter:
Yuingu warranganyu, a man’s boomerang.
Wanggangu gaganyu, a woman’s yamstick.
I was the first author to report this declension of the name of the
possessor as well as that of the article possessed, among the languages
of the aboriginal tribes of New South Wales, 5 and also in those of
Victoria. 6
1 “ The Thoorga Language,” Queensland Geographical Journal, xvii., pp. 49-61-
Tvith Vocabulary.
2 “ The Dyirringafi Language,” Journ. Roy. Soc., N. S. Wales, xxxvi., pp. 160,
3 “ The Bunan Ceremony of N. S. Wales,” American Anthropologist, ix., pp.
•327-344, plate vi.
4 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxiv., pp. 263, 264.
5 “ The Thurrawal Language,” Journ. Roy. Soc.. N. S. Wales, xxxv., p. 131.
“ The Gundungurra Language,” Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., xl., p. 143.
6 “ The Aboriginal Languages of Victoria,” Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, xxxvi.,
p. 78, 87, and 94.


Every object over which ownership can be exerted is subject to
inflection for number and person:
i Ist Person Warrangandha Boomerang my
Singular 2nd ~ Warranganngu Boomerang thy
( 3rd ~ Warrangannyu Boomerang his
And so on through the dual and plural. If a couple or several article®
be claimed, an infix is inserted between the noun root and the posses-
sive suffix, thus:—Warranganburrandha, boomerangs both mine.
Warranganburragandha, boomerangs several mine.
Dative*—This is the same as the genitive.
Ablative —Thuganda, from a camp. Barnda, from a fire.
The accusative is the same as the nominative.
Adjectives.
Adjectives follow the nouns they qualify, and take similar declen-
sions for number and easel:
Yuin birraga, a man large.
Yuindyi birragandyi wurran baiilla, a large man beat a child.
Yuingu birragangu warranganvu,, a large man’s boomerang, and so
on for the other cases.
There are euphonic modifications of the suffixes in all the cases of
nouns and adjectives, depending upon the termination of the word
declined.
For the comparison of adjectives, and the inflexion of some of them
•as intransitive verbs, see my “ Thoorga, Language.”
Pronouns.
The following are the nominative and possessive pronouns
1 Ngaiga
Thou Indiga
He Dyeliandyulla
We, inch Ngaiawungul
We, excl. Ngaiawungulla
You Indiwu
Mine Ngaiaganguli
Thine Indiganguli
His Dyellungundiwuli
Ours, inch Ngaiawunguli
Ours, excl. Neaiawungulanguli
Yours Indiwuli
They Dyellandyullawurra Theirs Dyellandyawurrawuli
We, inch Ngaiawanyi
We, excl. Ngaiawanyaga
You Indiwunhu
Ours, inch Ngaiawunyunguli
Ours, excl. Ngaiawunyunganguli
Yours Indiwunhunguli
They Dyellandyullawurraga Theirs Dyellandyawurraganguli
The objective pronouns, me, thee, him, etc., are not found separ-
ately, like the nominative and possessive, but consist of pronominal
suffixes to verbs and other parts of speech:
A kangaroo scratched me Burrui garrulingga
A kangaroo scratched thee Burrui garrulunyi
A kangaroo scratched him Burrui garrula
There is a causative form of the nominative pronouns:


Ngaiagandyi, I (did it). Indigandyi, thou (didst it). Other forms
are : Ngaiagamiddyi, myself. Ngaiagabah, I also. Ngaiaga-ndyingundi,
from me. Ngaiagandyina, with me. Yennaira ngurndi ngaiagan, go
away from me. Yennauwulura dhainggu ngaiaganggu, come towards
me.
Interrogatives—Who, wunnungga. Who (did it), wunnunggalla.
Whom belonging to, wunnunggawuli. Who for, w’unnunggalula.
What, minna. What for, or why, minnaua. What is the matter,
minnamun.
Demonstratives —This, near, nyinya. That near you, nyiinya. Dyin,
that. Dyinalibura, that, farther. Dyinginda, that yonder. Dyin-
nadha, that person. Nyindyiwal, this other one. Dyindyi, over here.
Nyidyila, anything this side of the person addressed. Wurridya, some-
thing beyond the person addressed. Nyullun, anything below the
speaker. Dyulliinga, something on a higher level than the speaker.
Ngaiina, over there.
Most of the demonstratives are likewise used as pronouns of the
third person, and are inflected accordingly, as : NyindyiwuiTa, these
two. Nyindyiwurraga, all these.
A native will often indicate the location of a thing by giving its
compass bearing from a tree, waterhole, rock, or other known point.
Verbs.
All that has been said respecting this part of speech in my “Thoorga
Language) 1 ” is substantially applicable to the Tharumba. verbs. The-
following additional particulars, which are common to both dialects,
may now be supplied :
I am quite well
Jummagangarilaga
J ummagangabullaga
I was quite well
I will be quite well Jummaganguringa
Nyamundyaliang, we, dual, exchange or barter.
Warrangan yunullaga thugandha, I have a boomerang at my camp.
Yangawamiigiin yubbunda, I will sing for thee a song.
Waddhana baiuga, it is doubtful whether I will beat.
Wunnungulla gurrugandhullingga, who called me.
Verbs take inflection for the same number as the object noun :
I saw a dog Mirriga thambamulaga
I saw a couple of dogs Mirrigamburra thambamulagul
I saw several dogs Mirrigamburraga thambamulagin
Adverbs.
Yes, ngawe. No, thuggail. To-day, nhauai. Yesterday, bugia.
To-morrow, buradya. There, dyindyiladyi. Here, nyindyi. When
used predicatively, nyindyi and its variants, can be inflected for tense,.
1 Queensland Geographical Journal, vol. xvii., pp. 49-73.


-as well as for number and person, thus : —Nyindyiaga, here am I.
Nyindyiwulaga, here was I. Nyindyiwabulaga, here will I be.
The natives can also say:—Yuin nyindyiwula, a man is here.
Yuin nyindyiwala, a man was here. Yuin nyindyiwuna, a man will
be here. For other examples of present, past, and future forms of
“here,” and “there,” see my “ Thurrawal Language.” 1 The adverbs
“ here,” “ there,” “ yonder,” and their modifications, are also frequently
used as demonstratives, and then take the same declensions as the
nouns they qualify.
Yugunbunyerruga, liow shall I do it?
Wingululla wagura nyin baiilla, which of you (dual) killed the
crow ?
Wingulal murrul, which is first?
Some adverbs admit of inflection for number, person, and tense, and
ought therefore to be included among the verbs, but I will show some
•of them in this place in order to keep all the adverbs together:
Present Where am I
Waddungabaga
Wacldungaluga
Past Where was I'
Future Where will I be Waddunguga
See my “ Thoorga Language ” for other examples of adverbs.
Prepositions.
The examples of prepositions in my “ Thoorga Language,” and their
declension for number and person, are nearly the same in the Tharum-
ba, and will not be further referred to here.
The exclamations, conjunctions, and numerals are likewise almost
identical with the Thoorga. But many of the words in every part of
speech are quite different; some are more or less dissimilar, whilst
others are so nearly alike in both dialects that their meaning can be
recognized at once.
THE WUTTYABULLAK LANGUAGE.
This language is spoken in the county of Borung and surrounding
country, in the western part of Victoria. It is distinguished by having
four numbers!—singular, dual, trial, and plural. 2 The nouns, preposi-
tions, adverbs, etc., in addition to the verbs and pronouns, take in-
flexion for number and person. In all parts of speech subject to
conjugation and inflexion there is a double form of the first person in
the dual, trial, and plural.
Westward of the 145th meridian of longitude, and southward of
the 35th parallel of latitude, all the Victorian tongues have! the same
grammatical structure as the Wuttyabullak, although more or less
diverse in vocabulary. The same typo of speech, with its trial number,
extends onwards into South Australia.
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S.W., vol. xxxv., p. 140.
2 See also my “ Thaguwurru Language.” Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol.
x xxvi., pp. 86-90.


Within the geographical limits indicated, the people are divided
into two phratries, called Gurgity and Gamaty, with their feminine
equivalents, Gurgitygiirk and Gamatygurk. The men of one phratry
marry the women of the other, and the offspring take the phratry of
their mother. For particulars respecting these phratries, and a com-
prehensive list of totems, the reader is referred to an article I con-
tributed to the Anthropological Society 1 , at Washington, U.S.A., in
1898.
Nouns.
Number.-— Nouns have the singular, dual, trial, and plural. Wille,
an opossum. Willebule, a pair of opossums. Willebarakullik, three
opossums. Willebarak, several opossums.
Gender. —Guli, a man. Bumbanggo, a woman. Bupup, a boy.
Wartibibumbanggo, a girl. The sex of animals is denoted by adding
the words mamu and babu, thus : —Gure babu, a female kangaroo.
Gure mamu, a male kangaroo.
Case. —The cases are indicated by inflexions:
The nominative merely names the thing spoken of, and is without
inflexion, as, guli, a man; der, a spear.
The causative, or nominative-agent, represents the subject doing
some act, as, guliu gure dhakkin, a man a kangaroo struck.
Possessive—The owner and the property are both inflected, as in
the Thoorga language: Guliga deruk, a man’s spear.
Accusative—This is the same as the simple nominative.
Instrumental —When an instrument is used in the performance of
any action, it takes the same inflexion as the causative: Deru gure
yungginan, a spear at a kangaroo threw I.
The other cases will be passed over.
Personal property of any description can be declined by possessive
suffixes to the noun, as : My spear, derek. Thy spear, derin. His
spear, deruk, and so on through all the numbers and persons.
Adjectives.
Adjeetives follow the nouns they qualify, and take the same de-
clensions for number and case. They are compared as in the Thoorga
and Murawarri languages.
Pronouns.
There are two forms of the first person of the dual, trial, and
plural—one in which the person or persons addressed are included with
the speaker, and another in which they are exclusive of the speaker : —•
j Ist Person I Wallungek
Singular 2nd ~ Thou Wallungin
I 3rd ~ He Wallunyuk
1 “ The Victorian Aborigines: their Initiation Ceremonies and Divisional
Systems,” American Anthropologist, vol. xi., pp. 325-343, with map of Victoria,
plate v.


[ _ jWe inclusive Wallungul
\ Ist Person (We exclusive Wallungulluk
Dual • ~ You Wallungula
( 3rd ~ They Wallungbulla
f ( We inclusive Wallungurrakullik
llstleison jWe exclusive Wallungandakullik
Trial ... -j y 0 u Wallunguddakullik
3rd ~ They Wallungennakullik
( _ | We inclusive Wallungurrak
Ist Person j We eX( .i usive Wallungandak
Plural < 2 n( j „ You Wallunguddak
( 3rd „ They Wallungennak
The possessive pronouns are: —Wallungangek, mine. Wallungan-
gin, thine. Wallunganguk, his, and so on through all the numoers and
persons. The language Contains many demonstratives and interroga-
tive®, besides objective forms of the pronoun, which are all inflected
for number and person.
Verbs.
#
Verbs have the same numbers and persons, with inclusive and ex-
elusive torms, as tne pronouns.
Indicative Mood—present tense.
I Ist Person I throw Yunggan
Singular 2nd ~ Thou tbrowest Yunggar
( 3rd ~ He throws Yungga
( -p jWe inch throw Yunggangul
J Ist Person |We exc p ti irow Yunggangullung
ual ••• \ 2nd ~ You throw Yungawul
(3rd ~ They throw Yunggabulla
(. , >We inch throw Yunggangukullik
Jlstlerson )We excl. throw Yunggandakullik
rial ...<2 n d ~ You throw Yunggawatkullik
(3rd ~ They throw Yungganatykullik
(.. , „ (We inch throw Yunggangu
Plura ) ISt FerS ° n ' We excL throw Yun gg andak
elusive forms, as the pronouns.
( 1 „ (We inch throw Yunggangu
j Ist Person j We excL throw Yunggandak
ural n 2 n( j You throw Yunggawat
( 3rd ~ They throw Yungganaty
Past tense—l threw, yungginan.
Future tense—l will throw, yungginyan.
Imperative mood—Throw ! yunggak.
Conditional mood—Perhaps I will throw, windyabaga yungginyan..
A substitute for the verb “ to be ” can be exemplified by taking an.
adjective or other suitable word as a predicate:
r Ist Person I am well Mullanda delgaia
Present <j 2nd ~ Thou art well Mullar delgaia
3rd „ He is well Mullu delgaia
Past Ist Person I was well Mullandagaty delgaia
Future Ist Person I will be well Mullandanga delgaia


.£4 THE MURAWARRI AND OTHER AUSTRALIAN LANGUAGES.
There are also reflexive and reciprocal forms of the verb, as in the
Tyattyalla Language 1 , which space will not permit me to detail.
Prepositions.
Several prepositions can be inflected for number and person :
C Ist Person At my back Warmadliak
Singular \ 2nd „ At thy back
| 3rd ? At his back Warmadhanyuk
This inflexion continues through all the persons and numbers.
Adverbs, Interjections, and Conjunctions.
These are similar in character to the identical parts of speech in
the Thoorga and Murawarri tongues, and some of them are capable o
inflexion in the same way. .
It may be as well to state that all the languages of Eastern Victoria,
known as Gippsland, are the same in grammatical structure as the
T'hoorga and Tharumba, but the vocabularies are different. The gram-
mar and vocabulary of two additional aboriginal tongues of Western
Victoria, “ The Yota-yota Language ” and “ The Bureba Language/
were contributed by me to the Royal Society of New South Wales. 2
«A Mystic or Secret Language.
Before concluding this brief article on the speech of the Australian
aborigines, I wish to refer to a secret language, used by the men at the
-ceremonies of initiation, but which is never spoken in the presence of
women, or in the presence of those youths who have not yet entered
upon the prescribed course of instruction. Whilst the novitiates qre
away in the bush in charge of the elders of the tribe, they are taught
.a mystic name for surrounding objects, animals, parts of the human
body, and short phrases of general utility. This language varies in
different communities.
I was the first author to draw attention to this mystic tongue, 3 and
during the past year I contributed to the Royal Society of New South
Wales some short vocabularies of the secret languages of the Kurnu 4
.and other tribes. I consider my discovery of this secret form of speech
•of great linguistic importance, and recommend the reader to peruse the
vocabularies referred to.
In an article on “ Aboriginal Songs at Initiation Ceremonies ” 5
printed by this Society last year, I published several sacred songs in
this secret tongue—the first songs of the kind ever set to music.
1 See my “ Aboriginal Languages of Victoria,’ ’Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, vol.
•xxxvi., pp. 71-106.
2 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. xxxvi., pp. 167-175, and pp. 179-190.
3 Congres Internat. d’Anthrop. et d’Archeol. prehistoriques, Compte Rendu, 12 mc
Session, p. 494.
4 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxvi., pp. 157-160.
5 .Queensland Geographical Journal, vol. xvii., pp. 61-63.


Vocabulary of Murawarri Words.
The following vocabulary contains about, two hundred and seventy
words in the Murawarri language, with their English equivalents.
Every word has been noted down carefully by myself from the lips of
old men and women in the native camps.
The
Family.
A man, Main
Wife, Nubabuga
Husband, Girrinbirra
Old woman, Burraka
Clever man, Kubi
Girl, Gutheraguni
Small boy, Dharda
Elder sister, Mudyabubbur
Elder brother, Mudyabauin
Younger sister, Gidyuguira
Younger brother, Gidyumo-an
Child of either sex, Guthera
Father, Buddhun
Father of family, | Gutheraira
Mother, Kaia
Mother of family, I
Woman, Mogin
Family, Gutheragulgera
The Human Body.
Head, Bumbo
Fat, Thunde
Forehead, Ngulu
Ankle, Burrunggal
Fair nf Vipn.d Blimbo
Skin, Dhundhu
Back, Biila
Armpit, Burran
Elbow, G-ubu
Bone, Mungga
Penis, Dhun
Erection, Thandharaiu
Sexual desire, Nuddhun
Testicles Burnin
Hair of head, Bumbo
Beard, Yerran
Eye, Mil
Nose, Nguru
Neck, Ngundul
Ear, Binna
Mouth, Dha
Lips, Dha
Teeith, Tirra
Belly, Dhugu
Tongue, Thallun
Checks, Ngumun
Shoulder, Bunggul
Arm, Murngu
Semen, Burdin
Vulva., Kinni
Nymphae, Dhillin
Urine, Kiwa
Excrement, Guna
Hand, Murra
Thigh. Thurra
Knee, T'hin-gal
Foot, Dhinna
Blood, Goan
Copulation, Thandhirra
Sun, Dhuri
Moon, Gian
Stars, Mirrin
Masturbation, Guddhu-guddhum-
badhurri
Venereal, Kauaira
Pleiades, Kumbul-Kumbul
Venus, Tharda
Natural Objects.
Small hill, Gumbugun
Open plain, Bulla
Scrubby place, Mirdi
A live coal, Giirniin
Thunder, Yandibu
Lightning, Wung-in
Hill, Bulguru


Natural Objects— Continued.
Rain, Burdu
Fire*, Wi
Rainbow, Gurierrina
Dew, Dhulle
Hut, Gurli
Camp, Ngura
Smoke, Thuran
Fog, Guguma
Frost, Murnda
Hail, Mugari
Water, Ngubba
Food, animal, Widyi
Food, vegetable, Munnu
Day, Gundargunda
Still water, Burdulngubba
Running water, Nguruwrurru
Ground, Me
Night, Yurin
Morning, Burrulla
Grass, Yaui
Mud, Millin
Leaves of trees, Yirral
Eggs, Kubbn
A stone, Buggul
Sand, Kurrawir or dhirri
Darkness, Yurin
Honey, Wean
Pathway, Kai
Heat, Burriu
Shadow of tree, Kuliguli
Cold, Murndamiu
Teiars, Ngulgun
Perspiration, Niindur
Pipe clay, Muggiindhurra
Animals. —Mammals.
Wild dog, Yugi
Dog, Gundul
Opossum, Kugai
Padamelon, Duggun
Bandicoot, Geala
Kangaroo, Gula.
Kangaroo-rat, Boi, or bilba
Native-cat, Burbur
Porcupine, Kuggara
Water-rat, Widdyi-ngubba
Animal s .—B ird s .
Crow, Wagun
Large fish-hawk, Kwiadhuna
Laughing jackass, Kuguburra Peewee, Burandalla
Native companion, Gururu Common magpie, Gulbu
Black duck, Gundungal Curlew, Wilu
Swan, Burrema Crane, Gurraga
Emu, Ngurun Small crane, Budhul
Pelican, Thulaida Galah, Gilla
Eaglehawk, Kurra
Animals.—Fishes.
Cod, Gudu Bony bream, Pirngi
Black bream, Bunngulla Cat-fish, Thunggur
Yellow-belly, Kawira All small fish, Kidyeraguya
Animals. —Reptiles.
Death-adder, Kundage
Black snake, Bumburra
Water snake, Baiara
Ground iguana, Buma
Shingle-back, Birrira
Carpet snake, Kummul
Turtle, Waiamba
Tree iguana, Wurrui
Brown snake, Kan
Shadow of man, Kummunggurra
Red ochre, Gudhi


Blow-fly, Mugun
Louse. Muni
Nit of louse, Thinnil
Jumper-ant, Burbi-burbi
Bulldog-ant, Burrungga
Centipede, Dhuliri
Grasshopper, Bunda-bunda
Any leaning tree, Bundhirri
Any dead tree, Bungih
Any large tree, Bungil
Sandalwood, Buddhar
Whitewood, Burbul
Myall, Maial
Tomahawk, Wugganhurra
Koolamin, Gulgo
Spear shield, Burgu
Boomerang, Murli
Net bag, Munda
Yamstick, Gunnai
Alive, Kurrin
Dead, Bullibu
Large, Tharda
Small, Kittyu
Tall or long, Burndurra
Low or short, Urdagamba
Good, Murrin
Bad, Yuralmurra
Thirsty, Burriu-ngubba
Hungry, Kundulmiu
J©along, Burdhegulindu
Full, Tugu
Quick, Kurdugurdu
Slow, Iba
Blind, Nundun
Deaf, Mugu-binna
Strong, Murrin
Afraid, Kurraiu
Animals. —Invertebrates.
Shrimp, Tliunul
Common ant, Burra
Mosquito, Born
Scorpion, Guna
Mussel, Thungunna
Crayfish, Mamura
Trees and Plants
Beefwod, Mumbo
Coolaba, Buggura
Gum tree, Guraua
Pine, Bailin
Brigalow, Kulbai
Weapons,, Etc.
Hunting club, Muru
Fish net, Kule
Spear, Gulia
Adjectives.
Right., Kaila
Wrong, Yural
Tired, Mullu
Lean, Munggabulgan
Cold, Mundamiu
Warm, Burri-burriu
Angry, Kuridyurriu
Sleepy, Yumburu
Glad, Murrinyindaiu
Sorry, Millanyurungi
Fighting club, Maimuru
Fighting boomerang, Widdyanur-
Blunt, as an edge, Mugu
Sharp, as an edge, Tirraira
Fat, Thunde
Greedy, Wallungundibungunna
Sick, Marriu
Stinking, Bugabuddhibu
Pregnant, T'uguira


Verbs.
Die, Bullindyira
Eat, T'haddhira
Drink, Ngubba-thaddhira
Sleep, Ngunandhira
Stand, Thinnandhira
Sit, Nia
Talk, Yan
Tell, Thurgurra
Walk, Yandhira
Run, Thunggira
Bring, Thanganga
Take, Mara
Point at, Thumburra
Fill, Kaimburra
Stamp on, Nurrunggunya
Make, Thunnulgu
Break, Dhudhia
Strike or beat, Bundhira
Arise, Dhurria
Fall down. Wurra
Observe, Naga
Hear, Binnambi
Sing, Yiinggi
Weep, Wun-gebu
Cook, as food, Mulguyu
Steal, Ngurba
Request, Ngua
Climb, Gula
Conceal, Nunbi
Jump, Burbi
Laugh, Kinda
Send, Dinnamara
Shine, Bullanbi
Swim, Banggi
Spit, Kanggul
Smell, Buddhe
Throw, Kurrawirra
Whistle, Kui
Pretend, Middyin
Kiss, Mudhil
Vomit, Muralli
Dive, Kaindyera
Sting, Bingga
Blow with breath, Bumbira
Scratch. Wirrungurra
Forget, Binnayualgui
Suck, as a, child, Ngummadha-
dhira
Suck a wound, Bindyaui
Search for, Wurrawa
Hit by throwing, Bungirra
Dance, Burbiddyera-Kirrira, li
erally to jump about
Chop (with axe) Burira


f |)o l|oual of
QUEENSLAND.
{Established in honour of J. P. Thomson , Hon.F.R.S.G.S., etc., Founder.
See pages 132-135 of Journal , T 01. A l I.)
CONDITIONS.
This Medal shall be awarded annually, or at such other times as the
Council may approve, to the author of the best original contribution to
Geographical Lrterature, provided it be of sufficient merit, approved and
accepted by the Society (the subject of such contribution to be named by
the Council). Special awards of the Medal may also be made from trme
to time to such persons as have gratuitously rendered eminent servrces to
the Society.
The Council may award a silver or a bronze impression of the Medal
to the Author of a contribution deemed to further the interests of the
Society and add to the value ot Geographical Literature.
The Council shall name from time to time the subject of such con-
tribution for which the Medal is to be awarded, preferential consideration
being given to the Geography of Australasia.
All contributions for which the Medal may be awarded must be
written in the English language, and will become the property of the
Society absolutely.
It shall not be competent for any Officer of the Society or Member
of the Council for the time being to compete lor the Medal.
The administration of the Medal shall be entirely in the hands of
the Council of the Society, who will make such additional rules and
regulations for awarding the Medal as from time to time may seem
necessary.


-.1 t ,
j|oual dieajjrapfptitl of
QUEENSLAND.
Conditions of Competition for The Thomson Foundation
Gold Medal.
The Thomson Foundation Gold Medal of this Society will be
awarded to the Author of the Best Original Paper (provided it be of
sufficient merit) on each of the following subjects:
To be sent in not later than Ist July, 1903.
1- The Commercial Development, Expansion, and Potentialities of
Australia—or, briefly put, The Commerce of Australia.
fsoTE. [This subject belongs to the department of Commercial Geography and should
be treated in such a manner as to indicate very clearly and fully the present
commercial life of the Continent, its development under constitutional Govern-
ment and future possibilities].
To be sent in not later than Ist July, 190^.
2- The Pastoral Industry of Australia, past, present and probable
FUTURE.
To be sent in not later than Ist July, 1905.
3.—The Geographical Distribution of Australian Minerals.
To be sent in not later than Ist July, 1906.
4.— The Agricultural Industry of Australia.
The competition is open to Members and Non-members of the
Society alike, whether residing in Australasia or elsewhere,, but not to
any Officer of the Society or Member of the Council for the time
being. 'No award of the Medal will be made for a mere compilation,
no matter how meritorious.
All competitive communications for the Medal should be written on
one side of the paper only, with marginal space on the left hand side
thereof, and limited to, say, about 32 pages of the “Queensland Geo-
graphical Journal,’ Royal Bvo. Instead of the writer’s name each paper
must be identified by a motto. A sealed envelope with such motto
written outside, and the writer’s name and address inside, should ac-
company each paper.
The successful papers will be printed and published in the Journal
of the Society, fifty reprint copies of each being supplied to the author,
free.
All communications, with illustrations for which the Medal may be
awarded, must be written in the English language, and will become the
property of the Society absolutely.
Papers may be illustrated by such maps, diagrams and pictures as
are considered by the authors thereof to be necessary and useful.
Additional subjects for future papers will be announced from time
to time.
All communications should be addressed to the Hon. Secretary of
the Society, Brisbane
Hugh M. Nelson, President
J. P. Thomson, Hon. Secretary


The Gundungurra Language
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
I


■ •
THE GUNDUNGURRA LANGUAGE.
BY R. H, MATHEWS, L.S.
(Read October 4, 1901.)
Orthography.
The DhaProok and Gun'dungur'ra tribes rerpectively occupied
the country fiom the mouth of the Hawkesbury river to Mount
Victoria, and thence southerly to Berrima and Goulburn, New
South Wales. On the south and southeast they were joined by the
Thurrawal, whose language has the same structure, although differ-
ing in vocabulary.
Besides the verbs and pronouns, many of the nouns, adjectives,
prepositions and adverbs are subject to inflection for number and
person. Similar inflections have, to some extent, been observed in
certain islands of the Pacific Ocean, but have not hitherto been
reported in Australia. I have also discovered two forms of the
dual and plural of the first personal pronoun, a specialty which has
likewise been found in Polynesian and North American dialects.
Traces of a double dual were noticed by Mr. Threlkeld at Lake
Macquarie, New South Wales, and traces of a double plural by Mr.
Tuckfield in the Geelong tribe; but the prevalence of both forms
of the dual and plural in different parts of speech in any Austra-
lian language has, up to the present, escaped observation.
Nineteen letters of the English alphabet are sounded, comprising
fourteen consonants —b, d, g, h, j, k, 1, m, n, p, r, t, w, y—and five
vowels —a, e, i, o, u. Every word is spelled phonetically, the letters
REPRINTED FROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC. VOL. XL., NO. 167.


having the same value as in English, with the following qualifica-
tions :
Unmarked vowels have the usual short sound.
Vowels having the long sound are distinguished by the follow-
ing marks :
a as in fate I as in pie oo as in moon
a as in father 6 as in pole ee as in feel
ou as in loud
It is frequently difficult to distinguish between the short or un-
marked sound of a and that of u. A thick or dull sound of iis
occasionally met with, which closely approaches the short sound of
u or a.
G is hard in every instance.
R has a rough trilled sound, as in hurrah !
Ng at the beginning of a word, as ngee = yes, has a peculiar
sound, which can be got very closely by putting oo before it, as
oong-ee', and articulating it quickly as one syllable. At the end
of a word or syllable it has substantially the sound of ng in our
word sing.
The sound of the Spanish n is frequent, both at the beginning
or end of a syllable. '
Y, followed by a vowel, is attached to several consonants, as in
dya, dyee, tyoo, etc., and is pronounced therewith in one syllable,
the initial sound of the d or other consonant being retained. Y
at the beginning of a word or syllable has its usual consonant
value.
Dh is pronounced nearly as th in “ that ” with a slight sound of
the d preceding it.
Nh has nearly the sound of th in “ that ” with an initial sound
of the n.
The final h is guttural, resembling ch in the German word
“joch.”
T is interchangeable with d, p with b, and g with k in most
words where these letters are employed.
A sound resembling j is frequently given by the natives, which
can be represented by dy or ty; thus, dya or tya has very
nearly the same sound as ja.
In all cases where there is a double consonant, each letter is dis-
tinctly enunciated.


142 MATHEWS —THE GUNDUNGURRA LANGUAGE. [Oct. 4,
W always commences a syllable or word and has its ordinary
consonant sound in all cases.
At the end of a syllable or word, ty is sounded as one letter ;
thus, in beety-bal-lee-mafi, it is disappearing, the syllable beety
can be obtained by commencing to say “beet-ye,” and stopping
short without articulating the final e, but including the sound of
the y in conjunction with the t—the two letters being pronounced
together as one.
Articles.
The equivalents of the English articles, “a” and “the,” do
not occur in this language.
Nouns.
Number. —Nouns have the singular, dual and plural:
(1) Singular .... A man Murrin
Dual ...... A pair of men Murrinboolallee
Plural Several men Murrindyargang
(2) Singular .... A kangaroo Booroo
Dual A pair of kangaroos Booroolallee
Plural Several kangaroos Boorooyargang
It will be observed that the dual and plural suffixes vary slightly
in form, according to the termination of the noun.
Gender. —Mur'rin, a man ; bul'lan, a woman ; boobal, a boy;
mullunga, a girl; goodha, a child of either sex; warrambal, a
young man. Another name for a man is boual; a married man is
kunbeelang ; a married woman is boualillang. Generally the males
of animals are distinguished by the addition of goomban, and the
females by dhoorook. The males of certain animals have a name
which distinguishes them without stating the sex; thus, the male of
wallee, the opossum, is known as jerrawul, while the female is wallee
dhoorook. Goola, the native bear, has burrandang for the male
and goola dhoorook for the female. A few animals have a distinc-
tive word for the female as well as for the male ; thus, the female of
the wallaroo is bawa, and the male goondarwa. Others again have
the suffix koual for the male, and noual for the female. The words
for “ male ” and “ female ” are inflected for number like other
adjectives.
Case. —There are two forms of the nominative, the first naming
the subject at rest; as, Boual ngabooroman, the man sleeps. The


second shows that the subject is doing some act; thus, mirreegangga
wallee burraran, the dog an opossum bit. Mirreegang is a dog in
the first nominative.
The possessive case takes a suffix both to the possessor and that
which is possessed :
Murringoo warrangangoong, a man’s boomerang.
Mirreegangoo goodhawoong, a dog’s puppy.
Bullangoo goodhayarroong, a woman’s children.
Booroongoo dhoombirgoong, a kangaroo’s tail.
Any object over which one can exercise ownership can be con-
jugated by possessive suffixes for number and person :
/ First Person . . .My boomerang Warrangandya
Singular. -I Second Person . . Thy boomerang Warranganyee
l Third Person . . His boomerang Warrangangoo:
W arrangangoong
f pj rs{ p erson f Our boomerang, incl. Warrangangulla
p l \ 1 Our boomerang, excl. Warrangangullang
| Second Person . . Your boomerang Warranganboola
[ Third Person . . Their boomerang Warranganboolangoo
f x _ f Our boomerang, incl. Warranganyinnang
First Person. . ■! , ,
I Our boomerang, excl. Warranganyillung
Plural . i g ecQnd p erson , , Your boomerang
Warranganyoorung
Warrangandyunnung
Third Person . . Their boomerang
The accusative does not differ from the nominative. There are
a few forms of nouns for the dative and oblative, but these cases
are frequently shown by modifications of the verb ; as, I carried to
him, he carried from me. They are also indicated by the pro-
nouns ; as, with me, to me.
Pronouns.
Pronouns are inflected for number, person and case. There are
two forms of the dual and plural in the first person. The following
table shows the nominative and possessive cases :
r I Goolangga Mine Goolanggooya
Singular. ) Thou Goolanjee Thine Goolanyingoo
( He Dhannooladhoo His Dhannoogoolangoo
f We, incl. Goolanga Ours, incl. Goolangalla
j We, excl. Goolangaloong Ours, excl. Goolangaloong
ua • • 'Ye Goolamboo Yours Goolambooloong
They Dhannooboola Theirs Dhannooboolangoo


144 MATHEWS —THE GUNDUNGURRA LANGUAGE. [Oot. 4,
We, incl.
Goolanyan Ours, incl. Goolanyannung
Plural. J We, excl.
Goolanyilla Ours, excl. Goolanyillungoon
Ye
[ They
Goolambanoo Yours Goolanthooroong
Dhannoojimmalang Theirs Goolangandyoolang
These possessives admit of variations to include two or several
articles and in other ways. There are also forms of the pronouns
signifying, with me, with thee, and so on as follows:
First Person With me Goolangngooreea
Singular.
Second Person . . . With thee Goolangooroonyee
Third Person .... With him
Goolangooroong
f First Person j With us ’ incl - Goolangooroongulla
J (. With us, excl. Gaolangooroongullung
j Second Person . . . With ye Goolangoorooloong
Third Person .... With them Goolangooroolangoo
Dual.
_. _ f With us, incl. Goolangooroonunnung
First Person ... \
(. With us, excl. Goolangooroonullungoo
Second Person . . . With ye Goolangooroonooroong
Third Person .... With them Goolangooroodyunnung
Plural. .
There are other modifications of the pronouns to meet different
forms of expression. The demonstratives and interrogatives are
inflected for number and person like the rest.
Adjectives.
Adjectives take the same dual and plural numbers as the nouns
with which they are used :
(1) Barri buggarabang A wallaby, large
Barriwoolallee buggarabangoolallee A couple of wallabies, both large
Barridyargang buggarabangargang Several wallabies, all large
(2) BUllan yeddung
A woman pretty
Bullanboollee yeddungboolallee
Bullandhar yeddungdyargang
A couple of pretty women
Several pretty women
Comparison is effected by saying, This is heavy—that is heavy ;
this is smooth —that is not; this is sharp—that is very sharp.
When used predicatively, as yooroang or yoorwang, he is strong,
an adjective can be conjugated through all the tenses and moods
of an intransitive verb:


Present Tense.
First Person . . .lam strong Yooroangga or Yoorwangga
Singular. / Second Person . Thou art strong Yooroandyee
Third Person . . He is strong Yooroang
f pj rst p erson fWe are strong, incl. Yooroanga
IWe are strong, excl. Yooroangaloong
j Second Person . Ye are strong Yooroangboo
Third Person . . They are strong Yooroangboola
Dual. . .
{First Person I are stron £> ' nc ' - Yooroanyun
IWe are strong, excl. Yooroanyulla
Second Person .Ye are strong Yooroanthoo
Third Person . . They are strong Yooroanjimmalang
Plural.
The past and future tenses are not given, owing to want of space.
Verbs.
Verbs have the singular, dual and plural numbers, the usual per-
sons and tenses, and three principal moods, viz., indicative, im-
perative and conditional. The verb-stem and a contraction of the
pronoun are incorporated, and the word thus formed is used in the
conjugation.
INDICATIVE MOOD.
Present Tense.
Singular.
{First Person... I throw (throw I)
Second Person . Thou thro west
Third Person . .He throws
Dual. .
n f We throw, incl
First Person.. ( ,
l We throw, excl.
Second Person .Ye throw
Third Person . . They throw
Plural
_. „ fWe throw, incl.
First Person
I We throw, excl.
Second Person . Ye throw
Third Person . . They throw
Past Tense.
S First Person. . . I threw (threw I)
Second Person . Thou threwest
Third Person . . He threw
Yerreemangga
Yerreemandyee
Yerreeman
Yerreemang'a
Yerreemangaloong
Yerreemanboo
Yerreemanboola
Yerreemanyan
Y erreemany alia
Yerreemanthoo
Yerreemandyoolung
Yerreering'ga
Yerreerindyee
Yerreering


f r - . „ fWe threw, inch
I First Person. . j ’
gj l \ tWe threw, excl.
j Second Person . Ye threw
I Third Person . . They threw
\ First Person. . { We threw, inch
l We threw, excl.
I Second Person . Ye threw
I Third Person . . They threw
Plural .
Future Tense.
Singular.
First Person . . .1 will throw
Second Person . Thou wilt throw
Third Person . . He will throw
Dual ,
Plural .
f „ f We will throw, incl. Yerreening'a
(. We will throw, excl. Yerreeningaloong
I Second Person . Ye will throw Yerreenimboo
Third Person . . They will throw Yerreenimboola
f x „ f We will throw, inch Yerreeninyan
hirst Person. . \ ’ . .
(. We will throw, excl. Yerreenmyulla
j Second Person . Ye will throw Yerreemunanthoo
Third Person . . They will throw Yerreemunadyoolung
Yerreering'a
Yerreeringaloong
Yerreeringboo
Y erreeringboola
Yerreeooranyan
Y erreeooranyulla
Yerreeooranthoo
Y erreeooradyoolung
Yerreeningga
Yerrenindyee
Yerreenin
IMPERATIVE MOOD.
Singular . . Second Person .... Throw thou Yer'-ree
Dual .... Second Person .... Throw ye Yer'-ree-ou'
Plural. . . Second Person .... Throw ye Yer'-ree-a-nhoor'
CONDITIONAL MOOD.
Perhaps I will throw Yerreeningga booramboonda
If a negative meaning be required, it is effected by means of an
infix, mooga, between the verb-stem and the abbreviated pronoun,
One example in the first person singular in each tense will exhibit
the negative form of the verb :
I am not throwing Yerreemoogamangga
I did not throw Yerreemoogaringga
I will not throw Yerreemooganingga
This negative infix can be applied in the same manner to all the
persons of the three tenses.
There are numerous modifications of the verbal suffixes to con-
vey variations of meaning ; as, “ I threw at him,” “ He threw at


me,” etc., which can be conjugated for number and person. Case
can also be indicated in this way, as already stated in dealing with
the nouns.
Verbs have no passive voice. If a native desires to state that a
fish was swallowed by a pelican, he would say, “ A pelican swal-
lowed a fish.”
Prepositions.
Some prepositions can be used separately, as dhooreegoong, be-
tween ; warroo, around ; willinga, behind, and several others,
thus: Dhooreegoong ngullawoolee, between trees two or between
two trees ; gunbee warroo, the fire around or around the fire.
A prepositional meaning is often obtained by a verb; thus,
instead of having a word for “up ” or “down,” a native will say,
Boomaningga, up I will go ; wooraramuningga, down I will go.
Many of the prepositions admit of conjugation for number and
person, as in the following example :
Singular.
First Person. . . Behind me
Second Person . Behind thee
Third Person . . Behind him
Willingia
Willinganyee
Willingawoong
f pj rst p erson f Behind us, incl. Willingangulla
I 1 Behind us, excl. Willingangullung
j Second Person . Behind ye Willingangawooloong
Third Person . . Behind them Willingangawoolangoo
( _. , „ f Behind us, incl. Willinganyanung
(. Behind us, excl. Wilhnganyanungoo
Second Person . Behind ye Willinganthooroong
Third Person . . Behind them Willingadyanung
Dual .
Plural
Adverbs.
Space will not permit of a list of adverbs any further than to
illustrate how some of them can be conjugated :
First Person . . Where go I Ngoondeeneea
Singular. ) Second Person . Where goest thou Ngoondeeneenee
Third Person . . Where goes he Ngoondeeneeoong
f _ r Where go we, incl. Ngoondeeneenga
l First Person... ] , , ,
I (. Where go we, excl. Ngoondeeneengoolung
Dual • * j Second Person . Where go ye Ngoondeeneewoo
Third Person . . Where go they Ngoondeeneewoola


ijl
148 } MATHEWS —THE GUNDUNGURRA LANGUAGE. [Oct. 4,
First Person ■! Where S° we > inch Ngoondeeneennun
1 Where go we, excl. Ngoondeeneenulla
Plural
* Second Person . Where go ye Ngoondeeneenoo
Third Person . . Where go they Ngoondeeneeyoolung
Adverbial meanings are sometimes conveyed by means of verbs,
as beetyballeeman, he (or it) goes out of sight. Conjunctions
and interjections are few and unimportant.


LANGUAGES OF THE NEW ENGLAND ABORIGINES,
NEW SOUTH WALES.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
ASSOCIE ETRANGER SOC. D’ANTHROP. DE PARIS.




LANGUAGES OF THE NEW ENGLAND ABORIGINES
NEW SOUTH WALES.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
ASSOCIE ETRANGER SOC. D’ANTHROP. DE PARIS.
(Read May 15, 1903.)
Synopsis. —lntroductory—Orthography— Anewan Language
The Banbai Language—A Mystic Language—Anewan Vocabu-
lary.
The native tribes of New South Wales are disappearing rapidly
before the advancing tide of European population, and unless some
Reprintedfrom Proceedings American Philosophical Society. Vol. xlii, No. rjj.


250 MATHEWS—LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES. [May 15,
person qualified for the task shall take up this highly important
subject, the languages and the customs of an interesting primitive
people will be lost to science.
The languages spoken by the native inhabitants of the New
England district of New South Wales are quite different in vocabu-
lary and intonation from those found in any other part of New
South Wales which I have visited. Therefore I consider myself
very fortunate in being the first author to report their grammatical
structure.
In the following pages I shall endeavor to record and preserve
the elements of two aboriginal languages, with a vocabulary of one
of them. All of the materials of the grammars, and also of the
vocabulary, have been collected by me in the camps of the abo-
rigines, and were noted down direct from the mouths of the native
speakers, so that I can become entirely responsible for their
accuracy.
In common with other Australian languages reported by me, the
Anewan and Banbai tongues possess a double form of the first
person of the dual and plural, in every part of speech subject to
inflection, by means of which the person spoken to may be
included or excluded. It may be stated here that I was the
first author to give full details of this peculiarity in the languages
of Australia, 1 although it had been observed to a certain extent in
some of the islands of the Pacific Ocean, and among the Amarinds
of North America. These two languages likewise contain a dual
and plural number in all parts of speech.
It is hoped that these efforts of mine may prove of some value,
by enabling philologists to compare the native tongues of Aus-
tralian tribes, not only among themselves, but with other languages
in the islands of Polynesia, Melanesia, and various parts of the
Pacific Ocean, as well as with the speech of other primitive tribes
in different parts of the world.
The space at my disposal in the Proceedings of this Society
render it necessary Jo describe only the leading elements of the
languages dealt with.
Orthography.
The system of orthoepy adopted is that which is recommended
by the Royal Geographical Society of England, but a few addi-
i “The Gundungurra Language,” Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc., Vol. xl, p. 14°-


1903.] MATHEWS —LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES. 251
tional forms of spelling have been incorporated, to meet the
requirements of the i\ustralian pronunciation, as follows :
As far as possible, vowels are unmarked, but in some instances
the long sound of a, e and u are indicated thus, a, e, u. In a few
cases the short sound of u has been marked thus, u.
Gis hard in all cases. R has a rough, trilled sound, as in the
English word “hurrah!” W always commences a syllable or
word.
Ng at the beginning of a word or syllable has a peculiar nasal
sound. At the end of a syllable or word it has substantially the
sound of ng in the English word “ sing.”
The sound of the Spanish n is frequent; at the beginning of a
word or syllable I have given it as ny, but when terminating a word
the Spanish nis used. Y at the beginning of a word has its ordi-
nary consonant value.
Dh is pronounced nearly as ih in the English word “that,” with
a slight sound of d preceding it. Nh has also nearly the sound of
th in “ that,” but with a slight initial sound of the n.
TTs interchangeable with d;p with b; and g with k.
Ty and dy at the commencement of a word or syllable have
nearly the sound of the English j, or the (Spanish ch ; thus, dya or
tya closely resemble ja or cha. At the end of a word or syllable ty
is sounded as one letter, closely approaching the tch in the English
word “catch,” but omitting the final hissing sound.
In all cases where there is a double consonant, each letter is
enunciated.
The Anewan Language.
The remnants of the Anewan tribe are scattered over the southern
half of what is known as the “table-land” of New England, in-
cluding Macdonald river, Walcha, Uralla, Bendemeer, Armidale,
Hillgrove and other places.
ARTICLES.
The indefinite article, a , is not represented, but the demonstra-
tive pronouns, in their numerous modifications, supply the place of
the definite article, as “this man,” “that woman,” “ yonder hill.”
The English adverb, here , in its several native forms, is frequently
treated as a demonstrative, and is then also a substitute for the
definite article.


NOUNS.
Nouns have number, gender and case.
'i ,
Accusative: This is the same as the nominative.
Dative : Rullagu, to a camp.
252 MATHEWS—-LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES. [May 15,
Number.— There are three numbers —singular, dual and plural.
Kana, a crow. Kanaburala, a pair of crows. Kananyeta, several
or many crows.
Gender. —Gender in the human family is denoted by different
words. Tana, a man. Kettyura, a woman. Romunna, a boy.
Kemika or nganda, a girl. Kwanga, a child of either sex.
Among animals gender is distinguished by using words signifying
“male” and “female.” Pwela, an opossum. Pwela rula, a male
opossum. Pwela imbarra, female opossum.
Case. —The principal cases are the nominative, causative, instru-
mental, possessive, accusative, dative and ablative.
Nominative: This case simply names the subject, as imboanda, a
kangaroo; naia, a yamstick, without any change in the noun.
Causative: When a transitive verb is used the noun takes a
suffix, as Tananda imboanda nyuna, a man a kangaroo is beating.
Kettyuranda pwela nyuna, a woman an opossum is beating.
Instrumental: This takes the same suffix as the causative. Ketty-
uranda tana nyuna naianda, a woman a man is beating with a yam-
stick. Tananda imboanda nyumbina arkananda, a man a kangaroo
hit with a boomerang.
Possessive: Tanango arkana, a man’s boomerang. Kettyurango
naia, a woman’s yamstick.
Ablative: Rullunge, from a camp.
It should be mentioned that in all the expressions illustrating the
several cases, both in the Anewan and Banbai languages, the demon-
strative pronouns are omitted, for the two-fold purpose of saving
space and of avoiding confusion by introducing any more words
than are really necessary to show the declension. For example,
where I have given “man kangaroo hit with boomerang”
would be fully expressed by the native thus: “Man this-on-my-
right kangaroo yonder-in-front boomerang struck-with,” or as the
subject might require.
These remarks apply to every example of aboriginal sentences
throughout both the languages dealt with in this article.


1903.] MATHEWS —LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES. 253
ADJECTIVES.
Adjectives succeed the nouns they qualify, and take the same
inflections for number and case.
Tana birkungirra, a man large
Tanango birkungirrango arkana, a large man’s boomerang.
Tananda birkungirranda kwanga nyuna, a large man is beating a
child.
It is not necessary to give examples of the other cases.
Comparison of adjectives is effected by two positive statements,
such as, This is good—that is bad; runyerra indya—irrunga indy-
unda.
PRONOUNS.
Pronouns have three numbers, with inclusive and exclusive forms
in the first person of the dual and plural. The following table
exhibits the nominative pronouns:
l Ist Person I Yukka
Singular .... J2d “ Thou Indyuk
3d “ He Gamba
Indyukka
Gambaua
Dual. . . .
r •
1st Person..
t We, inch,
1 We, excl.,
Teka
( Tala
2d “ . .
You
Twukka
3d “ . .
They
Takana
Plural . ..
r
i st Person..
( We, inch,
1 We, excl.,
Nyukka
Nala
2d “ ..
You
Audilia
3d “ •••
They
Nalena
Singular.
1st Person Mine Yinga Me Enna
2d “ Thine Nyunga Thee Nunya
3d “ His Onning Him Onna
The possessive and objective pronouns are as under
( Ours, inc., Tenyunga
Ist Person.. .•< „ , t. , .
i Ours, excl., lambiga
2d “ ... Yours Twanyung
Us, inch, Tenya
Us, excl., Tuanya
You
3d “ ... Theirs Lambiga
Them Walanya
„ ( Ours, incl.. Nyambiga Us. incl., Nanyabura
Ist Person... \ „ . , T ~ T
) Ours, excl., Nyanyambiga Us, excl., Nanyumbmga
2 d “ ... 'Yours Nuka You Audumbinga
“ ... Theirs Nambiga Them Nanya


254 MATHEWS —LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES. [May 15,
There are forms of the pronouns meaning “away from me,”
“towards me,” etc., which must be passed over for want of space.
Interrogatives: Who, anunga. What, nyanga. What for,
nyangabura.
Demonstratives: This, indya. That, indyunda. The demon-
stratives are numerous, and of various forms, frequently taking the
place of pronouns of the third person in the singular, dual and
plural. This accounts for the great diversity of the third personal
pronouns, which have little or no etymological connection with
the others.
The demonstratives in this language, by the combination of simple
root-words, can be made to indicate position, direction, distance,
movement, possession, number, person and size. If space permit-
ted, I could show tables of these demonstratives which would be
most important for comparative purposes. This applies also to the
Banbai demonstratives.
VERBS.
Verbs have the singular, dual and plural numbers, with the usual
tenses and moods. There is a form of the verb for each tense,
which remains constant through all the persons and numbers of
that tense. Any person and number can be expressed by using the
required pronoun from the table given in the foregoing page.
Following is a short conjugation of the verb Nyuka, “to beat
or strike.”
Indicative Mood—Present Tense.
• r xst Person I beat
Singular )2d “ Thou beatest
/ 3d. “ He beats
and so on through the dual and plural.
Past Tense.
Yukka nyuna
Indyukka nyuna
Gambaua nyuna
Singular Ist Person I beat Yukka nyumbina
Future Tense.
Singular Ist Person I will beat Yukka nyumarala
Imperative Mood.
Beat, nyumera
Beat not, yinna nyumera


Conditional Mood.
Perhaps I will beat
Yukka neta nyumarala
Reflexive.
Present. .1 beat myself
Past .... I beat myself
Future . .1 will beat myself
Yukka nyugatina
Yukka nyugatimbina
Yukka nyugatila
Reciprocal.
Dual... .We, exclusive, are beating each other, Tala nyutaka
Plural.. .We, exclusive, are beating each other, Nala nyutaka
ADVERBS.
The following are a few of the more commonly used adverbs:
Yes, ngeh. No, apala. Today, lunna. Tomorrow, yun. Soon,
lanabura. By and bye, loka. Long ago, toangga. Now, ilan.
Recently, irrandya.
How, thanggana. Where, renya. How many, thambula. Here,
awa. There, gamba. The two last are frequently used as demon-
stratives. 1
PREPOSITIONS.
In the rear, yanda. In front, gattanda. Around, lunggai. In
the middle, umunda. Up, dapai. Down, irrakirran. Between,
ilkongga.
CONJUNCTIONS.
The general absence of conjunctions is attributable to the nu-
merous modifications of the different parts of speech, by means of
which sentences are brought together without the help of connect-
ing words.
INTERJECTIONS AND EXCLAMATIONS.
These parts of speech are not numerous.
NUMERALS.
One, nyoanda. Two, tuala.
The Banbai Language.
The aboriginal tribes speaking this language adjoin the Anewan
community on the north, and are located at Guyra, Ben-Lomond,
Wollomombi and Kookarabooka.


256 MATHEWS— LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES. [May 15,
NOUNS.
Number. There is no special declension for number, but the
noun is followed by words signifying two or several.
Gingger bulabulari, kangaroos two.
Gingger girrawa, kangaroos several.
Gender. —Man, thaimburra. Woman, burranyen. Boy, bo
yerra. Girl, dillanggan. The sex of animals is denoted by words
meaning “male” and “female” respectively, placed after the
creature’s name, as, Margan dyillawara, a buck wallaby. Margan
kandura, a doe wallaby. Among birds, boro means a cock, and
ngapara, a hen. _
Case. There are the nominative, causative, instrumental, pos-
sessive, accusative, dative and ablative cases.
Nominative: Tua, a boomerang. Kunnai, a yamstick. Wan-
dyi, a dog. ,
Causative : Ginggeru nganya bittang, a kangaroo me scratche .
Burranyendu nganya buang, a woman me struck..
Instrumental: Thaimburradu nganya bindaimang tuandu, a
man at me threw a boomerang. # .
Possessive: Burranyengu kunnai, a woman’s yamstick. Ihaim-
burrangu tua, a man’s boomerang.
In the Gundungurra, and in several other aboriginal languages
of New South Wales and Victoria, the article possessed takes a
suffix, as well as the possessor. For example, warrangan means a
boomerang, and murrin a man, but “ a man’s boomerang ” must be
expressed, Murrin-** Until reported by me,
this peculiarity of a double suffix in the genitive case of Australian
nouns had not been observed by any previous author.
Dative : Nguralami, to a camp.
Ablative: Nguranga, from a camp..
Accusative: This is the same as the nominative.
adjectives.
Adjectives take the same inflections as the nouns which they
qualify.
Thaimburra burwai, a man large.
Thaimburradu burwaidu nganya buang, a man large me struck.
Thaimburrangu burwaigu tua, a large man’s boomerang,
i «The Gundungurra Language,” Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc., Vol. xl, p. 143-


1903.] MATHEWS —LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES. 257
Comparison : Nyam dhurrui—nyam yonggo; this is good—that
is bad. Nyam dhurruiunba, this is very good.
PRONOUNS.
Pronouns have the nominative, possessive and objective cases, as
in the subjoined tables. There are two forms in the first person of
the dual and plural—one in which the person or persons addressed
are included with the speaker, and another in which they are ex-
clusive of the speaker. The following is a list of the pronouns in
the nominative case:
( Ist Person I
Singular J2d “ Thou
(3d “ He
Plural
' ( We, inch,
.st Person... j We exc]>
2d “ ... You
3d “ ... They
. ( We, inch,
J ( We, excl.,
2d “ ... You
3d “ ... They
The possessive and
in the following table
objective forms of the pronouns are exhibited
Singular.
Ist Person Mine Ngunyo
2d “ Thine Nginnu
3d “ His Gurragunga
Dual.
„ ( Ours, inch, Ngullimba
Ist Person .. ir, , XT ... ,
| Ours, excl., Ngullimbagai
2d “ ... Yours Bullamba
3d “ ... Theirs Bullambagai
Plural.
Nyeullagai
Nguddyilindya
Yangbendu
( Ours, inch, Ngeumba
Ist erson .. | Q exc ]Ngeumbagai
2d “ ... Yours Nguddyimba
Me Nganya
Thee Ngena
Him Nyam
Us, incl., Ngullinya
Us, excl., Ngullinyagai
You Bulanya
Them Bulanyagai
Us, incl., Ngeanya
Us, excl., Ngeanyagai
You Nguddyinnirtya
Them Ittyaramben
3d “ ... Theirs Ittyaran


There are also forms meaning “ with me,” nganyumbulla. Ngaia,
as in the table, is used with an intransitive verb, as, ngaia nganggi,
I sit; but when a transitive verb is used, the pronoun is changed to
ngatya, as, Ngatya bonggi, I beat. These rules apply to the other
persons and numbers. Other forms of the pronouns are omitted
for want of space.
Interrogative pronouns : Who, wuttanya. Whom belonging to,
wuttanyannin. What, minya. How many, minya-minya.
Demonstrative pronouns: This, nyam. That, mumum. These
are frequently used as adverbs, and they mean “here” and
“ there.”
VERBS.
The rules for the conjugation of verbs are similar to those of the
Anewan language. An example in the singular number of each
tense will be sufficient:
Indicative Mood —Present Tense.
( xst Person I beat
Singular .... 32d “ Thou beatest
/3d “ He beats
Past Tense.
Singular Ist Person 1 beat
Future Tense
Ngatya bonggi
Nginda bonggi
Ngurrung bonggi
Ngatya boang
Singular Ist Person T will beat Ngatya boanggo
The imperative, conditional, reflexive and reciprocal forms of
the verb will be passed over for want of space.
ADVERBS.
Yes, nge. No, wuna. Today or now, gillu. Tomorrow, gur-
lau. Soon, gurubilli! By and bye, kanga. Long ago, dhullumba.
Yesterday, nyukkumba. Certainly, yare. How, dyirrung. Per
haps dyirraugam. Where, dyota. How many, minya-minya.
Here, nyam. There, mundyaba. Yonder, mungga-munggara.
Mareda, far away. Close to speaker, tulbaia.
The adverbs “ here ” and “ there ” are often used as demonstra-
tive pronouns, and have the same meaning as “ this and “ that.”


1903.] MATHEWS —LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES. 259
Prepositions.
In front, munggara. In rear, wallungga. Between, pimita.
On the other side, kawatadyula. On this side, ilamgidda. Up,
kaba. Down, warri. Around, kokari.
Conjunctions and interjections are omitted.
NUMERALS,
One, kurrukun. Two, bulari.
A Mystic or Secret Language.
Before concluding this short article on the speech of the Austra-
lian aborigines, I wish to refer to a secret language, used by the
men at the ceremonies of initiation, but which is never spoken in
the presence of women, or in the presence of those youths who
have not yet entered upon the prescribed course of initiation.
Whilst the novitiates are away in the bush in charge of the elders
of the tribe, they are taught a mystic name for surrounding objects
of every-day life, for animals, for parts of the human body, and
short sentences of general utility. This language is different in
different tribes.
I was the first author to draw attention to this mystic tongue, 1
and during the past year I contributed to the Royal Society of New
South Wales some vocabularies of the secret languages of the
Kurnu 2 and other Australian tribes. I consider my discovery of
this secret' form of speech is of great linguistic importance, and
invite my readers to peruse the vocabularies referred to.
In connection with this subject it maybe mentioned that in 1901
I contributed an article to the Royal Geographical Society of
Queensland, on some ‘‘Aboriginal Songs at Initiation Ceremo-
nies,” 8 in which I published several sacred chants in the secret
tongue, which are the first songs of the kind ever set to music.
Vocabulary of Anewan Words.
The following vocabulary, containing about 210 of the most im-
portant words in general use by the Anewan tribes, has been pre-
pared by me from notes taken in the camps of the aborigines.
1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., London, Vol. xxv, p. 310.
2 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxvi, pp. 157-160.
3 Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. xvii, pp. 61-63-


Every word was carefully written down by myself from the mouths
of the natives.
In a communication to the Royal Society of Victoria in the year
1896/ I gave a comprehensive description of the initiation cere-
monies of the Anewan, Banbai and other tribes. Again in 1897,
I contributed a paper to the Royal Society of New South Wales, 2
in which I described the Anewan laws of marriage and descent,
with lists of their totems. On account of the two articles referred
to, it has not now been thought necessary to repeat the subjects
therein dealt with.
English.
Anewan.
Man tana
Boy runui
rumunna
Elder brother irkomba
Younger bro-
ther ilpaminda
Father peta
Woman kettyura
Girl kemika
Elder sister pauana
Younger sister paua
Mother irrapella
Child of either
sex kwanga
The Human Body.
Head kwulla
Forehead tui
Hair of head rella
Beard nutyi
nutyina
Eye ila
Nose nyanba
Jaw dhanda
Ear nakuna
English.
Anew an.
Teeth
yella
Tongue
tunda
Navel
dyikanga
Back
twila
Arm
kyunda
Shoulder
irringala
Elbow
indina
Hand
nyella
Calf of leg
yula
Thigh
illanba
Knee
gwunba
Foot
nyalla
Heel
nungan
Blood
gwianba
Woman’s
breasts
ipinda
Fat
pyenna
Skin
twunda
Penis
duna
Testicles
ilwundandha
Semen
bungan
Copulation
bungadala
Masturbation
bungalulamun
Tribes,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, Vol
Tribes,” Journ.
Roy. Soc. iV.|5.J Wales,
1 “ The Burbung of the New England Tribes,’
ix, N. S., pp. 120-136.
2 “ The Totemic Divisions of Australian Tribes,’
Vol. xxxi, pp. 168-170.


English. Anewan.
Venereal tharpunda
Anus biilla
Excrement ngunba
Urine itirra
Natural Surroundings.
Sun . nura
Moon ternda
Stars ikina
Sky rtinbinna
Thunder lamutika
Lightning kimmitta
Rain yunggara
Fog ngatta
Snow ikana
Frost lala
Hail arrepanna
Water ukunda
The ground kyuna
Stones rola
Sand raikana
Darkness illona
Coldness inganna
Fire inba
Smoke rutta
Night lonna
Food (flesh) kara
Food (vegeta-
ble) kyaia
Honey irrota
Hill kuta
Watercourse retta
Any tree dulla
Leaves of trees indora
Path kurra
Shadow tonba
Summer
Winter
ilkaiwa
tyerwanba
English. Anewan
Rainbow rumira
Large flat rock lara
Camp rulla
Mammals.
Kangaroo imboanda
Porcupine iwutta
Wild-dog irritanga
Opossum pwela
Flying-fox ramana
Kangaroo-rat bara
Native-bear lauanha
Wallaroo lumulla
Bandicoot imbunga
Ring-tail opos-
sum aunda
Native-cat kyura
Wallaby kyatta
Tiger-pat yara
Bat lyunganda
Birds.
Birds collec-
tively pillang
Emp. runda
Eagle-hawk lambara
Black-duck rungara
Pelican wuyara
Laughing jack-
ass rokala
Crow kana
\
Swan dyuwula
Native-compan-
ion rualgunda
White cockatoo erpatha
Black cockatoo wellara
Common mag-
pie
Plover
imbota
tharringga


262 MATHEWS —LANGUAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES. [May 15,
English. Anewan.
Curlew rilwinnu
Brown-hawk owara
Parrokeet imbanga
Mopoke urkung
Perch
Jewfish
Codfish
Sprat
Fishes.
indanga
lyunda
guyu, or ruta
birran
indhurra
Reptiles.
Black iguana rutyala
Water iguana nhawala
Ground iguana tyunda
Spotted iguana laipara
Jew-lizard nura
Snakes collec-
tively yenda
Death-adder minda
Rock-lizard roppung
Turtle yiwang
Stinking-turtle werra
Big frog imbottonga
Carpet-snake imbiala
Sleepy lizard pvvoggana
Invertebrates.
Bee ronnang
Locust warra
Centipede engara
Louse irrakan
irrakanba
Nits of lice minna
House-fly rulunga
Spider alman
Mosquito irwala
English. Anewan.
Bulldog ant
(red) thanda
Bulldog ant
(black) oppunga
Scorpion imbunda
Crab thambanna
Trees and Plants.
Mountain ash o-inba
Kurrajong nunggutta
Ironbark girranba
Stringy bark indwarra
Wattle luna
Grass-tree dunburra
Peppermint newurra
Apple-tree tunba
Gum-tree orrulla
Scrub-gum-tree bikkara
Pine wungulla
White box yina
Reeds moanda
Forest oak rewilla
Cherry-tree poara
Jeebung lwainda
Weapons, etc.
War spear kyenba
Hunting spear anbelang
Jagged spear mumberin
SpeaLshield induta
Club shield bekang
Club raipella
Spear thrower womur
Boomerang arkana
Tomahawk mukung
Fighting-hook lenyang
Nulla-nulla rularokara
Koolamin tilla
Net bag loia


English. Anewan.
Yamstick naia
Stone knife imbonda
Adjectives.
Large
Small
Good
Bad
birkingirra
latherana
ronyerra
irrunga
imbyura
Hungry
Thirsty
Quick
ambia
ngunna
Slow
numbadia
Afraid
Angry
Greedy
no-aran
anagana
myuna
Verbs.
meka
Drink
Sit
imbekka
Speak
oidekka
English.
Walk
A newan.
nadiga
nuppanati
wammin
unumbia
peka
Break
Give
Sing
Weep
Steal
Bite
Catch
Climb
Hear
Laugh
Scratch
See
twaka
nomekka
irruttela
anamarai
irrukka
nugguna
indeka
Dance
Swim
Stand
Throw
Pretend ,
Swallow
nirmatin
aikunna
thekinna
imbwiana
ragya
imbia
twandyingan
pwika




BULLETINS
ET MfiMOIRES
DE LA
SOCIETE D’ANTHROPOLOGIE
15, Rue de l’Ecole-de-Medecine, 15




Extrait des Bulletins et de la soci&£ d’Anthropologie de Paris
LE LANGAGE WAILWAN
Par M. R. 11. Mathews. L. S.
Traduit par M. Oscar Schmidt.
be langage Wailwan , l’un des idiomes des naturels de la Nouvelle-
Galles du Sud, est parle sur les deux rives de la riviere Barwon depuis
Walgett et, en la descendant, jusqu’k Brewarrina; il s’etend en remon-
tant les rivieres Castlereagh, Macquarie et Mara a environ 70 milles vers
le Sud, ou il rencontre d’autres idiomes : le Wiradyuri et le Wongaibon. A
l’Est du Wailwan on parle le Kamilaroi et au Nord, le Yualeai.
Nous nous occuperons d’abord des differentes parties du discours
demontrant les d4clinaisons des substantifs et des adjectifs les modi-
fications des pronoms la conjugaison des verbes, puis de quelques listes
sommaires d’adverbes et de prepositions. Nous ferons suivre ce travail
d’un vocabulaire de quelques-uns des mots les plus importants du langage
usuel. Get expose n’a pas la prevention d’en donner une grammaire com-
plete, mais seulement un apergu de sa structure grammaticale.
Nous esperons qu’il intdressera les philologues en leur permettant de
comparer les difterentes langues des naturels d’Australie avec celles
d’autres peuplades primitives.
ORTHOGRAPHE.
Oix-huit lettres de l’alphabet anglais nous ont servi, comprenant treize
consonnes : b, d, g, h, k, l, m, n, p, r, t, w, y, et cinq voyelles : a, e, i, o, u.
Le d’orthoepie que nous avons adopts est celui qui a ele
par la circulaire de la Soci£t6 Royale de Gdographie, de
°ndres, sauf les modifications suivantes :
Autant que possible, nous avons laiss6 les voyelles sans signe special,
roais dans quelques cas le son prolonge de a, e et u a dte indiqu6 corame


suit : a, e, u. Dans quelques cas les sons brefs de u et o ont ete notes
ainsi : u, 0. ,
Le G est toujours dur et le W n’a ete employe qu’au commencemen
d’une syllabe ou d’un mot.
N g commengant un mot ou une syllabe a un son nasal particulier; a
la fin du mot il prend le son de ng, dans le mot anglais « sing. »
Le son de l’n espagnol est assez frequent; au commencement d’un mot
ou d’une syllabe je l’ai exprime par ny, tandis qu’& la fin du mot, c’est la
lettre espagnole qui a servi.
Y au commencement du mot ou de la syllabe conserve son son habituel.
Dh ressemble beaucoup, comme prononciation, au th anglais dans le
mot (( that, » avec une nuance de d pour commencer. Nk se rap-
proche egalement du th, dans le mot « that », mais en y ajoutant un son
initial d’/i.
Le T se confond avec le d; le p avec b et g avec k dans la plupart des
mots ou on se sert de ces lettres.
Ty et dy au commencement d’un mot ou d’une syllabe se prononcent a
peu pres comme I’y anglais ou comme ch\ ainsi ; dya ou tya ressemblent
beaucoup a ja ou cha.
A la fin du mot ou de la syllabe ty ou dy sont prononces comme tch,
dans les mots anglais : « pitch », « catch », mais en omettant leur son
sifflant final.
SUBSTANTIFS.
Les substanlifs sont soumis aux variations de nombre et de genre et a
la d^clinaison.
Nombre. Geux-ci sont de trois degres : le singulier, le double et le mul-
tiple. Exemple : Mulyan, un epervier, mulyangali, une paire d’eperviers,
mulyangalga, plusieurs eperviers. Quelques substanlifs ont une forme spe-
cial de pluriel qui leur est particulidre comme ; iviringamboi , plusieurs
femmes.
Genre. Pour les humains, celui-ci est exprime par diflterents mots, tels
que ; thur, un homme; wiringa, une femme; warm, enfant d’un des deux
sexes.
Pour les animaux, le genre est indique par l’addition d’un mot signi-
fiant « male » et « femelle », comme : Kuragai mundava, un opossum
male; Kuragai gunal, un opossum femelle. Baba et gunni, les termes
usuels de « p6re » et « m£re » sont egalement employes dans le rndme but,
surtout pour les oiseaux.
D^CLINAISONS
Les subst-antifs sont d6clin6s par des suffixes dont les principaux
expriment le nominatif, le causatif, [’instrumental, le l’accusatif>
le datif et l’ablatif.


Le nominatif est la racine du substantif comme : thur wingana « l’homme
est assis » et cette racine n’a pas de declinaison.
Le causatif le motif d’un acte exprime par un verbe transi-
toire et specific par un suffixe, tel que : Thurumurrawi qume « un homme
un kangourou a frappe». Mirrigu kuragai kutthe, «un chien un opossum
mordu ».
Genitif. Thuranggu bier, « le boumerang d’un homme »; Wiringanggu
kuni , « le baton (yamstick) d’une femme ».
Une particularity du genitif que Ton retrouve dans le Wailwan et dans
beaucoup de dialectes australiens, ainsi que dans plusieurs iles de la
Melanesie et ailleurs, consiste dans l’addition d’un suffixe possessif & un
grand nombre de substantifs dont nous donnons les exemples suivants :
( l re personne : Mon Boumerang : (boumerangde moi) Bierdhi.
Singulier ]2 e Ton Biernu.
3 e Son Bierlugu.
Lorsqu’il est question de deux ou de plusieurs objets
Biergalidhi: Boumerangs deux a moi.
Biergalgadhi : plusieurs a moi, etc.
Instrumental. Lorsque c’est un instrument ou une arme qui repre-
sented le but 61oign6 du verbe il prend le rrl£me suffixe que dans le cau-
satif, exemple : Thuru waru bume bieru, « un homme un corbeau frappa
avec un boumerang ».
Datif. Le datif et le genitif se ressemblent, exemple : Nguranggu, « a
un camp ( ngura ) ».
Ablatif. Ngurandyiy « d’un camp ». L’accusatif est le m£me que le
nominatif.
Dans toutes les mentionnees ci-dessus, la forme du suffixe
varie gen6ralement avec la terminaison du substantif. Elies sont cepen-
dantsujettes a certaines regies euphoniques consistant a relier le suffixe
avec les diverses terminaisons de maniere a en assurer une pronunciation
facile et agr£able.
ADJECTIFS.
Les adjeclifs sont places apres les substantifs qu’ils qualifient et sont
d£clin£s de la m6me fagon : Thur bitthe , « un homme grand »; Thuru
betthegu murrawigume, « un homme grand frappaun kangourou »; Thurgu
bitthegu bier , « le boumerang d’un grand homme ».
Lorsque la derniere lettre du substantif a fait subir une modification
e uphonique au suffixe, comme nous l’avons indiqu£ plus baut, le causa-
tif et le genitif se ressemblent quelquefois comme dans les deux derniers
temples. Dans ce cas, toute ambigu'ite est par le sens du teXte.


La comparaison se fait par assertions positives, comme : Nginya yedda,
nginya wurrai , « ceci est bon, ceci est mauvais ».
Si un adjectif est employe comme predicat, il peut, en y ajoutant
les suffixes necessaires, 6tre converti en verbe, et il suit alors toutes les
formes de conjugaison de celui-ci. Exemple : Yeddadhu, je suis bon (bon
moi); Yeddagedhu, j’etais bon; Yeddagalagadhu , je serai bon et ainsi de
suite pour toutes les personnes, les nombres et les temps.
PRONOMS
Les pronoms sont personnels et ont le nombre et le cas, mais n ont pas
de genre. II y a deux pronoms pour le singulier, pour la dualite et pour
le pluriel; on se sert de l’un des deux lorsque la personne k laquelle on
parle est comprise dans Taction et de l’autre lorsqu’elle en est excluse.
Yoici une liste des pronoms nominatifs, possessifs et objectifs :
Singulier.
ire pers.: je Ngadhu mon Ngaddhi moi Dhi
ge _ : tu Ngindu ton Nginya toi Nu
3e ; ii Ngillu son Ngigula lui Lugu
Dualite,
( nous,incl. Ngullu nos, incl. Ngulligi . a nous, incl. Ligi
D® pers. | excl .Ngullina e,*.c\.Ngullingina excl. Ligina
2® : vous Ngindiivulu vos Nginyanula a vous Nula
30 ; ils Ngillibula leurs Ngigulagu eux Lugula
Pluriel
( nous, incl. Ngeane nos,incl. Ngeanigi a nous, incl. Ngenaga
i ro pers. | __ exel. Ngeaninna excl .Ngeanigina exci. Ngenagtna
2® : vous Ngindugal vos Nginyuga k vous Nugal
3® i ils Ngillngula leurs Nguggagala eux Lugugal
Les formules compactes des pronoms ci-dessus sont surtout employees
comme a une interrogation. Exemple : Qui estassis lk-bas ? peut
provoquer la reponse : « Ngulligina ; et a la question : Qui est-ce? on peut
r6pondre : « Ngeanigina ». Dans le langage courant, cependant, les indi-
genes se servent plutot des contractions indiquees dans notre paragraphe
des « Verbes ».
II existe egalement des formules de pronoms objectifs signifiant « vers
moi », « de moi », « avec moi », etc.
Pronoms interrogatifs. Qui, ngandi? Qui (l’a fait), nganduwa? Pour
qui, ngangu? Quoi, minyang? Pourquoi, minyangu ?
Demonstratifs. Geci, nginya. Gela, ngunna. Ceux-ci sont mis les
substantifs et sont d£clin6s dans leurs nombres doubles et multiples.


Des mots distincts sont employes pour indiquer la position relative de
l’objet de la personne qui parle, tandis que d’aulres specifient cette posi-
tion vis-&-vis de la personne a laquelle on s’adresse.
Les pronoms de la troisieme personne servent aussi frequemment de
demonstratifs; de la, le tres grand nombre et l’irregularite de ces pronoms
dans le langage australien.
Les pronoms demonstratifs acquierent egalement souvent le sens de
l’article d£fini, comme par exemple : Kuragai nginya qui peut signifier
soit « cet opossum » ou « l’opossum » selon le texte. Les adverbes « ici »
et « la » sont identiques a « ceci » et « cela » et ont ainsi,
parfois, le m6me sens que I’article deflni.
VERBES
Les verbes ont le nombre, la personne, le lemps et le mode usuels.
Comme les pronoms, ils ont des terminaisons inclusives et exclusives
pour exprimer la dualite ou le pluriel a la premiere personne.
Chaque temps a sa terminaison speciale, comme : gumurra, gume,
gumullaga, le present, le passe et le futur du verbe « frapper ». Une con-
traction du pronom est ajoutee a la racine du verbe pour designer le
nombre et la personne.
Voici, par exemple, en abrege, une conjugaison du verbe gumulli
frapper ». ,
indicatif 'present.
l ro personne :Je frappe Gumurra-dhu
Singulier
2° Tu frappes Gumurra-ndu
3® 11 frappe Gumurra-lu
. ( Nous, inch, frappons Gtimurra-h
l re personne ] ’
( excl., Gumurra-lma
2® Vous frappez Gumurra-ndut
Dualite
Vous frappez Gumurra-ndula
3® Ils frappent Gumurra-lula
(Nous, inch, frappons Gumurra-ne
l re personne , n • .
v ( excl., Gumurra-ninm
2° Vous frappez Gumurra-nducn
Pluriel
Vous frappez Gumurra-ndugal
2® Ils frappent Gumurra-lugal
Le passe et le futur ont des terminaisons variables indiquant les inter-
vades plus ou moins longs dans la duree de Taction. Ces diflerentes
terminaisons restent les mdmes pour toutes les personnes, soit au singu-
lar pour la dualite ou au pluriel. En ajoutant la parcelle pronominale
necessaire, le verbe acquiert une terminaison speciale pour chaque per-
sonne et chaque nombre de tousles temps comme l’indique la conjugai-
son de l’indicatif present donnee ci-dessus. Nous nous contenterons done
de donner un exemple a la premiere personne, singulier, au passe et au
futur.


Passe.
J’ai frappe, indefini
Gume-gadhu
Singulier ) J’ai frappe ce matin
l re person ne ) J’ai frappe hier
Gume-ngurranyedhu
Gume-gumbirradhu
J’ai frappe il y a longtemps Gume-ngargambodhu
Futur.
Je frapperai tout de suite Gumulla-galladhu
Singulier | Je frapperai, indefini
J re person ne 1 Je frapperai demain
Gumulla-gadhu
Gumulngurriagadliu
G urn allay awan d uyadli u
Je frapperai bientbt
Imperatif.
Singulier : Gumullagu, frappe quelqu’un
Dualite : Gumullagulla, frappe deux
Pluriel : Gumullagugal , frappe tous
Conditionnel
Gumullagdyadhu, peut-etre je frapperai
Mode rellexe.
La forme rellexe du verbe est celle que decrit l’action que le sujet exe-
cute directement sur lui-m6me :
Present : Je me frappe Gumadyiliingadliu
Passe: Je me frappais Gumadyillingedhu
Futur : Je me frapperai Gumadyillingadhu
Mode reciproquc.
Cette modification du verbe s’applique au cas oil deux ou plusieurs
personnes se frappmt reciproquement et se limite, par consequent, a la
dualite et au pluriel.
Dualite : Nous (inch), nous frappons les uns les autres : Gumullanullali.
I*l uriel : Nous Gumullamillane.
11 est entendu que dans tousles exemples preciles les aulres nombres,
personnes et temps sonl sujets aux memes inllexions.
Le passif n’u pas de forme speciale. Ainsi, la phrase « un chien a ele
mordu par un serpent » est exprimee par « un serpent a mordu un
chien ».
ADVEII BE.
Voici quelques adverbes qui, dans la conversation, se placent gene,
ralement apr£s le verbe :


Oui, ngaru. Non, wail. Ici, nginya. La, ngunna. La has, gurar. A present,
dhulungurra. Tantbt, wanduga. II y a longtemps, ngurgambo. Demain,
Icumbirragali. Hier, kumbirra. Toujours, thugowai. Goment, widdgu? Quand,
widdguwaru? Ou, wundha? Pourquoi, minyali? Ou es-tu, wundhullandu?
Yite, burrai.
PREPOSITION.
Devant, wirringa. Derriere, wuggurwila. A gauche, mirarnbil. Entre,
ivongga. Au-dessus, ngunnawa. Au-dessous, ngunnadhur. Dehors, ngullugal.
Plusieurs de ces prepositions sont sujettes a des inflexions indiquant
le nombre et la personne, comme dans I’exemple suivant se rapportant a
tout ce qui se trouve a gauche :
l rn personne : Ama gauche Mirranggadhi
Singulier '2 e Ata gauche Mirrangganu
(3 e Asa gauche Mirranggalugu
et ainsi de suite pour toutes les personnes de la dualite et au pluriel.
Wirringgadhi , devant moi. Wuggurwiladhi, derriere moi et les suivants
sont soumis aux memes inflexions.
Interjections et Exclamations.
Yd! pour appeler I’atlention. Chub! signitie chut! Nginyalandum, equi-
vaut a « bien fait! »
Nombres.
Un, muggu. Deux, bulagar.
CONCLUSION.
Le langage dont un aperju a ete donne dans les pages precedentes
reproduit la langue indigene parlee dans une vaste region de la partie
centrale de la Nouvelle-Galles du Sud. Partant d’Albury, sur la riviere
Murray et en nous dirigeant & 600 milles vers leNord, sur une largeur de
350 milles nous trouverons, tout le long de notre route, des dialectes du
Wailwan. Dans ce voyage nous passerions successivement a travers les
terrains de chasse des Wiradyuri, Wongaibon, Wailwan, Kamilaroi,
Yukumbil, Yualeai, Pikumbil, et d’autres tribus parlant toutes des dia-
lectes d’une m£me grande langue.
Tout cet article est le resultat de mes recherches personnelles, parmi
les tribus indigenes, sans le concours d’aucune autre personne. Aussi, n y
a-t-il que ceux qui connaissent toutes les difficultes que rencontre la col-
lection de pareilles donnees au milieu de races sans culture et sans litte-
rature d’aucune qui peuvent se rendre compte des obstacles que
j’ai eu a surmonler pour reunir les details qui m’ont permis de fixer la


forme grammaticale du langage de que!ques-unes des tribus indigenes
importantes. Des erreurs et des omissions sont presque inevitables dans
la premiere edition d’un ouvrage de cette nature. C’est pourquoi l’auteur
sollicite l’indulgence du lecteur pour tousles defauts qu’il pourrait d£cou-
vrir en parcourant ces pages.
Les ceremonies d’initiation des Wailwan, Wongaibon et Wiradyuri,
connues sous la denomination de Burbung ont ete longuement decrites par
moi dans d’autres articles ! .
Les ceremonies d’initiation parmi les Kamilaroi, Yukumbil et autres
tribus sus-mentionnees et denommees la Bora ont egalement ete ample-
ment decrites par moi ailleurs 2 .
L’organisation sociale de toutes ces tribus est la meme, avec de legeres
moditications et consiste en quatre coutumes appliquables aux manages
entre eux, denommees : Murri, Kubbi, Ippai et Kumbo, que j’aidecrits
avec tous leurs details dans d’autres journaux 3 .
APPENDICE
Le langage lyatlyalla.
Depuis deux mois j’ai ecrit un article pour la Societe Royale de la
Nouvelle-Galles du Sud, sur « Les langages des Indigenes de Victoria »
que cette Societe a sous presse et qui remplira environ trente-cinq pages
de leur Journal.
Le duel est tres repandu dans les langues australiennes, mais dans
toutes celles de la partie Ouest de Victoria, ainsi que d’un certain peri-
metre dans l’Australie Meridionale, il existe un nombre triel, fait qui n’a
pas etc signale dans aucune autre parlie du continent australien. C’est
pourquoi j’ai pens£ qu’un resume condense de la forme grammaticale du
langage Jyattyalla, tel qu’il est parle sur les bords de la riviere Wimmera,
pourrait interesser les membres de votre Societe s’occupant de linguis-
tique.
Substantifs.
Comme nombre, les substantifs ont le singulier, le duel, le triel et le
pluriel. Les cas sont declines analoguement au Wailvvan excepte que
dans le lyatlyalla le proprietairc, ainsi que sa propriete p ennent tousles
1 Le Burbung des tribus Wiradhuri. Journal de I’lnstilut d’Anthropol. de Londres ,
vol. XXVI, pages 295-318 et vol XXVI, pages 272-283. Le Burbung des tribus du
Murrumbidgee. Journal de la Societe Royale de la Nouvelle-Galles du Sud, vol.
XXXI, pages 141-453.
! Lo Bora des tiibus Kamil.iroi, I'roce les de la Soc. Royale de Victoria, vo!. IX,
N. S., pages 187-473 Aussi dans le Journal de I’lnslitut Anlhropol. de Londres, vol.
XXV, pages 318-339.
3 Les divisions feotemiques des tribus australiennes. Journal de la Societe Royale
de la Nouvelle-Galles du Sud, vol. XXXI, pages 454-170.


Adjectifs.
IjCUA’tl 3U1VOIH 1UO OUJJOlUIJUiO uui
memes regies de declinaison.
Pro
Nous ne donnons ici que les proni
Singulier
Je Yurwek
Tu Yurwin
11 Yuruk
Triel
Nous, incl. Yurwengurrakullik
Nous, excl. Yurwendakullik
Vous Yurwuddakullik
. 11s Yurwennakullik
Pronoms
pronoms nominaux
Nous, incl.
Nous, excl.
Vous »
Yurwal
Yurwalluk
Yurwula
Yurbullang
Pluriel
Nous, incl.
Nous, excl.
Vous
Yurwengurrak
Yurwendak
Yurwuddak
Yurwenmk
Verbes.
Adverbes.
deux un suffixe, bien que ce suffixe differe dans chaque mot. En voici
quelques exemples : Wutyu, un homme; galtim-gattim, un boumerang ;
mais « le boumerang d’un homme » s’exprime par : Wutyuga gattim-
qattimuk. La grammaire admet aussi que la propriete, pour donner plus
d’harmonie a la phrase, y figure en premier quelquefois et, dans ce cas,
il y a transposition des suffixes. Ainsi, au lieu de dire : Lamm lahrnuk,
le camp d’une femme, nous employons une tournure plus euphonique en
disant : Lahrga laiurk. Laiure st « une femme »et Lahr est «un camp ».
Les variations des suffixes, regies par les derni&res lettres, du substantif
decline s’appliquent, comme dans le langage Wailwan, dont nous avons
parle, egalement ici.
Ceux-ci suivent les substantifs auxquels ils sont affectes et subissent les
memes regies de declinaison.
11 est apparent, par le tableau ci-dessus, que le triel est forme par l’ad-
dition d’une terminaison speciale au pluriel.
Dans la conjugaison des verbes, le nombre triple est, comme pour les
pronoms, indique par I’addition de kullilc au suffixe du pluriel. Dans tous
les autres cas le verbe subit les m6mes variations que dans le laugage
Wail wan.
Ceux-ci sont les adverbes usuels d’affirmation, de negation, de temps,
de place, etc. Quelques-uns d’entre eux peuvent £tre declines quant au
nombre et la personne :


Singulier : Ou es-tu? Windyar
Duel : Oft etes-vous? Windyawul
Triel : Ou etes-vous? Windyatkullik
Pluriel : Ou etes-vous? Windaty
II y a egalement des formes speciales de declinaison pour le passe et le
futur et pour tousles nombres et personnes.
Prepositions.
Comme les substantifs et les adverbes, quelques prepositions ont leur
:
l re personne: Derriere moi Walmengek
Singulier )2 e Derriere toi Walmengin
3® lui Walmenguk
11 en est de meme pour les nombres double, triple et pour le pluriel.
Interjections et Exclamations.
Celles-ci tie sont pas nombreuses, mais, comme les prepositions, subs-
tanlifs et autres parties du discours, elle peuvent etre declinees :
Singulier : Arrete Tyarrigi!
Duel ; Tyarriyiwal!
Triel : Tyarriguatkullik
Pluriel : ArrStez Tyarriyuat
Nombres : Un, kainp. Deux bulaty
VOCABULAIRE.
Le vocabulaire contient environ deux cents mots du langage Wail wan
recueillis par moi dans les camps des indigenes. Les mots d’une m6me
espece sont groupes sous des en-t6tes differentes, comme : La famille
le corps humain entourage naturel animaux adjectifs verbes.
Nous avons pens<s que ce classement serait plus commode pour les
recherches que s’ils etaient places par ordre alphab6tique.
La famille.
Hommes, collec
tivement Mali
Un horn me Thur
Homme intelli-
gent Wirringan
Chef Dhurrungal
Garcon Murrakunga
Femme Wiringga
Fille Mariyungga
Vierge Kimadhilici
Jeune femme Nikimikai
Mari et femme Nguan
Enfant des deux
sexes Wurra
Pere Bubba
Mere Gunni
Frere aine Kukka
Fr6re cadet Kullumi
Soeur ainee Gatthi
Soeur cadette Giddyurai


L& corps humain.
Tete Wulla
Front Ngulu
Barbe Kir
Moustache Muludyin
OEil Mil
Nez Muru
Derriere du cou Nan
(iorge Nug\
Nugi
Oreille Kuringgera
Bouche Ngundal
Levres Willi
Langue Thulle
Dents Wira
Poitrine Wirri
Poitrine de
femme
Ngummu
Nombril Gindyur
Estomac Buri
Epine dorsale Nirrimirri
Bras Nuru
Avant-bras Pi
Aisselle Kilkilburi
Coude Ngunuga
Main Murra
Doigts Wurria
Pouce Gunendyir
Hanche • Dhurra
Genou Bundai
Mol let Kaia
Tibia Piyu
Pied Dhinna
Sang Goai
Graisse Gudhal
Peau Yulai
Anus Nge
Penis Mundai
Testicules Buru
Uesirsexuel Girinya
Vagin Munnc
Nymph ae Wugga
Copulation Gunggamulli
Sperm Buddhe.
Masturbation Wirringra imuddha
Urine Kil
Excrement
Guna
Entourage naturel.
Soleil Dhuni
Lune Giwa
Etoiles Girrila
Pian&te Venus Ngindigindiwa
Ciel Gununggulla
Pluie Ngiddyunna
Gr£le Mugorai
Eau Kulle
Sol Thagun
Pierres Kurrul
Lumiere Ngullan
Obscurite Bullowi
Feu Wi
Fume Budhu
Miel Wurrungunna
Herbe Gurun
Feuillesetarbres Gira
Gamp Ngura
OK ufs Kubbo
Ombre Kual
Echo Wurrungun
Nourriftire
(viande) Dhingga
Nid d’oiseau Mudhi
Mammiferes.
Ghien Mirri
Kangourou Murrawi
Porc-epic Thigarila
Chien sauvage Yugi
Opossum Kuragai
Rat-kangourou Bilba
Padamelon Wiru
Bandicout Guru
Chauve-souris Wibullabulla
Oiseaux.
Emu Nguri
Plongeur Duguru
Canoir noir Budunba
Canard-Teal Dharawaiya
Canard des bois Kunambi
Canard sifflant Thipaiyu
Canard musque Wukkabuddhal
Epervier
Mulyan


Ibis Willidubai
Pelican Wirea
Corbeau Warn
Cygne Burrima
Pie riante Kuguburra
Cacatoes blanc Murai
Courlis Kawilc
Kawila
Pigeon bronz£ Yamur
Pigeon s6den-
taire Munumbi
Wag-tail Diridyiri
Hirondelle Millimaru
Poissons.
Morue Kuddu
Crevette Dhunul
Poisson-chat Dhungur
Ventre-jaune Biddhan
Breme Bunngulla
Breme argentee Birnnge
Ecrevisses Wingga
Reptiles.
Iguane de terre Duli
lguanedesarbres Gugar
Serpent noir Yugai
Serpent-tapis Yubba
Vipere Murrai
Tortue Munggalia
Lnvertebres.
Araignee
Gillidya
Mouche com
mune
Moustique
Centipede
Burimul
Kummogin
Yerrir
Adjectifs.
Mort Buga
Grand liitthe
Petit Buttyu
Long Kungal
Court Ngurdhu
Bon ou bien Yudda
Mauvais Wurra
Wurrai
AfTame
Rouge
Blanc
Noir
Vert
Prompt
Jaloux
Malade
Fort
Yerringin
Girawil
Lourd
Col&re
Bunggoba
Bulwi
Fatigue
Chaud
Froid
Gidyungidyun
Burrai
Jeune
Vieux
Manger
Boire
Dormir
S’asseoir
Aller
Kurugur
Girrumbia
Parler
Dire
Kurgirri
Murdil
Kulgigara
Iri
Kirru
Courir
Gunundai
Dhullungaimba
Bugaia
Apporter
Prendre
Porter
Casser
Battre
Tomber
Voir
Verbes.
Dharridyanna
Nurrunnha
Yuanna
Winy a
Yunna
Ngea
Entendre
Grandir
Siffler
Dhumbulludha
Bunnhagunna
Se lever
Thai-gaga
Etre debout
Cracher
Jeter
Ngullugal-gaga
Donner
Chanter
Pleurer
Danser
Eternuer
Tousser
Voter
Wumburra
Gumma
Guma
Dhuane
Nganhi
Winnungulli
Yurunnha
Wilwa
Wurraga
Warrana
Ngundyar
Gurarwa
Ngunhi
Wuggaimulli
Yungani
Wuggagiri
Tliigar
Gunungguna
Munnamulli


Mordre Kutthulli
Souffler (avec
l’haleine Bumbilli
B&tir Womma
Xuer Gumaibugagu
Hacher Kugga
Attraper Mummulli
Grimper Walgagiri
Voler (en l’air) Wurrannha
Sauter Baranhi
Rire Gindani
Gratter Wirmuggiri
Pincer Nimmulli
Frotter Muma
Sentir Budhe
PrStendre Bir






SOME ABORIGINAL LANGUAGES OF QUEENSLAND
AND VICTORIA.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.'S.,
MEMB. ASSOC. ETRAN. SOC. D’ANTHROP. DE PARIS.




SOME ABORIGINAL LANGUAGES OF QUEENSLAND
AND VICTORIA.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
MEMB. ASSOC. ETRAN. SOC. D’ANTHROP. DE PARIS.
(Read October 3, 1902.)
Last year I contributed to this Society a short description of the
Gundungurra, one of the native tongues of New South Wales. In
the following pages it is proposed to furnish the outlines of
grammatical structure of some aboriginal languages spoken by the
native tribes of Queensland and Victoria.
The method of spelling adopted is that recommended by the
Royal Geographical Society of London, with the following qualifi-
cations :
As far as possible vowels are unmarked, but in some instances
the long sound of a, e, and u are indicated thus, a, e, u. In a few
cases, to avoid ambiguity of pronunciation, the short sound of u is
thus represented, u.
G is hard in all cases. R has a rough, trilled sound, as in
“hurrah!” W always commences a syllable or word. Yat the
beginning of a word or syllable has its ordinary consonant value.
The sound of the Spanish ft often occurs; at the beginning of a
Reprinted, from Proceedings American Philosophical Society , Vol. xlii, No. 173


word or syllable I have given it as ny , but when terminating a word
the Spanish letter is employed.
Ng at the beginning of a word or syllable has a peculiar nasal
sound. At the end of a syllable it has substantially the sound of
ng in “ sing.”
Dh is pronounced nearly as th in “that,” with a slight sound of
d preceding it. Nh has likewise nearly the sound of th in “ that,”
but with an initial sound of the n. A final h is guttural, resembling
ch in the German word “ bach.”
T is interchangeable with d, p with b, and g with k, in most
words where these letters are used.
Ty and dy at the commencement of a word or syllable has nearly
the sound of j. At the end of a word ty or dy is pronounced nearly
as tch in “batch” or “ditch,” omitting the final hissing sound.
All the details supplied in this article were taken down by myself
from the lips of the natives speaking the languages herein dealt
with —a tedious and laborious task.
The Murawarri Language.
In a communication to this Society in 1898 I described the social
divisions and laws of intermarriage prevailing in the Murawarri
tribe, together with a comprehensive list of totems, and will now
proceed to exhibit the structure of their language. This tribe
occupies an extensive region on the southern frontier of Queens-
land, between the Warrego and Culgoa rivers, reaching also some
distance into New South Wales. Languages similar in grammar to
the Murawarri, although differing somewhat in vocabulary, extend
northerly into Queensland for hundreds of miles.
NOUNS.
Number. —Nouns have three numbers, the singular, dual and
plural. Gula, a kangaroo. Gulabural, a pair of kangaroo 6.
Guladhunna, several kangaroos. The suffix dhunna is frequently
shortened to dhu, in rapid conversation.
Gender. —Men, a man. Mugin, a woman. Guthera, a small boy.
Gutheragamba, a small girl. The sex of animals is distinguished
by using, after the name of the creature, the words dhungur, male,
and guni, female, and these words take inflexion for number and
case.


Case. —The principal cases are the nominative, causative (or
nominative-agent), genitive, accusative, instrumental, dative *and
ablative.
The nominative merely names the animal or thing, as, ngur’un,
emu; dhaggun, padamelon; wirri, bandicoot; wagan, crow; mulli,
boomerang; kinni, yamstick; gundal, dog; gugai, opossum; ngura,
a camp; wungga, a bird’s nest.
Causative: Guladyu ngunna wirrunga, a kangaroo me scratched.
Instrumental: Mendyu wagan mullinyu bundhara, a man a crow
with a boomerang hit.
Genitive: Mugingu kinni, a woman’s yamstick. Wagangu
wungga, a crow’s nest.
Dative: Dhan yanna nguranggu, come to the camp.
Ablative: Dhirri yanna ngurango, go away from the camp.
Accusative: This is the same as the nominative.
ADJECTIVES.
Adjectives are placed after the nouns they qualify, and are simi
larly inflected for number and case.
Nominative: Gundal kittyu, a dog small; gundalbural kittyubural,
a couple of small dogs; gundaldhu kittyudhunna, several small dogs.
Causative: Mugindyu thurdadyu guthera bundhara, a woman
large a child beat.
Genitive: Mengu thurdagu mulli, the large man’s boomerang.
Adjectives are compared by using such phrases as, thurda nhu,
kittyu nungga, large this, small that. Superiority is implied by
saying, thurdaburra, very large.
PRONOUNS,
Pronouns are inflected for number and person, and comprise the
nominative, possessive and objective cases, some examples of which
are given in the following table. There are forms in the first
person of the dual and plural to express the inclusion or excl«sion
of the party addressed :
Singular.
Nominative. * Possessive. Objective.
Ist Person Ngadhu Ngundi Ngunna
2d « Ngindu Ingga Bunga
“ Yallunggo Ngumboga Bunha


Dual.
r Ngulli Ngulliga Ngullinya
Ist Person p . Ngullinumba Ngulligilunna Ngullinyai
Ngullinumba Ngulligilunna Ngullinyanumba
2 d « Nula Nulaga Nulanna
3d « Yallabural Bulaga Burannha
Plural.
r Nginna Nginnaga Ngurranna
Ist Person p Nginnadyula Nginnagadyula Ngurranad;
Nginnadyula Nginnagadyula Ngurranadyula
2 d “ Nura Nuraga Nuranna
3d «« Yalladhunna Dhurraga Dhurrana
There are forms of the pronouns signifying “tome,” “from me,”
“ with me,” and so on, as in the following few illustrations:
Dhangandhera dhiga, he brought it to me.
Dhirrithunggia dhigamil, he ran away from me.
Ngunnhura niambu, with me rests he.
Interrogatives: Ngannga, who? Nganngabural, who (dual)?
Nganngadhunna, who (plural)? Ngangagu, whom belonging to?
Minya, what? Minyanggu, what for?
Demonstratives: This, nhu ; that, nhurana. These demonstra-
tives are very numerous, according as the object referred to is in
front of, behind, near, or far from the speaker. Many of them
take inflexion for number and person.
VERBS.
Verbs have the singular, dual and plural numbers, the usual per-
sons and tenses, and three principal moods—indicative, imperative
and conditional. There is a distinctive form of the verb for each
tense—present, past and future; but number and person are shown
by short pronominal suffixes to the stem of the verb. These rules
will be readily understood on perusing the following conjugation, of
the verb, bundhera, to beat:
Indicative Mood—Present Tense
( Ist Person I beat Bundhiyu
Singular.... J 2d “ Thou beatest Bundhind
I 3d “ He beats Bundhibu
Thou beatest Bundhindu
' ( We, inch, beat Bundhili
Ist Person | We, excl., beat Bundbilinumba
“ 2d “ You beat Bundhinula
3d “ They beat Bundhibula


1903.] MATHEWS —ABORIGINAL LANGUAGES. 183
( We, inch, beat Bundhina
IS * erson | We, excl., beat Bundhinadyula
Ura 2d “ You beat Bundhinura
3d “ They beat Bundhira
You beat Bundhinura
They beat Bundhira
Past
Tense.
C ist Person I beat Bundharanyu
Singular.... 2d “ Thou beatest Bundharandu
3d “ He beat Bundharabu
Future Tense.
!' ist Person .1 will beat Bunggunyu
2d « Thou wilt beat Bunggundu
3d “ He will beat Bunggubu
Thou wilt beat Bunggundu
He will beat Bunggubu
It is thought unnecessary to give the dual and plural numbers of
the past and future tenses.
Imperative Mood.
Positive Beat » Bungga
Negative Beat not Bungga wulla
Conditional Mood.
I may beat
Wullawurri bunggunyu
Reflexive.
I am beating myself Bundherriyu
I was beating myself Bundherriaiyu
I will beat myself Bundherriguyu
The inflexion continues through all the persons
Reciprocal.
j We, inch, are beating each other Bumbullali
j We, inch, will beat each other Bumbullagi
Bumbullaguli
( We, incl., are beating each other Bumbullana
Ura ( We, incl., will beat each other Bumbullagu
Bumbullaguna
The second and third persons of the dual and plural also take
reciprocal inflexion.
The following examples show the native way of expressing the
English verb “ to be ” :


Present I am well Murrin indivu (well am I)
Past I was well Murrin indayu (well was I)
Future I will be well Murrin inguyu (well will be I)
ADVERBS.
Yes, kaila. No, wulla. Here, nunggo. There, ngurra. Now,
kunyegaila. By and bye, kunye. Yesterday, gunda. Tomorrow,
burda. A few days ago, buggera dhurungga. Long ago, muttya-
gaila. Perhaps, wullawurri. Slowly, mun-gi. Rapidly, kurdu-
gurdu. Where, dhirrungga ? Where (if two), dhirrambula?
Where (plural), dhirradhunna? How many, minyungurra?
PREPOSITIONS.
In front, kurbu. Behind,' billungga. In the rear, durungga.
Inside, mugungga. Outside, bullungga. Beside me, gurgungga
dhiga. Between, dhunnungga. Down, burrungga. Up, gunda.
Over or across (referring to a river, hill, etc.), gurrundha. This
side of, nhubaran. The other side, beyond, gowurrigurrundha.
Through, gaimyu. Towards, dhai. Away from, dhirra.
Several prepositions take inflexion for number and person : Be-
hind me, billunggadhiga. Behind thee, billunggabunga. Behind
him, billunggabuga. Behind us, billunggangurriga, and so on.
CONJUNCTIONS AND INTERJECTIONS.
It is not thought necessary to supply illustrations of these parts
of speech.
NUMERALS.
One, yaman. Two, kubbo. Several, murabirri.
The Wamba Wamba Language.
This language is spoken among the remnants of the native tribes
about Swan Hill on the Murray river, and extending southerly into
the State of Victoria beyond Lalbert and Tyrrell creeks, the lower
Avoca river, etc. The people are divided into two phratries,
Gamaty and Gurgity, the men of one phratry marrying the women
of the other. For lists of totems attached to these phratries, the
reader is referred to a paper I contributed in 1898 to the Anthro-
pological Society at Washington. 1
1 “ The Victorian Aborigines: their Initiation Ceremonies and Divisional Sys-
tems,” American Anthropologist, Vol. xi, pp. 333, 334. Map of Victoria,
Plate V.


All the languages spoken in the eastern portion of Victoria are
identical in grammatical structure with the Gundungurra language
reported by me to this Society last year, although their vocabularies
are altogether different. Westward of the 145th meridian of lon-
gitude all the Victorian languages have the same structure as the
Wamba Warnba, with the exception of a strip of country on the
lower Murray river.
NOUNS,
Number. —Karrange, a kangaroo. Karrange bullang, two kan-
garoos. Karrange girtawal, several kangaroos.
Gender. —Wurtunge, a man. Laiur, a woman. Banggo, a boy.
Bannulaiur, a girl. Bupu, a child of either sex. The sex of ani-
mals is indicated by using the word mamo for males, and baba for
females; thus, willunge mamo, a male opossum; willunge baba, a
female opossum.
Case. —The nominative : Wanne, a boomerang. Kenninge, a
yamstick. Wirrangin, a dog. Lurnge, a camp.
The Causative: Wurtulu karange dhakkin, a man hit a kan-
garoo. Laiuru bupu dhakkin, a woman beat* a child
Possessive: Wurtua wanne, a man’s boomerang. Every object
over which ownership can be exercised is subject to inflection for
number and person, thus:
{ist Person My boomerang Wannai
2d « Thy boomerang Wannin
3d “ His boomerang Wannu
.Thy boomerang Wannin
His boomerang Wannu
This declension extends to all the persons and numbers, in each
of which one example will be sufficient:
Dual Our, inclusive, boomerang Wannul
Trial Our, inclusive, boomerang Wannangurkullik
Plural Our, inclusive, boomerang Wannungur
Dative: Lurndal, to the camp.
Ablative: Lurnung, from the camp.
ADJECTIVES.
Adjectives follow the noun qualified, as kurwinge kurong-untu,
an emu large. Kurwinge bannutu, an emu small. They are in-
flected for number and case like the nouns, and comparison is
effected as in the Murawarri


PRONOUNS.
Pronouns have four numbers, singular, dual, trial, and plural.
There are double forms of the first person to include or exclude the
person spoken to. The following table shows the nominative and
possessive pronouns:
Singular.
ist Person...
...I
Yetti
Mine
Yenneu
2d “ ...
Nginma
Thine
Nginneu
3 d “ • •.
...He
Kinyi or Kalu
His
Kikinga
t _ ( We, incl., Ngulh
ist Person... I ® „
{ We, excl., Ngullu
2d “ You Nyula
3d “
Dual.
They Kalubulang
Trial.
Ours, inch, Ngullidha
Ours, excl., Ngulludhu
Y ours Nyuladhu
Theirs Kinyebuladhu
Ist Person i * nC *'’ Yan & ur k u hik Ours, inch, Yanguradhukullik
| We, exch, Yandakkullik • Ours, exch, Yandhadhukullik
2d “ You Ngutakullik Yours Ngutadhukullik
3 d “ The y Kaludhanakullik Theirs Dhanadhukullik
Plural.
( We, inch, Yangur
ist Person... •] , *
J We, excl., Yandhank
2d “ You Nguta
You Nguta
Ours, inch, Yanguradhu
Ours, exch, Yandhadhu
Yours Ngutadhu
Theirs Dhanadhu
3d “ They * Kaludhana
There are objective forms of the pronouns, signifying me, with
me, towards me, from me, and so on. Interrogative and demon-
strative pronouns are also various and precise.
VERBS.
Verbs have the same numbers and persons as the pronouns, three
tenses and three principal moods ; as exhibited in the following
conjugation of the verb “to sit
Indicative Mood—Present Tense.
( ist Person I sit
Singular .... J2d “ Thou sittest
(3d “ He sits
Ngangan
Ngangar
Nganga


_ (We, inch, sit
Ist Person. ,
| We, exclu., sit
2d “ You sit
3d “ They sit
( We, inch, sit
Ist Person... •? ... ,
j We,excl.,sit
2d “ You sit
3d “ They sit
f ( We, inch, sit
1 We, excl.,sit
2d “ You sit
3d « They sit
Dual.
Trial
Plural.
Past Tense.
Ngangangul
Ngangangullu
Nganganyulu
Ngangabulang
Ngangangur
Ngangandhak
Nganganguta
Ngangandhana
f Ist Person I sat
Singular J 2d “ Thou sattest
(3d He sat
Nganginan
Nganginar
Ngangin
Future Tense.
r Ist Person I will sit
Singular .... J2d “ Thou wilt sit
/3d “ He will sit •
Nganginyan
Nganginyar
Ngangin
Ngangangurkullik
Ngangandhankullik
Ngangangutakullik
N gangandhanakullik
The remaining moods are omitted, being similar in constitution
to those of the Murawarri.
This is the first occasion on which the trial , or triple, number
has been reported in the verbs of any Australian language. Mr.
J. J. Carey, from the MS. of the late Mr. F. Tuckfield, 1 published
a list of pronouns in what he calls the Woddowro language, but
which I spell Wuddyawurru, in which he shows an incomplete set
of trial pronouns. He did not, however, observe the double form
in the first person of the dual, trial and plural, which is now com-
municated by me in the languages of Victoria for the first time. 1
Among the native tribes on the upper Campaspe, Lodden and
Avoca rivers, instead of kullik being the sign of the trial, the word
baiap is employed, as, Ngurnabuingunyinbaiap, we three sit.
1 Rep. Aust. Assoc. Adv. Sci., Vol. vii, p. 842 and p. 853.
2 I have, however, previously discovered and reported the existence of two
forms of the first person of the dual and plural in the nouns, pronouns, verbs,
adverbs and prepositions of the Gundungurra, one of the native languages of
New South Wales: Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Vol. xl, pp. 140-148.


Tyilbuingunyinbaiap, we three beat. It will be apparent that the
words baiap or kullik are merely superadded to the suffix of the
plural.
In the Motu, one of the languages of New Guinea, Rev. W. G*
Lawes reports that the dual and trial of pronouns are formed by
additions to the plural. 1
If a line be assumed to be drawn on the map of Victoria from
Melbourne to Echuca, then the whole of that portion of Victoria
situated on the eastern side of that line has no trial number in its
speech, but in all the languages to the west of that line the trial
number obtains.
ADVERBS AND PREPOSITIONS.
In principle th'ese resemble the same parts of speech in the
Murawarri and Gundungurra, and some of them take similar
inflexion for number and person.
Interjections and exclamations are not numerous and have been
omitted.
NUMERALS.
One, yuwaia. Two, bulle. Several, girtawal.
i'Motu Grammar (Sydney, 1896), p. 9.


THE
NATIVE TRIBES OF VICTORIA: THEIR LAN-
GUAGES AND CUSTOMS.






THE NATIVE TRIBES OF VICTORIA: THEIR LAN-
GUAGES AND CUSTOMS.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Bead March 1904.)
Synopsis. —Prefatory. Orthography. Dhauhurtwurru Language
and Vocabulary. Initiation Ceremonies. Folklore. Sociology.
The object of the present short paper is to supply some missing
links in the literature of the aborigines of Victoria. For a number
of years past I have devoted a portion of the leisure of a busy pro-
fessional man to taking special journeys among the remnants of
the Victorian tribes, for the purpose of adding to our knowledge
of their languages, ceremonies, sociology and customs generally.
When first entering upon this congenial task I found that little or
Reprinted from, Proceedings American Philosophical Society, Vol. xliii, No. 175.


nothing had been done to record and preserve the native languages
of Victoria, and also that the rites and customs of the people had
not received the attention which their importance deserved.
Perhaps it should be mentioned that in 1898 I contributed to the
Anthropological Society at Washington a paper dealing with the
initiation ceremonies and divisional systems of the Victorian abori-
gines. 1 In 1902 I read another paper on the aboriginal languages
of Victoria before the Royal Society of New South Wales.* On
the present occasion it is intended to supply further information
not included in my former memoirs. The whole of this article has
been prepared by me from notes written down by myself from the
lips of the aboriginal speakers. When the difficulties encountered
in obtaining such particulars from an uncultivated race are taken
into consideration, I feel sure that all necessary allowances will be
made for any imperfections of my work.
In all the aboriginal languages of Victoria the pronouns and
pronominal affixes have two forms in the first person of the dual
and plural—one of which includes, and ftie other excludes, the
party spoken to. Again, inflection for person and number is not
confined to the pronouns and verbs, but extends to many of the
nouns, prepositions, adverbs and interjections. I was the first
author to report, in any of the Australian languages, the important
grammatical forms referred to in this paragraph.*
The items of folklore show the proclivity of the native mind to
account for any specialties of animal structure, or remarkable for-
mations in hills, trees, lakes and the like. Under the head of
“ Sociology,” although the names of the phratries have been known
for some time, yet many new and important details have been
gathered and reported in this article.
The natives of the southwestern portion of Victoria have a habit
of distinguishing the neighboring tribes by means of the second
personal pronoun, “thou,” of their respective dialects. For exam-
ple, the Dhauhurtwurru are known as the Ngutuk people, the Bun-
gandity as the Nguro people, and so on. A more widely prevalent
practice is to name the dialect of a tribe by the lip, which is sym-
bolical of speech. For this purpose they suffix to the name of the
tribe the native word, wurru, lip; or its possessive form, wurrung,
l American Anthropologist, Vol. xi, pp. 325-343, with map of Victoria.
2 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxvi, pp. 71-106.
8 Ibid., Vol. xxxv, p. 127.


lip of (someone). In other districts the equivalent of our nega-
tive adverb, “ No,” is used, with the suffix wurru , as, Woi-wurru,
meaning the No-lip, or Woi-speaking, people.
Orthography.
Eighteen letters of the English alphabet are sounded, comprising
thirteen consonants —b, d, g, h, k, 1, m, n, p, r, t, w, y—and five
vowels—a, e, i, o, u.
The system of orthoepy adopted is that recommended by the
Royal Geographical Society, London, but a few additional rules
of spelling have been introduced by me, to meet the requirements
of the Australian pronunciation.
As far as possible, vowels are unmarked, but in some instances
the long sound of a , e, o and u are indicated thus, d, e, d, u. In
a few cases, to prevent ambiguity, the short sound of u has been
marked thus, u.
It is frequently difficult to distinguish between the short sound
of a and that of u. A thick sound of iis occasionally met with,
which closely resembles the short sound of u or a.
Gis hard in all cases. W always commences a syllable or word.
Ng at the beginning of a wcrd or syllable has a peculiar nasal
sound, which can be obtained by adding together the two English
words “hang up,” making “hangup” ; then assume this divided
into two syllables, thus, “ ha-ngup.” By pronouncing this so that
the two syllables melt into each other, the ng of “ -ngup” will rep-
resent the aboriginal sound. At the end of a syllable, ng has the
sound of ng in “ sing.”
At the beginning of a word or syllable, the sound of the Spanish
n is given by ny, but when terminating a word, the Spanish letter
is used.
Dh is pronounced nearly as th in “ that,” with a slight sound of
d preceding it. Nh has also nearly the sound of th in “ that,” but
with an initial sound of the n.
A final h is guttural, resembling ch in the German word joch.
T is interchangeable with d, p with b , and g with k.
Ty and dy at the commencement of a word or syllable have
nearly the sound of j or ch, thus, tyu, in the name of Tyu-ron,
closely resembles chu or ju. But at the end of a word or syllable
ty or dy is sounded as one letter; thus, raty, the last syllable of


barraty, can be pronounced exactly by assuming e to be added to
the y, making it rat-ye. Then commence articulating the word,
including the y, but stopping short without sounding the added e.
The Dhauhurtwurru Grammar.
The Dhauhurtwurru language is spoken in the country about
Portland and Lake Condah, in the State of Victoria, but it is rep-
resentative of the native speech from the Glenelg to the Gellibrand
river, and reaching inland about fifty miles or more.
ARTICLES.
The place of the English article is supplied by the various forms
of the demonstratives, representing “ this” and “that.”
NOUNS.
Nouns have number, gender and case.
Number. —Mar, a man. Marara, a cotfple of men. Maraban,
several men.
Gender.— Sex in the human family is distinguished by different
w T ords, as, mar, a man \ dhunnumbur, a woman. Wurran, a boy j
barraty, a girl.
Among animals gender is denoted by the addition of words sig-
nifying “male” and “female,” as, warrun mamung, a male bandi-
coot ; warrun ngerang, a female bandicoot. The females of certain
animals have a name which distinguishes them without stating the
sex, as, ngerangyer, a female dog; murrin, a female kangaroo. The
corresponding male names are gal and goran. Many of the male
animals likewise have a distinguishing name.
Case. —The cases are indicated by inflections, the following being
the principal:
Nominative: This case merely names the subject at rest, as, gal,
a dog; kunna, a yamstick; mar, a man; dher, a spear. Mutyir
or kurkin, a tomahawk.
Causative: This represents the subject acting, as, marra guramuk
burtan, a man an opossum killed; dhunnumburra gal yilpan, a
woman a dog flogged galla guramuk bundan, a dog an opossum
bit.
Instrumental: This case takes the same affix as the causative, as,
marra kalngun maiangan dherra, a man my dog speared (or pierced)


with a spear. Sometimes the first affix is omitted in such a sentence
as this.
Genitive: A peculiarity of the genitive case, which I was the
first author to report in Australian languages, 1 is that the property
and the possessor each take an affix, but the former affix differs
from the latter—marngat lettalettimyung, a man’s boomerang;
dhunnumburngat kannanyung, a woman’s yamstick; wurranngat
kurkinyung, a boy’s tomahawk.
Every object or article over which ownership can be exerted is
subject to inflection 2 for person and number, as, kurkinngun, my
tomahawk; kurkinngu, thy tomahawk; kurkinung, his tomahawk;
and so on through the dual and plural, which also contain “ inclus-
ive” and “ exclusive” forms in the first person.
Accusative: This case is the same as the nominative.
The other cases will be passed over.
ADJECTIVES.
Adjectives follow the nouns which they qualify, and are subject
to similar declensions for number and case:
Nominative: Mar muryarrung, a man large. Gal lenggin, a dog
large. Dhunnumbur dhugai-muruk, a little woman.
It is not thought necessary to illustrate the other cases.
Comparison: Din ngutyung —dinnung ngummindyar, this is
good—that is bad. Din kurpung kurpung, this is the best.
In the declensions of all the cases of nouns, and of their qualify-
ing adjectives, there are modifications in the affixes, depending
upon the termination of the word declined. Sometimes the affix
of the noun is omitted, sometimes that of the adjective ; this rather
being regulated by the euphony of the sentence.
PRONOUNS.
Pronouns are inflected for number, person and case, and contain
two forms of the first person of the dual and plural, marked
“inclusive’’ and “exclusive,” respectively.
1 “The Gundungurra Language,” Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Philadelphia,
Vol. xl, p. 143.
2 “The Thoorga Language,” Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. xvii,
P. 53-


The following is a full table of the nominative pronouns:
5 ist Person I
2d “ T
3d “ I
( Ist Person I Ngutthuk
.Thou Ngutuk
He Nung
f Ist p erson j We » inclusive Ngutthungul
y )na i J 1 We, exclusive Ngutthungul]
! 2d “ You Ngutuwal
[3d “ They Dilakal
Ngutthungullin
f ist Person I We » inclusive Ngutthungan
[ We, exclusive Ngutthungani
2d “ You Ngutuwan
3d « They Dilakanda
pj ura ] J ( We, exclusive Ngutthungannin
There is a sort of trial number, which is formed by the addition
of the word balinia to the plural, as, Ngutthangan baJinia, we three,
and so on for the remaining numbers. I am inclined to believe,
however, that this added word merely serves the purpose of a
numeral, and is copied from the Wuddyawurru tribes on the east,
and the Tyattyalli on the north, among whom I reported a trial
number last year. 1
The following are examples in the singular number of the posses-
sive case:
( Ist Person Mine % Ngutthungat
Singular.... J2d “ Thine Ngutungat
i3d “ His Nungat
And so on through the remaining numbers.
The full forms of the pronouns given above are mainly used in
replying to a question. In ordinary conversation the natives use
the pronominal affixes illustrated under the head of “ Verbs.”
The accusative pronouns, me, thee, him, etc., are not found
separately, like the nominative and possessive, but consist wholly
of the pronominal suffixes to verbs, nouns or other parts of speech,
as in the following example :
Ist Person (Someone) beats me Burtangun
2d “ “ beats thee Burtangu
3d “ “ beats him Burtanung
And so on through all the numbers. See also the example under
the heading “Prepositions.’’
Demonstratives: The demonstratives in this language, by the
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxvi, pp. 77-86.


combination of simple root-words, can be made to indicate posi-
tion, distance, direction, number, person, movement, etc. Want
of space precludes more than this brief reference to them at present.
Interrogatives: Who, winya. What, nganya. How many,
nummia.
VERBS.
Verbs have the same numbers and persons as the pronouns, and
also the “ inclusive” and u exclusive” forms. The principal moods
are the indicative, imperative and conditional. Person and num-
ber are indicated by pronominal affixes to the root of the verb, as
in my Bungandity grammar. 1 In the following conjugation of the
verb, burte, “ to beat or kill,” the present tense is given in full,
but the singular number of the past and future is considered
sufficient
Indicative Mood—Present Tense.
f Ist Person I beat Burtu
Singular.... J2d “ Thou beatest Burtangin
(3d “ He beats Burta
' Ist Person i We > incl - beat Burtangul
( We, excl., beat Burtangull
2d “ You beat Burtawul
3d “ They beat Burtakal
Burtangullin
Burtakal
f Ist person 1 We/incl., beat Burtangan
p liira) J ( We, excl., beat Burtangannin
I2d “ You beat Burtawan
3d “ They beat <, Burtakanda
Past Tense.
Si st Person I beat
2d “ Thou
3d “ He be
Burtanu
•••••< 2d “ Thou beatest Burtanyin
He beat Burtan
Future Tense.
I Ist Person I shall beat Burtugu
Singular .... J2d “ * Thou shalt beat Burtuhu
(3d “ He shall beat Burtuk
He shall beat Burtuk
Imperative: Beat, Burte.
1 “ Language of the Bungandity Tribe, South Australia,” Journ. Roy. Soc.
N. S. Wales , Vol. xxxvii, pp. 59-75.


There are conditional, reflexive and reciprocal moods, similar in
principle to those shown in my Kamilaroi grammar. 1 There are
also modifications of the verbal suffixes of the past tense to indi-
cate the immediate past, the recent past, and the remote past.
Similar modifications exist for the proximate, or more or less dis-
tant future. There are likewise forms of the verb to express repeti-
tion or continuance of the act described, and many other complex-
ities, which need not be detailed in the present brief paper.
ADVERBS.
Following are a few examples in this part of speech :
Yes, ko. No, bangat. To-day, thinggatbe. Yesterday, ngagat.
To-morrow, tungatti. By and by, kalu. Recently, wuluba. Long
ago, mulkaiu. All the time (doing something), girtnabe. All the
time (resting), girtitbe. Where, wunda. Wbere art thou, wunda-
yin. Where are you two, wundawar. Where are you all, wunda-
wan.
PREPOSITIONS.
Here, dinnu. There, dinnunung. These, with numerous modi-
fications, are also used as demonstratives.
In front, gullingat. Behind, wurtgat. On the right, dumbitgat.
On the left, warumgat. Inside, gunni. Outside, gunna. Between,
bukkargat. This side, yukkai-gatthung. Other side, kunninung.
Down, wenyu. Up, gunnu. Underneath, wenyanu. Through,
yunyin.
Many prepositions admit of inflection for person and number, as
in my “ Thurrawal Language”: 2
( Ist Person Behind me Wurtganhun
Singular.... J 2 d “ Behind thee Wurtganhu
( 3 d « Behind him Wurtganhunj
J 2 d « Behind thee Wurtganhu
Behind him Wurtganhung
And so on through the remaining numbers and persons.
NUMERALS.
One, kaiappa. Two, bulattya. Several, bortung.
1 Journ Anthrop. Inst., July-December, 1903.
2 Journ . Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxv, p. 148.


[March 4,
Vocabulary.
This vocabulary contains about 260 of the most commonly-used
words in the Dhauhurtwurru language, every word having been
noted down by myself from old men and women in tU native
camps.
The Family. I Umbilicus rikut ~
A man mar j Abdomen thukung
Old man ngurram Tongue thallan
Youth nguin-nguin- Chin bulun
mar Back w irk
Roy wurran Arm wurk
Elder brother wartai Shoulder pakkuran
Younger bro- Elbow < .ailing
ther koko Hand marang
Father pipai Thigh wurkarriman
Mother ngerang Knee purran
Mother-in-law nullinyur Foot thinnang
A woman dhunnumbur Blood kerik
Old woman ngurramdyar Fat pippul
Girl barraty
Child (neuter) tukui
Elder sister kukkai
Younger sister kokodyar
Bone bukkan
Penis wirrunp
rems wirrung
Scrotum burung
Vulva mulun
The Human Body.
Head
pim
Forehead
mittin
Hair of head
ngarat
Beard
ngaran
Moustache
munutyir
Eye
mirng
Eyebrow
tharruing mirng
Nose
kappung
Ear
wirng
Mouth
ngulang
Lips
wuru
Teeth
thungang
Mammae
murtung
Urine kirng
Excrement gunang
Inanimate Nature.
Moon
Stars
thirrung
dhenget
Thunder
kukkadhing
murndal
Lightning murthung
Rain murriang
Rainbow dharnt-burrut
F o g wallat
Frost mikkur
Hail puttirang
Water purrity


Ground miring
A Stone murrai
Sand kulak
Light (of day,
etc.) . - neanan
Darkness burun
i at kallun
Cokings bullabety
Camp wurn
Camping place limbity
Fii wien
Sm ;ke thueng
1 mutthal
1 . dhinggatmirring
Night ' l 'burun
Dusk burunggittian
Hill kang
Sandhill pangat
Grass karriwan
Leaves of trees dhirrang
Bird’s nest wurnung
Egg mirkinyi
mirkinyung
Honey • wirraty
Path dha-urn
Shadow ngakuyung
Tail of animal wirranyung
Summer kallun
Winter pullapity
Mammals.
Native bear winggil
Dog gal
Wild dog burnang
Opossum guramuk
Kangaroo-rat barrut
Native cat kuppung
Bandicoot warrun
Water-rat murung
Porcupine willangalak
Kangaroo guran
Platypus ngullirtil
Flying squirrel wethity
Small squirrel ngundaty
Ringtail opos-
sum wiyan
Bat ngunni-ngun-
Birds.
Laughing jack
gunit
Crow wang
Curlew wiruk
Plain turkey burriam
Native-compan
ion kurun
Pelican » kurtpirrap
Swan kunuwar
Wood-duck ngawurk
Quail ngaren
Eagle-hawk ngianggara
Emu kapirng
Common mag-
pie kirre
Black magpie munyukil
Black-duck dhurbang
Mopoke mumgaty
Bronze-wing
pigeon gure
Rosella parrot kurtkurty
Parrokeet yukuty
Kingfisher bunbungwarpit
Peewee thulirm
Plover pitthirrit
Corella kurogity
White cockatoo ngaiyuk
Woodpecker dinden
Mountain parrot kalingai
Small nightjar yerradhaher
~ I


Crane kukap
Black cockatoo willan
Fishes.
Black fish yim-yim
Trout dhurkurt
dhurkurt
Eel kuyang
Frog dhiamp
Reptiles.
Sleepy lizard yuruk
Carpet-snake kurang
Black-snake muwang
Tiger-snake wangaluk
Jew-lizard wirinyurn
Small lizard munni
Whip-snake kirdok
Invertebrates.
Locust billirt
Blow-fly wurul
Louse barum
Nit of louse lirt
Bulldog ant,
black wulakai
Bulldog ant,
red kumal
Centipede thirrimbangarak
Jumper ant birpirk
Maggot thirtui
House fly minnik
Grasshopper nger-nger
Spider bun-bun
Mosquito murukar
March fly murun
Mussel thalup
Trees and Plants.
Ti-tree kurang
Wattle karrang
Pine murrung
Oak ngering
Cherry tree pallat
Red gum bial
White gum leng
Honeysuckle wirraty
Bullrushes burtity
Yam gerang
Broom bunung
Blackwood tree mutthang
Peppermint wurut
Stringybark maran
Box tree karran
Ironbark yirip
Bush tree wirriks
Weapons, etc.
Tomahawk mutyir
Koolamin, wood bupir
Koolamin for
grubs yurom
Yamstick kunnak
Jagged spear dhuluwarn
Hunting spear der
Reed spear ngiren
Fishing spear 1 koyot
Spear lever ngarrung
Spear shield kirram
Waddy shield mulkar
Fighting club,
bent murduang
Hunting club bippin
Club, with knob munup
Boomerang lettalettim
1 There is a bone spike, called killip , fastened to the striking end of the koyot
or fishing spear.


Plaything
(wooden) wity-wity
Net bag kurera
Canoe dhurung
Belt murum
Kilt burrandity
Adjectives.
Alive boandian
Dead kulpiran
Large muryarrung
Small gurnung
Long wurumbet
Short mulubet
Good ngutyung
Bad ngummindyar
Thirsty kurangan
Red gerrigerrigund-
White ngapgority
Black min
Quick wungura
Slow . gurpippa
Blind kundity
Strong ngarakithung
Afraid kuninbity
Tired barbangan-
mirringa
Hot kallun
Cold pullapety
Angry watthanlingan
Sleepy wandyangan
Greedy murkappu
Sick ngullarvvano
Stinking wumbity
Pregnant karrawian
Verbs.
Die
Eat
kalpirmity
thakian
Drink
Sleep
Stand
Sit
Talk
Tell
Walk
Run
Bring
Take
Break
Strike
Arise
See
Hear
Listen
Give
Sing *
Weep
Steal
Ask
Climb
Conceal
Jump
Laugh
Scratch
Send
Swim
Spit
Throw
Whistle
Vomit
Dance
Go
Come
Burn
Bite
thathin
yuin
kartan
nginggan
lakan
kuyin
yanmin
karkurtmin
wambake
wambaku
yenhin
burte
mirtako
nakin
wangin-mirri
wangity
woke
litbity
lumin
kurunmin
kuein
kurwurnin
yunbin
wurnbin
wiakan
wirrinity
yumbin
yawin
thukipin
yarndin
dhegirnin
kurnan
kurwin
yanmin
kaka
bawa
bundin
mirtan


Initiation Ceremonies of Victorian Tribes.
Under this heading it will be sufficient to mention that I have
elsewhere described some important ceremonies of initiation in
use among the native tribes of Victoria. I have given full details
of the Wonggumuk ceremony, which is in force over the central
and northern portions of that State. I have likewise reported the
Kannety initiation ceremony, practiced by the tribes inhabiting the
southwestern districts of Victoria. Other inaugural ceremonies
used in eastern Victoria and elsewhere are described by me in a
contribution to the Anthropological Society at Washington, already
referred to in this paper.
Folklore.
The following stories were told me by some old aboriginals of
the Hopkins and Eumeralla rivers in western Victoria, and as I
have never seen them in print, they are included in this paper. 1
Tyuron, the Eel Spearer. —Tyu-ron, a man of the Kappaty
phratry, was a notable ancestor of the plovers. He carried a
fish-spear on each shoulder when he went fishing, because he
was equally dexterous with both hands. He frequented swamps
and shallow streams where eels were plentiful, and never hunted
for any other kind of food. He was a very agile fellow, and kept
a sharp lookout along the margin of the water. When he saw
an eel, he struck at it with one of his spears, and threw it out on
the bank. He then ran along the edge of the water, and stood a
little while looking for his favorite fish. If none were visible, he
again ran on, and stood watching. He continued running up and
down the stream, or around the margin of the lagoon, until he
had caught as many eels as he required.
Tyuron used to paint his breast and the under sides of his arms
with pipe-clay, so that the eels would not readily observe him, and
sang at intervals, “Pittherit, pittherit.” This is why the plover
still carries the point of a fish-spear on either shoulder, and likes
to remain near water. He also continues his old habit of running
a little way and standing still, then running on again. And he
still sings his old song, from which he has received his onomato-
poeic name of pittherit.
Murkupang and Mount Shadwell. —Among the remote ancestors
1 See my Folklore of the Australian Aborigines (Sydney, 1899).


of the Girriwurru tribe there was a man of great stature, named
Murkupang, whose body was covered with hair. He dwelt in a
cave on the Hopkins river, in the vicinity of Maroona. His nul-
lanyurung, or mother-in-law, resided near him, and one day she
sent her two grandchildren to see Murkupang and ask him for some
food, because according to tribal custom she could not herself
approach her son-in-law. As he had not been successful in the
chase for a day or two, he killed the children and ate them.
Fearing the retribution of his mother-in-law’s friends, Murku-
pang left his habitation at dawn next morning and journeyed down
the Hopkins river to a place near Wickliffe, where he tried to
make a cave in a rock by pulling loose pieces off with his hands,
but he did not succeed. He next went on to Hexham, and saw
in the distance Mount Shadwell, with its rocky sides. He approached
it and saw a suitable cave in one side near the top. Being a great
conjurer or sorcerer, he commenced “bouncing” or scolding the
mountain, and commanded the portion containing the cave to
come down nearer to the plain on which he was standing. He
stamped his feet and made passes or signs with his hands while he
sang a magical song, and presently a large piece of the mountain
containing the cave parted from the rest of the hill. 1 Murkupang
ran away across the plain, and shouted to the fragment of moun-
tain to follow him. After a while, when he thought he had reached
a good camping place, he turned round, stamping his feet and using
other menaces which caused the mountain fragment to stop. It
then settled down and became what is now known as Flat-top Hill.
Murkupang then selected a place sheltered from the weather by
an overhanging rock—a sort of cave—and made his camp there.
In a few days’ time his mother-in-law tracked him to this retreat.
She had with her two young fighting men of the Gurogity phratry,
who were clever “ doctors” and had some knowledge of magic.
While Murkupang was out hunting, these warriors hid themselves
near the cave entrance, one on each side. They covered their
bodies with stringybark, softened by beating, so that they could
roll it around their bodies. This was done to prevent Murkupang’s
dogs from scenting them. After a time the hunter returned, carry-
ing a large kangaroo which he had caught. As soon as he went
1 The natives point out a depression in one side of Mount Shadwdl from
which FJat-top was disrupted.


into the cave, the warriors emerged from their hiding-place and
walked to the entrance, with their weapons ready for an attack.
When Murkupang saw them, he went through some very obscene
antics, 1 in the hope of throwing them off their guard, so that he
might get a chance to strike one or both of them, but all to no
purpose. The warriors divested themselves of their stringybark
coverings, with which they stopped up the mouth of the cave. A
fire was then applied to this inflammable material, which made a
great flame and suffocated Murkupang. His spirit flew out of the
cave and became a Mopoke, called by the natives mumguty, a bird
which goes about at night.
Sociology.
In a former article published in 1898, 2 I gave a short description
of the social organization of the tribes occupying the southwestern
districts of Victoria, but since then I have again visited the natives
of those localities and obtained further information which will now
be briefly stated.
If we assume an approximate line drawn on the map of Victoria
from Geelong via Castlemaine to Pyramid Hill; thence via Lake
Tyrrell to a point on the boundary between Victoria and South
Australia where the thirty-fifth parallel of latitude intersects it;
thence along that boundary southerly to the ocean; and thence by
the seacoast easterly to the point of commencement at Geelong.
Then the people composing all the tribes within the region thus
described are divided into two phratries, called respectively Guro-
gity and Gamaty, or dialectic variations of these names. But upon
making a closer examination of the constitution of these phratries,
we discover that the details of their composition among the tribes
in the northern portion of the above region differ from those in
the southern or coastal portion. I will first deal with the tribes
occupying the country north of the main dividing range, where the
rules of intermarriage of the phratries and the descent of the pro-
geny are as under:
1 “ The Nguttan Initiation Ceremony,” Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Philadel-
phia, Vol. xxxvii, pp. 69-73.
2 “The Victorian Aborigines: Their Initiation Ceremonies and Divisional
Systems,” American AnthroJ>ologist,\o\. xi, pp. 325-343, with map of Victoria.


Table No. 1.
Phratry, Husband.
Wife.
Daughter,
A Gurogity Gamatygurk Gamaty Gamatygurk
B Gamaty Gurogitygurk Gurogity Gurogitygurk
All creation, animate and inanimate, is divided into Gamaty and
Gurogity. Attached to each of these phratries are groups of totems,
consisting of animals, plants, the heavenly bodies, the elements,
etc., lists of a number of which were given in my former treatise. 1
There is a further subdivision of each phratry into what may be
called clans or sections, with distinctive names, taken in some
instances from animals and in others from inanimate nature. Each
subdivision comprises a number of families bearing different totem
names. That is, all the totems of a phratry are apportioned among
the sections, some sections (or clans) possessing a certain aggregate
of totems and some another. Every individual of a tribe claims
some animal or inanimate object as his totem.
Again, each of these clans has its own spirit-land, called mi'-yur,
to which the shades of all its members depart after death. The
miyur of a clan is located in a certain fixed direction from the
present hunting grounds of the tribe, but the direction of the
miyur of each clan differs from that of the others. It may be situ-
ated far out in the desert country of the mallee-scrubs, or away
towards the setting sun, or in the distant rocky mountains, or
elsewhere.
When a member of a clan dies and is buried, the body is laid
horizontally, face upwards, with the head placed towards the part
of the horizon which leads to the miyur or spirit-land of the clan
to which the deceased belongs. These miyurs are divided into the
same two phratries as the people of the tribe. The spirit of a
Gurogity man or woman goes to a Gurogity miyur, and a Gamaty
spirit travels away to a Gamaty resting-place, conformably to the
spirit-home of his clan.
Each spirit-land has its own description of water. For example,
in one miyur the water is gray, in another sparkling, in another
reedy, in another dark blue, in another reddish, and so on.
Between the main dividing range and the seacoast the phratry
1 American Anthropologist , Vol. xi, pp. 333-334.


names and their feminine equivalents are slightly different from
those just described, as shown in the following synopsis:
Table No. 2.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Son. Daughter.
A Gurogity Kappatyar Kappaty Kappatyar
B Kappaty Gurogityar Gurogity Gurogityar
Everything in the universe is divided between these two phrat-
ries. Among the totems of Gurogity are included the following :
Dog, flying squirrel, small squirrel, pelican, eagle-hawk, white
cockatoo, tiger snake, red bulldog ant, red gum tree, oak tree,
bloodwood, broom, peppermint, ironbark.
The undermentioned are some of the totems of Kappaty : Native
cat, kangaroo, crow, swan, bat, crane, black cockatoo, whipsnake,
black bulldog ant, white gum tree, wattle tree, cherry tree, honey-
suckle, stringybark, tomahawk, reed spear, boomerang.
The totemic families belonging to Gurogity and Kappaty are
subdivided into clans or sections, somewhat similar to those in
use among the tribes already described, but not so numerous or
elaborate. They likewise have a spirit-home, which some of the
tribes call maioga and others miingo. Every individual, when
buried, is placed with the head pointing in that direction, and all
the spirits go away to the same resting-place. This is an island,
called by the white people Lady Julia Percy Island, situated off
the coast of Victoria, about halfway between Warrnambool and
Portland. On the shore of the mainland there are some rocks like
stepping-stones stretching out into the sea towards the island.
These rocks, some old black fellows told me, were purposely
placed in that position, in the far away past, by the spirits of clever
men, to enable their fellow-countrymen to reach their maiogo.
The spirit of a deceased person walks on the land to the shore and
springs out to a rock, then to another and another rock, and lastly
makes a final bound over the intervening sea and alights on Lady
Julia Percy Island, the native name of which is Denmar.


Aus der
Zeitsclirift flir Ethnologic.
Heft 6. 1904.
XXXV/
Language of the Wuddyawurru Tribe, Victoria. 1 )
By
R. H. Mathews, L. S.
,In 1902 I contributed to the Royal Society of New South Wales an
article 2 ) describing six of the native tongues of Victoria. One of these
six languages was the Wuddyawurru, but as my previous remarks upon it
were necessarily very brief, I propose on the present occasion to furnish
examples of the different parts of speech not touched upon in my former
treatise, together with a short vocabulary of Wuddyawurru words.
The territory of the Wuddyawurru tribe may be roughly described
as extending from Werribee river to Ballarat; thence southerly via Lake
Korangamite to Cape Otway, and thence by the coast back to Werribee
river. Along their western boundary they met and mingled with the
Kullidyan and Dyargurt, whose speech was the -same as the Wuddyawurru
in all essential points.
In a paper recently communicated to this Society I briefly described
the language of the Kogai, one of the tribes of Queensland.. I now wish
to place before the reader one of the languages of Victoria, for comparison
with my former memoir. The grammatical constitution of the Wuddyawurru
differs in some important respects from the Kogai, among which the
following may be mentioned.
In the Wuddyawurru language many of the nouns, adjectives, pre-
positions, adverbs and interjections are subject to inflection for person
and number, in addition to the pronouns and verbs. In the genitive case
°f nouns, the possessor and the chattel are both declined. In common
with some other languages in central and northwestern Victoria, there is
a trial number, made by the addition of the suffix „kullik“ to the plural
form of the word inflected.
All the information contained in this article has been collected by
lne in tire camps of the natives, every word having been written down by
toyself from the lips of the aboriginal speakers.
The system of orthography adopted in my previous article will again
e followed, and need not be recapitulated in this paper.
Articles.
Ihe demonstrative and adjectival pronouns serve the purpose of the
*fiuite article „the“ in the English language. The indefinite article is
d expressed.
1) Nach einem in der Sitzung vom 20. Februar 1904 gehaltenen Yortrage.
2) „The Aboriginal Languages of Victoria", Journ. Roy. Soc. New S. Wales, vol.
V b pp. 71—10 G.
sitschrift fttr Ethnologie. Jahrg. 1904. Heft 6. 47


Number. Nouns have four numbers the singular, dual, trial
and plural:
Wangirn, a boomerang. Wangimbulih, a couple of boomerangs.
Wangimkullik, three boomerangs. Wangimgetyaul, several boomerangs.
Gender. In the human family, different words are used, as, guli,
a man; bagurk, a woman; gulkurguli, a boy; ngunyagurk, a girl. The
sex of animals is denoted by adding wmrds meaning „male“ and „female“
respectively, as, goim gulawan, a male Kangaroo; goim ngurdang, a female
Kangaroo.
Case. The cases are indicated by inflexions:
The nominative merely names the thing spoken of, as guli, as man;
kanni, a yamstick.
The causative represents the subject doing some act, as, gulia goang
bakunirring, a man an eel caught.
Genitive. The owner and the property are both inflected, as, guliak
wangimnyuk, a man’s boomerang; bagurkak kanninyuk, a woman’s yam-
stick. Personal property of any description can be declined by possessive
affixes to the noun, as, wangimik, my boomerang; wangimin, thy boo-
merang; wangimuk, his boomerang, and so on through all the numbers
and persons.
The remaining cases are passed over, being similar in principle to
those of other languages of Victoria already described.
Adj ectives.
Adjectives follow the nouns they qualify and take similar declensions
tor number and case. They are compared as illustrated in my „Thoorga
Language 4 * 1 ), but differing in words.
Pronouns.
There are two forms of the first person of the dual, trial and plural
one in which the person addressed is included with the speaker, and
another in which he is exclusive of the speaker.
The following are the nominative and possessive pronouns.
Singular.
1. Person I Bangek
2- „ Thou Bangin
3. „ He Banguk
Mine
Thine
His
Bangordigek
Bangordigin
Bangordiguk
Dual.
1. Person (!! e ’ inC !'
l W e, excl. Bangalluk
2. „ You Bangbula
3- » They Bangbullang
Ours, incl. Bangordingal
Ours, excl. Bangordingalluk
Yours Banffordiwula
Bangordiwula
Theirs Bangordibullang
1) Queensland Geographical Journal, vol. XVII, pp. 53—54.


— 731
•—
Trial.
1. Person
[We, incl.
IWe, excl.
Bangadukullik
Bangwiidyakullik
Ours, incl.
Ours, excl.
Bangordingadukullik
Bangordiwiidyakullik
2- „
You
Bangutkullik
Yours
Bangordingutkullik
3- »
They
Banganakullik
Theirs
Bangordiganakullik
Plural.
!*
1. Person
[We, incl.
Bangaduk
Ours, incl.
Bangordingaduk
IWe, excl.
Bangwudyak
Ours, excl.
Bangordiwudyak
2. „
You
Bangut
Yours
Bangordingut
3- „
They
Banganak
Theirs
Bangordiganak
The foregoing full forms of the pronouns are employed chiefly in
replying to questions. In ordinary conversation the natives use the pro-
Ij
nominal suffixes illustrated under the heading of „ Verbs".
The objective pronouns, me, thee, him, etc., are not found separately,
like the nominative and possessive, but consist of pronominal suffixes to
verbs and other parts of speech, as.
Gerinnin (Someone), spoke to me, and so on. See also the example
under „Prepositions“. There are likewise forms of the pronouns meaning
„with me“, „towards me“, „away from me“, etc.
Demonstratives are numerous, hut must be omitted for want of space
— Interrogatives — who, wela. Whose, wekanyuk. What, minga.
Y erbs.
Verbs have the singular, dual, trial and plural-numbers, with the
usual persons and tenses. They also possess the „inclusive“ and „ex-
clusive“ forms in all the numbers beyond the singular.
The following few examples will serve to illustrate the conjugation
°f a verb. The singular number in each tense only will be given.
Indicative mood Present Tense.
j 1. Person
I speak
Gelan
Singular < 2. „
Thou speakest
Gelar
1 3. „
He speaks
Gela munya
Past Tense.
| 1. Person
I spoke
Gelikan
Singular <2. „
Thou spokest
Gelikar
13. „
He spoke
Gelik munya
Future Tense.
I 1. Person I shall speak Gelinyan
Singular < 2. „ Thou shalt speak Gelinyar
3. „ He shall speak Gelin munya
Reciprocal.
Dual We, in cl., speak to each other Gekiringal
Trial We, inch, speak to each other Gekiringitkullik
Plural We, inch, speak to each other Gekiringity


No, nyullawinyar. Yes, ngiyi. Yester-day, dyallinyu. Jomorro
yerrandyu. Where, wea. Here, mun. There, kiupan.
Prepositions.
Several prepositions can be inflected for number and person:
1. Person In front of me Kallinyunyik
2. „ In front of thee Kallinyunyun
3. „ In front of him Kallinyunyuk
Numerals
One, ku-i-muty. Two, bullaity.
In conclusion it may be remarked that when I first commenced tin
study of Victorian languages, the subject possessed no literature beyont
a few vocabularies. When Mr. R. B. Smyth published his work on tin
„Aborigines of Victoria", some of his contributors very rashly attempte<
to relate one or two native stories in the original tongue. 1 ) I have rea<
over these abortive productions, and can pronounce them to be men
ungrammatical jargon, written by men who knew nothing of th<
grammatical structure of the languages they were dealing with.
In the foregoing pages I have touched only upon the fundamenta
elements of the language, for the purpose of keeping this article withii
reasonable limits for publication.
Vocabulary.
The following vocabulary contains about 150 English words with the
equivalents in the Wuddyawurru language. Every word has been writt<
down by myself in the native camps, and much time and labour ha 1
been bestowed upon the work.
The
Family.
English
Wuddyawurru
English
Wuddyawurru
Man
guli
Woman
bagurk
Boy
gulkurguli
Girl
ngunyagurk
Father
pettyang
Child
burun
Elder brother
wardang
Mother
ngurdang
Younger brother
wangat
Elder sister
dattyerrung
Many men
gulibullaiak
Younger sister
burrumbarak
Many women
bagurkullaiak
Mother-in-law
nyalluhgurk
Parts of th
e Human Body.
Head
murk
Shoulder
ngam
Forehead
men
Armpit
kurrap
Eye
mir
Elbow
balluty
Eyelid
wurtimir
Arm
tarak
Eyelash
dharaty
Wrist
turnan
Nose
kang
Hand
mfirna
1) „The Aborigines of Victoria*, vol. II, pp. 48—49.


English
leard
'eeth
Tongue
Breast
Navel
Ribs
Spirit
wern
ngarle
liang
wfirru
dyellung
tyuram
warung
nyillilirnan
murup
Sun
Moon
Stars
Clouds
Summer
Winter
Stone
Kangaroo
Bog-
goim
garl
Opossum
wallert
burnung
Ring-tail opossum
Emu karwir
uagienawk: ngarapgar
Mountain hawk gaire
Eaglehawk
Black cockatoo dyering
White cockatoo dyirnap
Bronze-wnng
pigeon ngure
Blue-mt. parrot kullingar
ative Companion poronggity
Town hawk tyarrar
'Wall trout
lei
thurpurt
goang
ty-fish
wi-ity
e iguana
°k snake
dyulin
gurnmil
Wuddyawurru
Thigh
Knee
Shin
Calf of leg
Foot
Heel
English
Heart
Liver
Inanimate Nature.
mirri Earth
yern Water
turtbaram Fire
wur-wur Rain
durnmarung Night
kurkart Day
maianyu Sand
Mammals.
Native-bear
Wombat
Native cat
Birds.
Teal duck
Ibis
Pelican
Crow
Wood duck
Mtn duck
Black duck
Fish.
Black-fish
Frog
Reptiles.
Turtle
Sleepy lizard
karrip
bun
lurk
tyinnang
kunnak
dhurung
boity
ngubity
win
mundar
murgalyu
mirriyu
korak
Flying squirrel
ngarmbulum
ngur-ngur
yurn
duan
birnar
bitbitdyerrak
burdunghl
wurwirt
wanyukai
pardwang
tharaiwil
thulum
Common magpie
Plain turkey
wirrepm
dyierin
barribiri
wallop
Wuddyawurru


English
Wuddyawurru
Louse
Nit of louse
Grasshopper
Locust
Mosquito
Centipede
dyirrangarrak
Weapons and
Jagged spear
Reed spear
Spear shield
Waddy shield
Wommera
Canoe
Girdle
Woman’s apron
dyirburnin
Long
Short
Large
Small
Tired
Bitter
gfirrain
Beat
Throw
Bite
Walk
Laugh
Give
Catch
Invertebrates.
English
mQnya Leech
lirt Spider
marak Bulldog ant
ngullanggullang Mussel
nguyunguyu March-fly
Manufactures
karrup Boomerang
tyark Fighting club
giram Tomahawk
mulka Hunting spear
mariwan Yamstick
gurung Net bag
murum Kilt
Adjectives.
nyirrim Good
mort Bad
dittabil Red
ngunyagurk White
dermillih Black
Y erbs.
tyilpai Stand
yungak Sit
pone Speak
yanne See
wekkili Hear
wa-ak Dance
kudyak Sleep
mapmak Climb
Wuddyawi
billity
burnakurrik
ngurung
murron
wangim
liangal
kulpallangurk
der
kanni
kurara
burrandigim
guinyebin
nyulam
derpkarring
darngarin
wurgarin
dyarrike
bure
gele
nyaiyu
ngarwak
yergeh
kumir
kadne


Extrait des Bulletins et Memoires de la Societe d’Anthropologie de Paris.
Par R. H. Mathews, I. S.,
Associe etranger de la Societe d'Anthropologie de Paris.
LANGAGE DES KURNU, TRIBU D’INDIGENES DE LA NOUVELLE GALLES DU SUD
(Traduit par M. Oscar Schmidt).
Dans un article prudent adresse a la Societe, je me suis occupe du
langage des Wailwan, Tune des tribus indigenes de la Nouvelle Galles du
Sud. Dans celui-ci j’essaierai de la'formation grammaticale du
langage de la tribu des Kurnu, occupant un territoire 6tendu sur la
riviere Darling.
La grammaire du langage Kurnu est des plus interessantes, car elle
poss6de des que je n’ai, jusqu’ici, observes dans aucun des
autres idiomes indigenes de la Nouvelle Galles du Sud. Ainsi, par
exemple, on observera dans la table des pronoms que leur forme est
pour exprimer le present, le pass 6 ou le futur. On verra, aussi,
que les pronoms regis par des verbes transitifs different de ceux employes
avec des verbes intransitifs. Bien que le verbe ait son present, son pass 6
et son futur, leur pronom suffixe indique le temps.
En 1902 j’ai communique a la Societe Royale de la Nouvelle Galles du
Sud 1 un resume de la grammaire Kurnu, mais j’avais omis les verbes et
autres details parceque je n’avais pas encore saisi toutes les difficulty
que pr6sentent les pronoms et les variations peu communes qu’ils subis-
sent en conjonction avec des verbes. Depuis ce premier rapport succinct,
un voyage h travers cette tribu m’a permis de recueillir de nombreuses
donn6es nouvelles.
LA GRAMMAIRE KURNU.
Le territoire des tribus indigenes parlant le langage Kurnu commence
au Darling, entre Tilpa et Louth, et s’6tend sur les deux rives de ce
fleuve jusqu’a Bourke, et m6me un peu au-dela. II remonte 6galement la
1 Journal de la Societyßoyale de la Nouvelle Galles du Sud. Vol. XXXVI, p. 154-157.


riviere Warrego jusqu’& Ford’s Bridge. Des dialectes du Kurnu sont par-
ies le long du Darling, en aval, depuis Tilpa, via Wilcannia et M6nindie,
jusqu’a Wentworth, soit sur une distance d’environ 350 milles. Le lan-
gage Kurnu, avec quelques modifications de dialecte, pen£tre egalement
en arriere du fleuve Darling, jusqu’au lac de Tarowoto et aux Barrier-
Ranges et remonte la riviere Paroo jusqu’k la du Queensland.
J’ai recueilli, dans le territoire des Kurnu, parmi des vieillards
serieux et intelligents des deux sexes, les elements suivants de leur
langage.
ORTHOGRAPHE.
Le
celui de ma communicatidh precedente sur le langage Wailwan, deja
publiSe par la Societe d’Anthropologie.
Articles.
Les pronoms demonstrates remplacent, dans leurs differentes formes,
Particle defini. L’equivalent de Padverbe anglais « here » (ici), ainsi que
ses variantes, est souvent traite comme un pronom demonstrate dans le
langage indigene. Ces indigenes ne paraissent pas se faire d’idee abstraite
d’un homme, d’un emeu, ou d’autres sujets sembldbles, mais parlent
toujours d’un homme ou d’un animal defini et se servent, en consequence,
d’un demonstrate, tel que : « cet homme », « l’emeu la-bas », ainsi de
suite. S’il s’agit de specifier qu’ils n’ont qu’un seul objet en vue, ils le
font en employant le pluriel qui peut <Hre comme remplagant
notre article indefmi.
SUBSTANTIFS.
Les substantifs ont le nombre, le genre et le cas.
Nombre. II y a trois nombres : le singulier, le dual et le pluriel. Le
dual et le pluriel sont formes en ajoutant le nombre « deux », ou « plu-
sieurs »au singulier : Thurlta, un kangourou; Thurltapalcula, un couple
de kangourous; Thurlta gutthalagu, plusieurs kangourous.
Genre. Pour les humains le sexe est par Pemploi de mots
differents : Wimbadga , un homme; Kumbukka , une femme; Kurtymgga,
un gargon; Karnkali, une fille; Mundhanggura, un enfant, sans distinction
de sexe.
Le genre des animaux est demontrd par l’usage de mots indiquant le
m4le ou la femelle : Thurlta dhuladya, un kangourou mftle. Thurlta
ngammugga, une kangourou femelle.
Quelques animaux m&les ont un nom qui les distinguent, sans que le
sexe soit sp£cifi6 et quelques femelles se reconnaissent egalement k un
mot special. Dans ces cas, il est inutile d’indiquer le nom de l’animal.
Cas. Les cas principaux sont: le nominatif, le causatif, l’instrumen-
tal, l’accusatif, le g6nitif, le datif et l’ablatif.
Nominatif. Lorsque Taction dScrite reste avec le sujet, le substantif


n’est pas decline. Exemple : Wimbadya ngingganunna, I’homme est assis.
Causatif. Lorsque faction decrite peut <Hre transferee kun objet,
a l’accusatif, le sujet prend un postfixe : Wimbadyawa waku burtatyi,
l’homme un corbeau tua. Kulliwa yerrandyi dhuttatyi, un chien un opos
sum mordit.
Instrumental. Dans beaucoup de langages australiens, dont j ai
etudie la grammaire dans de precedents articles, le suffixe est le meme
pour l’instrumental etlecausatif, mais en Kurnuc’est le sullixe genitif qui
est applique au cas instrumental. Exemples : Kumbukkavva wimbadya
bulkatyi kurnkarna , une femme un homme battu avec un yamstick.
Wimbadyawa thurlta bundatyi karpukkarna, un homme un kangourou perga
avec une lance. Kutyunggawa thapura wurtatyi mulkarna, le gargon une
inorue attrapa avec un filet. Gulkawutthuvn wangulu wunnat na, tua lui un
wallaby avec un boomerang.
Genitif. Wimbadyarna wunna , le boomerang d’un homme. Kumbuk-
karna kuvnkn, le yamstick d’une femme. Kullivna, guvni , la queue dun
chien.
Accusatif. Est le m&me que le nominatif.
Datif. Yuppira, un camp. Yuppiramirra, a un camp.
Ablatif. Yuppirandu, d’un camp.
ADJECTIFS.
Les adjectifs suivent les substantifs qu’ils qualifient et subissent les
memes inflexions quant au nombre et au cas : Wimbadya wuita , un
homme grand . Wimbadyawa wurtawa icunna ngartatyi, un homme grand
un boomerang jeta. Wimbadyarna wurlarna wunna , le boomerang dun
homme grand.
Le suffixe est souvent omis de fun des mots et applique soit au subs-
tantifou k l’adjectif seulement, pour en indiquer le nombre ou le cas,
l’euphonie de la phrase en reglant l’emploi.
La comparaison des adjectifs s’effectue par deux declarations positives,
telles que : Ithugundyallca, ithugaru dliulugalla, ceci est bon, 1 autre est
mauvais.
PRONOMS
Les pronoms kdrntl ont plusieurs inflexions speciales qui ne se trouvent
pas dans les autres langages australiens quej’ai signales. louteune serie
de pronoms ne s’applique qu’aux verbes transitils, tandis qu une autie
s6rie ne s’emploie qu’avec les verbes iniransitifs. De plus, ces pionoms se
modifient tant pour les verbes transitifs que pour les verbes inti ansi tifs,
selon qu’ils se rapportent au present, au pass 6, ou au futur. Ils ont ega-
lement une forme double de la premiere personne, selon qu il s agit de la
dualite ou du pluriel.
Voici un tableau de pronoms nominalifs, employes avec des verbes
transitifs, dans chacun des trois temps. En dehors de leur usage comme
pronoms, ils expriment, en m6me temps, les differentes formes du verbe


auxilliaire « &tre »; exemple : ngutthu qui signifie non seulement « Je »,
mais aussi « Je suis ».
PRESENT
PASSE
FUTUR
Ngutthu Wutthu Gutthu
Singulier
Tu
II
Ng’irndu Wirndu Girndu
Ngutthara Wutthera Gutthera
Nous, incl. Ngulli Wulli Gulli
Nous, exclus. Ngutthevangulli Wuttherawulli Guttheragulli
Dual
Vous Ngupa Wupa Gupa
Ils Ngutthevangulu Wuttherawulu Guttheragulu
Nous, incl. Nginna Winna Ginna
Vous, exclus. Dhundinginna Dhundiwinna Dhundiginna
Pluriel
Vous Ngurta Wurta Gurta
II s Ngutthe Wutthe Gutthe
Les pronoms dont on se sert avec les verbes intransitifs different de
ceux qui prudent, a la premiere et a la seconde personne, au present,
pass 6 et futur, ainsi que l'indique le tableau suivant :
PRESENT
PASSE
FUTUR
Nguppa Wuppa Guppa
Singulier ] Tu
Ngimba Wimba Gimba
Ngutthara Wutthara Gutthara
Les pronoms etant les au dual et au pluriel pour les verbes in
transitifs et transitifs il n’y a pas lieu de les repeter ici.
Les pronoms possessifs sont les suivants :
l re personne : a moi
2® a -toi
Ngari
Ngoma
Singulier
3® & lui
Wuttliuna
& nous, inclus. Nqulhna
l re personne : , , ,
( ci nous, exclus. Wuttherangullina
2® a vous Nqupunna
Dual
a vous Ngupunna
3° a eux Wutthawuna
l re res nne I nous ’ i nc * us - Nginnunna
piesonne . j noug> exc i US- Dhundinginnanna
2 e h vous • Nqurtunna
Pluriel
h vous • Ngurtunna
3° ci eux Wutthina
Les formes
suivantes a I’accusatif sont celles des pronoms au singulier
l re personne : moi
2® toi
Ngunnha
Ngumma
Gimunna
Singulier
3 e lui


II existe d’autres modifications des pronoms signifiant « vers moi »,
» 4carte de moi », etc. comme dans les exemples suivants :
! l re personne : vers moi JYgunnhari
Singulier j3O _ vers lui Gitthunavi
Dual : l re personne : vers nous, inclus. Ngullinari
Pluriel: l ro vers nous, inclus. Nginnanari
( ire personne : de moi Ngunnarndu
Singulier j j u - Gitthunarndu
Dual : t r ° personne: de nous, inclus. Ngullinarndu
Pluriel : l re de nous, inclus. Nginnanarndu
Avec moi, ou pr6s de moi se dit : Ngariri
Dans chacun des exemples que l’on vient de lire les inflexions peuvent
etre appliquees k toutes les personnes du singulier, du dual, ou du
pluriel. ,
Interrogatifs. Qui (au singulier) windyaka. Qui (dual) windyula. Qui
(au pluriel ) windyiwindyi. A qui, windyagunnagi. Quoi, rninnha. Pourquoi,
minnhamundi.
Demonstratifs. Les demonstrates sont* trks nombreux et varies et
indiquent la position, la distance, la direction, la grandeur, le nombre,
la personne, la possession, etc. Tousles pronoms de la per-
sonne sont, de fait, des demonstratifs cequi explique leur irre_,ularit6 et
Tabsence de leurs rapports etymologiques.
Voici quelques exemples de ces demonstratifs : Ceci, ithu. Cet autre-ci,
ithugari. Ces deux, ithuwutu. Tous ceux-ci, ithangirnga. Cela, githu. Cet
autre la wutthagari. Cela lk-bas, wurradijalanaga. Cela demure moi, dhur-
nangurrina. Cela (au dessus de moi), buringunna. Cela (au dessous de moi),
kukuruna. De ce cdffi (de la personne k laquelle on parle), ijaumim. De
l’autre c6te (de la personne a laquelle on parle) wurramungamirn. Ce
grand la, wurtuwurri. Appartenant kceci, ithuna. Appartenant & ces deux,
ithuwunn. Appartenant k tous ceux-ci, ithinna.
Beaucoup de ces demonstratifs sont modifies pour les adopter aux
verbes transitifs ou intransitifs qui les accompagnent et aussi pourcor-
respondre avec le temps, comme e’est le cas pour les pronoms.
VERBES
Les verbes ont trois nombres et trois personnes et comportent une
variante « inclusive » et « exclusive » a la premiere person ne du dual et
du pluriel.
Chaque temps a sa forme distincte, mais le temps est egalement in-
dique par des pronoms suffixes ajout&i au verbe ou qui les accompagnent.
Void, par exemple, une conjugaison abregee du verbe bulka , frapper,
ou tuer.


lndicatif present
l 1 personne: Je frappe Bulkangunna-ngutthu
Singulier j2® Tu frappes Bulkangurina-ngirndhu
(3® 11 frappe Balkangunna-ngutthara
Nous ne croyons pas necessaire de donner des exemples du dual et du
pluriel, les variations des nombres et des personnes pouvant etre expri-
mees en appliquant a chaque cas le pronom special que l’on trouvera
dans le tableau des pronoms nominatifs indiques dans une page precedente
de cet article.
Passe.
( l re personne: J'ai frappe Bulkangga-wutthu
Singulier j2 e Tuasfrappd Bulkangga-wirndu
(3 e II a frapp6 Bulkangga-wutthara
Futur.
( l ro personne : Je frapperai Bulkara-gutthu
Singulier |2 e Tu frapperas Bulkara-girndu
(3 e II frappera Bulkarci-guttharci
3 e II frappera Bulkara-gutthara
Imperatif.
Frappe, bulhalla. La forme negative ou prohibitive s’exprime ainsi :
ldlla bulkalla, ne frappe pas.
Conditionnel.
Frapperais-je? Killamura bulkciragutthu.
Reflexe.
La forme reflexe du verbe ddcrit Faction du sujet operee sur lui-m6me.
!Je me frappe Bulkamuldhanguppa
Je me frappais Bulkamuldhangga-wuppa
Je me frapperai Bulhamuldhava-guppa
Imperatif.
Frappe-toi Bulkamuldlia.
Reciproque.
Une forme du verbe sert & exprimer Taction commune et reciproque
de deux ou plusieurs personnes; cette forme est evidemment restreinte
au dual et au pluriel :
Nous (dual inclusif) nous frappons l’un l’autre, Bulkamilla-ngulli. Nous
nous somraes frapp6s l’un l’autre, Bulkamillangga-wulli. Nous nous frap-
perons l’un l’autre, Bulkamillara-gulli. Dans les exemples qui precedent
toutes les personnes et les nornbres peuvent 6tre indiques par des prp-
noms.


La conjugaison d’un verbe intransitif ne change que par les pronoms
qui lui sont ajoutes comme le demontre l’exemple suivant de ngingga,
asseoir :
lndicatif.
Present : l ro personne J’assieds Nginggangmm-nguppa
Passe : l re J’assis Nginggangga-wuppa
Futur : l re J’assierai Nginggara-guppa
Et ainsi de suite pour les autres personnes et nombres en employant
les pronoms
Les verbes, transitifs, aussi bien que les intransitifs, ont Sgalement des
formes indiquant que l’action decrite est immediate, proche ou lointaine,
soit au passe, soit au futur; ces formes expriment egalement la continua-
tion ou la repetition de l’action. De nombreuses modifications des verbes
servent a mettre en valeur toute une de nuances de signification,
dans lesquelles nous nous abstenons d entrer pour le moment.
Le passif n’a pas de forme sp£ciale et la phrase :« un gargon fut puni
par son p£re » serait par la paraphrase :« un p&re a puni son
gargon. »
ADVERBES
Oui, ngi. Non, ngattha. Ici, kungara. La, wurra. La-bas, wurityallinnaga.
Aujourd’hui, kailpomainka. Hier ,yillana. Demain, wambirna. Tantdt, gunni.
A l’avenir, gundigundyi. mirraga.
Ou es-tu, windyarra ngimba. Ou vas-tu, windaywurradhani ngimba. Com-
bien, ngulthurra. Comment, nunguna.
PREPOSITIONS
Devant, mirrika. Derriere, ngunda. Entre, bukkula. A c6te, gungo. En
bas, baikabika. En haut, wunggalu. Dedans, ngungguru. Autre c6te, murlalca.
Ge c6te (de la riviere), wurrangurraga. Derriere moi, dhurna-nganri.
Derriere toi dhurna-ngumari. Derrierelui, dhurna-gitthunari.




INITIATION CEREMONIES OF AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
> l'.




‘
11 I


VOL. XXXVII, No. 157, PLATE V.


11
ill
Ij


INITIATION CEREMONIES OF AUSTRALIAN TRIBES
(Plate V.)
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Read March 18, 1898.)
"Ihe Koombanggary tribe, which was at one time both numerous
and important, inhabits the country from the south side of the
Clarence river along the sea coast about as far as Nambucca, ex-
tending westerly almost to the main dividing range. On the south
they are bounded by the Thangatty tribe, occupying the Macleay
river. The Anaywan tribe, scattered over the table land of New
South Wales, bound the Thangatty and Koombanggary people on
REPRINTED FROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC., VOL. XXXVII, NO. 157.


MATHEWS —INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
thewest. As no description of the Burbung of these tribes has yet
been published, I have prepared the following brief account of that
ceremony as practiced within the district indicated. Their social
organization is after the Kamilaroi type, being divided into four
sections, 1 with numerous totems consisting of animals, plants and
other natural objects.
A Burbung is held at any time that there are a sufficient number
of boys old enough to be installed as tribesmen; and the headman
of the tribe, whose turn it is to take the initiative in calling the
people together for this purpose, is generally agreed upon at the
conclusion of the previous inaugural gathering which took place.
When the appointed time comes round, the tribe who are charged
with this duty select a suitable camping ground within their own
territory, and some of the initiated men commence preparing the
ground. While they are employed at this work, the principal head-
man dispatches messengers to such of the surrounding tribes as he
wishes to join in the ceremony. These men are selected from among
his own friends and belong to his own totem. Each messenger has
generally one or more other men with him to keep him company,
and he is provided with the emblems usually carried on such occa-
sions, namely, a bull-roarer, several articles of a man’s dress and
some native weapons. The conduct of these messengers on their
arrival in the proximity of the camp of the people to whom the
invitation has been sent is very similar to the procedure previously
explained in my descriptions of the initiation ceremonies of other
tribes.
The situation of the general encampment as regards water and
food supplies, and the location of the visiting tribes around the local
mob, are also substantially the same as already stated. In a retired
spot, a short distance from the main camp, the headmen have a
private meeting place, called the bunbul , where they congregate to
discuss such matters as they do not wish the women to hear. They
have one or more fires around which they sit, and none of the un-
initiated men are allowed near them. T. he women must not intrude
upon the butibul, even if the men are not there. The single women
and girls also have a place near the camp, but in the opposite direc-
tion, where they assemble to work at making nets, headbands and
1 I have given the names of the divisions of these people in my paper on “ The
Totemic Divisions of Australian Tribes,” Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales,
xxxi, 168-170.


56 MATHEWS—INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [March 18,
such like. Every aboriginal camp is kept free from excrementitious
matter. When the people go out to attend to any necessity of
nature, they at once make a hole in the ground and cover the
deposit over with earth.
In close proximity to the camp is the burbung or public ring,
bounded by a low earthen embankment, with a narrow sunken
pathway called maro, leading about four or five hundred yards into
the forest to another circular space, formed in the same manner,
known as the eeteemat, in the floor of which the butts of two sap-
lings are firmly inserted, having the rooty ends upwards. These
inverted stumps are called warringooringa, and are prepared in the
way described in my papers dealing with initiation ceremo-
nies elsewhere. 1 The maro enters both the circles through
a narrow opening left in the embankment, and the latter is
continued outward a few feet along either side of the path where
it meets the rings. Within the eeteemat there are also sometimes
two, and sometimes four, heaps of earth, about a foot and a half or
two feet high.
Around the outside of the ee teetnat and along both sides of the
pathway referred to, there are a number of trees marked with the
usual ‘moombeera devices, as well as the outlines of an iguana, a
squirrel, the new moon and other figures, all chopped into the bark
with a tomahawk. On one side of the path are some tracks of an
emu’s foot, cut into the surface of the ground a few feet apart, as if
made by that animal running along. These tracks lead away some
distance into the adjacent bush, forming a sort of curve or semi-
circle around the eeteemat ; and on following them up they are found
to terminate at the prone figure of an emu, ngooroon, formed by
heaping up the loose earth into the required shape. All over the
body of the emu thus drawn in high relief small twigs of the oak or
wattle tree are closely inserted to represent the feathers of the bird.
All the sticks and loose rubbish are scraped off the surface of the
ground for several yards around this figure, for the purpose of danc-
ing on.
Approaching the eeteemat, near one side of the pathway, there is
a low mound of earth about a foot high. This is called kooroor-
ballunga, and a fire is lit on top of it during the time that any per-
1(t The Bora of the Kamilaroi Tribes, n Jouvn, Authrop . Ittst, y xxv, 325.
2 The fronds or leaves of these trees bear some resemblance to the emu’s
feathers.


MATHEWS —INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
formance is going on, such as the arrival of a tribe, their daily
games and the ceremonial connected with the removal of the
novices.
In the vicinity of the marked trees is a gigantic human figure
named Dharroogan or Gowang, lying extended on the ground,
composed of the loose soil scraped off the surface for some yards
around. A little way farther on, near the eeteemat, is the prostrate
image of a wallaroo, formed in high relief in the same manner. In
building all the earthen figures just described, stones or pieces of
wood are first heaped up on the ground, almost to the height of the
object required, and on top of this the loose earth is thrown to com-
plete the figure and give it the necessary shape. The finished draw-
ing represents the intended animal in high relief on the surface of
the ground.
A rope made of stringy bark is stretched between two of the
marked trees which are not too far apart, and about midway along
this rope there is a bundle of leaves and finely frayed pieces of soft
bark, supposed to represent the rest of a ring-tail opossum. 1
When a strange tribe reaches a point somewhere within an easy
stage of the main camp they paint their bodies with colored clays
in accordance with the style customary in their tribe, after which
the journey forward is resumed, the men in the lead, with the women
and children following. On the approach of the strangers, the men
of the local mob, and also the men of previous contingents who
have arrived at the main camp, stand outside the burbung circle
with their spears and other weapons in their hands, and sway their
bodies to and fro. The new arrivals then march on in single file,
in a meandering line, each man carrying his weapons in his hands;
they enter the ring and march round and round until they are all
within it in a spiral fold. They now come to a stand and jump
about, the headman calling out the names of camping grounds,
water-holes, shady trees, etc., in their country. After this they
come out of the ring and each detachment of the hosts enter it in
succession and act in a similar manner. For example, the contin-
gent from Kempsey, who had arrived first, entered the ring and
called out the names of remarkable places; next, the contingent
from Armidale did likewise ; then the contingent from Tabulam,
and so on. Lastly, the men of the local Nymboi river mob enter
1 All the animals drawn upon the trees, or on the ground, represent the totems
of some of the people assembled at the main camp.
* w
• ;


58 MATHEWS—INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [March 18,
the ring and act in the same way. While this reception is being
accorded to the men, the women, novices and children go into the
camping ground and take up their quarters on the side nearest their
own country.
The men of the newly arrived contingent are next taken along
the track to the sacred ground, and are shown all the markings in
the soil and on the trees, the earthen figures in high relief, and
the fire, at each of which they dance and give a shout. They then
start along the tracks of the emu, some men being on one side and
some on the other, the front men pretending to be following the
marks in the ground. They make short grunt-like exclamations as
they run along and all the other men follow in a body. On reach-
ing the figure of the emu, they all give a shout and dance round on
the clear space before referred to.
They next assemble around the eeteernat and are shown the war-
rangooringa, on the roots of each of which an old man is sitting
performing magical feats. Some of the headmen enter the ring
dancing and singing round the heaps of earth and the warrangoo-
ringa, after which the two men descend from the latter and join the
others. All the wizards or “doctoi's” take their turn at produc-
ing rock-crystals, blood, string and other substances from different
parts of their bodies. After each trick, these clever fellows run
with their heads down amongst the men who are standing outside
the ring, who jump around to get out of their way. At the conclu-
sion of these performances all the men go back along the track, and at
about, say fifty yards from the bur bung, they are met by the novices,
who join the procession, taking their places with the men of their
own sectional division, 1 who enter the ring and dance round a few
times, naming remarkable localities in their several districts, their
totems, etc., and the women, who are standing around outside,
throw handfuls of leaves at them, after which they all disperse to
their respective quarters.
A week or two, and in some cases a much longer time, elapses
between the arrival of the first contingent and the last mob who
have been invited from the surrounding districts, so that the earlier
arrivals have a good while to wait at the main camp. During this
period carraborus are held almost every fine night, the different
tribes present taking their turn at providing the evening’s amuse-
ment. The men go out hunting every day and the women proceed
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxi, 169.


MATHEWS—INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
in search of vegetable food, but there are always some of the old
men and women in the camp. Each afternoon when the men re-
turn from the hunting or fishing expeditions, which have engaged
them during the earlier portion of the day, the men of the local
tribe start from the camp and walk away to the eeteemat, carrying a
boomerang or some other weapon in each hand. They are shortly
afterwards followed by the men of the other tribes, each mob start-
ing in the order of their arrival at the main camp. On reaching the
ring they look over the moombeera , the raised and carved figures on
the ground, the warrangooringa, etc., and go through practically
the same routine —and return to the burbung in the same manner —
as on the arrival of a new tribe. On some days during their visit
to the eeteemat , the bullroarer is sounded, and the men beat the
ground with pieces of bark held in the hand. It may be that a few
additional trees are marked on these occasions, or some improve-
ments are made in the earthen figures, or any other extra work
which may add to the embellishment of the ground.
As soon as convenient after the arrival of all the tribes who are
expected to join in the ceremony the headmen assemble, and after
a consultation among themselves they determine the day on which
the novices will be taken away for the purpose of initiation. The
Kooringal, or. band of men who are to take charge of the ceremo-
nies in the bush, are selected and the locality fixed where the women
are to erect the new camp and wait for the return of the novices.
On the morning which has been decided upon for taking the boys
away, the whole camp is astir at daylight. The painting of the
novices is now proceeded with, all of them being adorned with red
ochre and grease from head to foot. Each boy is then invested
with a girdle, to which four “ tails ” or kilts are attached, one hang-
ing down in front, one at each side and one behind. They are
then conducted into the burbung ring and placed sitting down on
the raised earthen wall, the boys of each tribe being in a group
by themselves on the side of the ring which is nearest their own
country. The mother of each novice is then seated outside the em-
bankment a few yards behind where he is sitting; his sisters and
the other women are placed on the ground a little farther back. A
screen of boughs is erected between each group of mothers and their
sons. One or more of the headmen now go along the groups of
novices and throw a rug over the head of each boy. All the women
and children are told to lie down and keep still, and are covered
' lip


60 MATHEWS—INITIATION - IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [March 18,
with rugs, bushes or grass, which have been placed in readiness for
the purpose. The women then commence making a low humming
or chanting noise, and several old men armed with spears keep
watch over them to see that no attempt is made to remove the cov-
ering or look about.
When these preliminaries have been completed, two men sound
bull-roarers ( yoolooduree or yeemboomul) in close proximity and a
few other men come along the path and run round inside the circle
beating the ground with pieces of bark, similar to those described
in my paper on The Burbung of the Wiradthuri Tribes A All the
men who are standing about the circle shout and beat their weapons
together, a separate detachment of men being located near each
group of women for this purpose. During the combined noise of
the bull-roarers, the shouting and the beating of the ground, the
guardians advance, and, assisted by some of their friends, raise the
novices on their shoulders and carry them away, their heads being
still covered with the rugs to prevent their seeing anything. The
novices are taken as far as the commencement of the moombeera,
where they are placed lying on the ground with the rugs spread over
them. Here they are kept a short time until the women depart
from the biirbung , particulars of which will be given presently.
This delay also furnishes an opportunity to the men who have been
chosen for the kooringal to go on to the kooroorballunga and paint
their bodies jet black with powdered charcoal and grease.
The novices are then raised to their feet and the rugs are adjusted
on their heads in such a manner that they can only see the ground
in front of them. Their guardians lead them along the pathway
and they are shown the marked trees, the drawings on the ground,
the fire, the squirrel’s nest, etc., and are told to take particular no-
tice of all these things. They are next conducted along the tracks
of the emu until they reach the bird lying on the ground, as already
described, around which some old men dance and all the people
give a shout. After this they proceed to the eeteemat, and the
novices are placed standing in a row. On being told to raise their
eyes, they see two old men sitting on the warrangooritiga exhibit-
ing different substances out of their mouths, whilst some of the
other men are dancing around the heaps of earth. An old man
with a coolamin of human blood now approaches the novices and
rubs some of the blood on their wrists. The guardians again bend
I Journ . Ant hr op. Inst.,xxv, 308, PI. xxvi, Fig. 40.


MATHEWS —INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
down the boys’ heads and a start is made for the bush. The war-
rangooringa stumps are then pulled out of the ground and placed
upon the fire, some of the men remaining in the vicinity until they
are consumed.
I must now take the reader back to the burbling ring. Shortly
after the guardians and novices get out of sight, the bushes and
other coverings are taken off the women and children by the men
who have remained in charge of them. They then gather up their
baggage and remove to another locality, perhaps several miles dis-
tant, where they erect a new camp, each tribe selecting their quar-
ters on the side of the camping ground nearest their own country.
Before starting from the burbung, a pole is inserted in the ground in
a slanting position, elevated and pointing in the direction of the
place where the new camp is to be established. If this locality is
some distance off, a long pole is used, making a considerable angle
with the horizon, but if the camp is not far away, the pole is shorter
and the angle of elevation less. The upper end is decorated by
having a bunch of green boughs, grass or feathers attached to it.
This indicator is left for the guidance of any natives who may
arrive at the main camp after the assemblage has broken up.
As already stated, the novices have started with the men into the
bush. They march along with the rugs projecting on each side of
the face like a hood—their guardians being with them, and the
other men following, making a considerable noise. During the
afternoon they arrive at the place where it is intended they shall
remain for the night. A semicircular yard is made of bushes or
bark, and the novices are placed sitting on leaves spread upon the
ground, their backs being toward the men’s camp, which may be
fifty or sixty yards away. This camp is called karpan. Between
the men’s quarters and the yard in which the novices are kept a
space is cleared of all loose rubbish, and one or more fires lit to
afford sufficient illumination. After the evening meal has been
disposed of, the boys are brought out of their yard and are put
sitting down facing the fires, while the Kooringal go through
various pantomimic representations and traditional songs. These
performances consist for the most part of imitating animals with
which the people are familiar, or scenes from their daily life ; and,
like the ceremonials of other savage races, are largely mixed with
obscene gestures. The animals selected include, amongst others,
the totems of some of the novices, the headmen and the kooringal.
* f;


62 MATHEWS —INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [March 18,
During the day the men go out hunting, to provide food for all
the party, but the novices remain in the camp in charge of a few of
their guardians. Several days may be spent in one camp, or per-
haps a fresh camping place is reached every night, especially if
game is scarce. In the latter case it would be necessary for the
novices and guardians to accompany the rest of the men. The
novices march along with the rugs on their heads, and when stop-
pages are made in the bush they are placed sitting on the ground
with their hands clutching their genitals. On arriving at the place
which has been agreed upon as the camping ground for the night,
a yard is made for the boys in the usual manner. During the
evenings at these camping places human ordure is occasionally
given to the novices in addition to their daily food. If they want
anything they are not allowed to ask for it, but must make a sign to
the guardian who has charge of them. Some or all of the men who
are not attached to the kooringal may go away for a day or two to
another camping place some miles distant in quest of food, and
contribute a fair share of game to the maintenance of the novices
and guardians.
The period spent in the bush with the kooringal is about ten
days or a fortnight, being regulated by the weather and other con-
siderations. Different burlesques and songs take place every day,
but the general character of the procedure is the same. If the
wombat totem is. represented, the kooringal crawl under a log as if
going into a wombat’s hole; if they select the scrub-turkey, all
the men scratch the ground with their feet, kicking the rubbish
backwards into a large heap resembling the nest of those birds; and
so on for any other totems which may be represented.
When the course of instruction in the bush is nearly completed,
some strange men, called irghindaly or wyendee, come from the
ahrowanga, or women’s camp. They belong to a distant part of
the tribal territory, and this is their first participation in the cere-
mony. On approaching the karpan, they utter a weird noise, like
the howling of the wild dog, and advance in single file, each man
holding a leafy bough in front of him, which hides the upper part
of his body. The novices are led to believe that a strange mob of
blacks are coming to attack the camp. They are then raised to
their feet, and placed standing in a row, with their guardians, some
of the kooringal, standing on the right and some on the left of the’
row of boys, having the latter in the middle, holding their hands


MATHEWS—INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
to their ears. By this time the irghindaly have reached the camp,
and form into a line parallel with and facing the row of men and
novices. They jump and shake their boughs, and then, throwing
the latter on the ground, they retire a few yards. The kooringal
now step forward and pick up the boughs and strip the leaves off
them, shouting wah / wah / while doing so. The irghindaly then
consult with the headmen, and arrange the time for the return of
the novices to the ahrowanga , after which they go back to the
camp from which they have come, and inform the women when the
oys may be expected. The mission of the irghindaly is analogous
to that of the beegay of the Kamilaroi, described by me elsewhere,
namely, to liberate the novices from the rigorous custody of the
kooringal.
That evening at the karpan, by the light of the camp fires, some
of the usual totemic representations are enacted by the kooringal
after which some of the old men chant Dharroogan's song. About
sunrise next morning the novices are placed standing in a row
beside the camp, with their eyes cast upoh the ground. All the
men then run about pretending to throw pieces of stick at a squirrel
in a tree, and while they are doing so two men step into an open
space and swing the yooloodury. The blankets are then lifted off
the heads of the novices, who are requested to take particular notice
o this ceremony. Some armed warriors now rush up to each of
the novices in a menacing attitude, and caution them against
revealing what they have been taught during their sojourn in the
bush. At the conclusion of these proceedings, everything is packed
up and a start made toward the women’s camp.
After proceeding some miles the party come to a halt at a water-
ole or running stream. Here a fire is lit, and they partake of such
game as may have been caught during the morning. By and by
all the kooringal gather on the bank of the water-hole or creek, and
one after another goes into the water, washing off the black coloring
matter, after which they come out, and paint their bodies all over
wit i pipe clay. During this time the novices are sitting on the
bank of the water-hole—or near the fire if the day is cold-and do
not participate in the washing and painting ceremony. This watei-
hole is one which is always used for the same purpose at every
burbun S which takes place in this part of the tribal territory, and is
?ever used for bathing on any other occasion. The journey forward
“T® resumed ’ ail d one of the men goes on ahead to report that the
bush contingent will shortly arrive.


64 MATHEWS —INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [March 18,
I must now give some further particulars of the new camp erected
by the women, referred to in an earlier page. The same camp
may be occupied all the time the novices are away, or the women
may shift to a fresh camping ground every few nights, in conformi y
with the movements of the kooringal. A patch of ground is cleared
near each of these camping places, to which the mothers and
sisters of the novices repair every evening for the purpose of sing-
ing and dancing during the time the boys are away in the bush wit
thf headmen. As soon as the women are informed of the day which
has been fixed for the return of the kooringal, they proceed to th
cleared space and erect an avenue of boughs, called the
in the following manner. In this work they are assisted by the old
men who have been with them all the time, and also by the trghm-
Jaly contingent. A number of small green saplings are cut down
with tomahawks, and the stems are inserted in holes ,n ‘
ground, all in a line-the bushy tops being sufficiently clree
together to make a leafy screen, about four feet hig . e
from this, another line of saplings is set up, parallel with the otto
The two rows of boughs are fixed in the ground with a slant
toward each other, so that their tops almost meet overhead, forming
a kind of arched avenue long enough to hold all the kooringa .
few yards on one side of this avenue, and parallel thereto, the
women light about four fires, beyond which they sit down in a row,
and commence chanting in monotonous tones. .
When all is ready, a signal is given by the men who have charge
of the women, and the bush mob approach in single file, all painted
white, as already stated. On coming in sight of the
the novices and their guardians stop behind, and.go to anothe
camp a little way off, where they remain for the night.
are now told to lie down, and are covered with bushes The
kooringal march on and enter the avenue of bushes, one after
other and sit down with their legs gathered under them in he
2% native fashion. During this time a small taU-«»rer. ca led
dhalgungun, is sounded out of sight in the rear. A few o fthe
men jump round outside the avenue, beating together two boom
erangs, and muttering wcoh , wooh / After going round wo M
three times, theyshout birr, birr / and ali the-women standlupan
dance round the men who are hidden in the avenue. After going
round a few times, the women commence pulling down the b g
screen, upon which all the kooringal rise to their feet, a


MATHEWS —INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
commence pulling the bushes out of the ground, breaking them
smaller and throwing them on the fires as they jump about. The
women also assist in breaking the twigs off the boughs and placing
them on the fires. By this time a dense smoke is issuing from the
burning bushes, and some of the kooringal stand in the smoke
around each fire until they are all sufficiently fumigated. A few of
the old headmen stand round directing the proceedings, and the
irghindaly assist in throwing bushes on the fires when more smoke
is required. While the kooringal are standing on the smouldering
boughs, the women come up and rub their hands on them, ostensi-
bly to wipe the white paint off them. When the ceremony is over
it is getting near sundown, and the kooringal mix with the women
and irghindaly, and all of them go into the camp adjacent.
During the forenoon of the following day the mothers and sisters
of the novices, accompanied by some of the men, again muster at
the arroivanga, but on this occasion no bough screen is erected, and
the women are allowed to see everything which takes place. Some
fires are lit and green bushes cut and laid rofind ready for use. At
the camp to which the novices and their guardians went the even-
ing before preparations are also made for the approaching cere-
mony. The bodies of the boys are smeared over with ashes from
the camp fires, and the hair of their heads is singed, to make the
women believe that they have been burnt by the evil spirit and
have just emerged from the fire. After a mutual interchange of
signals that everything is ready at both camps the guardians and
novices start forward, marching two and two till they arrive at the
arrowanga. As they approach the women shout “ Heh ! heh !” and
throw pieces of bark over their heads. The irghindaly lay some of
the green bushes on the fires and each guardian conducts his novice
into the smoke, which curls upward around them both. The
mothers of the boys, who have been standing on one side, now ad-
vance and rub their open hands over the bodies of their sons, after
which they rub their teats on their mouths. The sisters of the
novices next step forward and rub their feet on their brothers’
ankles. During the whole of this ceremony the novices keep their
eyes cast down, and do not look at their mothers or sisters. A
signal is now given and they scamper off with their guardians to a
camp which has been prepared for them not far away.
At the conclusion of the ceremonies at the arrowanga all the
tribes shift camp to another place, perhaps a few miles away, and


66 MATHEWS—INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [March 18,
next morning the novices are brought up in close proximity, where
they are again smoked, after which they are invited to partake of
food spread upon nets by the women. They are then conducted to
a camp a little way from the men’s quarters, where the old head-
men show them quartz crystals and other sacred substances; and
also small pieces of wood called bandhanyay or kungara, On which
certain mystic lines are made, said to be the work of Dharroogan.
They are forbidden to eat certain kinds of food until released from
these restrictions by the old men.
The ceremonies being now at an end, the visiting tribes make
preparations for starting on their return journey, and in a few days
most of them are on their way homeward, each tribe taking their
own novices with them. The latter are kept under the control
of their seniors for a considerable time, and must conform to cer-
tain rules laid down by the headmen. It is also necessary that they
shall attend one or more additional Burbling gatherings before they
can become thoroughly acquainted with the different parts of the
ceremonial and be fully qualified to take their place as men of the
tribe.
On the Macleay river there is an abbreviated form of inaugural
rite, known as the Murrawin , and among the tribes occupying the
Nymboi and Mitchell rivers there is a short ceremony called the
Walloonggurra. Both these rites are of a probationary character,
leading up to the fuller ceremonial of the burbling, from which
they differ in so many respects that I have thought it necessary to
describe them in separate articles.
Before cannibalism ceased to be practiced by the tribes dealt
with in this paper it was the custom to kill and eat a man during
the burbling ceremonies. The victim was an initiated man of the
tribe, and his flesh and blood were consumed by the men and
novices. I am preparing an article dealing fully with this and
similar customs, so that further reference is unnecessary at present.
Explanation of Plate V.
The burbling described in the preceding pages completes a series
of articles written by me on the different types of initiatory rites
of the aboriginal tribes scattered over the whole of New South Wales.
I have now prepared a map of the colony, defining the boun-
daries of the several districts within which each type of ceremony


is in force. On this map I have marked the approximate position
of these boundaries, and have assigned to each district a distin-
guishing numeral, from 1 to 9, so that they can be readily identi-
fied. It is outside the purpose of this paper to define the areas
occupied by the people speaking the different dialects prevalent in
each district, but the names of some of the most important of them
will be stated in a general way under each number. The reader
will be referred to certain articles which I have published describ-
ing the initiation ceremonies, and also the totemic divisions of the
tribes located inside the boundaries shown upon the map.
No. 1 on the map represents a wide zone of country stretching
from near the Murray river almost to the Barwon, occupied chiefly
by the Wiradjuri-speaking people. This includes the Wonghibons,
a branch of the Wiradjuri, who are spread over the country from
Mossgiel to Nyngan. 1 On the Lower Murrumbidgee and extending
up the Murray from about Euston are several small tribes speaking
the following dialects : The Eetha-eetha, Watthi-watthi, Kianigani,
Yuppila, Yota Yota, Boorabirraba and soihe others on the upper
Murray whose initiation ceremonies are the same as the Wiradjuri.
For my descriptions of the burbling of these people the reader is
invited to peruse the following publications: Journ. Anthrop. Inst.
London, Vol. xxv, pp. 295-318; Ibid., Vol. xxvi, pp. 272-275.
Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q.), Vol. xi, pp. 167-169, and
Journ, Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxi, pp. m-153. I have
also dealt with their totemic division in the last-named work, pp.
171-176.
No. 2 includes the country of the Kamilaroi, Yookumble, Wal-
laroi, Pickumble, Yuollary, Wailwan, Moorawarree and a few
others. The Bora ceremony of these tribes is described by me in the
following works: Journ. Anthrop. Inst. London, Vol. xxiv, pp.
411-427; Ibid., Vol. xxv, pp. 318-339; Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S.
Wales, Vol. xxviii, pp. 98-129; Ibid., Vol. xxx, pp. 211-213;
Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, Vol. ix, N. S., pp. 137-173. I have
described their totemic divisions in Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales,
Vol. xxxi, pp. 156-168.
No. 3. In this tract of country the Bunan ceremony is in force.
Some of the dialects are the Thurrawall, Wodi Wodi, Jeringin,
Ngarroogoo, Beddiwell, Mudthang, Dhooroomba, Gundungurra
1 Mr. A. L. P. Cameron kindly furnished me with the location of the Wong
hibon, Eethee Eethee and Watthi Watthi tribes.


68 MATHEWS —INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [March 18,
and Wonnawal. I have given a comprehensive account of this
ceremony, with a plate illustrating the Bunan ground and the dif-
ferent objects connected with it in the American Anthropologist,
Washington, Vol. ix, pp. 327-344.
No. 4 represents the country occupied by the tribes speaking
the Darkinung, Wannerawa, Warrimee, Wannungine, Dharrook
and some other dialects. Their country commences at the Hunter
river and extends southerly till it meets and merges into that of the
people of No. 3. Their ceremony of initiation is known as the
Narramang, which is described in a paper published in Proc. Roy.
Soc. Victoria, Vol. x, N. S., pp. 1-12. Their totemic system is
dealt with in Journ. Roy. Soc. JV. S. IVales, Vol. xxxi, pp.
170-171.
No. 5- Within this area, which extends from the Hunter river
almost to the Macleay, the initiation ceremonies are of the Keeparra
type described by me in Journ. A?ithrop. Inst. London, Vol. xxvi,
pp. 320-340. This tract of country is inhabited by the remnants
of the tribes speaking different dialects, some of the most important
of which are the following : Wattung, Gooreenggai, Minyowa, Molo,
Kutthack, Bahree, Karrapath, Birrapee, etc. North of the Hunter
river and extending along the sea coast to about Cape Hawk there
is an elementary ceremony called Dhalgai, which I have included
in the article last quoted.
No. 6 represents the hunting grounds of the tribes whose initia-
tion ceremonies are dealt with in the preceding pages. Their sec-
tional divisions are the same as the tribes in No. 5, and are described
in Jour. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxi, pp. 168-170.
No. 7 comprises the country of the Bunjellung, Gidjoobal,
Kahwul, Nowgyjul, Watchee, Yackarabul, Ngandowul and some
other small tribes, whose initiation ceremonies are of the Wandarral
type, described by me in Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, Vol. x, N. S.,
pp. 29-42. Districts Nos. 2,7, 8 and 9 cross the boundary of
Queensland, and Nos. 1 and 8 extend some distance into the Vic-
torian frontier.
No. 8. On the west of Nos. i and 2 are the Barkunji, Bung-
yarlee, Bahroongee, Wombungee, Noolulgo and some other tribes,
occupying the country on both sides of the Darling river, as well as
on the Lower Paroo and Warrego. South of the Murray river are
several small tribes, among which may be mentioned the Wamba
Wamba, Waiky Waiky, Latjoo Latjoo, Mutti Mutti, etc. I have


1898.] MATHEWS —INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. 69
referred to the totemic divisions of the Barkunji and kindred tribes
in Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust., Queensland, Vol. x, p. 32. Their
initiation ceremonies are described by me elsewhere.
No. 9. In this triangular portion of New South Wales we
encounter the advance guard of those tribes who practice circum-
cision and subincision, extending thence northerly into Queensland
and westerly into South Australia. The customs of these people
will be dealt with by me in another article.
APPENDIX.
The Nguttan Initiation Ceremony.
In this article it is intended to give a short account of the Nguttan,
an abbreviated ceremony of initiation practiced by the native tribes
of the Williams and Gloucester rivers and surrounding country.
Although it is not necessary to muster the whole community for the
purpose of installing the youths into the privileges of tribesmen by
means of the Nguttan , yet it is always thought safest to consult with
the headmen of some of the nearest neighboring tribes, who may
also have one or more youths old enough to pass through the ordeal.
The preliminaries are arranged by means of messengers, and when
the appointed time comes round the tribes proceed to the appointed
meeting place. Here the combined concourse indulge in corrobo-
ries and songs at night by the camp fires. The men of each tribe
dance in their turn and their women beat time for them.
When the festivities have lasted for a few days the headmen
decide upon the time for taking away the novices. Early on the
appointed morning all the men assemble under pretense of going on
a hunting expedition, or perhaps they represent that they are making
an incursion into the country of a hostile tribe for the purpose of
avenging some supposed injury. The novices are mustered out of
their mothers’ camps and are taken charge of by the men. The
women are not told anything about these proceedings, but all the
elder ones and those who have been present at similar gatherings
before form their own conclusions in regard to the purpose of the
meeting.
A number of the men, with the novices amongst them, start first,
and are immediately followed by the rest of the men, singing and
shouting as they march along in the rear. The novices are told that


these incantations are for the purpose of making a plentiful supply
of game, or to cause them to be victorious over their enemies. The
men are painted in the manner customary on these expeditions.
After traveling perhaps several miles they come to a water-hole or
running stream, where a halt is made. The novices are now taken
charge of by the men who have been appointed for this duty.
Each of these men is the brother-in-law—actually or collaterally—
of the graduate who has been placed under his care.
The novices are stripped naked, and after being painted are
placed sitting cross-legged on the ground, with both hands grasping
their genitalia and their heads bowed toward their breasts. Their
guardians and some of their relatives remain with them, but all the
other men go away, taking their departure quietly and a few at a
time so that the boys may not know that they are gone. These
men go away to a suitable camping ground, perhaps a mile or two
distant, which has previously been agreed upon, and there they
erect a camp of bark or bushes and spread leaves on the ground for
the novices to lie upon. They then go into the bush hunting to
provide food for themselves and the rest of the party. Late in the
afternoon the guardians and other men who remained with the.
novices bring the latter to this new camp—each boy with his eyes
cast down and being forbidden to look at anything around him—
and place them lying down upon the leaves with rugs thrown over
them. Fires are lit near where they are lying, 1 and they are sub-
jected to considerable heat, which causes them to perspire very
freely, but they are not permitted to move and must keep silent.
During the evening, perhaps an hour after sundown, by the light
of the camp-fires, some of the usual totemic dances, described by me
in previous communications, and other instructive performances, are
gone through by the men, and the novices are allowed to sit up and
look at them. Some of the men exhibit their genitals to the boys
and invite them to pay especial attention to a number of other
obscene gestures. After this human excrement is thrown to the
novices, which they are required to eat, and also to drink urine out
of a native vessel. At the conclusion of these proceedings all hands
lie down for the night.
Early next morning about half the men start away without the
knowledge of the boys and go into the bush in quest of food.
1 Compare with the fire ordeal described by me in “ The Bunan Ceremony of
N. S. Wales,” in the American Anthropologist (1896), Vol. ix, pp. 335, 336.


1898.] MATHEWS —INITIATION IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. 71
About midday they return, and on coming within hearing of the
camp they commence making a weird noise, like the howling of the
native dog, and advance in single file, each man carrying a leafy
bough which hides his face and chest. When these men, who are
called ghirrang, reach the camp where the novices are they spread
out in a line and spring up into the air, waving their arms and
uttering grunt-like exclamations. The novices are led to believe
that the ghirrang belong to a hostile tribe and will perhaps attack
them and their guardians.
The ghirrang and other men then produce several small sheets of
bark stripped from trees, on which some dharroong devices have
been carved, similar to the marks on the trees standing around a Kee-
parra ground. 1 These pieces of bark are placed at intervals of a few
yards along the cleared space which was used for dancing and per-
forming upon the previous night. The novices are now brought
out in front of these pieces of bark and are invited to take particu-
lar notice of them. They are at first shown the dharroong on one
sheet of bark, and are then taken to each of the others in succes-
sion, but are not allowed to speak a word.
When this part of the ceremony has been disposed of, the men
form into two divisions—one mob standing on one side of the
cleared space and another mob on the other side—the graduates
being placed in a row facing them. The humming sound of the
bull-roarer, mudthinga, is now heard a little way in the rear, and
almost immediately two men step out into the opening, each man
swinging one of these instruments at the end of a string. The usual
obligations of secrecy are then imposed upon the neophytes, after
which the sacred mudthinga is rubbed upon their penises, chests,
arms and other parts of their bodies. While doing this the string
of the bull-roarer is placed round each lad’s neck in rotation.
The guardians, novices, and all the rest of the men now start
away from that place, and proceed toward the women’s camp—
which, it should be mentioned, was removed to another locality
the same day the men and boys went away. A man is sent
ahead to announce that the contingent from the bush will return
presently, and upon receipt of this message the women muster on
a level, open parcel of land contiguous to their camp. Here the
mothers of the neophytes spread nets upon the ground, on which
1 See my “ Keeparra Ceremony of Initiation,” Journ. Anthrop. Inst., Vol.
xxvi, pp. 320-338, PI. xxxii, Figs. 6 to 13.


they lay food for the use of their sons. The sisters of the novices
and the other women also assemble near this spot, which is called
ngurra nyalla.
When these preliminaries have been arranged, the men and boys
come marching on, painted and dressed in their full regalia as men
of the tribe, and as they approach the women throw sticks over
their heads. The novices step forward to the nets, and eat the
food which their mothers have provided for them. After this the
women return to their own camp, but*the graduates are taken by
their guardians to a place near the single men’s quarters. During
that evening some of the old headmen show the novices the sacred
white stones, which are so much valued by all native tribes.
These white stones, which in this district are called buggan , are
said to be found in the scrubby mountains beyond Bandon Grove,
near the head of the Williams river, and are supposed to be the
excrement of Gan Mudyer Dhingga (Goen of the Hairy Hands), a
malevolent being who has his abode in these mountain fastnesses.
A number of clever old men—the so-called wizards of their tribes
—used to make periodical expeditions into these regions for the
purpose of obtaining supplies of the buggan. On these occasions it
was not considered safe for a man to travel alone, but it was neces-
sary that several should go in company. At their camps at night
they were required to sing songs similar to those which form part
of the keeparra ceremonial, and the camp-fires had to be main-
tained by burning certain kinds of wood to be found in that dis-
trict. During the night, while the old men were asleep, Goen was
supposed to appear, accompanied by some of his coadjutors, and put
white stones into their dilly bags.
If any of the old men of the company had been remiss in their
observance of any of the tribal customs, they would keep awake,
holding a burning brand in their hand, in order to protect them-
selves against Gcen’s evil designs. The only way in which such
men could secure the sacred buggan was to search for them along
the sides of hills or watercourses, where they had been deposited by
Goen.
Every youth who graduates through the Nguttan is required to
attend the next keeparra ceremony which takes place among his
own people—or the burbung of those tribes who adjoin them on the
northwest—in order that he may receive further instruction in the
sacred initiatory rites of the community.


Short or probationary forms of inauguration ceremonies are found
in several districts, and a knowledge of them is highly valuable, as
exhibiting the various stages through which a youth must pass before
he is qualified to take his place as a full man of his tribe. In a
different portion of the same tract of country, there is another ele-
mentary ceremony known as the Dhalgai , described by me else-
where. 1 Both the Nguttan and the Dhalgai are practiced in parts
of the geographical area represented as No. 5 on the map of New
South Wales hereto appended (Plate V).
1 “ The Dhalgai Ceremony,” Journ. Anthrop. Inst., Vol. xxvi, pp. 338-340.




[From the American Anthropologist for October, 1896]
THE BUNAN CEREMONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
R. H. MATHEWS
Among all the aboriginal tribes of Australia, when the boys
approach the age of puberty a ceremony to initiate them into
the privileges and responsibilities of manhood takes place. In
this paper I propose to describe the initiation ceremonies of the
native tribes occupying the southeast coast of New South Wales
from about the Victorian boundary northerly to Bulli, a distance
.of about 300 miles, and extending inland from 80 to 100 miles.
Among the tribes inhabiting this district and parts of the counties
of Wallace, Cowley, and Murray the ceremony is called the
buntin.
The tribes occupying the territory to the westward gradually
merge into the Wiradthuri community, and the latter extends
westerly down Murray and Murrumbidgee rivers to somewhere
near their junction. The initiation ceremonies of the W iradthuri
tribes referred to are known as the burbung.
The Wiradthuri and coast tribes attended oue another’s meet-
ings for the initiation ceremonies, as old men of Shoalhaven river
have told me that they attended the burbung on Tumut river,
and some of the Wiradthuri people about Yass have stated that
they were present at the bunan at Queanbeyan or Braidwood.
Along the zone or tract of country where the Wiradthuri and
coast tribes join each other the ceremonial of the burbung and
buntin respectively would probably be found to have some modi-
fications of detail to meet the views of both communities.
As a type of the initiation ceremonies throughout the coast
district comprised within the limits previously laid down, I shall


select the tribes who occupy Shoalhaven river and adjacent dis-
tricts, and will endeavor to give a detailed description of the
bundn as carried out among them.
The main camp and Bundn ground. —The tribe in whose country
the bundn is to take place finds a suitable locality within its own
territory and selects a ground which has previously been used.
The women know nothing of these arrangements, but the camp
is shifted to some place not far from the selected spot, and the
men commence renovating or making the ring. In the evening
they assemble at the wurrawurrudthang, and the headman, fol-
lowed by the others, all with a bough in each hand, runs through
the camp, taking a serpentine course. They make frequent
pauses, first swaying their boughs downward and then raising
them over their heads, uttering guttural noises the while. They
then form into a group in a clear space, shout out the names of
the principal camping places, water holes, etc, in their country,
and disperse.
When the women who have been to a bundn before see this
procession and hear the noise they know there is to be a general
gathering of the tribes for the purpose of initiating the boys.
The whole tribe —men, women, and children—next day remove
to the place selected for the general encampment, generally on
a moderately level piece of ground, not far from water, and where
plenty of wood for fuel is obtainable. The local tribe is the first
to pitch its camp, and the other tribes encamp around this. On
a cleared space in the central part of the camp corroborees are
held almost every night. (Plate vi, figure 1, a, b, c.)
At a retired spot in the bush, a short distance from the general
camp, the headmen have a private meeting place called ivur-
rawurrudihang, where they congregate to consult on such tribal
concerns as may be brought before them by the leading men of
the several contingents present, and also to arrange the various
details of the ceremonies. Here they have a fire around which
they sit, and none but the initiated men are allowed near it.
(Figure 1, d.)
As soon as the local tribe have erected their camp the initiated
men proceed with the preparation of the bundn ground work,
generally carried on while the messengers are away gathering
the tribes.
The last bundn which was held by the Shoalhaven river tribes




AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST
VOL. IX, PL. VI
Fig-1
Fig. 4
*"N
Fig- 2
1 f i
] r?v!
i
1
I:
%
\
w/
-;7-
\
\ Ai.
) i
' i
1 £
V
\ \}
Sc: ;
j
i
■4
ii
j
CO
t(
Fig. 3
5*-.
\
Fig. 5
II
ec
1
!>
r /
I i
\
_A
kb
00.
1
a>
kb
e
•
•
•
••••••• •«
Fig. 6
kr
kb
.. frump
9
•
•
•
> #
9
• #
0
•
i t
i
f
2>
A
A
•
•
9
•
•
•
•
e
0
•
•
• •
•e
•
i
• e
Ft
g.£
f
j
1
%
1
s/^S
g
%
y
1
ll
cu
■>
T
c.
"T
.
e'
. —j
f
y
■U.
Fig. 7
Chains
o l 2
3 4-
Scales
Fu,.l
12
\6
•
•
• •
•
•
cL &
•*:
b
Cs
• •
• •
• s
•
\ •
• • •
1/
•
Feet
O 5 io
20
Figs
iO
2t*7
40 ie
60
70
80
.*
•
•
•.
•
f\
c,
•.
•
•
•
• •
•
•
V
Feet
0 l 2
4„,f - r ,-
Fig. 8
•
\z
16
dj &
*3
/f // Afafhetvs detf.
THU BUNAN CEREMONY


Oct. 1896] THE BUNAN CEREMONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 329
took place about eight or ten years ago, at a place two miles and
a half N. 13° W. from Cooloomgatta trigonometrical station, in
the parish of Cooloomgatta, county of Camden, New South
Wales. Last year I visited the bun&n ground with some abo-
riginal natives and found it in a tolerably good state of preser-
vation. I took careful and complete sketches and measurements
of all its surroundings, from which I have prepared accurate
drawings, which will now be described.
The general camp (figure 1) was pitched on level land in a
forest, near a small watercourse rising in the western side of the
Moean range and flowing southwesterly into Broughton creek,
a tributary of Shoalhaven river.
About six chains from the center of the camp was cleared a
circular space, called the bun&n, measuring 34 feet 9 inches in
one diameter and 32 feet 6 inches in another. The loose soil
scraped off in making it smooth was used to form the boundary
and was about a foot or more in height. A narrow pathway led
from this circle to a smaller cleared space, whose diameters were
18 feet 6 inches and 16 feet 6 inches (figure 4). This circular
space, like the larger one, is bounded by a raised earth wall. In
each of these circles there is an opening left as an entrance for
the pathway, and the embankment is continued outward about
8 feet along each side of the pathway in both instances (figures
3 and 4). Standing at the larger circle the magnetic bearing
therefrom to the smaller one is N. 50° E. and the distance from
one to the other is 265 paces.
Starting from the larger ring and proceeding along the track,
at the distance of 158 yards, on the left side, is a raised earthen
figure of a human being 7 feet long and surrounded by an em-
bankment similar to those used in defining the boundaries of
the rings, but not so high (figure 5, g).
At the distance of 236 yards from the starting point, or 29
yards from the smaller ring, on the same side of the track as the
figure last described, was a heap of earth a foot high, having
a basal diameter of about two feet. It was surrounded by a
raised earthen wall, like the preceding figure, a space about a
foot wide being left between the heap and the circular embank-
ment, along which some of the old men danced, waving their
arms to and fro (figures 1 and 6, h ).
Inside the smaller ring (figure 4) was a horizontal representa-


tion of Dharamoolun, about 8 feet long, formed by heaping up
the loose earth, the height of the earth at the man’s breast being
about a foot. During the ceremonies a quartz crystal is laid on
the head of this figure.
At the time of my visit the foregoing were the only figures dis-
tinguishable on the turf, but my native guides stated that when
the bun&n ground was freshly formed a number of nondescript
patterns and devices were cut in the soil similar to those shown
in the plates illustrating my papers describing the initiation
ceremonies of the Ivamilaroi and Wiradthuri tribes, 1 My guides
also pointed out some faint, indistinct forms of animals, also
made by means of raised earth or by cutting a nick or groove
into the surface of the soil along their outline. There were thus
represented the porcupine, the kangaroo, fish, snakes, and others.
In the raised figure of the porcupine the quills were represented
by inserting numerous small sticks.
Around the small ring and for a distance of 130 yards near
each side of the track toward the larger circle a number of trees
were marked with the tomahawk, some of them close to the
track and others at various distances. I counted 29 marked
trees and copied the devices on nine of the most representative
of them, which are shown in figure 8, ato i. All the figures and
devices, whether raised or graven upon the ground or cut upon
trees, are known by the native name of muttima.
Around each important figure on the ground a space was
cleared on which the men could walk, and a similar space
around each of the marked trees, the loose soil being scraped
into heaps encircling the butts of the trees.
Gathering the tribes.— The headman of the tribe whose turn it
is to call the community together sends messengers to the various
tribes whom he wishes to be present at the ceremonies, and in
this matter the totems are regarded—that is, the messengers are
generally of the same totem as the sender of the message, though
they may be chosen on account of their fitness for the duty, irre-
spective of totemic distinctions. It not unlfequently happens
that a messenger is sent on his mission alone, but men are gen-
erally sent together, one of whom belongs to a different tribe to
the headman who issues the message. The tribe to whom the
i Journ. Anthrop. Inst., London, xxiv, pp. 411-427.


Oct. 1896] THE BUNAN CEREMONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 331
two messengers are sent pay more attention to them if one is
from a remote part of the territory. The strange man merely
accompanies'the messenger, who is provided with a bullroarer
(' mooroonga, or mudthi), a quartz crystal, and all the articles worn
by a man when fully dressed. In some tribes a l ' message stick ”
is carried in addition to these emblems. He carries his own
weapons with him and has yellow or white paint on his legs
from the knees down and the same color on his forehead band.
His companion is similarly decorated.
On the arrival of a messenger at a camp, usually in the after-
noon or early in the morning—because at these times the men
are at home —he sits down in sight of the camp of the single
men. Some of the men go and speak to him, lighting a fire and
offering him food and water. On learning that he has a message
to deliver they go and inform the chief men, who come to where
he is sitting. After some conversation the messenger opens his
bag and produces the mooroonga , the crystals, and other articles,
and delivers the message, stating who it is from and the time
when and place where the bun&n is to be held. He then pro-
ceeds with the rest to the single men’s quarters, and all the
initiated men in the camp are called and informed of the mes-
sage. All then run in a serpentine line through the women’s
camp, making.a peculiar noise, by which the women know of
the call for a meeting for the bun&n, and there is general rejoic-
ing. Having gone in this manner through the camp, the men
form into a group in a clear space close by and dance round a
few times, calling out the names of a few camping places, etc,
after which they disperse to their own quarters. That evening,
after dark, the messenger swings his bullroarer a short distance
from the camp and the women commence singing the songs
usual on such occasions.
The next day or perhaps in a few days’ time the messenger
leaves this camp and proceeds on his journey to deliver a like
message to another tribe. He would thus proceed until he
reaches the farthest tribe or section of a tribe whom he has been
directed to summon. Sometimes, however, the messenger goes
no farther than the first tribe, the headman of whom sends the
message on by one of his own men, of the same totem as the
original messenger, who carries the message to a man of the same
totem in the tribe to whom he has been sent.


THE AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST
[Vol. IX
At the several places where the tribes camp at night by the
way corroborees are generally held at night at the camp fires.
When within a few days’ journey of the bundn ground a man is
sent forward to inform the headmen there that the tribe will
arrive about a certain day. Frequently no such notice is given,
because the men at the main camp are expecting arrivals from
different places and are always ready painted every afternoon.
Moreover, it adds to the excitement of the meeting for these con-
tingents to come without warning.
Arrival of contingents. —When a strange tribe arrives to within
half a mile from the general encampment a halt is made while
the men paint themselves with pipe-clay, drawing lines on their
faces, chests, and limbs; they also put on all their articles of
dress and arrange feathers in their hair.
When all is ready the messenger who has brought them sounds
a bullroarer somewhere out of sight, and the men, about two feet
apart in a single zigzag line, follow their headman. The women,
children, and novices of the contingent follow in a group. Every
man holds in each hand a green bough 1 about 18 inches long.
At short intervals the leader pauses and, turning half round to
the right, swings the bough in his right hand into the air, and
this action is repeated by all the other men. Then he turns to-
ward the left, and swings the bough in that hand into the air,
which is also repeated by all the others. As they swing the
boughs they give a shout. They thus go through the main camp,
looking in at every hut or gunynh, after which they march toward
the large circle, shouting and swaying their boughs. They are
now joined by the men of the local tribe and other men who
have arrived on previous occasions, and all approach the circle,
the newcomers being in the lead. The women and novices are
all standing in a group in the center of the ring, 2 having come
straight on while the men were going through the camp.
The men now enter the ring through the opening in its wall
and form a cordon around the women (figure 2). If the tribe is
a numerous one, there may be two or three circles of men. The
men dance for a few minutes, and then close in around the
i Sometimes the men have a boomerang or other small weapon in one hand and a
bough in the other.
2 Infirm old men and women and small children would not go into the ring, but would
sit down close by.


Oct. 189ft] the bunan ceremony of new south wales 333
women, in the center of whom the novices are standing, and raise
their bushes into the air. Each man then walks outward to the
boundary of the ring and lays his boughs outside of the embank-
ment. As every man goes to the part of the wall nearest to him,
the boughs are scattered all round it. After this the women and
novices withdraw, and sit down outside of the wall on the side
farthest from the pathway, with their backs toward the latter,
and the women commence to sing and beat their rugs. The
headman of the local tribe then calls out the names of a few of
the chief camping grounds, water holes, or remarkable places in
his country, and all the men present shout, The headmen of
the other tribes follow in succession, each naming a few chief
places in his country.
The headman of the local tribe now starts along the pathway,
followed by his own people; the headman of another tribe,
accompanied by his people, follows, and thus all the men leave
the ring. The women remain sitting, and continue to sing and
beat their rugs, the novices remaining with them. The newly
arrived men are shown the drawings on the ground and trees.
At the chief figures the men stop and dance and shout, but some
of the muttima are only looked at in passing, or a short halt is
made in front of them. The wizards go through various forms
of jugglery, pretending to bring different substances out of their
bodies. On arrival at the small inclosure the old men enter it
and dance round the figure of Dharamoolan (figure 4), the rest
of the people going round outside the embankment. All the
men then return along the track and go into the large circle and
dance round. The women now cease singing and get up and go
away to the camp, the men shortly following. The men and
women of the new arrivals, visiting tribes, erect their quarters on
the side of the main camp nearest their own country.
That night the local tribe makes a corroboree for the benefit of
those who arrived during the afternoon. On nearly every suc-
ceeding night a corroboree is held, the tribes taking their turns to
provide this amusement in the order of their arrival.
Daily performances at the bunan ground. —While waiting for the
arrival of other tribes, the men and women already assembled
daily go through preliminary performances similar to those just
described, beginning a few hours before sunset.
After partaking of the evening meal the young men of the


THE AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST
[ Vol. IX
tribe whose turn it is to make the corroboree that night commence
to paint. While this is being done one or two bullroarers are
sounded at short intervals in the adjacent forest. Fires are lit on
a cleared level space in a central part of the camp convenient for
all (figure 1, c.) This corroboree ground is used by all the tribes
present. As the men of each tribe corroboree in turn, the women
of each tribe beat time and sing for their own men.
Every morning at or before daylight and every evening about
dusk a bullroarer is sounded by one of the single men in the
vicinity of the camp. When this is heard in the camp the
elderly women begin to sing, and at intervals the men raise a
shout in unison with one another. Every evening the boys go
and sit among the women as they sing.
Talcing aioay the boys. —When all the tribes expected at the
bundn have arrived, the headmen hold meetings at the wurrawur-
rudthang and select the yooroonga or band of men who accom-
pany the novices and their guardians into the bush. The
yooroonga are strong, active men, well acquainted with the tribal
customs, who peform the different pantomimic feats and assist
the headmen to carry out the various rites and maintain dis-
cipline. The day of taking away the boys is also fixed at these
meetings, and a guardian ( jumbi ) is assigned to each novice.
This guardian is one of the brothers, own or tribal, of the women
from among whom the novice could obtain a wife in accordance
with the tribal laws; in other words, he is the brother-in-law,
actual or titular, of the novice he has in charge.
About sunrise on the appointed morning the men go through
the camp in single file, with hushes in their hands, and muster
all the women, novices, and children to that side of the large
ring farthest from the pathway. A sister or some near relative
accompanies the mother of each novice and remains with her
and carries her yamstick and a net hag in which are a head-
band and other articles of dress which she is entitled to wear
after her son is taken. This woman also paints the mother in
the manner customary in her tribe. One of the headmen takes
the yamstick, with the bag attached to it, and inserts it in the
ground a little way inside the ring, by this means defining the
place where both mother and son are to sit. The mother of each
novice is then seated outside of the embankment opposite her


Oct. 1896] THE BUNAN CEREMONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 335
own yamstick, her relative sitting behind her. The other Avomen
and children sit on the ground farther back.
Each novice is painted with red ocher and grease by his
brother-in-law, assisted perhaps by other relatives (figure 3, b).
The boys are now also invested with the belt, headband, and
other articles of a man’s attire. The other men of the tribes
gather wood, and they kindle a large fire, mulleech or mulleej, in
the middle of the ring (figure 3, a). When the painting and other
preliminaries have been completed the guardians take the novices
on their shoulders and carry them into the ring, followed by
several other men, who keep up a guttural chant. Each guard-
ian then lets his novice down and seats him on the bank imme-
diately in front of the mother of the boy, who puts her arms
around his waist, he being within the circle and she just outside
(figure 3). He is directed to gaze intently into the fire, which
by this time is a mass of blazing embers, his guardian remain-
ing near him to watch that this instruction is strictly complied
with. The novices of each tribe are generally placed in groups
on the side of the ring which faces in the direction of their own
country, their mothers and the other women of their tribe being
also in a group by themselves just outside. In the plate, I have
shown both novices and women all in one place to save space
and to prevent confusion.
All the novices, who are called yangomidyang , are similarly
placed in a row along the inside of the embankment, at the op-
posite side of the circle to that from which the track emerges.
Their mothers, who are behind them, are also required to look
into the fire. If the mother of a boy is dead or is absent, the
mother of one of the other boys looks after him as well as her
own son, or perhaps a tribal mother or relative of the boy takes
him in charge. The headmen walk about, directing the proceed-
ings generally, and the other men stand in different groups, most
of them being on the side of the ring opposite to where the
women are.
As soon as the boys have been placed, a number of men walk
several times around the fire, between it and the novices, clap-
ping their hands and repeating an exclamation at each step. At
a sound made by the headman these men fall down with their
heads toward the fire, where they lie still for a short time. W hen
the headman considers that boys and men have been sufficiently


THE AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST
[Vol. IX
exposed to the fire, he hits the ground with a piece of bark which
he holds in his hand, and the other men, half stupefied by the
heat, rise. They then step back and stand outside the embank-
ment. All the women and children are now told by the old
men to lie down, and are covered over with rugs and bushes,
some of the men walking about to see that the covering is not
removed.
When all is ready the principal headman gives the signal, and
two men sound bullroarers near the ring, walking along, taking
up their position near the side from which the path emerges
(figure 3, g). Each guardian then catches his novice by the arm,
leads him along the pathway, the boy, dazed and stupefied by
the heat of the fire, keeping his eyes cast on the ground and re-
maining silent. All the men beat their boomerangs and other
weapons together and shout, making a great noise, which some
of them keep up till the boys and their guardians, accompanied
by most of the men, are out of sight. The covering is then taken
off the women and children by the men whose duty it is to
watch them, and they are set at liberty. The women who have
charge of the mothers now invest the latter with the articles car-
ried in the bag. After this all the women and children proceed
to a new camp, which will be described in subsequent pages.
Ceremonies in the bush. —When the novices get out of sight of
the women a halt is made and a rug is thrown over the head of
each boy in such a manner that he can see only the ground at
his feet. The novices are told by their guardians that a number
of things will be shown to them by and by, and that they must
pay attention to what they see and hear, but must not speak or
laugh or be afraid. They are then taken along the pathway and
are shown the drawings on the ground and on the trees, a short
stop being made before all the principal figures, around which
the old men dance. During this time the doctors or wizards go
through various tricks of jugglery, pretending to bring up out of
their mouths certain substances, such as quartz crystals, pieces
of bone, string, etc, collectively known by the name joea.
The novices are next placed standing around the outside of
the smaller ring. Some of the old men enter it through the
opening in its wall and dance round the figure of Dharamoolun,
extending their arms toward it, then drawing them back again,
exclaiming “Dharamoolun! Dharamoolun!” several times in


Oct. 1896] THE BUNAN CEREMONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 337
succession. The novices, standing outside of this cordon of old
men, wave their arms in a similar manner (figure 4). The nov-
ices, the rugs still on their heads and their eyes cast down, are
next taken farther into the bush and seated on the ground.
All the men now paint themselves a jet black with powdered
charcoal and grease. As soon as this painting is completed they
go into the bush to a place which has been previously selected
as a suitable camping ground. Here and there on the journey
saplings are bent over, under which the novices have to pass in
a crouching attitude, and at other places are logs under which
they have to crawl on their hands and knees at the bidding of
their guardians and the other men. Several stoppages are made
and at each the men go through different performances. Some-
times they imitate flying foxes. Several men go on ahead
unknown to the novices, and one man climbs up a tree and
hangs on with his hands and feet to a branch, another man hangs
on to the first, and so on till there are as many as one man can
support. The novices are then directed to look up and see the
suspended men. In succession these men drop on their feet and
all then dance up in front of the novices. At another stopping
place a number of men are covered with bushes, under which
they make a humming noise like bees. At a signal the bushes
are thrown down and the men dance before the boys. Some-
times a number of men go ahead and climb trees and saplings
and imitate the song of the locusts. The novices are brought on
under the trees and are told to look up, after which the men
descend to the ground and dance about.
Or arriving at the camping ground a space about 60 feet or
more in diameter is cleared. In the center of tins space, which
is called mudthiwirva , is raised a heap of earth about a foot high,
called thalmoor, and on top of this a fire is lighted. Around this
space the men of the various tribes make their camps, each in
the direction of their own district. The guardians and the nov-
ices camp by themselves at one side of this cleared space, in a
semicircular yard of boughs, having one or more fires lighted at
the open end. The boys lie down on bushes and leaves, their
heads being covered with rugs, some of their guardians remain-
ing constantly beside them. During the time that the novices
are out in the bush with the old men they are forbidden to


THE AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST
[Vol. IX
speak; if they want anything they must make signs to their
guardians.
After the camping place has been arranged another small space
is cleared and a line of holes the size and shape of a human foot
are dug about six inches deep. 1 When these preparations are
completed the novices are brought out and are placed standing
with their feet in the holes described, with their guardians beside
them. The yooroonga , fantastically disguised, then kneel down
in a line in the clear space, the outside man at each end having
a piece of bark ( boonboon ) in his hands (figure 6, a, a). These
pieces of bark are about 2} feet long and 6 inches broad at the
widest end. One of these outside men hits the ground in front
of him forcibly with his piece of bark and all the men utter a
low, rumbling noise, each man in succession bending his head
toward the other end of the line. When the movement reaches
that end the other outside man now hits the ground with his
bark in a similar manner and the men bend their heads the con-
trary way. This performance, which is repeated several times,
is intended to represent the breaking of the waves on the sea-
shore and their recoil. The line of the performers is approxi-
mately at right angles to the nearest seacoast, so as to correctly
indicate the direction of the waves.
Each guardian then comes behind his boy and, kneeling down,
puts his head between the boy’s legs. The guardian remains in
the kneeling position, with the novice on his shoulders, while
another man stands behind him, with one hand over the eyes of
the novice and the other hand holding his chin in such a way as
to keep his mouth open. A man accustomed to the work of
extracting the teeth or who has watched the operation on pre-
vious occasions then advances and placing one end of a small
wooden chisel ( dthungnn ) against the tooth gives it a smart blow
on the other end with a wooden mallet ( bunyah ), which forces
it out. More than one blow is frequently required to dislodge
the tooth. Sometimes the headman rubs the boy’s gum with a
large quartz crystal for the ostensible purpose of loosening the
tooth and making it draw out easily. The tooth is either spat
out or is taken out of the mouth with the fingers, but all blood
flowing from the wounded gum has to be swallowed. During
l Sometimes only one pair of holes are made, and the novices are placed in them and
operated upon one after the ocher.


Oct. 1896] THE BUNAN CEREMONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 339
the operation the headman stands by directing the proceedings,
and a large bullroarer ( jummagong ) 1 is sounded impressively by
a man standing in the rear. The ceremony of knocking out the
tooth is done either on the afternoon of the day of arrival at the
mudthiwirra or the day following, according to circumstances.
As soon as this ceremony is concluded the men take off their
queer disguises and throw them on the ground where the foot-
holes are made, together with the pieces of bark used for hitting
the ground, and everything is covered over with the loose rub-
bish which had previously been scraped away. The mallet and
chisel are either burnt or driven into the ground.
The novices are then taken back to the mudthiwirra and are
given human excrement, of which they have to eat a small
quantity. At night the fire on the thahnoor is kept burning
brightly to afford light to the men, who continue to play various
games and dances the greater part of the night, very little sleep
being indulged in. These performances, consist for the most
part of imitating animals with which the people are familiar or
scenes from their own daily life, and, like the ceremonials of
other savage races, are mixed with obscence gestures. During
the day the men hunt to provide food for all the party, but the
novices remain in the camp in charge of a few of their guardians.
These proceedings occupy about three or four days, the per-
formances at the camp fire being somewhat varied every night.
All then leave the mudthiwirra early in the morning, carrying
with them all their belongings, and go to some place where there
is a large water hole, the novices walking with their guardians,
still silent and with their faces cast downward. Before leav-
ing the fire at the mudthiwarri the novices are given pieces of dry
bark lighted at one end. As soon as this piece of bark smoulders
they renew it with another. On the way to the water hole some
of the yooroonga go on ahead, unknown to the novices, and one
lies dow r n in a hollow place, such as a hole where a large tree has
been burnt out or in a natural depression, or a shallow hole is
dug in some soft or sandy soil. Ibis man is coveied ovei with
a light layer of bushes or rubbish, and holds in his hand a small
bush, as if it naturally grew there. When the guardians and
l The jummagong is a very large bullroarer used by the men when away with the boys
in the bush; the mooroonga is a smaller instrument, and is used in mustering the
tribes, and on all occasions, when it is required, in the vicinity of the women’s camp.


novices reach this spot a halt is made, and the man begins to
groan and move, thus causing the bushes and rubbish with
which he is covered to shake and heave up and down. Some of
the old men go through various incantations around this figure,
and at a signal the man gradually rises out of the ground, throw-
ing aside the bushes, and stands up in front of the boys.
All hands arriving at the water hole, the boys are stood upon
the banks. The men go into the water hole, pretending to look
for turtles, crayfish, eels, or the like, but in reality to wash off
the charcoal powder with which their bodies had been painted.
They splash or lave water with their hands upon the boys
standing on the bank, the latter waving their arms to and fro in
the direction of the water hole, imitating the actions of the men.
These then come out of the water hole and walk about till they
are dry, or light a fire to warm themselves if the day is cold.
A start is now made toward the place where the women have
erected the new camp. When they have gone on a short dis-
tance some of the yooroonga, who are a little way in the lead,
stop and two of them stand out in a clear space, one of whom is
sounding the jummagong and the other the mooroonga. The boys
are now brought to a stand and are told to look at the men who
are swinging the bullroarers. The headmen then tell the nov-
ices that what they now see and hear is the instrument which
they heard at the large ring and at the other places since they
have been out in the bush. They are cautioned under pain of
death not to reveal anything they have seen or heard to the
women or children or any uninitiated person. The bullroarers
are then handed to the boys for their inspection, and they are
invited to use them. They are now permitted to walk erect and
to look around. When the day is far advanced a suitable camp-
ing place is chosen, where they remain all night. Next morning
the journey is resumed, and on coming near the new camp men
and neophytes lay down their weapons and other articles which
they have carried and decorate themselves to meet the women.
The men and boys are painted with stripes and patches of white,
according to the manner of their tribe, and the boys are invested
with the belt, kilt, head-band, and other articles of a man’s
attire. The men are also dressed in their full regalia. As soon
as these preparations are completed, one of the men swings a
bullroarer and the others raise a loud shout or cooee and are
answered by the women at the camp.


Oct. 1896] THE BUNAN CEREMONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 341
The new camp. —Immediately after the departure of the boys
with their guardians from the bundn circle the women and chil-
dren and some of the men who are left to supervise and assist
them pack up all their belongings and shift to a suitable place
which has been chosen by the headmen, and there erect a new
camp, each tribe occupying the side next its own country.
Sometimes this camp is formed only a short distance, in other
instances it may be several miles from the original camp. Close
by it is a partially inclosed space, called the dhurrawangan, built
of saplings and bushes, with an opening in the side, over which
the saplings are sometimes bent to form a kind of triumphal
arch (figure 7, b).
Each mother is accompanied by the female guardian who has
remained with her. Only those women are qualified for the
duty of guardian who have had a son initiated at a previous
bundn. These guardians and the mother of the novices are col-
lectively called yanniwa , and have a camp to themselves close
by the camp of the other women, only the old women of the
tribe being allowed to go near them. All the yanniwa have had
to carry firesticks in their hands ever since the boys were taken
away, and they have also been required to sing the customary
bundn songs at the camp fire every morning and evening. While
they are singing these songs they lift burning sticks from off the
fire and wave them in the direction of the novices. They thrust
their yamsticks into the ground in a row and dance along facing
them while waving the burning brands.
Early in the forenoon of the day on which the novices are to
return, one of the yooroonga goes on ahead to the new camp and
announces their approach. The yanniwa then go from their
camp to the dhurrawangan, each woman carrying in her hand a
piece of burning bark, which on entering the inclosure they lay
on the floor, their fiery ends together, the other end pointing
toward the woman who places it. Before going into the inclos-
ure each mother inserts her yamstick vertically into the ground
near the entrance. These yamsticks are all in a row, and on each
one is a net bag, belonging to the owner of the stick, filled with
small green bushes. Some of the old men who have remained
with the women also go with the yannhva to the dhurrawangan
and light a fire near the outside of one end of it (figure 7, g ).
All the other women in the camp also rejtair to the dhurrawangan


and lie around the outside opposite the opening or doorway,
where they are covered with bushes by the men. The yanniwa
are gaily painted, and wear strings of shells, eagle-hawk’s claws,
and teeth of animals around their necks and in their hair. Each
of the mothers is provided with a piece of bark, called jinnin,
about a foot or eighteen inches long and two or three inches
wide, tapering smaller toward the end held in the hand. These
pieces of bark are painted with lines and dots of pipe-clay to
make them ornamental.
Return of the hoys. —When the necessary preparations are com-
pleted at the dhurrawangan the party from the bush makes its
appearance. The men, painted and wearing their full regalia,
advance in a group, the novices being in the middle; on getting
near the latter are taken on the men’s shoulders. The principal
headmen walk by themselves just outside of the other men. A
bullroarer is sounded somewhere in the rear just out of sight of
the women, and the guardians march into the dhurrawangan and
let the boys down from their shoulders, each in front of his own
mother, being guided by the arrangement of the yamsticks near
the door. The yooroonga stand near the entrance. Each mother
then approaches her son and taps him lightly on the breast with
the jinnin; the guardian then turns the boy round, and the
mother taps him on the back in a similar manner. The guard-
ians again take the novices on their shoulders and carry them
out of the dhurrawangan , when they let them down on the ground
and conduct them away to a camp a short distance off, where
they remain for the night. As soon as the boys are out of sight
of the dhurrawangan the covering is taken off the other women,
who return to the camp; the yanniwa come out of the inclosure,
carrying with them the firesticks before described, and return
to their own quarters.
While the women and yanniwa are going away some of the
old men who have been there from the first throw green bushes,
which they have in readiness, on top of the large fire before re-
ferred to, making a dense smoke ( booraylang ), and all the men
who were out with the boys in the bush stand round the leeward
side of the burning boughs. The smoke caused by the burning
of the green leaves ascends around them. After this fumigation
the men disperse, some going into the women’s camp and others
to the boys’ quarters. Until now the boys have been called


Oct. 1896] THE BUNAN CEREMONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 343
ycingomidyang, but from this time forth they are ranked as ivoorgal,
men.
That night some of the old men are present at the camp of
the neophytes, and forbid them to eat the flesh of certain animals
until they receive permission from the elders of the tribe. Young
men who at previous buntins had been prohibited from eating
certain kinds of food are at this meeting relieved from any further
restriction in regard to it. A few animals are, however, tabooed
as food until a man has been to several buntins or has attained a
certain age. These forbidden animals to eat are called mookoo to
the young men. At the conclusion of these proceedings one or
more of the men go into the bush some distance from the women’s
camp and sound a bullroarer, after which they return to their
own quarters and everybody retires for the night.
The day after the ceremonies the entire camp is again removed
to a new site, as on other occasions; the several contingents
camp around the local tribe in the direction of their country,
and each one makes a corroboree for the amusement of the others.
These corroborees are held on a common ground, which is in a
convenient part of the camp. The women belonging to each
tribe beat their rugs and sing for their own men during the night
on which it is their turn to perform.
When all the merry-making is over, if any of the people pres-
ent have a personal grievance to bring before the headmen or
a complaint to make respecting a violation of the tribal laws, the
matter is fully discussed by the elders of the several tribes, and
punishment is meted out to the offending parties in the presence
of the men and women of the whole assemblage. As it would
be a breach of the tribal customs for the neophytes to appear
before the women, they are debarred from witnessing these pro-
ceedings, but are permitted to witness those at the next biindn
ceremonies which take place.
The next day all the tribes from other places who have at-
tended the ceremonies pack up their things and take their de-
parture for their respective districts. There now remains only
one further rite to be carried out before the neophytes are finally
liberated, and this is performed by the men of each tribe on their
own contingent of novitiates some time after their return to their
own country.


Final ceremony. —The boys belonging to each tribe, after hav-
ing been shown to their mothers at the dhurraivangan, as already
described, remain with some of the old men of their own tribe,
camping in the bush, perhaps some distance from where the
women are, gaining their own living during a period of proba-
tion Avhich is fixed by the headmen. During this term, which
may extend over several months, the neophytes are not per-
mitted to go into any water or to look into it. If it becomes
necessary for them to cross a stream they must get some one to
carry them over it.
At the end of this period of probation they are again brought
back by their guardians to a place near the women’s camp, where
a platform of bark about a foot or eighteen inches high has been
erected. The yanniwa, painted and dressed in their ornaments,
are at the platform, having laid down their firesticks on the
ground close by ; the other women of the tribe are also present,
a little farther back, and some of the old men stand near, direct-
ing the proceedings.
When everything is ready a signal is given, and the guardians
appear with the boys on their shoulders, a bullroarer being
sounded out of sight. The men let the novices down from their
shoulders and leave them standing on the platform. Each
mother now steps forward and taps her son with a piece of bark,
jinnin, on the breast and on the back. From that time until
now the boys have been compelled to carry a firestick, dhungga,
in their hands when they went out hunting or when removing
from one place to another, and the yanniwa have continued to
do the same, but from this time they need not do this. The
yanniwa leave their firesticks lying on the ground w r here they
put them down at the platform, and those used by the novices
were thrown away when they were taken on the men’s shoulders.
The yanniwa and other women return to the camp, and the
neophytes are no longer kept under restraint; they are now free
and can go about among the men, although they must not asso-
ciate with the young women, nor must they allow any woman’s
shadow 7 to fall upon them until the old men who are the reposi-
tories of the tribal laws and traditions allow it.






(From the American Anthropologist (n. s.), Vol. 3, April-June, 1901)
INITIATION CEREMONIES OF THE WIRADJURI
TRIBES
By R. H. MATHEWS
In 1896 I contributed two articles on Australian class systems, 1
describing the social organization of the native tribes composing
the Wiradjuri community in New South Wales. They are
divided into four groups, called Ippai, Oombi, Murri, and Kubbi,
having the marriage laws and rules of descent as set forth in de-
tail in the articles referred to. In other papers I have dealt with
the inaugural ceremonies of certain tribes in the northern 3 and
southern 3 parts of the Wiradjuri territory, but have never before
had the opportunity of describing the ceremony as performed in
the western portion.
Early in the year 1898 a Burbung took place in the parish of
Gunnabonna, county of Mossgiel, New South Wales. The native
encampment was about half a mile from Blake s waterhole, on
Canoble run, about 8 miles east by north from Canoble head-
station, or about 33 miles easterly from the town of Ivanhoe.
This ceremony, at which two novices were admitted to the privi-
leges of manhood, was attended by the aborigines from Hillston,
Keewong, Cobar, Ivanhoe, and Paddington.
In connection with this gathering the manner of summoning
the tribes to attend, the procedure in taking the novices away,
the ceremonial performances in the bush, and subsequent ritual
were substantially the same as described in my former articles on
the Burbling of the tribes of Lachlan and Murrumbidgee rivers,
1 American Anthropologist , IX, 411-416 ; Ibid., X, 345“347-
2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., Lond., xxv, 295-318 ; Ibid., xxvi, 272-285.
3 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxi, m-153 ; Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust.,
Q. Bch., xi, 167-169.


AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST
[n. s., 3, 1901
Fig. S3 —Ground carvings at a Burbung ceremony.


MATHEWS]
hence they need not now be further dealt with. A description of
the Burbung ground and its surroundings will, however, be of in-
terest for purposes of comparison.
The circular incloshre called the boorbung was about 23 paces
in diameter, and was formed by heaping the loose surface soil
around its circumference, forming an embankment about a foot
wide and six inches high, in which a narrow opening was left to
afford access to the interior. From this opening a pathway led
away northerly through a forest of myall and other trees 560 paces
to the goombo , consisting of the usual four elongated heaps of
earth, 1 not unlike graves ; and a few paces farther on was the
gareel , or fence of boughs. There were no inverted stumps* at
the goombo, as they are not used by the natives of this district.
The following were some of the carvings in the soil: Starting
at the goombo, and going 5 paces toward the boorbung inclosure,
was the representation of a serpent-like monster called the kurrea
(figure 53, 1), outlined in the soil by a groove cut with a sharp-
edged wooden instrument. This was by far the longest native
carving in the soil that I had ever seen, the distance from the
head to the tail, following the sinuosities of the body, being 130
feet, while the width, which was fairly uniform, was from 15 to 18
inches. Within the outline of the posterior portion of this monster
were two other incised lines, one on each side, but whether these
were intended to represent the intestines, or for the purpose of
ornamentation, or to denote a young animal within the larger
one, I could not learn.
Not far from the kurreas head was an oval object representing
an emu’s egg (figure 53, 2), 2 feet 6 inches in length. Farther on
was a kangaroo (3), a little over 6 feet high. In one of the bends
of the monster’s body, a man upward of 10 feet high was deline-
ated, with an elongated body and short legs (4). There was also
the drawing of a dog (5), about 4 feet long, and on the opposite
1 Journ . Anthrop. Inst., Lond., XXV, 301
5 Ibid.


AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST
side of the serpent’s body was a large boomerang (6), and a little
way farther a nulla-nulla (7). Then there was an elongated depres-
sion, nearly 3 feet long, 14 inches wide, and 6 inches deep (8), repre-
senting the pudenda of a woman. Small leafy twigs and green
grass were suggestively stuck in the loose soil around this de-
pression. The drawings shown in the illustration are in their cor-
rect relative positions as they appear on the side of the path.
In several places along the pathway there were cut in the soil
representations of the footprints of men, emus, and kangaroos ;
boomerangs, eggs of birds, and patches of the usual yowan pat-
terns. At other places some small sticks, leaves, and rubbish
were scraped into circular heaps, about 3 feet in diameter and
2 feet 6 inches high, representing the mallee-hen’s nest. There was
also an imitation of a wombat’s burrow.
About a hundred yards from the great serpent was a drawing
apparently representing some imaginary animal of the dog or
opossum tribe (9). This was a little over 9 feet long, exclusive of
the tail. Only a few trees were marked, because most of the tim-
ber growing near the pathway was too small for the
The few markings were not noteworthy. In one of the trees was
the imitation of an eagle-hawk’s nest.
At the ceremonies connected with the arrivals of strange tribes,
and during the daily performances while awaiting their arrival, an
image of Dharamoolan was set up in the vicinity of the goombo.
A sapling was found with two branches growing opposite each
other, and these branches were cut off at about the length of a
man’s arms. The bole of the sapling was then cut through on one
side of these “ arms,” sufficiently long for the head, and on the
other side of the branches, or arms, it was again cut through at a
distance of about five feet. On this framework, mud mixed with
grass was plastered and fastened with string, so as to make a rude
figure of a man with only one leg, since according to aboriginal
mythology the maleficent being known as Dharamoolan has one
leg only. This figure was either propped up with forked sticks or


laid against a tree to support it in an erect position. Two of these
images were used at the Burbung referred to, but sometimes
three or four are made, if the assemblage is a large one. They
are carefully hidden away and covered with bushes when not in
use, and at the conclusion of the ceremonies they are destroyed
in a fire.






THE TOARA CEREMONY OF THE DIPPIL TRIBES
OF QUEENSLAND
By R. H. MATHEWS
As no description of the To'-a-ra 1 ceremony of initiation has
hitherto been published, I shall endeavor to give a brief account
of it, gathered from the natives, in which the principal parts of
the ceremonies are detailed with sufficient fulness, it is hoped, to
enable comparison between this and similar rites in different parts
of Australia. The country occupied by the people among whom
the Toara is practised comprises the Queensland coast from Port
Curtis to the New South Wales boundary, extending inland to
include the valley of Dawson and upper Condamine rivers. The
principal languages prevailing in this area are the Dippil, Tur-
rubul, Kahbee, Goonine, Kurranga, Kanalloo, and others. I have
given the name of the first-mentioned tribe to the whole group,
as their language is the most widespread and best known. All
these tribes are divided into four intermarrying sections known as
Barrang, Banjoora, Bunda, and Terrawine*; the first two form
a phratry called Karpeun, and the latter two constitute the
Deeyajee phratry.
When the headmen consider that there are a sufficient number
of youths old enough to be admitted as men of the tribe, messen-
gers are despatched to invite their neighbors—who will probably
also have some boys of suitable age—to participate in the cere-
monies. When a messenger arrives at his destination, he
approaches the men’s quarters about sunset, and, sitting down,
commences tapping two boomerangs together, or a boomerang
1 Also pronounced Do'-a-ra and Too'-a-ra in different parts of the district.
2 Australian Divisional Systems ; Journ. Roy. Soc. New South Wales, vol. xxxil,
p. 82.


and a throwing-stick. When this is heard in the camp, all the
men give the shout usual on the arrival of a stranger. The mes-
senger again taps his boomerangs, which is answered as before.
He repeats the tapping for the third time, and the men in the
camp proceed a short distance toward him and light a fire. A
few of the chief men then go to the messenger and invite him to
come up to the fire. On his arrival there, the oldest man present
says to him, employing the indirect form of speech used in connec-
tion with secret matters, “ You appear to nave found something”
—to which the messenger assents. “ Where did you find it ?” is
next asked, upon which he states the name of the hunting grounds
of his own tribe, and proceeds to deliver the details of the mes-
sage, accompanied by the sacred bullroarer, which is always
used on these occasions.
In summoning the tribe who are to act the part of liberating
the novices from the men who have the custody of them in the
bush, as later described, the messenger, in addition to the usual
emblems of his mission, hands to the headman a small parcel,
wrapped in tea-tree bark, consisting of a portion of a feather or of
a porcupine’s quill, a piece of an animal’s skin, or the like, and
tells him that the other part of it is hidden in the embankment
bounding the Toara circle.
While the several envoys are away assembling the neighboring
tribes, the local mob is engaged in preparing the ground for the
reception of their visitors. A clear, level spot is selected near the
camp, and all the grass and rubbish removed from the surface.
Around this space small logs and sticks 1 are laid in the form of a
circle, and are covered with loose earth, forming a low wall or
embankment about 18 inches high. The space thus enclosed
ranges from 70 to 100 feet in diameter, according to the number
of people who are expected to attend. In a secluded locality
about a quarter or half a mile away (the distance depending
1 This way of building the embankment differs from that ordinarily employed in
other communities, which consists of heaping up the loose earth only.


upon the character of the country), another round space is cleared
and enclosed in the same way. Within this second circle two
stumps, resembling those used in the goonaba enclosure of the
Kamilaroi tribes, 1 are inserted in the ground. A small opening
is left in the surrounding wall of either circle, and a narrow
cleared pathway leads through the forest from one to the other.
None of the trees is marked, either at the distal circle, or along
the path.
The preliminary performances at the main camp, the proce-
dure on the arrival of the different strange tribes, and other
routine matters so closely resemble corresponding portions of
the ceremonial of other communities with which I have dealt,
that they will not be described here. When the tribe to whom
the portion of feather or other secret object has been sent has
arrived at the Toara ring, the headmen commence to search for
the other moiety, which is concealed somewhere in the earth and
logs of which the embankment is composed. When it is found
there is much rejoicing, and the men dance round the ring shout-
ing the names of male and female genital organs, shady trees, hills,
and some of the totems of their tribe. If the object has been
hidden by covering it in such a way as to render the search for it
unreasonably difficult, the tribe who are expected to discover it
may quarrel with the local mob, which may result in a fight.
On the eve of the day settled upon for taking charge of the
novices who are awaiting initiation, all the people of both sexes
move up close to the Toara ring, where they encamp for the
night. Shortly after daylight next morning the novices are
painted all over with red ocher and grease, and are placed sitting
with their heads bowed, close to the embankment. Some small
green bushes are then held for a few moments in the blaze of a
fire, after which the leaves are pulled off, and whilst still warm
are rubbed on the bodies of the novices.
When all preparations have been completed, the men stand
1 The Bora of the Kamilaroi Tribes ; Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, vol. ix, n. s., p. 143.


with their faces toward the farther ring and shout, and stamp
with their feet, whereupon the mothers of the novices, who are
carrying burning brands, step on top of the embankment, and
throw the fire-sticks into the central part of t,he ring. The other
women and some of the men throw burning sticks in the same
way. The guardians now help the novices to their feet and con-
duct them along the path toward the other enclosure. A num-
ber of armed men then emerge from the scrub on one side, as if
they were a strange tribe, and throw spears and boomerangs over
the heads of the men and boys as they march along.
On reaching the farther ring, the novices are placed standing
in a row near the entrance, and are permitted to raise their eyes
and observe two old men who are standing upon the stumps,
before referred to, within the enclosure. The heads of the
novices are again bent down, and they are led away by their
guardians to a camp in the bush. The stumps are then pulled
out of the ground and burnt by some of the men who remain
behind for that purpose. It should be stated that as soon as the
boys were taken away from the Toara circle, the women followed
them for 50 or 100 yards. They then turned back and packed
up all their movables, and, accompanied by some old men who
had been instructed to remain with them, went away to another
camping place some distance off.
We must now return to the novices. At nightfall a con-
venient camping place is reached, and a bough yard made for the
boys, with green leaves strewn on the floor for them to sit or lie
upon, accompanied by their guardians. The rest of the men, who
are collectively called the kooringal , camp near by, and during the
evening imitate different animals, some of which are the totems
of those present, while others are connected with myths and
superstitions current among the people. These performances are
in the main analogous to what I have reported in other tribes.
Next morning, or the day following, each novice is subjected
to the extraction of one of his upper incisor teeth, the process


being substantially the same as that adopted in the punching out
of a tooth in the Bunan ceremony previously described. 1
The novices are taken out hunting with the men during the
day, but as they are required to keep their hands shut, both in
the camp and in the bush, the guardians open their hands and
place a waddy or other weapon in them, when they are allowed
to join in the pursuit of game.
One day the kooringal take the novices into a place where
there is very tall grass, or else a thick patch of scrub, or it may be
near a deep gully or dry watercourse. Presently a whistling noise
is heard, and also the rattling of weapons. The kooringal pretend
they think it is a strange tribe coming to attack them, and pre-
pare to fight. In a few minutes a considerable number of men, all
in their war-paint, rise out of the long grass, or emerge from the
scrub, or sally forth from their hiding place in the deep ravine, as the
case may be, and running toward the men and novices, commence
throwing spears. An apparently real encounter takes place, in
which the novices participate, and after a while the strangers
retreat and disappear. That afternoon the bullroarer is exhibited
to the graduates, with the customary solemnities. A smaller
implement, called bundandaba , resembling the moonibear 2 of the
Wiradjuri tribes, is also shown to them. The bullroarer is rubbed
on the penis and navel and also under the arms of each novitiate.
Early next morning, in the vicinity of the camp, some men
climb trees in which the top foliage is sufficiently dense to hide
them, and shout in a clear, weird voice. These men represent the
Deeyajee and Karpeun groups; the men of the former occupy
the trees on one side of the camp, and the latter ascend trees, in
the opposite direction. Several other men sit in a cleared piece
of ground, the surface of which they beat with strips of bark held
in the hand, and in this way make considerable noise. Every
novice is brought out in rotation by his guardian, and after some
1 The American Anthropologist, vol. IX, 1896, p. 338.
9 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., Lond., vol. XXV, p. 311.


[n. s., 2. 1900
deliberation among his kinsfolk, he receives a new name, by which
he shall thenceforth be known by his fellows. As each boy is
named, all the men give a shout, which is answered by the men in
the tops of the nearby trees, giving the novices the impression that
ancestral spirits are hovering about in the air. When a Deeyajee
boy is named, the men of that division up in the trees imitate the
noise made by his totem, or that of some of his relatives—as
the trumpeting of an emu, the song of a locust, the howling of a
dingo, and so on. A Karpeun boy is next led forward and
named, and the men in the trees on the opposite side of the
camp imitate certain animals. The headmen say to one another,
“ Those ghosts have flown over there now,” indicating a certain
direction with the hand, to make the boys believe that the noise
emanates every time from the same individuals, who pass through
the air unseen from one side of the camp to the other.
The remainder of the ceremony will be passed over as briefly
as possible, because the procedure closely resembles correspond-
ing parts of the ritual elsewhere described in detail. On arriving
near the place to which the women had removed the camp, as
above stated, the novices are met by their female relatives and
are passed through a dense smoke caused by placing green boughs
on a wood fire. They are then taken away into the single-men’s
quarters, where they remain for a period regulated by their age,
but they generally have to pass through several Toaras before
they are permitted to associate with the women or to take a wife.
During this long sojourn in the bush, the graduates are taught
a mystic language which is understood by none but those who
have passed through the prescribed course of instruction. 1 Par-
ticulars relating to the use of stercoraceous matter, the mythology
of the tribe, the sacrifice of one or more men during the inaugural
gathering, the restrictions relating to the eating of certain foods,
and other matters, have already been given in other articles.
] The Burbling of the Wiradthuri Tribes ; Jour. Anthrop. Inst., Lond,, vol. xxv,
p. 310.






[From The American Anthropologist for October, 1897]
AUSTRALIAN CLASS SYSTEMS
R. H. MATHEWS
In an article under the above title published in the Ameri-
can Anthropologist for December, 1896, volume IX, pages 411
to 416, I gave a short account of the class system of the Wi-
radjuri tribes, New South Wales. 1 Ihe editor of that journal
found it necessary, in order to provide space for my paper, to
abridge it in certain particulars, and, among other matter, ex-
cised some details relating to the descent of the children. As
these details form an essential part of the paper, without which
it would be incomplete, I have again submitted them for publi-
cation. They fit into the original article between lines 34 and
35, on page 414, and should be read in conjunction with that
article. The following is the matter which was excised.
An explanation of the rules regulating the descent of the
children under the four class and totemic divisions will now be
given, and in doing so the same sixteen totems mentioned in
1 See also my paper on the “ Kamilaroi Class System of the Australian Aborigines,
Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q.), x, 18-34,


Table A will again be adopted, so that throughout our examples
we may be dealing with the same people. The totem names
given in that table will be taken in the same order, so that a ready
reference can be made to any number from Ito 16. The pecu-
liarity of a mother producing children having a different totemic
nomenclature to her own has not, so far as I am aware, been ob-
served by any previous investigator, and is now published for
the first time.
No. 1, Matha Emu is the mother of Kubbitha Flying Squirrel.
No. 2, Matha Red Kangaroo is the mother of Kubbitha Bandi-
coot.
No. 3, Matha Brownsnake is the mother of Kubbitha Porcu-
pine.
No. 4, Matha Ground Iguana is the mother of Kubbitha Na-
tive Bee.
The four little Kubbithas who are born in this way will grow
up and become the mothers of another generation of Mathas,
each little Matha having the same totem name as her mother’s
mother, as follows :
No. 5, Kubbitha Flying Squirrel is the mother of Matha Emu.
No. 6, Kubbitha Bandicoot is the mother of Matha Bed Kan-
garoo.
No. 7, Kubbitha Porcupine is the mother of Matha Brown-
snake.
No. 8, Kubbitha Native Bee is the mother of Matlia Ground
Iguana.
Taking now the totems belonging to the Ippatha and Butha
pair of classes we find a similar result:
No. 9, Ippatha Mallee Hen is the mother of Butha Common
Fly.
No. 10, Ippatha Opossum is the mother of Butha Goonhur.
No. 11, Ippatha Eaglehawk is the mother of Butha Gray Kan-
garoo.
No. 12, Ippatha Jew Lizard is the mother of Butha Codfish.
In the next generation the Buthas just referred to will become
the mothers of other Ippathas having the same totems as those
mentioned in Nos. 9 to 12, thus:
No, 13, Butha Common Ply is the mother of Ippatha Mallee
Hen.
No. 14, Butha Goonhur is the mother of Ippatha Opossum.


Oct. 1897] AUSTRALIAN CLASS SYSTEMS 347
No. 15, Butha Gray Kangaroo is the mother of Ippatha Eagle-
hawk.
No. 16, Butha Codfish is the mother of Ippatha Jew Lizard.
A careful perusal of the foregoing genealogy will show that
among the tribes treated of in this paper any given totem is
always the mother of a certain other totem. 1 For example, an
Ippatha Eaglehawk, No. 11 in the above list, is invariably the
mother of a Butha Gray Kangaroo. Of course, her sons will be
Kumbo Gray Kangaroos, but I have omitted the names of the
males, because they will be understood by the reader in each
case. In the next generation the relationship is reversed, and
Butha Gray Kangaroo, No. 15 in the genealogy, becomes the
mother of Ippatha Eaglehawk.
I wish to make the following corrections in my paper on
“Australian Class Systems,” published in the American An-
thropologist, volume IX, page 413 : In line 28, for “ No. 10 ”
read “ No. 12; ” in line 30, for “ No. 11 ” read “ No. 10 ; ” and in
line 32, for “ No. 12 ” read “ No. 11.”
l Among the Kamilaroi tribes every totem reproduces itself; that is to say, the chil-
dren of an Emu mother are always Emus. Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q.), vol. x, p.
22. But owing to the different course of descent which I have discovered among certain
tribes of the Wiradjuri people, the Emu is the mother of the Flying Squirrel.




THE WOMBYA ORGANIZATION OF THE AUSTRA-
LIAN ABORIGINES
R. H. MATHEWS


(From the American Anthropologist (n. s.), Vol. 2, July-September, 1900)
THE WOMBYA ORGANIZATION OF THE AUSTRA-
LIAN ABORIGINES
By R. H. MATHEWS
The object of the present paper is to define the geographic
limits of that portion of Australia which is occupied by aggrega-
tions of tribes distinguished by having eight intermarrying sec-
tions in their social structure. It is proposed to give this type
of division the name of the Wombya organization, after the
Wombya tribe, owing to their having been the first people in this
part of the country whose sectional divisions were accurately
reported and described. 1
The accompanying map shows the northeastern corner of
Western Australia, the northern half of South Australia, and the
northwestern corner of Queensland, being the whole of the terri-
tory within which the Wombya organization prevails. Within
this region each native tribe is divided into two primary phratries
or groups, which may be called A and B. Each of these phratries
is subdivided into four sections, making a total of eight divisions
of the community. A name is given to each of the eight sec-
tions, by means of which the members of the different divisions
are readily distinguished ; and identification is further facilitated
by a masculine and a feminine form of each of these names.
The accompanying table, illustrating the divisions of the Chin-
galee tribe, exhibits the rules regulating the intermarriage of the
several sections and the names of the resulting offspring. Exami-
nation of the table will show that the sons of the women of either
phratry marry the daughters of the women of the other, and that
the children of both sexes belong to the same phratry as their
mother, but to a different division of it.
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Phila., vol. xxxvii, pp. 151-152


Taking the first name in the table, we see that a Jimmitcha man
marries a Nungalleeinjah woman, who is his regularly appointed
spouse ; but he has the alternative of marrying a Nalainjah maiden
instead ; or, polygamy being allowed, he may take a wife from
each of these sections. If he marry a Nungalleeinjah woman his
sons will be Taraleeinjah, and his daughters Naraleeinjah ; but if
he select a Nalainjah woman his sons and daughters will be Tun-
Divisions of the Chingalee Tribe
Section of Parents
Section of Offspring
Husband
Daughter
Jimmitcha
Chunainjah
Chemarainjah
Tampachina
Nungalleeinjah
Nalainjah
Naraleeinjah
Nungareeinjah
Taraleeinjah
Tungareeinjah
Chulainjah
Chungaleeinjah
Naraleeinjah
Nungareeinjah
Nalainjah
Nungalleeinjah
Chungaleeinjah
Chulainj ah
Tungareeinjah
Taraleeinjah
Nameeinjah
Nanainjah
Nabajinah
Nemarainjah
Tampachina
Chemarainjah
Chunainjah
Jimmitcha
Nabajinah
Nemarainjah
Nanainjah
Nameeinjah
gareeinjah and Nungareeinjah, respectively, the sectional name
of the offspring being determined through the mother.
Again, a man of the Chunainjah section, whose proper wife is
Nalainjah, can marry Nungalleeinjah. That is, Jimmitcha and
Chunainjah can exercise their choice over the same two sections
of women. Similar privileges are accorded to the men of the
other sections. Chemarainjah and Tampachina may marry as
stated in the table, or they may reverse their wives the same as
Jimmitcha and Chunainjah can. Chungaleeinjah and Chulainjah
may marry as in the table, or to either of the women opposite
their respective names. The same applies to Tungareeinjah and
Taraleeinjah and their alternative choice of a wife.
Totems consisting of animals, plants, and inanimate objects
are attached to certain pairs of sections, and these totems descend
generally from a father to his sons and daughters, but this rule is


subject to modification. Certain totems are allotted to, or are
inherited by, two sections in common, one of the sections belong-
ing to phratry A, and the other to phratry B. Hence we find
that Jimmitcha and Taraleeinjah, who stand in the relation-
ship to each other of father and son, have a collocation of totems
attached to them ; Chemarainjah and Chulainjah have another lot
of totems; Chunainjah and Tungareeinjah have another, and
Tampachina and Chungaleeinjah have their own totems in the
same manner. The section names composing each phratry are
those given in the “ wife” column of the table. The masculine
form of each name can readily be found in the “ offspring ”
columns.
As Jimmitcha is a man of A phratry, his son Taraleeinjah
belongs to B phratry, therefore it follows that the totems allotted
to this pair of sections will fluctuate from one phratry to the
other in each generation. And this also holds good in regard to
the totems of the other pairs of sections. Owing to the alterna-
tive allowed to a man in choosing his wife, already explained, the
men of the Jimmitcha, Taraleeinjah, Chunainjah, and Tungareein-
jah sections are more nearly related among themselves, as fathers
and sons, than they are with the men of the other four divisions,
who are their brothers-in-law. If we take Chemarainjah, Chula-
injah, Chungaleeinjah, and Tampachina as examples, it will be
found that the rules in force in the preceding four sections also
apply to these.
In tracing the genealogy in the direct line given in the table it
can readily be demonstrated that a brother’s son’s progeny inter-
marry with a sister’s son’s progeny ; but if we follow the descent
of the offspring in the alternative line previously referred to, it is
found that a brother’s children intermarry with a sister’s children.
Study of the table will show also that by taking the men of one
phratry in a certain order they are the fathers of the men of the
other phratry in continuous alternation ; taken in another order
they are brothers-in-law one of the other; and by taking them in


a different way they are related as brother’s children and sister’s
children. The reader can easily select examples for himself.
On the accompanying map, No. 1 shows the country of the
Wombya tribe, including Cresswell and Burnett creeks, Corella
downs, Eva downs, Beetalo downs, Walhollow downs, etc. 1 In
this tribe some of the totems have certain country assigned to
Fig. 61—Geographic distribution of the Wombya organization.
them ; for example, the Kangaroo, Eaglehawk, Emu, and White
hawk will each have certain plains, ridges, scrubs, waterholes,
and the like. The same custom is observed among different
tribes of this organization. Each section has also certain restric-
tions as to the animals and plants which they may use as food.
No. 2 is the territory of the Inchalachee and Warkya tribes,
who occupy the sources of Gregory and Georgina rivers, and from
Camooweal to Lake Sylvester. Their eight divisions have pre-
viously been given. 2
No. 3. The Yookala, Karrawar, Wonyee, and Yangarilla
1 For their divisions see Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Philadelphia, vol. xxxvil, p.
2 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. xxxm, p. m, table 5.
AM. ANTH. N. S., 2 —32


tribes inhabit the coast of the Gulf of Carpentaria from Calvert
river to the Nicholson, and southerly to the Inchalachee territory.
Their sectional divisions have also been reported. 1
No. 4. On the coast of the Gulf of Carpentaria, from the Cal-
vert to the Roper, including the McArthur and other streams, are
the Yanyular, Willangan, Binbingha, and Yuggamurra tribes. 2
No. 5 on the map is the country of the Chingalee, Yungmanni,
and Koodangie people, whose social structure forms the subject
of the present article.
No. 6 represents the hunting grounds of the Koorangie, Mud-
burra, Tooinbol, etc., on upper Victoria river. Particulars of
their intermarrying divisions have been given. 3
No. 7 refers to the Geelowng, Oolwunga, Wartaman, and Hal-
lurra tribes on the lower Victoria. Their eight sections have else-
where been tabulated. 4
No. 8. On Ord, Fitzroy, and Margaret rivers and their tribu-
taries are the following tribes amongst others : Nigena, Keha,
Lunga, and Mayoo, whose eight sections have also previously
been given. 6
On Sturt creek and on Ord and Victoria rivers certain totems
are more generally known, and appear to be invested with
greater importance, than others. Among these are the white
crane, or spoonbill, and the eaglehawk.
No. 9 is the territory of the Meening, Jarroo, and Munga
tribes, inhabiting Sturt creek and stretching southeasterly, meet-
ing No. 10 on the map. Their eight divisions are particularized
in a previous paper. 6
I now wish to add lists of totems attached to certain pairs
of sections who are related as father and son alternately from
1 Ibid., vol. xxxii, pp. 251-252.
2 For their divisions see Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Phila., vol. xxxvm, p. 77
table 3.
3 Ibid., p. 78, table 4.
4 yourn. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. xxxm, p. 112, table 6
5 American Anthropologist, N. S., vol. 2, p. 186.
6 yourn. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. xxxm, p. 112, table 7


generation to generation. The section names given in the work
last quoted will again be used.
The Choongoora and Chabalye sections have the following to-
tems : Eaglehawk, water-snake, pelican, tree-snake, fish, mos-
quito, curlew, desert-quandong, death-adder, sugar-bag, centipede,
stone spearhead, shag, cockatoo, rat, wasp, nut-wood, grasshopper,
grass, pigeons (all kinds), plain turkey, ants, whistling-duck, and
native bee.
The totems of Chowan and Chowarding are as follow: Eagle-
hawk, certain stars, brown hawk, native dog, sun, rain, coolabah
tree, wild potato, black-head snake, clouds, thunder, ibis, water-
hen, boree tree, native-companion, black duck, and scorpion.
To the Chambeen and Changalla sections the undermentioned
totems belong: White crane, galah parrot, lignum bush, opos-
sum, wind, copperhead snake, iguana, mopoke, moon, lightning,
and frog.
Chagarra and Chooaroo are allotted the following totems:
White crane, blood-wood tree, mussel, kangaroo, native cat, rock
wallaby, wild orange, bilbee rat, wood duck, crow, and porcupine.
In consequence of the alternative rules of intermarriage, of
which mention has been made, certain totems are common to the
four sections Choongoora, Chabalye, Chowan, and Chowarding,
and other totems are common to the remaining four sections
above mentioned.
No. io represents an aggregate of tribes, among which may be
enumerated the Ulperra, Illyowra, Warramonga, Kaitish, and
Wolpirra, whose hunting grounds are from Tennant’s Creek to
Alice Springs, extending some distance on either side of the
overland telegraph line from Adelaide to Port Darwin. The
names of the sections and the rules of their intermarriage have
already been particularized. 1
The names of the sections in each of the tribal aggregations,
Nos. i to io, differ somewhat, but the principle is the same
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales , vol. xxxii, pp. 7i~73 I vol. xxxiii, p. 113-


in them all. The curved line (x —x —) on the map from the
Gulf of Carpentaria to the Indian ocean is the southern limit of
the Wombya organization. All the tribes adjoining this boun-
dary on the southwest, south, and southeast, possess a divisional
system comprising four sections only.
In their initiatory rites circumcision and introcision are prac-
tised, the former by means of a piece of stone chipped or ground
to an edge, the latter with a stick prepared for the purpose or a
smooth stone of requisite size and shape found in a watercourse.
Throughout the region represented on the map no woman is
allowed to marry until the operation of introcision has been per-
formed, nor can a man marry until after the ceremony of circum-
cision has taken place.
Among the tribes on Fitzroy river, Sturt creek, and at other
places, in the event of the death of a child, the mother is com-
pelled to carry its body about with her for several weeks and in
some cases for months. If a woman’s husband, or an adult son,
dies, the wife or the mother, as the case may be, is not allowed to
eat flesh for a long time, nor is she permitted to speak to anyone,
but must communicate by signs only, until the father of the
deceased bites her on the palm of the hand. This breaks the ban
of silence, and she may then converse with her people as before.
In cases of death from snake-bite, or the result of an accident
of any kind, the body is placed in a tree on a platform of sticks,
eight or ten feet from the ground, and is covered with boughs,
accompanied by the weapons of the deceased. When the death
is caused by violence, the body is not buried but is left where it
lies. In other cases the corpse is interred.
Owing to the barren character of most of the territory dealt
with in this paper, it is only on the rivers and creeks that water
can be relied on throughout the year. Back from these water-
courses there are weatherworn holes or depressions in rocks,
known as “ rock-holes,” in which water collects during rainy
weather. There are also a few small springs at wide intervals


where a limited supply of water can be obtained. In times of
drought these rock-holes and most of the springs become dry,
and the natives are compelled to keep in the vicinity of the rivers
and watercourses ; but as soon as the rain comes in sufficient
quantities to replenish the rock-holes and revive the springs, the
people make an exodus into the back country and remain there
as long as the water lasts, because that is the only time they can
pursue the game and obtain other foods in those parts of their
hunting grounds. They proceed first to where the water is
known to disappear most rapidly ; then they go to those places
in rotation where it remains longer, and in this way utilize their
water supply to the greatest advantage. They sometimes carry
water in bags made from the skins of small animals, such as wal-
labies and opossums, when going on hunting expeditions into
waterless country.




BULLETINS
ET MEMOIRES
DE LA
SOCIETE D’ANTHROPOLOGIE
DE PARIS
EXTRAIT
PARIS-VP
15, Rue de l’Ecole-de-M6decine, 15




(Extrait des Bulletins et Memoires de la Soci6t6 d’Anthropoiogie de Paris.)
ORGANISATION SOCIALE DES TRIBUS ABORIGENES DE L’AUS TRALIE.
Par R.-H. Mathews, L. S.,
Membre associ6 stranger de la Soci6t6 d’Anthropologie de Paris.
En etudiant la structure sociale des tribus primitives de l’Australie,
on decouvre que les individus dont une tribu est composee, sont par-
tages en deux principales divisions, ou phratries les fils et les lilies
d’une phratrie 4pousant ceux de l’autre, conformement a de certaines
lois definies. Dans quelques parties du pays, les deux phratries sont
les seules divisions employees a cet eflet. Dans d’autres localites il y
a une separation de chaque phratrie en deux sections, faisant quatre
divisions de la tribu.
Dans certains districts il y a quatre subdivisions de chaque phratrie,
donnant ainsi un total de huit sections. Mais qu’il existe deux, ou quatre,
ou huit divisions de toute la communaute, les principes fondamentaux
qui les mariages entre les divisions du groupe, et l’ordre de
succession de la posterite sont identiques en tout.
Dans le present travail, on s’occupera seulement des tribus qui adoptent
huit divisions dans leur structure sociale, et a cet effet je choisirai la
tribu Yungmunni. Cette tribu occupe un territoire 4tendu sur le plateau
qui separe les sources des rivieres, le Roper et le Daly, dans le Territoire
du Nord (Northern Territory) nom donne aux parties septentrionales
et aux centrales de l’Australie du Sud (South Australia). II sera n£ces-
saire de recourir a un tableau pour les descriptions donnees
dans le texte ci-dessus. Les hommes se distinguent des femmes au moyen
de la forme masculine, et de la forme feminine, du nom de toutes les
sections, Par exemple, Uwallaree est le masculin, et sa sceur Imballaree
est le feminin, et ainsi de suite dans tout le tableau.
Phratrie. Pfcre.
Mire.
Fils.
Fille.
Ekmitch
Inkagalla
Uwallaree
Imballaree
A ]
| UWANNEE
lmbawalla
Uwungaree
Imbongaree
A i
1 Unmarra
Imballaree
Urwalla
lmbawalla
Tabachin
Imbongaree
Yungalla
Inkagalla
Ycngalla
Iramadenna
Tabachin
Tabadenna
B
I Urwalla
Imbannee
Unmarra
Inganmarra
, UwONGAREE
Tabadenna
Uwannee
Imbannee
UWALLAREE
Inganmarra
Eemitch
Immadenna
Tableau f.
D’apres le tableau ci-dessus il est evident que toute la tribu se divise


en deux phratries, A et B, et que chacune de ces phraties contient cer-
taines categories de femmes, qui ont entre elles une succession perpe’
tuelle. Quand on la genealogie des femmes qui composent
la phratrie A dans la table ci-dessus mentionn£e, on voit que la fille ap-
partient a la m6me phratrie que sa m6re, mais pas h la section de
la phratrie. Par exemple, Inkagalla produit Imballaree ; Imballaree est la
mere d’lmbawalla; Imbawalla a une fille lmbongaree; et lmbongareere-
produit Inkagalla, et cette s£rie se repute a jamais dans le m6me ordre.
Si Ton avait pris l’exemple de la phratrie B, on aurait obtenu un resultat
semblable. Les des filles, dans tousles cas, appartiennent ala
m6me phratrie et a la section que leurs soeurs.
Le tableau numero 1 s’explique de lui-meme —le pere, la mere, le fils,
et la fille de chaque division paraissent sur la imbue ligne transversale de
la page. Selon les regies ordinaires ou « directes », du mariage et de la
descendance qui sont indiquees sur la table, Eemitch prend Inkagalla poui
femme, et la posterite de l’union sont Uwallaree et Imballaree. Mais
Eemitch a l’alternative d’6pouser une femme Imbawalla ;et dans ce cas la
posterite sera Uwungareeetlmbongaree. Encore une fois, voila Uwannee,
qui prend, comme epouse r6guli6re, Imbawalla et comme epouse alter-
native, Inkagalla; le nom de section de la posterite est celui de la m6re,
comme autrefois. De la m6me manure, un Unmarra peut epouser ou une
Imballaree ou une lmbongaree; en outre, la femme de Tubachin est Im-
bongaree dans la ligne directe, avec l’alternative d’une Imballaree.
De plus, dans les couples de sections Yungalla et Urwalla Uwungaree
et Uwallaree dans la phratrie B aussi bien que dans la phratrie A, le
mariage et la descendance suivent les m6mes regies. En raison de la tole-
rance de la polygamie, il est possible aun homme, d’une section d£ter-
minees d’avoir une femme de la ligne « directe », et une autre de la
division « alternative » on r6gle la nomenclature des enfants selon l’ex-
plication donn6e.
On doit specifier, cependant, que le plus grand nombre de manages, de
beaucoup s’accordent avec ce que j’ai appele la ligne « directe ». Pour
qu’un mariage ait lieu dans la ligne « alternative »ou irreguliere, il laut
que l’un des epoux sorte d’une famille eloignee, de manure k empScher
une proche parents entre les parties qui s’unissent.
Dans le but de jeter une lumidre additionelle sur les manages entre
parents selon la table numero 1, j’ai prepare une table suppl6mentaire
demontrant certaines parentis entre les gens de difT6rentes sections, ainsi
qu’il suit:


R.*H. MATHEWS. ORGANISATION DES TRIBUS ABORIGENES DE L’AUSTRALIE 417
Un homme.
Son neveu.
Son cousin germain.
Son cousin issu de germain.
Eemitch
Tabachin
Urwalla
Yungalla
UWANNEE
Unmarra
Ynngalla
Urwalla
Unmarra
Eemitch
Uwungaree
Uwallaree
Tabachin
Uvvannee
Uwallaree
Uwungaree
Yungalla
Uwallaree
Uwannee
Eemitch
Urwalla
Uwungaree
Eemitch
Uwannee
UWUNGAREE
Yungalla
Unmara
Tabachin
UWALLAREK
Urwalla
Tabachin
Unmarra
Tableau 2
Le neveu, comme ci-dessus, est l’enfant de la soeur de l’homme; les
cousins sont les enfants d’un frere et ceux d’une soeur; le cousin issu de
germain est l’enfant de l’enfant d’un fr&re, et l’enfant de l’enfant d’une
soeur. Par exemple, Eemitch aun neveu Tabachin ;un cousin Urwalla; et
un cousin issu de germain Yungalla.
En comparant les deux tableaux nous observons ceci; que, selon ce
que j’ai appele les lois « directes » du mariage, un homme prend sa
cousine issue de germain exemplupi gratia , Eemitch epouse Yungalla
(lnkagalla). Mais, conformement aux lois « alternatives », un homme
est uni a sa cousine germaine, e. g. Eemitch epouse Urwalla (Imba-
walla). Dans le dernier cas, cependant, il faut que la parente de cousine
soit collateral ou de la tribu, et pas du meme sang.
Dans le tableau numero 2, je n’ai parle que des formes des noms mas-
culins des sections, afin de rester dans des limites raisonnables ; mais
le lecteur peut trouver le feminin de quelques uns des noms cites s’il se
retire & la table numero 1. Par exemple, quandje dis qu”Eemitch epouse
Yungalla, je veux dire qu’il epouse la soeur de Yungalla, lnkagalla, etc,
Si l’on etudie le tableau numero 2, on voit qu’Eemicht est I’oncle (le
fr6re dela de Tabachin ; Tabachin est allie de la m£me maniere a
Uwannee; Uwannee est l’oncle d’Unmarra ; et Unmarra est le fr£re de la
m£re d’Eemitch, Eemitch etant le nom par lequel nous avons com-
mence. Cette suite d’oncles et de neveux se repute continuellement dans
le m£me ordre. Ces quatre sections appartiennent ala phratrie; et
elles font de doubles mariages avec les quatre sections de la phratrie
opposee, ou les femmes se succedent dans le meme ordre (Voyez la
table numero 1). Si on prend les hommes des quatre autres sections, a
savoir, Yungalla, Uwallaree, Urwalla et Uwungaree, on peut demontrer
qu’ils sont allies de la meme maniere.
Je vais maintenant t&cher d’6tablir que le mariage, la parente, et la
ligne descendante des tribus Australiennes dependent principalement
du p&re qui s’applique avec une force egale a toutes les tribus, et
a toutes les parties de l’Australie auxquelles mes investigations ont pu
atteindre jusqu’h present.
Les personnes de tousles sexes epousent des individus qui appar-


4 JUILLET 1901
tiennent a la meme phratrie que leur pere. Par le tableau numero 1, nous
voyons que Yungalla epouse Immadenna, de la meme phratrie que
son p&re. Immadenna prend pour mari un Yungalla, de la phratrie de
son p6re Uwallaree. . „
Toutes les personnes - les hommes aussi bien que les femmes -
Spousent, dans la phratrie de leur un individu appartenant la meme
section que de celle de la m£re de leur pere. Si l’on prend un exemp e
dans le tableau, on trouve que le p6re d’Eemitch est Uwallaree, et que la
m&re d’Uwallaree est Inkagalla. Eemitch epouse une Inkagalla, qui ap-
parent ainsi kla section de la de son De plus, le p£re d’lnka-
galla est Tabachin et la mere de Tabachin est Immadenna. Uette Imma-
denna s’unit avec Yungalla, le nom de la section de la mere de son pere.
Lesenfants des deux sexes prennent le nom dela section du grand pere
paternel. Eemitch a un fils Uwallaree, et Uwallaree est le pfere d’Eemitch.
la section du paternel. De nouveau, Eemitch a un Ills Uwal-
laree, et Uwallaree a une fille Immadenna, la forme feminine du nom de
la section a laquelle Eemitch, le paternel, appartient.
Commel’indiquele tableau n° I, Eemitch et Uwallaree sont parents
Pun de l’autre comme pere et fils dans une alternation continue, et j’a
observe qu’ils possMent certains totems dont heritent leurs descendants.
Par exemple, Eemitch pelican est le pere d’Uwallaree pelican, et dans la
generation la plus proche Uwallaree pelican est le p£re d’Eemitch pelican.
Les autres couples de sections ont des totems qui leur viennent de la
meme maniere, et de ceci je don ne un exemple dans le tableau ci-dessous
Tableau 3.
, Eemitch j Gl . onp6d6loternB .
La ; Uwallaree )
moitieA Uwannce | G d „ , oleins .
\ Uwungaree )
[ Unmarra L pe de totems .
La ) Urwalla )
moiliiß Tabachin j GrO dt toloms .
\ Yungalla )
Plus haut en traitant des mariages « alternatifs » j’ai demontre
qu’Uwannee pout se marier avec Inkagalla aussi; dans ce cas son fis
serait Uwallaree. De la meme manure, Eemitch pourrait etre le peie
d’Uwungaree. Avec des totems qui descendent du p£re a sa postente, dans
les tribus ou la polygamie est mise en pratique, le totem d’Eemitch
pourrait etre transmis tant a Uwungaree qu’a Uwallaree, en supposant
qu’il choisit une femme dans chaque section sur laquelle ll possMe des
droits de manage virtuels.
J’ai decouvert, qu’en consequence de la proche parente du sang men-
tionnee dans les derniers paragraphes, les divisions Eemitch, Uwallaiee,


R.-H. MATHEWS. ORGANISATION DES TRIBUS ABORIGINES DE I’AUSTRALIE 419
Uwannee, et Uwungaree sont tres amies entre elles, et ces quatre sec-
tions se servent, plus ou moins, des mtmes totems; en consequence,
j’ai appele ces sections la moitie A. En d’autres mots, les totems men-
tionnes dans le tableau n° 3 comme appartenant primitivement a Eemitch
et a Uwallaree, sont aussi, jusqu’h un certain point, communs k Uwannee
et a Uwungaree. Les memes remarques s’appliqueront 4galement aux
quatre sections qui restent, et k leurs totems, qui sont designes dans le
tableau comme la moiti6 B.
Gtntralement les enfants des deux sexes heritent du totem de leur pa-
rent mkle, mais des irregularitts ont ete observtes dans la ligne directe
des totems dans quelques districts sur lesquels je recueille des renseigne-
ments complementaires.
Si l’on veut rassembler toutes les femmes de chaque phratrie, pour d -
montrer leur ordre de succession, en etablissant aussi la serie de la ligne
directe de succession des oncles et des neveux, le tableau n° 1
un arrangement convenable des sections. Mais si pour suivre la trace des
regies du mariage et de la ligne directe par les hommes, et exposer les
deux moities par lesquelles la communaute est constitute, le tableau
suivant est alors un arrangement,preferable.
Pfere.
Mfere.
Fils.
Fille.
,
Eemitch
lnkagalla
Uwallaree
Imballaree
La )
Uwallaree
Inganmarra
Eemitch
Immadenna
moili6 Aj
Uwannee
Imbawalla
Uwungaree
Imbongaree
Uwungaree
Tabadenna
Uwannee
Imbannee
,
Unmarra
Imballaree
Urwalla
Imbawalla
La J
Urwalla
Imbannee
Unmarra
Inganmarra
moiti6 Bj
Tabachiu
Imbongaree
Yungalla
lnkagalla
Yangalla
Immadenna
Tabachin
Tabadenna
La lecture de ce tableau demontre que les hommes de chaque mi
Tableau 4
La lecture de ce tableau demontre que les hommes de chaque moilie se
reproduisent dans des generations alternatives; qu’ils epousent les lilies
des hommes de la moiti6 opposee; et que les enfants appartiennent a la
meme moitie que leurs p6res. On observera aussi que chaque homme et
chaque femme du tableau epouse un individu qui porte le nom de la
meme section que la mere du pere de la personne prenant mari ou
femme.






RUE DE I’eCOLE-DE-MEDECINE, 15, PARIS
BULLETINS
Les Bulletins de la forment chaque ann6e un volume in-B°.
Premiere serie, six volumes (1859-1865). Cette s6ne r6duite a un petit
nombre d’exemplaires ne peut Stre cedee qu’avec les deux suivantes au prix
total de 420 fr.
La table alphab6tique et analytique de la premiere s6rie redigee par M. Bu-
reau (174 pages), se vend 1 franc.
Deuxieme serie, douze volumes (1806 1877). I'iix do la se.ie complete
180 fr.
Troisi6me serie, douze volumes (1878-1889). Prix de la complete
180 fr.
s6rie> dix volumes (1890-1899). En vente.
Les volumes des ann6es 1871, 1873 et 1881 & 1899 se vendent isolement
10 fr., (7 fr. pour les membres de la Soci6te) et les fascicules 2 fr.
Cinqui6me serie, commence en 1900. Chaque annee forme un volume
grand in-8° public en 6 fascicules. Abonnement 12 fr. (le port en sus). Le fas-
cicule 2 fr. 50.
MEM OIR ES
Neuf volumes grand in-80. Le volume est vendu par l’6diteur 16 francs (le port
en sus).
Premiere s6rie,trois volumes. Les tomes I et II sont 6puis6s. Le tome 111
est en vente au si6ge de la soctete.
Deuxieme serie, quatre volumes, 1873 a 1893.
Dn certain nombre de fascicules isol6s de ces deux series sont en vente au
siSge de la Soci6te, au prix de 2 fr. 50.
serie, commence en 1894.
Dans cette serie chaque travail ou memoire forme a lui seul un fascicule dis-
(inct qui pourra 6tre acquis s6parement au prix de 2 centimes la page.
VIENT DE PARAITRE :
Table generate des Publications de la Society d'Anthropo-
logic de Paris (1860-1899) vol. in-B°de 240 pages. (Prix :
6 francs).
JmP. >l. J-AFPriAY


-*•
• ■
■
'
- - m ! ! . i
. 1
I
DIVISIONS OF AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
BY K. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
ii i
■ -iSggwnij i jl -'iN'i'i
>mm\\ - i




BY R. H. MATHEWS. L.S.
(Read April 15, 1898.)
In 1891, my attention was drawn by an article contributed to the
Royal Society of South Australia, 1 by the Rev. L. Schultze, to the
existence of eight classes or divisions among the native tribes in-
habiting the Finke river in South Australia. On making further
inquiries, I found that this eight-class system, with different modi-
fications, extends northerly from the Finke river almost to Port
Darwin and the Gulf of Carpentaria. It also prevails in a westerly
direction, from the boundary of Queensland to that of West Aus-
tralia, and may therefore be said to be in force over the greater
part of the Northern Territory—a name given to the northern por-
tion of South Australia.
Owing to the great apathy regarding native customs shown by the
white population sparsely distributed over this immense tract of
country, I have experienced much difficulty in obtaining particu-
lars respecting these classes. Among my correspondents I was,
however, fortunate enough to find Mr. S. N. Innes, the owner of a
station in the Northern Territory. He had read a paper on the
class systems of other tribes contributed by me in 1894 to the
Geographical Society at Brisbane, 2 which had awakened his interest
in the subject, and when I wrote to him he willingly offered to
collect particulars of the divisions among the natives in his district.
The tribes reported upon by Mr. Innes are divided into eight
classes or sections—the names of the women being slightly different
from those of the men in each section. Four of these sections
form a group, which may be called A, and the other four sections
become group B. This division will be readily understood by
means of a table.
It will be seen by the accompanying table that the women of group
A are the mothers of the men of group B, who marry the women be-
longing to the latter group. The women of group B are likewise the
mothers of the men who marry the women of group A. In other
words, the sons of the women of one group marry the daughters of
the women of the other group. Or, what amounts to the same thing,
1 Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Australia , xiv, 210-246. .
2 Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust., Queensland, x, 18-34.
REPRINTED FROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC., YOL. XXXVIT, NO. 157.


the men of group
eration in group '
in group
Children.
Group.
Husband. Wife ,
Daughters.
Choolum Ningulum
Palyarin
Palyareenya
Nooralum
Bungareenya
Ningulum
Jamerum Palyareenya
Chooralum
Bungarin
Chingulum
Cheenum Nooralum
Yacomary Bungareenya
Chingulum
Bungarin
Noolum
Yacomary
Cheenum
Jamerum
Choolum
Yacomareenya
Neenum
Chooralum
Palyarin
Neomarum
Noolum
Neomarum
Husband. Wife. Sons and Daughters.
Ippai, Kubbitha, Murri and Matha,
Kumbo, Matha, Kubbi and Kubbitha,
Kubbi, ’ Ippatha, Kumbo and Butha,
Murri. Butha. Ippai and Ippatha.
152 MATHEWS —DIVISIONS OF AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [April 15,
i A marry the sisters of the men of their own gen-
B, and vice versa.
Yacomareenya
Neenum
On examining the table further it will be observed that the
daughters of the women of group A belong to the same group as
their mothers, but to a different section or class of it. For example,
Ningulum has a daughter Palyareenya; Palyareenya produces
Nooralum; Nooralum produces Bungareenya; Bungareenya is the
mother of Ningulum, and this series is continually repeated. The
women of the A group pass through each of the four classes in as
many generations —the same class name reappearing in the fifth
epoch. If our example had been taken from the B group, an
analogous result would have been obtained.
When on the Culgoa river some years ago I collected some in-
formation respecting a large tribe speaking the Moorawarrie lan-
guage, who occupy the country from about Goodooga on the
Bokara river to Barringun on the Warrego, extending southerly
about fifty miles and northerly into the Queensland frontier about
the same distance. They are divided into four sections, having the
same names for the men and women as those of the Kamilaroi tribe,
with rules of marriage and descent as exemplified in the following
table:


1898.] MATHEWS —DIVISIONS OF AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. 158:
The whole community is divided into two groups—the members
of the Ippai and Kumbo sections forming the one, and the Kubbi
and Murri people constituting the other. The families composing
these groups bear the names of different animals, plants, or inani-
mate objects, which are called totems, a word copied by us from the
North American Indians. Among the totems of the people consti-
tuting the Ippai and Kumbo sections may be mentioned the follow-
ing:
Wirroo (parrot), Bilbee, Mulga Snake,
Emu, Gray Kangaroo, Red Kangaroo,
Native Dog, Jewfish, Bronze-wing Pigeon,
Codfish, Swan, Plain Turkey,
Bream, Native Companion, Common Ants,
Gray Frog, Jew Lizard, Wood Duck,
Common Fly, Galah, Native Cat,
Spider, Kangaroo Rat, Top-knot Pigeon,
Plover, Grasshopper, Muscle,
Grasshopper, Muscle,
Curlew, Cocklarina, Bush Mouse,
Water Hen, Copi (Moganderra), Blue Bonnet (parrot),
Sun, Hail, Clouds,
Rain, Rainbow, Lightning,
North Wind, West Wind, Thunder,
Birribil, Numumbeera, Cuttibundi,
Doomul, Mulga, Carbeen,
Gidyer, River Gum, Bloodwood,
Myall, Belar, Leopard Tree,
Kurrajong, Quandong, Grooee,
Supple Jack, White wood, Greenwattle,
Tea Tree, Plop Bush, Wild Orange Tree,
Lime Tree, Yams, Lignum,
Nardoo (Bah), Blue Grass, Mitchell Grass.
Pig-weed, Sensitive Plant,
The under-mentioned totemic names may be enumerated as
belonging to some of the people comprising the Kubbi and Murri
sections :
Ground Iguana, Padamelon, Opossum,
Carpet Snake, Brown Snake, Black Duck,
Eagle Hawk, White Cockatoo, Pelican,
Fish Hawk, Dove, Bower Bird, ,
Tree Iguana, Porcupine, Black Snake,
Crow, Death Adder, Native Bee,
Death Adder, Native Bee,
Scrub Turkey, Silvery Fish, Flying Squirrel,
Common Magpie, Black Magpie, Green Frog,


154 MATHEWS —DIVISIONS OF AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [April 15,
Cross Frog, Shingle-back, Jackass,
Mopoke, Turtle, Wasp,
Centipede, White Crane, Blue Crane,
Ibis, Crimson-wing Parrot, Shag,
Diver, Wood Adder, Scorpion,
Butterfly, Bull-dog Ant, Moon,
South Wind, East Wind, Quartz Stone,
Midjeree, Brigalow, Coolaba,
Ironbark, Pine, Sandalwood,
Apple Tree, Box, Mungal,
Cherry Tree, Wirribil, Barley Grass.
Nepon Tree,
East of the Moorawarrie is a large tribe speaking the Uollaroi
dialect; they have the same sectional divisions as the former, and
with some variations their totems closely agree. In both tribes
descent is reckoned through the mother. In gathering the particu-
lars respecting the Moorawarrie tribe, now for the first time pub-
lished, I desire to thank Mr. J. E. Miller, of Goodooga, for his will-
ing assistance.


DIVISIONS OF NORTH AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S,




DIVISIONS OF NORTH AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Read May 5, 1899.)
The division of a tribe into intermarrying sections or classes,
although one of the most interesting of the institutions recognized
among the Australian aborigines, has not hitherto received the
attention which its importance deserves. In a former number of
the Proceedings of this Society 1 I tabulated the names of eight
sections, with the rules of marriage and descent in force over a
large extent of country in the Northern Territory. Since then I
have reported' 2 a similar eight-section system, but with different sec-
tional names, in the northwest corner of Queensland, extending
southerly from the Gulf of Carpentaria for a distance of about
three hundred miles, including the Wentworth, Nicholson, Greg-
ory and Upper Georgina rivers.
In an article contributed to’ the Royal Society of New South
Wales in June, 1898, I described the eight sections of the Arrinda
tribe on the Finke, Todd and other rivers, 3 but, while that paper
REPRINTED FROM PROC. AMER. PIIILOS. SOC. VOL. XXXVIII. NO. 159.


76 MATHEWS —DIVISIONS OF NORTH AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [May 5,
was in the press, a correspondent furnished me with additional
information which shows the line of descent in a manner that is
more readily understood than by the table appended to the article
in question. I propose, therefore, to supply a new table, showing
how the divisions intermarry, with the sections to which the off-
spring belong, as follows:
TABLE I.
Husband Wife Offspring
I. Panungka Parulla Pungata
I 2. Mbutjana Pungata Ngala.
Group A j Knurraia Ngala Bultara
4. Koomara Bultara Parulla
f 5. Parulla Panungka
J 6. Bultara Koomara
7. Ngala Knurraia
[ 8. Pungata Mbutjana
Koomara
Knurraia
Mbutjana
Panungka
Group B.
It will be observed by the foregoing table that the sons of the
women of one group marry the daughters of the women of the
other; and, also, that each group has perpetual succession through
its females. For example, take the women of Group A in the
table, we find that Parulla is the mother of Pungata; Pungata of
Ngala; Ngala of Bultara, and Bultara is the mother of Parulla,
and this order of succession is continually repeated. 1 Among the
women of Group B the line of descent conforms to the same rules.
I have traced some of the section names of this organization,
namely, Bultara, Koomara, etc., across the country from the Upper
Finke river northeasterly to the Georgina river, a distance of more
than four hundred miles.
My correspondent also made some further investigations respecting
the order of succession in four of the sections of the Warramonga
tribe 2 at Tennant’s Creek, with the result that it becomes necessary
to prepare an amended table of one of the groups. As it might
cause confusion to show only one group, I have included both in
the subjoined table:
1 The names of the eight sections of the Upper Finke river tribes were first
reported by the Rev. L. Schulze in 1891 (Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Australia, xiv,
223, 224). Their arrangement into two intermarrying groups was the result of
my investigations {Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 72).
2 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 73.


1899.] MATHEWS—DIVISIONS OF NORTH AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. 77
TABLE 11.
Husband Wife Offspring
i. Aponunga Tungulli Apungata
2. Ampajona Apungata Opalla
jROUI 3. Ungary Opalla Kabajee
4. Akamarra Kabajee Tungulli
5. Tungulli Aponunga Akamarra
| 6. Kabajee Akamarra Ungary
| 7. Opalla L T ngary Ainpajona
[ 8. Apungata Ampajona Aponunga
Group B j 6. Kabajee Akamarra Ungary
I 7. Opalla L T ngary Ampajona
Aponunga
In Group A of the above table, the rotation of the section names
is different from that given in my former table, which, necessarily,
alters the order of descent among the women and children. Group
B is the same as that previously given. If my correspondent is
now correct, it can be shown by this table that a brother’s son’s
children intermarry with a sister’s son’s children, instead of
the son of a brother marrying the daughter <?f a sister, and
vice versa, as stated in my former'paper. 1 In examining the two
tables, I and 11, it is seen that the names of several sections in the
Arrinda tribe are almost identical with some of the section names
of the Warramonga.
On the McArthur, Kangaroo and Calvert rivers, in the Northern
Territory, reaching thence along the shore of the Gulf of Carpen-
taria beyond the Queensland boundary, and extending inland
about one hundred miles, are several native tribes, among which
may be mentioned the Yuckamurri, Yanular, Leanawa, Yookala and
Kurrawar. The following synopsis shows the section to which a
man belongs—the section into which he can marry—and the desig-
nation of the offspring:
TABLE 111.
Husband Wife Offspring
f 1. Joolanjegoo Jungalagoo Bullaranjee
2. Jameragoo Bullaranjee Jooralagoo
3. Jinagoo Jooralagoo Bungaranjee
4. Yukamurra Bungaranjee Jungalagoo
f 5. Jungalagoo Joolanjegoo Yukamurri
J 6. Bungaranjee Y ukamurra Jinagoo
| 7. Jooralagoo Jinagoo Jameragoo
[ 8. Bullaranjee Jameragoo Joolanjegoo
Group B.
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 74.


78 MATHEWS —DIVISIONS OF NORTH AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. [May 5,
Some native tribes on the Victoria liver, in the Northern Terri-
tory of South Australia, are segregated into two intermarrying
• groups, with the following subdivisions :
TABLE IV.
Husband Wife Offspring
f i. Jamada Jungalla Dhalyerree
2. Jameram Dhalyerree Joolam
Group A I janna Joolam Dhungarree
{ 4. Jummiunya Dhungarree Jungalla
(5. Jungalla Jamada Jummiunya
6. Dhungarree Jummiunya Janna
7. Joolam Janna Jameram
J 8. Dhalyerree Jameram Jamada
If we compare Tables I, 11, 111 and IV with the table of
If we compare Tables I, 11, 111 and IV with the table of eight
sections reported by me in a former article to this Society, 1 it will
be observed that the four tables are constructed on the same system,
and all contain the same order of succession. In other words, all
the tribes dealt with have substantially the same organization,
although there are dialectic variations, more or less, in the names
of the sections. In the Tables I, II and 111, I have omitted the
feminine form of the name of each section, which, it is thought,
will enable the reader more readily to follow the rules of marriage
and descent. The divisional system, or social organization,
reported in this article, extends from the Upper Finke river to the
embouchure of the McArthur, in the Gulf of Carpentaria, a distance
of about six hundred and fifty miles. lam informed by some of
my correspondents that the same system, but with different divi-
sional names, reaches westwardly from the Gulf of Carpentaria to
the Daly and Victoria rivers, and onwards into West Australia.
The southern portion of the Arrinda and adjoining tribes occupy
the Middle Finke and Charlotte waters, reaching as far south as the
Macumba river. Among them there are only four sections em-
ployed to regulate the intersexual relations, as shown in the follow-
ing table. These sections comprise four, of those enumerated in
Table I:


18SW-] JVIATHEWS —DIVISIONS OF NORTH AUSTRALIAN TRIBES. 79
TABLE V.
Husband Wife Offspring
Group A / *• Panungka Parulla Bultara
l 2. Koomara Bultara Parulla
Group B f 3- Parulla Panungka Koomara
l 4. Bultara Koomara Panungkt
Panungka
It will be seen that the community is segregated into two inter-
marrying groups, and that the children take the name of the com-
plementary section in the division to which their mother belongs.
In the southern portion of South Australia there are a number of
tribes who possess the two primary groups only, like A and B in the
foregoing tables, without any subdivisions into sections. As an
example of this system, it may be mentioned that in some districts
these two divisions, or groups, are called Matturri and Karraroo; 1
in others they are Krokee and Kumite; in other parts they are
called Kookoojiba and Koocheebinga, and, again in others, they
are known as Koolpirry and Thinewah. In each case the men
belonging to one primary division marry the women of the other,
and the children take the name of their mother’s division. As I
am now engaged in the preparation of a comprehensive article
dealing with this type of organization, I shall not enter farther
upon it at present.
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 69,




• ■ ' • 4 *




DIVISIONS OF QUEENSLAND ABORIGINES. 1
(With Map, Plate XIII.)
BY R. H. MATHEWS, E.S.
(Read November 18, 1898.)]
In an article on the “Initiation Ceremonies of Certain Tribes of
Australian Aborigines,” published in the Proceedings of this
Society, Vol. xxxvii, No. 157, pp. 54-73, I established the bound-
aries of the different organizations spread over the whole of New
South Wales. In the present article it is intended to show the
limits of the aboriginal nations inhabiting that portion of Queens-
REPRINTED FROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC., VOL. XXXVII, NO. 158.


328 MATHEWS—DIVISIONS OF QUEENSLAND ABORIGINES. [Nov. 18,
land lying between the northern boundary of New South Wales
and the nineteenth parallel of south latitude.
Each of these nations is composed of certain communities or
aggregates of tribes who adopt identical section or class divisions,
the particulars of which are explained under each head in the fol-
lowing pages, and the boundaries of the nations are accurately
defined on the accompanying map. Each nation has been named
after one or two of the tribes whose section or class divisions were
first reported in it, and they are numbered on the map to corre-
spond with the numbers given in the letter-press.
On the map referred to there is also represented the dividing
line, AB, between the area in which circumcision is practiced, and
that in which such rite is not in force. From B, this line con-
tinues in the same northerly direction till it meets the shore of the
Gulf of Carpentaria. The continuation of this line southerly from
the point A passes through the northwest corner of New South
Wales, and its position is fixed on the map of that colony accom-
panying my paper read before this Society March rB, 1898.
No. i. The Dippil Nation.
The country occupied by this nation, No. i on the map, extends
from the Upper Clarence in New South Wales to Port Curtis in
Queensland. On the east it is bounded by the sea-coast, and on
the south, west and north by the distinguishing line marked upon
the map, and includes the Brisbane, Mary, Burnett, Dawson, Upper
Condamine and other rivers; together with Moreton, Stradbroke,
Fraser and other islands on the adjacent coast. The following are
a few of the principal and best known tribes who were formerly
spread over this tract of country: Dippil, Turrubul, Paiamba,
Kitabool, Kaiabara, Kooranga, Goonine, Murrungama.
The people are divided into two primary groups, called Deeajee
and Karpeun ; the former is again divided into two sections, called
Bunda and Derwine, and the latter into two, called Banjoora 1 and
Barrang. The following synopsis shows which sections may inter-
marry, and to what section the children belong:
1 In the Wide Bay district, Balcoin is used instead of Banjoora, with the fem-
inine equivalent Balcoingan.


OF QUEENSLAND ABORIGINES. 329
Section.
Offspring.
Group.
Husband.
Wife.
Sons. Daughters.
Karpeun
Barrang j Bundagan
Banjoora Derwinegan
Derwine | Derwinegan
Bunda Bundagan
Bundagan
Deeajee
Bunda j Barrangan
Banjoora | Banjooran
Barrang Barrangan
Derwine j Banjooran
Descer
taking th
however,
tion in tl
Tl-.P rv
he female side, the children
their mother. They do not,
Descent is always reckoned on the
king the group and totem name of th
the name of the other sec-
however, belong to her section, but take th<
tion in their mother’s group, as exemplified
in the above table.
The pair of sections, Barrang and
Banjoora, forming the group
Karpeun, invariably marry the Biwida and Derwine pair, of the
group Deeajee, but the rules of intermarriage of the individual sec-
tions constituting the groups is different in different parts of the
tribal territory. For example, in some districts, instead of the
rules of marriage following the order laid down in the foregoing
table,, a Barrang, male, marries a Derwine, female, and vice versa ;
a Banjoora, male, marries a Bunda, female, and vice versa. The
descent of the children is not, however, affected by this variation
—the offspring of a Derwinegan being always Bunda, no matter
whether she marries a Banjoora or a Barrang husband. This law
applies, mutatis mutandis, to the offspring of the women belonging
to the other three sections.
Although marriages are generally regulated by the rules set out in
the above table, and in the last paragraph, yet there are what I have
called family or sectional regulations, under which a man may, in
certain cases only, marry a woman belonging to his own section,
but of a different totem to that to which he himself belongs. For
instance, a Barrang Opossum might be allowed to marry a Bar-
rangan Porcupine. Marriage between persons of the same totem is
strictly prohibited. 1
The totems belonging to each of the primary groups are common
1 “ The Kamilaroi Class System of Australian Aborigines,” Proc. Roy. Geog.
Soc. Aust. (Q.), x, 23-24.


330 MATHEWS —DIVISIONS OF QUEENSLAND ABORIGINES. [Nov. 18,
to the two sections of which it is composed. Thus, the totems
attached to Karpeun are common to the sections Barrang and Ban-
joora, and the Deeajee totems are common to the Bunda and Der-
wine sections. I have found that certain totems which belong to
Karpeun in a given district are reported to be attached to Deeajee
in a different part of the tribal territory. It may be stated that I
have observed similar local disagreements among the totems of
other organizations. 1
In the tribes inhabiting the country on the heads of the Clarence
and Condamine rivers, the following are some of the totems
attached to the group Karpeun: kangaroo-rat, parrot, turtle, carpet
snake, eaglehawk, codfish, sea, brown kangaroo, crow, opossum,
scrub turkey and porcupine. Among the totems of the Deeajee
group in the same district may be enumerated the plain turkey, red
kangaroo, bat, common magpie, wallaroo, black snake, native cat,
emu, iguana and platypus.
Mr. A. W. Howitt reports that in the Turrubul tribe, one of
those included in this Nation, “descent is counted through the
male.” 2 In another place he makes the same assertion in regard to
the Kaiabara, also belonging to this Nation. 3 There is, however,
no question that he is in error in both instances, and has evidently
been misinformed. I have drawn attention to the matter now,
because on a former occasion I was misled by Mr. Howitt’s conclu-
sions respecting the line of descent of the Kaiabara tribe. 4 I have
since, however, from personal inquiry, reported that descent is
through the mother. 6
I have before given the Rev. William Ridley the credit of being
the first to report the Turrubul and Dippil tribes from Moreton Bay
to Wide Bay, whence Mr. E. Palmer traced a similar organization to
Port Curtis. 6 lam the first to publish the existence of identical
divisions on the sources of the Clarence and Dumaresq rivers ;
down the Condamine, and across the country to the Dawson,
including that river and its tributaries, as shown upon the map.
x Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxi, 170.
2 Trans. Roy. Soc. Victoria (1889), i, 102.
* Jour Anthrop. Inst., xviii, 50.
* Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q.),
*Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 81-82.
6 Loc. cit., p. 81.


1898.] MATHEWS —DIVISIONS OF QUEENSLAND ABORIGINES. 331
The names of the groups Deeajee and Karpeun, and the equiva-
lehce of the four sections to those of the Kamilaroi tribes, have
also been first reported by me.
No. 2. The Kogai-Yuipera Nation
The name is adopted from the Kogai of the Maranoa and
Yuipera of Mackay, the two tribes whose divisions were first made
known in this area. The immense extent of country covered by
the tribes and communities constituting this nation can be under-
stood better by a reference to the map than by any description of
it. In a former paper, to which the reader is referred, 1 I detailed
the original work done by the Rev. William Ridley, Mr. R. B.
Smyth, Mr. E. M. Curr, and Mr. E. Palmer, among different tribes
of this organization.
I have traced the same section names among the tribes of the
Warrego, Paroo, Bulloo, Barcoo, Thomson, Diamantina, and other
rivers, thus covering all the country in which the section or class
names had not been particularized by previous writers. The fol-
lowing are a few out of a large number of tribes included in my
inquiries: The Gnoree tribe of the Middle Warrego, the Murgoan
of the Bulloo, the Moothaburra and Birria of the Thomson, the
Koonkerri of the Barcoo, the Kurrawulla of the Diamantina, the
Banthamurra of the Wilson, etc.
In all the tribes of this Nation the people are divided into four
sections, called Woongo, Koobaroo, Bunburri and Koorgilla, or
else mere variations of these names. The people appertaining to
the Woongo and Koobaroo sections together form a group called
Wootaroo, and the Bunburri and Koorgilla sections constitute the
group Yungaroo. In my previous article already referred to, 2 1 gave
a tabular arrangement of the groups and sections of the Yuipera
tribe at Mackay, as reported by Mr. R. B. Smyth, in 1878, but as
the names are slightly different in the interior, it will be better to
supply a new table, as follows :
x Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 78-SO.
' l Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 79.


332 MATHEWS—DIVISIONS OF QUEENSLAND ABORIGINES. [Nov. 18,
Section.
Offspring,
Group.
Husband.
Wife.
Sons.
Daughters.
Wootaroo Woongo Bunburrian
Koobaroo Koorgillan
Koorgilla
Bunburri
Koorgillan
Bunburrian
Yungaroo Bunburri Woongoan
or Mallera Koorgilla Koobarooan
Koobaroo
Woongo
Koobarooan
Woongoan
Mr. E. M. Curr reported that the name Mallera was used on the
Belyando and other rivers instead of Yungaroo, and I have found
the same name on the Warrego, Thomson and elsewhere.
As every man and woman.in the community bears the name of
an animal, or some other natural object, it follows that there will
be an aggregate of diverse totems known by the collective title of
Wootaroo, and a corresponding variety of totems will be distributed
under the distinguishing name of Yungaroo or Mallera. The
tribes of this organization are so widespread that I shall not at
present occupy the space to enumerate the lengthy lists of totem
names collected by me in the various districts, but will reserve this
task for a future occasion.
Although the section names are practically the same over the
vast territory shown as No. 2 on the map, yet the dialects and cus-
toms of the people are more or less diverse in different parts of it.
Throughout a wide zone of the western end of this nation, all the
males are circumcised, and other rites are performed, which have
been described by me elsewhere. The line from Atoß on the
map separates those tribes who practice circumcision from those
who do not. Such a boundary would necessarily be varied slightly
at different times by conquest, or by the intermarriage of neighbor-
ing tribes on either side.
The southwest and west boundaries of Queensland, separating
that colony from South Australia, being arbitrary geodetic lines,
cannot be expected to coincide with the boundaries of the aborig-
inal nations. For the sake of simplicity, however, the Queensland
boundary has, for the present, been adopted as the southwest limit
of the Kogai-Yuipera people. I am preparing a map dealing with


1898.1 MATHEWS—DIVISIONS OF QUEENSLAND ABORIGINES. 333
some South Australian tribes, on which the actual boundary between
them and the Queensland communities will be shown in its proper
place. The northern boundary of the Barkunjee nation, No. son
the map hereto annexed, will also be more particularly defined in
my forthcoming article.
No. 3. The Kooinmerburra Nation.
This nation comprises several small tribes, inhabiting the coastal
district from Port Curtis via Keppel Bay, Port Bowen, Cape Town-
shend and Shoalwater Bay to Broad Sound, together with Long
Island, Curtis Island and some smaller ones off the coast. On the
south they were bounded by the Dippil, and on the west and north
by the Kogai-Yuipera nations, as represented by a distinguishing
line upon the map, PI. XIII. The community is divided into two
intermarrying groups, having the same names as their western
neighbors, but with subdivisions bearing a different nomenclature.
The primary group Wootaroo is divided into two sections, called
Moonal and Karilburra, and the Yungaroo group into two, called
Kooealla and Koorpal.
The names of the groups and sections, showing how they inter-
marry, and the names of the respective divisions to which the chil-
dren belong, will be readily understood by referring to the follow-
ing table:
Section.
Offspring.
Group.
Husband.
Wife.
Sons.
Daughters.
Moonal Kooeallan
Wootaroo
Koorpal
Kooealla
Koorpalan
Kooeallan
Karilburra Koorpalan
Y ungaroo
Kooealla Moonalan
Koorpal Karilburran
Karilburra
Moonal
Kanlburran
Moonalan
Moonal and Karilburra are equivalent to Murri-Kubbi, and
Kooealla and Koorpal to Kumbo-Ippai, of the Kamilaroi and
Wiradjuri communities in New South Wales.
In this community descent is always reckoned on the female side,


334 MATHEWS—DIVISIONS OF QUEENSLAND ABORIGINES. [Nov. 18,
the same as in the two adjoining nations, the children of both sexes
taking the totem name of their mother. The undermentioned are
a few of the totems common to Moonal and Karilburra: curlew,
wallaby, rain, russet hawk, bat, yellow-bellied snake. The Koo-
ealla and Koorpal sections have the following totems amongst
others: crow, boomerang, jackass, eaglehawk, salt water perch.
The intermarriage of certain totems belonging to the same sec-
tion, referred to in my explanation of the marriage laws of the
Dippil nation, also prevails in the Kooinmerburra community.
For example, a Moonal might, under certain restrictions, marry a
Moonalan of a totem different to his own.
For the particulars of the social structure of the Kooinmerburra,
and their geographic range, I am much indebted to Mr. William
H. Flowers, one of my most valued correspondents, who took a
deal of trouble in replying to my inquiries. In 1894, in an article
treating of another tribe, 1 I incidentally referred to the Kooinmer-
burra divisions reported by Mr. Flowers. The divisions of this
tribe have also been briefly mentioned by Mr. A. W. Howitt. 2 The
full details given in the present article, and the map defining the
boundaries of the tract of country occupied by all the tribes of
this organization, have never been published until now.
Explanation of Plate XIII.
No. 1. The Dippil nation,'at its southern end, extends a little
way within the New South Wales frontier —the whole of the
remainder being situated in Queensland. Moreton and Stradbroke
islands appertain to this organization.
No. 2. The Kogai-Yuipera nation adjoins the northern boundary
of the Barkunjee and Kamilaroi nations of New South Wales, which
encroach some distance within Queensland territory. All the
tribes occupying the country to the west of the line AB practice
the rite of circumcision, but to the east of that line the custom is
not in force.
No. 3. The Kooinmerburra nation inhabits a comparatively
small territory fronting the sea-coast for some distance north and
south of the Fitzroy river.
No. 4 is the northern extremity of the country of the Kamilaroi
1 Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q.)> x > 27.
i Journ. Antkrop. Inst., xiii, 34 X.




33H MATHEWS —DIVISIONS OF QUEENSLAND ABORIGINES. fNov. is.
nation, which crosses the boundary between the colonies of Queens-
land and New South Wales.
No. 5 represents a portion of the Barkunjee territory, which also
overlaps the Queensland frontier.
For particulars of the country occupied by the Kamilaroi and
Barkunjee nations, and the eastern limit of the custom of circum-
cision in New South Wales, the reader is referred to my paper on
the “Initiation Ceremonies of Australian Tribes,” published in
the Proceedings of this Society, Vol. xxxvii, pp. 54-73, PI. V.


DIVISIONS OF THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.






DIVISIONS OF THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
WITH MAP
(Plate VI.)
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S
{Read January 19, 1900.)
The territory dealt with in the following pages comprises approxi-
mately that part of the province of South Australia situated east of
the 132 d meridian of longitude and south of the 24th parallel of
latitude, but is more particularly delineated on the accompanying
map. All the native tribes within this immense region are divided
into two intermarrying phratries, with the exception of some tribes
on the Murray river and Yorke’s peninsula, among whom no well-
defined divisional system has been reported.
I shall endeavor in this article to determine the boundaries of
the country occupied by certain aggregates of tribes possessing the
same divisional names and practicing similar initiatory rites, which
it is proposed to denominate nations, following the method adopted
by me in showing the distribution of the native tribes of New
South Wales, 1 Victoria 2 and Queensland. 3 A map is added, on
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc. Philada., xxxvii, 54-73. Plate v.
2 American Anthropologist , Washington, xi, 325-343, Plate v.
3 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc. Philada., xxxvii, 327-336, Plate xtii.
REPRINTED FROM PROC.-AMER. PHILOS. SOC., VOL. XXXIX, NO. 161.


1900.] MATHEWS—SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. 79
which is marked the geographic range of each nation and defining
also the limits within which circumcision and subincision are in
force.
I. The Parnkalla Nation.
"In 1846 the Rev. C. W. Schiirmann published a pamphlet on the
Aboriginal Tribes of Port Lincoln , South Australia , in which, on
p. 9, he stated that the Parnkalla tribe was “ divided into two dis-
tinct classes, the Mattiri and Karraru people If a husband be
Mattiri, his wife must be Karraru, and vice versa , the children
taking invariably the appellation of that class to which their mother
belongs.” This is the first accurate record of the divisions of abo-
riginal tribes, not only in the colony mentioned, but in any part of
the Australian continent. Owing to this priority and for conveni-
ence of reference I have adopted the name of the Parnkalla tribe
for the whole nation. I shall endeavor to give the names and ter-
ritorial limits of a few of the most important of the many tribes of
which this large nation is composed.
The Rev. Mr. Schiirmann says 1 the Parnkalla language extended
“ from Port Lincoln probably as far as the head of Spencer’s
Gulf,” which would be about where Port Augusta now stands, and
that “ northeast of the Parnkalla was the Nukunna tribe.” The
Nauo, or Nowo, tribe adjoined the Parnkalla on the west 2 and in-
habited the country from Venus Bay to Koppawanata station.
Northwest of the Nauo, around Yardea station, was the country of the
Willeuroo tribe. The Parnkalla, Nauoand Willeuroo, were practically
the same people in language and customs, and are included in the
same nation on the map. lam informed by old residents that a
small tribe called Kooapudna was formerly located around Frank-
lin Harbor. These people are not mentioned by Mr. Schiirmann.
Mr. B. Hack states that a tribe, which he calls Noocoona, occu-
pied the eastern side of Spencer’s Gulf, from Port Augusta to Bun-
dalear (see map) and extended east to Coonattod As the Noocoona
of Mr. Hack were located in the country indicated by Mr. Schiir-
mann as being inhabited by the Nukunna, it seems safe to infer that
both writers meant the same people; for although the spelling is
different the pronunciation is substantially the same.
1 Native Tribes of South Australia (1879), p. 249.
2 Ibid., p. 249.
3 Folklore, Manners, etc., S. A. Aborigines (1879), pp. 64-66.


80 MATHEWS —SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. [Jan. 19,
Mr. Noble, a police trooper, in describing the customs of the
Alury tribe of the Flinders Range, 1 says they were divided into
“ two clans,” called Muttay and Arriee, which I have assumed are
intended to represent Mattiri and, Karraru of the Parnkalla divi-
sions. ML Noble includes “ Crystal Brook and surrounding coun-
try ” in his description, which would overlap and include the ter-
ritory of the Noocoona tribe above referred to. This suggests the
inference that the Alury and Noocoona were subtribes of the same
people.
The Kooyeeunna and some smaller allied tribes occupy the coun-
try from South Lake Eyre, including Turret Range, Chambers
creek, Screech-Owl creek, and others, to Lake Torrens, and
southerly along its eastern shore as far as Nilpena station, where
they adjoin the Alury already mentioned. A friend of mine who
resided a long time on Willochra creek, in the heart of the country
occupied by the Alury tribe, says their proper name is Eeleeree.
He states that they are divided into the two groups, Mattiri and
Karraru, like the Hillary people, who are their near neighbors on
the western side of Lake Torrens. Both tribes circumcise and split
the penis of the youths, and their language has many words in com-
mon. The Kooyeeunna extend northeasterly to meet the Dieyerie ;
and on the southeast they are joined by the Kutchnamootha and
friendly tribes, who are spread over the district from Mount Free-
ling to Lake Frome and Lake Blanche. 2 East of the Kutchna-
mootha is inhabited by the Pulladapa tribe, including the country
adjacent to Lake Callabonna, and thence toward the New South
Wales boundary.
Adjoining the Kooyeeunna and Kutchnamootha, and reaching
northerly, beyond Cooper’s creek, is the territory of the Die-
yerie tribes. Their eastern boundary is approximately a line
drawn from Mount Freeling, through Lakes Blanche and Hope, to
Lake Perigundi. 3 From the debouchure of the Diamantina river
into Lake Eyre, up that river to Goyder’s Lagoon, taking in
Kalamurina, Cowarie, Mungarane and Berlino stations, is inhab-
ited by the Ahminnie tribe. Beyond the Ahminnie is the Wonka-
1 Folklore, Manners, etc., S. A. Aborigines (1879), p. 64.
2 Mr. E. M. Curr, in his book, The Australian Race (1886), refers to these
two tribes, whom he calls Cooyiannie and Kudnamietha. Vol. ii, p. 118.
3 Compare with description given by S. Gason in his Dieyerie Tribes of Aus.
Aborigines (1874), p. 11.


1900.] MATHEWS—SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. 81
oora tribe, occupying the country from Macumba river nearly to
Alton Downs. The southern end of their country is watered by the
Macumba river and the lower portion of Kallakoopa creek. North
of the Wonkaoora is the Wonkamudla tribe, reaching from Alton
Downs to Annandale and other stations.
The Wonkaoora and Wonkamudla tribes extend a long way to
the northwest into the desert country, consisting of sandhills, with
sterile patches and salt marshes between them. The only water in
this tract is obtained from native wells, called mickeries , and the
natives of that district are on this account known as “the mickerie
blacks. ’ ’ These wells are for the greater number shallow holes, little
more than “soakages,” and generally contain only small supplies
of water, but a few of them are as much as twenty feet deep, or more,
being wide at the top and tapering almost to a point at the bot-
tom, into which the water percolates through the loose strata.
Adjoining the Wonkaoora on the southwest are the Arrabunna
people, who inhabit the country from near the Macumba southerly
along the western side of Lake Eyre as far as Margaret creek,
where they adjoin the Kooyeeunna tribe already mentioned. The
Arrabunna extend up the Neale and Peake creeks till met by the
Andigarina people; toward the southwest they reach to Stuart’s
Range, where they adjoin the outposts of the Kookatha nation.
Touching the Kooyeeunna about Red Lake, and extending thence
southerly down the western side of Lake Torrens is occupied by
the remnants of the Hillary, Kakarrura, Yallingarra and other
friendly tribes, meeting the northern limit of the Parnkalla and
Nauo before referred to. I propose calling this tract of country
the Hillary Nation, after the Hillary tribe, mentioned by Mr. J.
Bryant in 1879. 1
In all the principal tribes or aggregates of subtribes and fami-
lies, whose boundaries are outlined in the preceding pages and
enumerated on the appended map as 1 to 10, the people are
bisected into the phratries, Matturri and Kirraroo, 2 the men of the
one marrying the women of the other. No previous writer has
attempted to define the geographic distribution of all the people
possessing this organization, and show the correct relative location
of each tribe on a map of South Australia. The collection of
x Folklore, Manners, etc., S. A. Aborigines (1879), p. 103.
2 1 have adopted these forms of the Phratry names, because they are used by
the Kooyeeunna tribe, who are located near the centre of the nation.


82 MATHEWS —SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. l Jan>l9 >
reliable data, from which to prepare such a map, has been the
result of long and patient inquiry extending over some years.
The following synopsis shows how the two phratries intermarry
and the descent of the resulting offspring :
Table No. i.
Phratry.
Husband.
Kirraroo,
Matturri,
Wife.
Offspring.
Matturri.
Kirraroo.
A
B
Matturri,
Kirraroo,
All the people, men and women alike, bear the name of an ani-
mal or some other natural object, which is their totem. I have
noticed that certain totems which belong to one phratry in a
given district are found to belong to the other phratry among the
members of a tribe occupying a different part of the country.
Similar differences have been observed by me among the native
tribes of New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria. Therefore,
in supplying a few lists of some of the totems attached to the two
phratries Kirraroo and Matturri —the name of the tribe will be
mentioned in each case. 1 will take the totems of the Arrabunna
tribe first.
The undermentioned totemic names may be enumerated as some
of those belonging to the people comprising the Kirraroo group :
Emu, Rainbow, Diver,
Mopoke, Scrub Turkey, Bull-dog Ant,
Fish, Gum Tree, Crane,
Common Fly, Top-knot Pigeon, Moon,
Sun, Clouds, Sandalwood Tree,
Rain, Lightning, Barley Grass,
North Wind, Thunder, Acacia,
Nardoo, Crow, Carpet Snake,
Hailstones, Opossum, Spoonbill,
Box Tree, Pelican, Beefwood Tree,
Needle Bush, Mimosa, Green Snake.
Among the totems of the people constituting the Matturri group
may be mentioned the following :


1900.] MATHEWS —SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. 83
Wild Dog, Eagle Hawk,
Small Lizard,
Brown Snake,
Whip Snake,
Kangaroo Rat,
Wattle Tree,
Ring-neck Parrot,
Mulga Tree.
Spider, Common Magpie,
Curlew, Black Duck,
Swan, Frog,
Grasshopper, South Wind,
Quandong Tree, Shag,
Iguana, Quartz Stone,
Plain Turkey,
11. The Yowerawarrika Nation.
The Yowerawarrika tribe adjoin the Dieyerie Ahminnie, Wonk-
aoora and Wonkamudla on the east, and reach northerly and eas-
terly into Queensland. Their territory includes Coongie, Clifton
Hills, Pandy Pandy and Cordilla Downs. Adjoining the Yowera-
warrika on the south are the Yanderawantha, who reach from
Patchawarra creek southerly across the Cooper and down the
Strzelecki creek till they meet the northern limit of the Pilladapa
about Lake Callabonna. On thp west they are bounded by the
Dieyerie, and on the east they extend within the Queensland and
New South Wales frontier. Innamincka, Tinga Tingana, Kano-
winna, Oontoo and other stations, are situated within the territory
of this tribe.
The social organization of the Yowerawarrika and Yanderawan-
tha consists of two intermarrying phratries called Koolpirro and
Thinnawa; a Koolpirro man marries a Thinnawa woman, and, vice
versa , the sons and daughters of the marriage taking the name of
the group to which the mother belongs. Arranged in tabular form
these rules of marriage and descent appear as follows :
Table No. 2.
Phratry.
Husband. Wife. Offspring.
Koolpirro, Thinnawa, Thinnawa.
Thinnawa, Koolpirro, Koolpirro. -
There is a collection of totems attached to each phratry. The
following are some of the totems of the Koolpirro people :
Carpet Snake, Rainbow, Rat,
Red Ochre, * Pigface, Native Companion,
Crow, Emu, Curlew.
Kite-hawk, Pituri.


84 MATHEWS —SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. [Jan. 19,
The Thinnawa division claims the undermentioned animals and
objects amongst others :
Iguana, Eaglehawk, Plain Turkey,
Bull-Frog, Shag, Black Duck,
Jew Lizard, Dingo, Plover,
Witchetty, Native Cat, Crane,
Ground Frog, Kangaroo Rat, Diver.
Water Rat,
The phratry name Koolpirro is the equivalent of Kirraroo, and
Thinnawa corresponds to Matturri of the Parnkalla organization.
Koolpirro is likewise equivalent to the pair of sections Woongo and
Koobaroo, and Thinnawa to the pair, Bunburri and Koorgilla, of
the tribes adjoining them on the northeast.
111. The Barkunjee Nation.
The divisional system and initiation ceremonies of the tribes
constituting this nation have been fully reported in my paper pub-
lished in the Journal of the Royal Society of JVew South Wales ,
Vol. xxxii, pp. 240-255.
IV. The Adjadurah Nation.
The Adjadurah tribe occupied Yorke Peninsula, a long tongue of
land lying between St. Vincent and Spencer Gulfs and reaching
north as far as Crystal brook. Mr. McEntire says these natives
were more similar to the Adelaide tribe than any other; and Mr.
E. M. Curr states that the language of the Adelaide blacks resem-
bled that of those occupying Yorke Peninsula more than the lan-
guage of the natives of the Murray river. I have compiled the fol-
lowing comparative vocabulary of twenty-four words used by both
tribes, selected from four different authors—Teichelmann and
Schurmann, 1 Edward Stevens, 2 E. McEntire® and E. M. Curr. 4
1 Grammar and Vocabulary of Aboriginal Language Spoken by Natives
of Adelaide (1840), pp. 1-176.
2 Jour. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxiii, 498-501.
3 Folklore, Manners, etc., S. A. Aborigines (1879), p. 63.
4 The Australian Race (1886), ii, 146, 147-


MATHEWS —SOUTH
AUSTRALIAN
ABORIGINES
English.
Teich. and Sch,
Adelaide.
E. Stevens.
Adelaide.
E. McEntire.
Y. Peninsula.
E. M. Curr.
Y. Peninsula.
Kangaroo
Opossum
Dog
Nanto
Pilta
Kadli
Kari
Munthu
Nan too
Bilta
Cudlee
Curree
Kuddelee
Kadle
Garrie
Gooa
Emu
Crow
Swan
Fish
Egg
Kudlyo
Kuya
Guldyoo
Guya
Cooyar
Kooya
Muka
Mokka
Kakka
Mudla
Minni
Tea
Head
Nose
Eye
Makarta
Mudla
Kukaa
Mudla
Midna
Teeya
Murra
Thidna
Meedla
Meena
Mena
Tia
Teeth
Hand
Foot
Marra
Tidna
Moora
Tidna
Mirra
Didna
Breasts
(female)
Blood
Ngammi
Karro
Umme
Ammie
Garro
Gerra
Excrement
Reed Spear
Fire
Kudna
Kaya
Goodnarie
Giea
Gadla
Puiyu
Tindo
Kudla
Gurdla
Booyoo
Tintoo
Birra
smoke
Sun
Tindoo
Cackera
Deento
Bigha
Moon
Kakirra
or Piki
Purle
Boorlee
Barloona
Burlie
Die or Dead
Moorloona
Barluna
Besides the affinity of their speech, the Yorke Peninsula and
Adelaide natives had many customs in common. Mr. E. M. Curr,
Mr. E. McEntire and Mr. T. M. Sutton report that circumcision
was practiced on Yorke Peninsula, and the last-named author men-
tions the use of a bullroarer. 1
Teichelmann and Schiirmann state that in the Adelaide tribe a
youth was called Pappa after being circumcised; Turlo was the
name of the circumcisor; and the being who first taught the rite
to their ancestors was named Yura, who also punished those who
neglected to carry it out. He further says that a bullroarer called
Kadnamangutta was employed in the ceremony. It was a thin, oval
piece of wood, five inches long and an inch and a half wide, tied to a
1 Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc., S. A. Bch., Vol ii, 3d series, p. 17.


86 MATHEWS —SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. [Jan. 19,
string, by which the natives swung it rapidly round, causing a hum-
ming noise. Females and children were not allowed to see it.
Mr. G. F. Angas reports that circumcision was in vogue among
the Wirramayo tribe, who occupied the vast scrub country to the
northwest of the river Murray, and that an instrument called Wittoo
Wittoo, an oval piece of wood fastened to a string of human hair,
was whirled round with great rapidity, producing a loud, roaring
sound. 1
Owing to the similarity of the dialects of the Yorke Peninsula and
Adelaide tribes, the prevalence of circumcision and other customs,
together with the fact of their being adjoining neighbors, seems to
me to justify the assumption that they were practically the same
people. I have therefore included these two tribes in one nation.
Mr. McEntire and Mr. Sutton say that in the Yorke Peninsula
tribe the children followed the father. Having read all that both
these writers have to say on the subject, I am nevertheless of opinion
that the descent of the children depended directly on the mother,
being led to this conclusion by inquiries I have made from old resi-
dents of that part of the country and from natives of adjacent tribes.
Whether or not they were divided into two intermarrying phratries,
like the nations to the north and west of them, appears to have
escaped the notice of early investigators.
V. The Narrinyeri Nation
The tribes composing this nation have been dealt with in my
article on “ The Victorian Aborigines,” 2 so that a brief reference
will be sufficient in the present treatise. Their territory was chiefly
in South Australia, but extended a little way into the adjoining
colonies of New South Wales and Victoria. Their southern limit
was Lacepede Bay, whence they reached along the coast to Cape
Jervis and up the Murray river almost to the junction of the Dar-
ling (see map). They did not practise circumcision, and their lan-
guage differed from that of their neighbors. The Rev. G. Taplin,
who is the most experienced of the early writers on the customs of
these people, gives no group divisions, and says descent was counted
through the father. 3 In the Barkunjee and Booandik tribes, who
1 Savage Life in Australia and New Zealand, Vol. i, p. 99.
2 American Anthropologist (Washington), xi, 336-343.
» Folklore, Manners, etc., S. A. Aborigines (Adelaide, 1879), p. 157.


1900.) MATHEWS —SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. 87
adjoin the Narrinyeri, the descent is on the mother’s side, although
they marry into the phratry of the father, and the children are
brought up in his tribe.
VI. The Booandik Nation.
More than three-fourths of .the entire area of this nation is situated
on the other side of the boundary between South Australia and Victo-
ria, and their social organization has been described in my paper on
the aborigines of the latter colony. 1 I wish to repeat here, however,
that the community is divided into two intermarrying phratries,
called Krokitch and Kamatch. If a man belongs to the Krokitch
division his wife must be taken from among the Kamatch people,
and vice versa —the children taking the name of the phratry to
which their mother belongs.
VII. The Kookatha Nation.
Lying to the west of the Parnhalla, Hillary and Arrabunna Na-
tions, the country is occupied by several tribes, including the Koo-
katha, Geebera, Wirrunga, Yilrea, Warnabinnie and some others.
This aggregate of people will be designated the Kookatha Nation,
and the following is a brief outline of the geographic distribution
of the different tribes composing it.
The Kookatha tribe extends from the Stuart Range, taking in
Lake Phillipson, Mount Eba Station, Wilgena Station, Mount
Finke and Lake Bring. The Geebera people are on the north of
Lake Gairdner. Between the Gawler ranges and the head of the
Great Australian Bight we encounter the Wirrunga, Yilrea, Warna-
binnie and other tribes, inhabiting the coastal districts. The peo-
ple of the interior are more friendly among themselves than with
the coast people, and speak a slightly different dialect. They all
mix together, however, in their great corrobories, and have simi-
lar ceremonies of circumcision, subincision and the enlargement of
the vaginal orifice. The coast tribes do not extract a front tooth
from the upper jaw of the males, but this custom prevails all over
the back country.
In the Geebera tribe, and for a long way westward of them, the
two intermarrying phratries are designated Kookoojiba and Koo-
cheebinga, and the resulting offspring take the name of their
1 American Anthropologist , xi, 331-336.


mother’s phratry, which may be exemplified in tabular form as
under:
Table No. 3
Phratry. Husband. Wife. Offspring.
A Kookoojiba, Koocheebinga, Koocheebinga
B Koocheebinga, Kookoojiba, Kookoojiba.
Among the coastal tribes, in order ]to prevent] consanguineous
marriages, the chief old men appoint certain women to be uumree
to certain young men, and the men thus selected are also uumree
to these women. This can be illustrated by supposing that a
woman who is uumree to a certain man has a son and a daughter.
The man, who may be called A, who is also uumree to her, takes
her daughter as his wife, and if he himself has a sister he is sup-
posed to give her to the woman’s son, who would, of course, be his
wife’s brother. Then the man A and his wife’s brother would be-
come what the natives call maratho, which signifies that they must
always assist one another in time of danger. A man and woman
who are uumree , therefore, stand in the relationship of son-in-law
and mother-in-law. They never speak to one another as long as
they live, and avoid looking at each other if possible, yet remaining
the best of friends.
Female children are betrothed in their infancy to such of the
males as may be entitled to claim them as their wives in accord-
ance with the laws of the tribe. A man is supposed to contribute
something in the way of food to his future wife, until she is old
enough to go and cohabit with him.
Where the law permits, women who have very dark hair and
complexions are appointed uumree to men whose complexions and
hair are lighter, and vice versa. This distinction in the color is
also apparent in the betrothals, a lighter girl being betrothed to a
darker boy, and a darker girl to a lighter boy. In all cases, how-
ever, the parties who are uumree, and also those who are betrothed,
must belong to opposite phratries. 1
The tribes who adjoin the Kookatha nation on the west are sub-
stantially the same people in language and customs, and extend
onwards into western Australia. Commencing about Israelite Bay
1 The Parnkalla divisions, Kirraroo and Matturri, are known at least as far
west as Murat Bay, owing to the intermarriage of the people of the two nations.


1900. j MATHEWS—SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. 89
and extending a considerable distance westerly and northerly along
the coast of western Australia, the tribes are divided into two inter-
marrying phratries 1 called Munnichmat and Wartungmat, with
groups of totems attached to each, particulars of which will be given
in another article.
VIII. The Andigarina Nation.
Bounding the Arrabunna on the northwest are the Andigarina
and friendly tribes, occupying the country up the Alberga river to
the Musgrave range, and onward to the Petermann ranges and
Lake Amadeus, where they meet the Locrudgee tribe. The Andi-
garina and Loorudgee are divided into four sections, called Koo-
mara, Panungka, Bultara and Parulla, particulars of whose inter-
marriages have been dealt with by me elsewhere. 2 This organiza-
tion, with some modifications in the names of the sections, and in
the order of their intermarriage, extends westward across the colony
of western Australia to the Indian'Ocean. 8
Lying northward of the Andigarina, and adjoining also the
Wonkaoora and Wankamudla referred to in a previous page, is the
Arrinda tribe, occupying the country at Macumba, Dalhousie,
Charlotte Waters and the Lower Finke river, and stretching north-
easterly a considerable distance. They have the same four sections
as the Andigarina, and their rules of intermarriage and descent are
identical. The Arrinda and Andigarina people have a similar
language.
Northeasterly of the Arrinda are the Yorrawinga and friendly
tribes, located on the Field, Woodroffe and Georgina rivers. They
1 Divisions on the same principle, but differing in the names of the phratries,
are also found on the northeast coast of Queensland, between Cardwell and Cape
Melville. In some places the names are Koorabunna and Kooragoola—in others
Darboo and Tooar—in others Chunna and Jaypar, and so on.
2 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc. Phila., xxxviii, 79.
3 Among the Weedokarry tribe in western Australia, the following table shows
he names of the four sections and their rules of intermarriage and descent :
Phratry. Husband. Wife. Offspring.
( Butcharrie, Burronga, Banaka.
I Kurrimurra, Banaka, Burronga.
f Burronga, Butcharrie, Kurrimurra.
\ Banaka, Kurrimurra, Butcharrie.


have four intermarrying divisions named as follow : Koomara, Bel-
thara, Gaballa and Deringera.
Adjoining, but farther to the northward than the Andigarina,
Loorudgee, Arrinda and Yorrawinga people, are a number of tribes
who are distinguished by having eight intermarrying divisions, in-
stead of two, or four, as in the communities herein described. This
eight-section organization extends northerly to the Gulf of Car-
pentaria and Cambridge Gulf, and will be dealt with in another
article.
The language spoken by the Arrinda and allied tribes, and reach-
ing a long way into the eight-section system, has been ably studied
and explained by the Rev. H. Kempe. 1
Explanation of the Map.
I. The Parnkalla Nation.—This is the largest nation in South
Australia, occupying a territory of upwards of 700 miles in length,
by a maximum width of 300 miles. In consequence of the immense
tract occupied, it has been thought advisable to locate on the
map certain communities, consisting of one or more of the tribes
constituting the nation. These communities are represented as
Nos. 1 to 10 on the map, and are all divided into the two phratries,
Matturri and Kirraroo, already explained. The names of some of
the principal tribes in each community are as follow: No. 1, Parn-
kalla, Nauo, Willewroo and Kooapidna tribes. No. 2, Nookoona
and Eeleeree. No. 3, Kooyeeunna and others. No. 4, Kutchna-
mootha. No. 5, Pilladapa. No. 6, Dieyerie. No. 7, Ahminie.
No. 8, Wonkaoora and Wonkamudla. No. 9, Arrabunna. No. 10,
Hillary, Kakarraru and Yallingarra, tribes.
11. The Yowerawarrika Nation.—The principal tribes compos-
ing this nation are the Yowerawarrika, Yandrawontha, Wonka-
murra, Mullinchie, Kullally and others.
HI. The Barkunjee Nation, extending into New South Wales,
has two intermarrying phratries, Muckwarra and Keelparra, and the
offspring belong to their mother’s division.
IV. The Adjadura Nation, comprising the tribes on Yorice Pen-
insula and around the district of Adelaide.
1 “A Grammar and Vocabulary of the Language Spoken by the Aborigines of
the Mac Donnell Ranges, South Australia,” Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Australia , Vol.
xiv, pp. 1-54-


Proceedings liner, Philos, Sot,
111, mil h, HI, Plate VI,
Map showing Divisions of South Australian Aborigines.




1900.] MATHEWS —SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. 93
V. The Narrinyeri Nation. —This and the next following nation,
VI, have been described by me in The American Anthropologist,
Vol. xi, pp. 331-343-
VI. The Booandik Nation, reaching into Victoria. There are
two phratries, Krokitch and Kamatch, the men of the one marrying
the women of the other.
VII. The Kookatha Nation.—The principal tribes are the Koo-
katha, Wirrunga, Yilrea, Warnabirrie and others.
VIII. The Andigarina Nation, consisting of the Andigarina,
Loorudgee and Arrinda tribes, with four intermarrying divisions, as
explained in the text of this paper. To show the wide geographic
range of this system, it is interesting to notice that on the Batavia
river, in the extreme north of Queensland, the Joongoonjee tribe
is divided into two intermarrying phratries, called Chamagunda
and Gamanutta; the former is subdivided into two sections, named
Langename and Namegoore, and the latter into two, called Pack-
wicki and Pamarang. The children of both sexes belong to the
same phratry as their mother.
There are no feminine equivalents for these section names, but
each phratry has a collection of totems, which the natives call edeet,
some of which are the emu, dingo, rock, bamboo, wood, crow, fire,
kangaroo, carpet-snake, sea, shark, sun, black-duck, rat, pigeon,
fresh water.
The reader’s attention is invited to a line (see map) from Port
Augusta, passing east of Lake Frome and entering the New South
Wales boundary south of Tilcha. All the tribes to the west,
northwest and north of this line practice the rite of splitting the
penis in addition to that of circumcision. There is a belt of coun-
try, including Yarke Peninsula, Adelaide, Bundalear, and extend-
ing into New South Wales, in which circumcision only is in force ;
the southeastern limit of this tract is also delineated upon the map
as far as the New South Wales boundary. From the latter point
onward, through the Australian Continent to the Gulf of Carpenta-
ria, the position of the line separating the tribes who practice cir-
cumcision and splitting the penis from those among whom neither
custom is in vogue, is defined on maps accompanying contributions
by me to> different societies. 1
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales , xxxii, 240-255, PI. xii ; Proc. Amer.
Philos. Soc. Phila., xxxvii, 327-336, PI. xiii.




fab*


622 MATHEWS —SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. [Oct 5.
PHALLIC RITES AND INITIATION CEREMONIES OF
THE SOUTH'AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
OF PARRAMATTA, NEW SOUTH WALES.
{Bead October 5, 1900.)
This paper is intended as a continuation of the one I communi-
cated to this Society in January last on Divisions of the South
Australian Aborigines; and the map thereto appended, Plate VI,
represents the territory within which the rites now described are in
operation. Exigencies of space render it necessary to treat the
subject in the briefest possible manner, but it is hoped that each
part has been described with sufficient fullness to give a consecutive
account of the proceedings.
It may, perhaps, be as well to state that I was appointed by the
Government of South Australia a land surveyor in 1883 and a
Justice of the Peace in 1884, both of which positions I still hold,
by which means I have had opportunities which would not other-
wise have occurred of carrying on my inquiries respecting the cus-
toms of the aborigines in that colony.
Circumcision.
When a tribe has a few boys old enough to go through this
ordeal, messengers are dispatched by the head men to several of
the neighboring tribes to ascertain if they also have some youths
REPRINTED FROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC., VOL. XXXIX. NO. 164.


MATHEWS—SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
ready for the ceremony. One of the lads to be operated upon
whose body is painted with red ochre and grease, with down feathers
in his hair, is sent with each messenger. The age at which the
boys are circumcised varies from about eight to twelve years,
depending upon the growth and development of the subject and
other circumstances.
People occupying country a hundred or a hundred and fifty miles
distant respond to an invitation of this kind, and assemble at a
general camping ground which has been fixed upon by the initiator
of the proceedings. The men of each tribe approach the main
camp painted and in a meandering line, stamping their feet, and
are accorded a formal reception by the local mob, after which they
establish their quarters on the side nearest their own country. The
boy who accompanied the messenger is borne into the general en-
campment on the shoulders of one of the men, and the old chiefs
shout out the names of well-known localities in the district they
• have come from. They also mention flowering trees such as the
wattle, remarkable mountains and shady trees. 1
In a secluded place, a short distance from the main camp, a
space about twenty-five or thirty yards in diameter is cleared of all
grass and loose rubbish and partially surrounded by a fence of
boughs, where the circumcision of the novices will be carried out
later on. These gatherings are generally arranged to take place
shortly after the new moon makes its appearance, so that there will
be moonlight during some part of every night for two or three
weeks; and where circumstances permit the summer time is chosen
—the season of the year in which game and vegetable products are
the most abundant being preferred.
Festive and preliminary ceremonials are carried on for some days
after the last mob has arrived, which I need not now occupy the
space to detail. While these performances are in progress the head-
men assemble at their private meeting place near the camp, and
determine the date on which the novices will be circumcised. As
the men of one tribe circumcise the youths belonging to another, as
soon as the date is announced the men of the several mobs present
pretend to quarrel with each other, on account of their boys being
compelled to submit to the rite. During the night considerable
sexual intercourse is indulged in, but this privilege is accorded only
to those persons who would be entitled to marry each other in con-
1 Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria , N. S., Vol. x, pp. 4 and 32.


624 MATHEWS—SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. [Oct. 5,
with the tribal laws, and would not be extended to the
novices.
On the afternoon of the following day the youths to be operated
upon are conducted to the prepared place before referred to and
are kept there all night. When the men are taking the boys away,
the mothers and other female relatives of the latter dance around
and gently strike the men of their own phratry on the shoulder with
the open hand. For example, the Koolpirro women would strike
the Koolpirro men, and the Thinnawa women the Thinnawa men.
After this the women retire, and are not permitted to witness any of
the secret portions of the rites. The men who have the custody of
the novices are accompanied by young fellows who were circum-
cised and subincised at previous gatherings of recent date.
A cold night is usually selected for taking charge of the boys, and
they are kept at their camp without sleep or clothing. The men
shove and pull them about to keep them awake, under pretence of
watching for the approach of an enemy. At the first appearance
of daylight a short passage is formed by some men standing in a
row on one side and some on the other. During this time bull-
roarers are sounded m the bush close at hand. A novice is carried
along the passage referred to and laid face upward on the backs of
several men who are clustered together, and his limbs are held fast.
An old man, selected from one of the visiting tribes, then pulls the
foreskin forward and cuts it off with a sharp flake of stone. The
foreskin is then held up in view of those standing around and its
appearance is hailed by acclamation. A new name is now con-
ferred upon the graduate by which he will in future be distinguished.
Those who have charge of him put dust or ashes on the wound to
stop the bleeding. Being sleepy, cold and weary from the effects
of the previous night’s proceedings, his body appears to be numb
and almost insensible to pain.
The same ritual is gone through in regard to every novice oper-
ated upon and a fresh circumcisor is appointed for each. These
men profess to undertake their duty with reluctance, and are rubbed
over with dust by their comrades before commencing the ceremony.
Different ways of disposing of the foreskin are practiced in different
parts of the territory treated of in this paper. In some districts it
is eaten by the man who cuts it off and his friends, the men stand-
ing around being responsible that this is done. In other cases it is
eaten by the elder brothers or brothers-in-law of the novice; in


others it is buried in sand or otherwise dealt with, according to
the custom of the tribe in whose country the rite is carried out.
When all the subjects have been operated upon, they are placed
standing beside their guardians, while two men sound bullroarers in
their presence. Some armed warriors now advance in a menacing
attitude and threaten the boys in fierce loud tones that if ever they
divulge any part of the secret ceremonies to the women or to the
uncircumcised, they will be punished with immediate death. About
noon human blood is sprinkled over the bodies of the novitiates, and
they are kept near the place where they were circumcised during
the remainder of the day.
All the ceremonies being now at an end, toward evening there is
another mock quarrel, and during the ensuing night the men of
each tribe lend their wives to the men of the other tribes present;
this privilege, however, is restricted to individuals belonging to the
proper intermarrying divisions, and to men who have passed the
prescribed initiatory rites. The following morning all the visiting
tribes disperse and start on their r/eturn journey to their own hunt-
ing grounds, taking their respective novices with them.
Each tribe takes charge of its own novices, who are kept under
the control of their sponsors after their return to their own country.
They are taken away to a camp in the bush until their wounds are
healed, during which period they must not be seen by women, and
are restricted to certain kinds of food, in accordance with the direc-
tions of the old men. Several fires are now lighted to the windward
of the graduates, so that they may be enveloped in a dense smoke,
after which they are brought back by their guardians to a place pre-
viously arranged, where they are met by their mothers and female
relatives, and are then taken to a camp near the single men’s
quarters. At the next meeting of the tribes for initiation purposes
these young men will be permitted to be present at all the secret
ceremonies which may take place.
C. Provis reports that “ among the natives of Fowler’s Bay,
South Australia, after the boys were circumcised their hair was
daubed with grease and clay and rolled into several divisions like
rat’s tails. A rounded pad composed of emu feathers, grease, clay
and human excrement was then placed on top of the head and all
the hair brought up over it and securely bound in its place.” 1
1 Folklore , Manners , etc., of South Australian Aborigines (Adelaide, 1879),
pp. 99, 100.


MATHEWS —SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
[Oct. 5,.
Subincision.
Splitting the lower side of the male sexual organ is denoted by a
different word in each of the several communities among whom it
is practiced. It will therefore prevent any confusion as to what is
meant if we disregard the native nomenclature and substitute the
English term Subincision, a name which has already been used by
some writers and clearly indicates the character of the rite.
Some time after the wound caused by the circumcision has healed,
the tribes are again brought together and the ceremony of subin-
cision performed. The length of time between the two operations
varies among different tribes, and is also subject to the convenience
of mustering the people and other circumstances. The interval
may be only a few months, or it may be a year or two, or perhaps
several years. The age at which it is performed is entirely in the
discretion of the old chiefs, and fluctuates from about fourteen to
eighteen years.
All the preparatory arrangements are substantially the same as
already stated in dealing with ‘'circumcision ; ” and the proponents
for initiation must be young fellows who have already submitted to
that rite at previous gatherings. On the evening preceding the day
fixed for the ceremony, the novices are taken to the appointed
place near the camp, where they remain all night without clothing
or rest of any kind. No youth who has not been subincised, nor
any female, is allowed to see any part of this ceremony.
Early in the morning a novice is caught and thrown face upward
on the backs of a heap of men, similar to that described in the cir-
cumcision ceremony, and held in position, a bullroarer being
sounded by one of the men within hearing, but out of sight. In
some cases a man sits astride his chest, so as to render movement of
the body impossible. One of the assistants then takes hold of the
youth’s penis in his fingers and stretches it full length upward
along the abdomen. He uses both hands in catching the glans—
a hand on each side—and holds it in such a position as to expose
the meatus and the urethral canal as fully as possible. The oper-
ator, who is chosen from among the strange tribes present, then
with a sharp flint cuts the urethra open, extending the incision from
the meatus toward the scrotum about two inches, and in some
cases almost back to the scrotal pouch. In other districts the urethra
is split from near the scrotum to within about an inch of the glans,


MATHEWS—SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
but leaving the head of the penis and the meatus uninjured. In
the latter case the length of the cleft is from one to two inches or
more.
The graduate is then released, and a piece of soft bark or a
bundle of fur or down, greased with animal fat, is laid in the incis-
ion to keep it open. Wet clay or ashes moistened with a man’s
urine are also put in the wound to assist the healing. The organ is
then bound round with string manufactured by the natives from the
bark of a shrub or small tree bearing a yellow flower which grows
in the sand hills.
As each youth passes through the ordeal he is placed standing on
one side of the cleared space, and when the ceremony is concluded
they are all congratulated by the men present, and the caution in
regard to keeping the secret is again repeated. The young men
are then taken away by their guardians into the bush, and when
their wounds are healed they are brought back to a prepared spot in
the vicinity of the camp and presented to the people of their tribe.
This is done with certain formalities which need not now be entered
upon, after which they are invested with the belt, the kilt, and
other articles comprising the simple dress of an Australian savage.
During the ceremony of subincision —or at that of circumcision
if the latter only is practiced—one or two men are killed and eaten
by the visitors, who also drink the blood. The tribe in whose ter-
ritory the circumcision or subincision has been carried out—these
being the people who summoned their neighbors to attend the cere-
monies—have to provide the person or persons thus sacrificed from
among themselves. I also have evidence of this cannibalistic rite
among the tribes occupying the eastern portion of Australia, where
the initiation ceremonies take a different form. 1
The Rev. C. W. Schiirmann was the first author to accurately
describe the mutilation of the penis among Australian tribes.* In
1846, when speaking of the Port Lincoln natives, South Australia,
he states: “It consists of a cut from the orifice of the penis along
its lower side down to the scrotum, thus laying the passage open in
its whole length.” In 1845, Mr. E. J. Eyre also reports having
observed this peculiar custom in the same part of the country.* As
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Vol. xxxvii, p. 66.
Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxii, p. 250.
3 Aboriginal Tribes of Port Lincoln , South Australia (Adelaide, 1846)
P- 15*
s Jourtis. Expeds. Discov. Central Aus. (1845), Vol. ii, p. 332.


628 MATHEWS —SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. [Oct. 5,
regards slitting a portion only of the urethral canal and leaving the
head of the penis intact, a police trooper named Richards, in speak-
ing of the natives of Fowler’s Bay and Davenport Creek, South
Australia, says : “ An- incision is made in the penis from near the
testes to nearly the end.” 1 C. Provis, a corporal in the police
force, referring to the people near the same district, says : “ An in-
cision about half an inch long is made in the urethra between the
scrotum and glans penis.” 2
Whether the incision is made from the meatus or there is only
a perforation in the middle of the urethral canal in the way de-
scribed, the subjects always afterward pass their water through the
artificial opening. The men partially squat down during micturi-
tion and hold the penis horizontal with one hand. After the
wound heals the urethra appears as a mere groove which becomes
callous; and in those cases where the glans is split, the penis dur-
ing erection becomes flatter and broader at the extremity than in
its natural condition.
There is a widely spread opinion among laymen, and a few medical
men have been found concurring in the same view, that the object
of this rite is to prevent impregnation. I have made searching
personal inquiries over an immense extent of country in Queens-
land, South Australia and Western Australia, and have collected in-
contestible evidence that men who have been operated upon in this
way can be the fathers of families. Another equally erroneous
popular belief is that some of the men are left intact for the purpose
of propagating the race. Having carefully investigated this matter
I am quite satisfied that in any case where such men have been
observed they have been merely visitors from other tribes where the
custom was not in force.
Scarring the Body.
Raising cicatrices by means of cutting on the back and chest is a
custom of wide prevalence among the Australian aborigines, but
more importance is attached to the ceremony in some districts than
in others. From Cooper’s Creek to the Great Australian Bight the
rite may be briefly described as follows:
The subject is kept awake without food or clothing during a cold
night, as in the two last described ceremonies, and in the morning,
1 Folklore, Manners, etc., S. A. Aborigines (1879), p. 103.
2 Ibid., p. 99.


MATHEWS—SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
as soon as it is clear, blood is sprinkled over his body from the arms
of some of the initiated and he is required to drink a small quantity,
which must be that of a man older and stronger than himself. He
is then laid on a heap of green bushes piled up on the ground to
serve as a platform, where a man who is not a relative cuts certain
lines on the back of his shoulders, on his chest and on the arms
with a sharp flake of stone similar to that used in circumcision.
The position and extent of the scarring is regulated by the custom
of the tribe to which the novitiate belongs. During these proceed-
ings the men standing around make a great noise. After this cut-
ting, which is all done on the same day, a coat of ground charcoal
mixed with grease is applied to his body, and he is kept at that
place for two or three days.
He is then taken away into the scrubs by some initiated men
who act as his guardians and provide him with food. He is not
permitted to speak above a whisper, and firesticks are occasionally
held close to the wounds to make them open and protrude as much
as possible during the process of' healing, in order to leave raised
scars. Every evening about sundown he is freshly painted with a
mixture of charcoal and grease on the arms, chest and face, the
mixture being applied freely to the gashes in the flesh.
In the course of about six weeks preparations are made for
returning the graduate to the tribe. He is now at liberty to go in
quest of such articles of food as game, honey, roots and so on.
Next he is painted with red ochre and grease on the lower parts of
his body and on the hands and arms as far as the elbows. He is
then taken to a spot near the main camp, where he is met and wel-
comed by the old men. A feast then takes place at which he con-
tributes all the provisions he may have succeeded in obtaining, and
gives presents to the men who participated in the ceremony of
scarring his body.
As already stated, the youths are taken away from the women
after they are circumcised, again when they are subincised,
and again after their bodies are scarred. During these long so-
journs in the bush with the old men they are permitted to see and
listen to certain dances and songs, the secret lore of their fore-
fathers and the traditional customs of the tribe. A mystic lan-
guage or vocabulary is also inculcated, which is known only to
those who have passed through the prescribed course of instruction.
Every man and woman, all the animals, plants and surrounding


630 MATHEWS —30UTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. [Oct. 5,
objects, as well as the principal places in their hunting grounds,
have a secret name by which they are spoken of among the initi-
ated, in addition to the general nomenclature with which the
women and children are familiar. After the novitiates have passed
through the final stages of the inaugural rites, the instruction thus
briefly outlined is continued for many years at the single men’s
camp, at which the catechumens have now the right to be present.
In the portion of South Australia where subincision is not prac-
ticed the scarring takes place some time after the boys recover from
the effects of circumcision. And in the districts where depilation
is the initiatory rite, as in the Narrinyeri and adjacent tribes, the
scarring succeeds that ceremony.
It not infrequently happens that after a batch of novices are cir-
cumcised, as described in earlier pages, and before the tribes dis-
perse, such of the young men present who have passed through
that ordeal at a previous meeting, and have attained a sufficient
age, are seized by direction of the head-men and the rite of sub-
incision performed upon them. This is done to save the delay and
trouble of mustering the people again for the latter ceremony, in
cases where the graduates are few in number.
It may be stated that the women, girls and little boys are forever
afterward forbidden to go near any of the localities where the rites of
circumcision, subincision or scarring have been carried out, these
spots being rigorously tabooed to the uninitiated. This taboo ex-
tends to the initiated of a lower degree ; for example, a circum-
cised youth could not enter upon a place where subincision had
been performed, and so on.
Certain restrictions as to the food to be eaten by the novices at
different periods of their course of instruction have to be com-
plied with, in accordance with ancient custom, under the super-
vision of the old men.
Initiation of Women.
It may be stated generally that among all Australian tribes every
girl on attaining puberty is violated, either in a natural way or by
artificial means, before she is permitted, to have a husband ; this is
a tribal law from which there is no escape. Among the people
treated of in this paper it is found that certain mutilations are per-
formed upon the young women by which the vaginal orifice is per-
manently enlarged.


1900.] MATHEWS —SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. 631
When one or more girls have reached the requisite age, which
is determined by the first menstrual flux and the development of
the breasts, a meeting of the tribe takes place and some festivities
are indulged in. The girls are taken by some old women a short
distance from the camp, where they are met by men who take
charge of them and conduct them to a place where everything is
in readiness for the purpose. These men are Noapa to the nov-
ices—that is, they are men whom they could marry in accordance
with the tribal laws. Here a girl is caught and placed lying face
upward on the ground, and her hands and feet are held by the
men present. An old man, appointed for this duty, then inserts
two or three of his fingers, bound round with human hair, into the
vaginal orifice for the purpose of stretching it. Sometimes a
smooth piece of wood or stone, of the requisite thickness and
length, is used to accomplish the same result. In either case the
operation is continued until bleeding takes place. In other dis-
tricts the lower part of the vaginal wall is lacerated with a sharp
stone, the incision extending more or less into the perineum.
Forcing a large body into the vagina in any of the ways just de-
scribed causes a rupture of the fourchette, similar to that which
usually takes place in the first parturition ; and cutting with an
edged stone effects the same purpose. Bleeding from the wound is
arrested by plugging fur or birds’ down into the passage. Shortly
afterward, all the men present, one after the other, avail themselves
of their right of prelibation, or, as it is termed by the French
anthropologists, droit du culage.
These mutilations, like those upon the men already referred to,
are commonly supposed by Europeans to be done for the purpose
of rendering the women incapable of bearing children, but I have
gathered abundant evidence that there is no foundation whatever
for this assumption.
Depilation.
This ceremony, the principal feature of which is plucking the
hair from the bodies of the graduates, is practiced in the Narrin-
yeri and Booandik nations, 1 occupying the southeast corner of
South Australia. As it is substantially the same as the Kuranda
ceremony of some of the Barkunjee tribes, described in a paper
contributed by me to the Royal Society of New South Wales in
1 The American Anthropologist , Vol. xi, pp. 331-343, Plate V.


632 MATHEWS —SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. [Oct. 5,
1898, it will be sufficient to give the following resume from my
previous work. 1
The preliminaries connected with inviting the neighboring
tribes and their assemblage at an appointed meeting place are
almost identical with the practice of other districts. The time of
life at which a youth is considered ready for the ordeal is deter-
mined by the first appearance of hair on the pubes and chin. On
the morning of the day settled upon for the principal ceremony all
the people are astir at daylight. The boys to be operated upon,
who have been gathered out of the camp the previous night, are
now painted all over with red ochre, their hair being combed and
decorated with the white down of birds. When all is ready the
guardians take charge of the novices, and a number of men armed
with spears surround them in a circle, and all of them march away.
The men make a great noise, shouting and beating their weapons
together, but the boys remain silent, with their heads bowed
toward their breasts.
The mothers of the novices and other women present make a
pretence of resistance by throwing pieces of sticks over the heads
of the men, but do not attempt to follow them. The men and
graduates then proceed to a secluded locality previously agreed
upon, perhaps some miles distant, where a camp is formed, and the
novices placed lying down on a layer of leaves upon the ground,
and are covered over with cloaks or grass, their guardians remain-
ing with them. All the other men make their camp in close prox-
imity. Between the quarters of the boys and those of the men a
space is cleared of all sticks and grass, and a fire lighted close by
it. In the evening, after the youths have partaken of their allow-
ance of food, they are placed, sitting in a row, near this prepared
spot, and the men go through various pantomimic performances,
consisting of hunting and other scenes, imitating the animals
which are the totems of those present, and certain obscene gesti-
culations which are usually practiced on similar occasions. Dif-
ferent burlesques take place every evening, and also sometimes
during the day if the men are not otherwise occupied.
A week or more may be spent at these camping places in the
bush, the time being regulated by the weather and other considera-
tions. When conducting the novices from one camp to another
they are obliged to hold a bunch of green boughs in each hand.
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxii, pp. 243-245, Plate XII.


1900.1 MATHEWS—SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. 633
During the afternoon of one or more of the days of this period the
novitiates are carried a short distance from the camp, and placed
lying down on bushes thickly strewn on the ground, and rugs
spread over them. A man then sits down beside each novice, and
commences pulling out the hair from the pubes, under the arms
and the incipient beard ; when one man gets tired he is replaced
by another. Beeswax or gum is used upon the ends of the fingers
to facilitate catching the hair, which is pulled out singly. The
men of the novitiates’ own tribe do not take part in the hair-
plucking operation, this duty devolving upon the men of the dif-
ferent strange tribes present. The pluckers must be men who
have been initiated in the same way at previous gatherings, and are
the potential brothers-in-law of the novices who have been
assigned to them. Some of the head-men of each tribe sit on the
ground near by, directing the proceedings, and a bullroarer is
sounded in the vicinity. The hair pulled out of the bodies of
each youth is kept carefully by itself, and is given into the charge
of one of his relatives, in the same way that the extracted tooth is
disposed of in other districts. When the plucking of the hair has
been completed the novices are raised to their feet by their guar-
dians and other men, amid the shouts of all present. Each
graduate is then painted and invested with the usual regalia of a
man of the tribe.
The novices are then cautioned against divulging the details of
what they have passed through to any person except the initiated.
They are now taken to a place where the women have formed a
new camp, where they are met by their mothers and other female
relations, who light fires to the windward of them, enveloping
them all in a dense smoke, caused by placing green grass, bushes
or weeds on the burning wood. The graduates have to pass
through this ordeal of depilation at not less than two or three
different meetings of the tribes for that purpose before they can
be admitted to full membership and be permitted to take a wife.
While the novitiates are going through their course of initiation
in the bush with the old men they are shown the sacred bullroarer,
and certain crystalline quartz stones which are supposed to protect,
or in some way to confer magical powers upon, their possessor.
In the Narrinyeri, and in the Adjadurah nation adjoining them
on the west, marriages are regulated by the old men in accordance
with fixed rules. The sons and daughters of particular women are


634 MATHEWS—SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. [Oct. 5,
allotted as husbands and wives respectively to the sons and daugh-
ters of certain other women, these matters being arranged during
the infancy of the parties to the marriage, and in some cases before
they are born. In order that every man and woman may be sure
of obtaining a conjugal mate, several persons are appointed to each
individual of either sex, the same persons being often eligible to
several different people. When they all grow up to manhood and
womanhood each man claims the woman who has been assigned to
him, or, if she has died, he takes one of the other women who
were appointed to meet such a contingency. In like manner, if
the allotted husband of a young woman loses his life, she is taken
by one of the other men provided for the purpose.
Miscellaneous Phallic Rites.
Besides the inaugural rites herein described, I am acquainted with
other forms of initiation ceremonies in different parts of Australia,
in all of which great prominence is given to the sexual organs. In
aboriginal carvings of human beings on rocks and on trees, in
raised or carved figures on the ground, and in paintings on the
walls of caves, the sexual organs are conspicuously displayed.
There is much in these rites and customs suggestive of the exist-
ence of some form of phallic worship at an earlier period, if not
still actually observed, among the Australian aborigines.
In the great gatherings for the Bora ceremonies of the Kamilaroi
community a gigantic horizontal image of Byama, a mythologic
ancestor, is formed by heaping up loose earth upon the surface of
the ground. 1 He is represented lying on his back, with a piece of
wood cut into a representation of the human penis, projecting from
his abdomen. This organ is disproportionately large compared
with the dimensions of the body. The initiated men assemble
daily on the Bora ground and dance round this image, uttering
guttural incantations and making remarks referring to the great size
of the penis, and while so engaged they catch hold of their own
genital organs in both hands. Similar representations have been
observed by me among the Wiradjuri, Koombanggary and several
other tribes.
Not far from the image of Byama is the earthen representation
of his wife, also of colossal proportions and lying on her back,


MATHEWS —SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
with the pudenda prominently exposed, around whom the men
execute many libidinous dances.
On a Bora ground at Gundabloui, Moonie river, in addition to
Byama and his female consort, there were the images of a man
and woman lying together behind a tree 1 in the act of copulating.
Similar shouting and dancing to that just described was indulged
in around these figures.
Bora grounds always consist of two circles, defined by a low
bank of loose earth, with a pathway connecting them, called
thoonburvga, a word derived from thoon, the Kamilaroi name for
the penis. The initiated men in going from one circle to the
other walk along this track, which is supposed to represent the
penis of Dharramoolan, a mystic evil being who is said to preside
over the Bora ceremonies.
When the men assemble at the Bora circle and proclaim their
totems, as described in my previous memoirs, 2 they also shout out
the name of the penis. Certain localities in their territory are
called by names made up from thofee of the genital organs of both
sexes.* In many tribes the sacred bullroarer is rubbed upon the
penis of every novitiate present at the inaugural rites.
During the secret portions of the ceremonies, the novitiates are
placed sitting on bushes on the ground, with their hands clutching
their genitals. The men place themselves in many obscene atti-
tudes, in some cases fastening a piece of bark to the penis to give
it the appearance of being of great length. 4 At other times they
smear that organ with blood to make the boys believe that they
have a menstrual flow, like the women. In some instances the men
rub their penis on the food given to the novices; in others, they
stand in front of the boys, displaying their genitalia, and invite
them to take particular notice. 6
In the pantomimic performances in the bush, in which the
totems are represented, a man is hidden in a hollow place in the
surface of the ground and covered over with leaves. When the
men of the Kooringal presently turn him out of his lair—pretend-
ing to the novices that they think it is the nest of a gigantic bandi-
1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., London, Vol. xxiv, p. 416,
3 Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, Vol. x, N. S., p. 4.
s American Anthropologist, Washington, Vol. ii, N. S., p. 141.
4 Ibid., Vol. ix, N. S., p. 166.
Journ. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. y Queensland Bch., Vol. xv.


coot they roll him over on his back and examine whether he is
a buck or a doe.
Among all the aboriginal tribes with which I am acquainted mas-
turbation and sodomy are practiced on certain occasions. 1 It is
more general in the Kimberley district and Northern Territory
than elsewhere reached by my inquiries, but I have traced them
in the inaugural rites and ceremonial corrobories of the natives in
all the Australian colonies.
In previous articles I have referred to the enactment of an ob-
scene and disgusting tableau, called Boballai .* In several rehear-
sals of this tableau which I have witnessed there was no actual
sodomy, but some of the old head-men present told me the vice
was perpetrated in former times during this portion of the Bora
ceremonies.
Mr. R. B. Smyth narrates a legend of the Victorian tribes which
credits Boonjil, a traditionary ancestral chief, with micturating
continually for several days upon the earth, the ample store of
urine flowing away and forming the great sea. 3
In the Dieyerie tribe the men obtained blood by wounding the
penis for the purpose of fixing the down of birds upon their bodies
at certain ceremonial dances. Mr. S. Gason * states that when the
people of that tribe wish to make the wild fowl lay an abundant
supply of eggs some of the able-bodied men sit in a circle, each
having a bone from the leg of a kangaroo, sharpened at one end,
with which they pierce the scrotum several times They
are generally laid up for two or three weeks afterward and are
unable to walk.
Dr. E. C. Stirling, in describing the customs of some tribes in
tne Northern Territory, states that in some cases of severe illness
the sick man is anointed all over with blood obtained by piercing
the labia minora. The patient is held by several women while she,
whose blood is being used, rubs it all over his body, after which a
coating of grease is used. A sick woman may be similarly an-
ointed with blood taken from the male urethra. 5
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Vol. xxxix, p. 125.
2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., London, Vol. xxv, pp. 333, 334.
3 Aborigines of Victoria (Melbourne, 1878), Vol. i, p. 4 2 9*
* The Dieyerie Tribe of Australian Aborigines (Adelaide, 1874), p. 25.
4 Horn Expedition Central Australia , Part iv, p. 182.


Both male and female urine is applied externally in several kinds
of sickness, and is believed to be an excellent remedy. At the
initiation ceremonies of many tribes the novices are made to drink
the urine of the men, and also to eat human excrement. 1
In several districts, when a boy reaches seven or eight years of
age or upward and dies, his mother must submit to the plucking
out of the hair of the pubes by the people of her own tribe.
Although the rites and customs described in the foregoing pages
may appear very horrible to us, yet we should remember that the
savage has been brought up amid similar scenes from his childhood,
which causes him to view them in a different light from ours. To
him they have all the sanctity and force of divine law; and any
neglect on his part to conform to long-established custom would
bring down upon him the hostility of the community, and subject
him to all the retributive terrors of superstition.
Reference to the Map.
The map to which these references apply is Plate VI, accom-
panying my paper on the “ Divisions of the South Australian Ab-
origines,” published in No. 161 of the present volume of the
Proceedings of this Society, pp. 78-93.
The region within which circumcision is performed, and also
that in which the additional rite of subincision is practiced, are
plainly delineated upon the map in question and fully explained in
the letter-press at p. 93.
The map also shows the Narrinyeri nation, V, in which the rite
of depilation or hair-plucking is in operation, which also extends
into the part of the Booandik nation, VI, which is contiguous on
the south.
Scarring the body is in vogue over the entire territory delineated
on the map, but is carried out with greater ceremonial in some
parts than in others.
Initiation of women is also practiced over all the country repre-
sented by the map, but the more rigorous forms of it, detailed in
the letter-press, belong to the immense districts west and north of
Port Augusta, reaching to the boundary of South Australia in both
these directions.
In the northern part of the Kokatha nation, among the Hillary,
1 American Anthropologist, Washington, Vol. ix, p. 339.


i !tt 9 ■
Kooyeeunna, Dieyerie, Ahminie, Wonkaoora, Wonkamudla, Yow-
erawarrika and Yanderawantha, the custom of extracting one or
two of the front teeth is carried out, females being included in
some of the tribes mentioned. In the remainder of the territory
shown on the map the teeth are not interfered with.






NATIVE TRIBES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
{Bead March 16, 1900.)
Western Australia contains an estimated area of 978,299 square
miles, or, inclusive of the contiguous islands, about 1,057,250
square miles, being about eight times the size of Great Britain. It
is the largest of all the colonies of Australia, containing more than
a third of the entire area of that continent. In the southwest
coastal districts there is much land suitable for farming operations,
and farther north there are extensive grassy downs, capable of de-
pasturing immense numbers of sheep and cattle. Considerable
areas are gold-producing, chief among which may be mentioned
Coolgardie, Cue, Marble Bar and Kimberley—comparable in ex-
tent to some prominent European kingdoms. By far the greater
portion of the colony, however, consists of vast arid tracts of sand
and scrub, which is practically a desert.
reprinted from PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC., VOL. XXXIX, NO. 161.


124 MATHEWS —TRIBES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA. [March 16,
In the present preliminary paper it is intended to give a brief
outline of the social organization, rites and customs of the native
tribes sparsely distributed over the whole of that portion of west-
ern Australia lying to the north of the twenty-eighth parallel of
south latitude. Compared to the size of the territory occupied the
number of the aboriginal inhabitants is insignificant.
On the Murchison, Greenough, Sanford, Roderick, Wooratnel,
Gascoyne and Lyons rivers the several native tribes are each divided
into four sections, called Buljerry, Kiemarra, Boorong and Boogar-
loo. The intermarriage of these divisions, and the sections to
which the resulting offspring belong, will be readily understood
when arranged in tabular form, as under:
Offspring .
Husband.
Buljerry
Kiemarra
Boorong
Boogarloo
Boorong ' Boogarloo
Boogarloo Boorong
Buljerry I Kiemarra
Kiemarra ! Buljerry
These sectional names, with some modifications, are found among
the natives at Weld Spring, Bonython Creek, Lake Throssell, Elder
Creek, Glen Cumming, and extend eastward into South Australia,
where a similar organization exists among the Andikarina and
Arrinda tribes, particularized by me in previous publications.
If we travel northward from the Murchison, Gascoyne and other
streams above mentioned, we discover that the tribes occupying the
Ashburton, Fortescue, Yule, Shaw, De Grey and Oakover rivers
are likewise divided into four sections, the names of which are
Butcharrie, Kurrimurra, Burronga and Banaka, being simply varia-
tions of the nomenclature tabulated in this paper, Banaka taking
the place of Boogarloo. These sections reach easterly into the
northern territory of South Australia.
Proceeding still farther to the northward from the Oakover to
the Fitzroy river, the four sections are known as Baljarra, Boorungo,
Kimbera and Bannicka, the men of one section marrying the
women of another in a certain fixed rotation. In all the tribes
referred to in this paper there are aggregates of totems attached to
each section or pair of sections, and descent of the children is
counted through the mothers.


In the northeastern corner of western Australia, comprising the
region watered by the Ord River and its tributaries, Sturt Creek,
Margaret river and the Upper Fitzroy, are a number of native
tribes, particulars of whose divisions and the limits of their territory
are described in papers which 1 have communicated to different
learned societies.
In all the country dealt with in the present article, with the ex-
ception of a strip along the western coast from about Geraldton to
Onslow, all the youths are circumcised. Some time after their
recovery they must submit to a further mutilation, consisting of
splitting open the urethral canal from a point a little way from the
scrotum almost to the glans, but leaving the latter intact, the inci-
sion being about two inches in length. In'some tribes the glans is
also split, the cut being carried right into the urinary orifice. After
a man recovers from the effects of splitting the penis fie is allotted
a boy who has not yet been operated upon. This youth is a brother
of the woman whom the man is entitled to claim as his wife. The
boy is used for purposes of masturbation and sodomy, and con-
stantly accompanies the man.
The natives who inhabit the barren desert country are much in-
ferior to the coast tribes, both in personal appearance and in their
weapons and utensils. Their mode of camping at night during the
cold months of the winter is as follows: They scoop out a circular
depression in the sand, about eighteen inches deep, the diameter
varying with the number of individuals who are to use it. In this
depression they light a fire, and gradually replace the sand they
have scooped out until it is all sufficiently heated. At bedtime
each person scrapes a trench in the warm sand and lies down with-
out any clothing, letting the loose sand fall in around his body,
except the face. A man, with his wives and children, would per-
haps occupy one of these sleeping places, several young men
another, some unmarried or old women another, and so on. It
not unfrequently happens that pebbles are mixed with the sand,
and these retain the heat for a longer time. 'Although not suffi-
ciently hot to burn the skin of the sleepers, yet on lying against a
person’s body for a long time they raise blisters, which sometimes
become sores, especially on the tender skin of children. No fire is
kept alight during the night, but on emerging from their lairs in
the morning fires are lit to cook any animal food they may have on
hand.








.vi a. --q ,< v‘ ,ivkxx JrtV


VOL. XXXVI, No. 155, PLATE IV.
Australian Rock Carvings.
(To face page 195.)


BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
AUSTRALIAN ROCK CARVINGS.
(Plate IV.)
(Read May 7, 1897.)
At a meeting of the Royal Society of New South Wales, held on
the Ist of August, 1894, I read a paper on “ The Aboriginal Rock
Carvings and Paintings” in that colony, for which I was awarded
the Society’s medal. 1 I also contributed papers on the same subject
to the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain, 2 the Royal Society
1 Jour. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxviii, 329, 330.
2 Jour. Anthrop. Inst., London, xxv, 145, 163.
kEPRINTED FROM VOL. XXXVr, NO. 155, PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC.


of Victoria, 1 the Royal Geographical Society of Australia 2 and other
learned bodies. Since then I have continued my researches, and
have succeeded in discovering several other groups of native carv-
ings not hitherto recorded, a description of which I have thought
are worthy of being recorded.
In the papers above referred to I have described the way in which
these carvings were executed by the native artists, their geographic
range, etc., so that it will not be necessary in the following pages
to again refer to these parts ot the subject. The accompanying
plate shows much the largest and most varied as well as the most
valuable collection of rock carvings hitherto published. All the
figures are drawn to scale from careful measurements and sketches
taken by myself, and the position of each on the Government maps
is also stated in the descriptions, so that they can readily be found
by persons desirous of visiting them. As all the carvings are sit-
uated within New South Wales, it will not be necessary to add the
name of the colony in the description of each figure.
Plate IV. Rock Carvings.
Fig. 1. This huge, roughly drawn figure of a man is carved on a
table of Hawkesbury sandstone, almost level with the surface of the
ground, on the old road from Peat’s Ferry to Sydney, and is about
half a mile northerly from Vize Trigonometrical Station, Parish of
Cowan. The old dray track, now little used, passes over this figure,
which has caused some of the lines to become rather indistinct.
From the feet to the top of the head measures ten feet eight
inches. 3 Both eyes are shown and a diagonal line across the face.
There is a line across the body at the waist, across each arm near
the shoulder, across the left thigh, and the left ankle. An un-
finished line rises from the left thigh, outside of the figure. The
right hand and part of the left shoulder have been obliterated by
the traffic along the road referred to.
Figs. 2,3, 4 and 5. This group of carvings appears on a flat
I Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, vii (N. S.), 143, 156.
2 Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q.), X, 46-70; ibid, xi, 86-105.
3 For other gigantic carvings of men, the reader is referred to the following
plates in various papers written by me on this subject: Figs. 1 and 6, PI. 16,
Jour. Anthrop Inst., London, xxv, 145-163; Fig. 5, PI. 2, Proc. Roy. Geog.
Soc. Aust., Queensland, xi, 86-105 5 and Fig- 7» PI. 9, Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria ,
vii (N. S.), 143-156.


sandstone rock, about a quarter of a mile in a northwesterly direc-
tion from Taber Trigonometrical Station, Parish of Broken Bay.
There are a man and a woman in the attitude of aboriginal
dancers; the man is about four feet six inches high from his feet to
his hands. The head contains eyes and mouth, but no nose, and
there is a belt around the waist consisting of one incised line. On
the upper side of the belt, and projecting from it, are two incised
lines extending upwards about five inches. Lines are also cut across
the arms above the shoulder, with short lines similar to those pro-
jecting from the belt extending a few inches along the centre of each
arm. The hands have four fingers and the feet four toes each. The
penis is shown in this figure by a single incised line, 1 instead of in
the way usually found in native carvings.
On the right of the man is a female figure, much smaller, without
eyes or mouth. The mammae are depicted in the manner usually
employed by the Australian aborigines in their paintings or carvings
of women. 2
Another carving, Fig. 4 in this'group, represents a male figure,
which is interesting on account of the lines rising from the head,
which may represent hair, or may perhaps be intended for feathers
or other ornaments stuck in the hair. The hands have four fingers
only, and the feet have been carried away by the weathering of the
rock;
On the same rock is another of those grotesque forms, Fig. 5,
which are hard to definitely identify, and may be intended either
for some kind of lizard or for a human being.
Fig. 6. The large sandstone rock containing this carving is dis-
tant from Taber Trigonometrical Station about fifteen chains in a
westerly direction, Parish of Broken Bay. It is on the top of the
range dividing Smith Creek from Coal and Candle Creek.
This shield is four feet five inches long by two feet broad, and has a
longitudinal and a transverse subdivision. In the upper right-hand
quarter are four jagged holes cut in the rock, and five similar holes
in the lower right-hand quarter. The upper left-hand quarter of the
shield contains five similar holes and the lower left-hand quarter six,
1 Compare with Fig. 4, PI. 2, of my paper on “ Australian Rock Pictures,” con-
tributed to the Anthropological Society of Washington, and published in The
American Anthropologist, viii, pp. 268-278.
2 For an interesting carving of a woman dancing, see Fig. 3, PI. 2, American
Anthropologist, Vol. viii, pp. 268-278.


or twenty holes altogether. These holes are not in any symmetrical
design, but appear scattered irregularly over the surface of the shield,
and have probably been intended for ornamentation. The ethno-
logical collection of the Australian Museum in Sydney contains a
hielaman, or shield, from Queensland which has a longitudinal line
and two median horizontal lines, and is ornamented with a ground-
work of red dots. On the other hand, these marks may be intended
to represent the indentations made by spears.
Near this shield is a hollow, or “pot-hole,” in which water col-
lects in wet weather. Around the margin of this small pool of
water are a large number of grooves or hollows worn by the abo-
rigines in sharpening their stone tomahawks. For illustrations and
descriptions of similar grinding places, see my paper on “Some
Stone Implements Used by the Aborigines of New South Wales,”
Jour. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxvii, pp. 301-305, Plate -43, Fig. 3.
Figs. 7-13. These carvings are all on the same flat rock, situated
within Portion No. 1140, of forty acres, in the Parish of Manly
Cove. The first three are apparently intended for eels, varying in
length from four feet three inches to six feet one inch. Figs, nto
13 are all of the same kind of fish, but of different sizes. lam un-
able to say definitely what fish is intended to be represented, but it
has been suggested perhaps that they are grupers. The length of
the smallest is two feet four inches, and that of the largest four
feet two inches.
Fig. 14. This drawing, which is on the same rock as Fig. 26,
represents a man about five feet eight inches high, with a boomerang
lying near him. The left hand has four fingers and the right five.
The distance from the right toe to the centre of the boomerang is
one foot two inches, the length of the latter being two feet four
inches. The end of one of the weapons shown in Fig. 60 almost
touches the right foot.
Fig. 15. This well-executed figure of a buck kangaroo is carved
on a large flat rock of Hawkesbury sandstone, near the southern
boundary of Portion No. 717 in the Parish of Manly Cove. The
drawing appears to have been intended to represent the animal bent
down in the attitude of grazing. The eye, one of the ears and the
mouth are shown, the latter being open, which is unusual.
Figs. 16 and 17. These carvings are found on the perpendicular
face of a large standstone rock about five yards from the left shore
of Cowan Creek, about seven or eight chains above its confluence


with Cockle Creek, in the Parish of Gordon. Fig. 16 repre-
sents a fish five feet nine inches long and about two feet nine
inches across the body at the widest part. This fish has
two eyes and three small dots about two feet three inches from
the point of the nose, which are perhaps intended to represent
gills. The tail is divided by two curved lines extending from the
back to the belly. Within the outline of the larger fish there is a
small one about eighteen inches long by eight and a half inches
across the body. There are six representations of boomerangs, the
most I have yet observed in so small a space, three of them being
within the outline of the large fish, two partly within and one out-
side of the said outline. 1
Ten feet five inches farther to the right from the nose of the large
fish, on the vertical face of the same rock, are two small animals,
Fig. 17, which are probably intended to represent kangaroo rats,
judging by their size and general aspect. 2 They are each about one
foot four inches in length, and are fairly well executed.
The side of the rock on which 'the figures are cut faces north-
easterly, or towards Cowan Creek. These carvings are somewhat
uncommon on account of being executed on the face of a vertical
rock, such drawings being generally found on horizontal surfaces;
they are, however, sometimes met with on rocks occupying different
slopes between the two positions mentioned.
Fig. 18. This curious drawing is on the same flat rock as Fig. 26,
and is probably intended to represent a fish, real or imaginary. 3 It
is five feet three inches in length.
Fig. 19. This figure of a wallaby is on the eastern continuation
of the same rock as Fig. 26, but is on the Government road separating
Portions Nos. 1139 and 1140 before referred to. The length of the
wallaby from the tip of the nose to the end of the tail is four feet
five inches; it is in the attitude of jumping, and the eye is shown.
1 Three feet seven inches to the left of the tail of the larger fish is the carving
of an iguana six feet long which is shown as Fig. 11, PI. 3, of my paper on “ The
Aboriginal Rock Pictures of Australia,” Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust., Queens-
land, Vol. x, pp. 46-70.
2 Kangaroo-rats are represented in Figs. 13 and 14, PI. 99, illustrating my paper
on this subject in the Report of the Australasian Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, Vol. vi, pp. 624-637.
3 For other examples of nondescript or monstrous creatures drawn by the
aborigines the reader is referred to Fig. 6, PI. 2, Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust.,
Queensland, Vol. xi, pp. 86-105 ; Fig. 10, PI. 9, Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, Vol.
vii (N. S.), pp. 143-15&


fig. 20. This figure, which is three feet eleven inches high
and on the same rock as Fig. 26, is probably intended to represent
a boy. The correct number of fingers is shown on each hand.
Fig. 21. This remarkable carving is on a large, flat rock of
Hawkesbury sandstone on the western side of the road from Pymble
to Pittwater, within Portion No. 23 of 320 acres in the Parish of
Narrabeen.
The drawing represents a man with a weapon in his left hand,
which is raised over his head. It is not clear whether the weapon
is a nullanulla or a tomahawk, resembling one as much as the other.
This carving is one of unusual interest, as it shows what appears to
have been intended for a breast on the left side, as if the native
artist had at first intended to draw a figure of a woman and had
afterwards changed his mind. Or it may have been drawn to repre-
sent a dilly bag carried by a string over the right shoulder, with the
bag hanging under the left arm. Again, it may have been intended
to show some deformity which existed in the man it was designed
to represent ; or perhaps the intention w’as to delineate some real or
legendary personage having the characteristics of both sexes.
The head contains eyes, but no other features; the feet are drawn
in the usual way, but the hands are not shown. From head to foot
the man stands five feet eight inches high. The rock on which this
figure is carved slopes gently towards the southwest, and the bear-
ing of the figure from feet to head is N. 50° E.
Fig. 22. This figure of a man five feet eight inches high is on the
same rock as Fig. 26. The eyes and mouth are shown, and the
hands have each only four fingers.
F>g- 23. This figure of a woman, one foot seven inches high, is
drawn on the same rock as the last described. The hands and feet are
omitted, but the paps are shown as in other carvings of females de-
lineated on this plate. This figure is interesting on account of the
comparative smallness of its size.
Fig. 24. This figure of a man six feet high is on the same flat
rock as Fig. 15. The fingers are shown on the right hand, but not
on the left. On the left side of the head and coming partly within
it is a shield one foot nine inches long and five inches wide, with a
bar across it near the middle. The penis of this figure is drawn in
an unusual style, showing the foreskin.
Fig. 25. This human figure is three feet three inches high, and
although the sex is not shown I am inclined to think it is intended


to represent a young girl. I have arrived at this opinion by
comparing it with Fig. 23 on the same rock and with Fig. 36 in a
different locality. It may also be compared with Fig. 11 Plate
9, of my paper on “Aboriginal Rock Paintings and Carvings in
N. S. Wales,” published in the Proceedings of the Royal Society of
Victoria , vii, N. S., pp. 143-156.
Fig. 26. This carving is delineated on a flat rock of Hawkesbury
sandstone sloping northerly, within Portion No. 1139 of twenty-four
and one-half acres in the Parish of Manly Cove. This drawing is
apparently intended to represent the wombat, an Australian animal
with a very short tail and heavy body. Like many other native
drawings, the animal is shown much larger than the natural size.
From the point of the nose to the end of the tail it measures nine
feet eight inches, and across the body at the widest part it is four
feet. The plate shows the figure exactly as it appears upon the
rock, the usual careful measurements having been taken. Within
the outline of this carving is what appears to be a snake three feet
six inches long. 1
Fig. 27. This carving, which probably represents a shark, 5 is on
the same rock as Fig. 26, and is eleven feet long. There are two
dorsal and one ventral fin and a fairly good tail. The nose of this
fish is very pointed, a peculiarity I have observed in other native
drawings. Near the mouth is a boomerang one foot eight inches
long, on the concave side of which is a small oval figure. Farther
on towards the tail of the fish are two other oval figures of larger
size, but I am at present unable to suggest what they are intended
to represent —they might conceivably be meant for eggs.
Fig. 28. This figure is on the same rock as Fig. 61, and repre-
sents a man four feet four inches high. Contiguous to his right
hand are two oval figures about a foot long and nine inches across,
which may have been intended to represent shields, or possibly the
eggs of a bird. A similar object is shown in Fig. 61.
Fig. 29. This group of carvings is situated on the horizontal sur-
face of several large tabular masses of Hawkesbury sandstone, all in
1 This carving is shown as Fig. 14, PI. 3, in my paper on “The Aboriginal
Rock Pictures of Australia,” in Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Anst., Qld. Bch., Vol. x,
pp. 46-70.
2 An immense fish carved on a rock by the aborigines is shown in Fig. 15, PI.
in my paper on “Aboriginal Rock Paintings and Carvings in N. S. Wales,”
published in Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, Vol. vii (N. S.), pp. 143-156.


close proximity to each other on the western side of the cleared
road leading from Pymble along the dividing range between Cowan
and Cockle Creeks, about half a mile southerly from “ Bobbin” Trig-
onometrical Station, in the Parish of Gordon. 1
The largest emu 2 is six feet three inches from the beak to the end
of the tail, and is five feet high, in the attitude of looking for food
or at something on the ground ; and although the neck is rather too
short, it is a very fair picture of an emu. Only one leg is delineated,
and the foot is shown in continuation of the leg.
The other emu, which is much smaller, measures three feet two
inches from the beak to the tail, and stands three feet five inches
high. In this drawing the eye has been added, and one leg with
its foot is delineated in the same way as that of the large emu.
Between the last two birds is a small one, fifteen inches from tail
to head, and fourteen inches from pinion to pinion. Were it not
for the presence of wings and the shortness of the neck and legs we
might suppose this to be intended for a young emu to complete the
picture. As it is, however, it appears to represent some bird upon
the wing.
Fig. 30. This carving is also on the continuation of the same
flat rock which contains Fig. 29. The figure measures two feet four
inches in extreme length, one foot two inches across the fore feet
and one foot four inches across the hind feet. The head is four
inches long and the tail nine inches. This drawing appears to be
intended for a flying squirrel, as it resembles that animal more
besides Figs. 29 to 37, inclusive, shown in this plate and now described, there
are on the same cluster of rocks some other carvings which are described by me
elsewhere, the positions of which are as follows: About five paces from the snout
of Fig. 31 is a group representing a man and woman in the attitude of dancing.
Near them is a native «dilly bag ” and several human footmarks cut into the
rock. For a description of this group of carvings see my paper on “Aboriginal
Rock Paintings and Carvings in N. S. Wales,” published in Proc. Roy. Soc. Vic-
toria, Vol. vii (N. S.), pp. 143-156, PI. 9, Fig. 8.
About twenty-five or thirty paces in a southwesterly direction from the last-
mentioned carvings is another group representing two men and two emus. For
a drawing of this group, see Fig. 3, PI. 2, in my paper on the “Rock Pictures of
the Australian Aborigines,” published in the Proceedings of the Royal Geo-
graphical Society of Australasia, Queensland, Vol. xi, pp. 86-105.
2 A group of six emus are represented in Fig. i, PI. 2, in my paper on “ Aus-
tralian Rock Pictures,” published in The American Anthropologist, viii,
268-278.


closely than any other I can compare it with. It may, however, be
intended to represent some bird.
Fig. 31. This figure is delineated on the same flat rock of Hawkes-
bury sandstone as Fig. 29. It measures four feet five inches from
the point of the nose to the tip of the tail; the head contains an
eye, and there is also a dot on the ear, apparently to indicate the
hollow part of it. I submit that this is intended to represent an
opossum, 1 because the portion of the body is more horizontal
than in figures of kangaroos and kangaroo-rats, in which the fore
part of the body is always more or less elevated. The position of
the tail, pointing slightly upwards, also strengthens the supposition
that it is an opossum.
Fig. 32. This carving is on a flat rock of Hawkesbury sandstone,
not far from the last-described carving, and appears to be intended
to delineate a bird on the wing, 2 but it is difficult to suggest what
bird is the likeliest to be indicated, and in trying to arrive at a definite
conclusion the forked tail should not be lost sight of. From the extrem-
ity of one wing to that of the other ffieasures three feet, and the total
length from the head to the end of the tail is one foot eleven inches.
It is well known that the natives had animals and birds as totems ;
among these may be mentioned the eagle hawk, the crow, the white
cockatoo, the emu, the kangaroo and so on.
Fig. 33. This peculiar carving is executed on the same group of
flat rocks as the preceding, and delineates the lower part of the
body of a man, from the waist downwards, the knees being bent
outwards, with the feet also in the same direction. From the out-
side of one knee to the outside of the other measures three feet eight
inches. The figure may have been intended to indicate that the
man was sitting on the rock, the rest of the body being upright
and not shown ; or perhaps it was intended to convey the idea that
the rest of the man’s body had gone into the rock, leaving this part
protruding. I have seen similar figures carved upon rocks, but
they are uncommon, 3
1 For another carving of an opossum see Fig. 7, PI. 3, Rroc. Roy. Geog. Soc.
Aust., Queensland, p. 67.
2For carvings of birds on the wing the reader is referred to Fig. 2, PI. 99, il-
lustrating my paper on “ Rock Paintings and Carvings of the Aborigines of New
South Wales,” published in the Report of the Australasian Association for the
Advancement of Science, Vol. vi, pp. 624-637.
s For a similar carving see Fig. io, PI. 2, attached to my paper on “Rock Pic-
tures of the Australian Aborigines,” rroc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust., Queensland,
Vol. xi, pp. 86-105.


Fig. 34. This small figure is also on the same line of rocks as
Fig. 31. It is one foot seven inches high, and the same distance
from hand to hand. The head is rather bird-shaped, and has an
eye ; there are incised curved lines reaching from the arms to the
head on each side, the meaning of which I am unable to suggest.
This figure is most likely intended to denote a “piccaninny” or
young aborigine, because there was room on the rock to draw a much
larger figure if it had been desired. We frequently, I might say
mostly, find figures of men drawn in caves which are not larger than
this, but in such cases the small-sized figures are chosen on account
of want of room on the cave walls. 1
Fig. 35. This carving is on a continuation of the same flat rock as
Fig. 31 and is another of those objects found in aboriginal draw-
ings the precise identity of which it is difficult to arrive at. It is
probably intended for the echidna 2 or porcupine, but I would, how-
ever, throw out the suggestion that it may be intended to represent
a dilly bag. Some color is lent to this view from the lines drawn
across it; the dot, which may represent the eye, is, however, against
the latter theory.
Fig. 36. This carving is delineated on the continuation of the
same flat rocks as the preceding, and represents a female two feet
seven inches high and about the same distance across from hand to
hand. 3 The arms are very long for the size of the body, and there
are four fingers on each hand, but the feet are not shown. In the
centre of the head is a small hole or dot, and there are two similar
holes on the chest, but whether they were put there by the native
artist or are merely water-worn indentations in the rock is uncer-
tain. Above the figure there is a bird-like object which at the
nearest points is two and a half inches from the head. This may
be intended as an ornament to the head, or it may be where some
other figure has been commenced and abandoned. The breasts are
drawn in the usual way adopted by native artists, and there is a
short incised line apparently intended to represent the pubes.
1 A few feet from this figure is a carving of an iguana seven feet two inches
long, shown as Fig. 9, PI. 9, Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, Vol. vii (N. S.), p. 153.
2 For similar carvings see Figs. II to 17, PI. 2, American Anthropologist,
viii, 276.
3 For a colossal carving of a woman nearly twelve feet tall, the reader is re-
ferred to Fig. 2, PI. 16, of my paper on “The Rock Paintings and Carvings of the
Australian Aborigines,” Jour. Anthrop. Inst., London, Vol. xxv, pp. 145-163.


Fig. 37. This carving is also on the same flat rocks as Fig. 31. It is
evidently intended to represent a male, probably a youth. It has
the same bird-like head as Fig. 34, a form not uncommon in
native carvings. The legs are short, but the termination of them
is well defined, showing that they were originally drawn as they
now appear. Near the extremity of one of the legs is a small un-
finished drawing eight inches long by two inches wide.
Fig. 38. This large fish, apparently intended for a shark, is de-
lineated on the same rock as Fig. 15 ; it is fourteen feet four inches
long and three feet nine inches across the widest part of the body,
not including the fins. It has a pointed nose like Fig. 27 and other-
wise closely resembles that fish. 1
Fig. 40. This interesting carving is delineated on the same rock
on which Fig. 26 appears and represents a fish two feet nine inches
long and one foot across the body at the widest part. It has a
dorsal and a ventral fin and a small, well-formed tail. An incised
line, similar to that marking the outline of the fish, extends from
its mouth for about five feet six inches along the rock. 2 This is
evidently intended as the picture of a fish caught on a line. 3
Fig. 41 consists of a circular figure with a winding lind extend-
ing from it to another figure one foot six inches long and six inches
wide. Within the former is one of those oval objects referred to in
Fig. 27. Both this and the preceding carving, Fig. 40, are on the
same flat rock as Fig. 26.
Figs. 39, 42 and 43. Fig. 43 lam unable to offer any explanation
of at present. Fig. 39 are no doubt intended either for human hands
or the paws of some animal. 4 The upper one has three fingers, the
lower one four, each having a thumb in addition. Fig. 42 is, in
my opinion, a human hand with part of the arm attached, and not
1 The reader is referred to my paper on “ The Rock Paintings and Carvings of
the Australian Aborigines,” Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xxv, pp. 145-163, PI. 16,
Fig. 7, for a carving of a very large shark, 33 feet 10 inches in length.
2 For a similar carving of a fish caught on a line see Fig. 13, PI. 2, illustrating
my paper on “The Rock Pictures of the Australian Aborigines,” Proc. Roy. Geog.
Soc. Aust., Queensland, Vol. xi, pp. 86-105.
3 Collins says he saw the natives of New South Wales fishing with a hook and
line. The line was made of the bark of a small tree, and the hooks of the pearl
oyster shell, which they rubbed on a stone until it assumed the shape desired.—
Account of the English Colony in N. S. Wales, 1798, Vol. i, pp. 556-557.
*For a similar hand see Fig. I (g), PI. 2, Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc, Aust., Queens-
land, Vol. xi, pp. 86-105.


a foot, as might be supposed at first sight. Compare with repre-
sentations of feet in Fig. 61.
Figs. 44 to 47. On the same rock as Fig. 26 are representations
of fish of different sizes, ranging in length from two feet two inches
to six feet. Six inches from the mouth of Fig. 45 are two lines
crossing each other, one being ten inches long, the other five.
Fig. 48. This figure of a man five feet nine inches high appears
on the same rock as Fig. 61 and is close to it. The eyes, mouth,
and the proper number of fingers are delineated, as well as a belt
round the waist. A small oval figure, similar to those seen in Fig.
27, appears close to the belt on the right-hand side.
Fig. 49. This appears to me to be part of a shield, which was
left when half finished. It is two feet five inches long and ten
inches wide. It is on the same rock as Fig. 47 and is close to it.
Fig. 50. This interesting drawing of a fish four feet six inches
long appears on the same flat rock as Fig. 15. There are two dots
for the eyes, on the same side of the head, a peculiarity of native
drawing frequently seen in representations of fish.
Fig. 51 is on the same rock as the preceding, and is a very good
drawing of a fish four feet five inches long.
Fig. 52 represents a shield three feet six inches long and one
foot eight inches wide, and is on the same rock as the last two
figures. Attention is drawn to the unusual point at the end.
Fig. 53. This figure represents a shield four feet three inches in
length and one foot nine inches in breadth, with a longitudinal and
a transverse subdivision. This carving is on the same series of flat
rocks as Figs. 7 to 13 and is not far from them.
Fig. 54. This drawing, which is on the same rock as Fig. 26,
may have been intended to represent a fish, or perhaps the skin of
iome animal.
Fig. 55 is on the same rock as Fig. 26, and represents a human
figure five feet one inch high, the sex of which is uncertain. Five
fingers are shown on each hand.
Figs. 56 and 57. Fig. 56, which is eighteen inches long, is appar-
ently intended to represent the native tomahawk, with handle
attached. Fig. 57, which is one foot nine inches long, may be
either a nulla nulla or a tomahawk. These figures are carved on a
mass of Hawkesburg sandstone more than an acre in extent, about
five chains from the eastern side of the old road from Peat’s Ferry
to Sydney, and about a mile northerly from the rock containing
Fig. 1.


Fig- 58- This large fish is carved on the same mass of sandstone
as Fig. 1, but several yards farther south, and close to the old dray
track. It measures twenty feet five inches from the snout to the
farthest end of the tail, and thirteen feet from point to point of
the fins. Across the larger of the fins, which appears to be the
dorsal, is an incised line, such as is frequently met with on the
bodies of different animals drawn by the aborigines. The two eyes
are shown on the same side of the head, a mode of representing
the eyes often observed in native pictures. The greatest width of
the body, independently of the fins, is eight feet. 1
Fig. 59. This representation of an eel is three feet four inches
long, and five inches across the widest part of the body; from
point to point of the fins measures seven inches. There are four
bands or lines across the body. It is carved on the same flat rock
as Figs. 56 and 57. For other carvings of eels, see Figs. 7, 8 and
9 of this plate.
Fig. 60. It is difficult to arrive at a definite conclusion as to
what these figures are intended to represent. One is ten feet long,
the other twelve, and they each have an average width of three
inches. They occupy a position on the rock very close to Fig. 14,
the end of them almost touching the right foot of the latter. Per-
haps they represent spears or yamsticks; or were possibly intended
for large snakes.
Fig. 61. This interesting carving is on a flat rock of Hawkes-
bury sandstone with Portion No. 796 of 9 ac. 2 r. 3 p., Parish of
Manly Cove. It represents a man six feet high, with a belt round
the waist and bands round the arms near the shoulder, similar to
those seen in Fig. 1. Within the outline of the body is a very
good representation of a human foot, twelve inches long, four
inches across the toes, and three inches across the heel. 2 About
three feet behind the heel of the last-mentioned figure is another
human foot, not so perfect as the first, twelve inches long and hav-
ing only four toes. Eleven inches farther away in the same direc-
1 For a monstrous carving of a shark, nearly thirty-nine feet long, see my paper
on “The Rock Paintings and Carvings of the Aborigines of N. S. Wales,” pub-
lished in Rep. Australas. Assoc. Adv. Sci., vi, pp. 624-637, PI. 99, Fig. 30.
2 Human footmarks carved on rocks are represented in Fig. 8, PI. 9, illustrat-
ing my paper on “Aboriginal Rock Paintings and Carvings in New South
Wales,” published in the Proceedings of the Royal Society of Victoria , Vol. vii
(N. S.), pp. 143-156.


tion is an oval object, but what it is intended to represent I am at
present unable to offer an explanation. The two last-described
figures are shown in their relative positions to each other, but are
not so in reference to the man. They are shown above the head of
the latter on the plate to fill out a vacant space, but a careful
reading of this description will indicate their true position.


ABORIGINAL ROCK PICTURES IN QUEENSLAND.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Read April 12,1901.)
A number of interesting aboriginal carvings are found on the
Burnett river, parish of South Kolan, county of Cook, in the State
of Queensland. The drawings are cut upon some flat rocks situated
in the wide channel of the river mentioned, at the junction there-
with of Pine creek, this point being a little over fourteen miles in
a direct line southwesterly from Bundaberg, an important town on
the Burnett river. The small township of South Kolan is situated
about four miles northwesterly from these carvings, and is the near-
est railway station from which they can be reached. The Burnett
river, in this locality, consists of a series of large water-holes, be-
tween which the stream runs in narrow channels worn in the rocky
bed.
The rocks containing the carvings are a kind of hard sandstone,
which during the greater part of the year are quite dry, but in
times of floods are wholly submerged. Owing to the latter circum-
stance, and long exposure to the weather, many of the drawings are
now scarcely distinguishable. Most of the figures are small, vary-
ing from a few inches in length to upward of two feet, representing
native weapons, animals, human feet, and several nondescript de-
vices. The outline of each figure is defined by a groove cut into
the hard surface of the rock to a depth varying from one-eighth to
one-quarter of an inch, the width of the groove ranging from less
than half an inch in the smallest to about an inch and a quarter in
the largest specimens.
The mode of execution was to make a row of indentations or
punctures along the outline of the drawing by means of repeated
blows with sharp-pointed pieces of hard stone. The distance be-
tween the indentations varies from about a third of an inch to half
an inch or more, being farther apart in the larger objects. The space
between each puncture was subsequently chipped out, thus making
a complete groove around the exterior of the drawing. The po-
sitions of the punctures are still discernible, being somewhat deeper
and wider than the other portions of the groove—remaining as a
REPRINTED FROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC., VOL. XL, NO. 165.


witness of the method adopted by the artist in carrying out the
work.
Old residents of the district have known of these rock carvings
for twenty-five or thirty years, which were then fresher and more
numerous than at present. Very little notice was, however, taken of
them, and so far as I am aware, no definite description of them has
hitherto been published.
Near Rawbelle, a stock station on the Rawbelle river, one of the
headwaters of the Burnett river, county of Wicklow, Queensland,
similar carvings to the foregoing have been observed. They are cut
on some large rocks on the sides and bed of a watercourse about four
miles distant from Rawbelle head station in a westerly direction.
The carvings comprise human figures, weapons, feet of men and
animals, and several indecipherable representations. The rock on
which they are incised is a dark hard sandstone, and the method of
procedure in executing the drawings is the same as that described in
dealing with the carvings near South Kolan. Some of the pioneers
of this part of Queensland have known of these drawings for thirty
or forty years, but no attention has been given to them.
About two miles in a northwesterly direction from Augustus
Downs’ cattle station, on the bank of the Leichhardt river, in north-
ern Queensland, is a large rock containing aboriginal carvings,
among which may be mentioned representations of boomerangs of
different shapes, shields, and one or two human hands. The rock,
which is a kind of conglomerate, is gradually crumbling away under
exposure to the weather and from other causes, owing to which
some of the native drawings have disappeared since they were first
observed some years ago.


ETHNOLOGICAL NOTES ON THE
ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY.
R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
( Memb. Assoc. Soc. d'Anthrop. dc Paris).


-
t
•
1


ETHNOLOGICAL NOTES ON THE
ABORIGINAL TRIBES of the NORTHERN TERRITORY.*
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Memb. Assoc. Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris.)
In 1890, the Rev. H. Kempe, a missionary at Hermannsburg, on
the Upper Finke, completed a. valuable grammar and vocabulary of
the language spoken by the aborigines of the Mac Donnell Ranges,
Alice Springs, and the Finke River, in the Northern Territory of
South Australia.! From careful inquiries made by means of friends
who have resided in that part of the country I have obtained reliable
information that there is a similarity in the construction of all the
dialects along a wide zone of territory from Alice Springs northerly to
Davenport Range, and from Alice Springs southerly to Maoumba
River. I am now engaged in obtaining particulars of the tongues
spoken in different parts of the Northern Territory, which I hope to
submit to this Society on an early date. For the present I shall con-
tent myself with adding, at the end of this paper, a vocabulary of
the Chingalee dialect, spoken at Daly Waters, Powell’s Creek, and
Elsey Creek.
In the following pages it is proposed to deal briefly with the social
organisation, rites, and customs in force among the native tribes of
the Northern Territory.
Every tribe consists of two primary divisions, which may be called
phratries —a word used for a similar purpose among the ancient
Greeks—the men of one phratry marrying the women of the other.
Among the native inhabitants scattered over about three-fourths of
the Northern Territory we find that each phratry is subdivided into
four sections, making eight partitions of the community. Every
section has an independent name by which its members are recognised.
And, moreover, the women are distinguished from the men by a
feminine form of the name of each division.
All children, boys and girls’alike, born into the tribe, bear the
name of one of these sections, and also that of some animal, plant, or
inanimate thing, which is their totem. These may be called ancestral
appellations; in addition to which each person has an individual
name, by which he is distinguished among the men and women of his
tribe. Every youth who passes through the inaugural rites receives a
* Taken as read before the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland,
May 27, 11)01.
(f) Trans. Roy. Soc. S.A., vol. xiv., pp. 1—54.
Reprinted from the Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia, Queensland, Vol. XVI.


secret name, which is known only to the initiated; and further, he
possesses what may be called a titular name, which indicates the
degree he has attained to in the initiation ceremonies of his people.
Every woman likewise has a secret name, of which she herself is not
informed —this knowledge being possessed by the initiated men only.
There are also relationship names, which need not now be further
referred to.
Along the boundary line between the Northern Territory and
Western Australia, there are a number of tribes on the Negri and
Behm Rivers, Sturt’s Creek, Stirling Creek, and other watercourses,
among whom may be mentioned the Mayoo, Jeelowng, Neening,
Jarroo, Munga, and other tribes, possessing eight sections in their
social structure. Four of these sections form a phratry, which may
be distinguished as A, whilst the remaining four constitute phratry B,
which can be clearly illustrated in tabular form, as under:
TABLE No. 1.
Phratry Husband Wife
/l. Chungulla Narbeeta
2. Choolima Nanagoo
A
3. Changary Nambijai
.4. Chavalya Nemira
3. Changary Nambijana
4. Chavalya Nemira
15. Clioongoora Nungulla
6. Chinuma Naola
7. Chapota Nabajerry
8. Chambijana Nhermana
Son Daughter
Chambijana Nambijana
Chapota / Nemira
Chinuma Nanagoo
Choongoora Narbeeta
Chavalya Nabajerry
Changary Nhermana
Choolima Naola
Chungulla Nungulla
The above table shows the husband, wife, son and daughter belong-
ing to each of the eight divisions, on the same line across the page.
For example, Chungulla marries Narbeeta, and the progeny are Cham-
bijana and Nambijana, and so' on. This I have called the ordinary or
“direct” rule of marriage. Chungulla can, however, in certain cases,
exercise the right of marrying a Nanagoo woman. I have distinguished
such a marriage as irregular or “ alternative.’ Again, Choolima
takes Nanagoo as his regular spouse, and his “alternative’ wife is
Narbeeta. Besides these irregularities there are others of less fre-
quency. For example, Chungulla can occasionally marry a Naola
woman, and Choolima can take a Nungulla as his wife, but such mar-
riages may be designated “rare.” Whether Chungulla marries Nar-
beeta, or Nanagoo, or Naola, his children are Chambijana and Nam-
bijana, as in Table No. 1.
In the other pairs of sections, Changarry and Chavalya—Choon-
goora and Chinuma —Chapota and Cham b i jana—marr 1 age and descent
follow the same laws, mutatis mutandis. It should be stated, however,


that the majority of marriages are in accordance with what is here
termed the “ direct” law. Before a union can take place under the
'alternative” regulations, or under those which I have called “rare,”
either the man or the woman must belong to' a distant family, so' as
to guard against nearness of kin.
In examining Table No. 1 it becomes apparent that Chungullai and
Chambijana are 1 related to each other as father and son in continuous
alternation; and it is also found that they have certain totems which
descend with them; for example, Chungulla Opossum; may be the
father of Chambijana Opososum, and in the next generation Cham-
bijana Opossum will be the' father of Chungulla Opossum. The follow-
ing table illustrates the pairs of sections possessing the relationship of
father and son, together with some of the totems appertaining to
them :
TABLE No. 2.
. f White crane, galah, lignum, opossum, wind, copper-
• I^, m f U - a < headed snake, iguana, mopoke, moon, lightning,
<1 j Chambijana frQg<
'o i White crane, blood-wood, mussel, kangaroo, native cat,
CI °° \ ma rock wallab y- wb d orange, bilbee, wood duck, crow,
\b lapo a j porcupine.
I Eaglehawk, emu, water-snake, tree-snake, pelican, fish,
, mosquito, quandong, curlew, death-adder, honey,
/C lava ya centipede, stone spear-head, shag, cockatoo, rat,
pq mongooia wa sp, nut-wood, grasshopper, grass, all pigeons,
plain turkey, ants, whistling duck, native bee.
|
O / T? n /vl aEo txrlr ntn vin Kn/-»ttrv» bn titmOO OIITI VOITI
l Eaglehawk, stars, brown hawk, dingo, sun, rain,
Changary J cooliba tree, wild potato, black-headed snake, clouds,
) thunder, ibis, water-hen, boree tree, scorpion, native
( companion, black duck.
In general the progeny, boys and girls alike, inherit the totem of
their male parent, but in this matter irregularities have been observed,
which lam now investigating. In treating of the “alternative’’ mar-
riages in a preceding page, it was stated that C'hungulla, could also
marry Nanagoo, or Naola, and in a similar manner Choolima could
wed Narbeeta, orNungulla. In consequence of polygamy being sanc-
tioned, it is possible for either C'hungulla or Choolima to take one
wife from the direct' section, and another spouse from the “ alterna-
tive ” division, and a third from the “rare” class, which increases the
difficulty of tracing the totems. (See Table No. 1.)
Owing to the close blood relationship subsisting between Chun-
gulla, Chambijana, Choolima, and Chapota, I have discovered that
the same totems are more or less in use among these four sections,


whom I have accordingly called Moiety Ain Table No.. 2. In other
words, the totems given in that table as belonging primarily to Chun-
gulla and Chambijana, are also to some extent common to Choolima
and Chapota. The same remarks will apply in, all respects to. the
totems of the remaining four sections, which are distinguished as
Moiety Bin the table. Marriage between persons of the same totem
is forbidden if they belong to families inhabiting neighbouring hunting
grounds; but where the. parties to the. union come from remote dis-
tricts, and, therefore, cannot be any blood connection, I have observed
individuals of the same totem living as man and wife.
On Sturt Creek and on Victoria and Ord Rivers, certain totems
appear to be invested with greater importance than others. Among
these may be mentioned the White Crane and Eaglehawk, all the
totems in the community being divided between these two birds. (See
Table No. 2.) In other places, patches of country are said to belong
to certain totems ; for example, the kangaroo, white hawk, emu, eagle-
hawk, etc., will each have a particular ridge, scrub, plain, waterhole, or
the like. Every section is subject to certain restrictions as to the
animals and plants which they may search for and eat. Certain foods
are also tabooed to pregnant women, and young people of both sexes.
Over the whole. of the country drained by the Victoria River and
its numerous affluents, extending northerly to. the Fitzmaurice, Flora,
and Daly Rivers, we find a considerable number of important tribes,
including the Moodburra, Kangarraga, Cheeal, T'ewinbol, Bilyanarra
Wartaman, Oolawunga, Muttangulla, etc., who have the same organisa-
tion as that given in Table No. 1. The following are the masculine
and feminine forms of the names of each section —the numbers 1,2,
etc., corresponding to those in the table referred to:
1. Jungalla, Nungalla; 2. Joolama, Nowala; 3. Dhongaree, Non-
garee; 4. Dhalyeree, Nalyeree; 5. Jimidja, Namaja; 6. Janna, Nan-
nakoo; 7. Jeemara, Nee mar a; 8. Jambijana, Nambean,
The country around Daly Waters, Newcastle Waters, and Powell’s
Creek is inhabited by the Chingalee tribe, between whom and the
Victoria River are the Kwaranjee and other people. East of the
Chingalee is the Koodanjee tribe. Their divisions have the following
masculine and feminine names : —l. C'hunkaleeinja, Nunkaleeinja; 2.
Chulainja, Nalainja; 3. Tunkareeinja, Nunkareeinja; 4. Taraleeinja,
Naraleeinja; 5. Jimmitcha, Namuinja; 6. C'hunainja, Nanainja; 7.
Chemarainja, Nemarainja; 8. Tampachina, Nambajina. These eight
names, with dialectic modifications, have been observed by competent
friends who have made inquiries for me from the north-west corner
of Queensland, along the shore of the Gulf of Carpentaria to the Roper
River, and over all the country lying between there and the overland
telegraph line, and are fully described by me in other publications.


Among the tribes on the Upper Roper and its tributaries, on the
Katherine, and thence north-easterly to the Goyder River, the or-
ganisation is the same, but the nomenclature of the eight sections is
as follows:—1. Yungalla, Inkagalla; 2. Urwalla, Imbawalla; 3.
Uwungaree, Imbongaree; 4. Uwallaree, Imballaree; 5. Eemitch, Im-
madenna; 6. Uwanee, Imbannee; 7. Unmarra, Inganmarra; 8.
Tabachin, Tabadenna.
From the point where the boundary line between the Northern
Territory and Queensland meets the Gulf of Carpentaria, and thence
southerly to the junction of the Rankine and Georgina. Rivers, extend-
ing westerly beyond Elkedra and Alroy Downs, and easterly into
Queensland, is inhabited by the Inchalacbee, Warkya, Wanyee, Kui-
rawar, Yookala, and several other tribes, possessing eight divisions, as
under, all the rules of marriage and descent being precisely the same
as in Table No. 1:
TABLE No. 8.
Phratry Husband Wife
Son Daughter
Kingilla Nolangma
Naratyoo Neeonama
Akamaroo Jummeeunya
Komeranjee Neemurrama
Bongarinjee Jummeeunya
Boolarinjee Neemurrama
Warkoo Neeonama
Boolanjee Nolangma -
I Boolanjee Nungallama
| Warkoo Nurralama
Boolarinjee Nulyarama
Bongarinjee Nongaryma
B -
\
Komeranjee Nulyarama
Akamaroo Nongaryma
Naratyoo Nurralama
Kingilla Nungallama
A few of the above names are varied in different parts of the tribal
districts. In some places Naratyoo is called Burralanjee; Warkoo is
Narrabalanjee; Komeranjee is Boonangoona; and Akamaroo is known
as Thimmermill. 1
The first author to report the existence of an organisation contain-
ing eight sections among the natives on the Finke River, Alice Springs
and Mac Donnell Ranges, was the Rev. Louis Schulze, a missionary at
Hermannsburg. 2 They were next referred to by Dr. E. C. Stirling in
1896, 3 and by Spencer and Gillen in 1897. 4 Mr. Schultze, and the
other writers who followed his classification, divided the eight sections
into two moieties, which did not represent the phratries, nor give the
correct descent of the offspring. On the 12th of June, 1898, I read a
(1) Journ Roy. Soc., N. S. Wales, vol. xxxii., pp. 251-252. Ibid., vol. xxxiii.,
p. 111.
(2) Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Australia, vol. xiv., pp. 223-227.
(3) Report Horn Exped., Part iv., p. 46.
(4) Proc. Roy. Soc., Victoria, vol. x., N. S., p. 19.


paper before the Royal Society of New South Wales, in which, inter
alia, I gave the following tabulation of the two phratries, and the
sections composing them 2 :
TABLE
Phratry Husband Wife
/ Ungala Knurraia
I Parulla Panungka
A
Pungata Mbutjana
Bultara Koomara
Panungka Parulla
Knurraia Ungala
No. 4.
Son Daughter
Mbutjana Mbutjana
Koomara Koomara
Knurraia Knurraia
Panungka Panungka
Bultara
Pungata
Bultara
Pungata
Koomara Bultara Parulla Parulla
Mbutjana Pungata Ungalla Ungala
What has been said in explanation of Tables No. 1 and No. 2
regarding direct and alternative marriages, the descent of the pro-
geny, and all other matters, applies equally toi Table No. 4. Mr.
Sohultze had previously reported the occurrence of alternative mar-
riages, and he states that “whether Bultara has a Koomara. or
Mbultjana for his wife is immaterial .... the children are
Panungka.” According to my investigations, his conclusions are cor-
rect.
In the Warramonga tribe about Tennant’s Creek, the names of
the eight sections, how they intermarry, and the resulting offspring
are as under:
TABLE No. 5.
Phratry Husband Wife Son Daughter
I Jungulla Numajillee Ambajona Lambean
Joopalla Naponunga Takamara Nakamara
I Jungulla Numajillee
Joopalla Naponunga
-
Tapongatee Lambean
k Kubadjee Nakamara
Taponunga Naponunga
Jungaree Numajillee
Jungaree Nongillee
Taponunga Narala
Kubadjee Nabadjee
Tapongatee Napongatee
B H
Takamara Nabadjee
Ambajona Napongatee
Joopalla Narala
Jungulla Nongillee
Taking the first name in the table, we see that a Jungulla man
takes a Numajillee woman, who is his regularly appointed spouse;
and his family are Ambajona and Lam bean; but he has the alter-
native of marrying a Naponunga maiden instead, and polygamy being
allowed, he may select a wife from each of the sections mentioned.
(2) Jour. Roy. Soc., N. S. Wales, vol. xxxii., p. 72.


A man cf the Joopalla section, whose proper wife is Naponunga, can
marry Numajille©—that is, Jungulla and Joopalla can exercise their
choice over the same two sections of women. Similar privileges are
accorded to the men of the other pairs of sections, who may reverse
their wives in the same way. Everything which has been said in
the explanation of Tables 1 and 2 applies to this table.
The Yorrawinga, Yoolanlanya, Yanindo, and some other tribes are
located on the Upper Georgina, Woodroffe, Field, Hay, and other
watercourses, and reach some distance within the Queensland frontier.
Among them there are only four divisions, instead of eight, with
rules of intermarriage and descent as indicated in the following
synopsis:
TABLE No. 6.
Phratry Husband Wife Offspring
. j Deringara Koomara Beltliara
1 D aIIIi n -v»r» k nnm o i«q
Gubilla Beltliara Koomara
R | Koomara
Beltliara
Deringarra
Gubilla
Gubilla
Deringara
To the South-west of the people represented in Table No. 6, and
on the South of the organisation described in Table No. 4, the region
is occupied by the Arrinda, Andigarina, Loorudgie, and other tribes,
having the following intermarrying divisions:
TABLE No. 7.
Phratry Husband
. $ Parulla
I Bultara
Offspring
Koomara
Panungka
Panungka
Koomara
„ j Panungka
j Koomara
Parulla
Bultara
Bultara
Parulla
Throughout the whole l of the province of South Australia situated
to the southward of the tribes represented in Table No. 7, I have
described the social organisation of all the different communities
in a paper on the “Divisions of the South Australian Aborigines/'
published in the Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society
(Philadelphia, U.S.A.), Vol. xxxix., pp. 78-93, with a map of South
Australia, showing the boundaries of every native community in the
province.
In a tract of country reaching inland easterly and southerly from
Port Darwin, marriages are arranged by the elders, who are wetll
acquainted with the genealogy of the various families composing the
tribe. The daughters of certain women are betrothed to the sons of
certain other women, and on such children attaining puberty they
become man and wife. The relationship subsisting between these two


women is practically that of cousins, and their respective progeny are
second cousins. In determining the betrothals the old men are guided
by the totem of the parents of the children, in addition to their
pedigree. Although there are no sharply defined divisions, like those
enumerated in Table No. 1, yet upon closely investigating both systems
of marriage regulations, they are found substantially the same in
their fundamental principles.
The initiatory rites of circumcision and subincision to which the
youths are subjected, are practised over the whole of the Northern
Territory, with the exception of the region lying north-westerly of a line
drawn approximately from the mouth of the Victoria to the mouth of
the Goyder River. In a portion of this district, from the Daly River
round along the coast to the Liverpool River, circumcision only is in
vogue. Even when associated with subincision, circumcision is the
principal ceremony, and its celebration is attended with many for-
malities and repulsive practices, which are fully described by me
elsewhere. The age at which it is performed varies from six to
twelve years.
It may be explained that subincision consists of cutting open the
penile portion of the urethra from the meatus unirarius towards the
scrotum. The length of the incision varies in different localities, being
in some cases continued nearly to the scrotum, whilst' in other places
it extends downwards about two inches. Again, there are regions
where the incision commences below the glans, say an inch from the
meatus, and extends towards the scrotum some two or three inche;.
In this form of mutilation the head of the organ is left intact, whilst
in that last described it is split open. The incision ihe urethral
canal, in whichever manner it is performed, does not prevent either
coition or procreation.
When the girls arrive at puberty the vaginal orifice is enlarged,
the process varying in different tracts of country. In some districts
it is accomplished by a man inserting his fingers and using sufficient
force to stretch the parts. A smooth stick prepared for the purpose,
or a smooth stone of the requisite size and shape found in a water-
course, are also used for this operation. Over a very large geographical
area the enlargement is effected by lacerating, or cutting slightly
into, the perineum with a stone knife. The mutilation, whether by
forcible rupture or cutting, does not affect the uterus or ovaries in any
way, and there is no apparent diminution of the woman’s child-bearing
power. No woman is allowed to marry until this operation, in one
form or another, has taken place.
All over the Victoria River country, and reaching southerly to
Lake Amadeus, the natives have an ingenious way of trapping hawks,
which are very numerous and form an article of food. A blackfellow


and his family, or perhaps a few men who are friends, go out cn a
ridge where there are rocks with bunches of spinifex (Triodia pungens)
growing in the immediate vicinity. They set to work and gather a lot
of moderate sized pieces of stone, say from 20 to 50 pounds in weight
or more, and lay them in the form of a square or rectangle about
three or four feet each way. A wall is built up by laying tier upon
tier of stones —merely balanced one on the other, without mortar —
to a height of about four feet, the height, being less or more according
to the scarcity or otherwise of building material. The primitive
■structure is roofed in by laying sticks horizontally from one wall to
the opposite one, and over these a few green bushes are thrown,
for the two-fold purpose of affording a shade to the occupant, and
hiding him from view. A small hole is left in this airy roof about
a foot or eighteen inches in diameter, and there is also an opening in
one of the walls large enough for a man to crawl through.
The hunter who is to do the trapping has provided himself with an
iguana, opossum, leg of a wallaby, or any suitable bait, which he
partially roasts to make it' all the, more readily scented by the birds
of prey. He then goes into the trap and sits down, holding the
broiled iguana or other bait up through the opening in the roof.
His companions now set a light to two or three bushes of spinifex,
growing some on one side and some on the other of the trap, and
go away to their camps, or into another part of their hunting grounds.
The smoke from the burning spinifex, which ignites slowly, soon
attracts the hawks, which come flying to the scene, because they are
accustomed to see and capture rats and other small game, running
before bush fires. Kangaree rats and bandicoots build their nests
at the bases of spinifex, which affords them a good cover. A hawk
will soar round and round close to the fires, and the man moves his
bait to attract attention. As soon as the hawk espies this, it
swoops down on the wing, and grasps the iguana in its talons. The
moment it does this, the man below instantly takes hold of the feet
•of the bird in his right hand and pulls it down into the trap, whilst
with the left hand he catches the head, and bites deeply into the
animal’s neck with his teeth, near where it joins the skull, causing
instant death. He then pushes the bait up again through the roof
and waits for another hawk, which is caught in the same way. This
is continued either as long as any birds are in sight, or until the
hunter has caught sufficient for his present requirements.
To catch the larger game, such as kangaroos and emus, a hunter
will conceal himself behind a bush or screen of boughs which he has
prepared, near a track along which these animals are known to travel
to a watering-place. At other times a man will plant in a similar
-way close to a rock-hole, and when the animal is drinking will knock


it over with a club or spear. Another way is for the hunter to
carry a bush sufficiently large to conceal his body, and walk slowly
and stealthily towards a number of emus, kangaroos, or other game,
until he gets near enough to use his weapons.
To form a weir for catching fish, the natives of the Victoria and
Roper Rivers select a part of the river which runs over a flat, rocky
bar, and build a wall of loose stones from side to side, in the form of
the letter V, but with an opening at the apex, which is down stream.
The water can percolate freely through any part of the wall, but fish
are carried by the current towards the opening. Men and women
stand in the stream and catch the fish in their hands, pitching them
out on the bank or into vessels. If a catfish is seen, one of the fisher-
men drives a spear into it and lands it in that way; it being dangerous
to catch these animals with the naked hand on account of the pro-
jections on the head.
Fish are sometimes caught by throwing small leafy branches of
bloodwood or gum trees ipto waterholes, and leaving them to soak.
Next day the water is discoloured and tastes strongly of the leaves,
causing the fish to come to the surface in a stupefied state, where they
are caught by the natives, who are watching for them. In small
waterholes, whose depth is not greater than up to a man’s chest, the
natives collect a quantity of spinifex, and fasten it together in a layer
across one end of the waterhole, reaching from the bottom upwards
close to the surface. A number of men then push this wall of spinifex
before them towards the other end of the hole, driving the fish in that
direction, where men and women are watching for them. Any of the
fish attempting to turn back over the top of the spinifex wall are
caught or speared by the men who are there.
The women carry yamsticks made of any very hard wood, between
four and five feet in length, one end of which has a chisel-shaped edge,
and the other a point —both these extremities being hardened in the
fire, and are kept sufficiently sharp by scraping from time to time
with a flake of hard stone. The weapon is used in searching for
edible roots, grubs, and other insects, and also for digging out iguanas,
rats of different kinds, porcupines, frogs, or any creature which bur-
rows in the ground. In digging for yams of different kinds: they do
not pull the plant completely out of the ground, as a white man does
a turnip, but loosen the surrounding soil sufficiently to enable them to
break off the bulb —the top being left in the ground to take root again
or run to seed.
A few different kinds of trees bear fruit, nuts, and edible berries.
The Leichhardt pine and other trees produce a species of fig which
furnishes good eating when ripe, There are some native vegetables
called cucumbers, melons, and potatoes, which have some slight resem-


blance to the European products, and a small wild grape grows in the
jungles. Seeds of the euoalyptus and grass seeds are used as food.
The latter are ground on a flat stone by rubbing with a smaller one
held in the hand. Water is used in grinding most seeds, which are
usually very hard. The mee-uk'ka tree bears pods, each containing
a number of seeds, which are pounded and ground fine. The pul-
verized mass, in either case, is made into a cake and baked on the
coals.
The nut-wood tree grows on the downs, from ten to twenty feet
high, bearing fruit resembling a nut which is much sought after by
the natives, both for the fruit and the kernel.
When long periods of drought occur in any kind of country—and
during very wet seasons and excessive floods in low-lying lands—game
of all sorts, as well as fish, become so scarce that famines necessarily
follow, and many people die of starvation.
Along the valleys of most of the rivers and creeks there are plenty
of tea-trees growing, which have a soft outer bark which peels off
easily without injuring the bole. ( This bark is largely used by the
natives as a protection against the rain. In the 1 desert country, where
there are no tea-trees, the people make a kind of rug or covering out
of long grass, which they cut off with stone knives near the ground, and
plait it into a close mat. A breakwind is made by bending over the
tops of the spinifex and laying a few bushes around the camp fire.
The natives then cover themselves from the rain with the grass rugs.
Water-bags are made from the skin of one of the legs of a large
kangaroo, or from the whole skin of a wallaby, or other small animal,
for carrying water on hunting expeditions into waterless country.
Wooden vessels (referred to in the next paragraph), are commonly used
for bringing water into camp, and also for conveying it short stages —a
few handfuls of grass, or small twigs, broken from a green shrub,
being placed on the surface to prevent its splashing out as the bearer
walks along.
Wooden vessels for holding water, honey, or in short, anything, are
made, in the following way, out of the branch or trunk of a tree which
has soft wood resembling the kurrajong, or oork-tree. A piece of
timber of the required size, varying in length from one foot up to three
or four, is cut off with a stone hatchet —a part of the branch which has
a bend in it being preferred. The operator then commences on the
concave side, and chips out as much wood as he can with his hatchet—
cutting the chips parallel to the grain of the wood, not transversely.
For finishing the scooping out of the utensil he uses a double-ended
chisel. This tool is made of a slightly curved piece of very hard wood,
known as “ desert gum,” from fifteen to twenty inches long, on each
end of which is inserted a piece of hard stone, chipped or ground to a


cutting edge. The edges of the stones are at right angles to the plane
of the curvature of the wooden handle. Ope end of this tool is pro-
vided with a narrow edged stone, and the other with a wider, for use
in different portions of the vessel; and the bend in the handle enables
the workman to use the implement with facility on the curved surfaces
of the interior. The sharp stones are secured in the ends of the chisel
by means of gum, which is obtained in some places from the roots of
spinifex, in other parts from the beef-wood tree, and again in others
from the grass-tree. There is more gum on the side on which the
concavity of the handle occurs, to resist the greater pressure, or con-
cussion of the blow, on that side. The gum, when first collected, is
broken fine by pounding it either with a stone or a piece of hard
wood, and is then held close to the fire, causing it to run together into
a lump, which is carried about until required. When they want to
use some of it they soften it before the fire. In many tribes a chipped
or ground stone is fastened in the end of the throwing stick, and used
as a chisel.
To protect their feet from the sharp stones in rugged country, or
from the hot' sand of the desert, the natives sometimes make shoes, or
sandals, from the bark of the tea-tree, with a string tied over the foot
to keep it on. This string is made from the bark of a shrub with a
yellow flower which grows on the sand hills. In some districts the shoe
itself is made with strands of the bark of the same tree, worked in the
manner of netting, and is fastened on the foot as just stated. In other
parts these shoes are made of animal fur, woven into a net with very
small meshes. 1
Shoes are also sometimes made of emu feathers matted together to
form the soles, which are fastened on the foot with string in the usual
way. It has been erroneously said that such shoes, which are worn
only by old conjurors, do not leave any tracks on the ground which
could be detected by others, but the real explanation of their im-
munity from pursuit is because no man would attempt to follow the
tracks of an individual using shoes of this character, from a super-
stitious dread of the magical powers of the wearer.
Tufts of feathers of the common brown hawk, emu, or plain turkey
are sometimes worn by the men under their belts, as a charm against
their enemies, or for the purpose of adding valour to the wearer. Some
men possess waistbelts made from the hair of a deceased warrior, which
are supposed to preserve those who use them from their enemies or
evil spirits. The fat of such a warrior is often mixed with coloured
clays, and rubbed over the bodies of the young men. Belts are also
(]) Captain Cook states that he saw natives in Tasmania who had their feet
protected from the rough stones by means of pieces of animal skin.


made partly or wholly from the hair of a man’s mother-in-law, sup-
plied by her to his wife at various times. Remnants of food are des-
troyed or buried in the sand to prevent their falling into the hands of
mystic creatures, or enemies from another camp. If a man fear that
his wife, or one of his wives if he have several, wishes to get rid of
him, he never lets her see where he defecates, because she might take
some of his excreta and give it to an old sorcerer, and get him to
“ point a bone,” or work some other magic for the purpose of destroy-
ing her husband. In some tribes it is a universal rule that the women
never see where the men evacuate; if within view, the women must
turn their faces in the opposite direction while a man is so engaged.
If they see a whirlwind passing along, catching up leaves, small
twigs and dust, or if a violent thunderstorm is imminent, an old man
will collect a handful of long grass and micurate upon it—or perhaps
several men may join in the latter act—after which he sways the grass
to and fro in his hand in the direction of the approaching danger,
muttering some incantation the while, by which means he thinks the
storm or whirlwind will be stopped, or at any rate be bereft of its
baleful influences. If the whirlwind turns off in another direction, or
the storm clouds disperse, both of which are very probable con-
tingencies in that arid country, he believes that his efforts have been
successful. If, however, this expedient is ineffectual, then he considers
that the evil spirit is more powerful than himself.
Some of the old men, the Shamans of the tribe, profess to have the
power of causing the supply of animals, fruits, vegetable roots, and
other sources of food to increase. If an abundance of wild ducks is
desired, a man of the wild duck totem officiates as the Shaman; if
iguanas, an iguana man is supposed to take charge of the enchant-
ment, and so on.
On the upper Georgina and Field Rivers, the Yorrawinga natives
have a tradition that there was once an enormous snake-like creature,
called Wakana, endowed with supernatural powers, whose trail marked
out rivers and watercourses wherever it went. At every place where
there is a big waterhole at the presnt day, they aver that Wakana
camped at that spot after having done a hard day’s work. They like-
wise believe in an evil-disposed being in human shape, called Arenga,
who prowls about the camp at night; he is covered with feathers, and
has claws like the eaglehawk, and can fly like that bird. These natives
have names for the four quarters of the compass; the south is v'ilga,
the north aralinga, the west atugrabinga, and the east erawina. The
moon is algunda, and when a new moon appears they sing a peculiar
chant for the occasion. The Southern Cross they call waubara, the sun
awigela, the planet Venus warjera.
Rock paintings are fairly numerous in the Victoria River basin,
especially on Gordon and Jasper Creeks, the Wickham and elsewhere


The watercourse® are bounded by rocky escarpments, the bases of
which are hollowed out in places by the action of the weather and
other causes. In these depressions, which are more or less sheltered
from the rain, the natives draw pictures of alligators, fish, human
beings, flying foxes, kangaroos and other things, in pipe-clay, red ochre
and charcoal. In some, places where there is a sufficient rock surface
the natives delineate an immense snake-like monster, twenty or thirty
feet in length, which is said to have dug out waterholes and formed
rivers in olden times.
Mr. Michael Costello gave me the following account of some rock
paintings on the Valley of Springs Station, on the Limmen River.
There are four remarkable flat-topped sandstone hills, called “ The
Archers,” all about the same height and shape, looking like ancient
castles. They consist of immense blocks of Desert Sandstone, and are
shown on the Government maps of the Northern Territory as Mount
Thomas, Mount John, Mount Charles, and Mount David. Nine
miles up a valley, and at a part of it where there is a narrow gorge,
there are some native paintings. The gorge is about a. mile and a half
south of the Limmen River, and a stream of fresh water runs through
it all the year round. On both sides of this gorge there are some in-
teresting paintings oil the bare rocky walls, many of them being done
fairly well for the natives. There are pictures of alligators, snakes,,
fish, blackfellows in fighting attitudes, and some painted hands. Their
favourite drawing was one snake, 1 some of the representations being of
fabulous forms and sizes. In riding through the bush on the Limmen
River, Mr. Costello informs me he has frequently noticed rough out-
lines of large snakes cut into the white bark of gum trees. The natives
also sketch boomerangs and shields on the bark of trees, and paint
them on rocks.
If there is a man in the general encampment who has two or more
wives, and an unmarried fellow takes a fancy to one of them, or comes
to the conclusion that he will annex her, he watches till some night
that she is sitting at her camp fire, her husband being absent in some
other part of the camp, when he suddenly seizes her and carries her
off to his own fire. As soon as the husband learns what has occurred
there is a row, consisting of much angry recrimination between the
two men, but none of the other people interfere. If the husband
thinks the usurper is stronger than himself he lets him retain the
woman, otherwise there is a fight, after which the victor takes final
possession of her. This method of securing a wife is called jarrada,
but the women thus appropriated must belong to the section from,
which the man can lawfully select a spouse.
1. Serpent worship—or the fear of serpents—has been observed in almost every land
of which we have any knowledge


When a man dies, a platform is made by placing sticks horizontally
across the spreading branches of a low tree, and on this the corpse is.
laid, covered with bushes, paper-bark or grass, and is left there till
the flesh decomposes and the bones fall to the ground. The relatives
of the deceased now visit the spot, breaking the bones of the arms and
legs in some cases, and eating the marrow. They have a superstitious,
belief that eating marrow confers strength and superiority upon them.
The bones are carried away and placed in caves or clefts in rocky
places, or interred. In many districts the bodies of deceased persons
are buried in the ground, in others they are burnt. In rocky country,,
instead of laying the dead body on an arborial platform, it is placed
on a projecting shelf of rock on the face of a cliff. In all cases the
weapons of the deceased are placed with his remains, and if, as some-
times happens, the body is not disposed of in any way, his weapons,
and effects are left at his camp, and are never touched or used by any
one. Like other Australian natives, when a man dies his death is
attributed to some designing person in another tribe, and the injury
must be avenged. This retaliation is called warring-arree.
The rainy season commences about December every year, and the
hierarchy have observed that certain conspicuous stars are in par-
ticular parts of the eastern sky on the evenings of that period. The
old head men, therefore, avail themselves of this knowledge, and
muster their tribe on the approach of such times, for the purpose of
going through certain ceremonies for producing rain. The old
Shamans also know from tradition and experience that the rainy
season comes to an end when the same remarkable stars are in the
western sky early in the tvening, which is generally about the begin-
ning of March, and consequently if there is too much rain in any given
year, these men work somewhat similar enchantments to bring fine
weather. The gatherings for the production, as well as for the
tion of rain, may continue for some time with intervals between them.
I have observed that the men of certain sections of a phratry or
moiety will have charge of bringing the wet at one oorroboree, and the
men of a different set of sections of another phratry will be the prime
operators at the succeeding ceremony.
Periodic journeys are made into the territories of adjoining and
distant tribes for the purpose of exchanging manufactured or natural
products. The routes along which the people travel on these occasions
seem to have been fixed and acknowledged from time out of mind.
The period of the year is usually the autumn, because then the rock-
holes, springs and watercourses have been replenished by the annual
rains. For example, the natives of the Upper Victoria travel east-
ward to Newcastle Waters; thence northerly to Daly Waters, Birdum
Creek and Katherine Kiver, returning by way of Delamere and


Gregory Creek. Residents of the Wickham River go westward to the
Negri and Ord Rivers, which they run down a long way, coming baok
by Auvergne on the Baines, and thence up the Victoria River home.
There are several of these bartering or trade routes in different dis-
tricts, and the journeys, which occupy a long time, are marked by good
feeling and festive corroborees throughout.
The principal weapons in use are the barbed spear, fish spear,
womera, tomahawk, bomerang, a two-handed waddy, stone knife,
double-ended chisel, and yamstick. The natives are very dexterous in
making stone, spear-heads. They get the jaw of the crocodile, either
upper or lower, and break it into flakes by means of a heavy stone
held in the hand. The bones of these animals are very hard and do
not break easily; with them the workman chips suitable stones into
the requisite shape for spear heads. When, after much patient labour,
the necessary form is attained, the serrations are made by pressing a
small sharp piece of crocodile bene against the edges, chipping out
small gaps at regular intervals all the way along. The war'reedilla,
a hunting boomerang, a little over two feet long, is made on Sturt
Creek, with a hook projecting from one extremity, on the convex
edge, or back, of the weapon. The hook, which is about five or six
inches in length, extends backwards, forming an angle of thirty cr
■forty degrees at the point of juncture. This implement is in use
mong all the tribes from the Western Australian boundary right
across the Northern Territory into Queensland, where it was met with,
under substantially the same name, by Dr. Roth. 1 It is mentioned by
Mr. D. W. Carnegie, 2 who saw it among the natives in Western Aus-
tralia.
Flat sticks, or boards, called mirral'loo, varying from five feet to
nearly twice that length, from three to six inches in width, and thin,
are used by the natives of Sturt Creek and elsewhere in different im-
portant ceremonies. Bullroarers and message-sticks are also employed.
All these instruments and their uses, which are of a secret character,
form the subject of another article.
Marks are formed on the bodies of men and women by means of
cuts with stone knives. Soft sandstone, ground fine, or charcoal
powder, in either case mixed with grease, are rubbed into the cuts to
raise scars. Ashes mixed with soft animal fur or the down of birds,
are also applied to the incisions to keep them open. Long horizontal
scars are made across the chest and stomaoh ; short vertical lines,
either straight or slightly curved, being cut on the shoulders, back and
limbs.
(1) Ethnological Studies, etc., Queensland Aborigines,” p. 145, Fig 353
(2) 4 ‘ Spinifex and Sand,” p. 343.


Cannibalism is practised over the whole of the territory treated of
in this paper. A man’s body is cooked in a hole dug in the ground in
the same manner as a kangaroo, emu, or other large game. It is a
common belief among these natives that infants reside in rocky hills,
and in the dense foliage of forest trees, before they enter the bodies
of the women who give them birth.
The inhabitants of all the islands in the Gulf of Carpentaria are
virtually the same people, in language and customs, as those on the
adjacent mainland.
In the following tabulated list of fourteen members of the Chinga-
lee tribe, I have in each case given the section and totem of the
individual, the totem of his or her father, the totem of his or her
mother, and the totem of the offspring:
Individual (man or woman).
Totem of j Totem of
Individual’s ; Individual
Individual’s
Totem of
Individual’s
Offspring.
Father. | Mother.
Name.
Section.
Totem.
1 Charlie
Chuna
Blk. striped
snake
Blk. striped
snake
) Blk. striped
| snake
Lucy (wife) Nala
Native bee
Streculia
Native bee
Harry jChuna
Earth-worm
Iguana
Nora (Nala
Nut-grass
Blk. striped
snake
Earth-worm
Iguana
j- Iguana
Palmer
His wife
Chula
Nana
Honey
Kangaroo
Honey
Large water-
snake
N ut-grass
Kangaroo
| Honey
Rowley
(His wife
Chula
(Nana
Kangaroo
Honey
Kangaroo
Streculia
Bandicoot
Honey
]- Kangaroo
(Tunkaree
Watersnake
Iguana
Ground
honey
Honey
W a t e r-
snake
5a Belle
Nemara
Honey and Bandicoot
Kangaroo
Iguana Streculia
6 Jack
6a Mary
Chula
Iguana
Streculia
Nungalee
Streculia and Wallaby
| Streculia
Watersnake
Wallaby
W atersnake
7 Jumbuck
Tunkaree
Iguana
Iguana
8 Brumbie
Tunkaree
Plain-grass
Iguana
Not certain
Plain-grass
It will be observed that No. 5 is married to a woman
of the
“alternative'’ section, that is, Nemara instead of Nabajina.
No. 6
has taken a spouse from the ' rare ” section, his present wife
being a
Nungallee, instead of a Nana or Nameeinja. The parents of
Jumbuck,
No. 7, are both of the same totem.
According to 1 this table, the
children of Nos. 1,8, 4,5, 7, and 8,
take the totem of the father; but the offspring of Nos. 2 and 6 have
the totem of the mother. The wives of Nos. 5 and 6 have each two
totems. Examination of the totems in the fourth, fifth, and sixth
columns shows that some of them follow the father and some the


mother, whilst others inherit the totem of neither parent. In other
instances, not included in this table, I have found that among the
offspring of the same parents there is considerable irregularity —some
of the children having one totem and some another. lam inclined to
think, however, that if one had time to prepare tables of genealogies
for two or three generations, taking into account the “ alternative ”
and “rare” as well as the “ direct ” rules of intermarriage, the totemic
laws of descent might be found to be more fixed than at present
appears. This and other matters connected with the totems will be
further dealt with when certain investigations on which I am now
engaged shall have been completed.
In many of the tribes desalt with in this article the section to
which the offspring belong is determined through the mother. If
Chuna marry Nala, his children will be Tunkaree and Nungaree; if
he take an “alternative” wife, they will be Taralee and Naralee; and
if he choose a partner from the Nameeinja or “rare” section, they
will be Tampachina and Nabajina.
Again, in some tribes although a man may marry into three
different sections, he cannot do so concurrently. For example, Chuna
can marry Nala, or, polygamy being in vogue, he may take two or
more Nalas, but until they die, or are “ divorced,” of run away, he
cannot many a woman belonging to either of the other two sections
over which he has marital rights. In like manner, while he possesses
a ‘•rare” or an “alternative” wife, the same law will apply to him.
It is, perhaps, unnecessary to add that, moreover, marriages within
the prescribed sections are more or less regulated by betrothals in all
aboriginal tribes.
VOCABULARY.
This vocabulary contains afirst instalment of about 210 words in
the language of the Chingalee tribe, whose boundaries I have already
stated. Substantially the same tongue is spoken along that portion of
the overland telegraph line from Adelaide to Port Darwin, comprised
between the Katherine River and Tennant’s Creek. On the west of
the telegraph line, including the Victoria River, Caulfield Creek, Sturt
Creek, the Negri and Ord Rivers, and extending onwards far into
Western Australia, the structure of the language is the same as the
Chingalee. This will also apply to the dialects in all the country
between the part of the overland telegraph line referred to and the
Gulf of Carpentaria, comprising Playford Creek, Cresswell Creek, and
the rivers Calvert, McArthur, Limmen, Roper, Hodgson, and Strang-
■ways.
Throughout this enormous region, with very few exceptions, the
grammar of the language is substantially the same, although a large
number of words may differ more or less widely, or although the


'vocabulary is almost quite divergent. The following is a synopsis of
the grammatical elements of the dialects analyzed from a mass of
information on this subject collected by me within the geographic
limits indicated.
Nouns have the singular, dual, and plural numbers, and the usual
'cases; they are declined for number and case by means of postfixes.
Adjectives are declined similarly to the nouns they qualify. Pro-
nouns have the same numbers as the nouns, and are declined for pre-
sent, past, and future time. The verb® have three numbers, with the
usual persons and tenses; and three moods—the indicative, impera-
tive, and subjunctive. A verb and the suitable pronoun are merged
into one word, which can then be inflexed by suffixes for all the tenses,
as well as for number and person. Adverbs and prepositions have
their places in the language, but there are few conjunctions and inter-
jections. There is no article corresponding to aor the.
As the equivalent of English words will be most frequently re-
quired, I have put them first throughout the vocabulary. The spelling
is as nearly as possible the same as»in English. Words of the same
character are placed, together under separate headings, thus: —Family
terms. —Parts of the body. —Natural objects. —Animals.—Weapons. —
Ad j ecti ve s. —V erbs. —M i seel lan eous.
Family Terms, Etc.
Man, Pia
Old man, Mullaga
Woman, Nay-annee
Old woman, Immakinnee
Boy, Ahwah
Girl, Weewinnee
Baby, Korragulla
Father, Keeta
Mother, Bellannu
Head, Tummungeh
Parts of
Hair, Tatagura or Melabana
Eye, Ahbanjuh
Face, Ejeeju
Ear, Lungah
Nose, Kullamee
Smell, Bijwanggetju
Mouth, Ajarahgoolu
Teeth, Ahbinju
Husband, Unbeah
Wife, Kabinnee
Elder brother, Bapa
Younger brother, Burdatdah
Elder sister, Beebinnee
Younger sister, Burdatannee
Children, Wawalla
Copulation, Yanganu
Masturbation, Jeepanu
the Body.
Breasts (female) Ahbulluh
Arm, Peeannee
Hand, Munda-munda
Finger-nail, Meelinjee
Thigh, Tarramullu
Calf of leg, Illikbee
Foot and foot-mark, Yunku
Toe, Übanna
Skin, Kurranu
Blood, Borajah
(jheek, Kukunda
Forehead, Wuddaru
Beard, Jinteemee
Tongue, Talana
Stomach, Tunardgu
Bowels, Billa-billa
Excrement, Oomee
Urine, Myaggu


Sun, Olajennee
Moon, Badungarra
Stars, Kommaranjee or Chinkachee
Clouds, Medeye
Sky, Kullamarra
Ra ; n, Eepilkinnee
Rainbow, Kingmee
Light, Ellabarungoo
Dark, Kommaru
Morning, Warrarunga
Day, Adajudaju
Night, Warraru
Heat, Adalagu
Cold, Korramunmulla
Fire, Pooba
Water, Eepilka or Kalarunga
Milk, Choomoolka or Alipulluh
Food, Kundurru
Demon, Warrajee
Shadow, Eeleechinku
Wind (strong), Myamba
Porcupine, Kallamijee
Fish, Kagwag
Native dog, Wolloggu
Bees, Burrungah
Tail of animal, Bundamee
Kangaroo, Kunclialowree
Wallaby Kallamah.
Opossum, Chukalajee
Bandicoot, Patkoclali
Emu, Kinnee-injinnee
Iguana, Wollanja
Eaglehawk, Dundaninguli
Crow, Onkalay
Wild turkey, Kunnainju or Korka
badee
Wood-spear, Kunnarinju
Shield, Tarramee
Tomahawk, Warra-warra
Natural Objects.—Nouns.
Smoke, Ookalu
Ground, Korrallu
Stone, Ketcheelulu
Hill, Kuncharu
Creek, Churkulu
Grass, Peekarra
Bark, Koranu
Hole, Kwawah
Path, Karratbee
Honey, Wungoorah
Animals.
Mosquito, Konamaru
Earth-worm, Eepurooh
binee
Galah. Kila-kiladee
Weapons.
Breeze (light), Looarkoo
Mist, Illeebanku
Thunder, Dundunbeeaju
Lightning, Dojamee
Nut-grass, Appajimmee
Plain-grass, Urpaj inghee
Streculia, Maekemmee
Trees, Toranku
Wood, Pooba (same as fire)
Camp, Maruli
Ground honey, Onkaroonee
Pelican, Looinnee or Belladee
Laughing-jackas3, Karkanah
Native companions, Dallywa
Black cockatoo, Larikpinnee
Butcher-bird, Kudparenkee
Fly, Konninga
Black striped snake, Wahlacha
Water-snake, Eddengaddah
Large water-snake, Kawalajali
Kite-liawk, Dedinguna
Stoneknife, Taperree
Boomerang, Kurrabadu
Club, Kudru


Alive, Wunga
Dead, Bellenneegunna
Big, Mullaga (also Head-man )
Small, Kullagulla
Long, Breeja
Short, Mummaringee
Good, Badwarrah
Bad, Akkeeabudah
Hungry, Tummundurra
Thirsty, Wunjunganu
Black, Kubbreekubbra
Full, Bada-bada
Empty, Dayloonga
Quick, Kala
Slow, Wahdruku
Eat, Tarrangiju
Drink, Eepilka tarrangiju
Sleep, Munundigu
Sit, Ajjoo
Go, Wirree
Come, Unkoo
Speak, Ambanaju
Walk, Adu
Run, Tarkandammee
Bring, Abawah
Take, Espeere
Lift, Eepandammee
Carry, Tallada
Make, Unkalammee
Yes, Yoo-yoo
Alright, Wallee-wallee
No, Kabee
Exclamation, Ah woo !
I, Iyah
Eh ? Nah ?
Mine, Arrana
To-day, Talangu
Yesterday, Eetaju
To-morrow, Wetanagah
That one, Eeninneekee
Adjectives.
Blind, Kummumurra
Deaf, Longajitchah
Strong, Tatahla
Weak, Munmunbeeaku
Wild, Eeminjee
Light, Tumundara
Afraid, Elleewala
Sweet, Wungurra
Right, Walanbala
Wrong, Areenama
Straight, Wajankaka
Crooked, Kitteelagu
Tired, Whyabbee
Verbs.
Break, Larkamijee
Strike, Myammee
Fall, Udkanna
See, Ahtanganu
Hear, Unkanaju
Know, Lunkunanu
Give (request), Mawa
Give, Winnanagme
Like, Ahkitbee
Sing, Annainkaja
Weep, Uhkanaju
Miscellaneous.
I don’t know, Ayununku
Where? Wahjanay
Why ? Ahdanana
One, Tuukabennee
Two, Ukadilla
Three, Morkunbilla
Four, Tatawallah
Five, Dardu
Lamentation, Keening
Frightened, Illawollennee
Heavy, Bundundara
Fight, Myamunkummmee
Kill, Myanwarrajinnee
Cutting the private parts
woman, Beebajana


APPENDIX.
ABORIGINAL ROCK-CARVINGS.
In 1894 I contributed an article to this Journal on the “Aboriginal
Rock Pictures of Australia,” 1 in which I suggested that search sKould
be made for carved rocks in the valleys of Queensland rivers and on
the coast. Since then I have learnt of some interesting aboriginal
carvings on the Burnett River, parish of South Kolan, county of
Cook, in Queensland. These drawings are cut on some flat rocks
situated in the wide channel of the river mentioned, at the junction of
Pine Creek, and about four miles south-easterly from the township of
South Kolan.
The rocks containing the carvings are a kind of hard sandstone,
which are quite dry during the greater part of the year; but in time
of floods are totally submerged. Owing to the latter circumstance,
and long exposure to the weather, many of the drawings are now
scarcely distinguishable. Most of the figures are small, varying from
a few inches in length to upwards of two feet, representing native
weapons, animals, human footmarks, and nondescript device®. The
outline of each figure is marked out by a groove cut into the hard
surface of the rook to a depth ranging from to one-quarter
of an inch, the width of the groove varying from less than half-an-
inch in the smallest, to about an inch and a-quarter in the largest
specimens.
The mode of execution was to make a row of indentations or punc-
tures along the outline of the drawing, by repeated blows with sharp-
pointed pieces of hard stone. The distance between the indentations
varies from about a third of an inch to half-an-inch or more, being
farther apart in the larger objects. After the punctures were com-
pleted, the spaces between them were also chippd out, thus making a
complete groove around the exterior of the drawing. The positions of
these punctures are still easily discernible, being somewhat deeper and
wider than the other portions of the outline, thus remaining as a
witness of the method adopted in carrying out the work.
Old residents of the district have known of the existence of these
rock carvings for twenty-five or thirty years, but very little attention
has been given to them, and so far as I know, no definite description of
them has hitherto been published. By the kindness of a friend 1
succeeded in getting a portion of the rock chiselled out, on which is
carved the representation of a human foot. The block of stone is now
in my possession, and will be exhibited to any one desirous of ex-
amining it.
(1) Proc. Boy. Geog. Soc., AuaL, Queensland, vol. x., pp., 46-70.


OUTRIDGE PRINTING CO., QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.






fdje ui'oual sRognt|)f|i<|al of
QUEENSLAND
fHIS Society has been established in Brisbane for the last nineteen years. The
Society was instituted with the view of promoting the interests of Geographical
science, of encouraging exploration in Australasia, and of furthering the study of
Physical and Commercial Geography.
While these objects cannot fail to commend themselves to the scientific and com-
mercial classes of the community, and to many persons engaged in extending pastoral
and mining enterprise into distant parts of the Continent, of which comparatively
little is known, the great educational advantages to be derived from the establishment
of this Society will be no less apparent to all intelligent colonists.
Any lady or gentleman may become an Ordinary Member, subject to election.
Subscription, £1 Is. per annum, due on the Ist July in each year.
Life Membership, £lO 10s.
The usual Entrance Fee will not be charged during the session
1904-1905.
Members’ Privileges
To receive the Society’s Diploma.
The right to be present at, and to introduce two friends to, all meetings of the
Society.
The privileges of admission to the meetings of the Royal Geographical Society,
London, and of the use, for the purpose of reference, of the Map Room and Library.
To be allowed to purchase copies of all the publications of the Royal Geographical
Society, London, on special terms.
Membership of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society when in North Britain
without payment of additional fee, and the privilege of purchasing The Scottish Geo-
graphical Magazine on special terms.
Entree to the Evening Meetings, Library, &c., of the Sydney, Melbourne, and
Adelaide Centres of the Society.
To have access to the Library and other public rooms of the Society.
To receive a copy of the Society’s official publications.
Diplomas of Fellowship.
Section IV, Clause 3, Constitution and Rules :
The Council may confer the Diploma of Fellowship upon such eminent persons
as have rendered valuable services to geographical science ; on persons of distinguished
scientific attainments ; on those who have promoted the objects of the Society ; and
on Honorary and Honorary Corresponding Members of the Society, without the pay-
ment of diploma fees. On Ordinary Members, on payment of a nominal diploma fee,
subject to the following conditions, namely:— (a) Upon written application : Those
who have compounded for life membership and are deemed worthy of the distinction
by the Council, (b) Upon written application: Those who are not in arrears with
their annual subscriptions, and are, upon the recommendation of the Council, approved
by the Society at an ordinary monthly meeting. Of the honorary class the number
of Fellows shall not exceed ten. Each Diploma, after being approved by the Council,
shall be signed by the President and by the Hon. Secretary of the Society. Members
who receive the diplomas shall have the privilege of designating themselves “Fellows”
of the Society, and may use the initials F.R.G.S.A.Q. after their names as long as
they continue to be members of the Society.
Ladies or gentlemen who wish to become Members of this Society may do so by
handing in or posting their names to the Hon. Secretary, at the Rooms, Brisbane, or
to any Member of the Society who will arrange for their nomination.


ETHNOLOGICAL NOTES
ON THE
Aboriginal Tribes of Western Australia.
♦ \


Octridge Printing Co. Ltd., 398 Queen Street,


ETHNOLOGICAL NOTES ON THE ABORIGINAL
TRIBES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
By K. H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
Associe. etranger SO3. a’Anthrop. de Paris.
Synopsis.— Prefatory; Origin of Australian Aborigines; Rock
Pictures; Organisation; Initiation Ceremonies; Extraction of
Teeth; Superstitions, etc.; Description of Plates; Language;
Vocabularies.
During several years past I have been endeavouring to' obtain
reliable details of the rock-picturee and some other customs of the
aboriginals of Western Australia. My mode of procedure has been
to write to the owners and managers of stations in different parts
of that State, to members of the Police Force, and also to others
who might be recommended by any of these. Many of the persons
who were thus communicated with made no' response, but an indi-
vidual observer here and there took an interest in my work, and
did his best to help me.
I supplied to my correspondents categorical lists of the particu-
lars required, and when I received a reply showing that the writer
was a ’ capable man, I again wrote to him for further details, or
respecting new matters suggested by his letter. From the reliable
character of my correspondents, and my own general knowledge of
the subject under discussion, I feel sure that the information sup-
plied in this article can be relied upon.
ORIGIN OF THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINEiS.
The probable origin of the Australian aborigines, and the
development of some of their customs, are dealt with in my article !
on “ Les Indigenes d’Australie,” contributed to the twelfth session
of the International Congress of Prehistoric Anthropology and
Archaeology, held at Paris in 1900, and therefore it has not been
thought necessary to say anything on that subject in the present
paper.
ROCK PICTURES.
The rock-pictures of Western Australia, like those of New South
Wales, must be divided under two heads—Carvings and Paintings.
In the former the drawings are out into the surface of the rock
* Read before the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland.
f lnternat. d’Anthrop. et d’Arch6ol. pr6hist., Compte Rendus 12me
Session, pp, 488-495. Also see my article in L’Anthropologie, vol. xiii., pp. 233-240.
Reprinted from the Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia, Queensland, Vol. XIX.


either in outline or in low relief, whilst in the latter the pictures are
painted in pipe-clay, red-ochre, or charcoal on the walls or roofs of
caves or sheltered places, protected from the weather by overhanging
ledges of rock.
Rock Carvings. —The mode of executing these carvings is as
follows:—The outline of some object, say a kangaroo, was first
sketched or designed on a smooth or even-faced rock, selected on
account of its suitability for the purpose. Then, the operator got a
piece l of hard stone, broken or chipped to a. point or edge, with which
he chopped and battered at the surface of his design until all the
space insidei the outline had been beaten away to a fairly uniform
depth, say from a sixteenth of an inch to a quarter of an inch. The
new surface exposed in this way forms a striking contrast to the
surrounding weathered exterior of the rock. This fresh surface
retains -a distinctive colour for a long period, and shows the figures
very clearly, giving them, at a distance, the appearance of standing
out in relief.
The hammering and beating process is generally continued all
over the surface of the design, but in some instances a band or groove
is first formed along the outline of the figure, by chopping and
hammering the rock surface in the way above described. The artist
could then either batter away the internal surface, or leave the
drawing in outline only.
It will be observed that the above method of indenting the
design upon the rock differs somewhat from that, employed in New
South Wales, which I have described elsewhere.* In the counties of
Cumberland, Hunter, and other places on the coast of New South
Wales, where rock-carvings abound, the rocks consist of Hawkesbury
sandstone, in which lines and grooves could be cut with comparative
ease. In many parts of Western Australia, however, on the Upper
Murchison, Gascoyne, Ashburton, Fortescue, Yule, and other rivers,
for example, the rocks are mostly granite and basalt, to make marks
on which would be very difficult. Repeated blows, as above described,
would be the only way to execute the work with such rude tools as
those used by the aboriginal artist®.
About two miles south-westerly from Mount Stewart. Station,
on the Ashburton River, there are some hills, abounding in denuded
masses of granite projecting many feet above the ground. Under
overhanging ledges of these rocks, and in disintegrated hollows in
their sides, the natives have apparently taken shelter from the sun
and rain. On the walls of the rock-shelters, as well as on neigh-
bouring rocks exposed to the weather, there are figures of men,
iguanas, and other animals, all executed by beating away the surface
* “ The Aboriginal Rock Pictures of Australia.” Proc. Roy. Geo. Soc. Aus-
tralasia, Queensland. Vol. x., pp. 54-56.


of the rock within their outline. There 1 is no proportion between the
relative sizes of the objects depicted; for example, there are drawings
of men from one foot six inches to three feet, while iguanas on the
same rock are as large as the men. Pictured rocks of this kind are
usually near rock-holes, or other places containing water, which form
convenient camping localities for the natives. Similar drawings to
those described, incised in the rocks in the same manner, are found in
several places throughout the Ashburton district.
On Hillside Station, between the Shaw and De Grey rivers, are
some large granite rooks, close to the homestead, on which are drawn
several pictures by cutting or beating away the surface of the rock.
One of these represents a man about seven feet high.
Rock carvings are very numerous on the Yule and Shaw rivers,
and, as one of my informants puts it, “ they are in a variety of vulgar
attitudes.” They are incised on basaltic and granitic rocks by barter-
ing constantly within the margin of the object outlined until a slight
depression is worn in the rock. Such drawings retain their fresh
appearance for a very long time. '
Similar carvings to the foregoing are reported by my correspon-
dents as existing on Fortescue, Lyndon, Gascoyne, and Murchison
rivers.
By far the most interesting and numerous display of aboriginal
rock carvings in Western Australia, are found on Depuoh Island, situ-
ated opposite Balia Balia, a small town formed, during recent years,
on the mainland. The island is about four miles distant from the
shore, and about six miles from Balia Balia township. The shores of
the mainland in that locality consist of low banks of mud and sand,
studded with mangroves. At low water spring-tides these sandbanks
are sufficiently dry in some places, to admit of the natives walking
out to the island, which is called, in their language, Wommalunna.
The island is a little over three miles long, and upwards of two
miles wide. The highest part is at the western end, where it attains
an elevation of between 500 and 600 feet. On the eastern end of
Wommalunna is a fresh water spring, or natural tank, close to which
are the native drawings described in this article. In rainy weather,
water also collects in hollows in the rocks at different places. The
natives used to cross over to the island, and remain there as long as
the water lasted.
The island is one hug© mass of igneous rocks, standing on end in
thin layers, piled so loosely, block upon block, that in climbing o>ver
them, one expects the touch of his feet to start some monolith thun-
dering down into an adjacent gully. Even the hardy spinnifex cannot
grow excepting in the gullies, where a few stunted white gum-trees
and scrubs are also to be found. This scanty vegetation, however,
sustains numbers of rock wallabies.


• It will give the reader some idea of the great number of these
rock pictures if I quote Mr. H. A. Hall’s answer to my request to try
and count them : “ It would take hours to discover and count approxi-
mately all the drawings in the one gully I examined, still I think it is
safe to say there are about a hundred. But there are many gullies
on the island, and I am led to believe there are drawings; more or
less, in most of them. In fact, a week or ten days could easily be
spent in making up records of the aboriginal work.” Mr. Wm. Byron,
in one of his letters says, “ After some difficulty I am able to send
you about forty copies of the rock carvings on Depuch Island, of
which there are hundreds.”
In May and June, 1840, Captain Wickham, in the surveying ship
Beagle , was in the vicinity of Depuch Island!, the position of which
he gives as Lat. 20° 38' S., and', Long. 1170.44' El. Both he and
Captain Stokes subsequently described the aboriginal drawings dis-
covered there,* Captain Wickham speaks of “the vast number of
specimens of art, ’ and Captain Stokes says, the number of specimens
is immense,''’ showing that both these officers were impressed with the
great' profusion of the drawings. Captain Stokes adds: “ There is
not in them to' be observed the slightest trace of indecency.” Hie either
did not see the pictures found by my correspondents, or he mistook
them for saurian s—a mistake which anyone unacquainted with aborigi-
nal drawings would be likely to make, especially in regard to some
of them, where the penis is so much elongated as to resemble a tail;
and in others where the length of the body is out of proportion to the
rest of the figure. In fig. 6, however, of his plate of drawings, Cap-
tain Stokes shows a man with the genital appendage.
All the native pictures on Depuch Island (Wommalunna), are
executed m the manner described in earlier pages of this article—that
is, they are incised on the rock by repeated blows with a sharp instru-
ment.
Rock Paintings. —The rock paintings of Western Australia are
produced mainly by drawing the required object on the smooth sur-
face of the rock in the required colour. In some cases the objects
are shown in outline only; in other instances the space within the
outline is painted with a wash of the same tint; whilst not infre-
quently this space is shaded by lines or dots drawn either all in the
same colour, or in two or more different tints. The drawings which
appear in red are no doubt done with red oxide of iron, found as a
clay, and known as red ochre. The white colour would be either pipe-
clay or fine ashes from the camp fire; whilst the black drawings are
done with charcoal or soot.
* Capt. Wickham, “ Notes on Depuch Island,” Journ. Roy. Geog. Soc. (London,
1842), vol. xii., pp. 78-88.
Captain Stokes, “ Discoveries in Australia” (London, 1846), vol. ii., pp. 168-172.


Native paintings consist largely of representations of the human
hand. In .some instances the extended hand was placed firmly on
the surface of a rock sheltered from the wealther, and the required
colour blown or squirted over it out of the mouth. In other cases the
palm of the hand of the artist was either rubbed over with a liquid,
or was dipped into it, and while wet was closely pressed against a
smooth surface on the cave wall. Upon removing the hand, the col-
oured impression of it was left clearly defined on the rock. Occasion--
ally the surface of the rock was coloured previous to making the paint-
ings upon it, for the purpose of greater artistic effect.
On the Ord River, Hall’s Creek, Margaret. River, and Sturt
Creek, Mr. J. Wilson informs me there are numerous paintings on
the rocks, representing kangaroos, snakes, iguanas, human feet., etc.
Mr. J. C. Rose states that paintings of human figures, crocodiles,
reptiles, and other animals, as well as native weapons, are common
on the Fitzroy, Fraser, and Lenard rivers. I learn also from- Mr. E.
Smith, Mr. J. Hancock, and others, that aboriginal paintings on the
rooks are plentiful on the Upper Murchison, Ashburton, Fortescue,
and other rivers, being usually found near water. They consist of
men. hands, weapons, snakes, and other devices.
The most, famous of Western Australia’s paintings, and at the
same time amongst those' possessing the greatest interest, are those
discovered by Capt, Grey, afterwards Sir George Grey, on the Glenelg
River, in March, 1838, which were described and illustrated in a
work written by him in 1841.* Nothing definite' was again heard of
similar paintings in that district till 1891, when Mr. Joseph Brad-
shaw drew attention to the subject in a paper read before the Geo-
graphical Society in Melbourne.f
But the matter was not. lost sight, of by the Government of
Western Australia., and when, in 1901, an expedition was sent out,
under the command of Mr. F. S. Brockman, to explore the north-
west district of Kimberly, the party was supplied with photographic
appliances to secure copies of any cave paintings met with in any
part of the journey. At different places photographs were taken,
showing some very important aboriginal drawings found on the walls
of rocks protected from the weather by overhanging masses of sand-
stone. The photographs thus obtained have recently been published
by the Government of Western Australia - ! in official form.
* Two Expeds. N-W. and W. Australia (London, 1841), vol. i., pp. 201-218, with
six plates.
f Proc. Roy, Geog. Soc. Aust., Victoria Rch., vol. ix., p. 100, with one Plate. See
also Journ, Anthrop Inst., London, vol. xxiii., Plates 5 and C.
+ Report on Exploration of North-west Kimberley (Perth, 1902), pp. 4,6, 7,
18. Plates 4,5, 6, 10, 12, 13, 15-20, 23-26.


Several of the paintings discovered by Mr. F. S. Brockman
and his party are* similar in character to those reported by C’apt.
Grey, and in order to give this matter further publicity, I have
thought it desirable to copy one of the recent photographs into this
article, because the Journal of this Society will go into* many channels
which will not be reached by the report* of Mr. Brockman’s
discoveries.
The figure I have chosen for reproduction is numbered Plate 17
in Mr. Brockman’s report*. This painting is one* of several discovered
in caves on Bacbsten Creek, a tributary of the Colder River, which
empties into Collier Bay. This figure is all painted in red colour,
with the exception of the eye-balls and the pendant-like object* on the
chest, which are in black, the whole* of the rock-surface having been
previously coloured white. The outlines of the face were measured,
and found to be eighteen inches long and twelve inches broad. Tho
entire painting is about five feet high.
The face is bounded by a double line, which extends downwards
to form the shoulders, and is continued across the breast. The
countenance consists of very large eyes and nose, but no mouth, unless
the lower portion of the nose* be intended for that feature. Around
the sides and top of the head is a sort* of halo, with lines radiating
through it from the head outwards. Just beyond the halo is a broad
band with a number of spots at tolerably regular intervals along the
middle of it; and the ends of this band, which appear to be tassel led,
almost touch the shoulders. There are two* short arms, with bands
around them, and five fingers on each hand. In the centre of the
chest is a black object*, the vertical dimension of which is about
double the horizontal. The entire painting terminates at about* the
waist or abdomen, and there is nothing by which the sex can be
determined. The vertical lines drawn on the body from the thorax
downwards are not in my opinion intended to represent clothing, but
are only for ornamentation. Towards the right of the picture* are
some rude outlines, one of which resembles a human foot with four
toes, painted in red colour.
Somewhat similar paintings were found by Mr. Brockman's party
in different places in the Kimberly district, but space precludes
mere than this brief mention of them. Plate' 16 of Mr. Brockman’s
report represents a number of hands stencilled on a cave wall, similar
to those reported by me to the Anthropological Society at Paris in
1898.*
* “ Gravures et Peintures sur Kochers par les Aborigines d’Australie,” Bull. Soc.
d’Anthrop. de Paris, t. ix, 4me Serie, pp. 425-432.


ORGANISATION.
Western Australia is the largest of all the Australian States,
and its native inhabitants have several systems of social organisation,
which I will briefly refer to, for the purpose of giving their geographic
distribution.
The most primitive of these organisations is the Tuar system
which exists among the tribes on the west coast about Dongarra
northerly to Onslow. In this system, the elders of the tribe allot
the progeny of certain women to be the wives of certain men, but
the relationship existing between the parties to the marriage must
not be. nearer than that of second cousins. As the Tuar is the
same in principle as the Nanarri system of New South Wales,
described by me in a previous paper in 1900 * it will not be necessary
to go into details here. ,
Proceeding southerly from Dongarra to Perth and Albany, and
thence to Eucla, extending inland to Norseman and Lake Barlee,
we find the people of each tribe divided into two intermarrying
phratries, called Wurtungmat and Munnitchmat, with rules of mar-
riage and descent in accordance with the following table:
Table 1.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Offspring
A Munnitchmat Wurtungmat Munnitchmat
B Wurtungmat Munnitchmat Wurtungmat
Mr. Thos. Muir, J.P., of Deeside Station, Western Australia,
supplied this information in response to a letter which I wrote him.
On my writing again, requesting him to further check the descent of
the offspring, his reply was “ this table is exactly right.
The families composing the two primary divisions mentioned
bear the totem names of different animals, plants, or inanimate
objects. Among the totems of the Munnitchmat phratry may be
mentioned the following :—White cockatoo, kangaroo, fire, common
black and white magpie, dog, pelican, carpebsnake, kangaroo-rat,
blow-fly, porcupine, parakeet, and pigeon.
The undermentioned totemic names may be enumerated as
embracing some of the people of the Wurtungmat phratry : —Crow,
bandicoot, emu, mopoke, ringtail opossum, chuick (bird), black duck,
black cockatoo, iguana, spear, lizard, turkey, and wallaby.
My enquiries respecting the line of descent of the totems has
not yet been satisfactory, but I am following up the investigation.
Another form of organisation consists in the bi-section of each
phratry, thus making four intermarrying divisions, called Bulcharn,
Kurrimurra, Burronga, and Banaka, or dialectical variations of these


names. This system is in operation over more than half the geogra-
phic area of Western Australia, together with a wide zone through
the centre of South Australia, reaching as far as the Georgina River,
on the frontier of Queensland.
In all the northern part of Western Australia, situated north-
easterly of a line drawn approximately from Collier Bay to Lake
Macdonald, and continuing eastward into the Northern Territory,
each phratry is subdivided into four sections, thus making eight
divisions of the community. The names of these divisions are given
in Table 16, infra.
In order to explain this subject, it will be necessary to introduce
tables to exhibit the intermarriage of the different divisions, and
the sections to which the resulting offspring belong.
On the Murchison, Greenough, Sanford, Roderick, Wooramel,
Gascoyne, and Lyons rivers, the several native tribes are divided as
in the following table:
Phratry. Father.
(Buldyerri
(Kaimarra
R (Burung
(Bugarlu
Table 2.
Mother.
Burung
Bugarlu
Buldyerri
Kaimarra
Offspring.
Bugarlu
Burung
Kaimarra
Buldyerri
These sectional names, with some modifications, are found among
the natives at Weld Spring, Bonythou Creek, Lake Throssall, Elder
Creek, Glen Gumming, and extend eastward into South Australia,
where a similar organisation exists among the Andikarina and
Arrinda tribes.
The tribes on the Ashburton, Fortescue, Oakover, and Throssell
rivers have similar section names, with the exception that Banaka
takes the place of Bugarlu, as under :
Table 3.
Phratry. Father.
l Bulcharri
I Kurrimurri
Mother.
Offspring.
Banaka
Burronga
Burronsa
Banaka
jj ( Burronga
J | Bamika
Bulcharri
Kurrimurri
Kurrimurri
Bulcharri
These sections reach easterly into the Northern Territory of
South Australia.
In the Roeburne district, and on the Yule, Maitland, Shaw, and
De Grey rivers, the natives have practically the same four names for
the divisions, but the sections constituting the phratries are different,
as shown in the following table:


Table 4.
Phratry. Father.
. \ Paldyarri
A \ Burungo
Mother.
Offspring.
Banaka
Kaiamara
Kaiamara
Banaka
„ (Kaiamara Paldyarri gurungo
B (Banaka Burungo Paldyarri
On the Lower Fitzroy and Lennard rivers, Jurgurra Creek, and
thence along the coast to Broome and Condon, are a number of
tribes possessing the following four section names, which differ but
slightly from those in the other tables:
Table 5.
Phratry. Father.
j Parradyerri
A { Parungo
Mother.
Offspring.
Panaka
Kaiamba
Kaiamba
Panaka
n (Kaiamba Parradyerri Parungo
B | Panaka Parungo Parradyerri
It will be observed in Tables ,4 and 5, that Paldyarri and
Burning© constitute Phratry A, whereas in Tables 2 and 3, that
phratry consists of Buldyerri and Kaimara. This matter will be
again referred to farther on.
Among a number of tribes occupying the country drained by
the Ord, Denham, Fitzroy, and Margaret rivers, and on Sturt Creek,
the people are classified into eight sections, which intermarry m
conformity with fixed laws. A name is given to each of the sections,
by means of which the members of the different divisions are readily
distinguished; and identification is further facilitated by a mascu-
line and feminine form of each of these eight names. Table 16.
The division into eight sections is also in operation over the
greater portion of the Northern Territory, and extends into the
north-west corner of Queensland.! From information supplied by
Mr. J. Cahill, manager of Wave Hill Station, on Victoria River, I
reported the names of the eight sections obtaining on that river and
its affluents with the laws of intermarriage and descent. 2
Mr. W. Holze, of Daly Waters, in 1900 gave me full details of
the intermarriages of the eight sections of the Ohingalee tribe, and
likewise of the tribe at Elsey Creek. I contributed the former to the
Anthropological Society at Washington, 3 and the latter I reported to
1 See my paper on “Native Tribes of Queensland,” American Anthropologist,
vol. i. New Series, pp. 595-597. XT _ .
2 “Divisions of Tribes in the Northern Territory,” Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales
xxxiii., p. 112. Queensland Geog. Journal, xvi., p. 72.
3 American Anthropologist, ii., N.S., pp. 494-497.


the Royal Society of New South Wales the same year. 1 I also
communicated the divisions of the Elsey Creek tribe to the Society
of Anthropology at Paris: 2
Mr. Holze sent me a comprehensive vocabulary of the Chingalee
language, and also a valuable table of totems, showing their inter-
marriage and descent., both of which I contributed to the Royal
Geographical Society at Brisbane in 1901. 13 lam likewise indebted
to Mr. Holze for much reliable and important information respecting
native- customs in the Northern Territory.
The eight sections of the M'Arthur and Calvert rivers tribes
were collected for me by Mr. M. Costello, and communicated to the
American Philosophical Society at Philadelphia in 1899.’ 4
The Inehalachee and Warkya (or Waggaia) tribes have eight
divisions, which were tabulated under my direction by Mr. A. H.
Glissan, Rockland Station, and reported by me in 1899. 5
In the foregoing brief review of the social organisation of the
native tribes of Western Australia, it has been shown that in some
districts the primitive system of the Tuar is employed to regulate
intermarriages. In other localities the community consists of two
phratries, as A and B, without any further subdivision. , (Table 1).
Over the greater parti of Western Australia, there is a partition of
each phratry into two sections, making four divisions of the tribe.
(Tables 2,3, 4,5). Among the inhabitants, of other districts there
are four subdivisions of each phratry, giving a total of eight sections.
(Table 16).
These different types of organisation have originated so far back
in the past that the present natives cannot give any account of their
raison d'etre, and therefore I shall venture to state a theory by
means of which the origin of the different systems could be accounted
for. My object in adopting this course is to invite discussion on this
highly important subject among ethnologists in various part® of the
world reached by the Journal of this Society.
/ 4- “ Marriage and Descent among the Australian Aborigines.” Journ. Roy. Soc
N.S. Wales, xxxiv., pp. 130-131.
i '§ “ Organisation Sociale des Tribus Aborigines,” de l’Australia, Bulletins Soc.
d’Anthrop. de Paris, t. ii., serie 5, pp. 415-419.
3 4> “ Ethnological Notes on the Aboriginal Tribes of the Northern Territory,”
Queensland Geogrraphical Journal, xvi., pp. 85-89.
# ■? “ Divisions of North Australian Tribes,” Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., xxxviii.,
p. 77.
S' -&Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, xxxiii., p. 111. See also my article on “ Les
Indigenes d’Australie,” Congrss Internat. d’Anthrop, et d’ArcMol. pr6hist., Compte
Rendu, 12me Sess., p. 492.


Following a, line of reasoning I have before' adopted, 1 in dealing
with Australian organisations, we will assume that in the remote past
there were two tribe® called Bulcharri and Banaka,, who, either by
conquest or as a matter of public policy, amalgamated, and that the
Bulcharri men married the Banaka women, and vice versa. This
would give us the organisation shown in the following table, the
offspring* taking the mother s nam©:
Table 6.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Offspring.
A Bulcharri Banaka Banaka
B Banaka Bulcharri Bulcharri
Let us also say that Kaimarra and Burungo united in the same
manner, and intermarried one with another, as follows:
Table 7.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Offspring.
A Kaimarra Burungo Burungo
B Burungo Kaimarra Ivaimarra
It will be observed that the organisation in each of the Tables
6 and 7 is precisely the same in principle as that existing at the
present day among the Parnkalla 2 tribe, the Yowerawarraka tribe*
the Barkunjee tribe 4 , and several others. Likewise, the children
belonged to the same phratry as their mothers, as in the tribes quoted.
We will now assume that the confederacy represented in Table 6
conquered that in Table 7, or that these two people® considered it
politic to amalgamate for purposes of mutual advantage. Such an
alliance could have been accomplished by the interchange of sister®
between the members of the opposite confederacies in this way :
Bulcharri could have taken the sister of Burungo, and have given
his own sister in exchange Kaiamarra and Banaka could have
exchanged sisters in a similar way; but there was no alteration made
in the names of a man’s offspring in any instance. The united con-
federacy would then be illustrated by Table 3, ante, which represents
the organisation as we find it to-day among the tribe® on the Ash-
burton and other rivers.
On the Murchison River and elsewhere, the section name
Bugarlu, as stated in an earlier page, takes the place of Banaka,
1 “ The Origin, etc., of the Australian Aborigines,” Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc.
Philadelphia, vol. xxxix., pp. 556-578, with map of Australia. Also see my paper in
“ L’Anthropologie ” (Paris, 1902), vol. xiii., pp. 233-240.
2 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Philadelphia, vol. xxxix., p. 82.
3 Op. cit., p. 83.
4 .Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, vol. xxxii., p. 242.


which could be explained by supposing a tribe named Bugarlu,,
instead of Banaka, to have amalgamated with Bulcharri in past times..
Further, if we take the four names in Table® 4 and 5, we dis-
cover that the phratries comprise different sections to those shown in
Tables 2 and 3, as already mentioned in an earlier page. It may
be postulated that the people in Table 4, for example, consisted in
ancient times of the confederacies illustrated in Tables 6 and 7, and.
that at a later period they became amalgamated. The consolidation
of the four sections, however, was effected by the coalition of different
pairs of sections. Bulcharri married the sister of Kaiamarra, and
Kaiamarra took the sister of Bulcharri as his spouse; Burungo; and
Banaka exchanged sisters with each other in the same manner, thus
constituting the organisation existing at present on the De Grey
River and elsewhere;. (Tables 4 and 5).
Instead of exchanging sisters, as above suggested, the coalescence-
of tribes could be accomplished by the exchange of wives. This
arrangement would be only temporary, or it might endure for that
generation. But in the rising generation, the men of Phratry A
would obtain their wives from among the sisters of the men of
Phratry B, and conversely, precisely the same as we find marriages,
arranged at the present day.
We also discover, in examining Tables 3 and 4, that although the
phratries in each table are not composed of the same sections, yet
the offspring have the same fathers in both tables. For example,
in Table 3, Buloharrie marries Burronga, and his children are
Banaka; but if we take Table 4, it is seen that Bulcharri marries
Kaiamurra, and his children still retain the name of Banaka. This
is, of course, likewise true of the other three sections.
This may, perhaps, bear the construction that at the time; of
the amalgamation of these four sections, it was considered best to
bestow on a man's offspring the. same section name which they bore
before the consolidation, or, in other words, not to let the mother
influence the line of descent, as had been the custom under the-
ancient organisation represented in Tables 6 and 7.
Referring back to Phratry A of Table 3, it will be observed that
Rurronga is the regularly appointed wife of Bulcharri, and his child-
ren are Banaka. In certain cases;, however, where there is no blood
relationship, it is sometimes permissible for Bulcharri to marry a
Banaka woman belonging to a distant tribe, but in such case the
children are called Burronga. This alternative privilege may be a
survival of the archaic law, when Bulcharri married Banaka, as in
Table 6, and the descent of the progeny was regulated by the mother.
Kaiamarra can, under like circumstances, take a Burronga woman as
his alternative wife, and his children are Banaka. The same rule
applies to the men in both sections of Phratry B.


The fact of different, pairs of sections being employed to consti-
tute the phratries exhibited in Tables 3 and 4, and the consequent
variation in the intermarriage of the four sections, together with the
persistency of the names of a man’s children in both tables, may
help to strengthen the hypothesis of the consolidation of a number
of small clans into pairs, as in Tables 6 and 7, or into quartettes,
as in Tables 2,3, 4, and 5.
If we travel easterly from the tribes we have been describing,
and proceed into the Northern Territory, we find not only the same
organisation, but section names arei met with, some of which are
almost identical with those in Tables 3 and 4. For example, at
Charlotte Waters and Alice Springs, in the Northern Territory, the
people are segregated into four sections, which intermany as in the
following synopsis:
Table 8.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Offspring.
(Bultara Koomara Panungka
A- | Parulla Panungka Kumara
„ (Kumara Bultara Parulla
(Panungka Parulla Bultara
The sections Bultara, Kumara, and Panunga very closely
resemble the corresponding names in Table 4, but Parullct appears in
lieu of Burungo. This intrusive name, if it be not a dialectic varia-
tion of Burungo, may be accounted for in the same way as Bugarlu,
referred to in an earlier page.
Continuing still farther to the eastward till we reach the
boundary between the Northern Territory and Queensland, we
encounter tribes having four sections, as undei .
Table 9.
Phratry. Father.
. (Belthara
A | Kumara
Mother.
Offspring.
Gubilla
Deringara
Gubilla
Deringara
„ f Gubilla
(Deringara
Beltliara
Kumara
Kumara
Belthara
The two names in Phratry A of this table are substantially the
same as Bulcharri and Kaiamurra in that, phratry of Table 3, but
the two remaining names, Gubilla and Deringara, take the place of
Burronga and Banaka.
It now remains to apply onr theory to the explanation of the
origin of the present system of dividing a, tribe into eight sections,
the names of which are given in Table 16, infra. In order to simplify
the illustrations, the masculine form only of each section name will
be used.


Let us assume that in times of yore the Changura. and Chabalyi
clans became consolidated, by conquest or otherwise! A Changura
man espoused a Chabalyi woman, and vice versa, the offspring taking
the name of the mother in both oases, as under:
Table 10.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Offspring.
A Changura Chabalyi • Chabalyi
B Chabalyi Changura Changura
A similar incorporation took place between the Chauan and
Chauarding tribes:
Table 11.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Offspring.
A Chauan Chauarding Chauarding
B Chauarding Chauan Chauan
Afterwards these two confederacies amalgamated by an inter-
change of sisters, as exemplified in the attached table, but. leaving
the section name of the offspring the same as before:
Phratry. Father.
(Changura
(Chauarding
p, (Chauan
(Chabalyi
Table 12.
Mother.
Chauan
Chabalyi
Changura
Chauarding
Offspring.
Chabalyi
Chauan
Chauarding
Changura
In those days, Changura. had, perhaps, the privilege of taking
C'habalyi as an alternative wife, being similar to the law now existing
among the tribes on the Ashburton River and other parts of Western
Australia, possessing a quadruple organisation, already referred to.
Chabalyi was Changura’s former wife in Table 10.
In illustrating the remaining four sections, we will postulate that
in former days the Chungala and Chambin tribes sought incorpora-
tion, and intermarried one with the other, as follows:
Table 13.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Offspring.
B Chungala Chambin Chambin
A Chambin Chungala Ch ungala
We will also suppose that Chuani and. Chagara were similarly
coalesced:
Table 14.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Offspring.
B Chuaru Chagara Chagara
A Chagara Chuaru Cliuaru


Subsequently these two confederacies became amalgamated in the
same manner as those represented in Table 12, the section name of
each man’s children remaining unchanged:
Table 15.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Offspring.
t, j Chungala Chuaru Chambin
u {Chagara Chambin Chuaru
Chambin Chuaru
. j Chuaru Chungala Chagara
(Chambin Chagara Chungala
From eight separate clans or tribes we have now illustrated the
development of two communities, one represented by Table 12 and
the other by Table 15, each of which has four intermarrying divisions
in its social organisation. At. a later period these two communities
became consolidated into, their present, form, and the hypothetical
course followed in arriving at this result will now be investigated:
A man of the Changura section in Table 12 espoused the sister
of Chungala in Table 15; Chauan took the sister of Chuaru;
Chagara. in Table. 15 annexed the §ister of Qhiabalyi; and Chambin
took the sister of Chauarding. Again, a. Chungala man took the
sister of Changura ; Chauaru espoused the sister of Chauan ; Chauard-
ing took the sister of Chambin; and Chabalyi annexed the sister of
Chagara. The intermarrying sections of the new organisation, with
the names of their sons and daughters, are as under:
Table IG.
Phratry. Father. Mother. Son. Daughter.
/Changura Nungala Cliabalyi Nauadyerri
Chauan Nuaru Chauarding Nabungarti
A
Chagara Nauadyerri Chuaru Nuaru
(chambin Nabungarti Chungala Nungala
/Chungala Nangili
] Chuaru Nauana
Chauarding Nambin
.Chabalyi Nagara
Chambin Nambin
Chagara Nagara
Chauan Nauana
Changura Nangili
The rules of marriage in the. above table are those mostly
followed; thus, Changura marries Nungala, which I have elsewhere
called the “ direct. ”or “ tabular ” law. Changura can, in certain
circumstances, marry Nuaru, which I have denominated the alter-
native ” law. It may be explained that Nua.ru is Changura’s father’s
sister’s daughter, but the relationship must be collateral and not of
the full blood. Moreover, Changura may occasionally espouse the
sister of Chauan, who was the ancient wife of the Changura. section
(Table 12'), which is probably commemorative of the intermarrying


code of that period. This may be called the “ rare ” or “ ancient ”
law. In earlier pages of this article reference has been made to the
privilege of marrying the “ ancient ” wife in the quadruple organisa-
tion. Attention is again drawn to the matter, because if it be a
survival of the old law, it may add strength to the theory of the
consolidation of small tribes into confederacies in the past.
Again, in examining Table 16, it will be seen that Chauan’s
“ tabular ” wife is Nuaru, his “ alternative ” spouse, Nungala, and
his “ancient” wife, Nangili. It therefore appears that Changura
and Chauan may exercise their choice over the same two sections
of women; and they can also make matrimonial exchanges of their
sisters with each other. In other words, Changura and Chauan can
mutually exchange either their wives or their sisters. These two men
were brothers-in-law under the ancient regime (Table 12), and they
are indirectly so still. These remarks apply to Chagara and Cham-
bin, and also to the pairs of sections in Phratry B of Table 16.
In Phratry A of Table 16 it is seen that Nungala is the mother of
Nauadyerri, Nauadyerri of Nuaru, Nuaru of Nabungarti, and Nabun-
garti of Nungala, and this series is repeated in the same order for
ever. A similar result is obtained by taking successive generations
of the women in Phratry B.
Again, taking Phratry A of Table 16, we observe that Changura
is the uncle (mother’s brother) of Chambin; Chambin is related in
the same manner to Chauan; Chauan is the uncle of Chagara.; and
Chagara is the brother of the mother of Changurai —the latter being
the name with which we commenced. This succession of the uncles
and nephews is repeated in the same order from generation to genera-
tion. This applies also to the men of Phratry B.
If we wish to place together all the women in each phratry to
show their order of descent, and if we also' desire' to demonstrate th®
lineal succession of the uncles and nephews, then Table 16 is a. con-
venient arrangement of the sections. But if our object be to illus-
trate the descent of the offspring through the men, then the following
classification is preferable:
Table 17
Moiety. Father. Mother. Son. Daughter.
/Changura Nungala Chabalyi Nauadyerri
j Chabalyi Nagara Changura Nangili
A -I
Chauan Nuaru Chauarding Napungarti
Chauarding Nambin Chauan Nauana
Chagara Naudyerri Chauaru Nuaru
Chuaru Nauana Chagara Nagara
(:
* 1:
Chambin
Chungala
Napungarti Chungala Nungala
Nangili Chambin Nambin


The reader of this table sees that the men of each pair of sec-
tions in Moiety A reproduce themselves in alternate generations; that
the men in each pair of sections in Moiety B do likewise; and that
the children belong to the same moiety as their fathers. Again, the
men of Moiety A are the same as those in Table 12, whilst the men
of Moiety B coincide with the names in Table 15. Iti is, moreover,
observed that the “ direct, ’ the “ alternative,” and the “ rare ” wives
all belong to the same moiety in each instance.
Full details of the intermarriage and descent of the sections, with
particulars of the totems among a number of neighbouring tribes in
the Northern Territory, were' supplied in an article I contributed to
the Geographical Society of Queensland in 1901, to' which the reader
is referred.
INITIATION CEREMONIES.
In a strip of country commencing at Cape Arid, and thence along
the coast to Albany, Fremantle, and Sharks Bay, to Onslow, extend-
ing inland all the way for about a hundred miles or more, it is found
that the natives neither circumcise nor subincise'. But throughout
the whole of the remainder of Western Australia both these rites
are practised. As I have elsewhere 1 given tolerably full descriptions
of the ceremonies connected with the performance of these mutila-
tions, in the adjoining State of South Australia, they will be passed
over at present.
EXTRACTION OF TEETH.
Along the West Australian coast from Roeboume or Condon
southerly, via Onslow, Carnarvon, G-eraldtom, and Fremantle, to
Albany, and thence easterly to Eucla, on the South Australian
boundary, the custom of taking out a front tooth is not practised.
From Derby up along the Fitzroy River and its tributaries to Hall’s
Creek, thence down the Ord River to Wyndham, and thence round
along the coast., via Beagle Bay, to Condon, two front teeth are
extracted in some tribes, and in others one tooth. In the central
districts of Western Australia the extraction of teeth is also in force.
SUPERSTITIONS, ETC 1 .
The natives of Western Australia, like their confreres in other
parts of the continent, have many superstitions. They believe in a
number of malevolent spirits, who are always prowling about, more
especially at night. They are present in deep waterholesi, in whirl-
winds, in thunder, in certain scrubby and rocky places, in storms,
and elsewhere. They are supposed to have the form of men and
animals, and possess purely human traits. There is nothing sacred
in their character, although they are said to exercise supernatural
1 “Phallic Rites and Initiation Ceremonies of the South Australian Aborigines,’’
Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., xxxix., pp. 622-638.


powers. Instead of endeavouring to propitiate' these mysterious
creatures, the men treat them as they would any human foe, and
try to scare them away by open acts of defiance, or to' counteract
their wicked designs by magic.
Respecting the origin of these mystic spirits, the natives do' not
trouble themselves to formulate any definite idea. Some are sup*-
posed to have had an existence coeval with that of the blacks them-
selves, whilst othersi are feared because they are the shades of
departed enemies. There is no conception of a good or friendly spirit
any farther than that some of the ancestors of the tribe will try to
favour them by driving food-producing animals into their country.
Their ceremonies refer largely to the supply of food. Each
wizard or shaman has his own special occult functions. Some profess
to have the power of giving success! in the chase, others in fishing,
others in making rain to supply them with water in the rock-holes,
and so on. On such occasions they repair to a secluded rock, called
tarlo, which is used only at these ceremonies, and the practitioner
rubs or beats the rock with a stone held in the hand, muttering
incantations the while.
The natives of Sturt Greek and the Fitzroy and Ord rivers
believe that a supernatural monster in serpent form made: all the
rivers, as he travelled inland from the sea, which is his home'. In
some districts this creature is known as Ranbul, and in others as
Wonnaira.
The natives around Weld Spring have a legend that in the
desert country beyond the Parker Ranges there are enormous snakes,
called Wonnangura, living in the vicinity of rock-holes and other
places where there is water. If a blackfellow wishes to go to a rock-
hole or spring to get a drink, it is necessary that one or more of his
friends should keep' watch, or else these venomous monsters would
bite him, or perhaps devour him. Whirlwinds are also said to prevail
in that country, which would cany a blackfellow off, and deposit
him in some rocky mountain or dense scrub far away in an enemy’s
country. A whirlwind is supposed to be the tail of a maleficent
monster in serpent form.
The boundaries of the hunting grounds of the different tribes
are defined by patches of scrub, hills, sandy tracts, or any remark-
able natural features. If these are trespassed upon by adjoining
tribes, the intruders are' driven back by armed force.
A man’s weapons, utensils and ornamentsi belong solely to him-
self, and at his death are buried with him. Each woman also has
her own personal property, which is either interred with her or left
at her camp. In the Kimberly district the usual mode of burial is
tio place the body, wrapped in paper-bark, on a platform of sticks in
the branches of a tree. Sometimes in rocky country, the body is
laid on a shelf of rock, above which there is a projecting ledge.


Among the Lyndon and Minilya river tribes there is a belief
that a creature of malignant- power, called Yamaji, comes into- the
camp at night- and carries a man away into- the mountains, where
he changes his language, and brings him back to the camp. Next
morning no one can understand the man who- has been treated in this
way. Sometimes it is, a woman who is taken away by Yamaji.
Perhaps this superstition has developed to- account- for a- man or
woman losing his or her reason after expo-sure- t-o- thirst, sunstroke,
or other hardship.
Some of the natives believe they can delay the setting of the sun
by lighting a fire on a high rock, or by fastening a burning stick in
the fork of a tree-. Having done this they travel as fast as they can
towards their camp, apparently believing that they will get- there
before the darkness sets in.
Mr. H. T. Knight, station manager, Lyndon River, writes to me
that one day during a thunderstorm he saw a, black woman take her
little girl and dip her in a pool, for the- purpose of inducing the rain
to cease, because it was not wanted just then. In an interview with
Mr. G. Buchanan, Flora Valley Station, near Hall’s Creek, in the
Kimberly district, he told me a similar story. A black woman was
stopping in the stable, and during a storm she held her child under
the drip from the eaves, to stop the rain, in order that she could get
away home to her camp.
In my “ Ethnological Notes on the Aboriginal Tribes of the
Northern Territory,” 1 I have described their customs in hunting,
fishing, and other methods of obtaining food; their camps, vessels,
and weapons; some of their superstitions, sorcery, barter, modes of
burial, wife stealing, etc. All the particulars given in the work
referred to are applicable to- the aborigines of the Kimberly district
of Western Australia. They are in effect the same race as the
natives of the part of the Northern Territory with which I dealt in
my former treatise, which can therefore be read in connection with
the present article.
In conjunction with the present paper, I would also' ask the
reader to peruse my treatise on “ The Origin, Organisation, and
Ceremonies of the Australian Aborigines/' 2 which is accompanied by
a map of Australia,, showing the geographic distribution of the tribes
under each type of social organisation, and exhibiting also the boun-
daries between those tribes who practise circumcision and subincision,
and those tribes among whom neither of these genital rites are in
force.
1 Queensland Geographical Journal, xvi, pp. 76 85.
2 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Phila., U.S.A., xxxix., pp. 556-578.


DESCRIPTION OF PLATES.
Plate I.— Rock Carvings.
In this plate I have illustrated nine carvings upon rocks on
Depuch Island, called by the aborigines Wommalunna, all of which
have been drawn to scale by myself.
Figs. 3,4, 6,8, and 9 have been drawn from photographs fur-
nished by Mr. W. A. Hall, already referred to in this paper. Figs.
1, 2', and 5 I prepared from careful sketches and measurements taken
by Mr. Hall under my direction.
Fig. 7 was copied by myself, as stated in the text, infra.
In Figs. 1,3, 4,6, 7,8, and 9, the whole surface within the
margin of the' object depicted has been chopped or beaten away, this-
being indicated by solid colour on the plate. Fig. 5 is in outline only,
and Fig. 2 partially so.
Fig. I.—A man three feet seven inches high.. It is executed
on the perpendicular face of a rock about forty feet up the side of a
steep gorge. Mr. W. A. Hall says in his letter to me of September
16 th 1901, “We tried very hard to photograph this figure, but there
was too much angle from either side, and only the smallest' of ledges
in front. The original artist must have suffered some little incon-
venience to execute his drawing.”
Fig. 2 represents a human foot, with eight toes. It is one foot
five inches iu length, and seven inches wide. The figure is in outline,,
with the exception of the toes, where the rock surface has been
beaten away.
Fig. 3 shows three birds, cut upon a monolith lying on the side
of a hill, and forming an inclination of about forty-five degrees to
the horizon. The birds are shown on the plate in their correct rela-
tive position to each other, and the line around them represents the
margin of the rock on which they are carved. Mr. W. A. Hall says
in his letter above mentioned: “ The block of stone containing the
three birds weighs between two and three hundredweight, I started
two of my crew carrying it to the dingey, but the track was so rough,
and the tide receding so fast, we had to leave it, but I intend
seouring it at some convenient time later on.”
Fig. 4 is probably an emu or native companion in the attitude
of feeding, and measures two feet three inches from the bill to the
tail.
Fig. 5. —This carving is in outline only, the incised lines being
about half an inch wide and a quarter of an inch deep in the centre.
It is probably an unfinished drawing.
Fig. 6. —This is intended for either a wallaby or kangaroo, and
is one foot seven inches in length.


PLATE I


Pig. 7 represents a man one foot nine and a-half inches! in
height, carved on a slab of stone two feet five inches high, by an
extreme width of one foot ten inches.
Mr. W. A. Hall brought, this rock, which weighs about two
hundredweight,, with him from Depuch Island to Cossack. On my
expressing a wish to see it, he packed it carefully in bags and shipped
it to Sydney, whence I had it brought, to Parramatta by a drayman.
I then copied Fig. 7, which is the only drawing upon this monolith.
Pig. B.—lt is impossible to say what the native artist wished to
portray in this drawing, which is on the perpendicular face of a slab
of rock.
Fig 9 is shown in its correct, relative position, and represents a
man or woman seven and a half inches in length.
It may be stated here that I supplied my correspondents with
accurate copies of the carvings published by Capt. Wickham and
Capt. Stokes respectively, already referred to, and asked them to
endeavour to identify some or all of such drawings. I regret to- say
that very little success was met, with. Fig. 6 of my plate, however,
is probably identical with Fig. 11 of Capt. Stokes' plate, or Fig. 67
of Capt. Wickham's plate.
Plate II. — Rock Paintings.
The drawings shown on this plate have already been described
in the text of this article, from details supplied by Mr. F. S. Brock-
man, in a personal letter, at my request.
LANGUAGE.
Two short vocabularies! are added, for comparison with those
compiled by other authors in different parts of Western Australia.
The first one contains 155 words noted down by myself from the
mouth of a native of the Roebourne district named “ Baibung.” He
belonged to the section Banaka, and totem kangaroo. (See Table 4).
The second vocabulary of 125 words is prepared from information
supplied to me by Mr. A. E. Clifton, manager of the Yeeda, Station,
near Derby, and represents the language spoken on the Lower Fitzroy
River. In a paper contributed to the! Royal Society of New' South
Wales in 1901, I. furnished a vocabulary showing 120 words of the
Kishu language, collected under my direction by Mr. W. J. Wilson,
police officer at, Hall s Cheek, in the Kimberly district. 1
As far as my information at present extends in regard to the
languages of Western Australia, I am led to the following conclu-
sions respecting their grammatical structure:—There are the sin-
gular, dual, and plural numbers. Nouns and adjectives are declined
by postfixes. Pronouns and other parts of speech subject to inflection
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, xxxv., pp. 220 222.


have an inclusive and exclusive form of the 1 first person in the dual
and plural. The verbs are inflected somewhat similarly to those in
the languages of the Darling River tribes in New South Wales.
The study of the aboriginal languages of Western Australia has
been very much neglected. The following is a summary of the
principal pioneers in this direction :
In 1842, Mr. Charles Symmons, Protector of the Aborigines, with
the assistance of F. F. Armstrong, the Native Interpreter, published
plate ii.
Kock Paintings.
a short article entitled “ Grammatical Introduction to the Study of
the Aboriginal Language of Western Australia/’ It appeared in C.
Macfaull’s “ Western Australian Almanac for 1842, with Appendix,”
pp. 1-28. This work, which is elementary and incomplete, deals with
“ the language spoken by the Australian aborigines on the banks of
the Swan River, and in the country adjacent.”


Mr. Symmons is the only author, so far as I am aware, who has
attempted to define the grammatical constitution of the Western
Australian tongues. But a few of the vocabularies which, have
appeared at different times are deserving of mention :
Captain Grey, afterwards Sir George Grev, prepared a. vocabu-
lary of the language spoken “ from King George’s Sound to more than
one hundred miles beyond Perth.” The title of this work is “ Vocabu-
lary of the Dialects of South-western Australia.” (Perth, 1839.)
The Rev. J. Brady printed a “ Descriptive Vocabulary of the
Native Language' of Western Australia,’’ (Rome, 1845.) He 1 explains
that “ the words contained in thisi vocabulary are used in the vicinity
of Perth and adjacent districts.” He also states, “ Nothing is said
here about the grammar of the language, because it is not sufficiently
known.”
In 1866, Mr. E. M. Curr published vocabularies of several tribes
on the western and southern coasts of Western Australia. “ The
Australian Race,” vol. i, pp. 292-406.
A short vocabulary of native words in use among the Gualluma
tribe, located between the Yule and Fortescue rivers, was collected
by Mr. E. Clement in 1899, and published in the Journal of the
Anthropological Institute (London), vol. ii, n.s., pp. 192-196.
CONCLUSION.
It is hoped that, the information supplied in the foregoing pages
may be found useful to ethnologists, geographers and linguists in
dealing with the customs, boundaries, and classification of Australian
tribes.
The attention of the reader is also invited to the following papers
contributed by me during past, years to other learned societies on
the subject of the aborigines of Western Australia,
“ Division.** of Some West Australian Tribes,” American Anthro-
pologist (Washington, 1900), vol. ii., n.s., pp. 185-187.
“ Wojrbya Organisation of tihe Australian Aborigines,” Ibid., pp.
494-501.
“ Some Aboriginal Tribes of Western Australia, ” Journal Royal
Society, New South Wales (Sydney, 1901), vol. xxxv., pp. 217-222.
“ Native Tribes of Western Australia,” Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc.
(Philadelphia, 1900), vol. xxxix., pp. 123-125.
“ Western Australian Divisions,” Joum. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales
(Sydney, 1898), vol. xxxii., pp. 84-86.
“ The Origin, Organisation, and Ceremonies of the Australian
Aborigines,’’ Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc. (Philadelphia, 1900), vol.
xxxix., pp. 556-578, with map of Australia, on which is shown the
distribution of the tribes of Western Australia.


VOCABULARY—ROEBOURNE DISTRICT.
Family Terms, Etc.
A man, Ngaiada or Mulba.
Husband, Ngurra.
Old woman, Munga.
Young woman, Kuri.
Wife, Mirrawai.
Father, Mamana,
Boy, Kobbodya.
Sister, Konnarung.
Elder brother, Gurannha.
Woman, Dhurramba.
Child, neuter, Munggula..
Natural Objects.
Sun, Yunda.
Moon, Willara.
Stars, Binderi.
Pleiades, Kuriguri.
Wind, T'hura.
Whirlwind, Wunnangurra.
Thunder, Yindarra.
Lightning, Wulliwuddi.
Clouds, Kandera.
Rain, Yungo.
Water, Baba.
Fire, Kulla.
Camp, Nyirrang.
Bough hut, Maia.
Stone, Munda.
Sand, Yundaga.
Egg, Dyimbu.
Charcoal, Dyinda.
An enemy, Dyuna.
Evil spirit, Warungga.
Any tree, Barku.
Firewood, Thamara.
Flesh, food, Mundu.
Yams, Mudymuri.
Parts of the Body.
Head, Thuru.
Beard, Nganga.
Hair, Kulkara.
Neck, Ngulye.
Eye, T'hula.
Nose, Mula.
Teeth, Era.
Tongue, Yaluru.
Ear, Gulga,.
Arm, Thilli.
Elbow, Wungulla.
Hand, Murra,
Navel, Nilu.
Stomach, Ngalu.
Ribs, Thambi.
Heart, Kurrunggulla.
Breastsi, female, Bebi.
Backbone, Muru.
Thigh or leg, Wulugali.
Foot, Dyinna.
Penis, Wandi.
Scrotum, Karru.
Vulva, Minni.
Bone, Kudyi.
Skin, Kunnu.
Blood, Mudda.
Excrement, Guna.
Urine, Kumbo.
Animals.
Dog, Yugurra.
Black duck, Kundam.
Corel la, Bilyago.
Wild dog, Wundya.
Kangaroo, Mungurru.
Padamelon, Burtkarri
Fish, collectively, ta-wu-ru.
Snakes, collectively, Wallu.
White cockatoo, Metameta, Common lizard, Babangurra.


Animals Continued.
Claw of dog, etc.. Birrigal.
Claw of bird, Mungulla.
Common ants, Waruma.
Butterfly, Kunullawulli.
Feathers, Wullaguru.
Shield, Yarra.
Stone knife, Kundi.
Catch, Daga-lgo.
Shout, Eramaga.
Smell, Bandilgo.
Bring, Kurrima.
Roast, Thamera.
Walk, Yannambe.
Run, slowly, Winbai.
Run, fast, Murianbai.
Strike. Gurramunbi.
Sit, Bandiamba..
Lie, Ngari.
Cut- open, Diagalma.
Go away, Bungarra.
Throw, Ngaialgo.
Tall, Mandibanga.
Short Thumbaga.
Black, Waru.
Red, Murrara.
Old, Windo.
Dead, G-uru.
Hot, Kumbai.
Cold, Nyugga.
Tired, Kundigo.
Little, Kulugulu.
Large. Kutthaguda.
Flies, Wurri.
Mosquito, Kumin.
Louse, Kulo.
Centipede, Minnawanggo.
Weapons, Etc.
Hair belt, Barawuru.
Verbs.
Come, Kugai.
Bite, Mindhalgo.
Pierce, Kuddhalgo.
Cry, weep, Nguddyinba,
Sleep, Gununba.
Eat, Ngunnamba.
Drink, Bundyalga.
Jump, Mungangurri.
Arise, Karri.
Fight, Kuiramanba.
Dance, Banigo.
Look, Wialgo.
Kill, Nyiddigalma.
Fly, as a bird, Kungurra.
Adjectives.
Quick, Wulli.
Slow, Thuragu.
Strong, Nunggo.
Sick, Wirago.
Wicked, Wulkya.
Distant, Kuddyaguda
Stinking, Buka.
One, Igawuda.
Two, Kudhara.
Several, Murru.
Miscellaneous.
I. nguddha. Mine, nguddhagu. Thou, nyinda. Thine, nyin-
dagu. He, nyia. We two, thou and I, ngalli. Those two, numbalu.
Yes, kugu. No, mita. Here, nunno. There, nyinna. I go,
nguddha yaamamba. We two go, ugalli yanmamballi. We all go,
nyealu yannambulu. How far, ngani muna.
Since the occupation of the country by European stock, the
following names have been invented: —Cattle, billamanba. Horses,
yau-a-da, Sheep, kukundyai.


BY R.
H. MATHEWS, L.S.
VOCABULARY—LOWER FITZROY RIVER.
Family Terms, Etc.
Man, Wamba. Woman, Dyandu.
Old man, Wadal. Wife, Wangu.
Father, Ibilla. Mother, Kuya.
Elder brother. Bubbala. Elder sister, W arnu.
Younger brother, Murridyudda, Younger sister, Nemmera,
Husband, Yargu. Little girl, Kan yarn.
Youth, uncircumcised, Dyuggada.Maid, Warrindyula.
Youth, eiicumeised, Balalli. Child, either sex, bubba.
Man, incised, Wongalong
Head, Nalma.
Hair, Labindyenna,
Eye, Nemilgera.
Ear, Nillabubba.
Nose, Wanaginna.
Smell, Ibbandyun.
Mouth, Nillira,
Sun, Walga.
Moon. Kerrading.
Stars, Larn.
Cioud, Warragarra.
Sky, Buddarra.
Rain, Whella.
Rainbow, Miding.
Light, Chanera.
Darkness, Yingadi.
Morning, Neimbi.
Day, Dy umbel.
Night, Baian.
Heat, Barra.
Cold, Amini.
Fire:, Dyungu.
Water, Whella.
Milk, Nurnina.
Evil spirit, Bullingun.
Shadow, Nimmeradya.
Wind, Wongal.
Misti, Dyaboera.
Parts of the Body
Teeth, Cherink.
Chin, T'emgu
, Cheek, Maila-maila.
Forehead, Cherribil.
Beard, Ngulgu.
Breasts, female, Numibla.
Finger, Wirril.
Natural Objects.
Smoke, Dui.
Thunder, Chiaama.
Lightning, Pinmuk.
Country, Burra.
Stone, Woningara.
Canoe. Kulbia.
East, Bauna.
West, Kula.
North, Yo-wan.
South, Yanbun.
Subincision, Worral.
Wat ercourse, Nimmila
Grass, Worxa.
Tree or wood, Barloi.
Bark, Kuding.
Camp, Chalbi.
Hut, Maiarra.
Hole, Dabbu.
Lump, D urrug.
Path, Kurdi.
Footmark, Neinbel.


72 NOTES ON THE ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Animals.
Native-dog, Kurrida.
Kangaroo, Baldyering.
Fish generally, Bi.
Opossum, Langura.
Emu, Yulgi.
Iguana, Banne.
Eaglehawk, Kalbedyug.
Crow, Wungina.
Black duck, Warrabaluin.
Plain-turkey, Mongaiera.
Pelican, Maiada.
Laughing jackass, Dyarradyurra.
Native companion, Kargura.
White cockatoo, Ngulagu.
Black cockatoo, Darreal.
Fly, Dumbara.
Mosquito, Nilagul.
Snake, C'hurra.
Weapons.
Wood spear, Minigwal.
Reed spear, Dyennil.
Shield, Karribina.
Boomerang, Chibba.
Club, Marballing.
Adjectives.
Alive, Marbu.
Dead, Kud.
Large, Wida.
Small, Wuba.
Long, Idan.
Short', Wongoela.
Good, Marbu.
Bad, Melu-marbu.
Hungry, Marrinyang.
Thirsty, Barra.
Red, Bui.
White, Dup.
Blactk, Rauga.
Full, Mera.
Empty, Marrinyang.
Quick, Bulla-bulla.
Slow, Bunga.
Blind, Mulgun.
Deaf, Bubbadarra.
Strong, Cherril.
Weak, Wogala.
Heavy, Duan.
Light, Ngo-rla.
Afraid, Waddyi.
Sweet, Yarrawin.
Right, Mummeragun.
Wrong, Ohuda.
Straight, Oharar
Crooked, Chulga.
Correction.
In Vol. xvi. of this Journal, in my “ Ethnological Notes on the
Aboriginal Tribes of the Northern Territory,” p. 70, fourth line from
the bottom, after the word “ Nambijana,” add “or Chapota and
Nemira, or Changary and Nhermana.” These words were inadver-
tently omitted.






THE THOMSON FOUNDATION GOLD MEDAL
cjoyal 4eogi;a|i(|ttal Society of
QUEENSLAND.
/Established in honour of J. P. Thomson, LL.D., Hon.F.R.S.G.S., etc.,
Founder. See pa/jes 132-135 of Journal, I 01. XVI.)
CONDITIONS.
This Medal slial-1 be awarded annually, or at such other times as the
'Council may approve, to the author of the best original contribution to
Geographical Literature, provided it be of sufficient merit, approved and
accepted by the Society (the subject of such contribution to be named by
the Council). Special awards of the Medal may also be made from time
to time to such persons as have gratuitously rendered eminent services to
the Society.
The Council may award a silver or a bronze impression of the Medal
to the Author of a contribution deemed to further the interests of the
Society and add to the value of Geographical Literature.
The Council shall name from time to time the subject of such con-
tribution for which the Medal is to be awarded, preferential consideration
being given to the Geography of Australasia.
All contributions for which the Medal may be awarded must be
written in the English language, and will become the property of the
Society absolutely.
It shall not be competent for any Officer of the Society or Member
of the Council for the time being to compete for the Medal.
Tlie administration of the Medal shall be entirely in the hands of
the Council of the Society, who will make such additional rules and
regulations for awarding the Medal as from time to time may seem
necessary.


Hjouiil tbeograplpcal Sipidu of Australasia^
QUEENSLAND.
Conditions of Competition for The Thomson Foundation
Gold Medal.
The Thomson Foundation Gold Medal of this Society will be
awarded to the Author of the Best Original Paper (provided it be of
sufficient merit) on each of the following subjects:
To be sent in not later than Ist July, 1905.
I.—The Geographical Distribution of Australian Minerals.
To be sent in not later than Ist July, 1906.
2.—The Agricultural Industry of Australia.
The competition is open to Members and Non-members of the
Society alike, whether residing in Australasia or elsewhere, but not to-
any Officer of the Society or Member of the Council for the time
being. No award of the Medal will be made for a mere compilation,
no matter how meritorious.
All competitive communications for the Medal should be written on
one side of the paper only, with marginal space on the left hand side
thereof, and limited to; say, about 32 pages of the “ Queensland »Geo-
graphical Journal,” Royal Bvo. Instead of the writer’s name each paper
must be identified by a motto. A sealed envelope with such motto
written outside, and the writer’s name r d address inside, should ac-
company each paper.
The successful papers will be printed and published in the Journal
of the Society, fifty reprint copies of each being supplied to the author,
free.
All communications, with illustrations for which the Medal may be
awarded, must be written in the English language, and will become the
property of the Society absolutely.
Papers may be illustrated by such maps, diagrams and pictures as
are considered by the authors thereof to be necessary and useful.
Additional subjects for future papers will be announced from time
to time.
All communications should be addressed to the Hon. Secretary of
the Society, Brisbane
Hugh M. Nelson, President
J. P. Thomson, Hon. Secretary..


✓
I




1508
00047969
fj si


