

AUTHORISED EDITION,
THE
Three Capital Issues
A SPEECH
DELIVERED BY THE RIGHT HON.
H. H. ASQUITH, M.P
PRIME MINISTER,
IN THE ALBERT HALL,
On DECEMBER 10th , 1909.
PUBLISHED BY
THE LIBERAL PUBLICATION DEPARTMENT
(In connection with the National Liberal Federation
and the Liberal Central Association),
43, PARLIAMENT STREET, LONDON, S.W.
PRICt ONE PENNY.


Copies of this Pamphlet can be obtained at the following’
rates •• —
12 Copies Os. 9d., Post Free Is. Od.
25 „ ... is. 3d., „ Is. 7d.
50 „ ... _ ... 2s. Od., „ 2s. 6d.
ICO „ 3s. Sd., „ 4-s. 2d.
250 „ 7s. 6d., 1 „ .
mtin ~ i Carnage Extra,.
1000 £1 os. Od. J


THE THREE CAPITAL
ISSUES.
Mr, Dickinson, my Lords, and Gentlemen, —I thank you, in not
merely formal words, but from the bottom of my heart, for this most
moving and stimulating greeting. The position which I have for
the time being the honour to hold as head of his Majesty’s Govern-
ment, and the chosen leader of a great political party, is a position
as beset with anxieties and responsibilities as can fall to the lot of
man. It is a position which no one can usefully or honourably fill
unless, on the one hand, he enjoys in full measure the confidence
of his colleagues and followers, and unless, on the other hand, the
policy of the Government over which he presides is a policy which is
not forced upon him against his better judgment, or in which ho
reluctantly and grudgingly acquiesces, but is one to which he can
give sincere and whole-hearted approval. Leadership without
authority and without loyalty is the emptiest and the least enviable
of baubles. But so long as the two conditions which I have just
named are satisfied—as I am glad and grateful to acknowledge they
have been in my case—a man is sustained against the pressure of
infinite and unceasing care by the sense that there is no better em-
ployment for human effort than the concerted pursuit of great
purposes for the common good.
The House of Commons of 1906-9.
As the chairman has reminded us, four years ago, when a new
Liberal Government had been but a few days in power, my ever-
lamented predecessor, standing in this place, outlined its intended
policy. So far as that policy could be carried into effect by adminis-
trative and executive action, as, for instance, in the building up of
free government in the recently conquered colonies in South Africa,
I may claim that the highest anticipations which he aroused have
been more than satisfied. But the bulk of those reforms which he
described could only be achieved by changes in the law, and the
law in this country can only be altered in one way, and that is by
the conjoint will of a composite body which we call Parliament. The


House of Commons of 1906 was not then born. To-night its days
are numbered, and its work is done. No legislative assembly in our
history has ever laboured with greater assiduity or, so far as the
majority are concerned, with more unity and singleness of purpose
to discharge the trust committed to it by the people and to clothe
in legislative form the expectations held out to the electorate. It
is true that, apart from a mass of useful but uncontentious measures,
a few of these have, in an expressive phrase used the other day by
Lord Lansdowne, a few of them have been “ allowed to pass.”
The Old Age Pensions Act.
The list —a very slender one—of these favourites of Parlia-
mentary fortune includes one item, the Act for the establishment of
old age pensions, which we deliberately kept out of the electoral pro-
gramme of 1906 because we were not disposed to promise that which
we did not see our way to perform. Well, it was allowed to pass,
amid a chorus of objurgation, and with an attempt, which happily
proved futile, to limit its operation by time. We are now assured—
and I accept and emphasise the assurance—that it has become a
permanent and indestructible part of our social legislation. A
House of Commons which secured this honourable provision for
necessitous old age is a House of Commons which has not lived in
vain.
The Lords and the Liberal Programme of 1906.
But what of the tasks to which by far the greater part of its
working hours has been devoted? The Session of 1906 was given in
the main to education; the Session of 1908 in the main to licensing;
the Session of 1909 almost exclusively to devising the necessary ways
and means for national defence and social reform. Lord Lans-
downe, as he surveys and thumbs the statute-books of these four
years, calculates their weight, and numbers their pages, is suffused
with a glow of compulsory self-approval. He is lost in admiring
wonder at the moderation of the House of Lords. Yes; but you and
I, when we search those volumes, search them in vain for any trace
of legislation on the most socially and politically important of the
reforms which were set forth in this hall four years ago, which were
submitted to and discussed before and approved by a vast majority
of the electors, which the representatives of the people came to
Westminster pledged to accomplish, and which during four years
that new House of Commons strove laboriously and faithfully to
carry into law. So far as these things are concerned the electors
in 1906 might just as well have spared themselves the trouble of
going to the poll. And why? Another body that is subject neither
to election nor to dissolution stood in the way. The toil and care
of the people’s representatives were nullified, and now, as a fitting
climax to this work of destruction, the supplies granted by the
Commons are stopped on their way to the Crown.


The “Single Task” of the Liberal Party.
And so we are here to-night on the eve of another dissolution,
and it falls to my lot to take up the tale. Last time we reckoned
without our host. We are not going to make that mistake again.
I tell you in the name and on behalf of the Liberal Party that we
have at this moment laid upon us a single task, a task which
dominates and transcends, because it embraces and involves, every
great and beneficent social and political change upon which our
hearts are set That task is to vindicate and to establish upon an
unshakable foundation the principle of representative government.
Do not let me be misunderstood. No one is asked to abandon or lay
aside the causes for which he has been fighting. On the contrary,
there is not one of those causes whose fortunes will not be found to
hang upon this.
Education, Licensing, and Electoral Reform
Let me, without attempting anything like an exhaustive cata-
logue, take a few capital illustrations. Take, first of all, the cause
of national education in England and Wales. W© stand now whore
we stood four years ago. The anomalies and injustices created by
the Act of 1902 have still to be set right. We have to secure by
statute access for ©very child to a school which is under the complete
control of a popularly elected authority and in which the office of
teacher is not fenced about by any sectarian tests. Provided that
that right is established—and, mark my words, made universally
available—w© shall be ready, as we have shown ourselves ready
before, to deal liberally with the question of minorities in populous
areas. With regard to licensing we stand by the main and govern-
ing principles of our Bill of last year. Our franchise law is still
encumbered by artificial distinctions and impediments for which
there is no justification in principle or in policy. Some of the most
crying of them we have in this Parliament attempted to set right
by the Plural Voting Bill and the London Elections Bill. You know
what was their fate and how it was brought about.
Woman Suffrage.
Let me say a word here upon the relevant but much-vexed topic
of woman suffrage. My own views on that matter are, I believe,
tolerably well known, and I have seen nothing in the course of the
last four years which has induced me to modify them. This is a
question upon which there has been, and I suppose there always
will be, a diversity of opinion in both parties, with which it is
peculiarly difficult for any Government to deal. Nearly two years
ago I declared on behalf of the present Government in the event,
which wo then contemplated, of our bringing in a Reform Bill we
should make the insertion of a suffragist amendment an open ques-
tion for the House of Commons to decide. Through no intention


and through no fault of ours that opportunity for raising the matter
has been taken away. Our friends and fellow-workers of the
Women’s Liberal Federation have asked me to say that my declara-
tion survives the expiring Parliament, and holds good in its suc-
cessor, and that their cause, so far as the Government is concerned,
shall be no worse off in the new Parliament than it would have
been in the old. I have no hesitation in acceding to that request.
The Government—notwithstanding the deplorable and suicidal ex-
cesses of a small section of the advocates of change —the Government
has no disposition or desire to burke this question. It is clearly one
upon which the new House of Commons ought to be given the
opportunity of expressing its views.
Welsh and Scotch Measures
if we look now for a moment to regions further afield the long-
delayed claim of the Welsh people for complete religious equality in
the Principality will, I believe, be put forward at this election with
as much energy of conviction as ever before, and with as strong a
proof that it represents a real national demand. There is, as Wales
knows well, one obstacle and one only to its realisation. The people
of Scotland, again, who have a first call upon my personal interest
and sympathy, have suffered more during the present Parliament
from the direct action of the House of Lords than any other part
of the United Kingdom. Their Land Bill, their Valuation Bill,
and, on the very last day of the last session, their House Letting
Bill—all sanctioned by the House of Commons—were each in turn
done to death because, forsooth, Lord Camperdown and his friends
think they know so much better than the elected representatives of
Scotland what are the wishes and opinions of the Scottish people.
Irish Questions.
Ireland, on the other hand, from a legislative point of view, may
be said by comparison to have been for once in a way fortunate,
largely because the measures sent up did not come violently athwart
the prejudices and special interests which prevail in the Upper
House. The University question, which has baffled British states-
men for the lifetime of a generation, has been settled by Mr. Birrell
on national lines. The improvident finance of the Land Act of 1903
has been corrected and supplemented, and a real effort has been set
on foot to deal with the social and economic dangers of congestion.
Nor is there any part of the United Kingdom which has benefited in
so large a degree as Ireland by the grant of Old Age Pensions. But
is there any man in this crowded hall who is credulous enough to
suppose that these measures, singly or in combination, or a succes-
sion of similar measures, have struck or can strike at the root causes
of Irish discontent? Speaking on behalf of the Government in
March of last year, a week before my accession to the office of Prime
Minister, I described Ireland as the one undeniable failure of British


statesmanship. I repeat here to-night what I said then, speaking
on behalf of my colleagues, and, I believe, of my party, that the
solution of the problem can be found only in one way —by a policy
which, while explicitly safeguarding the supreme and indefeasible
authority of the Imperial Parliament, will set up in Ireland a
system of full self-government in regard to purely Irish affairs.
There is not, and there cannot be, any question of separation. There
is not, and there cannot be, any question of rival or competing supre-
macies. But subject to these conditions, that is the Liberal policy.
For reasons which I believe to have been adequate the present Par-
liament was disabled in advance from proposing any such solution,
but in the new House of Commons the hands of a Liberal Govern-
ment and of a Liberal majority will in this matter be entirely free.
The Liberal Programme of Social Reform.
I must not close this brief review—and it is all relevant to the
purpose for which we are assembled to-night —of our outstanding
problems without referring to that which is perhaps the greatest of
them all. When, last year, after careful preparation in the remis-
sions of the burdens of taxation and in the reduction of our national
liabilities, we brought in our scheme of old age pensions, we were
avowedly opening only the first chapter in a new volume of social
legislation. If we—that is, my colleagues and myself—are to be
condemned to political impotence of extinction for a generation, I,
for one, shall be fully compensated by the knowledge that, through
the action and efforts of our Government, more than half a million
of old people, who in their days of activity and strength worked
to create and build up the wealth of the nation, not only at this
Christmas, but for the rest of their lives, are saved from a choice
between want and loss of self-respect. But old age, though it is,
perhaps, the most appealing, is, after all, only one of the hazards to
which the life of our industrial population is exposed. Sickness,
invalidity, unemployment —these are spectres which are always
hovering on the horizon of possibility, I might say of certainty, to
the industrious workman. We believe that here, also, the time has
come for the State to lend a helping hand. That is the secret, or
at least one of the secrets, of the Budget of this year. It is
described, and rightly described, as a Budget which looked beyond
the 31st of next March, and which sought to raise revenue from
sources of a growingly productive character. We admit the charge,
if charge it be. Yes, it was a Budget which sought by taxes upon
the accumulations of the rich and the luxuries of the less well-to-do
and by a moderate toll on monopoly values which the community
itself has either actively or passively created, to provide the sinews
of war for the initiation and the prosecution of what must be a long,
a costly social campaign. That was the Budget put forward on the
authority of a united Cabinet, passed after months of by no means
fruitless discussion by the House of Commons, rejected in a week


and at a single blow by the House of Lords. And that is primarily
why we are here to-night.
The New Claim of the Lords a Danger to Liberty.
The immediate, the acutely provoking cause of what is rightly
called a constitutional crisis is the entirely new claim put forward by
the House of Lords, not only to meddle with, but, in effect, to
control and to mould our national finances. Only once within living
memory has the Upper House attempted to touch a single tax im-
posed or repealed by the House of Commons. That attempt recoiled
at once upon their heads, and it has never since been renewed. This
year, by one stroke, they have taken upon themselves to shatter the
whole fabric of the year’s taxation. This, I repeat, is a new and
entirely unexpected danger to popular liberties. Two years ago it
was as undreamt of as would have been, as is to-day, the revival
by an arbitrary Minister of the veto of the Crown. In the debate
of 1907—not very long since—on Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman’s
motion, the leader of the Opposition declared that it was common
ground between us—common ground—that the House of Lords
could not touch finance. As late as October of last year the same
authority asserted that the power of the House of Commons over
finance was “ uncontrolled.” That was his exact word. A week
ago I quoted the former of those two declarations in the House of
Commons, and asked whether it still held good. To that question
Mr. Balfour, although he spoke for more than an hour, made no
reply. When the most fertile and astute dialectician of our time
passes by an obviously relevant point without making any attempt
even to circumnavigate it, the inference is tolerably clear.
Three Constitutional Innovations.
We are indeed—and I say it in all seriousness—we are in this
matter suddenly confronted with no less than three constitutional
innovations. In the first place we have the claim of the Upper
House, not as an archaic legal survival, but as a living and effective
right, to control the levying of taxation. In the second place
we have the claim of the same House, a body which cannot itself
be dissolved, to compel a dissolution of the popular Chamber. And,
lastly, as a consequence and a corollary of the other two, we have
the assertion of its power to make or unmake the Executive Govern-
ment of the Crown. Every one of these revolutionary pretensions
we shall withstand for all we are worth. The result is what at
first sight seems rather like a paradox. We, the progressive party,
find ourselves here to-day, in the first place, occupying Conservative
and constitutional ground, defending the liberties which have been
transmitted to us from the past against invasions and usurpations
which have for the first time received the official countenance of the


Tory party. What has been done once may be done again. Ido
not say that it will be. But Ido say this, that it becomes our first
duty to take effective stips to make its recurrence impossible. We
shall therefore demand authority from the electorate to translate
the ancient and unwritten usage into an Act of Parliament, and to
place upon the Statute-book the recognition, explicit and complete,
of the settled doctrine of our Constitution that it is beyond the
province of the House of Lords to meddle in any way, to any degree,
or for any purpose with our national finance.
Tariff Reform the Cause of the Revolution.
This proposed revolution in our constitutional procedure becomes
the more significant, and, I think, the more sinister, because it
has been brought about at the practical instigation and through the
ceaseless pressure of those who for years past have been trying to
bring about a revolution in our fiscal system. Some weeks ago, in
September, at a meeting in Birmingham, when few people thought
that responsible leaders of the Tory party were going to be driven
into these wild and desperate courses, a letter was read from Mr.
Chamberlain. Let me say in passing that his opponents regret
quite as sincerely as his friends the causes which disable him from
coming into the foreground in this impending struggle. But in that
letter Mr. Chamberlain expressed his hope that the House of Lords
would see their way to force a General Election, and he proceeded
to give his reason. What was his reason? “The Budget,” he
wrote, “ is the last effort of Free Trade finance to find a substitute
for Tariff Reform.” There we see the whole motive of this
manoeuvre unmasked. The Budget was to be rejected at all hazards,
at whatever violence to constitutional usage and practice, not be-
cause it is a Budget of Socialism and spoliation, but because it
provides a substitute, an effective substitute—l will go further and
say a destructive substitute—for what is called Tariff “Reform.”
Tariff “Reform,” as we all know, whatever it may mean to Mr.
Balfour—that is what nobody knows—but we all know it means
in the mouth of Mr. Chamberlain and his followers, among other
things, the taxation of the necessaries of life. It is the fear of its
advocates that if this Budget once takes its place on the Statute
Book, this Budget which seeks to provide the cost of social improve-
ment from the superfluities of one class, the luxuries of another,
the monopoly values of a third—if this Budget once takes its place
on the Statute Book the cause of the Tariff Reformers would become
a forlorn hope. It is that fear which has provoked and engineered
this crisis. In the issue so raised you have at stake the double for-
tunes of our constitutional liberties and of Free Trade.
Never Again !
So far we are on the defensive. But at the same time and by
the same action the House of Lords has not indeed raised but has


hurried on a larger issue still. I tell you quite plainly and I tell
my fellow-countrymen outside that neither I nor any other Liberal
Minister supported by a majority of the House of Commons is going
to submit again to the rebuffs and the humiliations of the last four
years. We shall not assume office, and we shall not hold office
unless we can secure the safeguards which experience shows us to be
necessary for the legislative utility and honour of the party of pro-
gress. You will be told, gentlemen —you have been told already—
that the issue lies between government by two Chambers and govern-
ment by a single Chamber. That is not the case. I myself, and I
believe a large majority of the Liberal party, are in favour of what
is called a bicameral system. I see nothing inconsistent with demo-
cratic principle or practice in a Second Chamber as such. On the
contrary, I see much practical advantage that might result from
the existence side by side with the House of Commons of a body,
not, indeed, of co-ordinate authority, but suitable in its numbers
and by its composition to exercise impartially in regard to our
ordinary legislation the powers of revision, amendment, fuller de-
liberation, and, subject to proper safeguards, of delay. Those are
both useful and dignified functions. Yes, gentlemen, but we have
got to deal with a present and an immediate necessity. It may
well be that a process of evolution or substitution may in course of
time give us a body better fitted than the House of Lords for the
judicial exercise of the functions which are really appropriate to a
Second Chamber in a democratic State. But, as a great man once
said, “Things are what they are,” and we have to face them as
they are. Our present position gives us all the drawbacks with few,
if any, of the advantages of a Second Chamber. For what is our
actual Second Chamber ? It is a body which has no pretensions
or qualifications to be the organ or the interpreter of the popular
will. It is a body in which one party in the State is in possession
of a permanent and an overwhelming majority. It is a body which,
as experience has shown, in temper and in action is frankly and
nakedly partisan. It is a body which does not attempt to exercise
any kind of effective control over the legislation of the other House
when its own party is in a majority there. It is a body which, when
the conditions are reversed, however clear and emphatic the verdict
of the country has been, sets itself to work to mutilate and to destroy
democratic legislation, and even in these last days it lays a usurping
hand on democratic finance. That is a plain, literal, unvarnished
picture of what everyone knows to be the fact.
The Absolute Veto Must Go.
We are going to ask the country to give us authority to apply
an effective remedy to these intolerable conditions. Here, again,
what is to be done is to be done by Act of Parliament. The time
for unwritten convention has unhappily gone by. We are not, as I


say, proposing the abolition of the House of Lords or setting up a
Single Chamber, but we do ask, and we are going to ask, the electors
to say that the House of Lords shall be confined to the proper
functions of a Second Chamber, which I enumerated to you a few
moments ago. The absolute veto which it at present possesses must
go. The powers which it claims from time to time of, in effect,
compelling us to choose between a dissolution and so far as legis-
lative projects are concerned —legislative sterility —that power must
go also. The people in future, when they elect a new House of
Commons, must be able to feel, what they cannot feel now, that they
are sending to Westminster men who will have the power not merely
of proposing and debating, but of making laws. The will of the
people, as deliberately expressed by their elected representatives,
must, within the limits of the lifetime of a single Parliament, be
made effective.
Shorter Parliaments.
And, remember, these changes in the relations between the two
Houses —and, of course, at this moment I do not commit myself or
commit you to any precise details of machinery or method—l say
these changes must be accompanied and supplemented by a shorten-
ing in the duration of the life of the House of Commons itself. No
one desires—certainly no Liberal desires—to make possible the
ascendancy even for a brief span of years of a body which has ceased
to represent the nation. Shorten the life of a Parliament to five
years—and I should not myself be afraid of making it four—and you
will have reduced that possible risk to vanishing point.
The Task Must Not he Under-estimated.
That, gentlemen, is the policy which the Government lay before
you. Let no one under-estimate the magnitude of the task. We
have not embarked upon it without counting the cost. Ido not—
which of us does?-—under-estimate the odds against which we have
to contend. The House of Lords has behind it on this occasion
forces which it could never have enlisted upon the abstract issue-
of its constitutional right to deal with finance. The vast majority of
those who are going in January to back it up at the polls would, a.
year ago, have strenuously denied its possession of such a right. It
will have behind it on the one hand concentrated for resistance the
formidable interests which the Budget has offended, and, on the-
other hand, burning with aggressive and missionary zeal, the motley
horde which has gathered itself round the flag of Tariff “ Reform.”
Does the prospect alarm you? I see that some great organs which
in the old days used to be in touch with popular opinion can discern
no evidence that the nation resents the conduct of the Lords. I.
believe you could tell a different tale. Well, we shall see.


The Three Capital Issues.
And now, how do we stand ourselves? United, I hope and trust,
for I cannot believe that with such causes at stake there will be
found any room for sectional divisions, for local differences, for per-
sonal rivalry. All these will, lam convinced, be fused and com-
bined in a common campaign against a common enemy, for with the
three capital issues which I have endeavoured to lay before you—
the absolute control of the Commons over finance, the maintenance
of Free Trade, and the effective limitation and curtailment of the
legislative powers of the House of Lords—-in these three issues we
are following on the best and surest lines of Liberal tradition and
Liberal policy. We have behind us the authorities whose teaching
and example we most revere, the founders and fathers of our Con-
stitution, the economists and administrators who rescued our indus-
tries from the fetters, the greatest apostles of democracy of our time
—Gladstone and Bright. We have to support us the memories of
the past, the needs of the present, and the hopes of the future. Show
yourselves worthy of the task, and quit yourselves like men.
National Press Agency Ltd., Pru ters, Wliitefriars House, London, E.C
