

THE PUBLIC LIBRARY, 1856.


THE BOOK
OF THE
PUBLIC LIBRARY, MUSEUMS,
AND NATIONAL GALLERY
OF VICTORIA.
1856—1906.
By
EDMUND LA TOUCHE ARMSTRONG, M.A., LL.B.,
Chief Librarian.
r
MELBOURNE:
Printed for the Trustees of the Public Library, Museums, and
National Gallery of Victoria,
By
FORD & SON.
1906,




PREFACE.
The Book of the Public Library, Museums, and National
Gallery of Victoria, issued on the occasion of the Jubilee in
celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of the opening- of the
Library, makes no claim to be a complete history of the
Institution. It is but a chronological record of the main
facts connected with its progress during the first half century
of its existence, and some notes on those who have served it
well in the past. The Library contained about 5,000
volumes when it was opened, in 1856, and the building con-
sisted of an Entrance Hall and a Reading Room about
fifty feet square. It now contains 220,000 volumes, and
the buildings connected with the Institution cover about 2
acres of land. The Reading Rooms, the Art Gallerias, and
the Museums are open to all reputable visitors without
restriction of any kind. The Public Library was one of the
first in the world to open its doors thus freely, and flic
Trustees have not found it necessary to alter this policy.
They have never lost sight of the fact that they hold the
Institution in trust for the people- of Victoria, and it is hoped
that some, at least, of those people will he interested in the
records of an Institution to which they have ever given a
generous support.
E.LAT.A.


PUBLIC LIBRARY, MUSEUMS,
AND NATIONAL GALLERY OF VICTORIA.
1856.
trustees:
HIS HONOUR MR. JUSTICE BARRY.
THE HONOURABLE WILLIAM FOSTER STAWELL.
THE HONOURABLE JAMES FREDERICK PALMER.
HUGH CULLING EARDLEY CHILDERS.
DAVID CHARTERIS McARTHUR.
Starr or tfte Public £ibrarj>:
AUGUSTUS TURK, Librarian.
WILLIAM CLEARY, Clerk.
EDWARD WASHFOLD, Porter.
1906.
trustees:
HENRY GYLES TURNER, Esq., F.R.G.S., President.
SIR HENRY WRIXON, K.C.M.G., K.C., M.L.C., Vice-President.
JAMES SMITH, Esq., Treasurer.
E. J. NANSON, Esq., M.A.
R. L. J.. ELLERY, Esq., C.M.G., F.R.S., F.R.A.S.
ALEXANDER LEEPER, Esq., M.A., LL.D.
MOLESWORTH R. GREENE, Esq.
THE REV. W. H. FITCHETT, 8.A., LL.D.
JOHN MATHER, Esq.
SENATOR SIR WILLIAM A. ZEAL, K.C.M.G.
THE HONOURABLE THOMAS BENT, M. L.A.
W. BALDWIN SPENCER, Esq., C.M.G., M.A., F.R.S.
F. H. BROMLEY, Esq., M.L.A.
R. MURRAY SMITH, Esq., C.M.G.
THE REV. E. H. SUGDEN, M.A., B.Sc.
EDWARD CARLILE, Esq., K.C.
HIS HONOUR MR. JUSTICE a’BECKETT.
J. FORD PATERSON, Esq.
LIEUT. COL. W. T. REAY.
ALEX. S. JOSKE, Esq., M.D.


1906.
Staff of the Public Library:
E. La T. ARMSTRONG, M.A., LL.B., Chief Librarian and Secretary.
A. W. BRAZIER, M.A., Sub-Librarian.
R. D. BOYS, 8.A., Senior Assistant.
A. NEVILLE, Assistant.
W. .1. VOGLER, M.A. , Assistant.
J. HOWARD. M.A.,
C. F. H. SHELLEW, B.A. ~
E. R. PITT
T. F. COOKE, B.A. ~
C. H. ROBINSON
E. M. MILLER, B.A.
W. CHRISTIANSEN, B.A. ~
A. HOSKEN, Clerk.
A. E. H. PHILLIPPS, Accountant.
F. S. BRYANT, Bookbinder.
D. W. EDWARDS, Library Attendant.
J. A. SHANNON
J. W. BROWNE, Libranj Attendant.
G. E. HUTCHINSON
J. E. SHIELD
J. T. SIMPSON, Attendant.
C. E. KAY
T. B. KELLY, Junior Attendant.
D. B. BRUCE
A. E. ABBOTT „
ALBERT WHITE ~
W. H. WARDROPE
S. HOWSON, Jun. Messenger.
A. B. FOXCROFT
L. C. IRWIN
T. ROCHE, Labourer.
Staff of (he industrial $ CocDnological IRuscum:
R. H. WALCOTT, F.G.S., Curator.
MISS M. E. E. CANE, Assistant.
T. W. WEATHERILL, Carpenter and
Model Maker.
J. HARVEY, Senior Attendant.
J. BATES, Attendant.
Staff of tl>e Rational ißuscum:
J. A. KERSHAW, F.E.S., Curator of
the Zoological Collection.
R. H. WALCOTT, F.G.S., Curator of
the Geological and Mineralogieal
Collections.
F. CHAPMAN, A.L.S., Palaeontologist.
W. E. G. SIMONS, Secretary.
C. BURTON, Taxidermist.
J. E. CHUBB, Taxidermist.
T. F. MOORE, Osteologist tO Articu-
lator.
F. W. BAILLIE, Assist. Taxidermist
F. P. SPRY, Museum Assistant.
C. HARDING, Carpenter.
W. S. WILLIAMS, Attendant.
Staff of tbe Rational 6aikrp:
L. BERNABD HALL, Director, and Master of the School of Painting.
F. McCUBBIN, Master of the School of Drawing.
T. DOBER, Senior Attendant.
H. HOPKINS, Attendant.
P. CORRIGAN
J. J. McMAHON „
W. H. HOLNESS, Attendant.
J. P. LITTLETON
J. P. GANNON


SIR REDMOND BARRY, K.C.M.G., LL.D.


THE BOOK
OF
THE PUBLIC LIBRARY, MUSEUMS, AND
NATIONAL GALLERY OF VICTORIA.
In the opening sentence of the Preface to the Catalogue of
the Public Library, which was published in 1861, it is stated
that the establishment of a Public Library in Victoria,
supported by the State, and stamped with the characteristics
of a national institution, was made the subject of early con-
sideration by our first Governor, Mr. Latrohe. By whom
the idea was first seriously suggested we shall probably never
know. Mr. Hugh Culling Eardley Childers, a member of
the Government of the young colony and a prominent
citizen, claims to have suggested the idea to Mr. Latrohe.
The Governor himself was a man of some liferary taste,
and one to whom the advantage of the establishment of a
Public Library would appeal strongly, He placed upon the
estimates a sum of £13,000 for the erection of a building and
the purchase of books, and this amount was passed in the
Appropriation Act, which was assented to on the 20th
January, 1853. By a proclamation in the “ Government
Gazette ” of the 20th July, in the same year, His Excellency
appointed the first Trustees of the Public Library. The
names are stated in the following order, viz.
His Honour Mr. Justice Barry,
The Honourable William Poster Stawell,
The Honourable Janies Frederick Palmer,
Hugh Gulling Eardley Childers, .
David Charteris McArthur.
Mr. Justice Barry, after-wards Sir Redmond Barry, was thus
mad© the senior Trustee, and acted generally as Chairman of
the Board. Ho became the recognized Head of the institu


tion and worked zealously, judiciously, and iadefatigab y
for its advancement during' the whole of his life. .t he Just
meeting of the Trustees was hold at his * n
Russell Street, and was attended by Mr. Childers
and the then Colonial Secretary, John hostel. No
minutes were taken, and the meeting' ajipcars to have
been an informal on© for the discussion of various
matters connected with the Library. The next. meet-
ing was held at the Judges’ Library in the old Supreme
Court buildings in Latrobe-street. In addition to ,Fudge
Barry, the then Attorney-General (Stawell), and D. C.
McArthur attended. It was resolved, inter a/itt, that the
Lieutenant-Governor be requested to convey to the Trustees,
by the usual Deed of grant, the land intended as a sito for
the Melbourne Public Library. It was decided to remit a
sum of £2,500 to London for the purchase of books, and to
ask certain prominent colonists then in England to co-
operate with the Colonial Agent in securing the nucleus of
a collection of works suitable for a Public Library. The
question of providing a building was discussed, and it was
decided to offer prizes of £l5O and £75 respectively to
architects for the two best designs submitted in open com-
petition.
No officials had as yet been appointed in connection with
the Library, but a Mr. Charles Cumberland, a Judge’s
Associate, was requested to perform the duties of Secretary
to the Trustees for three months for a gratuity of £25. As
there were only two meetings of the Board held within the
ensuing three months, it would appear that Mr. Cumber-
land’s office was somewhat in the nature of a sinecure,
although at the end of that period it was decided to retain
his services until further notice.
On the 16th of January, 1854, after two postponements,
the plans and designs of Mr. Joseph Reed were awarded the
firsfc Prize, whilst the second fell to a Mr. Burgoyue, Some
little difficulty appears to have occurred in connection with
the money voted for the building, for in March a deputation
of the Trustees waited upon the Governor, and enquired
whether the sum of £IO,OOO voted in 1863 could be placed


all tile disposal of tho Hoard. His Excellency stated iu
reply that there wore at the time no funds available for
that purpose.
In July, 1854, however, the toudor of Mr. James
Mefcoa-lfo for tho sum of £9,650 was accepted for the first
portion of the Library building, and arrangements were
made for fencing and trenching the land in Swanston-strect,
which had been sot aside for the site of tbo Library,
On Monday, tbo 3rd July, ,1854, the foundation stones
of tbo University and the Public Library wore laid by the
Level nor, fctii Gharios Ilothani, His Excellency, accom-
panied by Lady llotham, Judge Barry, 11, C. E. Childers,
members of the University Council, and other prominent
colonists, loft tho Government Cilices at noon for the Univer-
sity. After the ceremony there, the party drove to tho
1 üblic Library, arriving at li o’clock in tho afternoon. Dx'.
Palmer, Speaker of the Legislative Council, delivered a long
address, and tho Governor then laid the foundation stone.
Ho afterwards spoke at some length on tho advantages of a
1 nbiic Library, especially on what lie termed a working
man s library. I bell you as your friend and fellow colonist
that hero you will find society that will draw you away from
other temptations, and 1 hope that the Library will contain
books of all languages and descriptions, so that you may
never say you arc at a loss for references or information on
any subject.”
In the course of his address at the University, Chancellor
Barry pointed out that seventeen years bad scarcely elapsed
since the foundation of the colony, which was then inhabited
only by savages. Probably in the world’s history no
country bad attempted to found both a University and a
I üblic Library within a score of years of its first settlement.
185(5.
After Oho ceremony of laying the foundation atone, there
are no records of the history of the Library until the formal
opening of the building iu 1856, Books, however, had
been purchased with the money sent to London, and on
Monday, the 11th day of February, 1856, the Library was


formally opened by Major-General McArthur, Acting-
Governor of Victoria. The building then opened consisted
of the central portion of the Swanston-street frontage. The
lower storey was merely an entrance hall, and the first floor
contained a chamber 50 feet square and 32 feet high. In
this chamber shelf room was provided for 8,000 volumes, and
with only sufficient books to fill about half of this space, the
Melbourne Public Library—the first Public Library in
Australia—was opened. The Trustees, in their address to
the Governor, regretted that they had not been able to
obtain payment of two separate sums of £3,000, voted by the
Legislative Council in 1851 and 1855. They complained
also that their appeals for assistance were unacknowledged
or refused. The Library contained 3,846 volumes when it
was opened. The only donations of which it could boast
were a copy of the “Times” newspaper for the year 1800,
presented by Mr. G. M. Gallot, and eighty-four volumes
presented by Mr. Latrobe, the first Governor of the Colony.
Its most valuable possession was a copy of Gould’s “Birds
of Australia,” which had been obtained at a cost of ,£l4O.
The first rules and regulations issued by the Trustees
were of the simplest nature. It was decided that admission
to the Library should be free to all persons over 14, years of
age, without any letter of introduction or guaranty. The
Library was to be open from 10 a.m. till 4 p.m, from the
30th September till the Ist May, and. from 9 a.m. till 5 p.m.
during the rest of the year. No book was to be taken out of
the Library, and no person was allowed to mark or injure
a book in any way. Towards the end of May, 1856, the
building was lighted with gas, and the hours of opening wero
extended till 9 p.m.
The first man appointed in any permanent manner was
Edward Washfold. He had been employed at the Supreme
Court as a sort of general factotum, and on the opening of
the Library in February, 1856, Judge Barry appointed him
as Porter, at a salary of £l5O per annum, until provision
could be made for supplying him with suitable quarters,
when, it would appear, his salary was to be reduced to £l2O
per annum. Por three months Washfold carried on the


work of the Library, with the assistance of a constables at
the front door.
Printed catalogues of the first hooks supplied had been
sent out by Mr. Guillaume, the first bookseller to the
Trustees, and doubtless the Judge himself superintended
their arrangement on the shelves. The appointment of
Washfold was questioned by the Chief Secretary of the
time. Ho had nominated William Cleary for the position
and instructed him to report himself for duty at the Library.
Cleary did so, but, .apparently by Judge Barry’s instruc-
tions, was told that his services were not required. lie
returned to the Chief Secretary’s office and asked for instruc-
tions. Ho was directed to report himself daily, and this he
continued to do, with the invariable result that, according
to his statement, he was informed that " there was nothing
for him to do at the Library.” So matters continued for
some time, the Trustees, or, rather, the Judge, on their
behalf, insisting that the right of appointment to the staff
rested with them. On May Ist, Barry wrote to the Govern-
ment asking- that Washfold ho paid from the 11th of
February. He differed from Cleary in his view of the
position, for ho stated that Cleary had boon drawing pay
since the Library was opened, and although regularly
instructed by the Trustees in the duties he. was to perform,
he had withdrawn himself without their leave, and since the
31st of March ho had not done any duty whatever at the
Library. Finally the matter was compromised by the
appointment of Washfold as Porter and Cleary as Clerk, the
Government apparently conceding the right of future
nominations to the Trustees.
In April advertisements wore inserted in the newspapers
calling for applications for the position of Librarian. There
wore forty-eight candidates for the office, and the Trustees,
"after much deliberation,” reduced this number to eight.
These eight candidates wore instructed to wait personally on
the Trustees, and five of them did so on the sth of May.
Augustus .Henry Tulk was duly elected and entered on his
duties nine days later. The salary provided on the esti-
mates was £2lO for ton months, and the Trustees asked that


this amount be paid to Mr. Tulk rateably for the eight
remaining months of the year. Mr. Charles Cumberland
apparently severed his connection with the Library on the
appointment of a Librarian.
In June, 1856, the members of the Philosophical Insti-
tute asked that they might be allowed to hold meetings at
the Public Library, and also that the specimens belonging
to the National Museum, then in the Government Assay
Office, might he moved to the Public Library instead of to
the University as had been proposed. The Trustees agreed
as to the desirability of establishing a. Museum in connection
with the Library, and promised to take charge of the
specimens so soon as accommodation should he provided.
They would not agree to the first proposal of the Committee
of the Institute, but apparently as the result of the sugges-
tion in regard to the Museum, they instructed the Librarian
to procure plans from the architect, Mr, Reed, for building
the South Wing of the front of the Library. The Natural
History specimens, however, were never destined to bo
housed in this building, which was, later, devoted to the
purposes of an Art Museum.
1857.
The estimates submitted by the Trustees for the year
1857 included ,£5,000 for the purchase of hooks, £4OO for
the salary of the Librarian, with an allowance of £IOO for
rent, and salaries for .a clerk and two attendants. They
also asked for a sum of £30,000 for building, and the
Government agreed to grant £20,000 for this purpose. In
May application was made for the services of a second
porter to take duty at night, and John Hodges received
the appointment.
1858.
In January, 1858, it was found necessary to appoint .a
Sub-Librarian. The position was duly advertized, and
Mr. Henry Sheffield was selected from amongst forty-four
candidates, and was appointed at a salary of £3OO per
annum.


Parliament having voted ,£20,000 for building, in April
tenders were called for the erection of the South Wing, and
a contract was made with Mr. A. Linaore to complete the
building and supply fittings for £16,900,
The question of establishing Art Galleries and Museums
had been considered oven at this early period, and on tho
16th of August, 1858, Judge Barry wrote to the Chief
Secretary asking that tho remainder of tho block of land
behind tho Library, extending to Bussell Street, should be
set aside for tho site of a Museum of Natural History,
Geology, Science and Art, in immediate connection with
the Library.
The result of a stocktaking, or, as it was then called by
the Librarian, “an inquisition into the state of tho Mel-
bourne Public Library,” in September, 1858, showed that
since the opening of tho Library in February, 1850, 11
books had boon stolen (value £5 18s.), 41 volumes had boon
damaged by use, and 3 volumes had been injured by
mutilation and abuse.
In October, 1858, Professor Irving wrote to tho Trustees
suggesting that von Guorard’s picture of Fern Tree Gully,
which was to have been purchased by public subscription
and sent, to England, should bo hung in tho Public Library
and so form tho nucleus of an Art Gallery. The Trustees
declined to accept the picture, on tho ground that it had
not been paid for.
In November, 1868, Edward Washfold resigned, and in
December George G. Brockway was appointed second
attendant.
On Monday, 13th December, 1858, Sir Henry Barkly
and the Trustees mot at tho Library to receive from the
French Consul a valuable donation of books, presented by
Napoleon 111., Emperor of tho French.
At the end of the year .1858 it was resolved by the
Trustees that it would he desirable to send Mr, Tulk to
England to purchase books and works of art for tho Institu-
tion, but the Government declined to agree with tho
proposal. Mr. Guillaume, of Chester Square, London,
had acted as agent for the Trustees since the founding of


the Library, but as be bad become financially involved, and
intended to retire from business, it was thought that tho
special qualifications of Mr. Tulk should bo mado use of
to strengthen the collection. Mr, Guillaume's sou under-
took to supply bis father’s place early in 18159, and tho
Colonial Agsnt-Geueral was instructed to order books to
the value of £5,000 from Guillaume, Junior.
1859.
In March, 1859, George Hopkins was appointed as nil
additional attendant. In April it was resolved by tho
Trustees that 500 volumes should bo purchased for circula-
tion amongst the inhabitants of inland towns, anil with
this resolution was introduced into Australia tho system of
circulating cases of books, a system to ho known Inter ns
that of "Travelling Libraries,” and destined to become a
prominent factor in Australian Libraries and to be adopted
by America and other countries.
In May the Trustees met to consider tho bust method
of dealing with a sum of £2,000 which had been voted, as
the result of a suggestion from Captain (afterwards Sir
Andrew) Clarke to the head of the Ministry, Mr, O’Milan-
assy, for the purchase of works of art in England. I t was
decided that a catalogue of works of art, prepared by tho
Trustees, should be sent to Mr. Childers, who was thou in
England, and that he bo asked to associate himself with
Captain Clarke and others in order to obtain a "judicious
selection” of the works mentioned by the Trustees. The
proposed “catalogue” was apparently never prepared, but
a long letter was sent to Mr, Childers, asking him to act
for the Trustees, In this letter he was told that it was
not the intention of the Trustees to purchase original
pictures or copies, however excellent or cheap. Statues,
likewise, were beyond their roach, and the Committee was
advised to confine its purchases to photographs and casts,
medals, coins and gems, and “miscellaneous objects.” Tho
£2,000 was to be divided into four equal parts, one for tho
purchase of casts, one for photographs, coins, medals, and
gems, one for marbles and miscellaneous objects, whilst tho


fourth, part was to b© set aside for freight and other
■charges. The very careful instructions given in the letter
wore due to the anxiety of the Trustees that the new art
department should be as successful as the Library had been.
“They place much reliance upon this auxiliary element of
mental cultivation as eminently calculated to introduce a
now stimulus for intellectual refinement,” wrote the Judge,
and they “are sensitively alive to the danger of a failure,
and arc apprehensive lest the first impression produced
upon our visitors may ho apathy or dissatisfaction.”
It was resolved by the Trustees that the new room on
the south of the Central Hall should ho opened on the 2dth
of May, the anniversary of the birthday of Queen Victoria,
and that it should bo known as tbe “Queen’s Reading
Room,” a name that has long since come to he used for the
•whole of the first floor of the Swauston Street front of the
Library. The Governor, Sir Henry Barldy, attended,
and was received by Mr. Justice Barry and Sir James
Palmer. He was ushered into the new reading room, where
members of the Ministry, the foreign Consuls, and "a most
respectable body of assembled Colonists” duly greeted
him. A military review and other holiday attractions,
however, probably accounted for the fact that only about
150 persons were present, and the proceedings, according
to the press reports of the time, passed off with an almost
monastic quietude. Mr. Justice Barry pointed out that
tho Library then contained over 13,000 volumes, that 2,000
additional volumes were daily expected, and it was hoped
that very soon the shelves would contain 25,000 books,
as a large order was being supplied from London, and tho
Trustees had some .£5,000 at their disposal for further
purchases. The now reading room was 95 feet long by 50
foot wide and 32 feet high. The labours of the Trustees,
however, wore not to bo confined only to the benefit of the
residents in tho capital. “It has been deemed highly
important,” said Barry, “to spread abroad as widely as
possible tho beneficial influence happily brought into being,
of which those who live at a distance are unable to partake,
and thus, without impairing the resources of the Institution


as a Library of deposit and research, to increase the facilities
for general literary improvement, and for the expansion
of the public mind. To accomplish this object it is
joroposed to lend to the Mechanics’ and other similar Institu-
tions in the provincial towns a certain number of duplicate
copies upon a variety of interesting subjects.” The Judge
also referred to the proposal to establish an art museum, and
to the general advantages to be derived from the Institu-
tion. The Governor declared the new reading' room open,
and although lie expressed himself as an advocate for
economy in financial affairs, he trusted that the last vote
ou the estimates to bo curtailed would ever be that for the
extension and completion of so noble a work as the Public
Library.
In July, when preparing the estimates for the following-
year, the Trustees were not unmindful of the Governor’s
remarks. They asked for a sum of £6,000 for the purchase
of books, on the ground that such a sum was only equal to
the votes that had lapsed in 1854 and 1855. They stated
that the services of a 4th attendant were required, and they
urged that £14,000 should be voted towards building' the
North Wing, as they urgently required quarters for the
Librarian and increased accommodation for books and the
works of art which were shortly expected.
1860.
For some months the Library continued to make progress
quietly. In June, 1860, deputations from the Municipali-
ties of Brighton, Boroondara, Collingwood, Prahran, Kew,
and St. Kilda, were received by Mr. Justice Barry, and
they agreed to receive books subject to certain regulations,
which provided that the* borrowing libraries should be
within ten miles of the Public Library, that, the public
should have access to the books at certain hours, that the
buildings in which the books were placed should be insured,
that the borrowers should bear all expenses of taking and
returning books, and that they should be liable, for any loss
or injury, as well as paying the expense of collecting the
volumes on their return, at a cost not exceeding twenty


shillings per hundred volumes. The representatives of
the borrowing libraries cheerfully accepted these conditions,
but the lending- of the volumes was evidently not a task to
be undertaken lightly. Another meeting of the Trustees
was held, at which it was resolved that the premises of the
applicant Free Libraries be inspected. There is nothing to
show that such inspection was carried out, but at the next
meeting of the Trustees it was decided to send letters to
each of these libraries, enclosing the regulations and terms
upon which the books would be lent. Deputations were
again to meet the Trustees on the 21st July. Even then
the troubles of the would-be borrowers were not at an end,
for at the meeting on that day it was merely fesolved that
the distribution he left to the Librarian, and that the
Deputations should deliver to him on Monday, the 23rd of
July, the names and addresses of the proposed guarantors.
These wore to be approved by the Trustees, and the Deputa-
tions were again to attend, in order that the hooks might
be distributed to them by lot. On the 26th July it would
appear that their securities were accepted, and that the
first loans of books were granted on that day to Boroondara,
Collingwood, and Kew.
In September, Robert Curtis, who afterwards rose to b©
Secretary to the Trustees, was appointed 4th attendant.
Towards the end of this year arrangements wore made for
fencing the land at the rear of the Library, which had been
set aside for the museum site, A number of cottages,
occupied as police barracks, were standing in Little Lonsdale
Street, facing the Hospital, but the land between these
cottages and Latrobe Street was apparently unoccupied.
The Swanston Street frontage, containing nearly two acres
of laud, had been conveyed to the Trustees by deed of grant
in February, 1858, but the deed was not handed over to
the Librarian till January, 1860. As early as August,
1858, Sir Redmond Barry had written to the Chief Secre-
tary asking that the remainder of the block bounded by
Latrobe, Russell, and Little Lonsdale Streets should be
reserved for a Public Museum site. This request was
reiterated at intervals, and in 1860 the land was "appro


priated,” and provision made by Parliament for fencing it.
The -actual deed of convoyanoo of tlio land, however*, was
not executed till February, 1864. Towards the end of
1860 the casts, friezes, and busts for the Art Gallery wore
received from England, and Mr. Charles Summers, a-
sculptor, undertook for a sum of ,£SO the necessary repairs
and sotting up of the works, which had apparently been
-considerably damaged by son water during transport.
.1861.
Early in this year tho Librarian reported that the
Library contained over 22,000 volumes. Twonty-flvo
volumes ha& been stolon within seven months, and more
than, half of these wore set down as "Educational and Univer-
sity books.” As a result of this report a notice was posted
in the Library calling' attention to the breach of the rule
that no book was to be taken out of the Library, and slating
that “should individuals bo so ill-advised as to continue to
break this rule, tho Trustees will be reluctantly compelled
to adopt additional measures for preserving the property
-committed to their care.”
On the 24th of May, Sir Henry Buddy, the Governor of
tho colony, formally opened the- Museum of Art on the south
side of the ground floor, Tho collection consisted almost
entirely of casta of statues and /msst-re/im. Sir Redmond
Barry lamented that they were not exhibited in a- more
suitable building, and hoped that better provision would
soon be made. Sir Henry Baddy sympathized with tho
Trustees in the want of room, and remarked in his speech
on the occasion that “to cramp such a noble Institution by
withholding the few thousands necessary for its completion,
whilst tans of thousands are. appropriated to less important
■or less worthy objects, must;, I am confident, strike all who
have the welfare of the people at heart as poor economy,”
Even the small beginnings of tho Art Gallery wore not
without effect, and in August a long letter was written to
tho Treasurer of the colony by a Mi’, Thomas Clark, strongly
advocating the establishment of a School of Art in connection
with the Gallery. Mr, Clark had been head master of the


Birmingham and Nottingham Schools of Art and Design.
Some years later, when the School of Design was established
at the Gallery, ho became the first master,
The only other incident of note during this year was the
resolve of the Trustees to print a now catalogue, and a request
that £BOO be placed on the supplementary estimates for
assistance in compiling and printing.
1862.
Early in the year 1862 Sir Redmond Barry loft for
England, to represent the colony at the great International
Exhibition in Loudon. The staff would appear to have
been busily engaged on the now catalogue, mid there are
no records of any meeting of the Trustees from September,
1861, to March, 1862, The catalogue was finished early
in the year, and in March and April orders were given for
the presentation of copies to editors of colonial newspapers
and magazines who had presented files of their publications,
to the heads of Government Departments, and others inter-
ested in the Library, 'The books catalogued numbered
nearly 27,000. The entries wore made only under the
authors’ names, and no subject index was attempted.
Mr. F. G. Dalgety, a merchant, formerly resident in
Melbourne, placed £IOO at the disposal of the Trustees,
and Mr. James Murphy, brewer, presented them with £SO.
The former sum was devoted to obtaining a collection of
ceramic ware and the latter was spent on casts and moulds.
Room was wanted, however, for a display of this kind, and
it was some years before the casts were available for
exhibition.
1863.
A number of gentlemen, “Colonists of Victoria,” had
formed a Committee, with Dr. Gilheo as Chairman and Mr.
R. R. Woolcott as Secretary, to obtain a marble bust of Sir
Redmond Barry for presentation to the Public Library,
The bust was executed by Charles Summers in 1862 and
formally presented to the Trustees in January, 1863.


In March the tender of Linacre for building the north
portion of the Library front was accepted.
Mr. H. C. E, Childers, one of the first Trustees, having
left the colony to reside in England, it was decided by his
colleagues that his office should be declared vacant and a
new Trustee appointed. They approached the Chief
Secretary on the subject, and on the 4th of September Sir
Erancis Murphy, Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, was
duly gazetted a Trustee "in the room of H. 0. E. Childers,
Esquire, who had ceased to reside in the colony.”
1864.
The great majority of the books supplied to the Public
Library up to this time had been obtained from the Guil-
laumes, father and son, who had acted as London Agents
for the Trustees. There was much dissatisfaction exju’essed
from time to time during the period of their agency, and
it was decided in February, 1864, acting upon information
received from the Crown Agents to the Colonies, to discon-
tinue the agency. Eor the encouragement of the local book-
sellers it was also decided to expend for the purchase of
books in Melbourne, during the year, a sum not exceeding
.£5OO.
In August leave of absence for a year was granted to
the Librarian, and Mr. Sheffield was appointed acting-
Librarian. Mr. Tulk reached England early in November,
and was soon at work on the business of the> Library. He
made final arrangements in regard to some of the splendid
donations obtained by Sir Redmond Barry during his visit
to England in 1862. He reported .against Guillaume, and
recommended the Trustees to employ Bain in connection
with their agency work.
The 24th December, 1864, is notable as being the opening
day of the first Picture Gallery connected with the. Institu-
tion. The North Wing of the building was finished, and
the ground floor was filled with the casts and other works
which Sir Henry Barkly had found so unsuitably housed in
1861. The first floor was partly used for the extension of
the Library, but about two-thirds of it was reserved for


the temporary exhibition of the pictures which had been
bought in London by Sir Charles Eastlake, as the basis of a
National Gallery collection. With these pictures were
shown a number of paintings by Victorian artists, which
were exhibited in competition, as the Government had
undertaken to buy the best picture so exhibited for £2OO.
This exhibition and the founding of the National Gallery
were due to the recommendations of a Commission on the
Nine Arts, appointed in October, 1863, to inquire into the
subject of the promotion of the fine arts in Victoria, and
to submit a scheme for the formation and management of
a Public Museum, Gallery, and School of Art. The Com-
missioners appointed were Sir Redmond Barry, Archibald
Michie, George Frederick Verdon, Charles Gavan Duffy,
William Thomas Mollison, Frederick Wilkinson, William
Wilkinson Warded, William Parkinson Wilson, James
Smith, Augustus Tulk, and Charles Summers. The Secretary
of the Commission was Mr. Theyre Weigall. In addition
to the sum of £2OO set aside for the best picture painted by
an artist resident in the Australian colonies, two grants of
£l,OOO each were made in 1863 and 1864 by Parliament for
the purchase of works of art under the advice of the Com-
mission. The sum of £2,000 was remitted to Mr. H. C.
E. Childers, in London, and Sir Charles Eastlake, President
of the Royal Academy and Director of the National Gallery
of England, was asked to advise as to its expenditure. He
selected eleven pictures, and two small works by C. Baxter
were chosen by Sir Andrew Clarke. The titles of these
may be interesting as being the first purchases for the
National Gallery.
The pictures were:—
*A Fern Gatherer R. Herdman.
La Belle Yseult T. B. Bedford.
Watergate Bay J. Mogford.
Horses and Pigs J. F. Herring.
Sheep in Repose E. Tschaggeny.
Poultry Vendor P. van Schendel
French Artists in a Spanish Posada G. J. Vibert.
Rosebud of England C. Baxter.


Rose of England C. Baxter.
Departure of the Pilgrim Fathers , . O. W. Cope,
Bunyan in Prison G. F, Folingsby,
Depart du Fiance G. Koiler.
Italian Family (Ferry on the River Ninfa)
P. Williams.
The Australian artists submitted 43 pictures. The Com-
mission selected for purchase for the National Gallery a
painting of “The Buffalo Ranges,” by Nicholas Chevalier.
In addition to the pictures selected by Sir Charles Eastlako
and Sir Andrew Clarke, and those shown by the Australian
artists, the Exhibition contained "A Scene on the Ice at
Stockholm,” presented by F, CeAerberg; a portrait of Dr.
Mauncl, painted by Chevalier, and presented by Miss Maund t
a “Scene on the Hudson,” painted by Sonntag, and pre-
sented by J, R. Rioards. Shortly after the opening of
the Exhibition the Commission purchased the “Portrait of
a Lady,” by an unknown artist, who was later said to bo
Sir William Beechey. The Exhibition was to have been
opened on Christmas eve by Sir Charles Darling, but he
was unable to attend. His absence, wrote Sir Redmond
Barry, “shore the proceedings of tho accustomed edat of
an inauguration, and deprived mo of an opportunity of
saying a few words for the information of tho public.” Tho
new wing was, therefore, quietly thrown open to tho public
at 1 p.m., and, according to Sir Redmond, “nearly 500
visitors inspected the paintings, a goodly number, con-
sidering that it was a mail day and wet.”
1865.
Early in this year a Supplemental Catalogue of tho books
in the Library was issued. Additions were coming in
freely, partly as the result of donations obtained by Sir
Redmond Barry and Mr. Tulk during their visits to Europe,
and partly owing to the liberal treatment of the Library
by the Government. In March, 1866, it was estimated that
the Library contained 38,000 volumes. The Trustees,
however, were paying very heavily for many of the books


obtained, whilst tho binding', which was all done in London,
was of the most costly kind. The settlement with tbeix*
London agent had exhausted most of the funds in the hands
of the Trustees, and Mr. Talk, therefore, set himself to
obtain as many donations as possible, and met with a most
generous response from the Society of Antiquaries in London,
and from many other learned Societies, as well as from the
English Government Departments. Tho Governments of
France, Belgium, Holland, and Prussia, also responded
liberally to his applications for gifts for tho Public Library.
A scheme of obtaining books from the English booksellers
in a very novel manner was also suggested by Mr, Tulk,
and approved by .many of the leading publishers. They
wore to send to tho Library at Melbourne a copy of each
book published. The Victorian Copyright was to be
protected so soon as the receipt of a book was registered by
the Agent in London of the Victorian Library. Similarly,
the depositing of any book in tho Melbourne Library, fox-
transmission to tho British Museum, was to give a copyright
in Great Britain to the Victorian author. Unfortunately
for the Melbourne Library the proposal was never carried
out. Mr. Tulk also wrote to Sir Redmond Barry shortly
after his arrival in England, stating that a valuable collec-
tion of art works for the foundation of the Melbourne.
Museum might he obtained at the Villa Albani sale in
Italy, He suggested that possibly the Victorian Govern,
raent might vote .£20,000 for the purpose. Before- the
suggestion reached the Trustees, however, the order had
gone forth to cut dowxx expenses, and even the vote for the
purchase of books had suffered severely. Under tlx©
circumstances, Sir Redmond Barry decided not to- approach
the Government on the- matter. His answer on this point
to tho Librarian is worth quoting. “It is paiixful to destroy
the delightful vision which the intended dispersion of these
rarities afforded you. But, my dear Sir, oxxe honourable
member proposes that fifty thousand pounds, in addition to
that placed on tho estimates for the purpose, shall be spe-xxt
this year oxx 'Roads and Bridges,’ and carries his point.
Another honourable member proposes that ©very member


in the Assembly is to be paid three hundred pounds por
annum, and every member of the Council as much us is
pleasing to him. Fortifications, iron-clad ships, guns, and
munitions of war will absorb as much as Panic may suggest.
Although I wrote a most pathetic .appeal to the Chief
Secretary to place an additional sum on the estimates
simply to get us out of debt, the answer was sharp, short,
and decisive, ‘lt cannot be done.’ I was obliged to say
that we should be compelled to decline to receive presents
in future, in order to keep the current literature of tho day
au niveau. To this no reply was offered.” On Mu', Tulle’s
return to the colony he presented a report of his doings to
the Trustees, and it was resolved “That the Report of the
Librarian he received, and that an entry of its having been
read be made, and also that the high souse of tho apprecia-
tion of the Trustees of the indefatigable activity and
successful labours of the Librarian in behalf of the Institu-
tion, while visiting Europe on his private affairs, be
recorded,”
The final Report of the “ Commission on tho Fine. Arts ”
was presented to Parliament during the year. Tho chief
recommendations were, in brief ;
1. That whilst original pictures should form tho basis
and chief part of the National Collection, a limited
number of copies of pictures in European, National
Collections should bo obtained.
2. That the selection of pictures in future should
proceed upon an organised system, capable of
extension in various directions, so as to illustrate
history, both sacred and secular, poetry, domestic
life, landscape, portraiture, and those subjects
more immediately required for instruction in
drawing.
3. That ,a suitable gallery should be built upon the
reserve set apart by tho Government for tho Public
Library and Museums,
4. That the establishments of the Public Library, tho
Galleries, and Schools of Art, the Museum of
Natural History, with the allied economic


branches relating to science, art, and manufactures,
should be united, and form an institution to be
called the Public Museum.
5. That the property in, and the custody of, the Public
Museum should be vested in fifteen Trustees.
6. That admission to the Galleries and Schools should
be free to all, and that they be open in the
evenings.
7. That facilities should he afforded for holding annually
an Exhibition of Art in Melbourne,
The Report was considered by the Trustees, and they
reported to the Chief Secretary that they deemed them-
selves only called upon to express an opinion on the recom-
mendation as to the formation and government of the
Institution. They concurred in the proposal that the
Public Library, the Galleries, and Schools of Art, the
Museum of Natural History, and the allied economic
branches relating to science, art, and manufactures, should
be united and form one Institution. They approved of the
suggestion that all buildings for this purpose be on the site
of the Public Library, and bo vested by Act of Parliament
in fifteen Trustees. They recommended that certain
members of the governing body should be Trustees ex
officio , viz,, the Chief Justice, the Treasurer, the Minister
of Mines, the President of the Council, the Speaker of the
House of Assembly, the Chancellor of the University, and
the President of the Royal Society. They objected to the
title "Public Museum,” and suggested "The Public Library
and Museum.”
1866.
During the year 1865 consideration was given to the
advisability of holding an Intercolonial Exhibition, and in
October of that year a Commission was appointed to carry
out the proposal. Two exhibitions had previously been
held in the colony, one in 1854 and one in 1861, The
building used on these occasions was on the site now occupied
by the Mint. This building, however, was not considered
suitable for the purposes of the new exhibition, and it was
arranged to erect buildings on the Public Library site, such
Sa


buildings to bo the property of the Tiustees, aii cl to bo used
by them for purposes connected with the Institution, so
soon as the Exhibition closed. Early in 1866 Mr. Reed,
the architect to the Trustees, submitted plans and estimates
for the new buildings. These included a North Wing in
Latrobe Street, now used as a drawing school, a. groat hall,
220 feet long and 82 feet in breadth, used later for a Techno-
logical Museum, and a South Wing on the site now occupied
by the Vordon Gallery. The Rotunda was also built at
this time, for the use of the Commissioners. All these
buildings were of a temporary nature, although the founda-
tions, and, in some cases, the lower walls, were meant to ho
permanent. In addition to the buildings mentioned, a
large iron annexe was erected at the east of the Great Hall,
on portion of the site now occupied by the Stawell Gallery
and the National Museum. The Exhibition was opened
on the 23rd of October, 1866, by the Governor, Sir J. TI. T,
Manners-Suttou, and remained open till the- 23rd February,
1867. The ground floor of the South Wing was set aside
for the fine art exhibits, the basement being used for
refreshment rooms and the exhibition of preserved meats,
colonial wines, etc.
In September of this year the pictures were removed
from the north portion of the Reading Room, and in the
following month they were hung in, the Picture Gallery
connected with the Exhibition, on the present site of the
Verdon Gallery.
1867.
The Travelling Library system, until this year,' had been
confined to loans to Institutions within ten miles of Mel-
bourne. It was decided to abolish this limit, and to lend
cases of hooks to country libraries.
The Trustees wrote to the Chief Secretary urging that
an Instructor be appointed for the School of Painting and
Design, which they proposed to establish in connection
with the Art Museum. It was suggested that such -an
Instructor should receive a salary of ,£4OO per annum and
fees. No appointment was made, however, and the matter
remained in abeyance.


Mr. A. Taddy Thomson, a retired Victorian squatter,
residing in England, had succeeded Sir Charles Eastlake
as an adviser to the Trustees on the purchase of works of
art. A picture selected by him.—Wobor’s “First Snow in
the Tyrolean Alps,” .and " Rachel Going to tho Well,” a
replica painted on commission by F. Goodall, wore received
during tho year. In July Mr. Vordon brought in a Bill
to provide for tho incorporation of the Public Library and
Museum. It passed the Lower House, but had not finally
been dealt with by tho Legislative Council when a dissolu-
tion took place over tho Constitutional struggle between
the two houses of Parliament.
1868.
His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh, who was
visiting Australia, was formally received by the Trustees
on Friday, the' 3rd of January, the day before his departure
from the colony, and was conducted over the Library and
the Museum. On tho previous day a very lengthy letter
bad been scut to him by Sir Redmond Barry, through the
Chief Secretary, giving an account of the. foundation and
progress of the Library. On the 4th of March a further
memento of his visit was sent by the Trustees, in the shape
of aomo jjortly volumes of newspaper cuttings, compiled by
Mr, Tnlk, to form an historical narrative of his visit to
Australia. A duplicate- of this compilation was made for
the Public Library. It was continued to a later date, and
contains a large number of cuttings relating to the attempted
assassination of the Duke in Sydney, collected by Mr. Tulk
under command of His Excellency Sir J, H. T, Manners-
Sutton.
The first rules for the School of Arts wore drawn up by
the Trustees in January. As there was no instructor
they related mainly to regulations for obtaining permits to
copy pictures and casts. Applicants had to sign the
students’ book on every day of attendance. The Students
were asked by the Trustees whether they would bo willing
to pay for tuition, and if so, how much. Nine replied,
stating that they were willing to pay ,£5 each for the half


year. The other Students stated that they wore not in a
position to pay. In September Mr. Eugene von Gueiaid
was offered the temporary position of Drawing' M,aster, to
be paid by the Students, without any responsibility on the
part of the Trustees. He declined the appointment on such
terms, and no further action was then taken.
Applications were made during - the year for the uso of
the "Great Hall,” as the main Exhibition .Building was
called, for a concert for the Benevolent Asylum, and for a
dinner to the Sladen Ministry, but both requests wore
refused by the Trustees, on the ground tha-t the objects wore
foreign to those for which the building had been confided
to their charge.
Webb’s picture of Rotterdam, selected by Mr. A, Taddy
Thomson, was received towards the end of the year. It was
much damaged owing to the careless packing - , and under
the advice of Mr. von Guerard was handed over to Mir.
Hiram W. Paterson for some necessary restoring. A further
sum of ,£I,OOO was sent to Mr. Thomson for the purchase
of pictures, and £2OO was transmitted for expenditure by
Mr. Charles Summers, the sculptor, who was then travelling
in Europe. Mr. Abraham Linacre, a contractor for some
of the Library Buildings, presented £IOO to the Trustees
for the purchase of a picture, but he afterwards agreed
that the money should be spent on Architectural Works.
A marble bust of Gustavus Vaughan Brooke, the actor, was
presented to the Trustees by the subscribers to his memorial
fund, inaugurated by the Press of Victoria.
1869.
A Technological Commission, for the purpose of pro-
moting technological and industrial instruction, was
appointed in January, 1869, with the Honourable Samuel
Bindon as Chairman. In the Commissioners’ Reports, in
1869 and later, they recommended the establishment of
Schools of Design and also of a Technological and Indus-
trial Museum, and urged that it was the intention of Parlia-
ment that the Exhibition Building was to be used partly for
this purpose. As early as July, 1867, a Provisional Oom


mittee of the proposed Museum of Industry and Art had
been appointed to take charge of any contributions or
exhibits which might bo presented to the Museum. The
Technological Commission continued to urge the advis-
ability of establishing the Museum, -and by its recommenda-
tions probably assisted in having a further Bill introduced
for the incorporation and government of the Library,
Museums, and Gallery. The Act of Incorporation, how-
ever, was not passed until the end of the year 1869. Mean-
time, in accordance with a recommendation of the Fine
Arts Commission, the Trustees were busy with the proposal
to hold an “Exhibition of Works of Art, Art Treasures,
and Ornamental and Decorative Art.” Advertisements
were inserted in the Press asking for loans of pictures and
other objects suitable for such an exhibition, which was to
he held in the Great Hall of the Public Library. The
hanging arrangements were under the supervision of Mr,
Hiram Paterson, who managed to have everything in
readiness for a formal opening by the Governor, Sir PI. J,
Manuers-Sutton, on the 29th March. It was remarked
in the Press notices of the ceremony that there was in the
room not a single Cabinet Minister nor high official, Parlia-
ment being represented by the Speaker and one member
only. The Exhibition remained open until the 30th June.
After paying all expenses and giving a donation of £SO to
the Melhoum© Hospital, and a similar amount to the
Benevolent Asylum, the Trustees were able to invest a sum
of £l6O, which became the nucleus of the Travelling
Scholarship Fund in connection with the Art Gallery. It
was estimated that nearly 70,000 visits were paid to the
Exhibition, There were 1,406 exhibitors, of whom more
than 700 lent oil paintings.
Early in the year the Trustees received a copy of Van
Dyck’s “Marriage of St. Catherine,” selected by A. Taddy
Thomson. Tho copy is supposed to have been made by
one of Van Dyck’s pupils, but it did not entirely meet with
the approval of the Trustees, for Mr. Paterson was instructed
before hanging it to reduce tho size of the picture to its
original state, and ho was authorized “to diminish the


unnatural deformity arising from bad drawing- of the infant a
cheek.”
The Melbourne Town Hall was being built at this time,
and, as there were very few large' rooms in tlio city, tho
Great Hall at the Library was in much demand for social
functions, but the Trustees refused to grant its uso, on tlio
ground that such purposes were foroig’n to those for which
they held it in trust. The Government was approached
on the matter, and the Trustees, on representations made
by the Chief Secretary, relented so far as to allow the Hall
to be used, by the Mayor of Melbourne for a ball given in
honour of the Duke of Edinburgh, and also for bulls given
by the Committee of the Sailor’s Home and tlio Alfred
Hospital. It was also used by the Governor for a similar
festivity, for there is a record that in August tho. Clork
and two Library Attendants were ordered to apologize to
His Excellency for misconduct in remaining- in tho supper
room after they had been plainly told by the butior that
they had no- right to be there.
The Trustees had not lost sight of tlio recommendations
of the Line Arts Commission, and wore evidently preparing
for the extension of the Institution In March they
decided to advertize for a Drawing Master, but apparently
no definite action was taken. In May they ordered that a
letter be written to the Minister of Minos accepting his
offer to place a collection of minerals under the protection
of the Trustees, with a proviso that tho Minister should
find an officer, who would be subject to tho Trustees, but
whose duty would be to look after tlio collection, ’ At
the end of the previous year they had suggested that as
the Government contemplated discontinuing- the Geological
Survey, it would he advisable to consider the transfer of
the apparatus of the Laboratory of tho Survey to the
Museum, together with the services of Mr. J. Cosmo
Newbery, who had been employed as Chemical Analyst.
They were also keeping in view the suggested removal of
the National Museum, and in July, 1869, informed tho
Chief Secretary that they were ready to receive the collec-
tions of that Department.


In December the tender of John Beardall for the
erection of the portico was accepted. It was to be built
of Tasmanian freestone, and the amount of the tender was
In November the Copyright Act was passed, under
which the Library was entitled to receive a copy of every
book, newspaper, map, etc., published in the colony.
On the 29th December an Act was passed to provide for
the incorporation and government of the Public Library,
Museums, and National Gallery of Victoria. This Act
provided that for the government of the Institution there
should be not less than fifteen Trustees, and that the exist-
ing Trustees of the Public Library were to be appointed on
the new corporation. The real and personal property of
the Institution was vested in the Trustees, who were given
power to make rules and regulations for the management
of the affairs of the corporation, such rules to be approved
by the Govornor-in-Couucil, and, if approved, to bo duly
gazetted.
1870.
On the 4th February the following were gazetted as
Trustees of the Public Library, Museums, and National
Gallery, viz.;—Sir W. F. Stawell, Sir Redmond Barry, Sir
James F. Palmer, Sir Francis Murphy, David 0. Mac-
Artluir, Hon. T. H. Fellows, Hon. John O’Shauassy,
Hon. Charles Ga.van Duffy, Hon. James McCulloch, Hon.
Archibald Micliie, Hon. James Goodall Francis, Hon.
Thomas Tumor a'Beckett, Hon. Samuel Henry Biiidou, Hon.
John A. MacPlxorson, Charles E. Bright, Eev. J, I. Bloas-
dalo, John Badcock, Eliouer Monteflore. The first meeting
of the now Board was held in the Executive' Council Cham-
bers on the 7th February, the Hon. J. A, MaePherson,
Chief Secretary, presiding. A committee of seven members
was appointed to frame rules and regulations. Those rules
and regulations were finally accepted at a meeting hold on
the 4th March, They provided for the appointment of
five sectional committees for the management of
1. The Library,
2. The National Gallery.


3. The Technological Collection.
4. The National Museum and Scientific Collections.
5. Finance.
Each committee was to have control and management of
the business of its section, subject to the approval of tlie
general body of the Trustees, who had power to dissolve any
committee and appoint another in its place. It was decided
to elect annually a President and a Vice-President of tlie
Trustees. At a meeting held on the Ist April, Sir Red-
mond Barry was unanimously elected President, and tlie
Hon. Archibald Michie, Vice-President. Prior to the
incorporation, Sir Redmond Barry, though recognised as
the Chief Trustee, and generally Acting as Chairman,
always signed official documents merely as "One of the Trus-
tees” of the Public Library. The new body of Trustees
was apparently content to carry on the policy of complete
freedom in the use of the Library, which had always been
one of its marked characteristics. They considered that
the abstraction and destruction of books was not sufficient
to demand any alteration in policy, as in 13 years the total
number of volumes stolen was only 237. Many of tlieso
were recovered, some being obtained on conviction of the
thieves, whilst others were returned to the Library quietly
by the persons who stole them, or by their friends, and
thus the total was reduced to 182 small volumes, mostly
cheap educational books and works of fiction.
The establishment of the Institution on a broader founda-
tion enabled the Trustees to get certain appointments made,
and in June Marcus Clarke was appointed Clerk to the
Tustees, ,an office which, a few months later, was altered to
Secretary to the Trustees. About the same time Eugene
vou Guerard was appointed Master in the School of Paint-
ing, the final appointment resting between him and Louis
Buvelot, and Thomas Clark was apjjointed Master in the
School of Desig-n. At this time there were six students in
the Painting School and thirty-five in the School of Design.
The work of both classes was carried on in the ball at the
north of the building, which is still used as a drawing
school.


Letters were sent by the National Gallery Committee to
the Agent-General (Mr. Vordon), Mr. Herbert, R.A., John
Rusldu, John Forster, and Mr. Cashel Hoey, asking them
to assist Mr. Thomson in choosing works of art for the
Gallery. The building of the new Picture Gallery was
strongly urged by the National Gallery Committee, one of
the reasons being the injury done to the pictures in the
building - in Little Lonsdale Street by tho amok© from the
chimneys of tho Melbourne Hospital,
During - tho year the Victorian Academy of Art held an
exhibition in tho "carriage annexe,” as the temporary iron
building on the site of the main hall of the present Natural
History Museum was known.
The Committee of the Industrial and Technological
Museum secured tho appointment of J, Cosmo Nowbcry,
B.Sc., us Scientific Superintendent of the Museum, and
Mr. G. H. P. Ulrich, F.G.S., as Lecturer in Mineralogy
and Mining, and Curator of tho Mineral Collections. The
Rotunda was fitted up as a lecture room, and temporary
laboratories wore established in tho old police sheds at tho
rear of the building - . In addition to a series of lectures by
Mr. Nowbery and Mr. Ulrich, addresses wore delivered by
Professors McCoy, Wilson, and Halford, Dr. von Muellor,
Mr. R. L. J, Ellery, and Mr. George Foord. The phyto-
logical specimens were classified and arranged by Dr. von
Muellor.
As tho National Museum, containing the Natural
History collections and some other exhibits, did not come
under the control of the Trustees until this year, it may bo
well to give a brief sketch of its establishment and progress.
Tho idea of forming such a Museum was originated by
Captain Clarke, of the Royal Engineers, afterwards Sir
Andrew Clarke, during the period in which ho held office
as Surveyor-General in Victoria, In April, 1854, William
Blandowski was appointed Zoologist, and ho had charge of
-a small Museum then housed in the Crown Lands Office in
Latrobe Street, George Fulker was appointed Taxidermist
in the same year, and in 1857 Homy Soworby was appointed
Clerk and Draughtsman. Great interest was taken in the


Museum by the Philosophical Society of Victoria, a society
which at a later period amalgamated with the Victorian
Institute, and became the forerunner of the present Royal
Society. In 1855 Sir Charles Hotliam, who was not
impressed with the advantages of a museum to the public,
was disposed, in a. spirit of economy, to sacrifice the collec-
tions, and the Philosophical Society proposed to petition
the Legislative Council in such an event to place it under
the custody of the Society, whose members would do all
they could “to keep up that only national institute existing,'’
Such a necessity, however, did not arise. Professor McCoy,
' who, in addition to his duties at the University, had been
.appointed Paleontologist in the Geological Surveyor’s
office in May, 1856, came forward with a proposal that the
Museum should be temporarily housed in some rooms above
the lecture rooms at the University. This proposal did
not meet the views of the Philosophical Institute, as the
.amalgamated society was called, and the members presented
a memorial to the Acting Governor in June, 1856, praying
that room might be found for the Museum in the Public
Library. It was also the wish of the Institute that the
control of the Museum should he vested in its members.
'The Legislature had decided that the Museum should bo
moved to the University, but the Institute arranged for a
public meeting in the Mechanics’ Institute on the 26th
July to protest against such removal, and to endeavour to
have the Museum established in a more central part of the
■city. Resolutions in favour of retaining the Museum in
the city wore carried almost unanimously, and a deputation
was appointed to draw up a memorial to the Governor, and
to take such further steps as the members might think neces-
sary. Meantime the advocates for removal to the University
had not been idle, and on , the 19th August the Museum
Committee had to report to the members of the Institute
“that while the arrangements for convening the public
meeting on the subject were pending, the collections wero
hastily removed from the Assay Buildings to the University,
where they at present remain,” The only source of
congratulation left to the Committee of the Institute was


that public attention had been directed to the subject, and,
that a distinct statement had been elicited from the
Government, that the removal to the University was merely
a temporary expedient. The exhibits, however, remained,
at the Museum for many years. In January, 1858, Professor
McCoy was formally appointed Director. In 1862 the- first
contract was let for a new Museum Building at the rear of
the University, and in that year the offices were built and
some of the foundations of the main building were- laid.
In 1863 grants to the amount of £7,000 in all were voted,
for erecting portion of the new building at the rear of the-
University, and in March, 1864, the exhibits wore removed
from these temporary premises, on the north-west side of
the University Quadrangle, to this building. Professor
McCoy retained the sole control, as an officer of tho Chief
Secretary’s Department, until the Museum was brought
under tho direction of the Public Library Trustees by the
Act of 1869. Professor McCoy’s idea, was not to have-
merely a Museum of Natural History connected with the
University, for, whilst the University Council gave the site
of tho Museum on condition that the building should not
ho used for any other purpose, it was agreed that the
University should not, in any way, interfere with its
management, The collection was to form a “National
Museum of Natural History, Geology, and Oooonomic
Geology, applied to mining, agriculture, and other arts.”
Tho Geological Survey had a laboratory in connection with
tho Museum, and exhibits collected by the Department of
Mines and the Department of Agriculture wore eagerly
seized for the Museum at the University by its energetic
Director. A most excellent collection had been got
together by Professor McCoy when the Trustees wore given
control, and when they wished to transfer the mining and
agricultural exhibits to the Technologieal Museum it was
not unnatural that, as a “collector,” he should grudge any
such transfer, oven to a kindred establishment, such as the
newly-established Industrial and Technological Museum.
The Trustees, however, had decided that the National
Museum should be entirely devoted to tho illustration of


Natural History, and accordingly they insisted that the
mining and agricultural exhibits should be transferred to
the Industrial Museum, After some months the Director
had to consent, although he still managed to retain same
of his most favoured mining exhibits at the University.
1871,
The portico was finished in 1870, and early in the follow-
ing year turnstiles were placed inside the doors, and also
at the entrance to the Library, so as to record the number
of visits to both sections of the Institution, Prior to this,
visitors to the Library had been compelled to register their
names in a hook kept for the purpose.
Sir James Palmer, one of the original Trustees, died on
the 23rd of April. Tho Hon, W. H. P, Mitchell and
Professor Martin Howy Irving wore appointed Trustees,
the latter in place of Sir James Palmer. Mr. E, L. Monte-
fiore left Victoria to reside in Now South Wales, ami resigned
his office as Trustee early in 1871.
A revision of the rules was made during the year, the
Pinance Committee being abolished, and a Building and
General Committee appointed. Up to this time the
President had signed cheques and financial documents, but
a new office of Treasurer was created under tho amended
rules, though apparently not filled till the following year.
In April Mr. Bindon moved that the Industrial Museum
and the National Gallery he open to the public on Sundays,
from 2 p.m, to 5 p.m. Consideration of tho matter was
postponed from time to time, but no definite action was
taken.
The Lectures in the Museum wore continued, and tho
Committee expressed a hope that they would bo able to
ostablish classes in Mathematics, Mechanics, Chemistry,
Mineralogy and Metallurgy, Mechanical Drawing, Modelling
and Model Making, and Telegraphy.
It was proposed to hold a series of annual international
exhibitions in London from 1872 to 1880, and tho Trustees
were asked by the Government to- take measures for the
proper representation of the products and manufactures of


the colony, a duty which was accordingly carried out by
the Committee of the Industrial Museum.
Five oil paintings were obtained for the collection, of
which two, “Memoirs of the First Palm Sunday,” by Edith
Courtauld, and “Druidical Monuments,” by Bering, chosen
by Mr. Herbert, were not actually received till the beginning
of 1872. John Buskin selected three water colours, viz.,
“Cottage Scenery,” by T. J. Watson, “Haunt of Ancient
Peace,” by Constance Phillott, and “Near Mannaton,
Devon,” by W. Morrish. The Committee continued to
urge the erection of a new Picture Gallery, and still com-
plained that the Hospital authorities, notwithstanding
frequent remonstrances, had taken no steps to remedy the
nuisance caused by the smoke from the chimneys in Little
Lonsdale Street.
In August of this year, when a vote for the Public
Library was under consideration, Mr. W. M. K. Vale stated
in Parliament that the Library Building had been defaced
by having placed over its pediment the coat of arms of a
private individual, and suggested that it he removed. The
coat of arms was that of Sir Bedmond Barry, who had
caused it to he placed over the main entrance to the Library.
On inquiry by the Minister of Public Works it was found
that inside the portico were five other coats of arms. These
wore placed at the back of the structure near the ceiling.
Mr. Vale, when this was pointed out, suggested that no
money should be paid out of the votes until all these armorial
hearings were removed. When the matter was brought
under the notice of Sir Bedmond Barry he wrote a long
letter to the Minister of Public Works. He “was at a loss
“to know the grounds of objection taken to the fact that
“the armorial hearings of the six original Trustees of the
“Melbourne Public Library had been placed under the
“ceiling of the portico. The practice of allowing persons
“to whom had been confided the honour of erecting public
"buildings to connect their names with them, had been
“sanctioned from a remote antiquity in every part of the
“civilised world. In Borne the officer charged with the
“conduct of public works was not only permitted to enjoy


“the distinction of placing his emblem on a conspicuous part,
"of a building which he had erected, but, in order to perpe-
tuate the recollection of his services in what has proved a,
“still more durable shape, the sum voted by the Senate was
"paid to him in bullion at the Treasury, and he was allowed
"to coin it at the mint with his effigy on the obverse, and
“the elevation of the building or the emblem of his family
“on the reverse of the piece of money. . . Agrippa, a
“plebeian of mean extraction, distinguished by his military
“achievements and his ability in the public service, was
“allowed to place his name on the frieze of the pediment of
“the Pantheon, where it has remained unblemished for
“nineteen centuries. . . It is not to be imagined that
"the Trustees with whom I have worked so long, who have
“received on so many occasions assurances of confidence in
"their administration of that character which makes respon-
sibility light and sweetens labour, it is not to bo conceived,
“I say, that they were capable of intentionally doing any
“act calculated to give umbrage to public sentiment.
“I conclude by saying that I will not readily permit myself
“to believe that it is the desire of the Ministry to which you
“have the honour to belong to affront the Trustees who .are
“in this country, or to offer such an indignity to those
“persons who are absent and unable to address themselves
"to you, as well as to the memory of a faithful, honourable,
“and respected public servant now no more. If such be the
“determination you will adopt such measures as may bo
“thought proper.” The Trustees approved of Sir Red-
mond's letter, and declined to make any suggestions when
the matter came before them as a body. Apparently no
further .action was taken, and the escutcheons, unobtrusive
and unnoticed, remain as interesting little mementos of the
first Governors of the Institution.
1872.
In this year several new Trustees were appointed, viz,,
Sir George Verdon, the lion. Charles MacMahon, Speaker
of the Legislative Assembly, the Hon. W. M. K, Vale, and
Dr. Dobson. The revised rules, which provided, inter alia ,


for the appointment of an honorary treasurer on the Trust,
were sent to the Governor for approval. On the sth of
April the Hon. J, G. Francis was elected Treasurer, but
shortly afterwards became Chief Secretary, and declined to
act. Sir George Yerdon was, therefore, elected in August,
but resigned on the 4th of October, on the ground that he
was leaving Melbourne for two months, and expected to be
constantly absent. On the same day Mr, Charles Edward
Bright was elected, and practically became the first
Treasurer, although he held office only for a few months.
The Great Hall was again in use during the latter half
of the year and until February, 1873, for Exhibition purposes
outside the usual scope' of the Institution. The Commis-
sioners of the International Exhibition for 1872-73 asked
that space might be provided for a preliminary exhibition
of the articles which were to be forwarded to London, A
deputation of the Trustees and the Commissioners waited
upon the Government, and suggested that money might bo
provided for a permanent Exhibition Building, and 113,000
was actually voted, but nut spent for the purpose. The
Great Hall, the annexe at tho rear, and some outbuildings
wore, however, placed at tho disposal of the Exhibition
Commissioners.
An agreement was made with Mr. Herbert for obtaining
a replica of his fresco, “Moses bringing down the tables of
the Law,” for the sum of H 1,700. The picture was to be
of the same size as the original work in the House of Lords,
and was to be completed in 1874. The National Gallery
Committee at the time expressed pleasure that Australia
would thus secure a faithful copy, from the pencil of the
master who produced it, of one of tho most powerful
examples of tho modern English school of art.
1873.
Mr. C. E. Bright resigned the office of Treasurer at the
beginning of this year, in consequence of his departure for
Europe, and the Hon. John Alexander MacPherson was
appointed in his place. Mr. Midhe was appointed Agent-
General for Victoria, and in consequence of his absence from ■


the colony, Mr. David Charteris McArthur was, in April,
elected Vice-President.
The erection of iron gates at the main entrance to the
grounds was completed at a cost of over .£7OO, but the
contrast between the new gates and the existing paling-
fence was so great that the Trustees felt it necessary to
appeal for funds to erect the permanent iron fencing.
The Trustees seriously considered a proposal to convert
the Great Hall into a Picture Gallery, and even went so far
as to authorize the Superintendent to place the Industrial
Museum exhibits in the Entrance Hall, Rotunda, and
Sculpture Galleries. Pending the conversion of the Hall
into a Picture Gallery, permission was given to the Governor ,
Sir George Bowen, to use it for a ball room on the 30th of
July. On further consideration it was decided not to
attempt to use the Hall for the exhibition of pictures, and
arrangements were made for the erection of a new Picture
Gallery. Parliament voted ,£5,000 for the purpose, and ii
tender was accepted for building the hall, now known as
the McArthur Gallery, at a cost of ,£7,000.
The most noticeable jaioture received at the Gallery
during the year was Layraud’s "Italian Brigands.” It was
selected by J. R. Herbert, R.A., and in the opinion of the
National Gallery Committee proved an exceedingly attrac-
tive addition, and excited more interest and drew larger
attendances than any previous purchase.
On the Ist of September Augustus Henry Tulk, the first
Librarian, died. The Trustees recorded their deep sens©
of regret at the loss of an officer who for upwards of seven-
teen years had filled the office with ability, efficiency, and
great zeal, and who, in addition to his discharge of the duties
of Librarian, acted for several years with much judgment
and taste in the formation of the Museum of Art. The death
of the Librarian led to several changes on the stall. Henry
Sheffield was promoted to the Librarianship, and Marcus
Clarke succeeded him as Sub-Librarian. Robert Curtis,
Assistant in the Library, was appointed to the combined
offices of Clerk, or Secretary to the Trustees, and Account-
ant. The latter office had become vacant by the insolvency


of William, Cleary, as such an act at that time incurred
forfeiture of a position in the Government service.
The question of protecting' the buildings and contents
from danger by fire was frequently considered by the Trus-
tees during the year. Extra hydrants were erected, and
a sum of ,£4OO was expended in precautions against loss by
fire.
Tho Lecture Room iu the Rotunda was removed to the
eastern end of tho Annexe, and tho Library Committee
arranged that the Rotunda should bo used for a Newspaper
Room and a Map Room.
1874.
The Hon, Archibald Micliio and Mr. John Badcock,
manager of tho Bank of Now South Wales, resigned office
as Trustees, and the Hon. John MacGregor and the Hon.
Edward Langton wore appointed in their stead.
Mr. MacGregor presented tho Library'with a copy of tho
“ Eucyclopcklio Mdthodiquo,” consisting of 198 volumes.
Another donation of note during the year was the collection
of original papers connected with tho Burke and Wills
Exploring expedition and tho relief expedition.
The building of the new Picture Gallery was finished,
but tho walls were not sufficiently dry to allow the pictures
to bo hung, and as the erection of a temporary passage was
required to connect it with the old Gallery of Art, no
attempt was made to open it during the year.
1876.
Tho number of students attending the painting and
drawing classes had increased to 41 in the former school
and 152 in the latter. An exhibition of students’ work
was held in the Annexe at the beginning of the year. The
artists appointed to judge the work reported favourably on
tho school of painting, notwithstanding that the seven best
pictures were all copies, but they criticized somewhat
unfavourably tho work in the school of design. The Master
replied to these criticisms that he was hampered by want of
models and drawings, and by small and ill-furnished class
n\


rooms, defects which the Trustees undertook to remedy as
far as possible.
During the year an exhibition of the various objects,
which it was proposed should bo sent by tiro colonies to the
Philadelphia Centennial Exhibition of 1876 was hold at the
Public Library Buildings. The old “carriage annexe” of
the first exhibition was oithor rebuilt or so much enlarged
and improved as to be practically a new building, and the.
Great Hall, the Rotunda, the north and south court yards,
and the Latrobe Street wing wore alb handed over for the
time being for the purposes of the exhibition, which was.
opened on the 2nd of September, and kept open until the
16th of November. The now buildings erected for the.
exhibition at the back of the Library at a cost of some
£2,000 were, by arrangement, handed over to the Trustees
when the exhibition closed, and were aub-dividod, so as to
form a Lecture Room capable of seating about 3fio people,
a Chemical Laboratory, a Metallurgical Laboratory, a
class room, and offices.
The pictures were removed from the temporary gallery
on the south side of the Library and bung in the new Picture
Gallery, which was opened to tho public on the Queen’s
Birthday, the 24th of May. The old gallery was used for
showing water colour drawings, engravings, loan pictures,
curiosities, etc., and during the time of the exhibition it
contained a portion of the mineral collection belonging to.
the Technological Museum. Tho building of the now
Picture Gallery and the Exhibition Annexe had caused the
removal of tho last of the old police buildings, oxcopt two
cottages occupied by attendants in the Institution, one
situated in Little Londsdale Street, at the east side of the
old Art Gallery, and one in Russell Street, about the site
of the entrance to the new National Museum.
The gentlemen acting for the Trustees in the purchase
of pictures, viz., the Agent-General (Sir Archibald Michio),
John Buskin, J, R. Herbert, R.A., Cashel Hocy. and tho
members of the Agent-General’s Board of Advice, found a.
difficulty in carrying out their duty. Mr. Taddy Thomson
and Mr. Inglis, .and at a later date Sir Charles Gavan


Duffy, declined to act with the Committee as constituted.
The Agent-General wrote in very strong terms as to. the
difficulty of getting advice' from gentlemen living- widely
.apart, especially whore prompt action was required. The
National Gallery Committee therefore decided to revert
to the system of trusting to one adviser, and asked Mr.
Alfred Taddy Thomson whether he would act in the capacity,
as he had done formerly. He agreed to do so, and continued
to act for the Trustees for some years.
1876.
«
On the 17th of January Sir Redmond Barry offered to
resign his position as President, on account of his contem-
plated visit to Europe. Ho was requested by the Trustees
to retain the office, and ho consented to do so, at the same
time undertaking to do all ho could for tho Institution
during his absence. His exertions, especially during his
visit to the Philadelphia Exhibition and the United States,
resulted in many valuable donations to the Library.
The Hon. Edward Langton, who had acted as Treasurer
during tho temporary incapacity of Mr. MacPherson owing
to an accident, was elected Treasurer at the annual meeting
■of the Board,
Sir Eraucis Murphy, upon leaving the colony for Europe
■at the end of the year, resigned his position as a Trustee.
Mr. Thomas Clarke, Master in tho School of Design, was
relieved from duty on account of ill-health, and Mr. Oswald
Rose Campbell was appointed in his stead,
The Rotunda was fitted and used as a Newspaper Room
•after the removal of tho exhibits for the Philadelphia
Exhibition. The Trustees were also enabled to complete
the iron fencing on the Swanston Street front, an improve-
ment that was badly needed for the sake of the appearance
■of the building. The question of extending the National
Museum Building at the University was again considered,
■and the Trustees decided, after full consideration of the
wjiole question, that it was not advisable to spend any more
money on the building at tho University, but that a suit-
able building should be erected on the Public Library site.


1877.
During this year the want of space to accommodate the
rapidly growing collection began to ho acutely felt, and the
Trustees drew attention particularly to the want of room
for the expansion of the Library and for the Natural History
collection.
Herbert’s picture, a replica of "Tho Descent of Mosos
from the Mount,” for which the artist received a commis-
sion in 1872, is referred to in the Trustees’ Report for
1877, although it was not actually received till tho beginning
of 1878. Great anxiety was expressed on its arrival, as it
was slightly damaged by some blotting paper, which was
used in packing, adhering to the paint, and some weeks
elapsed before the picture was cleaned and hung. The
Committee of the National Gallery congratulated the
Trustees and the public on obtaining such a noblo produc-
tion, and the Trustees passed a resolution that it was
necessary to build a room specially for the exhibition of this
picture. The replica was painted on paper instead of
canvas, because Mr. Herbert held that the latter material
rotted under the paint, and tho colours deteriorated more
rapidly than if paper were used. The Agent-General, when
forwarding the picture, wrote that tho replica was generally
regarded as superior in every respect to tho original fresco
in the House of Lords. The artist assured him that he
would require more than double the sum paid by tho Trustees
(£1,700) to produce another copy of the picture, and tho
Agent-General determined to insure tho work for £4,000,
which sum he thought it would fetch if offered for sale in London.
1878.
The printing of the new catalogue of the Library was
carried on during this year, and tho work connected with it
occupied a large portion of the time of the Librarian and
his staff, in addition to that of John Firth, who was
specially employed as reader. Tho total number of volumes
and pamphlets in tho Library at (lie cud of the year was
101,000, and. the Trustees felt it incumbent upon them to
renew their recommendations for additional accommodation.


Mr. George H. F. Ulrich resigned his position as Curator
of the Mineral Collections and Instructor in Mineralogy in
April, as ho had accepted a professorship in the University
of Otago. His resignation was accepted with regret, and
Mr. 0, E. Bulo was appointed to the charge of the Mineral
Collections.
Mr. Taddy Thomson purchased for the Trustees two
paintings, “England,” by Thomas Creawick, E.A., and
Eichard Ansdell, E.A., and "Queen Esther,” by Edwin
Long, E.A. The Hon. W. J. Clarke presented four marble
statues of the Eoyal Family, by G. Summers, viz., Queen
Victoria, and the Prince Consort, and the Prince and
Princess of Wales, which were placed in the South Hall on
the ground floor.
Early in the year some correspondence was received from
Sir Charles Gavan Duffy, in which it was stated that G. F.
Foliugsby, of Munich, the painter of “ Bunyan in Prison,”
was likely to settle in Victoria, if sufficient inducement were
offered to him to do so. The 'Trustees decided that in con-
sideration of the advantages likely to accrue to art from the
presence of Mr. Foliugsby in the colony, ho should ho com-
missioned to paint a picture at a cost not exceeding £5OO.
Professor Strong, of tiro Melbourne University, was
appointed a Trustee in October.
The Chief Secretary wrote to the Trustees in October
suggesting that Mr. Sheffield should retire from the office of
Librarian on account of his advanced age. The Trustees
replied that inasmuch as the lauds and property of the
Trustees of the Public Library and Museums were vested
in them by Act of Parliament as an independent corporation,
responsible for the custody, care, and management of the
property, it was reasonable and absolutely necessary that
they should continue to exercise the right of presenting for
appointment and dismissal all officers and servants of the
corporation, who wore accountable to them for the perform-
ance of their duty. They also stated that they were at
present satisfied with the Librarian, and that his services
were indispensable whilst the catalogue of the Library was
being printed. After the interchange of one or two letters


on the subject the matter was allowed to fall into abey-
ance.
1879,
The Rev. Dr. Bleasdalo, who had been a Trustee since
1870, left Melbourne during the year and severed his connec-
tion with the Institution. The Hon. S. H. Biudon, who
had been a Trustee and Chairman of tho Industrial and
Technological Museum Committee since 1870, died in
August. Professor Hanson was appointed a Trustee in
February, and Mr. Edward Ellis Morris, afterwards Pro-
fessor of modern languages in the University of Melbourne,
was appointed to the Board in September.
The Comte de Castelnau bequeathed to the Library a
valuable collection of 500 books on Natural History, mostly
relating to Ichthyology and Entomology. The Library also
obtained, by purchase from Mr. Ocock (per Mr. J. B. Wore)
two of the original “Batman deeds," ns they have since
become known. These deeds purport to convey from certain
native chiefs of Victoria to John Batman and others, large
tracts of land in the neighbourhood of Melbourne and Goo-
long. The documents, though admirable specimens of con-
veyancing, wore not valid, as the land could only be convoyod
by grant from the Grown. They are nevertheless interesting
relics of the foundation of the Colony of Victoria.,
Mr, D. MacDougall presented a picture by A. C. Gow,
entitled "No Surrender." Amongst the pictures purchased
were Schenck’s “ Anguish,” and Eolingsby’s “ First meeting
between Henry VIII. and Anne Boleyn."
1880.
The Hon. J. A. MacPhorson resigned his office as Trustee
as he was leaving the colony, and Mr. James Smith was
appointed in his place in July. Mr. Homy Sheffield, who
had been Librarian for about seven years, expressed a desire
to be allowed to retire on account of his advanced age and
failing health. Accordingly the Trustees in August adver-
tized in all the principal colonial newspapers for applicants
for the position. Some exception was taken to this pro-
cedure by the Chief Secretary, Mr. Graham Berry, who


intimated that the appointment of Librarian vested in the
Govornor-in-Couneil on the recommendation of the Chief
Secretary. Sir Redmond Barry replied that Mr. Sheffield's
resignation had not yet been accepted by the Trustees, and
that they would communicate with the Chief Secretary as
soon as they were prepared to accept the resignation and
recommend a successor. This was the practice that had been
followed with regard to the appointment of all officers and
servants of tho Institution since tho appointment of the first
Trustees in 1853. The Chief Secretary replied that, whilst
ho was always ready to give duo attention to the wishes of
tho Trustees, ho could not consent, ©von by implication, to
abandon the right to make recommendations for appoint-
ments in tho Library. The Library Committee received
thirty-seven applications for tho Librariauship. A Special
Sub-Committee considered these and decided to sub-
mit the names of seven candidates for consideration
hy tins Library Committee. Amongst tho seven can-
didates selected were Marcus Clarke (the Sub-Librarian),
Mr, W. H. Archer (formerly Registrar-General and
Secretary to the Lands Department), and Dr, Bride
(tho University Librarian). Tho Library Committee
selected Mr. Archer. The Trustees approved of the
selection, and on tho 16th of November recommended that
Mr. Archer be appointed and enabled to enter on his duties
on the Ist of January, 1881. As no reply to this letter had
Boon received by the Trustees on the 23rd of December, they
asked Mr. Sheffield to retain the office temporarily, and on
his consenting to do so, further action was postponed.
On tho 23rd of November Sir Bodmond Barry died, and
on the 7th of December the Trustees decided “ to place on
the record of their proceedings their unanimous feeling of
deep sorrow for the loss tho Institution has sustained by tho
death of Sir Redmond Barry, K.G.M.G., who, for twonty-
sevon years, filled with seal, urbanity, and distinguished
ability, tho office of President of tho Public Library, which
•owed its foundation to his public spirit, energy, and ardent
sympathy with tho cause of public education and refined
enjoyment, while at tho same time tho Institution was


greatly indebted to the lamented gentleman for the valuable
donations of books and other publications, which he was
instrumental in procuring from the various Governments
and public bodies of Europe and the United States." Mr.
David Charteris McArthur, the Head of the Hank of
Australasia in Melbourne, was elected President in succes-
sion to Sir Redmond Barry, and Sir George Verdun was
elected Vice-President in place of Mr. McArthur.
The printed Catalogue of the Library, with a supplement
almost to the close of 1880, was completed and issued in two
quarto volumes containing over 2,000 pages. It contains a
long preface by Sir Redmond Barry giving a. sketch of the
history of the Library.
1881.
Early in the year the question of the appointment of a
Librarian was further considered. In addition to the
nomination of Mr. W. H. Archer, the Chief Secretary asked
to be favoured with the names of other applicants whom the
Trustees considered eligible for the office.. The Trustees hold
a special meeting to consider the matter and forwarded cer-
tain resolutions to the Chief Secretary, pointing out that it
had been the invariable' usage that all appointments in tho
Library were to be made upon their nomination; that it
appeared necessary for the good government of the Institu-
tion that the duty and responsibility of selecting' officers
should remain with them; that they could not dispute tho
power of the Government to make appointments, without
their advice or in opposition to it, but, in such an event,
they could not be held responsible for the proper working of
the establishment. Finally they suggested a conference on
the subject, and it was arranged that tho President, Sir
George Verdon, and Professor Morris should see Mr. Berry
on the matter. They did so, and reported that he was willing
that the form of government by the Trustees of the British
Museum should he observed as far as it could be applied.
The practice for the appointment to the office of Principal
Librarian in tho British Museum was that two names should
be submitted by the three principal Trustees of the Museum,


DAVID CHARTERIS MCARTHUR.


and that the Crown should have tho final selection. The
trustees, therefore', proposed that tho following' regulation
be gazetted, viz. “That in the nomination and appoint-
ment of tho Librarian and of the other officers and servants
of tho Library, Museums, and National Gallery of Victoria,
the procedure prescribed for the British Museum shall be
followed, tho functions of tho throe principal Trustees of
the British Musoum being exercised by the Trustees of the
Public Library, Museums, and National Gallery,” The
Chief Secretary expressed his doubt that such a regulation
was within the competence of the Trustees to make, but
said that ho saw no reason why the practice of the British
Museum should not bo at once applied to the ponding
appointment, which need not be longer delayed. The Trus-
tees suggested that legal provision should be made to moot
the case, but the Chief Secretary desired them to postpone
consideration of this matter, and confine the correspondence
for tho time being to the circumstances under which a
Librarian should be appointed. Accordingly, at a meeting
on tho 7th. of June, a, resolution was carried “ That tho
Trustees, considering tho present state of the Library, and
tho urgent necessity for tho appointment of a Librarian
being made, accede to tho Chief Secretary’s request and
forward the names of two eligible candidates," The name of
Thomas Francis Bride, LL.D., was accordingly submitted,
and on tho 6th of July, the Uudor-Sccrotary wrote informing
the Trustees that the Goveruor-iu-Couucil had been pleased
to appoint him to the office.
Marcus Clarke, tho Sub-Librarian, had become financially
involved and had boon made insolvent, As a consequence,
in July, the Trustees requested him to resign. They had
made tho same request on a similar occasion in 1874, but
Clarke was allowed to withdraw his resignation. Possibly
a similar course might have been followed on tho second occa-
sion, but on tho 2nd of August Marcus Clarke died. Dis-
appointment at not being appointed Librarian and financial
distress doubtless intensified tho illness from which he was
suffering, and ho passed away at tho comparatively early age
of 34, The office of Sub-Librarian was abolished shortly


after his death, and two principal assistants were appointed
to take charge of the Library under, or in the absence of, the
Librarian.
On the motion of Professor Nanson it was decided that
the books in the Library should be numbered for tho purpose
of exactly locating each volume. Three numbers wore to be
placed on each book—the first signifying the ease or division
in which the book was placed, the second signifying the
number of the shelf in the case, and the third number sig-
nifying the place of the hook on tho shelf.
The Trustees asked for a special vote for the purchase of
works of art from the 'lnternational Exhibition, held
•at Melbourne in 1880-81, and the Government
granted £1,500, and the sum of £SOO for tho pur-
pose of purchasing objects for presentation to tho
■various Governments and persons who had made
donations to the Institution. Tho Trustees in tho previous
year had asked Mr. Tacldy Thomson to delay all purchases
in England, until they had made up their minds as to what
should be purchased from the Exhibition. They complained
that the grant was not made by the Government until most
■of the choice specimens in the Exhibition had boon sold.
However, they purchased some metal work and some speci-
mens of ceramic art and glass ware for the Art Museum.
They also obtained some Black and Whit© drawings from the
proprietors of the Graphic, three water colour drawings by
Sir John Gilbert, Brierly, and do Tommasi, and five oil
paintings by Esohke, Beyle, Wynfield, Courtens, and Felix
'Cogen.
At the end of the year Eugene von Guorard, who had
been master in the School of Painting for eleven years,
retired, owing to ill health.
The Hon. C. IT. Pearson was appointed a Trustee in
August.
After the appointment of Dr. Bride, the Trustees were
informed that the Government was willing to introduce a. Bill
with regard to future appointments in the Library, and they
were asked to consider the matter. They passed certain reso-
lutions amounting to recommendations that there should be


eighteen Trustees appointed from time to time by the-
Governor-]'n-(Joundl, and that in addition the Chief Justice,
the Minister of Education, and the Chancellor of the Uni-
versity for the time being, should bo Trustees ex officio ;
that absence for six months without leave of the general body
of Trustees should render an office vacant; that the Trustees,
should nominate two candidates for the office of Librarian
from whom the Govornor-in-Council should select one; that
in case the Governor should not select one of such candidates,
within a month after the names had been sent in, the
appointment should revert absolutely to the Trustees; that,
all appointments, promotions, and dismissals other than that,
of the Librarian should bo made by the Trustees; that the
funds for the support of the Institution should be made a.
special appropriation. They also suggested that, in view
of tho urgent need of increased accommodation for the Insti-
tution, it would bo expedient to raise a loan, if money could
not conveniently bo provided on tho estimates for the pur-
pose. A Bill, embodying most of those suggestions, was pre-
pared by Dr. Dobson, but it was never submitted to Parlia-
ment, as tho Premier declined to adopt the suggestions.
At the end of tho year the Trustees recommended that
Mr. W Hunting should retire, and that Mr. Alfred Neville,,
one of the Library Assistants, should succeed him in Die.
charge of tho Newspaper Hoorn.
Mr. Stephen Thompson was appointed to classify and
catalogue the collection in tho Art Museum,
1882.
Xu January it was decided to invito applications from,
persons qualified to take tho position of Master in the School
of Painting at a salary of ,£350 and fees. There were-
sixteen applicants for the position, but apparently none of
them wins deemed satisfactory, The Chairman was deputed
to approach Mr, G. F. Foiingsby, who was not among tho
applicants, with tho result that he was appointed at a salary
of £OOO per annum, without fees. Shortly after his appoint-
ment the title of tho office was altered to Director of the
National Gallery and Mhstor of tho School of Art. Mr..


Folingsby asked that proper painting studios should be pro-
vided for the students, and one of his early acts as
Director was to stop the practice of copying pictures in the
gallery, unless for exceptional reasons, as he considered such
a practice in no way beneficial to art students, and its effect
on the public taste pernicious and lowering.
Mr, R, L. J. Ellery, the Government Astronomer, was
appointed a Trustee in January, and Sir Bryan O’Loghien,
Bart., was appointed to the Board in August, in place of Mr.
C, E, Bright, who had resigned office on leaving the colony
to reside in England.
In May the question of Mr. Ormond’s proposal to estab-
lish a Working Men’s College was discussed by the Trustees.
The Hon. C. H. Pearson moved “That steps be taken to
increase the courses of lectures given under the direction of
the Trustees of the Public Library, and to systematize the
instruction conveyed in them, so that the teaching at the
Public Library may discharge all the requirements of a
Working Man’s College.” The Trustees, however, decided
to ask Mr. Ormond to meet them in conference before dealing
further with the matter. He did so, and the Trustees
assured him of their desire to aid him iu establishing a
College, and suggested that use should be mad© of the
Museum collections and books at the Public Library. This
could best be done if the College were near the Library,
Mr. Ormond expressed his intention of inviting representa-
tives of the Public Library, the Trades’ Hall, the Univer-
sity, the Government, and the subscribers, to meet him and
discuss the project. The Hon. C. H. Pearson and the Plon.
W. M. IC. Yale were appointed to represent the Trustees in
connection with the proposal to establish the College, and
were subsequently elected as representatives on the per-
manent Council of the College.
The Trustees continued to urge the necessity for addi-
tional buildings, and in July special reports were prepared
by the Heads of the different sections of the Institution.
The Trustees prepared a report and waited upon the Chief
Secretary (Mr, Grant), who expressed himself as personally
favourable to the request for a grant for building purposes,


and promised to bring the matter under the notice of the
Premier (Sir Bryan O’Loghlen), with a favourable recom-
mendation. Sir Bryan O’Loghlen consented to place a sura
of £4OOO on the estimates, and promised a further sum in
tho following year. The architects were accordingly
instructed to prepare plans for the South Wing of the
Library block, fronting Little Lonsdale-street. Unfor-
tunately, however, the estimates were delayed, and nothing
could he done towards starting the new building during the
year, Dr, Bride was busily engaged working out plans
for tho establishment of a Lending Branch, on which he
submitted a report in August, and was arranging for the
reclassification and the cataloguing of tho hooks in the
Reference Library. Up to this time the Library, admirable
in many respects, was sadly deficient in its working equip-
ment. There was no subject catalogue, nor were there any
special lists or indexes for the guidance of readers, with the
exception of some rough catalogues of books known as Bay
Catalogues. These lists, useful only when the author’s name
was known, consisted of some score or so of catalogues of the
contents of tho Bays, or more properly of the great sub-divi-
sions into which tho books were divided, such as Biography,
History, Chemistry, and so forth. The system of numbering
tho hooks had not as yet been introduced, and an inquiring
student had often, to wait whilst one of the assistants
searched through several cases for a required volume. The
Library had grown up under Messrs. Tulk and Sheffield,
and they, as well as some of the older assistants, had an
exceptional knowledge of the collection. But the number
of hooks had increased to such an extent that no man could
bo certain of remembering and locating- all the volumes.
Complete re-organisation was essential, and the task, beset
with difficulties, was undertaken with energy and zeal
by Dr. Bride. His assistants were few and untrained.
Tho older ones had grown up under a laissez jaire
system, and naturally did not appreciate the radical
changes introduced by the new Librarian. Gradually,
however, young University men were obtained for
the new work, often, unfortunately, only to leave as their


training in the Library was beginning to bear fruit. The
huge task of re-organization may be said to have commenced
in 1882, but some years had necessarily to elapse before it
could be completed.
It was decided to publish the Latrobo manuscripts, a
collection of letters from Victorian Pioneers which had been
collected by Governor Latrobe, and by him presented to the
Trustees, The Chief Secretary arranged to have tho print-
ing done by the Government Printer, and Dr. Bride was
directed to have the letters copied and prepared for publi-
cation.
Tho Mayor of Melbourne, Alderman C. J. Ham, on tho
27th of October, presented the original journal of John
Batman, a very interesting document relating to tho early
history of Victoria. He also presented some relics of
Captain Cook, consisting of pictures, maps, and a small
celestial globe.
The question of accepting on loan an oil painting of a nude
figure, "Chios,” by Lefebvro, was discussed by tho Trustees.
Tho National Gallery Committee reported that it was
inadvisable to hang the picture, which was offered on loan
by Dr. Fitzgerald. The Trustees, however, on tho advice
of the Director, decided to accept the offer, and the picture
was hung in the gallery towards the end of the year. Tho
exhibition of the picture gave rise to a considerable amount
of correspondence during tho few mouths in which it was
shown in tho gallery.
1883.
Mr, D. 0, McArthur resigned his position as President
on account of ill-health, and Sir George Verdon was elected
in his stead. The office of Vice-President was conferred on
Sir James McCulloch. Sir John O’Shanassy died on tho
Bth of May. Mr. C. E, Bright, who had resigned office in
1882, : was .re-appointed a Trustee in March, 1883.
A. sum of £6,000 was voted by Parliament for building
purposes, and the Trustees accepted a tender from James
Treeby for building portion of the South Wing at a cost of
£21,486, subject to money being provided for the purpose.


SIR GEORGE VERDON, K.C.M.G., F.R.S.


An especially noteworthy donation was made to the
Library by the Emperor of Germany, who presented an
edition tie luxe of the works of Frederick the Groat. The
set consists of 31 quarto volumes, and only 200 copies were
published.
The arrangements for supplying electric light were com-
pleted during the year, and the necessary machinery was
erected in a shod at the back of tho Library by the Austra-
lian Electric. Light Company, which agreed to erect the
plant at its own expense and light the Library for 12 mouths
for the same amount as tho Trustees paid in the previous
year for gas. The improvement in tho comfort of the
Library, and especially with regard to tho Galleries, was
very noticeable, but tho machinery for supplying the light
was not as perfect as it has since become. It was no unusual
thing for the supply to be cut off suddenly without warning
of any kind, to tho great discomfort of readers, who had to
wait patiently till the somewhat tedious process of lighting
tho gas was carried out. The picture gallery was also
lighted by electricity, and was opened in tho evening as an
experiment from the 24th of December to the sth of
January following. The lighting was not very successful,
but the attendance averaged about 200 visits each night.
Tlie question of opening the Institution on Sundays,
which was frequently under discussion in the Press, was seri-
ously debated by the Trustees during this year, In April
a resolution in favour of opening the Library and Galleries
during certain hours on Sundays was carried on the motion
of Professor Strong, At the following mooting of the
Trustees it was resolved to open the Museum and Galleries
during each Sunday in May from 1.30 p.m. to 5 p.m. When
this became known, a’ deputation of those opposed to the
opening waited on the Premier (Mr. Service) and asked him,
as Head of the Government, to prevent the opening of the
Institution until Parliament met, Mr. Service pointed out
that the Government had no direct control over the Trustees,
but he promised to communicate to them the views of the
deputation. He did so, and the Trustees held a special
meeting on tho matter. Sir James McCulloch moved that


action be postponed. Professor Pearson moved as an amend-
ment “ That the Premier be informed, in reply to his letter,
that the Trustees, in resolving to oj)en the Museum and
National Gallery on Sundays, are exercising the power and
discretion conferred upon them by law •, that they consider
the experiment they propose to try will he useful to Parlia-
ment in determining the whole matter when it meets; and
they therefor© regret that they cannot defer to the opinion
of the Premier, without evasion of the responsibility properly
devolving upon the Trustees.” The amendment was
seconded by Mr. Langton and carried. Professors Pearson,
Strong, and Nanson, Dr. Dobson, and Messrs. James Smith
and Ellery voted for the amendment, whilst Sir George
Yerdon, Sir James McCulloch, Professor Irving, and Messrs.
Yale, a’Beckett and McArthur opposed it. A public meet-
ing was held in the Town Hall on Thursday, the 3rd of May,
by those in favour of the opening. Mr. Justice- Higin-
hotham presided, and the meeting was described as " one of
the largest and most enthusiastic ever held in Melbourne. ’ ’
A "Sunday Liberation Society” was formed, and took a
special interest in pressing the claims of those who favoured
the opening, whilst a " Sunday Observance League” did
battle for those opposed to the action of the Trustees. The
Museum and Galleries were opened on the 6th of May from
1.30 p.m. to 5 p.m., and in that short space of time nearly
6,000 visits were recorded by the turnstiles. On Monday,
the 7th of May, another large meeting was hold in the Town
Hall. This was under the auspices of the Sunday Observ-
ance League, and was as largely attended as the previous
meeting of the opposite party. The- Galleries and Museums
were kept open during the month of May, and at a- meeting
on the- 28th of that month the Trustees decided to continue
the practice. The newspapers were filled with letters for
and against the opening, and with accounts of meetings and
articles on the subject. On the 4th of July Parliament
passed a resolution, on the motion of Mr. Mirams, con-
demning the- action of the Trustees and affirming that, as the
question was one of public policy, it was the prerogative of
Parliament alone to decide it. The action of the Trustees,


ill declining to postpone the opening till Parliament met,
was regarded as a slight upon the Government and an
infringement of the rights of Parliament, and the Trustees
were called upon to dose the Institution on Sundays until
Parliament should otherwise determine. The motion was
carried by a majority of 25, 37 voting for the motion and 12
against it. The Trustees met on the 6th of July and
decided that " In deference to the Resolution of the Legis-
lative Assembly, the Museum and Galleries be closed on
Sundays.” The Industrial Museum and Picture Galleries
had been opened altogether on nine Sunday afternoons, and
the attendance varied from 5,750 on the first Sunday to
about 3,000.
The Exhibition Trustees wrote in May suggesting that
the Industrial and Technological Museum should be trans-
ferred to the Exhibition Building, but the Trustees declined
to entertain the proposal.
In August the Trustees considered the provisions of a
new Public Service Bill, in which no provision was made for
exempting the officers of the Institution from the ordinary
regulations of the Service as regarded appointment and con-
trol. It was decided to write to the Chief Secretary and
ask that the right of nomination for appointment by the
Trustees, as recognised by the late Government, might be
ratified by law.
1884.
The Hon, Graham Berry and Messrs. Andrew Harper
and Henry Gyles Turner were, in May, appointed Trustees.
The Hon. J. G. Francis died on the 25th of January, and
the Board also lost the services of the Hon, John McGregor
and Sir William Mitchell, who died on the 25th of July and
24th of November respectively. Professor Strong, who had
decided to remain in England, resigned his appointment as
a Trustee in December,
The practice of appointing only certain Trustees to be
members of the Sectional, Committees was found to be in
some ways irksome, and Professor Morris drew attention to
this at the annual meeting in April. He moved that “As
•I.V


each Trustee had been appointed Trustee, not of a part, but
of the whole Institution, and as the present system of Com-
mitbe© meetings has been found wasteful of the time of
Trustees, that henceforth the business of all the departments
be transacted at a general meeting of the trustees, and that
for each meeting on© agenda paper bo prepared and one
minute book used,” The motion was negatived at the time,
but it was felt that some change in the procedure was
desirable.
The Trustees continued to object to the application to
the members of the staff of the Public Service Act of 1883.
The classification of the officers by tho newly appointed
Public Service Board was, however, proceeded with, and tho
Commissioners assured the Trustees of their willingness to
shape the rules as far as possible to meet tho requirements
of the Trust.
Dr. Perdinando Gagiiardi, who had boon employed in a
temporary capacity to assist in tho reclassification of the
Library, was permanently appointed as an Assistant in
November.
It was decided in this year that the Attendants in the
Institution should wear a regular uniform. It was also
decided that the Library officers should wear a badge when
on duty, but the latter proposal was found unsatisfactory
and allowed to drop.
The historical painting, " Qiintre' Bras ” by Miss Thomp-
son, afterwards Lady Butler, was purchased for tho Gallery
by Mr. A. Taddy Thomson, and received in September,
Mr. Frederick Dunn, Senior Assistant in tho Industrial
Museum, resigned his office in October, as ho had accepted
the position of Public Analyst to tho City of Melbourne.
1885,
The building of the South Wing of the Library was con-
tinued during this year and practically completed, with the
exception of the south-west corner. Tho samples of stone
submitted for the completion of this corner had been con-
demned, and the Trustees bad not been able to overcome the
difficulty as to obtaining suitable stone for the work. They,


therefore, decided to abandon the completion of this part of
the building, and apply the money voted for it towards the
erection of accommodation for the art classes and the exten-
sion of the Picture Gallery.
Tho Rotunda, was still used for a Newspaper Room, but
it was considered very unsatisfactory, and a proposal was
made to transfer tho papers to the vaults under the South
Wing. Tho light in the vaults, however, was so bad that
it was decided not to move tho collection of newspapers till
better accommodation was available.
The Superintendent of the Industrial and Technological
Museum prepared, for the Colonial and Indian Exhibition to
be hold in London in 1880, a collection of Australian
timbers, and a largo, number of models illustrative of the
fruits of tiro colony. Tho Trustees also decided to forward
to the Exhibition twelve of tho best pictures of the Students
in tho Art Schools, in order to illustrate the progress of art
in the Colony.
The Trustees still found themselves much hampered by
the provisions of the Public Service Act as applied to the
staff of the Institution, and they prepared a Bill for the
amendment of the Libraries Act, embodying their views on
the subject, which they duly submitted for the consideration
of the Government, The main alterations suggested were
that the number of Trustees should not exceed twenty-one,
and that they should have tho sole and entire management
of the affairs of the Corporation, and have power to appoint
and dismiss all officers and servants.
Tho services of Mr, Stephen Thomson, who had been en-
gaged to classify and catalogue tho collections in tho Art
Museum wore discontinued, and the charge of the Ethno-
logical collections and of the Art Museum was divided
between Mr. Cosmo Newbery and Mr. Polingsby.
At tho Annual Meeting of the Trustees in April it was
resolved, on the motion of Mr. Harper, “ That all the
Trustees he members of tho Sectional Committees, excepting
tho Building Committee.” In October the Building Com-
mittee was made to conform to the same rule, and henceforth
all Trustees were members of each of the Sectional Com


mittees. No change, however, was made in the method of
electing different Trustees to act as Chairmen of the Com-
mittees.
The lion. James Maoßain was appointed a Trustee in
August ■
1886.
Early in the year a letter was received from the Chief
Secretary transferring two officers to take the place tem-
porarily of Mr. Curtis, the Secretary, and Mr. Stewart, the
Clerk, both of whom were about to retire from duty owing-
to ill-health. Dr. Bride wrote to the Trustees and offered
to take up the duties of the Secretary’s office in addition to
those of Librarian. This offer was accepted, the Trustees
undertaking to arrange for a clerk to assist Dr. Bride, and
the Government was asked to withdraw the two officers trans-
ferred to the staff in place of Messrs. Curtis and Stewart.
As all the Trustees were now members of the Sectional
Committees, it was decided that the practice, hitherto in
vogue, of making separate reports from each Committee to
the Minister, should cease, and that the Trustees should
submit a general report.
Mr. O. R. Campbell retired before the classes assembled,
and Mr. F, McCubbin, a former student in the Gallery, was
appointed acting-Master of the School of Design, which
appointment was subsequently confirmed.
The fitting of the first floor of the South Wing- for
Library extension purposes, and the transfer of books from
the Queen’s Room, occupied some months, and it was
not until the 2nd of September that the formal opiening' of
the new wing took place. The ground floor was occupied
as an Art Museum, and the first floor was used for Library
purposes, the name of "The Barry Hall ” being bestowed
upon it in memory of Sir Redmond Barry, At the opening
ceremony Sir George Yerdon delivered an address, in which
he briefly reviewed the history of the different branches of
the Institution, and referred to the intentions of the Trustees
with regard to its future development. Sir Henry Loch, the
Governor of the Colony, then named the Barry Hall, and


declared the now wing open to the public. It was estimated
that the Barry Hall would provide for 26,000 volumes, but
the accumulation of books had been so great, that the
President considered that it would be necessary to build the
North Wing of the Library in two years’ time, if the collec-
tion continued to grow as heretofore.
The system of a central Inquiry Desk in charge of one of
the senior officers was introduced during this year. The
desk was placed in the centre of the Queen’s Room, opposite
the entrance. At first it consisted of an octagonal box with-
out any protection from draughts, a serious disadvantage, as
it was placed in the most draughty place in the Library.
Later, this box was surrounded with glass in a manner which
added to the comfort of the occupant in winter, but which
was a serious blot in the appearance of the handsome
Reading Room, Nevertheless, ugly, noisy, and uncomfort-
able as it was, it served its purpose and remained in use for
some years.
The unbound periodicals, which had boon very inade-
quately provided for in pigeon-holes in the largo bay under
the portico, were transferred to the east end of the Barry
Hall, and accommodation was found for the cataloguing
stall' in the room beyond the new Periodicals Depart-
ment.
Mr. William Gilhec, a prominent Melbourne Surgeon,
bequeathed to the Trustees a sum of ,-£I,OOO for the purchase
of an Australian historical picture.
The money voted, but not expended, for the completion
of the south-west corner of the Library Building, was
applied to building a new picture gallery and painting
studios on the south side of the existing picture gallery in
Little Lousdalo-street. Extra money was voted for the pur-
pose by Parliament, and the building was well advanced by
the end of the year.
The Trustees became the medium for the distribution of
Government publications, in accordance with a long
expressed desire, and the large increase in the number of
donations during the year was in part attributed to this
cause.


At the Annual Meeting of the Trustees the Hon. Edward
Langton was elected Vice-President and Chairman of the
National Gallery Committee, in place of Sir James McCul-
loch, who had gone to reside in England, and Mr. H. G.
Turner was elected Treasurer, in place of Mr. Langton.
It was decided, on the advice of the Director’, Mr, G.
P. Polingsby, to establish in connection with the art classes
at the National Gallery, a Travelling Scholarship of tho
value of .£l5O a year, tenable for three years, and that the
first award be made in 1887.
It was resolved to remove the Caretaker’s cottage at the
east end of the South Wing, in order to construct a. tem-
porary entrance to the picture galleries. A cottage on ihe
Russell-street front, of the grounds, occupied by one of the
Attendants, was given to the Caretaker.
Sir James McCulloch was authorised, in conjunction with
Mr. A. Taddy Thomson, to purchase pictures for the
Trustees. They were instructed to try and induce Mr. Alma
Tadema to accept a commission to paint a picture for £2OOO,
and Mr. Tadema was asked to assist them with his advice
on the purchase of pictures.
In October, the Committee of the " Service Memorial
Pund ” presented a portrait of the Hon. James Service, by
G. P. Polingsby.
1887.
The Hon. T. T. a Beckett resigned his office as a. Trustee
iu June. In July the Librarian reported that the Hon. W.
E. Hearn, Dean of the Faculty of Law in the University of
Melbourne, Dr. Deeper, the Warden of Trinity College, and
Mr. A. S. Way, Headmaster of Wesley College, had been
appointed Trustees. Mr. David Charteris McArthur, one
of the original Trustees, died on the 16th of November. He
had been prominently connected with the Library since its
foundation, and had been President of the Trustees from
1880 to 1883, when he resigned the office owing to ill-health,
though he still retained his seat on the Board.
In February Dr. P. D. Bird was engaged to deliver a
course of lectures on anatomy to the art students, and at the


oud of tho year ho was appointed to the position of lecturer
ou anatomy.
The Hon, Edward Langton visited England during this
year and was asked to assist Mr. A. T. Thomson and Sir
James McCulloch in the selection of pictures for the Gallery.
Ho selected “Thu First Cloud” by Orchardson, and “An
Easterly Breeze” hy Peter Graham, and, as his colleagues
approved, tho pictures were bought,
W. It. Honfcloy, the second Principal Assistant in the
Library, retired in November owing to ill-health,
Tho new building for tho extension of tho Picture Galleries
on tho Little Lousdale-streot front was so far advanced that
the Trustees agreed, at the wish of the Government, to lend
tho hall on tho ground floor for tho Grosvonor Gallery Inter-
colonial Exhibition, This was an exhibition of pictures sent
out for sale from the Grosvonor Gallery in London hy Sir
Coutts Lindsay. It was opened on tho 27th of October and
remained open till the 7th of January, 1888. From this
collection two pictures hy Kooley Halawollc were purchased,
viz.; -' The Heart of the Coolins ” and “ Welcome Shade,”
and also “ Love and Death,” a replica by G. F Watts.
The first triennial “Travelling Scholarship” was awarded
at tho exhibition of Students’ work in April to Mr, John
Longstaff for his picture “ Breaking the News.”
Mir. Cosmo Newhery, who was seriously injured in the
Windsor railway accident, was, in September, given leave
of absence for 12 mouths.
Ou tho 23rd of August tho statue of Sir Redmond Barry,
“ erected by a grateful public,” was formally unveiled at the
Public Library. During his lifetime it had been suggested
that some memorial was duo to him for his many public
services, and in 1877 a committee was appointed to receive
subscriptions and arrange for the erection of a statue. Sir
William Stawell was President of this Committee, and tho
Mayor of Melbourne general chairman. After Sir Redmond
Barry’s death in 1880, designs for the statue were invited
from local artists, and that of Mr. James Gilbert was
accepted. Ho modelled the statue in clay, hut died before
its completion, and the Committee was in a difficulty as to


the best course to pursue in the matter. Mr. Percival Ball,
a sculptor recently arrived from Rome and London, offered
to complete the model as designed by Mr. Gilbert, and the
figure was cast at the Masefield foundry in London. In the
absence of Sir William Stawell, Councillor Cain, the Mayor
of Melbourne, invited the Governor to unveil the statue.
Sir Henry Loch did so, and formally presented it to the
Trustees in the name of the people of Victoria.
Mr. li. G. Turner, who was about to visit Europe,
resigned the position of Treasurer, and Mr. James Smith
was appointed in his place.
1888.
A slight outbreak of fire had occurred in the Laboratory
in November, 1887, and the amount of temporary wooden
and iron buildings by which it was surrounded had given
the Trustees some anxiety. It was therefore resolved to
inform the Chief Secretary that, as the Mining Department
was chiefly concerned in the work done at the Laboratory,
and as it was only required at the Museum for testing'
minerals, it ought not be allowed to remain at the Public
Library Buildings. The risk of ■ fire was great, and if
removed, all the Trustees would ask for was accommodation
for one of their officers and access to appliances for testing
minerals. The question came up for consideration later,
but action was deferred in view of the probability of abol-
ishing all temporary buildings, owing to the proposed erec-
tion of a new Museum and Galleries.
Mr. G. G. Brockway, who was one of the first members
of the Library staff, and who had risen to be Principal
Assistant, retired on the 29th of February. Dr, F. Gag-
liardi and Mr. M. F. Dowden were promoted to be Principal
Assistants, the latter in place of Mr. Bentley, who had
retired in the previous year.
The Melbourne Centennial International Exhibition was
opened on the Ist of August, At this Exhibition the
Trustees purchased two notable pieces of statuary by Sir
Edgar Boehm, viz. '.—"The Young Bull and Herdsman,” a
marble group, and “St. George and the Dragon,” a group


in Bronze, They received as a gift from the Duke of West-
minster Turner's “ Dunstanborougli Castle,” wliicli was
shown at the British Loan collection; and Mr, Molesworth
Greene presented Qudc’s “ After the Storm,” from the
German Gallery, The Trustees also purchased from the Exhi-
bition Briton Riviere’s “Roman Holiday,” Stanfield’s
“Morning - After Trafalgar,” and Ward’s “Josephine
Signing the Act of her Divorce.”
The year was notable for additions to the National
Gallery, Besides those already mentioned, Mr. H. Koek-
koek presented a painting “The Land’s End,” and Messrs,
G. and R. Tangye presented “ James Watt’s Workroom,” by
Pratt. From England the Trustee’s obtained Alma
Tadema’s "Vintage Festival,” Linnoll’s “Wheat,” and
Watts’s “Portrait of Lord Tennyson,”
In December Mr. Matthew O’Shanassy presented to
the Trustees the library of bis late father, Sir John O’Shan-
assy, consisting of over 2,000 volumes. The library bad
been purchased by subscription for presentation to Sir John
O’Shanassy in recognition of his public services.
The newspaper collection was transferred to the base-
ment of the now Picture Gallery, and the Rotunda, which
had boon in use as a Newspaper Room, was fitted for the
exhibition of sculpture. The new Picture Gallery (known
for a time as the Grosvonor Gallery, and later named the
Buvolob Gallery) was lent to the Victorian Artists’ Associa-
tion for holding an exhibition in April. In June it was
lent for an exhibition of works of the late Louis Buvelnt,
and later was used for showing historical portraits, engrav-
ings, etc., belonging to the National Gallery.
Most of the work of the classes previously carried on at
the Industrial Museum had been taken up by the Working
Moil’s College, and during the year it was decided that the
Telegraphy Class, which was still carried omat the Museum,
should be discontinued, so far as the Trustees were con-
cerned.
A sum of £12,000 was voted for the extension of the
National Museum Building at the University, but the money
was not appropriated, and no new buildings were erected.


During the year the Trustees made an arrangement;
with the Education Department, by which they were to
obtain the services of Mr. 6. G. Simpson, for portion of Iris
time, to teach technical drawing, with a view to encour-
aging the application of art to industrial purposes. Mr.
Simpson was appointed in England as a highly qualified
teacher from South Kensington. He was to occupy the joint
position of Art Inspector in connection with the State
schools and teacher of technical drawing at the National
Gallery, and his salary was to be paid in equal portions by
the Trustees and the Education Department. The' Trustees
continued to pay him under this arrangement for two years
or more, but were never able to obtain the benefit of his
services, as his time was fully occupied in the Education
Department.
1889,
Sir William Stawell, the last survivor of the original
Trustees (with the exception of Mr. H. G, E. Childers, who
had resigned in 1863), died at Naples on the 12th of March.
In May the Trustees were informed that Messrs. David
Syme, proprietor of the "Age,” and Robert Wallen, a
leading stock broker, of literary tastes, had been appointed
members of the Board.
It was resolved to ask the Governor, Sir Henry Loch,
who was visiting England, to request Her Majesty Queen
Victoria to sit for a portrait by Mr. Horkomer, or any other
artist whom sho might select. The Queen declined to sit,
and Sir Henry Loch suggested that a copy of the Jubilee
Portrait should be obtained. The suggestion was approved,
but Mr. Horkomer would not agree to copy it, and proposed
to paint a portrait from Gilbert’s statue, a course to which
the Trustees agreed.
Briton Riviere’s picture, “Deer Stealers Pursued by
Sleuth Hounds,” was sent to the Agent-General, who was
to consult with Mr. Tacldy Thomson and Sir James McCul-
loch as to the best method of selling it. The Trustees were
advised not to sell the picture, audit was returned to the
National Gallery.


The Government decided to provide £90,000 for the
erection of buildings for the Institution, and the Trustees
obtained reports from tho heads of departments as to their
noods. These reports were printed and considered, and
the architects wore instructed to obtain sketch plans of
buildings to meet requirements. Sketches were accordingly
prepared, and a proposal to build on the lawns in front of
tho building was, amongst other suggestions, considered.
It was decided to build, in the first instance, a continuation
of tho eastern block, providing two art galleries and a
museum on tho north side of tho existing Picture
Galleries, at an estimated cost of £45,000. The Trustees
having determined not to call for competitive designs, the
architects were instructed to prepare plans and working
drawings, and to obtain tenders for the election of these
buildings.
Mr. James Graham presented a picture by Peter
Graham, R.A., entitled "After the Massacre of Glencoe.”
In November leave of absence for six months was granted
to the President, Sir George Yerdon, who was about to
visit Europe.
Tho uso of portion of tho Portrait Gallery (Buvelot
Gallery) was granted to tho Victorian Artists’ Society for
tho purposes of their Winter Exhibition, but it was not
thought advisable to load it when a second application was
made in the summer, as it was then fully occupied by tho
public collections,
In July Mr. Edward Ilowitt was appointed temporarily
to assist in the completion of the catalogue of the Art
Museum.
1890.
Early in the year tho Librarian, Dr. Bride, obtained
six, months’ leave. During his absence the duties of
Librarian wore carried out by Dr. Gagliardi, and Mr. M.
F. Dowden acted as Secretary to the Trustees,
"The Library, Museums, and National Gallery Act” and
the "Free Libraries Act” were incorporated into one Act
of Parliament, known as tho “Libraries Act 1890.” This.


was effected by the consolidation of the statutes by Cluof
Justice Higinbotham.
The Trustees still complained of groat difficulties
occasioned by the application of the Public Service Act to
the Institution, and much consideration was given to tho
question during the year. Some regulations as to the
qualifications of candidates for various positions in the
Institution were adopted by the Public Service Commis-
sioners, but control of the staff, and the right of appoint-
ment, promotion, and dismissal, were not given to the
Trustees.
The tender of Mr. P. Locfcington for the erection of the
new Industrial Museum and two galleries for £44,208 was
accepted in April. The Trustees had been successful in
obtaining a promise of £90,000 for building purposes from
the Gillies Government, the money to be provided out of a
proposed sale of the Kew Asylum reserve and other Crown
lauds. An advance of £37,000 was voted on the Public
Works estimates for 1890-91, and the bender for tho .new
buildings was accordingly accepted. The erection of these
buildings necessitated the removal of the existing Labora-
tory, Lecture Hall, and offices connected with the Museum.
It was decided that the Trustees should not erect another
Laboratory, and the services of the Assistants connected
with that Department of the Museum were dispensed with.
The Superintendent of the Museum, whose agreement with
the Trustees included the free use of the Laboratory, was
conpensated by an increase of salary and by other conces-
sions, and he was allowed the right of private practice in
analytical work in his own laboratory.
The death of Mr. Eeed, the original architect for the
buildings, was reported to the Trustees in May.
In July Sir George Yerdon reported on certain matters
that he had promised to attend to during his visit to Europe.
He had asked Mr. Alma Tadema to recommend pictures
from the Continental Schools for the National Gallery.
Mr. Tadema stated that he agreed with Sir James McCulloch
and Mr. Taddy Thomson that the best pictures by foreign
artists were in the hands of dealers, and could not be


purchased directly from the painters, and whilst lie •: was
unable to act as a representative of the Trustees, he under-
took to recommend any suitable pictures that might come
under his notice when visiting the Continent. Sir George
Vcrdou had also arranged for a design for the gold medal
for the Travelling Scholarship, and Mr. Allan Wyon had
undertaken to make the dies. The design chosen was a
winged figure of Victory and the motto from Horace,
"Victoria fremde coronet,” was altered to the present tense,
so that it might ho translated, “Victoria (or Victory) crowns
with bays.” On the reverse side of the medal was a wreath
of Victorian plants, with the inscription, “National Gallery
of Victoria, Australia,” and within the wreath, "Travelling
Scholarship,' 1 The name of the recipient was to he
engraved on the edge. Sir George also arranged that a
second die should be made for the reverse, in which the
inscription should be altered to the full title of the Institu-
tion on the outer rim, and the words, “For benefactions and
services,” should bo placed within the wreath. This medal
was for presentation to those who performed special services
for the Institution, The President also reported that he
had visited the chief officers of the British Museum, and
had consulted with them and other authorities on various
matters affecting the welfare of the Institution.
A motion by Professor Morris in favour of opening the
Institution on Sundays was carried in July, and ordered to
be communicated to the Chief Secretary.
At the Exhibition of Students’ work held in November,
tho Travelling Scholarship was awarded to Mr. Ahy Altson,
for a picture entitled “Flood Sufferings.”
Mr, A. Taddy Thomson and Sir James McCulloch
resigned their positions as selectors of works of art for the
Trustees, In accordance with tho decision of the Trustees
to award gold medals to persons who had rendered special
services to tho Institution, tho first two of these medals
were awarded to Mr, Thomson and Sir James McCulloch
for their work on behalf of the National Gallery.
It was decided to appoint Mr. Thomas Wallis, an art
dealer, to be agent in London for tho Trustees, at tho usual


commission, but he was to buy no pictures until approved
by a Committee, consisting of the Slade professors at Oxford
and Cambridge (Mr. Middleton and Mr. Herkomoi).
In December the Trustees formally received from Mr.
Justice Hodges, on behalf of the subscribers, a bust by
Percival Ball of the Right Rev. James Moorhouso, Bishop
of Melbourne.
1891.
Mr. G. F, Polingsby, Director of the National Gallery
and Master of the School of Painting, died on the 4th of
January. The Trustees recorded that his administration
had been very successful, and marked a new departure in
the progress of the Gallery and of tho art classes, Mr.
McCubbin was appointed acting Director, and the Trustees
invited applications for the vacant office both in Europe
and Australasia.
Mr. Louis Pagan, of the British Museum, who wfas
visiting Australia, had a personal interview with the
Trustees in February, and promised them any advice or
assistance that it might be in his power to render, as to the
best method of choosing pictures, or upon other matters.
In May Mr. Newbery was given leave of absence for six
months to visit Europe on business connected with tho
Department of Mines, and Mr. Rule was appointed to act
as Superintendent during his absence.
The Trustees had frequently considered the advisability
of establishing a Lending Branch in connection with tho
Public Library, but had never had the necessary funds and
accommodation. In May a deputation from tho Trades
Hall waited upon them and urged the immediate establish-
ment of a Lending Library. The Trustees promised that
an effort would be made to start such a branch immediately.
When the deputation withdrew it was decided to open a
Lending branch in the Newspaper Room as soon as arrange-
ments could be made, by transferring such hooks as were
suitable and could be spared from the Reference Library,
and by adding such new books as funds would permit. The
Government was asked to provide money, and the Library


Committee was requested to draw up regulations. The
regulations wore submitted and approved by the Trustees in
June, but the Government declined to give any assistance.
Instructions wore, however, given to the Librarian to
proceed with preparations for starting the Library as soon
as possible.
The card catalogue, on the Dictionary principle, contain-
ing entries both under author and subject, was placed in the
Library during this year. It contained about 200,000
cards, most of which had not been previously arranged in
alphabetical order. They had been kept aside for revision
by the Librarian, but the task bad become an impossible
one, and the cards were arranged for use by the staff and
by the public. Many formal inconsistencies were discovered
and gradually put right, and the catalogue became at once
an invaluable key to the collection.
In November, 1890, the Trustees bad resolved to call for
designs, in Australia, for a group to match the "St. George
and the Dragon,” and to offer prises of £2OO and £IOO for
the models awarded first and second place respectively, if
of sufficient merit. The models were submitted to the
Trustees in July, and it was resolved that the first prize of
£2OO bo not awarded, but that the second prism of £IOO be
given to Mr. Bertram Mackeumil for bis design, entitled
"The Triumph of Truth,”
The ll,on. J. A. MacPhersou, who bad been a Trustee
since 1870, died ou the 23rd of August, and. Sir Charles
MacMahou, who bad been a member of the Board since
1872, died on the 28th of the same month.
The lion. O. J. Ham was appointed a Trustee in October.
It, was decided to purchase for .£SOO a selection from the
works of art left by the late Director, consisting of 125
studios by Mrs. Polingsby, 83 studies by G. P. Polingsby,
and an unfinished portrait of Mr. Polingsby by J. Longstaff.
Mr. Herkomor asked that the commission for his portrait
of Queen "Victoria bo raised from 600 guineas to 900 guineas,
and the Trustees agreed to the increase.
A portrait of a gentleman, supposed to be a Gains-
borough, which had boon sent to London in 1889 for idonti-
n


fication, was pronounced by the authorities consulted to be
a portrait of a French gentleman by a Irouch artist.
The Slade professors did not see their way to work with
Mr. Wallis in the selection of pictures for the Trustees, and
they differed between themselves as to the pictures to bo
bought and the method of selection. It was therefore
decided to ask Mr, Herkomer to act on his own responsi-
bility, a course to which he agreed, but stated that he would
consult with Mr. J. C. Horsley, R.A., and Mr. Briton
Riviere. He selected the following pictures, viz.•
“Ulysses and the Sirens,” by J. W. Waterhouse.
“The Eight of Way,” by F. Walker.
“The Crisis,” by F. Diekseo.
Professor Herkomer also selected during the year a large
number of etchings by Rembrandt, Van Dyck, Durer, and
others, and two water colour drawings by Moyorhoini and
Lionel Smythe.
Mr. N. Chevalier had been asked to act with M.r, Louis
Fagan as a committee to report on applications in Loudon
for the Directorship, but he was unable to do so. Mr, Fagan
expressed his willingness to advise the Trustees, and after
consultation with Mr. Filcles ho recommended Mr. L.
Bernard Hall for the office, and the Trustees, after having
considered the claims of all the candidates, approved of the
recommendation.
In Juno the Trustees decided to offer two prizes of £IOO
each for the best landscape and the best, figure picture
respectively, to be exhibited at the Annual Exhibition of
the work of the Students of the National, Gallery, by artists
carrying on their profession iu Victoria. It was intended
at the time to hold such an exhibition yearly, and it was to
be known as the “National Gallery Annual Art Exhibition.”
The artists did not respond as expected, and the idea of
holding the exhibition annually was not carried out. The
first pictures exhibited under this scheme were shown with
the Students' work in November, and the prize for the best
landscape was awarded to Mr, James Peek; for his “Evening
Shadows, Otira Gorge,” The judges advised that the
second prize of .£IOO be not awarded for a figure picture,


but that it should be divided into two sums of £SO, one
such sum to be awarded to Signor Gatani for his picture
“Faith,” and the other to Mr, John Mather for his paint-
ing of “The Buckland Valley.” This proposal was adopted
by the Trustees, Mr, Mather also obtained a prize of £25
for tho best water colour drawing exhibited, viz., “Morning,
Lake Omoo.” For the best group of pictures a prize of
£25 was awarded to Mr, B. W. Andrews. The Trustees
decided to purchase tho picture “Evening Shadows,” by
Mr. James Poole, and also Mr. Mather’s water colour,
“Morning, Lake Omoo” ; the prizes awarded to those artists
to merge in tho price paid for tho pictures.
Mr. John Lougataff, who was entrusted with a commis-
sion to select a picture for tho Trustees, purchased from the
Salon an oil painting by Nozal, “La Seine k Saint Pierre
priss Louviers.”
1892.
Tho year 1892 was tho beginning of the retrenchment ora,
following upon the years of extravagance' in the colony,
known as tho "boom” period, and early in the year the
Trustees were instructed by tho Government to retrench in
every possible way. In their report in March they pointed
out that whilst this was possible in some departments, it
could not ho carried out to any groat extent in others. The
vote for pictures might be suspended for a time, but the
Public Library could not stand still. The new galleries,
which wore nearing completion, would provide all necessary
accommodation for some years, but a new Library Building
was greatly required, and whilst reluctant to suggest further
expenditure, the Trustees wore compelled to recommend
that provision should bo made for this purpose. The appeal,
however, was quite useless at such a time, and the Trustees
wore considered very fortunate iu having obtained in all an
advance of £55,000, against a sum of £90,000 which had
been promised to them under the “Land Sales by Auction
Fund Act” of 1891.
In May tho Librarian submitted a scheme by which
retired constables were to be employed as attendants in the
fiA


Museums and Galleries, and the proposal was approved by
the Trustees, as it was thought a considerable saving would
be effected by its adoption, and that elderly men were suit-
able for the work. One or two men were appointed under
this scheme, as opportunity occurred, but the practice was
then allowed to drop.
Professor Herkomer’s portrait of Queon Victoria was
received early in the year, and he selected for tho Gallery
“African Panthers,” by Swan, “An English Summer Day,”
by J. W. North, “A Salvation Army Shelter,” by E.
Borough Johnson, a water colour drawing- by J'. W. North,
entitled “A Little Copse, on the Hill,” and some etchings by
Whistler.
Mr. Alfred Pelton presented a picture by Rupert Bunny,
entitled “Soa Idylls.”
Several pictures were obtained from the Anglo-Australian
Exhibition, which was held at the Exhibition Building
during the year.
The Picture Gallery was opened at night on tho 2nd
March, a temporary entrance from Little Lonsdale .Street
being used. The attendance was not very satisfactory, ami
in December it was decided to open only on Monday and
Saturday nights.
Mr. Bernard Hall arrived in Melbourne in March, and
at once assumed the duties of Director.
Mr. O. R. Rule, in April, resigned his position as
Mineralogist, and in September Mr. R. TI. Walcott was
nominated for the vacant position.
The Lending Library was opened to tho public, in
temporary quarters in the Newspaper Room on tho Bth
August. The hours of opening wore from 2 p.m, till 8 p.m.
daily, except on Sundays. It contained 6,000 volumes, and
a printed catalogue of these volumes on tiro Dictionary
principle was published when the Library was opened.
Before the end of the year 31,000 volumes were lout, and
the- roll contained nearly 5,000 borrowers. Ratepayers
were allowed to borrow on their own guaranty, and non-
ratepayers were required to obtain a guaranty from two
ratepayers. The public were not allowed access to the


shelves, but an indicator was used, which showed what
books wore available and what books wore out on loan.
Readers had to ascertain that a book was on the shelves
before asking for it, and then they had to fill in a card of
application in order to obtain the book. , Fourteen days
wore allowed for reading a book, and if detained beyond
that time a borrower was fined at the rate of threepence
per day.
Mr. Molcsworth B. Greene was appointed a Trustee in
July. Dr. Pearson resigned in August on ceasing to reside
in Victoria, and in October the Bov. W. H. Fitchett was
appointed in his place. Sir James Macßain died on the
4th of November, and in December Mr. John Mather,
President of the Victorian Artists’ Society, was appointed
to succeed him.
In October it was decided that a gold medal for services
rendered to the Institution should bo presented to Sir
Henry Brougham Loch, ox-Governor of Victoria. Hie had
always shown a great interest in the Institution, and had
used his influence in England to advance its welfare. He
also obtained and presented to the Museum important
collections of South African ethnological exhibits.
In December it was decided that the rooms on the ground
floor under the Stawell Gallery should bo used as quarters
by the Librarian,
1893.
Sir James McCulloch, who had been Vice-President of
the Board of Trustees, and who had assisted in purchasing
pictures for the National Gallery, died on the 30th of
January.
The new Industrial and Technological Museum and the
Picture Galleries on the north and west of it were quietly
opened to the public on the 11th March, There had been
some delay in finishing the buildings owing to the financial
difficulty of the time, and the impossibility of obtaining
money as bad boon intended under the “Land Sales by
Auction Act.”


lii March the Trustees determined that the now North
Gallery should he th© only one opened at night, and that it
should he open only on Saturday evenings. In November
it was decided, as the average attendance was only about
40, to discontinue altogether the practice of opening- the
Gallery at night.
The Lending Library was transferred, about the middle
of the year, from the Newspaper Room to the northern half
of the old Technological Museum, and the south portion of
the old Museum was used for the exhibition of Economic
Botany. The collection of Specifications of Patents and
the English Parliamentary Papers were also transferred to
the old Technological Museum.
The use of the first Picture Gallery (now known as the
McArthur Gallery) was granted to the Royal Anglo-
Australian Society of Artists, and the Exhibition of this
Society was opened on the 10th of March, and remained
open till the 15th of July. The Gallery was lent to the
Victorian Artists’ Society from the 15th of July to the 30th
of September.
The only pictures of note obtained during this year were
"In the Fields,” by J. J. Souza-Pinto, and “Don Quixote,”
by A. Demont, both selected from the Salon by Mr. John
Longstaff.
Her Majesty Queen Victoria presented to the National
Gallery a number of etchings by herself and the late Prince
Consort.
It was decided that the Art Galleries should be named
as follows, viz. The new north Picture Gallery to bo called
' The Latrob© Gallery,” in honour of the first Governor of
Victoria; the west gallery to be called "The Stawoll
Gallery, in honour of Sir William Stawell, one of the
original Trustees, and Lieutenant Governor and Chief
Justice of the colony; the old Picture Gallery to be called
“The McArthur Gallery,” in honour of David Charteris
McArthur, one of the original Trustees. The South Gallery,
which had been called the Grosvenor Gallery, from the fact
that the Grosvenor Gallery Exhibition was held in it when
first opened, was to he known as “The Buvolet Gallery,” in


honour of Louis Buvolot, the pioneer artist of Victoria, and
the Art Museum under the Barry Hall was to bo called "The
Verclou Gallery,” in honour of Sir George Yordou, who was
President of the Trustees at tho time.
Mr. 11. E. Wftllon diod on the Ist of October, and in the
same month tho Bov, John Bold was appointed a Trustee.
Tho Travelling Scholarship was awarded to Mr. J. Quinn,
for a picture entitled “Too Late.”
Au arrangement was made' with Messrs. Pergusson and
Mitchell to publish, froo of cost to tho Trustees, an illus-
trated catalogue of tho pictures in the National Gallery.
Tho right of soiling photographs of pictures in the Galleries
was to ho conform! on Messrs. Pergusson and Mitchell, and
they were to have tho proceeds of tho ordinary sale of tho
catalogue. They .also undertook to print catalogues of
other sections of tho Institution, if given tho right to soli
copies at certain prices, and at a later date they issued
catalogues of tho Bock collection and of tho Timber exhibits
in tho Industrial and Technological Museum.
1894.
At tho first mooting of the Trustees for tho year a case,
of some interest, and on© which created uo little amusement,
was brought before tho Board. A member of Parliament
and an ox-Minister of tho Crown was reading in tho Library,
and as the weather was warm he took off his coat. An
Attendant spoke to him on tho matter, but ho declined to
conform with what was considered an unwritten law of tho
Institution and wear his coat. Tho matter was reported
to the officer in charge, who pointed out that to preserve a
necessary decorum in tho Library it was not thought
advisable that visitors should appear in their shirt sleeves.
Tho member declined to put on his coat, and gave his name.
The officer was adamant, and said that ho considered that
a member of Parliament should support the members of the
staff in carrying out tho rules, Persuasion, however, was
useless, and finally tho angry member was given the option
of wearing his coat or leaving the Library. Ho left the
Library, and learning that there was a meeting of the


Trustees at the time, he asked to be allowed to submit the
matter for their decision, not claiming privilege! in his own
favour, but contending that in a. democratic community
neither ho nor any one else should be excluded from tho
Library for divesting himself of his coat. A personal inter-
view with the Trustees followed, bub they wore not con-
vinced, and resolved to support their officer and adhere to
the existing practice.
In January it was decided, on the recommendation of tho
Director, to place £IOO at tho disposal of Mr. Joseph
Ponnoll for the purchase of examples of ''black and white”
work.
Tho Hon, W. A. Zeal, President of tho Legislative
Council, and the Hon. Thomas Pent, Speaker of the Legis-
lative Assembly, were appointed Trustees in May.
In February the Director of the National Gallery, Mr.
Bernard Hall, wrote to the Trustees that, as tho Institution
was suffering from want of funds, it would give people new
pictures to look at, and would arouse interest in tho Gallery,
if, from time to time, an interchange of pictures on loan
wore made between tho Galleries of tho different colonies,
Tho suggestion was approved by the Trustees, and negotia-
tions were entered with the Sydney and Adelaide Galleries.
The proposal met with support from both of the governing
bodies of these Galleries, and arrangements wore made for a
scries of exchanges, tho first of which was carried out in
August.
It was arranged that the sum of .£I,OOO, which had boon
set aside for the purchase of specimens of Ceramic Art for
the Verdun Gallery, should bo placed at tho disposal of
Sir George Vordou, who was about to visit England. On
his arrival in Loudon, however, Sir George Verdun recom-
mended that £SOO of this money be spout on a picture of
the interior of the Church of St. Anne, Bruges, by David
Roberts, and tho Trustees agreed to this proposal.
In August Mr. J, S. Bnttye, an assistant on the
cataloguing staff, was appointed Librarian of tho Public
Library of Western Australia, and resigned his position
in tho Library.


Mr. John LongstaJT completed his original picture, “The
Sirens,' ’ painted under the terms of the Travelling Scholar-
ship awarded in 1887, and exhibited it at the Royal Academy
and the Salon, afterwards sending it to the Trustees, by
whom it was received at the end of the year.
The following pictures were bought in November at the
Victorian Artists’ Exhibition, viz.:—“Autumn in the
Fitzroy (Hardens,” by J, Mather ; "Feeding Time,” by F.
McCubbiu; "Moouriso,” by D, Davies; and "A Bright
Winter’s Morning,” by W. Withers.
In November it was resolved, on the motion of Dr.
Looper, "’That in view of the great advantage likely to
accrue to the Public Libraries of Australasia, it is desirable
that tho Trustees take steps towards the foundation of a
Library Association of Australasia, on lines generally
similar to those of tho Library Association of the United
Kingdom and the American Library Association.”
1895,
In April Dr. Bride, who had been Librarian since 1881,
was appointed to the position of Curator of Estates of
Deceased Parsons. Mr - , Michael Francis Dowden, LL.B.,
tho second principal assistant in the Library, was appointed
Librarian in succession to Dr. Bride, without increase in
salary. The drastic retrenchment of the day made it
necessary to reduce all tho heads of the departments, and it
was only by tho strictest economy that tho Trustees were
able to moot the current expenses of the Institution.
Mr. J. Cosmo Newhery died on the Ist of May, and Mr.
R. H, Walcott, Mineralogist, was appointed acting Curator
of tho Industrial and Technological Museum, in addition to
his dirties as Mineralogist.
Tho Hon, F. S. Dobson died on the Ist of Juno, and the
Hon, W. M. K. Vale died on the 23rd of October, Professor
Walter Baldwin Spencer and Mr. Frederick H. Bromley,
M.L.A., wore appointed Trustees in Juno and November
respectively.
Several pictures wore obtained during the year from the
Victorian Artists’ Society, and the* picture by Mr. W.


Withers, "A Bright Winter’s Morning,” was exchanged fur
a more important work by the same artist, entitled Ir;ui-
quil Winter.” A picture by Mr. Aby Altson, painted
under the terms of the Travelling Scholarship awarded in
1890, entitled “The Golden,Age, was received in July.
Mr. Purdon Clarke, of the South Kensington Museum,
assisted the Trustees in obtaining specimens of furniture,
carved wood, wrought metals, etc., for the Art Museum :
and Sir Wollaston Pranks, of the British Museum, aided
them in obtaining a valuable collection of prehistoric implu-
ments.
In September it was decided, on the recommendation of
the Librarian, to extend the hours for opening the Lending
Library. It had been open from 2 p.m. till 8 p.m,, but it
was decided to open in future from 12 noon till 8 p.m.
In December the Trustees received, on loan to i;he
National Gallery, a valuable collection of pictures belonging*
to the Governor, Lord Brassey.
1896.
On the 13th of February Mr. Dowden died, after having
held office as Librarian for a few months only. The Trustees
requested that Dr. Bride should be re-transferred to his
former position as Librarian, and negotiations on this matter
proceeded for some months. The Public Service Commis-
sioners finally decided not to transfer Dr. Bride, and Mr.
E. L. Armstrong, the present Librarian, was formally
appointed to the position on the 29th of August.
Mr, Dowden had been actively engaged at the time of
his death in initiating the formation of the Library Associa-
tion of Australasia, and this work was taken up by
his successor, by direction of the Trustees. It was
decided to hold an Intercolonial Library Conference in
Melbourne on the 21st, 22nd, 23rd, and 24-th of April, to
settle the lines upon which the Association should be formed.
The Trustees decided to give a conversazione in the National
Gallery to welcome the visitors and open the proceedings.
Arrangements were made for holding a Loan
rare books, manuscripts, and other suitable objects. His


THE HON. EDWARD LANGTON.


.Excellency Lord Brasscy accepted the position of patron of
the couforouco, and Sir John Madden, Chief Justice of
Victoria, was elected President. About 600 guests, includ-
ing BO Librarians and delegates, attended the opening
couvorsaziano in the National Gallery, when Sir John
Madden delivered the inaugural address. At a later
meeting a constitution was drawn up and accepted, and it
was decided to hold an annual meeting- of the Association,
and that tho next congress should he held in Sydney.
A inurblo bust by Percivnl Ball of Mr. Cosmo Nowbery,
the into Superinteudent of the Technological Museum, was
presented to tbe Trustees in February by Sir John Madden,
on behalf of tbe friends and admirers of Mr. Newbery,
Sir George Verdon, who had been a- Trustee since 1872,
and President since 1883, died on the 12th of September.
Tho Honourable Edward Langton was elected President in
October, and at the same time Professor Morris was elected
Vice-President. The Hon, A. L. Tucker was appointed a
Trustee in October.
The retrenchment of the period was telling- heavily
against tho Library. Only sufficient money to pay for
current periodicals and existing orders was voted by Parlia-
ment. For tho first time in the history of the Institution
no money was voted for new books, and the grant for
contingencies was the smallest since the opening of the
Library in 1856. There was a noticeable decrease in the
visitors to the Library, and had it not been for a small sum
of money standing to the credit of the Trustees in London,
practically no new books could have been purchased for the
Library. This year and the lean years to follow left gaps
in the, collection, which have been most difficult to fill.
The only picture purchased for the Gallery during the
yoar was one by Arthur Streeton, representing a view on
the Hawkosbury River. It was entitled “The Purple
Noon’s Transparent Might,”
A School of Applied Art was opened in August, under
the char go of Mr. Gnyon Purchas.
The Travelling Scholarship was awarded in December to
Mi,'. Georg© Coates for a picture entitled “At Last.”


1897.
A portrait of Mr. R. L. J. Ellery, painted to tire older
of his friends and admirers by E. Phillips Fox, was presented
to the Trustees in February, and in the following mouth
they received in a similar way a portrait of Sir Frederick
Sargood bj r the same artist.
The Hon. C. J. Flam resigned his office as Trustee in
May, and in the same mouth Professor Tucker and Mr. R.
Murray Smith, C.M.G., were appointed members of the
Board.
On the 19th of June the “Diamond Jubilee Loan
Exhibition of Works of Art,” inaugurated by the' Trustees,
in commemoration of the 60th anniversary of the accession
of Queen Victoria, was opened in the McArthur Gallery by
Lord Brassey. Tier Majesty was pleased to lend for tho
occasion a painting, entitled "The Marriage of the Princess
Royal,” hy J. Phillip, R.A., and notable contributions were
also received from tho Governor, Lord Brassey, from Mnssrs.
H. Graves and Co., and from the Ballarat and Bendigo Art
Galleries, as well as from many leading citizens of Melbourne.
The Exhibition was opened at a conversazione in tho Art
Galleries on the evening of the 19th of June, and remained
open till the 4th of September. A conversazione for
working men and their friends was also held on the stli of
July in connection with the Exhibition.
The Industrial and Technological Museum was crowded
with a number of unsuitable exhibits, and it was decided
to dispense with these, to make room for more desirable
objects. Some were accordingly presented to the' Working
Men's College, some were sold, and it was decided that
objects on loan should either be presented to the Trustees or
removed.
During the year the Government considered tho advis-
ability of establishing a Commercial Bureau, with the object
of collecting and making available the latest information of
all kinds relating to home and foreign manufactures. The
Tiustees offered to co-operate by allowing the use of the'
Technological Museum for the Exhibition of raw material,
but the establishment of the Bureau was not carried out.


The exchange of pictures on loan between the different
colonies was discontinued in September. Since the adoption
of the scheme, in 1894, 46 oil paintings and. 14 water colour
drawings had been exhibited in Melbourne, as loans from
the Art Galleries of Sydney and Adelaide.
Mr. Guyon Purchas resigned his position as Instructor
in the Applied Art Class, which was consequently discon-
tinued.
1898.
The Library was still suffering from the drastic retrench-
ment of the period, but a small grant was made for the
purchase of hooks, practically the first for three years, The
Trustees waited upon the Chief Secretary and Treasurer
in the middle of the year, and made a strong appeal in
regard to the difficulties of carrying on the Institution in a
satisfactory manner on the reduced votes. They pointed
out that no pictures could he bought, that the supply of
hooks was totally inadequate, and that every branch of tho
Institution was suffering severely from tho long continued
retrenchment. An increase in the votes resulted, and tho
acute strain of carrying on the Institution on inadequate
grants was relieved, though rigid economy was still insisted
upon.
Dr. Eerdinando Gagiiardi, who had been for some years
Principal Assistant in the Reference Library, died cm tho
7th of August. He had carried out the greater part of
the reclassification of the Library on its present basis.
The Rules of the Institution were revised and amended
towards the end of the year, the most important alteration
being one that allowed Students outside the National
Gallery, under certain conditions, to compete for the Travel-
ling Scholarship. The Building and General Committee
was abolished under the new rules.
Several pictures by Victorian artists (Messrs, Withers,
Mather, Boyd, Loureiro, Streeton, Fox, McCubbiu, and
Davies) were lent from the National Gallery to the
Exhibition of Australian Art, held in London in May and
June, under the auspices of the Trustees of the National
Art Gallery of New South Wales.


An Enquiry Room and offices for the Principal Assistant
and the head of the cataloguing staff wore formed opposite
to the main entrance to the Reading Room, in order to
centralize the work of the staff as much as possible.
Alterations were made in the buildings in order to lessen
the danger from fire. The wooden building' covering tire
staircase to the Library was rebuilt in brick, and shut off
from the Rotunda by double iron doors. Xrou shutters
were also introduced where necessary.
The works of sculpture, which had been exhibited in the
Rotunda, were distributed throughout the building, and the
Rotunda was made available for Library purposes.
The McArthur Gallery was lent to the Victorian Artists’
Society for their Annual Exhibition, which, opened in
October.
A special grant was made by the Government, at the
request of the President, Mr. Langton, for the purchase of
Mr, Longstaff’s painting of the Bush Eires in Gippslaud in
1898.
A collection of "Letters from Victorian Pioneers,” which
had been in print for some years, but which, for various
reasons, had not been published, was finally prepared fin-
publication and indexed during the year, but was not issued
to the public till the following year, owing to a delay in
binding. The letters, which had been edited by Dr. Bride,
when Librarian, were originally addressed to Mr. Latrobe,
the first Governor of Victoria, by whom the manuscripts
were presented to the Trustees.
1899.
The Government having promised some money to the
Trustees for building purposes, it was decided to proceed
with the completion of th© south-west corner front of the
Library, and R. Gamlin’s tender for £6,044 was accepted.
As the Government wished to have this building completed
in Stawell stone, the amount was afterwards increased to
£6,999, The Trustees also considered the advisability of
extending the National Museum building at the University,
m accordance with the repeated requests of Sir Frederick


McCoy. It was decided, however, that the contents of the
Museum should be transferred to the Public Library
buildings.
Sir Frederick McCoy died on the 13th of May. He had
held office as Director of the Museum since 1856, and had
obtained a vory extensive and valuable collection of Natural
History exhibits during his long period of office. Professor
Spencer, Chairman of the National Museum Committee,
volunteered to act as tho Director of the Museum in an
honorary capacity, and his oll'or was gratefully accepted by
tho Trustees and by tho Government. It was decided to
transfer the specimens from tho University to the large
hall at the Library Buildings, thou used for an Industrial
and Technological Museum. Tho Geological collection in
the latter Exhibition was made part of tho National Museum
collection, and it was decided to find room for the best of
the other exhibits from the Technological Museum in a
room to he built oil’ the Vordon Gallery. Tho useless
exhibits were to bo sold, and the remainder, for which no
room could be found, were to bo stored in the vaults.
Tho old Technological Museum building behind the
Library, formerly known as tho “Great Hall,” was
condemned by tho Trustees as unsafe in itself, and as a
menace to the whole Institution in case of fire. It was
accordingly decided to demolish tho building, and to rebuild
temporarily rooms at tho north and south ends to accom-
modate the Lending Library, and, as far as possible, the
contents of tho Technological Museum,
It was proposed by tho Trustees that the mineral collec-
tion in tho Exhibition Building should bo transferred to
and made part of tho collection in the National Museum,
but the Minister of Minos, to whose Department the
specimens in the Exhibition Building belonged, would nob
sanction the transfer.
Tho Lending Library was closed from March to July,
ponding the alterations in the buildings, and the books
wore temporarily stored in the Rotunda, Up to this time
the collection had not been classified, and the indicator
system had been used. The Librarian arranged to abolish


this system, and to give the borrowers access to the shelves,
as in the Reference Department. The books were classified
under the Dewey Decimal System by Mr. R. D. Boys, who
had been placed in charge of the Lending Library. The
new system was found to bo entirely satisfactory, and in a
little over five months there were 5,660 borrowers on the
roll, and nearly 60,000 volumes were issued during- the same
period. After the books from the Lending Library were
placed in the new temporary building, the Rotunda was
fitted as a store room for the surplus books from tire Refer-
ence Library, and the Librarian was thus enabled to collect
into one room the books which had been “stored" in different
places. The Specifications of Patents were placed round
the walls of the Rotunda, and the corridor on the oast side
was used for Parliamentary Papers.
Mr. Andrew Burns lent to the. Trustees a large collection
of pictures, which were exhibited in the Buvelot Gullery.
The Travelling Scholarship was awarded to Mr. D. M,
Meldrum for his picture "Welcome News.”
The hall on the north side of the main entrance,
previously used for the exhibition of casts and sculpture,
was fitted up as an Australian Ethnological Museum, A.
fine collection of exhibits from Central Australia was
purchased from Mr. P. J. Gillen, by means of a special grant
of £3OO from the Government for the purpose. Tlio whole
of the Ethnological exhibits, which had previously been
attached to the Technological Museum, wore made part of
the Natural History collection.
The tender of Messrs. Christopherson and Brown for the
New Museum Buildings in Russell Street was accepted in
September. The amount was ,£17,989, and a proviso was
inserted that the work could be stopped at any stag - © by
the Trustees, in the event of money not being provided by
the Government.
As an additional safeguard in case of fire, and in order
to give the watchmen ready access to different parts of the
building, all doors were fitted with special locks, answering
to one master key.
A conversazione was held in the Picture Galleries and


Museum on tho owning of tho I!HU of December, to celebrate
tho opening of tho .Students’ iSxhiltiiion, and tin; opening
of tho now Nalurnl History Museum. An address was
delivered by the President, and tin; Museum was formally
opened by His Excellency Lord Brasscy,
1000.
Tho Trustees entertained the members of tho Australasian
Association for tho Advancement of Science at a, convor-
sii/,touu in the National Gallery and Museum, mi the evening
of the 1 Hl.li of January.
Madame Mellm, the fnnums I’rimn Donna, presented, in
January, a marble bust of hersolf by Mr. E. Bertram
Mac Icon ual.
A now system of record was introduced into tho Reference
Library during tins year. The stock hooks hitherto in use
wore discontinued, and accession hooks wore used in their
stond. Under this system hotter details can ho obtained
about any hook in the Library, and the statistical informa-
tion is much more accurate than formerly.
In February tho picture “Qual.ro Bras," by Lady Butler,
was soul; to Loudon to the Guildhall Limn Exhibition. It
was returned to the Gallery in September.
Tho Railway Commissioners arranged to supply the
electric light to I lie Public Library from the Oovonnnout
plant at Spencer Street, from tho 19th of March.
Tho Museum Building at tho University was handed over"
to the Government, and used later by tho University for the
Cousorvatorium of Music.
Tho National Museum was closed to tho public from tho
Ist of February to tho 20tli of July for purposes of
ro-arraugemeut. Professor Spencer had tho specimens,
re-classified on a zoological basis, instead of tho geographical
classification previously in use.
A deputation of tho Trustees of the Public Library, the
Council of tho Working Men’s College, and others, waited
upon the Minister of Public Works in August to protest
against tho proposal to oroch a new Police Court at the
corner of Latrobo Street and Russell Street, as tho site was
e


required for a Technological Museum, or for some purpose
connected with technical education.
An electrical apparatus for marking the times at which
the watchmen patrolled the buildings was installed in
November, and about the same time a system of internal
telephones was introduced for communication between
different portions of the Library and other branches of the
Institution.
The principal additions to the National Gallery during
the year were a picture by Miss Lucy E. Kemp Welch,
“Horses Bathing in the Sea,” selected for the Trustees by
the Council of the Royal Academy, and “A Bush
Symphony,” by Mr. J. Ford Paterson. Mr, McCubbin’a
picture, “Feeding Time,” was exchanged for another work
by the same artist, entitled “A Winter Evening,”
The Public Service Reclassification Board, after corres-
pondence and consultation with the Trustees, reclassified
several offices, and the changes were brought into effect in
December. The office of Librarian was placed in the "A”
division of the Public Service under the stylo of Chief
Librarian and Secretary, The former office of Sub-
Librarian was revived, and Mr. A. W. Brazier, M.A., was
promoted to this position. Mr. R, D. Boys, 8.A., and Mr.
J. M. Kerr, M.A., LL.B., were made Senior Assistants, the
former being placed in charge of the Lending Library, and
the latter officer taking the direction of the cataloguing staff.
Mr. R. H, Walcott, P.G.S., who had been acting as Curator
ef the Industrial and Technological Museum since Mr.
Newbery’s death, was formally appointed to that position in
May, and was also made Curator of the Geological and
Mineralogical collections, which had been transferred to the
National Museum (Natural History). Mr, James A.
Kershaw, P.E.S., was appointed Curator of tho Zoological
collection.
1901.
Early in the year some works of Mr. Bertram Mackonnal
were lent for exhibition in the National Gallery, amongst
them being a model of his statue "Circe,” for which an offer


was made by the Trustees and accepted by Mr. Mackennal.
A higher offer, however, was made to Mr, Macktmnal before
the transaction was concluded, abd the statue was not ob
taiuod for the National Gallery.
The Institution was specially illuminated from the 6th
of May to the 11th of May, in connection with the celebra-
tions for the opening of the first Commonwealth Parliament,
and the visit of thoir Royal Highnesses the Duke and
Duchess of Cornwall and York,
In July a Sub-Committee of the Trustees recommended
that the Chamber of Manufactures and the Chamber of Com-
merce bo asked whether they would join in raising £5,000
towards the establishment of a new Technological Museum,
and that tho Government bo asked to provide a similar sum,
and to grant a site for a new building at the corner of Russell
Street and Latrobo Street. It was decided to postpone
further consideration of the matter until the central portion
of the now National Museum was completed.
Application was made to the Government for sufficient
money to complete tho central block of the Natural History
Museum in Russell Street, but the requisite sum was not
provided and the binding had to be discontinued, although
the outer walls wore completed to the top of the first floor.
Professor Spencer was absent for most of tho year on a
scientific expedition, mainly of an anthropological nature,
into tho centre and north of Australia, As a result of this
expedition, the Museum was enriched with a very valuable
collection of ethnological exhibits, presented by Professor
Spencer and Mr. P. J. Gillen,
Leave of absence for seven months was granted to Pro-
fessor Morris in September, to enable him to visit Europe,
and, Mr. 11. G. Turner was appointed Acting Vice-President
during his absence.
On the evening of the 14th of November a hail storm of
exceptional violence broke over Melbourne. The skylights
in the Queen’s Reading Room were broken in many places
and the Library was partially Hooded. The Library staff,
with tho assistance of the Metropolitan Eire Brigade, man-
aged to erect a temporary screen of canvas over the skylights,
HA


before any serious damage was done to the books or furni-
ture.
“ The Vision of St. Stanislaus,” by Seuhor Loureiro, and
a picture by Mr, James Quinn, "The Nativity,” painted
under the terms of the Travelling Scholarship awarded in
1893, were the only oil paintings added to the collection
during the year. Ten water-colour drawings wore selected
for the Trustees by the Council of the Royal Academy, when
acting as a Committee of the Chantrey Bequest,
Mr. A. C. Gow, R.A., the painter of “ No Surrender,”
personally undertook the restoration of the. picture, which
had become badly cracked, and it was accordingly sent to'
him, and was returned to the Trustees in November.
Mr. Graham Officer, B.Sc., visited the Solomon Islands
in the early part of the year, and remained till August in the
interests of the Trustees. He obtained a very valuable’
collection of ethnographic exhibits, including £ ai exception-
ally fine head hunter’s canoe from Eubiana.
Two commissions were given for pictures under the terms
of the Gilbee Bequest, Dr. Gilbee had left a. sum of £I,OOO
to the Trustees for the purpose of obtaining an Australian
historical picture, the subject to be selected from the Burke
and Wills exploring expedition, or Captain Cook’s visit to
Australia. A considerable amount of interest had accumu-
lated, and the Trustees, with the consent of the residuary
legatees, decided to give two commissions instead of one.
Mr. John Longstaff and Mr. E, P. Pox were accordingly
given commissions in April, and it was arranged that
the former should paint a scene from the Burke and Wills
expedition, and the latter from the visit of Captain Cook.
1902.
Professor Morris, who was travelling in England, died on
the 2nd of January. He had been a Trustee since 1879 and
Vice-President since 1896’.
There were many changes amongst the Trustees during
this year. Mr. Henry Gyles Turner was elected Vice-
President in February, in succession to Professor Morris.
The Hon. A. L. Tucker, who had been a Trustee since 1896,


died on the Bth of May. Mr, A, S, Way, who had ceased
to reside in bho colony for some years, and Mr. Andrew
Harper, who had accepted an appointment as Principal of
St. Andrews Presbyterian College in Sydney, resigned their
offices in April, The Hon, Sir Homy Wrixou, President
of the Legislative Council, and the Rev. E. 11. Sugdon,
Master of Queen’s College, wore gazetted as Trustees on the
4th of Juno. The resignation of Sir Charles Cavan 'Duffy,
who had been absent from the State for some years, was
accepted on the Bth of July, Mr. Justice a’Beckett, Mr.
Edward Cavlilo, K. 0., and the President of the Victorian
Artists’ Society for the time being, were gazetted as Trustees
on the Kith of July. The latter office was hold by Mr. J.
Ford Paterson at the time, but shortly afterwards Mr.
McCubbin, a salaried officer of the institution, was elected
as President of the Association, in succession to Mr. Pater-
son. Apart from this fact there was soma doubt as to the
validity of a merely ex-offh'io appointment. Neither Mr.
Paterson nor Mr, McCubbin was summoned to the Board’s
mootings, and in the following year the matter was settled
by gazetting Mr, Paterson a Trustee for life, in the usual
manner.
The now catalogue of the Lending Library, containing
over (100 pages, was issued early in the year. The Library
contained over 17,000 volumes, which were catalogued,
briolly, on the dictionary plan,
Mr, .Frederick Chapman, who had been selected in
London to fill the office of Palasoutologisb in the. National
Museum, arrived in Melbourne, .and took up the duties of
the office in March.
The picture of “The Landing of Captain Cook,” painted
by Mr. K. P. Pox, under the terms of the Gilboe Bequest,
was received during the year. Mr. T. W. Stanford
presented a landscape by Louis Buvelot, entitled “Between
Tallarook and Yea,’’
The Travelling Scholarship was awarded to Mr. M.
Altson for a picture, entitled "The Leisure Hour.”
The Library Association of Australasia held its third
meeting (exclusive of the initial mooting) in Melbourne, in


the first week in April. All the Federal States were
represented, and a Loan Exhibition of rare bonks, manu-
scripts, and literary curios was held in the McArthur
Gallery. The Exhibition was opened at a conversazione
given by the Trustees on the 2nd of April, and Her Excel-
lency the Countess of Hopetoun performed tiro opening
ceremony, in the unavoidable absence of the Governor-
General. The meetings of the Association wore not so
well attended as was hoped, and doubt was expressed as
to whether it would be possible to carry on the Association
until the country was more populated.
In July, Mr. J. M. Kerr, M.A., LL.B., one of the senior
assistants in the Reference Library, and head of the cata-
loguing staff, resigned his office, in order to follow his
profession as a solicitor.
The turnstiles for recording the number of visitors to
the Institution were taken away from the main entrance
in September, as it was feared that they would seriously
retard free ogress from the building in any emergency.
A remarkable series of thefts of a number of recent law
books, to the value of about £SO, was reported by tho
Librarian in December. The matter was placed in tho hands
of tho police, but they were not successful in tracing the
thief.
1903.
Mr, L. Bernard Hall, Director of tho National Gallery,
was given leave of absence during the first term of the year,
on account of 111-health. Mr. F. McCubbin acted ns
Director during his absence, and Mr. George 801 l assisted
Mr. McCubbin in the Drawing School.
Mr, John Ford Paterson, formerly President of the
Victorian Artists’ Society, was appointed a Trustee iu
February. Professor Irving, who had been a Trustee
since 1871, resigned in May, as he had ceased to reside in
Victoria. Professor Tucker resigned from the Board in
June, and in July Lieut.-Col. W. T. Reay, sub-editor of
The Herald, and Dr, A. S. Josko, wore appointed
members of the Trust.


'During the yoar tho Trustees devoted much consideration
to tho question of the exclusion of undesirable visitors, and
they almost decided to introduce a system by which . all
readers desiring access to tho shelves, would have to obtain
a pass for the purpose. It was felt, however, that such a
system would bo burdensome to many readers, and that it
would torn! to keep away a certain number, who would
otherwise make good use of the Library. It was decided,
therefore, not to restrict the freedom of readers, but to
insist upon tho withdrawal of any really objectionable
visitors.
In April the Trustees were informed that James McAllan,
of Richmond, had bequeathed his residuary estate to the
Trustees. It is anticipated that eventually the Trustees
will obtain about ,-£20,000 from this generous bequest.
It was suggested to tho Trustees of the Exhibition Build-
ing that space should be found by them for the exhibits of
tho Industrial and Technological Museum, until such time
as tho Government could provide proper accommodation for
tho Museum, Tho Exhibition authorities, however, stated
that no satisfactory space could he lent to the Trustees for
tho purpose.
In November the Trustees received, by bequest from the
late George McArthur, of Malclon, a valuable collection of
coins, tokens, badges, and medals.
In December an Act was passed, further amending the
Libraries Act, 1800. The number of future Trustees was
limited to eighteen, instead of an indeterminate number,
and it was provided that any Trustee being absent without
leave from all general mootings of the Trustees for four
consecutive months should forfeit his office.
1904.
Sir Graham Berry, who had boon a member of the Board
of Trustees since 1884, died on the 25th of January.
Mr. Alfred Felton, a Melbourne merchant, who died on
tho Bth of January, loft his estate in trust, and provided
that tho income, subject to some small annuities, should be
equally divided between gifts to charities and the purchase


of works of art for the National Gallery, Eventually, it is
anticipated that the National Gallery will benefit to the
extent of between eight and ten thousand, pounds per
annum from this source. This munificent bequest will
practically relieve the Government from the responsibility
of providing funds for the purchase of pictures and other
works of art, and it is hoped that it will soon enable tlio
Trustees to place the National Gallery of Victoria amongst
modern Galleries of the first rank in the world of art. A
committee of five gentlemen, of whom one was to bo a
Trustee of the National Gallery, with provision for the
appointment of their successors, was appointed under the
will, to arrange for the distribution of the money available
for charitable purposes, and, in conjunction with the
Trustees, to draw up a scheme for the purchase' of works of
art for the National Gallery. Mr. Felton also loft tlio
Trustees the right of selecting, from his own collection, any
pictures or art objects that might be thought suitable for
the Gallery, and twenty-six pictures were accordingly chosen,
in addition to some carvings and other works of art.
A picture by Mr. George Coates, entitled “M.othorhood,”
painted under the terms of the Travelling- Scholarship
awarded in 1896, was received in February.
Miss A. M. Sharp, the well known authority and writer
on lace work, owing to the good offices of Mr. Bernard Hall,
obtained for the Trustees an excellent sample collection of
antique and modern lace. Miss Sharp also very generously
supervised the proper mounting and description of the pieces
in the collection.
The Government provided money for the continuation
of the central block of the Museum Buildings, in Bussell
Street, and the tender of Mr, W. P. Cliristojoherson, to
continue the work, was accepted on the 30th of June.
On the 22nd of September the Legislative Assembly
passed a resolution in favour of opening the Institution for
certain hours on Sunday afternoons, and on the 2nd of
November the Legislative Council passed a Bill approving of
the necessary expenditure for the purpose. The Picture
Galleries and Museums were accordingly opened on Sunday,


-the 13th of November, from 2 pan. to 5 p.m. On Sunday,
the 27th of November, the Reference Library was also opened
during the same hours.
On the 22nd of September a deputation of the Trustees
of the Public Library, the Council of the Working Men’s
College, and. others interested in the matter, waited upon
the Premier, and urged that the site of the Police Court, at
the corner of Russell Street and Latrobe Street, be set apart
for the erection of a Technological Museum, instead of being
used for a now Police Court and colls, as had boon proposed.
Mi;. Bent promised to go into the matter further, and said
that in the meantime ho would postpone the question of
building on the site.
On tho 9th of November it was resolved that it would
bo advisable to send the Director of the National Gallery
to England, to get into touch with experts, who would be
willing to assist tho Trustees in purchasing works under
tho Bolton Bequost, and to take steps to inaugurate a
comprehensive scheme for such purchases. Any persons
likely to assist wore to he informed of the aspirations and
needs of the Gallery, and tho desires of tho Trustees with
regard to carrying out tho terms of the Bequest. On the
23rd of November a consultation was held between the
Trustees and tho Belton Bequests Committee, and tho latter
body approved of tho suggestion that some one should bo
sent to Europe, for the purpose of making initial arrange-
ments. It was then arranged that Mr. Bernard Hall
should visit Europe, and bo empowered to purchase works
of art to the amount of .£4,000,
1905,
In February the tender of Messrs. Paterson Brothers, for
-cleaning and decorating the Queen’s Reading Room and
the Barry Hall, was accepted. The Queen's Room had not
been painted nor decorated for many years, and the Barry
Hall had remained untouched since its completion in 1886.
In March the Librarian recommended, as tho most fitting
way to celebrate the Jubilee of the Institution, that a new
Library bo erected, as the existing building was unsuitable,


and not large enough to accommodate the Tboolcs. The
recommendation was favourably received by the Trustees,
and sketch plans were prepared for a great octagonal build-
ing, to contain over a million volumes, and to provide accom-
modation for 500 readers in the main ball. It was estimated
that this room, without the front in Latrobo Street, could
bo erected for about ,£70,000, and a deputation of the
Trustees waited upon the Premier on the 12th of May, and
asked that this sum be voted in three yearly instalments.
The Premier undertook to bring the matter before the
Cabinet, but no grant was .made for the purpose during the
year.
Mr. W. B. Tappiu, of the firm of Rood, Smart and
Tappiu, architects to the Trustees, died in April.
In July Mr. Bernard Hall, Director of the National
Gallery, submitted a report ou the result of his visit to
Europe, in connection with the purchase of works of art
under the terms of the Felton Bequest. He had consulted
many people interested in art matters, and ho made recom-
mendations to the Trustees as to the future purchases for
the Gallery. He recommended them to endeavour to
obtain the advice of the South Kensington Museum authori-
ties and Mr. H. Wilson, for purchases of works of art in
England, other than pictures and sculpture. For the
purchase of paintings, he suggested that Mr. Clausen,
A.E.A., be asked to act for the Trustees, and that Mr.
Pennell he asked to advise them in the purchase of “black
and white” work. M. Marquet dc Yasselot, of the
Louvre, was recommended by Mr. Hall as an expert, who
would be able to render valuable aid to the Trustees in the
purchase of art objects iu Paris. The Director reported
that ho had obtained the following pictures during his visit,
viz.;—
Oil Paintings.
“Boulevard Montmartre,” by Pissarro.
“The Ploughmen’s Breakfast,” by Clausen,
“The Importunate Neighbour,” by Holman Hunt,
“L’ Aurnone,” by Moissonier.
“Prikre daus la Chapelle,” by Engine Isabey.


HENRY GYLES TURNER.


"lift Foramo Couch tin,” by Aman-J'ean.
Water Colour Drawings,
“Okchiunpton Castle,” by ,T. M. W, Turner.
"The Entombment,” by Ford Madox Brown.
“Haidoo,” by Ford Madox Brown,
and others by 1). Cox, Varley, Stanfield, and Tom
Collier.
Statuary,
“Persons Arming,” by Gilbert.
“Fisherman’s Hoad,” by Gilbert.
"Minorvo Sans Casque, ” by Rodin.
“Joan Paul 'Laurens,” by Rodin.
Two animal groups in bronze by Baryc.
Mr. Hall also purchased pon and ink drawings by
Charles Keene, H. J. Sullivan, Daniel Yiorge, Pogrom,
Townsend, and Arthur Rackham, and three engravings by
Swain, Thouoman, and Tim Colo.
Mr. Hall was thanked for his report, and earnest
consideration was given to his recommendations during the
year, both by the Trustees and the members of the Felton
Bequests Committee, with a view to formulating a scheme
for carrying out the tonus of the bequest.
The Honourable Edward Laugton, who had boon a.
Trustee for more than thirty years, and who had been
President of the Board siuoo 189(3, died on the sth of
October. Mr. Henry Gyles Turner was elected President,
in succession to Mr, Laugton, and Sir Henry Wrixon was
elected Yico-Proaidont in place of Mr. Turner. Mr, John
Mather was appointed to represent the Trustees on the
Felton Bequests Committee, in place of Mr. Langtou.
Sir Bryan O’Loghlon, Bart., who had been a member of
the Board since 1882, died on the 31st of October.
The Trustees received, by bequest from Lady McCulloch,
a marble bust of Sir James McCulloch, and an oil painting
by C, R. Leslie, entitled "Christ’s Lesson in Humility,”
The residuary legatoos of Lady McCulloch’s estate presented
an oil painting by W. G. Thomas, “Canute Listening to the
Monks of Ely.” From an anonymous donor the Trustees


received a picture by St. George Hare, entitled Iho Victory
of Faith.” Mr. C. Fairfax Murray presented, through
the Director, a copy of Rossetti’s “Prosorpiuo , and Mrs.
Edwards presented, in a similar way, a painting' by Edwin
Edwards, entitled “South wold. ” A portrait of the la to
Alfred Felton, by Mr, J. C. Waite, was purchased in
November.
The Travelling- Scholarship was awarded to Mr, Isaac
Cohen for a picture, entitled “Reconciliation.
1906.
In February the Right Honourable Charles Booth lent,
for exhibition in the Gallery, a picture by Holman Hunt,
entitled “The Light of the World,” It was hung in the
Stawell Gallery for about a month, and it was estimated
that nearly 200,000 persons visited tho Gallery for the
purpose of seeing this picture.
A picture by Hans Heysen, entitled “Sunshine and
Shadow,” was purchased in February, under the terms of
the Felton Bequest.
The central block of the New Museum Buildings in
Russell Street was completed, and possession given to tho
Trustees about the end of March. The first floor is to be
entirely devoted to the Australian collections, which are to
be made a special feature of the Museum. The staff is at
present busily engaged in transferring exhibits from the
Main Hall of the Museum and from the stores and vaults.
The extra accommodation has already enabled the Director
to make notable improvements in the arrangement of the
specimens,
In the course of fifty years the Institution has grown
from a small block about 50 feet square until its buildings
cover more than two acres of land. There is still room on
the site for the new Library, and the whole of the Latroho
Street front has yet to he built, but the ti’mo is not very
distant when more land will be needed, if the Institution
is to fulfil its purpose. The princely bequest of Alfred
Felton has relieved the Government for all time from the


necessity of purchasing works of art for the nation, and it
will be for future generations to see that the gifts provided
by his munificence are suitably housed. Moreover, the
time cannot be far off when the people of Victoria will insist
upon having a properly equipped Industrial Museum. There
is a probability that the Melbourne Hospital will some day
be moved from its present position, and there is still unused
Crown land about the Police Court site. Would it not be
well to consider very seriously whether some, at least, of
these lands should not be devoted to the future requirements
of an Institution, which must year by year become a greater
heritage, and one which will be more and more valued by
the people of Victoria.


NOTES ON PAST OFFICE-BEARERS AND OFFICERS
PROMINENTLY CONNECTED WITH THE
PUBLIC LIBRARY, MUSEUMS. AND NATIONAL GALLERY
OF VICTORIA.
SIR REDMOND BARRY.*
The name of Sir Redmond Barry will be for over
associated with the Public Library of Victoria and the
University of Melbourne. He has been accepted as the
founder of both institutions, and was the first President of
the Library Trustees, and the first Chancellor of the
University. It is probable, however, that the original sugges-
tion for the establishment of these institutions did not
■emanate from Sir Redmond. Mr. H. C. E. Childers, who
was a Minister of the Crown in the early years of the colony
•of Victoria, states that he proposed to Mr. Latrobe to
found the Public Library, and to make Barry the Senior'
Trustee. Rusden, the historian of Australia, thought that
the credit of establishing the University belonged more to
■Governor Latrobe than to Barry. Be these things as
they may, they do not alter the fact that Sir Redmond
Barry may be regarded as the de facto founder of both
institutions. He may or may not have been the first to
■suggest the actual establishment of a University and a
Library. He was, at least, the first man to see that such a
■suggestion bore fruit. His was tbs mind that planned tho
way in which each institution was to he built up, and his
was the paternal hand that guided Both in the struggles of
their infancy. With a rare foresight, h© saw that in a
very few years there would be needed both a Library and
a University with an almost infinite capacity for growth.
9 Partly republished from an article In the “ Library Ilecorcl of Australasia.”


Ho had uo idea of establishing an inferior college and digni-
fying it with the name of University. Bather he would lay
bho foundations in such a way, that from the first, the
education should bo, as far as possible, up to the standard of
tho old world, whilst there would be room for a natural
and unlimited expansion. He would have no small site,
because of its immediate convenience, hut sufficient broad
acres to provide for the accommodation that he felt would
soon lw required. How much the University owes to that
statesmanlike viow, only those who have closely followed its
evolution can tell. The magnificent site., with its forty
acres of reserved land, within a mile of the General Post
Office, is one of which any city in tho world might he proud.
But if the University owes him much, the Public Library
owes him still more. As early as 1842, he had established,
in a room attached to his own kitchen in a house at the West
end of Bourko Street, almost behind Goldshorough’s Wool
Stores, the first free library in Victoria. It was not a State
or a municipal institution, bub simply a collection of good
standard works belonging to himself, which he made accessi-
ble to any inhabitant of the little township. Some ten
years later, when the town had grown by leaps and bounds,
when the gold fever, with all its attendant evils, was at its
height, the Public Library and the University were founded
by tho wisdom of a few men, who realized that a nation
could not live by broad alone, and Sir Redmond Barry at
once Immune the guiding power of both institutions. He
was previously a man of note in the little community, in
which ho had settled as early as 1839. The son of an Irish
military man of good family, it was at first intended that
ho should follow his father’s profession. He changed his
plans, however, and after graduating at Trinity College he
was called to the Irish Bar in 1838. In the following year
ho emigrated to Sydney, where he remained hut a few weeks
before crossing over to Melbourne, to begin the practice of
his profession in the then struggling little village. In 1841
a Court of '.Requests was established in Melbourne, over
which Mr, E. J. Brewster presided for a few months. He
was succeeded by Mr. Barry, who received his first public


appointment, at a salary of illOO a year, as Commissioner
of this Court. Barry became Solicitor-General in 1851,
and in the following year was made a puisne judge of the
Supreme Court. On the 3rd July, 1894, Mr, Justice Barry
had the honour of appearing for the first time in his Chan-
cellor’s robes, and receiving Sir Charles Hotham in the
University grounds, for the purpose of laying the foundation
stone of that institution. This ceremony over, the party
proceeded to Swanston Street, and after listening to a.
lengthy address from Dr. Palmer, a co-trustoo of Barmy’s,
Sir Charles Hotham laid the foundation stone of the sister
institution. In addition to his work at the University
and the Library, Sir Redmond Barry was also to the fore
in the establishment of a hospital, a Mechanics’ Institute, a
Royal Society, an exhibition, a philharmonic society, and,
in short, in every public movement that would forward the
well-being of the colonists. Ho received the well-merited
honour of knighthood in 1860, an honour particularly appro-
priate, and doubtless highly prized by a man of his tempera-
ment. For, in truth, ho was by no means averse to the
"pomp and circumstance’’ that have been characteristic of
some of onr best and greatest men. He was a man of
handsome and commanding presence, and wore always the
dress of a gentleman of the earlier half of the century, His
peculiar “chimney pot” hat, his high collar, and white
stock, and, indeed, every item of his dross wore part and
parcel of the man. He had naturally a pompous manner,
and even in his younger days was somewhat grandiose and
starched. It is said that he did not succeed so well at the
Bar, as he would have clone, had he not boon so, extremely
formal and punctilious. He was not regarded as a brilliant,
or profound lawyer, but some of his addresses were notice-
able for their elegant and impassioned, if somewhat ornate,
diction. But he was not in favour with the solicitors of
the time, and his practice was not so largo as that of
Williams, Stawell, and others of his contemporaries. Never-
theless, ho did good work both at the Bar and on the Bench.
He had a high sense of honour, and never spared himself in
the performance of his duty, A model of punctuality


himself, ho could not brook being dolayod by others. If he
made an appointment for 10 o’clock, and if the luckless
individual with whom the appointment were made happened
to be five minutes late, ho received from the Judge a repri-
mand never to ho forgotten, and none the lees impressive
if it wero but a. pointed glance at the clock.
The Public Library was opened by Mjajor-General
McArthur, the Acting-Governor, on the 11th February,
1856. It is reported that owing to the irregular arrival
of ships at that time, large quantities of books had not been
received as expected, and as the day fixed for the formal
ceremony drew near, there was a possibility of opening a
library with empty shelves. The anxiously-looked-for
vossol arrived at length, but only in time to give Judge
Barry and the sta.il two or throe days for unpacking and
examining, and for filling the empty shelves. Barry,
nothing daunted, not to work, and kept his assistants toiling
till midnight, whilst he himself, eoatless and very warm,
worked with them, and directed all. It was his custom to
visit tho Library almost daily, and ho was invariably present
at the unpacking and sorting of the cases Us they arrived
from London, On tho summer mornings he would walk
down to the Library, hat and riding whip in hand, looking
about with watchful eye, and whistling very softly. Should
a blind, carelessly drawn up and out of line, catch his eye, he
would call out in no very gentle voice to the nearest
attendant' "Square the yards, air; square the yards.” He
was very punctilious about a visitor wearing his hat or dozing
in tho reading room, and would personally speak to an
offender, or scud an attendant to do so. In the early years
of tho Library, Barry drafted most of the correspondence,
and no order for books was sent without his personal inspec-
tion, lie would leave orders for letters to be sent him
at tho Court for signature, and it was sometimes irritating
to counsel that lie would read those letters whilst nominally
listening to their argument. If it were mail day, and the
documents to be signed were numerous, lie would stop the
Court work with a "Pardon me, gentlemen, a matter of
importance.” It was well known to the members of the
7


Bar that with him the Library matters were of first import-
ance, and they accepted the fact with good humour. On
one occasion, however, Mr. Aspinall stopped in his address
whilst Sir Redmond was reading a letter. “Go on, sin go
on,” said the Judge, looking up. . “Not until your Honour
has finished with your Library work,” replied the somewhat
exasperated counsel, and Sir Redmond took the hint. But
the Library was his special hobby, and took precedence at
all times
The first Trustees of the Public Library were Mr. Justice
Barry, the Hon. W, F. Stawell, the Hon. J. F, Palmer,
Mr. H. 0. E. Childers, and Mr. D. C. McArthur. These
five gentlemen were gazetted on the 19th July, 1853, and
managed the affairs of the Institution until the formation
of a corporate body of Trustees in 1870, when their number
was increased to a minimum of fifteen, and Sir Redmond
Barry was elected President. The five original Trustees
were all men of mark in the community, but, either
because they were too busy, or because they would not
brook the arbitrary actions of the senior member of tho
Board, they left the bulk of the work to Sir Redmond. For
it must be admitted that both as Chancellor of the University
and as head of the Trustees, Sir Redmond’s conduct was
decidedly autocratic. It was no unusual thing for him to
call a meeting, at which no one attended save himself. But
the meeting did not necessarily lapse. What there was
to do, he did, quorum or no quorum. Indeed, it is said
that what he wanted to do, he did, whether his colleagues
concurred or not. Possibly this may account for the
sparseness of the attendance of members during the early
years of the Trust.
In the selection of books, Barry showed a catholic taste.
The best of everything was his motto, and so far as money
was available, the best he got. Mistakes, of course, were
made, but, on the whole, the first 50,000 volumes placed in
the Public Library of Victoria formed the nucleus of a
collection of which any Library might be proud. One of
his famous orders was for a London bookseller to supply the
works of all the authorities referred to by Gibbon in his


monumental history. Such an order captivates by its
grandeur, oven if its wisdom he* questioned.
In connection with Library work, one idea of Sir
Redmond Barry’s lias gained unstinted approval. In 1859
ho introduced the system now known as “travelling
libraries,” in order to assist country readers and Mechanics’
Institutes, Gases of hooks, each containing about fifty
volumes, were specially prepared, and from one to four of
those eases wore lent to such libraries as chose to ask for
them. At tho end of the term they wore returned to
headquarters and replaced, if desired, hy others. This
system has been introduced into tho United States and
Canada, with various modifications, and with very marked
success. Barry was of opinion that novels -were out of
place in a groat public, library. A visitor, to whom ho was
showing tho Library, asked him whether there were many
works of fiction in the collection, "Very few indeed, Sir,”
replied tho Judge; “and I am thankful to say that these
few are being rapidly appropriated hy unscrupulous persons,
and will not be replaced.” Replaced, however, they were,
for tho only volumes of tho kind introduced by Augustus
Talk wore the works which had become classic, and which
wore, therefore, essential to the collection. Nevertheless,
the works of fiction in tho Public Library are probably less
than in any other library of the same size.
Sir Redmond Barry used to visit the Library at all
hours, and spent much of his time writing in Mr. Tulle’s
room, or in the Trustees’ room. In the Old Board Room
was a largo swinging mirror, long a source of wonder to
those who never know its purpose. It was tho Judge’s
dressing glass, and it would appear that ho frequently used
the'room as a robing room, when about to attend some
function. On one occasion he had arrayed himself in all
tho glory of the handsome gold embroidered gown worn hy
the Chancellor of the University, and, stepping into the
vestibule, he bade tho hall porter call a cab. It meant
an absence of several minutes, and the man, with some
hesitation, explained that if ho left bis post, there would
be no one to take charge of the sticks and umbrellas. “I
7 A


will attend to that,” said Sir Redmond, and visitors for
the next ten minutes marvelled at the apparition of the
stately Judge in magnificent robes taking charge of their
walking sticks, and doubtless enjoying the look of awed
astonishment which his appearance caused.
In his private life Sir Redmond Barry was always the
gentleman of the old school, most generous of hosts, kindest
of friends. The late Alexander Sutherland tells us how
royally he entertained his friends on occasions, and quotes
from the Comte de Beauvoir, who speaks of his astonishment
at finding Sir Redmond in a country but 30 years old, able
to entertain in the princely style of “la Yieille Auglotorro. ”
The Count speaks of Barry as the founder of the Museum
and the Library, the Chancellor of the University, and "on
un mot, Thoinm© important do Victoria.” From Mr.
Sutherland, too, we learn of the simple pride and pleasure
that the Judge took in gardening, and how ho loved to spend
a few days now and then devoting himself to a little
practical agriculture on his “Sabine Farm” at Mulgravo.
On each anniversary of his arrival at Melbourne lie enter-
tained his friends at a bachelor dinner. After the dinner
a great five-quart jorum of old port was produced, and it
is not difficult to imagine tlm Nunc est bibendum of the host,
as ho opened the great cobweb-covered bottle with much
ceremony. Each of these huge bottles was tagged with a
parchment label, on which was written some appropriate
Latin quotation, and the guests of the evening wrote their
names on the back of this label. One can picture tho
brilliant company that would be present on such occasions,
for “there were giants in the earth in those days.” Repre-
sentatives of the best blood and brains of the old country
had found their way to Australia, and Melbourne got her
share of these. Leaders of the learned professions, the
heads of the army and navy, politicians, and literary men,
and perhaps a foreign potentate from some great vessel at
anchor in the bay; these were the men who foregathered in
Sir Redmond Barry’s dining-room.
From his very early days Redmond Barry was a student
of the classics, and he loved to quote from them on ail


occasions. Ho was a personal friend of Isaac Butt, the
founded’ of tlio Dublin University Magazine, and in Mr.
Sutherland's opinion, was, doubtless, a coadjutor in this
venture. Sir Redmond tried his hand at writing verse,
hut soon had the good souse to recognise his limitations in
this respect. Ho was rather fond of lecturing, and delivered
addresses at different times on “Architecture, Sculpture,
and Painting,” on “Agriculture,” on “Music and Painting,”
and similar subjects. He was not a good lecturer; his
stylo was verbose and pedantic, and whilst his addresses
boar witness to patient research and much reading, they
were neither interesting nor inspiring. If not successful
in his own literary ventures, however, Redmond Barry loved
hooks, and ho lovod reading. The motto for the Public
Library he took from Cicero, and, with him, he believed that
books “are the food of youth, the delight of old age; they
adorn prosperity, and are the support and conso-
lation of adversity ; they are a delight at home and
no hindrance abroad; companions by night, in travel-
ling, and in the country.” Believing, nay knowing,
that, books wore all these things and more, he was
anxious that they should he within the roach of all, and
both privately and in his capacity as President of the Public
'.Library Trustees, ho did his utmost to attain that end. His
unselfish labour and his broad-minded and statesmanlike
conception of what a public library should he, have not been
without fruit. The people of Victoria are said to he proud
of thoir Public Library, and it may be hoped that they will
over remember, in connection with it, the name of its
founder, to whom they owe so much. Prom the personal
standpoint, those who have never troubled to. understand
the somewhat complex character of Sir Redmond Barry, are
apt to judge him superficially, and somewhat harshly. They
are prone to dwell upon his weaknesses rather than his
virtues. They speak of his pomposity, his vanity, and other
defocts in his character. Por these he, doubtless, paid the
penalty, great or small, and they are best forgotten. On
the other hand, there are many things we may remember
of Stir Redmond Barry. He was a truly charitable man.


He was ever ready to help those who wore in distress,
though never with the ostentations charity of the parvenu.
We may remember also of him that he never shirked his
obligations, and we may remember that to him honour,
truth, courage, and even dignity, were not merely empty
words, but binding obligations. But we prefer to judge
him by his works. Let those who seek to weigh him in
the balance put on one side of the scale all the faults they
can.; on the other let them put the unquestionable facts
that he was the de facto founder, the far-seeing - , noble, and
unselfish friend and guide of the Public Library and the
University, works that wo may fairly hope will make his
name immortal. To him who holds the balance fairly, it
is surely evident that he is but weighing feathers against
gold.
Sir Redmond Barry died on the 23rd of November, 1880.
Some four years previously a movement had been started to
erect a statue in his honour by public subscription. The
matter was not sufficiently pressed, however, and it was not
until seven years after his death that the groat bronze
monument was erected in front of the Public Library
buildings. Possibly Sir Redmond Barry was not sufficiently
appreciated by his fellows during his life, but it is certain
that in the two institutions with which his name is most
intimately associated, he has left a permanent memento of
unselfish toil and noble enthusiasm. Victoria has, perhaps,
had colonists more distinguished, more learned, more
brilliant. If a roll were made of the public men to whom
she is most indebted, it would be no ignoble list, and high,
very high, on that roll would be writ the name of Redmond
Barry. Victoria fronde coronet.
DAVID CHARTERIS MCARTHUR.
David Charteris McArthur, the second President of the
Trustees, was a well known colonist in the early days of
Victoria. He emigrated to New South Wales in 1835, to


accept a position in tho Bank of Australasia, in Sydney, and
some Uims yours afterwards he was sent over to Melbourne
to open tho first bank in tho little settlement, which was
soon to develop© into a groat city. Mr. McArthur at one©
took a prominent place amongst the citizens of the new
township. do was one of the founders of the Melbourne
Athenaeum, then known as the Mechanics’ Institute, and
ho also took an active part in the inauguration of the
Botanical Gardens. 110 was amongst tho first settlors at
Heidelberg, and interested himself in municipal matters
relating to that suburb, and at a later date took a prominent
part in the establishment of tho Austin Hospital for Incur-
ables. In 1882 ho became President of the Old Colonists’
Association, which was founded for the relief of old residents,
who were in destitute circumstances. Mr. McArthur, who
gradually rose to tho position of Superintendent of the
Bank of Australasia, was regarded as an authority on matters
of finance, and, as early as Governor Hotham’s time, he had
boon commissioned to report on the financial state of the
colony, the general extravagance of the time Having led the
people into a somewhat serious position. Mr. McArthur was
one of the live original Trustees of the Public Library, who
wore appointed in 1853. He remained on the Board until
his death, in 1887, and always took a keen interest in ©very-
tiling connected with the Institution, His work was done
quietly and unostentatiously, and it is difficult to estimate
how far his influence actually made itself felt in the advance-
ment of the Institution, His sound judgment was much
appreciated by his colleagues on the Board, and h© was made
Vice-President in 1873, and President, as well as Chairman
of tho Library Committee, on the death of Sir Redmond
Barry, in 1880, Ho held tho office of President until 1883,
when hi; asked that he should not be re-elected, as he felt
that owing to his advanced years and failing health he
would no longer ho able to carry out the duties of the office
to his own satisfaction.


SIR GEORGE VERDON.
Sir George Frederick Verdon, K.C.M.G., C. 8., E.R.S.,
was the third President of the Trustees of the Public
Library. He was first appointed a member of the Trust in
1872, and became Vice-President in 1880, and President in
1883. The eldest son of an Anglican clergyman, ho was
born at Pendleton in 1834, and came to Victoria- in 1851,
where, like most young men of the time, he at once tried his
fortune on the gold fields. Being unsuccessful, he turned
his attentions to mercantile pursuits, and for a time managed
a business in New Zealand for the firm of ITeape and Grice,
but soon returned to Victoria, and settled at Williamstown,
where Re became a member of the Municipal Council in
1856. He was a member of the volunteer forces, and in
1857 he led his company in suppressing an outbreak of
convicts, at the time Inspector Price was killed, Mr. Verdon
became an honorary assistant in the Melbourne Observatory
in 1858, and in the following year was elected to the Legis-
lative Assembly. In 1860 he was made Treasurer in the
Heales Government, and hold the same office under Sir
James McCulloch, from 1863 to 1868. In 1866 he went to
London, on behalf of the Government, in connection with
the defences of the colony and the establishment of the
Melbourne Mint. He was elected to represent Emerald
Hill on his return to Victoria, and in 1868 was appointed
Agent-General for the colony. Ho filled this office until
1872, when he resigned, in order to become General Manager
of the English, Scottish, and Australian Chartered Bank, a
position which he held till 1891, when he retired, Sir George
Verdon was a member of the Victorian Fine Arts Commission
of 1864-5, and he was one of the Royal British Commissioners
at the Centennial Exhibition, 1888-89. He was knighted
in 1872, in recognition of his public services.
Sir George Verdon was an amateur collector of objects
of art, and spared no pains to advance the affairs of
the National Gallery from the time that he served
on the Fin© Arts Commission, in 1864. He assisted


se Trustees, as far as possible, during the time he
hold office as Agent-General, and when he visited
London in 1890 he was asked to act on the Com-
mittee of Advieo, in conjunction with Mr, A. Taddy
Thomson and Sir .lames McCulloch. Ho obtained designs
for the Travelling .Scholarship medal, and for a gold
modal, to be presented for special services to the Institution.
In 1894, when lie again visited London, he purchased for
the Trustees tho picture of the “Interior of tho Church of St,
Anno at Bruges,” by David Roberts, and was instrumental
in obtaining for the Art Museum many specimens of ceramic
art. Sir George was a pleasant speaker, and filled the office
of President of tho Trustees with zeal and ability. In a
minute, expressing regret at his death, in September, 1896,
his colleagues stated that ho had rendered many and valuable
services to tho Institution, and during tho thirteen years
that ho had been President, his constant attention to the
host interests of the. Institution, and his artistic knowledge
and taste, as wo.ll as his tact and courtesy in the chair, had
boon of the utmost value, and his example would remain
with them as tho ideal of a Trustee and of a President.
THE HONOURABLE EDWARD LANGTON.
The Honourable Edward Langtou was first elected a
member of the Hoard of Trustees in 1.874. He was at that
time a very prominent figure in Victorian politics, and had
hold office as Treasurer and Postmaster-General in the
Francis Ministry. Ho first became known as a public
speaker in 185!.), when ho delivered some powerful addresses
in favour of free-trade, a principle to which he was devoted
with all tho thoroughness of his nature. Ho was first
elected to Parliament in 1866, and for some ten years
remained an active member of the House, to be remembered
for his keen, incisive, and logical speeches, and the unyield-
ing manner in which ho fought far principles in which he
thoroughly believed. His advocacy of free-trade was respon


sible for the establishment of a weekly paper, known as the
“Spectator," of which he became proprietor and editor in
1865. The paper was not a financial success, and Mr.
Lang ton gave it up, and devoted such time as he could
spare to literary work in writing for the “Argus,” to which
he contributed many leaders on fiscal and political matters.
From the date of his appointment as a Trustee, Mir.
Langton took an active interest in the affairs of the institu-
tion, and particularly with regard to the National Gallery.
He was an accountant by profession, and held office as
Treasurer from 1876 to 1886, and in that capacity fought
several battles with Government officers, for what ho
considered to be undue interference with the authority of
the Trustees. lie was elected to the office of Vice-Presi-
dent in 1886, and succeeded Sir George Verdon as President
in 1896.
Mr. Langton went to England in 1887, and devoted much
time during his visit to the affairs of tins National Gallery.
He selected “The First Cloud,” by Oi’chardsou, and “An
Easterly Breeze,” by Peter Graham. He was entrusted
by the Government with a commission to inquire into tho
working of the Council of the House of Commons on public
accounts, and in carrying out this duty he was brought into
contact with many influential people in London, and when
an opportunity offered he never forgot to do his best to
stimulate interest in the Public Library and Art Gallery.
The late President was always a keen advocate for
upholding what he considered the rights and responsibilities
of the Trustees. He was never able to reconcile the Act of
Parliament, which invested them with the management of
the Institution, and the Public Service Act, which practic-
ally took away from them the control of the officers on the
staff. Mr, Langton was always a prominent advocate of
the opening of the Libraries and Museums on Sundays, and
he took a leading part in the movement in its favour in
1883. He, with other Trustees, held that they were
responsible for the- government of the Institution, and that
they had power-to open it on Sundays if they thought fit.
They accordingly did open the Galleries for several Sundays,


PROFESSOR E. E. MORRIS.
MICHAEL FRANCIS DOWNEN.


but wore ultimately compelled to close them in deference to
the expressed wish of Parliament. Much public interest
was aroused at the time, and Mr, Laugton fought strongly
for the opening, and spoke at the public meetings, which
wore hold iu connection with the question by the citizens of
Melbourne. lie lived to see the Sunday opening principle
affirmed by Parliament more than twenty years later.
PROFESSOR MORRIS, LITT.D.
Professor Edward Ellis Morris was appointed a Trustee
of the Public Library iu 1879, and became Chairman of the
Library Committee iu 1885, and Vice-President of the
Trustees in 1896, Tie was enthusiastically devoted to the
affairs of the Library, and as Chairman of the Com-
mittee svas able to do much for its advancement. Kindly,
courteous, and sympathetic, as ho was by nature, lie was yet
a firm and businesslike chairman. He was particularly
interested iu publications connected with Australia, and
always urged that, as far as possible, every book and
pamphlet relating' to bis adopted country should be obtained
for the Public Library. In addition to a generous supply
of everything that could be called “literature,” ho was
strongly iu favour of obtaining books on technical subjects,
as ho considered the Public Library should, as far as possible,
deserve the title of “the University of the People.” Professor
Morris was born at Madras in 1843, and was educated at
Rugby, and later at Oxford, where he took a good degree in
3800. lie devoted himself to teaching, and was an assistant
master at St. Peter’s College, Radley, and afterwards at
Hailey bury. In 1871 he became head-master of the
'Bedfordshire Middle Class Public School, and in 1875
accepted the appointment of bead-master of the Church of
England Grammar School at Melbourne. He was appointed
to the chair of modern languages in the University of Mel-
bourne in 1884,
Professor Morris was the first editor of a series of “Epochs
of Modern History,” in which he published "The Age of


Anne” and “The Early Hanoverians.” After ho came to
Victoria he edited Cassell’s “Picturesque Australasia,”
which was issued in . 1887. He published a “Memoir of
George Higinbotham” in 1895, and “Austral-Euglish, a
dictionary of Australasian words,” in 1898. Ho also
contributed frequently to magazines and newspapers, and
at the time of his death was engaged upon a life of Captain
Cook. He lectured to the Library Association at diJTcronb
times on Flinders and Banks, and on the “Australian Author
and the Libraries.” Professor Morris was also tho founder
and president of the Melbourne Shakespeare Society. Besides
his literary work, he did much for tho cause of charity, and
by his efforts the Charity Organization Society, which has
done, and is still doing, excellent work in Melbourne, was
founded.
The Morris Library at the Melbourne Church of England
Grammar School was established by the late Professor in the
interests of the school, and in all matters relating to libraries
he was a sympathetic and a willing helper. ' He took a great
interest in the establishment of the Public Lending Library,
and was one of the advocates for a greater supply of fiction
to this department. Professor Morris did everything in
his power to raise the status of Library Assistants, Pie under-
stood the necessity of having educated and specially trained
men for the work, and he spared no effort to induce tho
Government to recognize the requirements of the Trustees
in this respect. His work at the Library was of a kind
that attracts little notice, but he was nevertheless a force
in the advancement of the Institution, where ho has left
behind him a name that is honoured and beloved.
AUGUSTUS TULK.
Augustus Henry Tulk, the first Librarian of tho Public!
Library, was appointed to that position on the sth of May,
1856. He was the son of a gentleman of independent
means, who owned a considerable portion of Leicester
Square, and represented Poole in the House of Commons.


AUGUSTUS HENRY TULK.


Like thousands of other Englishmen of his class, Augustus
Tulk was brought up to no particular profession or calling.
Ho was horn in 1813, and received his early training at
Winchester* School, where he received a good classical educa-
tion. Ho afterwards studied at Heidelberg, and spent much
time on the Continent, where he acquired a considerable
knowledge of modern European languages. He learnt to
speak with llueucy Gorman, French, Russian, and Italian,
besides studying other languages, including Hindustani.
Mr. Tulk was a man of delicate constitution, with a con-
sumptive tendency. For climatic reasons h© thought
Australia would he a suitable country in which to settle,
and ho road much about it during his life on the Continent.
He was instrumental in persuading Mr. Eugene von Guerard,
who for a time acted as a teacher of drawing to one of his
sous, to emigrate to Australia, and from Mr. von Guerard,
afterwards well known in Victoria as an artist, he heard
tic,counts of the country, which stimulated his existing desire
to settle there, Ho determined to become a squatter, for a
time at least, and settle his sons as landowners in Victoria.
As his wife was very averse to making a long voyage in the
passenger vessels of the time, Mr. Tulk bought a schooner,
which bo named the "General Guyou,” and having loaded
her with mining and other machinery, instead of ballast,
he obtained a crew, and made the voyage in this vessel, with
his wife and five children, On his arrival in Victoria he
was persuaded to invest his money in mining ventures
instead of land, and in a short time lost most of his capital.
He sold the General Guyou, which, under happier auspices,
ho intended to keep as a pleasure yacht, and finding that his
early training was not such as to make him a successful man
of business, ho was glad to look for a more congenial occupa-
tion, and applied for the post of Public Librarian, for which
ho was duly selected from some eight and forty candidates.
I’rom the moment of receiving this appointment he
threw himself heart and soul into the work of building up
the new Library, He won the confidence and friendship
of Judge Barry, and, inspired by that confidence, he soon
became as enthusiastic in the interests of the Library as the


Judge himself. His task, too, was in many ways an
inspiriting one. It was pioneer work. Books were very
scarce in the young colony, but money was fairly plentiful,
and the Government was treating- the Judge liberally.
Moreover, in the strange medley that then composed the
population of Melbourne there were many who hungered for
the quiet companionship of the books they had long since
learned to love. The now Library was watched with anxious
eyes, the interest taken in it by readers was a personal one,
and as the large shipments of books arrived there were many
eager to welcome them. Men, who in the Universities and
in the public schools, and in the private homes of the Old
Land, had learned to love books, found it hard to gratify
their taste in a new country, far removed from the literary
centres of the world. Redmond Barry and Augustus Tnlk
were in sympathy with such as these, as they were in
sympathy with all who sought assistance from the books
which were their peculiar charge. So the new Librarian
set to work. Book by book, set by set, the foundations
of tb© Library were laid, and in almost every volume the
Librarian was able to take a personal interest. Bor there
was a keen satisfaction in collecting the works of tho groat
men of letters. The English chronicles and romances, the
early Bibles, the works of Chaucer, More, Shakespeare,
Ben Jonson, Milton, Swift, Steele, Addison, and'numerous
others, to the days of Tennyson and Browning, Carlyle, and
Matthew Arnold; these and their great foreign contem-
poraries were all intensely interesting "quarry,” easy to
obtain, it is true, but some zest was added to the chase in
seeking only the best editions. Then there were the classics
and some good translations; all the groat histories and
topographies; the magazines and publications of the learned
societies; the scarce books, the good “tall folios,” and the
dainty little duodecimos; all these were interesting, the
very handling of them was a satisfaction, the compilation
of their records was something better than "a dull catalogue
of common things.” There was another, and less pleasur-
able, duty in adding to the collection. The purely utili-
tarian side was never to be neglected. It was not such


pleasant work as dealing with the literary side, but the
Librarian never shirked it. The technical works, the
Ephamerides, the hiblia-a-biblia , as Lamb would call them,
•were essential in a general library for the public, and they
received a due share of attention from the Librarian. Much
of the work of a library is pleasurable, much is pure
drudgery, and Augustus Tulk had too keen a sense of duty
to shun the drudgery, greatly as he might love the other
portion of his work. To see the collection grow, and the
gaps filled in; to handle the beautiful volumes that Sir
Redmond loved to buy ; to condemn the “cheap” editions; to
browse amongst the shelves; to linger lovingly over some old
friend, or to stop, spell-bound, by some new one; these
were matters of delight to a man like Mr. Tulk; whilst to
discuss literary matters with his friends was a welcome
relaxation from the routine drudgery of official correspond-
ence, consulting catalogues, and ordering and classifying
books. But Augustus Tulk found time for all. His
correspondence and the routine matters of his office
received their due attention. And when the Trustees wished
to found an Art Department, it was he who first took
charge,' Mr. Tulk was a member of the Fine Arts Commission
of 1863, and he worked as zealously for the Art Gallery in
its early days as he had worked for the Library. He lived
to see the Institution duly incorporated, and the Museums
and Art Galleries attached to the Library. It was in the
world of hooks, however, that Augustus Tulk found his true
mi Her. He had learned to love books long before he came
to Australia, and his work, as has been said, was largely
•that of a collector. He was supposed to have known every
great hook shop in Europe, as well as in London, and it is
certain that he know the best of them. Moreover, he knew
his hooks. It is told of a well known bookseller, that when
some one praised a. great reader, on account of his wonderful
knowledge of hooks, ho replied with scorn, Knowledge of
books; he has no knowledge of books; he only knows the
insides of them.” Augustus Tulk knew both sides. His
seventeen years’ experience as Librarian had taught him
much as regards the commercial value of books, his life s


experience had taught him to value them in a higher sense,
for what was inside them. Blessed with a wonderful
memory —a valuable gift to any man, but doubly valuable
to a Librarian—he was able to use his knowledge to the best
advantage. He was to some extent a Librarian of the old
school, and to say that is to pay the memory of the man no
mean compliment. It means that he was of a school with
Dibdin, Laing, Douce, Ellis, and, perhaps, the old Italian
Magliabecchi. He had not the combination of scholarship
and practical librarianship of Panizzi, but he had
the wide reading and the real love of books that
so often marked the old-time librarian or keeper.
He was not the man to devise means to supply
promptly whatever information might be required. There
was no need for haste, and what was worth getting was
worth waiting for, if it could not be supplied from his own
capacious memory. So he had none of the aids to readers
that are so necessary in modern libraries. The collection
of 80,000 volumes, which he had got together with Judge
Barry’s aid, was an excellent one, and it was fairly classified,
though he differed from modern views of classification, toto
coelo, as he himself would say. It was as a collector and a
book lover, rather than as a Librarian, that the services of
Augustus Tulk were valuable. Por valuable they wore,
and many a man to-day owes an unknown debt of gratitude
to the first Librarian of the Public Library for the broad-
minded spirit, and for the dutiful and loving care which ho
spent on selecting the books, which were to form the founda-
tion of what will surely some day he recognized as a great
collection. In reporting the death of the first Librarian,
the Trustees stated that he had performed with niarked
ability, efficiency, and zeal, the numerous and varied duties
incident to the formation of the collection of hooks. His
extensive acquaintance with literature, ancient and modern,
enabled him to render most important assistance to the
Trustees, and, in addition to the labours imposed on him in
the discharge of the duties of Librarian, he undertook those
of Curator of the Museum, and was justly entitled to a true
recognition of his meritorious services in collecting, classify


ing, and arranging the pictures, statues, and other objects
of art, accumulated up to the time of the incorporation of
the Institution. These are simple statements of fact, but
much more might be said of Augustus Tulk. He was a
born linguist, and up to the time of his death was studying
Fijian and Australian dialects, in addition to keeping up the
knowledge of languages acquired in his early days. He was
a personal friend of Sir Redmond Barry, and his linguistic
attainments made him always a welcome guest when the
Judge was entertaining foreign visitors. He had a faculty
for making and keeping friends, owing to his kindly and
generous nature, and he never forgot any little obligations,
TIo found employment at the Library for his former servant,
John Hopkins, who was the steward on the General G-uyon,
lie, doubtless, helped Mr. Eugene von Guerard in obtaining
the appointment of Master in the School of Painting, and
lie assisted Mr. G. G. Brockway, the son of a lawyer in his
father’s constituency, in obtaining his first-appointment" at
tiro Library. Mr. Talk’s reputation as a librarian, and his
success in building up the Melbourne Library, led to induce-
ments being hold out to him to perform a similar service in
Sydney. But his heart was with the Victorian Institution,
which he declined to leave for the neighbouring State, as he
declined to accept proffered assistance to enable him to
obtain a librarianship in the Royal Household in England.
Victoria was fortunate in securing his services at the initia-
tion of her Public Library, and her citizens should be
grateful to a public officer, who quietly and unostentatiously
rendered a great and lasting service to his country. There
are men still living who remember the kindly old English
gentleman, whose wide reading and capacious memory were
seldom at fault on questions connected with general litera-
ture. They speak of him as a man dignified in presence,
courteous, and pleasant in manner. It is not, perhaps,
unfitting to close this brief notice with the words of a friend,
who wrote at the time of his death. "As a man he was
modesty, gentleness,, and innate nobleness of character, all
combined. There never breathed a human being in whom
refined culture, boundless knowledge, dignity of character,
s


and the deepest piety of spirit, were more firmly blended.
Vale. -Let this unfitting tribute from the hand of one who
knew him intimately, loved him deeply, and respected him
this side of veneration, be cast as a simple wreath on the
grave of Augustus Tulk.”
HENRY SHEFFIELD.
Mr. Henry Sheffield was the first Sub-Librarian of the
Public Library. The rapid growth of the Library had
soon made it necessary that Mr. Talk should have more
assistance than that of the Clerk and two nr three attend-
ants, who constituted the staff when he was appointed.
Henry Sheffield was selected for the office at the beginning
of 1858, as ho had some training amongst books in the early
days. He had served an .apprenticeship to a London book-
seller, and by dint of hard work and close application to the
duties of his new office he soon made himself of value to Mr,
Talk. He lived at the Library for some year's, in rooms
opposite the old Board Room, in the south side of the
Entrance Hall.
Mr. Sheffield, who is still living - , is of a very retiring dis-
position. He was appointed Librarian in 1873, in succes-
sion to Mr. Talk, and held that office until the appointment
of Dr. Bride, in 1881. In his later years at the Library,
Mr. Sheffield devoted himself mainly to the woi'k of cata-
loguing. The manuscript of the largo catalogue issued in
1880 is mostly in his handwriting, and he also compiled a
bulky manuscript list of pamphlets, which was never printed.
He did not attempt anything in the nature of a classified
catalogue, hut confined his entries as far as possible to wbat
are kntfwn as author entries, periodicals and publications of
Societies being grouped under such headings ,as " Reviews,
Magazines, and Journals,” and “ Societies and Clubs.” He
had a wonderful knowledge of the books in the Library, most
of which had passed through his hands on many occasions,
hut he was fortunate enough to retire before the problems
that perplex the more modern Librarian had become of great


import at tho Melbourne Library, Mr, Sheffield resigned
in 1881, and Iras since spent moat of his time in tho quiet
retirement of a country town.
THOMAS FRANCIS BRIDE, LL.D.
Dr. Thomas Francis Bride, who was appointed to the
Llbrarianship in 1881, had previously held office as Univer-
sity Librarian and Assistant Registrar. After a distin-
guished career in the Law School, in which he obtained two
exhibitions and the Law Scholarship, he accepted the office
of University Librarian in 1873. In 1879 ho took the
degree of Doctor of Laws, a degree* which had only been
taken, up to that time, by two others in tho young Univer-
sity. In 1880, Dr, Bride had some idea of devoting himself
to politics, and ho contested an election for North Melbourne
in the conservative interest. Ho polled a large number of
votes, but was defeated by a supporter of the Berry
Ministry. In tho following year ho was appointed
tp the position of Librarian by Mr. Graham .Berry,
although he had stood in opposition to his Govern-
ment. When. Dr. Bride accepted the Librarian-
ship, ho took office under grave difficulties, and his
work was that of a reformer. Ho had a splendid collection
of hooks, about 115,000 volumes in all, hut ho had no quali-
fied stall, and the Library was in a state of confusion through
lack of systematic management. To add to tho troubles of
tho now librarian, the shelves wore overcrowded, and hooks
wore stacked in groat heaps in different parts of the building,
awaiting accommodation, Tho classification was on a system
long since out of date. There were no subject catalogues,
nor guides of any kind to the books, except tho printed
author catalogue, and the Bay catalogues, which were sup-
posed to contain author entries for the particular sections
which they represented The staff consisted of throe assist-
ants, some half-dozen attendants, and a messenger. Two
or three years previously Sir Redmond Barry had introduced
tho system of appointing lads, who had matriculated at the
HA


University, to junior positions on the staff, in tbo hope that
they would continue their studies 1 and become qualified
assistants. Dr, Bride approved of this system, arid one of
his first efforts was to obtain the services of some junior
assistants, and to endeavour to raise the status of the Library
service so as to give them some reasonable career for which
to work. Pie himself started with a will to improve the
Library records, and, following in the footsteps- his prede-
cessor, attempted to carry out the cataloguing' of the now-
books himself, whilst his junior assistants were being trained.
He also adapted and adopted a new scheme of classification
for the books, but his difficulty was to obtain assistants
capable of carrying out his plans. In the- course of a
few years, by dint of hard work, he had improved matters
very considerably. The periodicals, which for tbo most part
had not been available to the public until bound, often
months after the date of issue, were placed in pigeon-holes
and made available as soon as received at the XAhrary. A
similar course was adopted with the newspapers, and a special
effort was made to improve this department, which had been
sadly neglected. A catalogue raisonn'e was commenced, and
the reclassification of the books was gradually carried out.
In connection with the latter work Dr. Bride was fortunate
in obtaining the services of the late Dr, Ga-gliardi, who
brought to bear on the task a trained mind and a con-
siderable knowledge of books. As the books were classified,
they were numbered on a system introduced by Professor
Nanson, and lists were made giving the exact contents of
each particular shelf. In 1882, Dr, Bride drew up a- report
on the establishment of a Lending Library, a course which
he then strongly recommended, although he did not succeed
in getting it established till ten years later. In the year
1886 he was beginning to reap the benefit of the services of
some of the assistants whom he had trained, and felt himself
able to take up the duties of Secretary to the Trustees in
addition to those- of Librarian. He was thus enabled to
devote more attention to the administrative work of the
Institution, and to assist the Trustees in matters -of general
policy and development. In 1895, after fourteen years of


hard work in the Library, Dr. Bride resigned in order to
accept the position of Curator of the estates of deceased
persons, an office which.he still holds.
MICHAEL FRANCIS BOWDEN, LL.B.
Michael 1* i'Dowden succeeded Dr. Bride as Librarian
iu 1895. He was first appointed to the staff in 1878, when
bir Hcdiuoud Barry was endeavouring to make the Library
service more attractive to young men, and was urging them
to, continues l their studies so as to fit themselves for the higher
positions in the Institution. Mr. Dowden at the time was
doubtful whether he would remain at the Library, as he had
a strong desire to devote himself to the profession of law,
and with this object in view he took the degree of Bachelor
of Laws at the Melbourne University, and was called to the
Bar in 1886. In 1888 he was promoted to the office of
second principal assistant, and gave up the idea of practising
his profession, in order that he might give his undivided
attention to the work of the Library. He made a special
study of cataloguing and classification, and until his appoint-
ment as Librarian ho was in charge of the compilation of
the catalogue vaisonn'c which had been started under Dr,
Bride’s regime. Mr. Dowden had an extensive general
knowledge, and a rapid method of grasping and following
up a clue in any difficult question of library research that
cam® before him. He was very thorough in his work, and
spared neither time nor troirble in seeking the solution of
some knotty point in library procedure. His untimely
death, when he had held office only for a few months, brought
to an end a promising career. He had not had time to
make his influence permanently felt when he was stricken
with pneumonia, and died, after a very brief illness, in
February, 1896. Mr. Dowden was deeply esteemed for his
high character and sterling qualities, and he had won for
himself a very sincere personal regard from all with whom
ho was closely associated.


MARCUS CLARKE
Marcus Clarke’s name is so well known as an Australian!
writer that the fact of his connection with the Public
Library is apt to be overlooked. It certainly was not as a
Librarian that he made his reputation, but he occupied
the position of Secretary to the Trustees from 1870 to 1873,
and was afterwards Sub-Librarian until his death, in 1881.
His father was a barrister-at-law, of Irish descent from
Cromwellian times, though the family was said to have
been originally English. Ho was a man of literary tastes
and Bohemian proclivities, and his son inherited both
characteristics. Marcus Clark© was born in London in
1846, and emigrated to Victoria, where he had influential
relations, shortly after the death of his father in 1864. He
obtained a clerkship in the Bank of Australasia, but such
uncongenial employment did not satisfy him, and he did
not satisfy his employers. He left the bank to learn
“colonial experience” on a station in the Wimmera district,
where he remained for two years, and then, thanks to a.
chance meeting with a medical man, who was able to appre-
ciate the mental gifts of the young "Jackaroo,” he obtained
a position on the staff of the "Argus.” Regular journalism,
however, was little more palatable to his mercurial tempera-
ment than had been his other attempts to earn a living, and
he soon became a “ free lance ” instead of a regular member
of the staff. He contributed some papers to the “Austra-
lasian,” under the vom de plume of the “Peripatetic Philo-
sopher,” and these papers at once stamped him as a brilliant
and graceful writer. In 1868 he joined J. J. Shilling-law
in editing the “Colonial Monthly,” and in its pages pro-
duced his first novel, “Long Odds.” He also edited for a
time a paper called "Humbug,” and, in addition to this
and his newspaper contributions, he tried his facile pen at
dramatisation. Indeed, very little literary work, save that
which demanded sustained effort, came amiss to Marcus
Clark©. Pungent satire, sparkling wit, pathos, and humour
flowed freely from his ready pen, and occasionally touches


of deep fouling and true expression showed that, with the
necessary effort, ho might have achieved oven much more
than ho did. Ho married in 1869. In the following year,
as tho result of a visit to Tasmania to recuperate from over-
work, he began to write the novel by which he is best known,
a very powerful tale of convict life, entitled “ For the Term
of His Natural Life.”
During his connection with the Public Library, Marcus
Olarko contributed to many of the* leading newspapers, and
to the local magazines, and translated, or, rather, adapted,
Molioro’s “Bourgeois Geutilhommo” for production on the
Melbourne stage. Ho also wrote one or two plays and a
number of short stories. His literary work was his life’s
work, and to it his Library work was entirely subordinate.
Tho visible records of his ten years’ work in the library are
some* badly kept minute hooks, and a worse than badly kept
catalogue of bibliographical works that wore his special
charge. Neither Marcus Clarke’s temperament nor training
rendered him suitable* for tho real work of a* Librarian. Tho
difficulties of scientific cataloguing and classification wore
not such as ho caml to master, and ho never loved hooks in
the sense that Sir Redmond Barry and Auguste Tulk loved
thorn. The* drudgery of tho routine work, which is essen-
tial for any Librarian, was not a thing that he would
attempt. It is doubtful if there was in his vocabulary such
a word as duty, and his conception of the work of a
Librarian was a strange one*. After ten years’ apprentice-
ship, tho letter that he wrote in applying for the office of
Public Librarian was one that might have been written by
tho veriest tyro. But if his services to the Institution wore
not what they might have* been, he at least gained the
admiration and affection of his colleagues, and pardonable
pride .may ho felt in the fact that one* who was so auspiciously
connected with tho early literature of Australia, was also
closely associated with tho Public Library. Sir Redmond
Barry and his fellow Trustees, and, indeed, most people who
know him, wore very merciful to Marcus Clarke. Faults
that would have gone far to ruin another man wore over-
looked in him. Genius has an imperialism of its own, and


save perhaps by his creditors, Marcus Clarke was generally
regarded as Legihns soluius. His reputation spread far
beyond Australia, and those associated with the Public
Library, in common with all who are interested, in Australian
literature, will always hold in proud as well as fond remem-
brance the name of Marcus Clarke as a powerful and brilliant
writer, a fascinating comrade, who was boon companion of
tho best Bohemian set that Melbourne ever knew, a reckless,
irresponsible, and wholly irresistible Bohemian, litterateur,
raconteur , viveur.
SIR FREDERICK MCCOY, K.C.M.G., D.SC., F.R.S.
Sir Frederick McCoy held office as Director of
the National Museum almost from its foundation,
till his death, in 1899. For forty-five' years he
was head of the Museum, 'which, in late years, at least:, was
his principal care in life. In 1854 Frederick McCoy was
appointed first Professor of Natural Science in tho newly
established University of Melbourne. Ho had previously
been Professor of Geology and Mineralogy in Queen’s
University, Belfast. As a very young man he had dis-
tinguished himself in paleontological work in connection
with the geological survey of Ireland. Tho value of his
published work on this subject obtained for him the honour
of an invitation to join the British Geological Survey, which
lie left to accept the professional chair at Belfast. When
appointed to Melbourne, ha was expected to teach Geology,
Zoology, Paleontology, Botany, Mineralogy, Chemistry, and
even comparative anatomy. The work has since been
divided amongst many teachers, but, up till the time of his
death, Sir Frederick McCoy regarded the first four
subjects as peculiarly his own. The principal works
which he published in Victoria were the “Prodromus
of the Palaeontology of Victoria,” and the "Prodromus
of the Zoology of Victoria.” Within two years
of his landing in tho colony, Professor McCoy, in
addition to his University duties, was appointed


HENRY SHUFFIELD.
SIR FREDERICK MCCOY.
MAROUS CLARKE.
J. COSMO NEWBERY.
GEORGE F FOLINGSBY.


Palaeontologist in the Geological Surveyor’s office. The
National Museum at that time consisted of a small collection
.got together by Sir Andrew Clarke. It was housed in the
Crown Lands Office, and during the Governorship of Sir
Charles Hotham, who looked upon the collection of stuffed
birds and beasts as a useless fad, its dispersement was
seriously considered. The Philosophical Society spoke for
the young Museum and asked to be given control of it.
Professor McCoy, however, suggested that it should be
transferred to the University, and as this did not meet with
the views of the Philosophical Society, the difference of
opinion led to some warmth of feeling. A public meeting
was got up to advocate the wish of the members of the
Society that the Museum should be housed at the
Public Library, but before it could be held Professor
McCoy had quietly transferred the exhibits to the Univer-
sity, and having once got control of them, he proved the old
adage that possession was nine points of the law. The
members of tire Philosophical Institute and others might
" protest,” but the exhibits were safely housed at the Univer-
sity, and there Professor McCoy intended that they should
remain, and there they did remain for forty years. In 1870,
the control of the Museum was vested in the Trustees of the
Public Library by Act of Parliament, but Sir Frederick
McCoy had been too long in command willingly to yield tbe
guidance of his beloved Museum into other hands. He
remained Director, subject to the Trustees by law, but,
whilst nominally recognising that authority, Sir Frederick
McCoy .managed to evade it as far as possible. Always
polite, he managed to “forget” or to “misunderstand” in-
structions in such a way that remonstrance was useless. One
chairman of his Committee of Control insisted upon bearding
him at the University, and took with him a number of the
Trustees. The Professor met them in the most affable way.
Before entering upon business he hoped they would have a
glass of wine with him, and then there was so much to talk
about "before we touch upon that subject, Mr. President,”
that the Trustees withdrew late in the evening without


having in any way broken down the barrier of suave and
gentlemanly resistance, behind which the Professor always
entrenched himself. On another occasion, a member of the
Board attacked the Professor somewhat rudely, though not
without reason. Instead of dealing with the gravamen of
the matter, the Professor calmly endeavoured to excuse tho
ill manners of his tormentor, and assured the Trustees
that he was not hurt at such conduct, as the constituents
of Mr. Blank (who was a member of Parliament) did not
expect him to understand or conform to tho standard
of manners which was customary amongst gentlemen.
Again and again instructions were given to the Director
that money was not to be spent in the Museum without their
sanction. But whon brought to hook, the particular item
was “ one urgently required,” or " a groat opportunity would
have been lost had tho matter been delayed,” or “tho order
was really too trifling to need ratification,” and so on.
Professor McCoy worked very earnestly for tho Museum.
He was in correspondence with a largo number of scientific
men, and he never lost an opportunity of acquiring a speci-
men for tho collection. He spared no pains in determining
and classifying the exhibits, and as his knowledge of Natural
History was an exceptionally wide ono, lie was able to build
up a collectidn of the greatest value to Students. His work
for the Museum was really the main work of his life, and ho
succeeded in the face of great difficulties, in making the
Museum a credit to the country in which most of his life was
spent, and a fine memorial of its first Director. Greatly as
it has been improved since his death, and greatly as doubt-
less it will bo improved in future, the credit of collecting,
determining, and describing the hulk of the collection will
always belong to the first Director,


JAMES COSMO NEWBERY, C.M.G., B.SC.
James Cosmo Newhery had been employed on the
Scientific staff of the Geological Survey of Victoria for three
or four years prior to the opening of the Industrial and Tech-
nological Museum. He received the appointment of Super-
intendent of the Museum on its foundation in 1870. Mr.
Newhery was born at Leghorn, in Italy, in 1843, and, when
very young, he went to the United States. He graduated
at the Harvard University, where he took the degree of
Bachelor of Science, and afterwards studied at the School of
Mines in London, in order to fit himself for the profession of
an analytical chemist. He came to Victoria in 1865 as
analyst to the Geological Survey under Mr. Selwyn, who
afterwards became Director of the Geological Survey of
Canada. Mr, Newhery lost this position when the depart-
ment was abolished by the McCulloch Government, and was
appointed analyst to the Department of Mines, an office
which he continued to hold in connection with that of Super-
intendent of the newly formed Industrial Museum. The
original idea of the Trustees with regard to the Museum was
that it should form a technical training school, and courses
of lectures were established in applied chemistry, geology,
mineralogy, and other subjects intended to teach science in
relation to industry. Mr. Newhery obtained the services
of Mr. Ulrich as an assistant, and for some years the
Museum made rapid progress. The work of getting together
collections of minerals, and objects illustrative of different
manufacturing industries, was steadily carried on by the
Superintendent, in addition to his teaching and laboratory
work, and in course of time, he obtained a very valuable
collection of exhibits. Probably the most instructive of these
were the rock and mineral collections, the mining and metal-
lurgical models, the phytological exhibits, and a very fine
collection of specimens of Victorian timbers. Mr. Newhery
was appointed honorary Superintendent of Juries at the
Melbourne International Exhibition of 1880, and in the
following year was made a Companion of the Order of St.
Michael and St. George in recognition of his services at the


Exhibition and of his scientific attainments. Mr. Newhery
was always interested in scientific mining, and in conjunc-
tion with Mr. Vautin he patented a process for extracting
gold from refractory ores, a subject to which ho devoted
much time and thought. He visited Europe at the end of
1889 to pursue his inquiries on this subject, and in connec-
tion with other matters relating to mining and industrial
processes.
In 1882 Mr. Ormond decided to establish the Working
Men’s College, and the Trustees felt that it would be
unnecessary to continue the classes at the Museum. The
College was opened in 1887, and shortly afterwards, the
telegraphy class, which had been continued longer than any
other under the direction of the Trustees, was abolished, and
the working of the Laboratories was stopped. Mr. New-
bery, however, retained the office of Srqoerintendent until
his death, in May, 189 S, and was allowed the right of pri-
vate practice as an analyst.
Mr. Newbery’s genial disposition won for him many
friends, and he was deeply esteemed by his scientific con-
temporaries, He was one of the victims of the railway
accident at Windsor, in 1887, and, although he obtained
twelve months’ leave of absence, to enable him to recruit,
he never entirely recovered from the’effects of the accident.
Shortly after his death his bust in marble was presented to
the Trustees by some of his friends and admirers, as a per-
petual memento of his services to the Museum and to the
community.
GEORGE FREDERICK FOLINGSBY.
Georg© Frederick Folingsby was the first Director of the
National Gallery of Victoria, although Mr. Eugene von
Guerard held a somewhat similar office, under the official
title of Master in the School of Painting. Mr. Folingsby
was an Irishman by birth, but emigrated as a young man to
the United States, where he obtained engagements on
Harper’s Magazine and other illustrated American journals.


Having made sufficient money to enable him to pursue his
studies, ho ■went to Munich, and studied ..under Karl von
Pilots. Ho remained at Munich for six years, and then
wont to Paris, where he worked under Thomas Couture for,
about a year. After some time spent in travelling, he
returned to Munich, where he remained for twenty-five
years, practising his. profession as an artist. In 1879, Sir
Charles Cavan Duffy advised him to come to Australia,
who.ro ho thought there was a g'ood opening for a portrait
painter. Mr. Polingsby, who was already known in
Victoria by his picture of Bunyan in Prison, was favourably
impressed with the suggestion, and, after communicating
with soma influential people in Melbourne, he determined to
settle in the colony. He received a commission from the
Trustees of the National Gallery authorising him to paint a
picture for the Gallery at a cost of £SOO. It was intended
that the picture should be painted after the arrival of the
artist in Melbourne, hut apparently Mr. Polingsby did not
understand this, and induced the Trustees to purchase his
picture of Henry VIII. and Anne Boleyn, which was painted-
before he left the Continent.
In 1880, Mr. Polingsby came to Victoria, where he
became very successful as a portrait painter, one of his
first commissions being to paint a portrait of Sir Redmond
Barry, which is now in the Wilson Hall at the University.
At the end of .1881, Mr. von Guerard retired from the office
of Master in the School of Painting, and early in 1882 the
Trustees advertised for a successor. There were sixteen
applicants for the position, but Mr. Polingshy’s name was
not amongst them. The appointment was to carry a salary
of £350 per annum and fees from the Students. The Trustees
were apparently desirous of obtaining Mr. Polingshy’s ser-
vices, and negotiations were entered into with him, the result
being that he was appointed as Director of the National
Gallery and Master in the School of Art, at a salary inde-
pendent of any fees received from Students. One of Mr.
Polingsby’s first acts as Director was to discontinue tho prac-
tice of copying from pictures in the Gallery. He made the
Students give much more attention to drawing from life,


and lie may be said to have made the first attempt to take
the study of art seriously. He introduced a properly
organised system of teaching painting, and gave the Students
facilities for drawing from life in the evening classes as well
as in the day time. lie started a class in painting from the
head, and as the schools developed, he encouraged the Stu-
dents to work at landscape in the open, and to do other work
outside of the schools. He. also induced the advanced pupils
to compose and paint pictures under his direction. He.
initiated the regular exhibitions of Students’ work, and
advised the Trustees in regard to the foundation of the
Travelling Scholarships, which were first awarded in 1887,
in which year it was won by Mr. John Longstaif. Mr.
Folingsby retained his office as Director of the Gallery until
his death on the 4th of January, 1891.


THE PUBLIC LIBRARY BUILDINGS, 1906
(Central Front).


INDEX.
n’Bockott, Justice, 85.
n’Boukott, T. T„ 25, 56.
“African panthers,” GB,
“ After the massacre of Glencoe”
Gl.
“ After the storm,” 59.
Alfred Hospital, 24.
Altson, A., 63, 74.
Altson, M., 85.
Amnu-Joan, 01,
Andrews, E. W., 67.
“ Anguish,” 40.
Attendants, Police Constables
employed na, 67-8.
Ansdell, 39,
Archer, W, H„ 4.1.
Armstrong, K. La T., 74.
Art gftl lory. A'cc ISTati onal gallery
L’aninrtno, 90.
Australasian Association for the
A dvanoomont of Science, 81
“Autumn in the Pitzroy gardens,”
73.
Badoock, J., 25, 36,
Ball, I>., 58, 64, 75.
Ballarat Art Gallery, 76.
Darkly, Sir H., 7,9, 12, 14,
Barry, Sir Eodmond, appointed
Trustee, 1 ; addresses, 9, 12,
10; goes to England, 13; bust
of, 13 j obtains donations, 14,
16! appointed to the Eine
Arts Commission, 15; letter
to Tuik, .17 ; elected Pres-
ident, 20; coat of arms, 31-2;
visits Europe and America,
37; death of, 41-2; statue of,
57; biographical note, 94-102.
Batman, J., 40, 48.
Battye, J. S„ 72.
Barry Hall, 54-5, 89.
Barye, 91.
Baxter, C., 15, 16,
Beardall, J., 25.
Bedford, T. 8.. 13, 15.
Boechuy, Sir AY., 16.
Bell, G.-f 80.
Belle Yseult, La, 15.
Bendigo Art Gallery, 76.
Benevolent Asylum, 22, 23.
Bent, T., 72.
Bentley, W. E., 57.
“ Between Tallarook and Yea.”
85.
Berry, Sir G„ 51. 87.
Beyle, 44.
Bindon, S. H., 22, 25, 30, 40,
Bird, E. D., 56-7.
Blandowski, 27.
Bleasdale, Bev. J. 1., 25, 40.
Boehm Sir 8,, 58.
Booth, G., 92.
Boroondara, 10, 11.
“ Boulevard, Montmartre,” 90.
Boys. B. I)., 80, 82.
Brasaey, Lord, 74, 75, 76, 81.
Brazier, A. "W., 82.
Bride, T. E.. 41, 43, 47. 48, 54,
Gl, 73, 74, 78, biographical
note, 115-17.
Brierly, 44.
Bright, C. E., 25, 33, 46, 48.
“ Bright winter’s morning,” 73,
74.
Brighton, 10.
Brookway, G. G„ 7, 58.
Bromley, E. H., 73.
Brooke, G, Y., 22.


Brown, I l '. M., 91.
" liuckhmd valley,” 07.
" Buffalo Bongos,” 10.
Buildings, (11,07, 78.
Bunny, .11,, 08.
Buuyuii in Prison,” 1(1, 159.
Burgoyno, 2.
Burke and Wills expedition, 35.
Bums, A., 80.
" Bush tire in Uippsland,” 78.
‘' Bush Symphony,” 82,
Butler, Lady, 52. 81.
Bimihit, 2(1, 59, 85.
Buvelofc G-allury, 55, 57* 59, 01,
70.
Gain, J., 58.
Campboll, O.h*,, 37, 51..
" Canute listening to tho monks
of Ely.” 91.
Caretaker's Cottage, fid.
Carlilo, 10., 85.
Ciiatlonan, Comte de, 19.
Catalogues, 18, 1(1, 38, 12,71,85.
Oatani, D'., 07.
Gedorhorg, F., 1(1.
Chapman, F., 85,
CJiovalior, Nl, 1(1, (1(1,
Childers, H.C.E., suggests fouu-
diitiou of Library, ,1 j ap-
pointed Trustee, 1; to select
Works of Art, 8, 15 j super-
seded as Trustee, 11.
“ Ohloo,” 18,
Christophorson and Brown, 80.
Christaphersou, W. P., 88.
“ Christ’s lesson in humility,” 91.
“ Church of Bt. Anno, Bruges,”
72.
“ Circe,” 82-3,
Clark, T,. 12, 2(1, 37.
Clarke, Sir A., 8, 15, 10, 27.
Clarke, M„ 2(1, 31, 11, 13 ; bio-
graphical note, 118-20.
Clarke, P., 71.
Clarke, Sir W. X, ,39.,
Clausen, (L, 90.
Cleary, W,., 5, 31, 35.
Coates, CK, 75, UK.
CogOU, 41'.
Cohen, I. 92,
Cole, T ,91.
Collier, 'l'., 9,1.
Collingwpod, 10, 11.
Colonial and Indian exhibition,
59.
Commercial bureau, 7(1.
OouiiniHsiou on the Fine Arts,
in. IH, 21.
Committees, 25-0, 51-2, 53-1, 77.
Cook, Captain, •IK.
Cope, <l. VV,, 10. ,
Copying nf pictures, -.MI.
Copyright, 17.
Copyright Ail;, 29,
“ Cottage scenery," HI.
Oourtauhl, !U.
Gourtons, 11.
Cox, I)., 91.
Creswick, H 9,
" Crisis/’ 11(1.
Guuiborhuui, G., 2,0,
Guilin, ,K„ U, 111, 01.
DaJgoby, F. U., 111.
.Darling, Sir („!,, 10.
Davies, 1J„ 7!!.
“ Deer stealers pursued by
sleuth hounds,” (U),
Domout, A., 70.
“.Depart du Fiance,” 10.
“ Departure of (Jm Pilgrim
Fathers,” 1,0.
Dewey Decimal system, 80.
Diamond Jubilee Loan exhibi-
tion, 7(1.
Diekseo, F„ (10.
Dobson, F. S., 1)2, <tC, 73.
“ Don Quixote,” 70.
Dowdeu, M. I’., 08, 01, 73, 74,
biographical noto, 117.
" Drnidioal monuments,” 3(1.


Duffy, Sir O. G., 15, 25,37,39.
Ho.
Dunn, P., 52.
“ Duustanborough Castle,” 59.
11 (Ivor, 66.
Easterly breeze,” 57.
Eastlake, Sir G., 15, 16,
Edinburgh, H.R.H, Duke of, 21.
Edwards, 8., 92.
Edwards, Mrs,. 92,
Electric light, 49, 81,
Ellery, It. L. J., 27, 46, 70.
“ England,” 39.
“ English Summer Day,” 68.
“ Entombment,” 91.
Eschke, 44.
Etchings. 66, 68, 70,
Ethnological collection, 80, 84.
•' Evening shadows. Otira Gorge,”
(ili.
Exhibition at Library buildings,
19.
Exhibition of Australian art,
London, 77.
Exhibition of works of art, 23,
(i(5.
Exhibitions, 30, 31.
Fagan, 64-6.
“ Faith," (57.
“Feeding time,” 73, 82.
Fellows, T. H„ 25.
Felton, A„ presents picture, 68 ;
bequest, 87, 80, 90, 91, 92;
portrait of, 02.
“ La Femme Couehco, 91,
Fencing, 37.
Fergnsaon and Mitchell, 71.
“ Fern gatherer,” 15.
“ Pom Tree Gully,” 7.
“ Ferry on the Fiver Ninfa,” 16.
Fildos, L., 06.
Fire, protection against, 35, 78,
80.
Fire in laboratory, 58.
“First Cloud,” 57.
“ First meeting between Henry
VIII. and Anne Boleyn,” 40.
“First snow in the Tyrolean
Alps/’ 21.
Firth, 38.
“ Fisherman’s head,” 91.
Fitohott. W. H., 69.
Fitzgerald, T. N., 48.
Folingsby, G. F., 16,39,40,45,
46, 53, 56, 64, 65 ; biographi-
cal note, 124-26,
Folingsby, Mrs. 65.
Foord, 27.
Forster, ,T. 27, 81.
Fox, E. F., 76, 84, 85.
Francis, J. G., 25, 33, 51.
Franks, Sir W., 74.
“French artists in a Spanish
posada,” 15.
Fulker, 27.
Gagliardi, F., 52, 58, 61. 77.
Gallot, G. M., 4.
Gatos, 34.
Geological survey, 24, 29.
Germany, Emperor of, donation
to Library, 49.
Qilbee, Dr., 13, 55, 84.
Gilbert, A., 60, 91.
Gilbert, J„ 57.
Gilbert, Sir J., 44.
Gillen, F. J., 80. 83.
“ Golden Age,” 74.
Goodall, F,, 21.
Gould’s “ Birds,” 4.
Gow, 40, 84.
Graham, .T., 61.
Graham, P., 57, 61.
Graves, H. and Go., 76.
Great Hall. 20, 22, 24, 33, 34,36,
70.
Gieene, M., 59, 09.
Grosvenor gallery international
exhibition, 57.
Gride, 59.
Guerard, E. von, 7, 22, 26, 44.
0


Guildhall loan exhibition, 81.
Guillaume, 5,7, 14.
Haro, H. ft,. 92.
“ Haidoe,” 01.
Hail storm in Melbourne, 89-4'.
Halford, ft. 1!., 27.
Hall, 1,. H., 6(1, (18, 86. HO, 90, 91.
Ham, 0, J.. 48, 115, 7(1.
Harper, A,, 51, 5.8, 85.
“ Haunt of ancient pence,” HI.
Hearn, W. E., fill.
"Heart of the Ooolins,” 57.
Herbert. J. E,, 27, 61, 36, 36, 38.
Hardman, E., 15.
Heriug, 31.
Horkomor, H., CIO, 04, (55, (1(1, (18.
Hem mg, ,T. F., 15.
Hoysen, H.,92.
Higinbotlmm, Q ~ 50.
Hodges, J,, 0.
Hodges, Justice, 64
Hoey, 27, 6(5,
Hopetoun, Oonntoas of, 8(1.
Hopkins, ft., 8.
" Horses bathing in the sen,” 82.
Horsley, ,1. C,, (1(1,
Hotluun, Sir C., 3, 28, '
Howitt, JO., 61.
Hunt, H., 90, 92,
Illumination of buildings, 83.
" Importunate neighbour,” 90,
Industrial and Technological
Museum, 23, 24, 27, 29, 30,
6(1, 50-51, 59, 02, 69, 70, 79,
81, 86, 87, 89.
See also Grant Hall.
“ In the fields,” 70.
Inglis, 30.
Institution, Title of, 18.
Interchange of pictures, 72, 77.
Intercolonial Library Confer-
ence, 74-5.
Irving, M. H., 7, 30, 86.
Isaboy, B„ 90.
"Italian brigands,” 34,
“ James Watt’s workroom,” 59.
Johnson, B. 8., OH.
“Josephine signing the act oi
her divorce,” 59-
Josko, A., 80.
Keene, 0., 91.
Kerr, J. M„ 82, H(l.
Kershaw, J. A., 82.
Kew, 19, LI,
Itookkoek, H„ 51).
Kollor, ft-., 10.
Laboratory, 58, 02
Lace, 88.
“ Landing* of Captain (look," 85
“ Land’s End,” 59.
Langton, E., appointed Trustee
35; i‘looted Treasurer, 37
elooted yieu-l’rimidont, 50
visits England, 57; oleetet
President, 75 j death, 91
biographical note, 105-7.
Lntvobe, C, J„ X, 4,. 48, 78,
Lntrobe gallery, 70.
Laurens, J. P., 91.
Lnyraud, 34.
Lectures, 27, 30, 4(1.
Longer, A., 5(1, 73.
Lefebvre, 48.
Lending library. 47, 04-5, 08-9
70, 74, 79-80, 85.
Leslie, (1, E., 91.
“ Letters from Victorian pion-
eers,” 48, 78,
Librarian. See Tnlk, Sheffield
Bride, Dowdun, Armstrong.
Librarian’s quart;; ira, (19.
Libraries Act, 53, (IL,-H7.
Library Association of Aus-
tralasia. 73, 74-6, 85-0.
“ Light of the world,” 92.
Linaore, A., 7, 13, 22.
Lindsay, Sir 0., 57.
Linnell, 59.
" Little copse on the hill,’ 08.
Loan exhibition of books, 74, 80,


Xjocli, Sir H., 54-5. 58, 60, 69.
Looking-ton, 62.
Loudon International Exhibi-
tion, 33.
Long, E., 39.
Long-stall', J., 57, 67, 70, 73, 78,
84.
Louroiro, A.., 84.
“ Love anil death,” 57.
Mo Allan, J., 87.
Mu Arthur, Major-General, 4.
McArthur, I). 0., appointed Trus-
tee, 1; elected Vice-Presi-
dent, 34 j elected President,
42 ; resigns Preside utshijr,
48; death, 56 ; biographical
note, 103-3.
McArthur, G., 87.
McArthur gallery, 36, 70.
Mao Bain, Sir J., 54, 68.
McCoy, Sir P., 27-9, 79; bio-
graphical note, 120-3.
McOubbin, 54, 64, 73, 83, 85, 86.
McCulloch, Sir ,T., 25, 48, SJ, 56,
60, 63-3, 69, 91.
McCulloch. Lady, 91,
Mao Bengali, I)., 40.
MacGregor, J., 35, 51.
Mttckenual, B„ 65, 81. 82-3.
MauMahou, Sir 0., 32, 65.
MacPhorson, J. A., 25, 33, 87, 40,
65.
Madden, Sir J., 74.
Miumera-Suttou, Sir J. H. T.,
20, 23.
“Marriage of St. Catherine,” 23.
Mather, J., 67. 69, 73, 01.
Muund, Dr., 16.
Medals, 63, 69.
Meiasonior, !)0,
Melba, Madame, HI,
Melbourne Centennial Interna-
tional Exhibition, 58.
Melbourne Hospital, 23, 27, 31.
Melbourne International Exhibi-
tion, 44.
Meldrnm, 1). M„ 80.
“ Memories of the first Palm
Sunday,” 31.
Metcalfe, J., 3.
Meyerheim, 66.
Miohie, Sir A., 13, 33, 26, 33, 35, 36.
Middleton, 64, 66.
Mineral collection in Exhibition
Building, 79.
Mitchell, Sir W. H. P., 30, 51.
Mogford, J., 15.
Molliaon, W. T.. 15.
Monteflore, E., 25. 3J.
" Moourise,” 73.
Moorhouse, Bishop, 6 4.
“ Morning after Trafalgar,” 59.
“ Morning. Late Omuo,” 67.
Morris, E. E., 40, 51-3, 63, 73,
83, 84; biographical note,
107-8.
Morrish, 31.
“ Moses bringing down the
tables of the law,” 33, 88.
Mueller, Baron von, 37.
Murphy, Sir P., 14, 37.
Murphy, J, 13.
Murray, G. P., 92.
Nauson, E. J., 40.
Napoleon 111., 7.
National art gallery of New
South Wales, 77.
National Gallery. 7, 8-9, 12;
opening of, 14-15; trans-
ferred to site of Verdon
gallery, 30; erection of pic-
ture galleries, 27, 31, 34, 35,
01, 62, 69; lighted by elec-
tricity, 49 ; opened at night,
49, 68, 70; opened on Sun-
days, 50-1; naming of gal-
leries, 70; illustrated 'cata-
logue, 71; Pelton bequest,
87-91.
See also School of design,
School of painting, School of
applied art.
9a


National gallery annual art
exhibition, 66-7,
National Museum, Removal to
Public Library, (1, 24. 28, 37,
79 j early history of, 27;
vote for extension, 59 i erec-
tion of new buildings, 80,
83, 88, 92; opening of new,
81 ; building at University
handed over to Government,
Hi; closed for re-arrange-
ment, 81.
“Nativity,” 84.
“ Near Mannaton, Devon,” 31.
Neville, A., 45.
Newbery, ,T. C., 24, 27, 53, 57,
64, 73, 75 ; biographical note,
123-4.
Newspaper room, 35, 37, 45, 53,
59.
“No Surrender,’’ 40, 84.
North, J. TV., 68.
Nozal, 67.
Numbering of books, 44.
Ocock, 40.
Officer, Q-., 84.
Officers, appointment of, 41-3,
44-5, 51. 62.
“ Okehampton castle,” 91.
O’Loghlen, Sir 8., 46, 47, 91.
Orolmrdson, 57.
Ormond, P., 40.
O’Shanassy, Sir J„ 25, 48, 59.
O’Shanassy, M., 59.
Palmer, Sir J., 1,3, 30.
Paterson, H. W,, 22, 23.
Paterson, J. P., 82, 85, 86.
Paterson Bros., 89.
Pearson, C. H., 44, 46, 51, 69.
Peela, J., 66.
Pegram, 91.
Pennell, J., 72, 90.
Periodicals, 55.
“Perseus arming,” 91.
Philadelphia centennial exhibi-
tion, 36.
Phillip, J7l>.
Phillott, 31.
Philosophical inatifcuta, t», 28.
Picture gallery* b ,r Nathi
gallery.
Pissarro, 90.
“ Ploug'bman’B 1 ii’i'jikiiiHf , ’ ill
Police cottagcH, 11 • >*9.
Police court, protest agai
erection of, Hi, Hi).
Portico, 25, HO.
“Portrait of a gentleman,” (ii
“Poultry vendor,*' 15.
Praliran, 10.
Pratt, 59.
Pro-historic implements, 74.
President. See .Harry,McArll
Verdon, lAington, Turner.
“Priero duns la chapelle," ill)
“ Proserpine,” 92.
Public Library, KsUblisliim
lj building', 2, 11, li, 47,
52-3, 78; foundation sb
laid, 3; opened, 4; rub's,
Act of Incorporation, 23,
re-organisu,t.ion,47-Hi Ugh
by electricity, 'HI i intpi
desk, 55, 7H , distribution
government publications,
card catalogue, 1)5 ; ullii
78; accession-books in-
duced, 81 ; erection of i
building' HUggcsted, Hi)-
Mje also Harry I lull, Tamil
Library, Newspaper Roi
Queen’s Rending Room,
Public service act, 51-53, 02.
Public service re-classilloat
board, H 2,
Pnrchas, (i., 75, 77.
“Purple noon’s transpar
might,” 75.
“ Quatre Urns,” 52, HI.
“Queen Esther,” 39.
Queen’s Heading ’Room, 9,
89.


Quinn, J., 71, 84.
“ Eaohol going to the well,” 21.
Rackham, A., 91.
Bony, W. T„ 86.
Rood, X, 2,6, 20, 62,
.Reid, Rev. J., 71.
Rembrandt, 6(1.
Retrenchment, 67, 75, 77.
Bicards, J. It., 16.
" Bight of Way,” 06.
RiviiVc, 59, 60, 66,
Roberts, I)., 72.
Rodin, 91..
“ Homan holiday," 59.
“ Rose of England.” 16.
■' Rosebud of England,” 15.
Rossetti, 92.
" Rotterdam,” 22.
Rotunda-, 20, 35-37, 53, 59, 78, 80.
Royal academy, 82, 84.
Royal Anglo-Auatraliun society
of artists, 70.
Rule, O. 1f,., 3!), 64, 68.
Rules and regulations, 25, 30,
32-3, 77.
Hunting. 45.
Ruslan, 27, 30, 36.
Sailors’ Homo, 24.
“ St. George and the dragon,”
58 ,• companion statue, 65.
St. ICilda, 10.
“ Salvation Army shelter,” 68.
Sargood, Sir E., 76.
“ Secne on the Hudson,” 16.
“ Scene onthoico at Stockholm,” 16.
Schonck, 40.
Schoudcl, P. van, 18.
School of applied art, 75, 77.
School of design, rules, 21 j fees
21 ; master in, 24, 26; exhi-
bitions, 35-6, 63 ; teacher of
technical drawing, 60.
School of painting, master in,
20, 26, 45; rules, 21: fees,
2.1; exhibitions, 35-6, 63,
66-7, 81.
See also Travelling- scholarship.
Sculpture, 78, 91.
“ Sea Idylls,” 68.
Secretary, 2, 26, 54.
“ Seine il Saint Pierre, pres Lou-
viers,” 67.
Service, ,T., 49, 56.
Sharp, A. M., 88.
Sheffield, H„ 6, 14, 34, 39-42;
biographical note, 114-15.
Simpson, G-. G., 60.
“ Sirens,” 73.
’ Site for institution, 2,3, 7, 11.
Bladen ministry, 22.
Smith, X, 15, 4 1, 58.
Smith, E. M„ 76.
Smythe, L., 64.
Solomon islands, 84.
Sonntag, 16.
“ Southwold,” 92.
Souza-Pinto, X X, 70.
Sowerby, 27.
Spencer, W. 8., 73, 79, 83.
Stanfield, 59, 91.
Stanford, E. W., 85.
Stawell, Sir W., 1, 57, CO.
Stawell gallery, 20, 70.
Stewart, A., 54.
Stocktaking, 7, 12.
Streoton, A., 75.
Strong, H. A., 39, 51.
Snb-Librarian. See Sheffield,
Clarke, Brazier.
Sngdon, Rev. E. H., 85.
Sullivan, E. X, 91.
Summers, C„ 12, 13, 15, 39.
Sunday opening, 30, 49-51, 63,
88-9.
“ Sunshine and shadow,” 92.
Swan, J. M., 68.
Swain, 91.
Syme, D., 60.
Tadenia, Alma, 56, 59, 62-3.
Tangye, 59.
Ta.ppin, W. B„ 90.
Technological commission, 22,


Technological museum. Men In-
dustrial mid technological
museum.
Telegraphy idass, SI).
Telephones, H 2.
Tennyson, Lord, Oil.
Theft of Looks, SO.
Thomas, W. 0., 1)1.
Thompson, S., 40, Sit.
Thomson, A. T,, 21, 211, HO-7,
Hi), 02, 50, (10, (12-11.
Thmunnan, ill.
Timi's, Thu, 4.
Title deeds, 11.
Tomaasi, do, 44.
“Too Into,” 71.
Townsend, ill.
“ Tranquil winter.” 74.
Travelling', libraries, 8, ID, 20.
Travelling scholarship, fund in-
vested, 2H ; established, fillj
awarded, 57, (ill, 71, 75, HO,
85, HH, 112; gold medal for,
(ill; pictures painted under
terms of, 7H, 74'. 84 i outside
students allowed to compete,
77,
Treasurer, HO. 1!!!, 117, 5(1, 58,
Treeby, 4,8.
Trustees, first, 1 i first meeting,
2 i number of, 1(1. H 7 i incor-
porated, 25 i suggested num-
ber and powers of, 45, oil,
Tschaggony. 10., 15.
Tucker, A. L., 75, Ho.
Tucker, T. «., 70, HO,
Tulk, A. H,, appointed librarian,
6 i proposal to sond to Kng-
land, 7i goes to England,
14 j appointed to Pino Arts
Commission, 15 i obtained
donations, 10, 17 i copyright
scheme, 17 i report on visit
to England, IKj historical
narrative of visit of the
Duke of Edinburgh, 21;
doath, 114 j biographical note,
108-114,
Turner, 11. (L, appeinted Trus-
tee, 51; elected Treasurer,
50 j resigns Treasurership,
58 j elected acting Vice-
President, HH j elected Vice-
President, 84 i elected Presi-
dent, ill.
Turner, J. M, W„ 511, 111.
Turnstiles, HO, SO,
Ulrich, 27, HO.
"Ulysses and the sirens," 00.
Undesirable visitors, 87.
Uniforms, 52.
University of Melbourne, H.
Yale, W. M. K„ HI, H 2 411, 7H,
Van 'Dyck, 2H, 00,
Varlcy, til,
Yasselot, M. de„ 00,
Verdun, Bir (4-., appointed to Eino
Arts Commission, 15 j iutro-
ducoß bill to incorporate in-
stitution, 21; asked to select
pictures, 27 i appointed Trus-
tee, 82 s elected Treasurer,
HH i elected Vice-President,
42 i elected President. 48 s
visits Europe, 0,1-H j asked
to collect specimens of com-
mio art, 72 ; death, 75: bio-
graphical note, 104-5.
Verdun gallery, 20, 7.1.
Vibert, G. J., 1.5,
Vice-President.
Men Miebie, McArthur, Ver-
don, McCulloch, Liington,
Morris, Turner, Wrixon,
Victoria, H.M, Quecu, Oil, 05,
OH, 70, 70.
Victorian artists’ association,
51), 01, 78, 7H, 85.
Victorian Gallery of Art, 27.
“ Victory of faith,” 02.
ViiM'go, 1)1.
Villa Alhani, 17.


“ Vintage festival,” 50.
“ Visum of St. Stanislaus,” 84.
Waits, .1. 0„ 92,
Walcott, It. H., 68, 76, 82.
Walkin', F„ HR.
Walltm, It., (50, 71.
Wallis, T., 63-4, lid.
Ward. 51),
AVardell, W. W., 15.
Wash Mil, IS., 4,5, 7.
Watchman, 82,
Watergate Bay,” 15.
Waterhouse, J, W., (ill.
Watson, T. ,T„ 81.
Watts, CL F„ 57. fill.
Way, A. S,, 56, 85,
Webb, .] ~ 23.
AVobor, 21.
Weigall, T., 15.
Welch, Buoy 15. K„ 82.
“ Welcome Shade.” 57.
Wove, 'll).
Westminster, Duke of, 51).
" Wheatso.
Whistler, 68.
Wilkinson, F.. 15.
Williams, P,, Id,
Wilson, 11., 1)0.
Wilson, W. 15.,I 5 ., 15, 27.
" Winter evening,” 82.
Withers, W„ 73. 74,
Wooleott, It. H., 13.
Working men’s college, 46, 70.
Wrixon, Sir H„ 85,1)1.
Wynfleld, 44.
Wyon, 63,
“Young bull and herdsman,”
58.
Zeal, Sir W, A„ 72. ■
Printed liy Foul) & Son, Drummond Street, Carlton, Melbourne.
