

fkti-t
parlium^ittarg
QTJEEIN'SiL.AJOTD
SECOND SESSION OF THE NINTH PARLIAMENT.
No. 63.
SATURDAY, 22nb NOVEMBER, 1884.
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY.
Friday, 21 November, 1884.
The SPEAKER took the chair at half-past
FORMAL MOTION.
The following formal motion was agreed to: —
By Mr. MAOFARLANE—
• That there ho laid upon the table of the House, a
showing the tenders invited, received, and ac-
cepted for railway carriages; lines due and collected
thereon ; also the cost of such carriages a.s constructed
by outside contractors, and in the Ipswich workshops.
QUESTION WITHOUT NOTICE.
Mr. NORTON said: Mr. Speaker,—Before
the Orders of the Day are called upon, I wish to
ask the Minister for Works if there is any truth
in the report of two trains having nearly run
into each other on the Sandgate line on Tuesday
last ? It is mentioned in the Courier this morn-
ing, and I heard it spoken of as I Was coming
into town.
The MINISTER FOR WORKS (Hon. W.
Miles) said ; I am not Aware of anything of the
sort. It is tire first I have heard of it.
The Hon. J. M. MACROSSAN; I heard
the rumour last night ; I do not know whether
there is any truth in it.
The MINISTER FOR WORKS j I am not in
a position to contradict it.
Mr. NORTON : Perhaps the hon. gentleman
will be good enough to make inquiries and let the
House know.
Air. BEATTIE : Mr. Speaker,-—lliad mado up
my mind to draw the attention of the Minister
for Works to the report. The information I
have is that a special train left Nudgee, in oppo-
sition to the staff and ticket system adopted by
the Government, with nearly 800 passengers on
board, for Ipswich. On leaving Nudgee another
train was seen coming in the opposite direction,
and the special had only sufficient time to get
back on the siding before the other went through.
There was nearly a collision, and if the special
had started a minute or two sooner there
would have been one of the most frightful
collisions that have ever happened; that is,
if the information I have received be cor-
rect. I hope the Minister for Works will
inquire into the matter, because there appears to
have been very gross neglect on the part of some-
body at the Nudgee station.
BRANDS ACT OF 1872 AMENDMENT
BILL-CONSIDERATION OF LEGIS-
LATIVE COUNCIL’S AMENDMENTS.
On the motion of the Hon. B. B. MORETON,
the Speaker left the chair, and the House re-
solved itself into a Committee of the Whole to
consider the amendment made in the Bill by the
Legislative Council.
The Hon. B. B. MORETON said that if hon.
members would look at the 38th section of the
Brands Act they would find that the latter
portion read as follows :
“ And. if the jury, upon the trial of any person charged
before any court with the offence of horse or cattle
stealing, shall be of opinion that such person did not
commit the felony with which he is charged, but did
commit one of the minor offences mentioned in the 23th
and 29th clauses of this Act, It shall be lawful for the
jury to acquit such person of the felony and to find him
guilty of such offence, and he shall thereupon receive
sentence accordingly, although such person may never
have been charged or accused of such minor offence
before any justice or otherwise.”
Into that section an error had crept in stating
the 29th clause instead of the 27th, though in
the marginal note it was correct, the elause
there mentioned being the 27th and 28th. He
was informed that one offender, if not more, had
escaped on account of the error. The amend-
ment was a verbal one, and he therefore moved
that it be agreed to.
Question put and passed.
On the motion of the Hon. B. B. MORETON,
the House resumed, and the Chairman reported
that the Committee had agreed to the amend-
ment of the Legislative Council.
The report was adopted, and the Bill was
ordered to be transmitted to the Legislative
Council by message in the usual form.
PHARMACY BILL CONSIDERATION
OF LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL’S AMEND-
MENT.
On the motion of Mr. BAILEY, the House
went into Committee to consider the amend-
ments made by the Legislative Council in this
Bill.
Mr. BAILEY said that the Assembly had in-
sisted on the amendment in clause 5, and he
would refer hon. members to the reasons given
by the Legislative Council for disagreeing to it.
They said :
“ Because the Bill provides for the examination toy the
board of pharmacy of persons desirous of being regis-
tered as pharmaceutical chemists, and it is expedient,
for the safety of the public, and in order to secure proper
examination, that all members of such hoard should,
before their appointment thereto, have proved themselves
qualified to conduct the prescribed examination by
having passed a similar examination.”
He held in his hand a letter from one chemist
showing how very wrong the clause was as
originally drawn up in another place ; and point-
ing out that there ware no other chemists in the
same position as hiffiself who were qualified in
the same way. The letter was to the following-
effect :
“ With reference to the qualification as members of
the intended pharmacy board, I would draw your atten-
tion to the fact that the Pharmaceutical Society was not
established In Ireland until ten or eleven years ago;
therefore an Irish chemist who arrived in this colony be-
fore that time would not have the diploma of the Pharma-
ceutical Society, and would not therefore be entitled,
according to the intended Act, t o sit on the board, t hough
he may have had a professional experience of over
thirty years. A school of pharmacy ol the Apothecaries’
Hall of Ireland has existed in that country for nearly 100
years, and is In existence still as the premier school (in
conjunction with the recently formed Pharmaceutical
Society) members of which had, previous to the forma-
tion of the Pharmaceutical Society, the sole right to
compound medical men’s prescriptions.”
Then he explained the status of the Irish
chemists, and the examination to which they wer
subjected. That examination was a very string'ent
one, and in England would actually qualify
a man to practise as a medical man. Yet such a
man would be disqualified from sitting on tire
board here. But the writer made the same nijis-
take that had been made by those who objected to
the amendment, in thinking that the members of
the board would be the examiners. He (Mr.
Bailey) had tried to explain as well as he could, in
introducing the Bill, that nothing of the kind was
intended. The Government would appoint the
first board to examine in various subjects, and
the chemists on their part would appoint exami-
ners, but not to direct the line of examination ;
and they certainly would not bo. examiners
themselves, except in special cases. Instead
of dwelling on the subject, he had better
read the reasons which he proposed to submit to
the Legislative Council why the amendment
should be insisted-upon ;
1. Because, without the amendment in clause 5 the
Government would he limited in their choice of the
members of the first pharmacy board to medical men,
which would cause that board only to be a repetition of
the present Medical Board.
2. Because the members of the pharmacy board would
not be of necessity examiners. Their experience
would be able to direct the llneson which examinations
should be conducted, and to appoint examiners, whose
specialities would be Latin, botany, chemistry, etc.
3. Because the examination of candidates a* to the
knowledge of the qualities of drugs, and their ability
to delect adulterations, can only be safely entrusted to
men who have had great experience in the sale and
purchase of drug*.
4. Because of the English Phartnaoy Board very few
of the members are themselves examiners.
5. Because the chemists of this colony are dasirous
of abolishing the present unsatisfactory system, and
claim that they only wish to substitute a better one for
their own credit, and the safety of the public.
C. Because the object and intention of the Bill would
be practically defeated without the amendments. \
He had consulted several of the chemists, aku
rather than submit to the present system —if
they were not allowed to conduct their own
business in the way they thought best—in the
interests of the public and for their own credit—
they proposed to abandon the Bill. They had for
several years been subjected to a certain disci-
pline that had not been good enough. They had
come forward and offered to place themselves on
the same footing as chemists in England and
Victoria had done; but if it was insisted that
they should remain under the same regime as
they had been in the past then they would
abandon the measure. He would therefore move
that that House insist upon its amendments in
clause 5.
The PREMIER said the passage of the Bill
seemed_ almost to depend upon whether they
should insist on the amendments, and for that
reason the subject deserved some consideration
from the Committee. There was no doubt that
the intention of the Bill as "originally introduced
was that the chemists of the colony should be
entrusted with the regulation of their own
business and appointment of other persons ; and
at the present time they were under the ml*
of the Medical Board. Then the question arose
who were to be appointed to be members of the
board. At present all registered chemists were
supposed to be competent; but they knew that
some of them had only been registered because
they had been apprenticed to chemists and served
their time. They had passed no examination,
and possibly were not competent, but it was not
likely that those men would either be appointed
by the Government or elected by the qualified
chemists. Competent men would undoubtedly
be chosen. At the same time he did not alto-
gether go so far as the hon. member in saying
that there were no means of securing competency.
The only provision made for securing competency
in the Bill as it now stood would be the opinion
of the electing body. He agreed that the pro-
visions of the Bill as it stood were very much
too stringent, but he thought that a middle
course might have been agreed upon. He had
no sympathy with the medical men who had
tried to embarrass the chemists in remedying
the existing state of affairs, and he knew
that they had been able to exercise a great
deal of influence. He must point out that
the clause as it stood originally was ab-
surd, because it proposed that the persons
on the first board should be persons who held a
certificate of competency from Any society recog-
nised by that board ; but how the board could
recognise any society before it was constituted,
he confessed he -could not understand. That
would have to be differently worded. Perhaps
the hon. member could say whether there was
no f orm of words that would define with sufficient
accuracy persons of competency, and not persons
who had become chemists simply from the fact of
having served an apprenticeship.
Mr. BAILEY said the Government would
have the choice of the first board, and that board
would sit for two years. He thought the
chemists of the colony had quite sense enough
to know who were the beat men to sit on the
board. He wished again to impress on hon.
members that the men who formed the board
were not the examiners. From their practical
knowledge of the examiners, they had to say
what the standard of the examination was to be,
and bethought they could be trusted to do that.
Mr. Marr, as an analytical chemist, could not
expgct a man to come up to his standard, but the
board would limit the lines of the examina-
tion, and see that it was neither a stupid
one nor beyond the capacity of the candi-
dates. He thought that the clause as recom-
mended was very good indeed, and he eould
not see any better way of’framing it. The Bill
had been framed exactly on tie lines upon which
similar Bills had been framed in other countries,
and their success had been very marked—so
much so that the chemists had gone on improving
their status, and improving the education of the
candidates. He would move the following as
an additional reason for disagreeing to the
Council’s amendment :—•
Because it is not unusual, in academical bodies, that
examinations for degrees or diplomas should be in part
conducted by persons not themselves holding a degree
or diploma
That would add force to what had been already
said.
Question put and passed.
Mr. BAILEY moved that the amendment of
the Legislative Council in clause 28 be agreed to.
Question put and passed.
On the motion of Mr. BAILEY, the House
resumed, and the Chairman reported that the
Committee insisted upon their amendment in
clause 5, but agreed to the Legislative Council’s
amendment upon the amendment in clause 28.
The report was adopted, and the Bill was
ordered to be returned to the Legislative Council
with the following message
Mr. Bk-ksidknt,—-
The Legislative Assembly having taken into con-
sideration the Legislative Council's message, of date
the 12th Instant, relative to the Pharmacy Bill—
Insist upon the amendments in clause 5, because,
without them the Government would be limited in
their choice ©f the members of the pharmacy board to
medical men, which would cause that board only to be a
repetition of the present Medical Board.
Because the members of the pharmacy board would
notljfi of necessity examiners, but from their experience
would be able to direct the lines on which examinations
should be conducted, and to appoint examiners whose
specialities would be Latin, botany, chemistry, etc.
Because the examination of candidates as to the
knowledge of the qualities 6f drugs, and their ability
to detect adulterations, can only be safely entrusted to
men who have had great experience in the sale and
purchase of drugs.
Because of the English Pharmacy Board very few of
the members are themselves examiners..
Because It is not unusual in academical bodies that
examinations for degrees or diplomas should be in part
conducted by persons not themselves holding the degree
or diploma.
Because the chemists of this colony are desirous of
abolishing the present unsatisfactory system, and claim
that they only wish to substitute a better one for their
own credit and the safety of the public.
Because the object and inMition of the Bill would be
practically defeated without the amendment; and
Agree to the amendment of the Legislative Council on
.the amendment of the Legislative Assembly in clause
THE CONTAGIOUS DISEASES ACT.
Mr. JORDAN, in moving—
That this House disapproves of the compulsory exami-
nation of women under the Contagious Diseases Act.
said : Mr. Speaker,—This subject, sir, is one
which I would rather not have touched, and
which I would not have voluntarily undertaken to
bring under the notice of this House. I venture
to ask the consideration of the House, because
of thn—msMcacy of the subject, and because I
shall have to speak plainly on this question
Hon. members are aware that in 1864 an Act
was _ passed in_ Great Britain providing for the
medical examination of women suffering from
certain diseases. It was not made at that time
compulsory or periodical. In 1860 another Act
was passed providing for the registration of all
prostitutes, and for the compulsory and period-
ical examination of women by medical men. In
1869 an amending Act was passed extending the
operation of those Acts to eighteen districts in
England. To this legislation, as is well known,
there was much popular opposition. It was
considered to be un-English—opposed to the
most cherished principles of our free Constitution
which secures to every one personal liberty. It
was said to be oppressive, cruel, and an insult to
the sex. _ We know how much political power
there is in England in connection with the Army
and Navy, and how strongly those services are
represented in the British House of Commons.
Those Acts were passed for the special protection
of soldiers and sailors. It was believed at that
time that a similar system had been very success-
ful in Paris in diminishing certain diseases. It
was held that as our soldiers and seamen eould
not, generally, have wives, it was necessary to
make some provision for their protection against
the oidinary effects of illicit intercourse. It was
cSnsidered, therefore, in accordance with the oM
maxim that “necessity has no laws,” that
there was an absolute necessity for that legisla-
tion; and there was an end of the matter.
But there are people in England who will
eontend, especially if they conceive the idea
that anybody is going to be oppressed in
any way. These are a very stubborn sort of
people ; they are supposed to be descended from
the old stock of Puritans, and in this case they
were joined by a very powerful section of the
most influential classes—a section composed of
the very highest classes in England. These con-
tentious people held that those Acts were passed
hurriedly—without discussion, in a thin House,
at a late hour of the night. They called to
remembrance the old Roman system, where all
the senators were compelled to be present, and
where no Act passed after sunset was valid.
They had the _ temerity to say that penal legis-
latioa passed in a thin House after midnight was
a disgrace to any legislature. However that
may be, there Is no doubt that the Permis-
sive Aet of 1864 was the thin end of the
wedge; that the Compulsory Act of 1866
brought a great part of the country under a
system police espionage very hateful to the
people in Great Britain ; and that the Extending
Act of 1869 introduced this spy system into a
very large part of England and a part of Ireland.
The advocates of this system said that they
would endeavour to extend it to the whole of
England and Ireland; and the House of Lords
recommended that it should be extended by-and-
by—but with very great caution, as they put it—
to the whole of the United Kingdom, including
Scotland and Wales. Under these circumstances
a storm, which had been long gathering, was
brought to the culminating point, and the effect
was irresistible. In spite of organised combina-
tion on the part of the people who were in favour
of those Contagious Diseases Acts, and in spite
of every effort which that party could make—and
they left no stone unturned—the spirit df British
freedom and fair play prevailed, and the Acts
were doomed. Last year, after sixteen years of
trial, the Eight Hon. Mr. Stansfeld, member for
Halifax, carried his resolution in the English
House of Commons, “ That this House disap-
proves of the compulsory examination of women
under the Contagious Diseases Act,” In one or
two British colonies where this Act was im-
posed it has been discarded. In the Cape Colony
it has been repealed. In Canada, although they
passed the Act at the desire of the Imperial
Government,- or of the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, they have never ventured to put it
into operation; it was considered to be opposed
to the great constitutional principles of British
government, and the Canadians would not have
it. In Hongkong we know that Sir John Pope
Hennessey, until recently the Governor, has
expressed himself very strongly, and most
emphatically against the Contagious Diseases
Act. In the Presidencies of India the Act
is also doomed, and, now that the system has
been proved an actual, failure, in Paris, there
is no doubt it will be abolished in every one of
the British dependencies. Unhappily, as I
think, sixteen years ago we adopted this system
in this British colony of Queensland —very soon
’ after its adoption in England. The first attempt
to initiate the matter was made in the Upper
House, but that was overruled. It was after-
■ wards introduced in the Assembly, but there
were only two gentlemen who were found bold
enough to advocate the passing of, the Aet in
this colony, in this House, at that time; and
those were both members of the jnecScal profes-
sion. It was opposed in effinl&alble and un-
answerable speeches by Mr. Norton, the present
member for Port Curtis, by Mr, W. H. Walsh,
now a member of the Upper House, and
by the late Sir Joshua Peter Bell. It
was contended by the advocates of the Act
that it was an .exact copy of the English Act
of 1866, and it was asserted at Hie time that it
was the law in South, Australia. But that was
an error. It has never been the law in that
colony ; and if anyone disputes that, I have
\evidence enough before me to prove it. Queens-
land'is the only one of the Australian colonies
which has considered it necessary to bring itself
under the system which is established by the
Goh|agious Diseases Act. The only vestige of
an excuse which I could ever find for its estab-
lishment in England was that it was necessary for
the protection of our soldiers and sailors. But, sir,
where are our soldiers and sailors in Queensland ?
Who are the people who needed to be protected
here ? Is there any class of people in Queens,
land who cannot marry? Is there anyone
arrived at the age of manhood who would Ve
barred by poverty from entering into what the
Church England calls V the holy estate of
matrimony ” ? Ireland is said sometimes to I e
the poorest country in Europe; but we
know that Ireland is one of the most
virtuous countries in Europe, so far as the
intercourse of the sexes is concerned, and it
is so because the Catholic clergy do their
very utmost to promote early marriages—thi s
doing away with the cause of prostitution, ana
getting to the very root of the evil. And
yet, sir, though we had no soldiers in Queens-
land and no sailors, and, thank God, no poverty,
we must needs proceed to pass an Act of Parlia-
ment for making illicit intercourse with the sexes
as easy- -that is, as little liable to after disagree-
able consequences as possible. Why, sir,° the
Parisians themselves have abolished the system
after nearly a hundred years of trial ! In the
beginning of 1884 this atrocious system came
to an end in the great capital of France—for
which statement I will presently show you my
authority. The Parisians themselves, convinced
that the Act had not been successful but had
been a total in diminishing disease, me
ashamed of ever having introduced such a system ;
and, as I say, they have now actually abolished
it. In Paris the working of the system has
been for many yearsJn the hands of that branch
of the police called the Police des Mceurs. Those
' men are very vigilant, leaving no stone unturned
to carry out their system of registration of the
women, and to bring them under the power,
and the control of the police, and under the
examination of the medical officers. But in spite
of all their efforts that registration has proved a
perfect failure in Paris, for out of 36,000 women,
of that class, at the lowest calculation, less than
3,600 are generally found on the register. The
Police des Mceurs are the lowest of their class in
league with the keepers of Brothels, carrying out
their calling very often cruelly and vilely, and
too frequently at the expense, and to the annoyance
and irreparable injury of virtuous women. Let
any one, sir, read a book written in French and
published in Paris by M. Guyot. This gentle-
man has spent a great part of his life in.
exhibiting and pointing out the evils of this
cruel system. He was, and is still, I believe, a
■member of the municipal council of the city of
Paris ; a man, I believe, of high reputation ; in
fact, I kpow he is. He was imprisoned for having-
accused the police des mceurs of nefarious practices
in connection with the system. This brought
him under the notice of Mr. Stansfield and other
distinguished persons in England; and on his
liberation from prison he became himself the
liberator of Frarifee—chiefly by his writings and
by the mass of evidence which he brought for-
ward —from that atrocious, cruel, cowardly
system which is no longer in existence in France.
An_ Honourable Member was understood to
question this statement.
Mr. JORDAN: I have what seems to me
good authority for the statement. It never was
established by Aat of Parliament in France.
It was established by municipal authority hi
Paris, and the council resolved to abolish
the system in the beginning of this year.
I think I shall satisfy the House on " that
point. Hon. gentlemen -know that for three
years this matter has been investigated
by a select committee of the British House of
Commons. For three years evidence has been
taken. So far as the general effects of the Acts
were concerned, questions were put to private
individuals, and members of the police force,
and _the result, as to their individual private
opinion on the subject, was very conflicting.
But the evidence as to the fact that constitu-
tional disease has increased during the last
sixteen years, under the operation of these Acts,


SATURDAY, 22sd NOVEMBER, 1884.
is, to my mind, very conclusive. Now, sir, Then after explaining the measure he said :
the point I should chiefly endeavour to - esta- “ Those are all the pro visions which we Believe will he
blish ■is this : that constitutional disease has necessary. The provisions of the Contagious Diseases
not been diminished but has increased under Acts.,which relate to the compulsory examination ot
, ( a , ti •, T women, to tlie registration of women, and the so-ca,lied
the operation of cnese Acts in England. In voluntary submission to examination may, in our
fact, I believe that it was that reason that had opinion, safely be repealed/’
its final effect in determining the British Govern- The resolution come to by the municipality of
ment to bring in a Bill to repeal the Contagious Paris is this. It is given, I may say. in the
Diseases Acts. Ido not say that reason alone, Shield, an English publication of 7th July, 1873 ;
but that chiefly; and that having been fully and unless the Premier can show me that it is
proved, I think, the Government have had incorrect I have reason to believe it is correct,
no alternative-but\ to repeal the Acts. .Well, especially as it corresponds exactly with what
sir, Mr.. Stansfield points out a very impor- was imminent, as published again and again in
taut distinction—nainely, that there are venereal the Westminster Review —that they were deter-
disorders which are not constitutional, and are mined to bring it to an end. The resolution is
not in any sense dangerous ; and it is only those as follows :
which are constitutional —which are in the blood, <• Tj lo council—
and can be communicated from one person «Considering that the existing institution of the
to another—that the State has anything to do Police cles Mceurs rests upon no legal basis ;
with in this matter. Mr. Stansfield, in his speech . “ That notwithstanding its innumerable annual viola-
before the House of Commons, when his resohi- tions.of individual liberty, it has been unable to attain
Pnu was carried established this noint • that - the almf ° r which it was instituted,-either in regard to the
tion was. cainea, ostaoj-isnea tms point, mat diminution of syphilitic disease, or in respect of the pre-
even making the figures Or une. committee the • veution of offences against the common lav/, or against
committee, I should say, was chiefly composed of public morals. &c.;
pronounced advocates of the Acts. Out of six- “ Considering that neither prostitution nor syphilis is
teen members —whether designedly or not, I a crime or an, offence against the law :
cannot say—ten were gentlemen.fully committed r//f 0 n lYe mi, , v+ . ~ T *
7 V , i „ ■ i i. Art. I.—The ah-dition from the Ist January, 1884 of—
to support the Acts by. their public speeches i. The second Bureau of the first division of the
during the agitation which has been going on Prefecture of Police, 1 known as the Bureau of
in England for a great length of time. Ten the Police des Mosurs;
members of that committee were avowed advo- 2. The Brigade of the Police des Mceurs, incorpo-
cates of the Acts, and it was natural for them rated on the 9th March, 1881,. with the Service
to call witnesses who were likely to give Q .
~ • c c a l ic ■ i 3. The Pispensatre de SmuorMe (the examunng-
evidenoe m favour of the Acts—officers who .. room) of the Prefecture of Police •
had carried out the Acts, and. who would 4. The second section of the pirison of Saint Lazare,
naturally take credit for all the good that had and the special infirmary of the said prison,
resulted from the various efforts to put down “ Art. 2.—The Prefect of Police is requested—
prostitution and mitigate as far as possible thisi h To study, and consider a ..system of organisation
dreadful soda! evil. Well, Mr. Stansfield ehowe SSffiSUSX - «K«^£RS!
how very little good, even taking the ngtiies existing agents of the Police des Mceurs, in all
of the majority of the committee —of those matters concerning public order in respect of
gentlemen who were determined that the women who practise prostitution;
Acts should not be abolished if possible— 2. To formulate flibeller) now decrees on the subject
although the minority of six entirely disputed of prostitution, solely on the basis of the indi-
-1 i ■ i a,.:. Pi' -i . t„*. cations given in the present report; all contra-
aud denied their method of calculation, but ventions of such decrees to he henoaforth
“Taking the figures of the majority, and taking all brought before the competent tribunals ;
classes of disease together, the total saving ot efficiency .3. To revko the statutes of all societies of mutual
amounts to this: to 5-38 per thousand in the protected assistance and groat companies, etc.,in such wise
districts—that is,- where the Acts are in force. Now, as to- secure that medical..treatment andassis-
. assuming that in the protected districts there- were tance he accorded to venereal disease in the
60.000 men —there were, however, only 26,000 under the same manner as to all other diseases,
supposed protection of these Acts—that would amount “Art. 3. The administration of L’Assistance Publique
to only 269 out of 50,000.” is requested to proceed with all possible speed—
“ What I will ask the House is this—taking-broadly 1. To the transformation of the hospitals Lovreine'
and largely the figures of the report of the majority— and clu Midi into general hospitals;
whether a maximum saving in efficiency of less than 2. To the formulation of rules expressly authorising
Bi per 1,000 is a Justification of these Acts. (Cheers',)” the admission of venereal patients into the
This is a speech delivered in the House of „ genmJ hospitals. _ .
. .. G General hospitals, and other provisions tor secur-
' mg good order, doing away with registration,
“I would ask them I would ask even the supporters w jth forcible medical examination, and with the
ot these Acts, speaking honourably between man and t t f f neoi.le in lock hospitals M
man—whether these are figures which correspond to the tieatmeps ox tnes., people in ioca. no&pitais,. act
expectations held out and entertained when these Acts nutting them to the ordinary treatment of other
were introduced (hear, hear); and I would further ask patients in the general hospitals of France,
all men interested in this as a sanitary question, and Now, as far as we are concerned in Queensland,
especially medical men, whether such figures.as these we W ere in a great hurry to pass these Acts; I
show the slightest approximation to the realisation oi think they were passed with what may be called
the original rfeao ■ e stamping on, oi a mas l o j nc | ecen t haste, and without those reasons which
very great reduction, oi tnese diseases. . . c ., ~ ,• . ... ,
. . . alone justified —ix they did justify at all—thq
V/ell,. sir, instead of checking venereal diseases passing of these Acts in Great Britain. We
constitutional diseases waich they should check , \yQrd in a great hurry, I say, to pass these
* Mr. Stansfield goes on to show that there had Acts. Shall we hasten to retrace our steps
been no gain .whatever from the operation, of now that we know after sixteen years’ experience
those Acts, taking still the figures of the majority, that they have been a grand failure in England,
He said ; and. that a Bill has been brought in to repeal
« Oiir contention upon these figures ia this: We say it , them? That Bill has not been be/ i
is proved in evidence that the result of the operation of cause other business took the place of it, and
the Acts is a greater proportion of constitutional to because the Hon. Mr. Stansfield took exception
non-constitutional .case* to the sth clause ; but its passage is inevitable.
, r!HorOcisQ in the ftixiouiTt of constitutions! fiistvjise, O/liq a t i ii t at i ?
taking all the figures (which' we are not prepared to And. shall. we now, I say, copy the exampie of
admit) of the advocates of the Acts, the diminution of the Imperial-Government—of our own country—
constitutional disease amounted at - most to 0-15 per after we have been in such haste to impose.,
1.0 >O, or 71 out of 50,000 men.” these . Acts upon our fellow-colonists. sixteen
'T'imt was not 1, or or J, of 1 per 1,000, years ago without the shadow of a reason for doing
Cut 7* per 50,000. But, coming to statistics so—now that we know, as far as we can know, by
‘we can rely upon—the reports of the the evidence which we-can gather that the result
medical officers of the army in those dis- has been,a dead failure? But this is not the whole
tricta subject to the Acts—we find that con- question; this. French invention wasmtendedto
stitutioiial disease—true syphilis—has actually mitigate physical disease, at the. expense of
Increased during those sixteen years. Of course I} le xporal health of the community. It was,
medical men are in favour of these Acts, and sir, illicit intercourse made easy and safe—
especially army medical men and those who have any system which regulates such intercourse by
had the‘'carrying out of these Acts; but, Still Act of Parliament gives to it, I think, the sanc-
quoting from’Mr. Stansfield’s speech, that gentle- tion of law- it strikes me so. I submit, sir, that
man quoted from the Army Medical Report for the stability of this great Britisb.Empire, of which
1880 and he says we form a part, has its secret in the righteous-
’ ‘ , ... .„ ' . ti nessgenerallyof our laws, and in their conformity
“The Army Medical Report for 1830 was m the . ,P _ A , tb „ t w „„ pvpr „.- vp^
Isancls ot the authorities before the-chairman put to tne purgst moral cqae tnat. w^s. ever .givexj
S/ore us his draft report, and it shows a very great to the world. It may be. impossible or impolitic to
ihrarease in the amount of disease in the year make fornication punishable'by law; but if
1830 over the year 1879, in spite of the six- chastity be a virtue in a woman —which no man
teen fmis of these Acts, and a far greater increase of wd j dissent from. —then fornication in a man
disease, ia the. protected than in the , unprotected or j n a woman is a sinand any system which
stations; |«, though in the unprotected stations there , , , , • R f J . ■ n ;
was an increase of 45 percent., in the protected stations, seeics to make mat sin as easy ana as Sate, as pos-
minparing 18§0 with 1879, the increase was no less than sible, I submit, is morally unsound, and cannot
S 7 per cent.” possibly be conducive to the physical health
Now this refers to constitutional diseases." to of .„ th,i l aloW t, 11616 a f who
ilph hs-and it affects the men only. Now, so + T IU n f this . rn .°f l of the ques;
piiiiio culvl tion at all; they insist on confining their
far..a# tne women cue eon. ,g, * ‘ attention to the materialistic view of the matter,
eaid in bis speech m the House of Commons , and tJjat ig th e„ C a ge generally, I believe, with
“ Well, I come lastly to the case of the women under members of the medical profession. Now, I ,
the Acts—prostitutes. I find that there has been a have the greatest respect for the members of the
marked increase of disease under the Acts. Taking the , . , Qrofessiou P-Puerallv -ud I think GipHr
veats 1875 to 1881, I find that disease among these mecacai. profession generally, alia 1 tnuiK society
4«men in the subjected districts has Increased from 137 generally is very greatly : indebted to the mem-
Ho 176 per cent.” . bers of that profession. They : are a noble
'The -conclusion of the whole matter is this : The class are only human
Sof that committee, pledged as they f fter + , al 'We know that they generally seem
were tohb their utmost for the continuation of think that every evil is to be cured
ihe Acts, and being under the hallucination that b y , tho of the principles of. their ■
r, " ’ U noble art—that therapeutics is the universal
this wa» to be the means ot protecting oui . , ~ , pvprv mUmn] nhvs'ical noli
soldiers and sailors from disease, have come S and social iffid that h/mL^ein^are
to the conclusion—they could not do other- tlca1 ’ ancl s ? cla . ’ an R t \ iat Jlal^ a , i:i ngs , ar ®
wise- that they could not recommend that so many anatomies to be dissected by the scalpel
JE- Acts should be extended to any other the surgeon. Sir Stafford Northcote, speak-
2cte in England or in the United Kingdom. in & 9 n . tb ? after the. Hon Mr. Stansfield
7 s "? i r ,nf OnTn-mr/nQ mma +rv fw carried his resolution, said that the medical men
And tfce ■ , ~ ’ v „ c 9,j had always stated that they would stamp out this I
elusion that the Act sfioum De aone away with .. . 7 , , - d po } .i 1 - a G pr ,t a PVfiFri perk tr, Bp
■iq toto The Executive Government suspended disease , bit n A as, to be
the Act after the carrying of Stansfield’s resolu- mo [ e lts f S uard tQa » wh ® n the doo * or co ™ e *
they couM not do ffiherwise, and the Gov- for W??.* 0 , do something with
SSKIkd Bill to repeal the Act’. I policeman a his back Now, apart from .
■wmread™e rewfe»adeby'the Marquis of f tbe Vle . w taken orallsts , and materialists,
wui reaa w lux 'mi there is a common-sense view taken by a
Hartmgtoji wjien i . . u • different class, of thinkers and speakers.
He said : t There are such inen as. write in the Westminster
“Hon. members fßeview, for instance—men who are entirely
by a considerable majonG a mso.uUon coiidmnp.ia the 5 j j i. n f w l la t thev conceive to be the
<• unrmisorv examination o». women under the Con- maep.enaenp. ot wnat tney conceive to do tne
UtAous Diseases Acts, it to the Government j errors of religionists, and i will react from one of
that, although they were pgrfeety aware that no reso- them.a,--very short quotation —I know the House
hitiou of one House of .Parliament cojiM alter the law, does not want to be troubled with more than is
this was a matter which,.through the strueture of-the necessary. I attach the very greatest importance
Acts, was within J ' l : to the views here expressed, inasmuch as they
irhnse to decide upon ; because tae Aeta oepenaea u>l ■ , A . T T i , , ~ ■’
entirely upon the action of the metro- are not the views ot religionists merely—not the
woUtan police and certain surgeons, ti ig expenses of views of mere samtarians—but the views, as I
whom were met by vote* of this House. TUa Hopse of have said, of the common-sense, hard-headed,
Commons therefore had the power in their own case to thinking men who, as I say, prefer to .be
give effect to the resoliition at: which, by a large majoptj, independent of the religionists. I will now
they had arrived. Well, sir, the Govermaen., holding as ~ from the Westminster Review for 1870
they did that the powers conferred jjpoft them under 1 pom txie yv tsiminsKi xceview 101 xxqu,
the Acta were jimjiiestkmably mainly of a .permissive vol, a/: ,
character nroposel at once, when the resolution of the : “Jn tin* article entitled ‘Prostitution in relation to
woii'w wasunased to-giveeffeetto thatresoijjtionbyf/ith- the National Health,’ published in this Review pine
will o- aspossibte the metropolitan police fro®, months ago) .eyicie»oe was adduced proving that the
districts dealt with, and thereby put an end to tbo diseases associated with prostitution are very widely
tbiac va.A- VI . *4. 4-1,.-, „ c- ~ /I lliKAun'llAnf- fill iC! /i/\i .>. f Vir”
ithie (ilSibi lCiib ucci'i’D ?,uuu, «-w.vy ‘wvxvuy i- , ~ ;
eamjSUlsory examination of wonreji. At the same tune, : sp'f#ad throiighont tms-cojintry —-
ibe Government stated that in their opinion no time - XG|ly : recognising the'tlangej-’-G-
-fflaifliitto be lost in malting the law comlormable to .the <• Aiid that they are proancing a profonnclly clegenepar
mgw state of Affairs. They therefore i,in4ertook t,o bring tive influence on the physical fife of the British people,
mßiff to give effect to the resolption cu ,•§ House, three months ago we pubJishtcl a review of tbe govt pu-
iipoa ti® Jia; -srhieJ i ijaypUttafly tolisa G/’’ ipegtal cxperiiaeiita whigii have hotij uirde in several
continental cities In controlling prostitution, and The PREMIER said •Mr Flne-lker Tam
exercising a sanitary influence on prostitutes them- HnT ~ Z n Speaker, lam
selves; and we showed that all those experiments ? U1 ? “ 1 i I lm P OSBlble llsten to the
had been attended by one and the same result—! **°”: gentleman who has just sat down without
total failure to accomplish the object intended. Is, feeling that he was thoroughly and sincerely in
then, the policy of Itusse? faire the hast policy earnest in the matter which he has taken in
after all? Is that concurrence of stolid indiffer- hand. He has presented the matter to the
enoe and religious horror which lias reduced the House very a l olv indeed from the rininf nf view
English people to ignore both prostitution and the j® AZ ot
diseases it produces, to be, indeed, accounted the highest w If f a , , l ?’ and n; is with very great
practical wisdom ? Must we really sit down with our regret that 1 reel myself unable to agree with
hands folded in despair in presence of tire terrible him in the conclusions that he has arrived at.
evil we have described, and mutely recognise the There is no doubt that this is a very unpleasant
appalling, if truthful doom which has so often subject; but the fact that it is unpleasant is no
been pronounced, that prostitution, as well as the rPPQn n wtv ~r „ ,
diseases connected with it, shall always be with + • , J v e s “ 01 j- 1 d not address ourselves
us? We believe not; and, faithful to the idea, that by t 0 . and we must address ourselves to it
prolonged study and earnest strife, go to establish as x “ really is. Ido not propose to follow the
the mutual relations of men and women, that pros- , hon. gentleman at length in the arguments he
titution and its diseases shall cease, humanity will not used ; but I shall revert to a few of them as
labour in vain, we shall, in the present article, point out briefly as I can to bring before the House the
what steps may even now be taken for lessening and , Tmaillnr. In G ~ , A
preventing those diseases without violating any prin- P . n which the matter stands, according
ciple justly held sacred by moralists, political econo- ; to tne information i have been , able to obtain,
mists, or statesmen, and without outraging the feelings -*• am speaking for myself alone. Ido not know
or destroying the personal liberty of even the prostitutes what the views of my colleagues in the Govem-
themselves.” ment are on the matter, except one or two of
, T . T them; but I shall give the House the opinions
INow, sir, i will come back for a minute to I have been forced toby the researches [ have
Queensland and our own interests in this matter, made into the subject, and by the infer-
ior that is what we have to do with. By these mation I have been able to acquire. I
Acts our paternal Government undertake to pro- do not profess to know all about it. There
vide these women for the. use of our young men— is probably no subject upon which the
our own sons. Prostitutes in scores parade the best authorities are more divided in opinion. I
streets, holding out inducements to these young scarcely like to use the expression “sentiment”
men. They can say they have been treated at >in the matter ; but yet it must be admitted that
the hospital; they can show the certificate there must be a great deal of what is called
that they have been tnere; and that is “ sentiment ”in the arguments that are used in
.JVAiviiuvixu JU lU,io (J 1.1 CPU CPI \Zt LIOCU JLii
a proof that they are clean. In England opposition to the system we have adopted in this
and in Ireland, sir, these unhappy women call colony. There are a great many arguments
themselves “Queen’s women.” Why not ? Is not against any such proceedings as are adopted
their profession legalised ? Do not Government from one ' point of view; but, as in all
officers—highly qualified medical men—carry on other matters of legislation, we have, in
the examination—the introspection—with their dealing with different subjects, to look at
own hands, .with the aid of a speculum, and the them from all points of view and see upon
assistance of some terrible machine, which they which side the arguments preponderate unless
have invented for the purpose of getting the body any particular course is morally wrong. lam
into the right posture, too horrible to be described? unable to see that there is anything morally
. And this, sir, is done systematically and con- wrong in this system. It is a matter that we
tmually, and the effect we know must be this : have to deal with in this colony. lam perfectly
that these poor creatures, subjected periodically aware that the system which has been in force
tp that treatment at the hands of men, become i n Paris for nearly a century is as bad as any
lost.to all sense,of shame—of womanly shame; system can possibly be; and Ido not wonder
they become hardened and reduced to a wretched, that the municipality of Paris, which is charged
degraded condition, with the brand of infamy with the maintenance of the public order and
that can never be wiped out. The cruelty to the protection of the public morals, should have
women in this respect is m ray opinion beyond all determined to suppress it. lam not goim- to
power of expression; it is a violation of British weary the House with a description of "the
liberty of the grossest and most atrocious kind. system as it was;- but no one, can read any
Its effect upon the women is hardening and truthful narrative of it,, as carried out by the
humiliating, degrading', and shameful in the police des iruoeurs —moral police, as they are
extreme. And what of the men? Do we dare to called—without seeing that it was, an iniquity
make a law that will reach the men who commit and a scandal to any country. But that is not
these acts ? But why should we not establish a the matter we have to deal with here; we have
police des mceurs to watch the men ;to put to to deal with an entirely different question. The
them odious questions in the streets, to dog their administration of that" police was placed in the
steps, to haul them up before the magistrates, to hands of the lowest type of men, whose aim was
force them to register themselves as frequenters to ,crowd as many women as thev could into the
of brothels, and to put upon them the brand of brothels. That was avowed. If it was reported
infamy?. We dare not. And yet we do it that the number was diminishing, it was said
to these girls ;we watch all these poor defence- that it must be owing to the want of zeal on the
less- women by policemen m plain , clot,lies who part of the police; and things had arrived at such
mark their outgoings and incoming, and are a. pitch at last, that virtuous women could not be
actually empowered under our laws to put to the i n the streets alone after dark without beiim in
wife of any hon. gentleman m this House, it danger of being dragged to one of the lock
may be if they meet her in the street, at their hospitals in Paris. That is the state of things
own discretion, the moat odious questions. Is which had been brought about, and the whole
this yor thy of us as Englishmen, the emanci- world rebelled against it, as it was known that
patoi|s of the slave, the Christian and chivalrous the abuses were enormous. I am free to admit
nation which has figured before the world that, according to the best statistics available,
as the professed protector of the oppressed, so far as can be ascertained, a very large pro-
the do wn-trodden, and the unfortunate? But portion of venereal diseases.came from the women
what is to be done? Sir, much may be done. who were subjected to thatabominabletreatment.
Much has been done in the city of Glasgow, No wonder; read the circumstances and the
in the city of Winchester, and in many other effects of the kind of treatment they were sub-
places that I could name, and respecting which I Wed to. I will not state all about it, because
could give the facts and figures had I the time; I do not think it would be desirable that it
but that is not necessary. A great deal has been should appear in the public Press. I have,
accomplished in Glasgow, where the number of during the last few days, taken considerable
prostitutes has been reduced from over 400 trouble to make myself more acquainted than I
to sometliing like 37; and in Winches- was before, with the history of this matter in
ter, By admitting all diseased persons without Paris, and I only wonder that men ever escaped
question or ignominy to proper and humane from these houses uninfected. But that is not
treatment m the- general hospitals, the disease the question we have to deal with. The hon.
has almost disappeared. Tins is the policy of gentleman was in error when he said that only
justice and common sense as opposed to the three 1,000 out of 30,000 women were subjected to the
systems of repression— laissez faire as it has been operation. The statistics I have in this book are
called, or indifference, and forcible regulation, by Mr. Briot, who has been the most prominent
Repression has been tried at different times member of the Parisian Municipal Council
in various parts of the world and in all ages It Mr _ JORDAN : I said 8,600 out of 36,000
has been embodied, very well, as 1 saw tne other women
day, in a truly Parisian prescription written by an The RREMIER . If the horn gentleman went
eminent physician 111 Paris. His panacea is op,ooo b Mr> Bribes book, the estimated number was
police to watch over the suspected women of Paris, bn] g . ue sswork. The number not registered is
and make them live in brothels under their care, lmknown and a comparison between a known
with power also to _ take away young females tit ’ nd an unknown quant ity can never
who may be found in the greets from the toa be - ver / accurata It is impossible to base any
tectum of their parents We may dismiss-that m J ent upon statistics when one element of
at once. Systems of. that, kma-cruel in the comparison | 8 an unk nown quantity. I cannot
extreme-have been tried, and all of .hem have attach mubh ' imßortance t / that / j say wo
been found to be worse than useless. The system have nofc to dea f with the abominable system
oi laissez fmre as it is called is that which that exigted in Paris we have a different
refuses .to admit persons suffering from this in this colony, and I will say a few
disease into our genera! hospitals on the ground ords a& to wI that system was introduced,
that the sufferers are sinners, and that the disease and wh the circuihJlnceS of this colony, more
is judicial, a visitation from God with which it than a / otber of the colonies and
would be, impious to interfere. Then there are oertainl J moro than in EHgland except in one or
those who would deal with the evil by Contagious twQ inst ' a — are in fayou b r of the adoption of a
Diseases Acts. The. logical outcome of these tem anal sus to that which was adopted in
Acts is that prostitution is essentially an element t £ o Act of k | 6B . y assume that hon . numbers
of human society, and .the. Contagious Disiasea - kftmv tlle nature of the disease that is in rrnes-
Acts aim at making fornication as safe as posable. tlon _ a diaeage that is infinitely worse than
The disease ave know exists; it may be rife in small or chole 01 , typhoid, and those
Queensland for aught ! Imow-it is in Eng ano other diseases that we are accustomed
and other parts of the world; and what we have to look upon with such horror. They are
to do is to cure it. by all means, but not by. nothing a s compared with this scourge, and
violence, not by a violent interference w ith the it ig a s gC ourge by which the sins of the fathers
liberty of the person, or by cruelty perpetrated are Yis j ted the children even to the
on these defenceless wretched women but by third and fourt ‘ h generation. It is a sin which
receiving them into our general hospitals and isheg not onl | the man who is , guilty of the
treating them humanely, without putting any sin; but it is visited upon the innocent wife and
brand or sngma upon them. should cine children and grandchildren. Do hon. gentlemen
their disease with all speed That is the Chris- know tbat th “ re are countries in the world
tian way or dealing with the matter, and the whe re every man and every woman is infected
common-sense way too We cannot alter human wM the d J igease , ? That a fact . I will not
nature .by. Act of Parliament, but we can in trouble the House by reading it. I have known
Queensland cease from doing evil that good may instances of cases where me & & have , sinned and
come and we can purge ourselves as I hope aoquired that terrible disease in their youth, and,
we shah do toMay of the injustice tne cruelty, be f ieyi themselves cured, have married and
and the wrong of that Contagious Diseases Act, made w h at might have been a happy house a house
which unhappilyHecame law sixteen years ago of mig an § have blighted the lives of their
in rhid nmr' \A/ nor I rn.f on 1 rim unr n \7 .
. jtti . T T i *ji • ... ujl iniKciy, tbiiu iifcivtj outs uvea ui tiieu
in tins colony. What Ido t.o-day.l do with very wives ai / d imloCent children. Such are no isolated
great distress to my own mmd-it is more dis- but things which are well known ; and wo
tressmg „° me than anything I have ever had C an estimate vrhat is the nature, of the evil wo
re do befor|-and 1 hardly knew whether have to deal with. But how is the disease mostly
I should not be overwhelmed with the subject. propagated? We fi nd it is mostly propagated
1 feel greatly obliged to hon. members for having by Gombn who are engaged in an unlaw-
been so good as to listen to rneupon such a ful occupation-unlawful, though not for-
pamful question. ! bring forward tins motion bid( | n an positive i aw . f hey are by
the approval,. I feel sure of the majority tbe natalre 0 f t f leir cailing, most likely to
of our felffiw-colomsts, and m the name of the be infected . What is the consequence? Why,
Great majority of tbe people of this colony of that m - en who are infected will certainly infect
Queensland in the name of the united Churches- „ t Tbeir own constitutions -will,' in all
of Allis great land, m the name o the fathers probabilifcyi be entirely ruined. But the sin is
and mothers of (fur sons am daughters, in e- llot , visited himseM ou!v . If it were , some
name of gipls who love their brothers, and m the men might say, “ Let him take the consequences
name of all who love their country, I ask hon. of Ms sin .» that is Bot the ruie . we do not
members of tips House to, assist me in my feeble adopt it as such . We do llot a]low a ’, man to sin
effeg-t ui passing _ this resolution, and saying at Y leaBm . e alld take the consequences upon
thereby that the Contagious Diseases Act shall himselfj in any matter affecting public health,
be repealed. Let it be understood that this is a disease as


much as any other disease —as cholera, or
typhus, or smallpox ; and as we will not allow
any person, if we know it, deliberately bo
infect another with smallpox or typhoid,, or
cholera, why should wo allow a man to infect
another human being with a more deadly disease
than any of them ? I say that is a Very strong argu-
ment ; why should we allow it if we can avoid it?
The question then comes—liow are We tq prevent
it ? 'Of course we.cannot stamp the disease out;
but if we find a number of .persons engaged in an
unlawful occupation, which is likely to have the
effect of spreading this disease,, has the State not
a right to -say, “We eannbt.stop the practice of
your unlawful occupation ; but so long as
you continue to practise it we will take
care that you do not effect the ruin of. the
people of this colony.” That is how the question
strikes me. Let me just say how this Act
came into operation. Brisbane is the metro-
polis, though it was a very small metropolis
at that time. It is a place of resort for people
from all parts of the colony who remain a short
time in it, and then scatter throughout the colony
—some of them getting far beyond the reach of
medical aid. Who are the people most likely to .
contract this disease ? Why, those men who
come here to this centre of population acquire
the disease, and then distribute themselves
in the interior beyond the reach of medical
aid! Those are the individual sources of
contagion; and they are not imaginary cases.
Do not we know that almost the entire
aboriginal population of the colony has
been destroyed by this disease ? Do not we
know that in many of the islands in the South
Seas the same result has been brought about, and
that, to a very large extent, the aboriginals are
being destroyed by this disease more than any-
thing else? We find, then, this scourge in our
midst. ¥/e find a certain number of persons en-
gaged in the occupation of disseminating it. Are
we justified in trying to stop it ? Just before the
Act was passed in Queensland, some terrible'
oases occurred in Brisbane; and it was such
cases from which the innocent suffer. I re-
member hearing of one case of a gentleman from
England who would have been an ornament to the
colony, who sinned in the same way as many
others have done •; and|ho died, I believe, within
ten days. There were other cases about the
same time. Can anyone wonder, therefore, that
a feeling of horror was excited, and that it was
determined that some steps should bo taken in
the matter? Just before the experiment was
made in this colony, an Act was passed for the
garrison towns in England, which differed from
the Act here in many respects, and which has
been in operation for a considerable time. Ido
not, profess to know the effect the law has had
there; but it is notorious that in Queensland
the Act lias had the effect of rendering the
disease extremely rare compared to what.it is
in other places. I think there is no doubt of
that; I can, of course, only rely on the informa-
tion I have. That information I have from Dr.
Hobbs, who has been in charge of the Act for
many years, and who says that in many respects;
it would lead to deplorable consequences if it
were repealed. That, of course, is an indi vid'ual
opinion. I would point out that if it were
repealed there would be danger of infection
spreading all over the colony by men out of the
reach of medical aid. And as to such men, I
say it would be better if they died rather
than go about the country with the disease in
their system. I say that deliberately. It would
be better for the health of the community and
for the welfare of coming generations that a man
infected with the disease, should die rather than
go about with it in his system, and perhaps dis-
tribute it to Ins wife and children. Hon. mem-
bers, who know the terrible nature of the disease,
will, no doubt, give credit to those who are pre-
pared to take stringent measures to. prevent its
spread, for being just as much in earnest in
their convictions of what is right as those who
differ from them, Before passing from Brisbane
I will state what is the present condition here..
The return I have is up to the 9th November,
and it shows, that at the present time there are
100 women on the list. During the year there
have been as many as 136 ; but in that time
36 have been removed from it, and are
here no longer. That is a very large proportion
to have been removed in such a short time.
During the same period 163 persons have been
sent to the lock hospital. Now, I will not
trouble the House with saying anything about
Paris, which is not the only city on the
Continent where the question has received a
good deal of consideration, though I could give
the information if it were desirable; but it is
said by some persons that even if the effect of
the Acts in England and here were to stamp,
the disease out altogether they are morally
wrong; and then reversing that argument
they say that even supposing the Acts could
be justified they are not effective. That of
course is a matter for medical statistics.
The hon. member stated that the Acts in
England had only had the effect of reducing,
the list to the extent of 1 in 1,000. I
shall read the figures presently as given by
Lord Hartington, and the Chairman,of the Select
Committee of the House of Commons, and by
another member, Mr. Osborne Morgan, who
represented.the Government on that committee..
I do not profess to be able to say whether they
are right; but I do not suppose that incorrect
statistics would be laid before the committee. I
say, however, from the statistics of the Act
here that the effect of 163 persons having
been in the lock hospital during .the last,
twelve months must have been to prevent the
spread of contagion. They were 163 centres of
Cuntagion removed from the power of doing
mischief. Now, I say that no statistics could
prove what would have been the result had
those 163 persons not been admitted into, the
hospital. I will just refer to the question from
the speeches made on Mr. Stansfield’s motion,
and to what was said by Mr. Osborne Morgan,
who, as I stated, was the representative of the
Government on that committee. I may say that
the committee’s report, by a majority of ten to
six, recommended that the operation of the Acts
should be continued. I will now quote from the
Shield, which the hon. member (Mr. Jordan) has
been kind enough to lend me. Mr. Morgan
said :
“ I Rave got the figures for 1880 are per-
fectly appalling.”
Of course, hon. members will understand that
in England the Acts are only in force in the
garrison towns, and are only applied to some of
them. The towns in which they are applied are
called “subjected districts,” and those in which
they are not applied the “ unsubjected dis-
tricts.”
“ I will give Aldershot, which is a subjected dis-
trict. The admissions to the hospital there were
74 per 1,000. Surely that is large enough. But
in London, an unsubjeoted district, there wore
225 men per 1,000 absolutely taken into the
hospital for one alone of these diseases. In Man-
chester, 232 per 1,000 were so taken in ; in Dublin,
210 ; and in Belfast actually 273 per 1,000 were admitted
into the hospital. The figures are actually appalling.
-Sow, let me give the figures of 1831. In London, 219
per 1,000 were admitted to the hospital suffering from
venereal disease-; in Belfast, 2-79 per 1,000 were admitted ;
in Manchester, 228 per 1,000 ; and in Dublin, 309 per
1,0:10. Taking 50,000 flieii as the gaftrisoh Of the sub-
jected districts, you would have, if these Acts were re-
pealed, a loss of 400 men from the strength of the Army,
Out of 50,000 men, on a given clay, 400 would be actually
incapacitated and in the hospital.”
400 men in one day, and they would not be the
same 400 men every day, of course—
“ And so if you abolish these Acts you stfikb oil 4f)o
men from the effective strength rtf the forces. In the
appendix ot the evidence of 1881, there is printed a
letter from the cotnmaudcsr of the Both iicghheht .at
DtVblih, which made a great impression. It is oh page
471, and it says, ‘ There have been the enormous number
of 166 admissions to hospital of men suffering from
primary syphilis, and the admissions from gonorrhoea
amount to 113, making a total of 234. Thus during the
period of ten months considerably over 43 per cent, of
the unmarried .portion of my regiment have been
incapacitated from duty. And I submit for the sake of
economy, if not for the benefit of the soldiers, some
steps should be taken to wipe out this easily prevent-
able but terrible scourge.”
Now I will read some further statistics, or rather
quote from the Marquis of Harrington’s speech
on page 132 :
“ The latest statistics which the committee had under
their consideration were the statistics of 1878 ; but the
statistics of 1881 are now available, and the latter show
that the saving of efficiency to the army (has gone on
progressively increasing since the report of the com-
mittee, and that in 1830 it amounted, not to Sfper 1,000,
but to 6i per I,(XX), and in 1381 to 8 per 1,000; so that,
in that case, with an average strength Of 50,000 men, the
saving would be in 1880 a saving of 325 men, and in 1881
of 400 men. But I do not at all admit on behalf of
the army that the saving of efficiency is represented
by these figures. Those calculations take into
account only a number of men actually in hospital
and gulf e-ring, from the effects of those diseases. I will
not say that every one bears with him either temporarily
or permanently the results of this disease; but there is
no doubt that a very large number of them, after a very
considerable time, permanently and for life, render
themselves loss efficient soMcrs and sailors and useful
members of society. It is impossible from statistics to
ascertain What is the, actual loss, what is the actual
effect In the service from this consideration. The same
idea of it may bo obtained from the latest statistics
that had beoa laid bn the table of the House as to
1880-1. In the protected stations, on an aggregate
stx-ength of 30,500 the admissions for primary syphilis
were 8,920, or a ratio of admissions ot 71 per 1,000.
In all the unprotected stations, with a strength of
35,000 men, there were 6,873 admissions, or a ratio of 128
per 1,000. If the ratio of admissions had been the same
in the protected as in the unprotected, the number of
admissions in the protected districts would have been,
not 2,520, but 4.020, or an increase of 2,000. I say that
this part of the subject cannot be accurately arrived
at by statistics because it is Impossible to sea how
much the larger proportion of those numbers are per-
manently affected. The medical evidence can leave
no doubt upon the mind of any impartial person
that a very large number are rendered inefficient
for a proportion, and probably for the remainder
of their lives. Well, the right hon. gentleman
said that these Acts were only passed with a view of
achieving great results. Whether the expectations that
were formed by those who originally passed these Acts
had been disappointed or not—very probably they
have—l think it is possible that so long as their opera-
tion is confined to a. few stations it can be limited. I
entirely deny that this House Is bound to abandon those
Acts simply because they have not attained great results.
It Is sufficient for us that they have attained an
adequate result. They have obtained a material Increase
in the health of the Army and Navy and in the general
population, and these results have been obtained, I
believe, without any interference whatever with the
morality of the people. On the contrary, I believe they
have been. obtained with results most favourable to
morality.”
I will refer now to the statistics given by Mr.
O’Shaimossy, who was chairman of the com-
mittee, and drew up the report. Of course, as
has been pointed out, you cannot get all the
circumstances of the statistics, because men are
constantly going in and coming out of garrison :
“ Taking six years antecedent to the introduction of
the Acts, we find in the subjected stations primary
disease at the rate of 108-7 per 1,000. We find that In
the unsubjeoted stations for the same time they stood
at 10S - 0. But when we take the six years alter the intro-
duction of the Acta, wo find the 1097 ' of the subjected
stations had fallen to 63;4, and the 103 of, the
unsubjeoted was only reduced to 93;6. That is
to say, that there was a fall of 9 per cent, in
the unsubjeoted, and a fall of 40 per cent. In
the subjected districts; and if yon attribute the
fall ot 9, per cent, to natural causes, it leaves a diminu-
tion of SI per cent, in favour of the operation of the
Acts in this particular, kind of disease. We did the
same from the years 1860 to 1863, and the subjected
period of from 1870 to 1873. The same system of calcu-
lation was adopted; there was a balance of 34 per cent,
as the net gain of the Acts In these three years ; and
remember that 34 is sufficiently near 31 per cent, in the
other years to show that this is no accident.”
Of course, the numbers are always fluctuating as
in other diseases.
‘‘ After the passing of the Act there was a natural
fluctuation upwards, because the disease went up.
There was a rise after the passing of the Act of 1869.
lu the unsubjeoted dis tricts primary diseases had then
risen from 84 to 10(5, while in the subjected districts
they had fallen. Then in 18C9 there was a general
downward fluctuation, and the result was. that in
1871 the unsubjeoted stations had fallen to 81,
but the subjected stations had fallen far more—
to 51. Then In 1872 everything fell considerably.
Then ill 1877. the unsubjeoted stations were 68, and
the ether 35; and then the next year there came out
the reserves which disturbed the calculations. That
year raised the unsubjected from 88 to 78, and it only
raised the subjected from 35 to 40, Now, as to the con-
stitutional form of disease, and taking the same com-
parison of years, and thereby testing what the Acts had
done as distinguished from natural causes,! find that there
is a diminution in favour of the Acts of 29 per cent, in
the subjected stations. Then, in the periods between
1860 and 1833, and between 1870 and 1873, the ratio per
thousand of admission for secondary syphilis in unsub-
jected stations was in the former period 30‘5 ; in the
latter 27‘5; showing a reduction of 10 per cent. In the
subjected districts the corresponding ratios were 40 and
20 3 per thousand—a diminution of 49 per cent; from
which, if the natural reduction of 10 per cent, in the
unsubjeoted be subtracted, there remains lu favour
of the" Acts'a diminution of 39 per cent. But the right
hon. gentleman says that there were discrepancies
between the returns on which our evidence as to the
stations are founded. This is rather a complicated
subject, bub I will endeavour to deal with it as plainly
as I can.”
There is a difficulty then arising in this way.
The number of soldiers are constantly fluctuating.
There is never a fixed number, and some are
constantly coming in and others going out. The
question is whether the soldiers coming in
increase or diminish the prevalence of this disease.
Mr. O’Shannessy went into that and pointed out
circumstances which Ido not care to go into in de-
tail, but it may be said briefly that there are two
forms of the disease—secondary and primary.
Secondary disease shows itself on the average
once to every three times that the primary disease
shows itself. That is what is found in the un-
subjected districts. It was found in the sub-
jected districts that secondary disease was in
the proportion of two to three as-compared
with the primary disease. That shows
there must be a number of persons who
come in and increase the number in the
subjected districts beyond what it would other-
wise be by the introduction of fresh soldiers.
So that with regard to the diminution, instead
of it being 30 or 40 or 50 per cent., it is probably
double that; or, rather, the reduction, instead of
being 30 per cent., is probably 60 per cent. I
take these statistics in good faith, of course, for I
have not had an opportunity of verifying them,
but they are stated by the members of the com-
mittee. If you diminish the number of sources
of contagion you must necessarily diminish the
extent of the contagion,, and I think that is a
very strong argument, as I have already said. I
Want to refer now briefly to one or two other
arguments that hate been advanced by the hon.
member. It is said this system is brutalising,
but I confess, I cannot attach much weight to
that. The occupation is a brutalising olle,
and I do not think it can make those
who engage jii it airy more brutal. It is
inherent in the nature Of the thing. It is
a disease Specially dangerous, arid it is desirable
to stop its spread as .much as, Or more than* that
of any other disease known to the htlrrian race. If
persons deliberately make a business of spreading
that disease, I do not think it is too much to
say that they ought to submit to the conse-
quences. i am unable to concur in the conclu-
sion that the system is any more brutalising than
the occupation itself. The great argument
against the system, and the one Which most
impressed me, was that it might tend to prevent
reformation. If it did that, I should be disposed
to let that circumstance weigh very heavily
against all the advantages of the system. But
how is the statement borne out ? I quote again
from the evidence before the select committee.
The witness is Mr. Osborne Morgan. He says
(page 121): .
“ There were innumerable cases cited from Dsvonport
and Portsmouth, and the annual report clearly-shows an
enormous decrease in juvenile prostitution, I should
like to say one word about the innumerable cases'of
reclamation of young girls under the Acts. Miss Webb
showed a letter written by the benevolent wife of
Archdeacon Grant, saying that the Acts ilful a benefleias
effect on the inmates of the hospital. Gases after easel
have been brough t before us who would never have
had an opportunity of getting out of this course of life
but for these Acts. Is it possible that these Acts should
have the immoral results that their opponents say they
have, if men like Mr. Grant and Mr. Russell, who have
lived and had experience all these years, bear unequivo-
cal testimony of their good effects f And that is really
the opinion of the majority, and the almost unanimous
opinion of those who have had experience of their
operation in the subjected districts.”
One statement like that from a person who has
been engaged in the work of reformation, counts
fora great deal more than any general declara-
tion as to the probable consequences of the Act.
It is said, sir, that innocent women have been
seized and subjected to examination ; but I have
never heard of such a case in this colony. All the
cases that have come under my notice turned out
on inquiry to be cases where there was very good
ground indeed for suspicion. I have never heard
of any case where injustice has been done ; and
what does Mr. Osborne Morgan say ? That has
been one of the standard arguments in England
for years. Because, in France, such things have
been done, it was maintained that the same thing
was done in England under an entirely different
system. Mr. Osborne Morgan says :
' “If you can show that in a single case a virtuous
woman, or a quasi virtuous woman, had been molested
under these Acts, the case would be perfectly different;
but I told the right hon. gentleman that, if I came to
one authentic case of any respectable woman who had
been molested under the Act, I should be only too glad
to inquire into it. There were some cock-and-bull
stories, and they were nothing eise. There was but one
which a lawyer would admit, and it was the only case
that I could find. One witness, Mr. Wheeler, said there
were hundreds of cases in which terrified and innocent
girls had submitted to these Acts, and I asked him for
one case, and he mentioned the case of Caroline
Wybrow, and in that case we did think the policeman
had exceeded his duty.”
That is what it all comes to. They point out
one case in which a policeman exceeded his duty.
I circumstances of the case ; but I
know I have read them. That is the only case
in point in connection with the operation of the
Act in England. Now, I say we have to deal
with this matter from a practical point of view.
We found a virulent .scourge'in our midst being
spread all over the colony, ruining the con-
stitutions of many men, and destroying the
aboriginal population; we adopted a certain
system, and as far as we can ascertain,
the result has been that the disease, though
not entirely stamped out, has very nearly been
stamped out. I may mention one circumstance
in connection with the men-of-war that called
here. I know that very great surprise was ex-
pressed by the medical officers of the men-of-war,
after they had been here a few days, at the
condition of the men. Instead of the usual
number of men being laid up, there were none
or scarcely any; and that was noted with very
great surprise, because they were not aware
before that the Act was in operation in any of
the Australian colonies. To sum up : We have
an Act in operation which must have the
effect of saving the health of a very large number
of men in this colony—not only men now in the
colony, but also those who may come here, and
their children. No instance has yet been
adduced where that Act has done any harm,
except the harm that can be pointed out on
general grounds. It is said that it is an infringe-
ment of the liberty of the subject. Of course it
is, and so is every law relating to the public
health; but we have for many years
adopted the principle that in matters of
public health the comfort of the individual
must yield to the good of the public. I do
not think any exception can be claimed in
the case of a person engaged in an unlawful
occupation. On these grounds I am unable to
support the hon. gentleman. I give him credit
for the greatest sincerity, and I know that many
members in the House agree with him. I know
that in what I have said I am opposing the
opinions—and the very strongly cherished opinions
—of a great number of men, and a great number
of women .too, in this colony, with whom I
generally have the good fortune to agree;
but I considered it my duty to express
my opinion on the subject, and if I have
had the misfortune to irritate them I can-
not help it, I could not shirk the responsi-
bility of saying what I consider to be the true
view of the matter. I shall vote against the
resolution, which, if carried, would, I am afraid,
not tend to the physical health of the people
or in any degree to the improvement of their
morals.
Mr. MACEARLANE said : Mr. Speaker,—
For many years past I have felt very strongly on
the subject of the Contagious Diseases Act. I
may say that what caused me first of all to feel
an abhorrence towards the system was a circum-
stance that occurred in a house adjoining the one
I lived in thirteen years ago in the old country.
There was a young woman there who was always
supposed to be beautiful, virtuous, and possessed
of all the moral qualities that would attach her
to the opposite sex, and. she was very retiring in
her disposition. One day she did not appear at
her usual place of employment —at a warehouse.
Her brother could not understand, what had be-
come of her, and after two days’ search he found
her in a brothel. Everyone was horrified, for the
supposed virtue of the girl was revered by all
who knew her. Her brother begged her to leave
that house, but she refused ; and three months
after she died of disease in the same house.
Now, sir, that was the first thing to draw my
attention to this obnoxious system; and from
th §{• tee to this I have always. Mb that It
a disgritfef tq any community to’ sanction*
a law compe'llls’g ibo examination of Ifomen-
The motion this _ simply, disappft^®
of the compulsory examtearioti rf women, km
Premier, in his reply to thd bom member tor
South Brisbane, made some remarks to the effect ■
that, while he would not like to caff Ibsentlnaent,
yet there was,a great deal of sentirfiewt among:
those who opposed this Act. I ask hon. members.,
is it sentiment to see the daughters of our Work--
ing classes- toTii aw ay from, their homes to Jilt,
brothels,- and to be forced to undergo examina-
tions to 1 keep them in st fit state for the gratifi-
cation of those in the higher ranks of society ?
Who are the girls who are prostitutes? I hey
Me not the daughters oi our middle classes, or ot
our higher classes they aTC the daughters oi the
working meii iff the- colony. Is not the virtue
of those girls as! trieoious in the eyes of their
fathers and mothers, M is the virtue oi the
daughters of the middle and Mgher classes in the
eyes of theirs ? If that be so, should we not
deal out common justice to all classes ©f society .
The Premier says this is a terrible qvil—and
there I agf m with him—and that we shdttld ,ao
all we can to step it.- What I object to m that
he is not doing all fife’ eaa to stop it. And .he
Contagious Diseases Act, Me it at present stands*
will never stop it. I wish tM Premier to listen
to what I say, and I say distinctly that we shall
never, stop this evil until we deal out ©cpval justice-
to the men as well as to the women. There must-
be ?>t least tea Of twenty male sinners ferr every
prostitute that exists. That is a known fact,
I hope those Who intend to spe'ak in favour ot
the Act will bear it in mind. If w;e want to
stop this dire disease* Why do we
men as well as ■ the WOttlsg ? ■ The Premier says
that men -coming from the country _to & place
like Brisbane would get this' fell disease; but
have not those men the power of communicating
it as well as the females ? It is supposed they
have more power, and yet they are not- dealt
with. A man may steal away the virtue oi thc-s
daughters of out working classes, and there n
no redress whatever. He may give them that
fell disease, and there is no law to get hold ot
him. How can you stop a disease when you
only attack one-tenth or one-twentieth part ot
it ? It is impossible. The figures quoted by the
Premier, in opposition to the figures quoted by the
hon. member for South Brisbane, do not go to the
heartof the question. Figures williieversettlethin
question. Those in favour of the Act have figures
to show that it is beneficial, while those opposed
to the Act have figures to show that it is doing
no good. Therefore, I say figures will not settle
the thing. It is a matter of opinion —of
morality ; and looking at the system in the
light I do, I say it is a wrong, a disgrace, an
outrage perpetrated upon women. This subject
has been smouldering a long time in the breasts'
of the men and women of Queensland, and all
the members of Parliament united will not stop
the discussion of it—will not arrest the feeling
against the Act when we see the women of the
colony rise in their womanhood and denounce it
as something disgraceful to their sex and to the
men who keep up the system. I have no hesita-
tion in. saying that, if the present House wer®
asked to pass such a law, it would be scouted and
branded as it ought to be, as something terrible -
something wrongful to the sex whom I hope we
all love and revere and respect. I ask hon. gen-
tlemen to imagine that these young "women of thir-
teen, or eighteen, or twenty years, are their own
daughters, and what would they say ? But the
surroundings of the daughters of members of
Parliament are all in favour of virtue. It is not
so with the daughters of the working classes.
They are obliged to go out and perform thos©
menial duties which are to get them a living.
They take situations in public-houses, which the
very worst of men frequent, often for the very
purpose of seducing- those girls. Should we not
rather protect those females by passing a law to
prevent their taking positions in public-hpuses ?
That would be one means of lessening this evif.
The fact that this Act is partial, punishing the
female and sparing the male, is a strong argument
in favour of its being expunged from the Statute-
book of the oniony. Is there not something
cruel in forcing a young girl to undergo an
examination repulsive to all the finer -feelings of
a virtuous girl ? Hon. members may say that
virtuous girls are not submitted to it; but there
are many instances on record where girls who
were virtuous have been compelled to undergo
it, and whose feelings were so outraged by it that
they have thrown themselves upon the pavement
and dashed themselves into eternity. We have
many instances of girls drowning themselves
after having been compelled to undergo this
degrading operation. It is so unjust, so_ cruel—
so terribly cruel—because a girl has to register her
shame, proclaim herself a prostitute, and undergo
an examination which must be repulsive to the
finer feelings of anyone who has any feelings at all.
Hon, members may say we are dealing with a
necessary evil. If so, it is an evil that has
ruined many nations, beginning with Sodom
and Gomorrah, and going on to Home and
others sunk to the very lowest depths through
this terrible vice. Even if we could prove that
the compulsory examination of women lessens
the amount of evil, I say we have no right
to do it. We have no right to “do evil thar
good may come. ” That is a law propounded by a
higher authority than this Legislative Assembly.
Who will stand up in this House and say it is
not an evil, an injustice; and a cruel wrong to, the
softer sex ? I hope that those who maintain that
this law should be kept in force will, before they
give their votes, seriously consider the evil they
are doing. There is one thing that gives me
great comfort, although at the same time I feel
great shame for it, and that is, thattheonly colony
where such a law is in force is Queensland —a colony
called after our honoured Queen —a name, ala,s !
now identified with a land where the
is defamed, and women are lowered in the sight
of all the nations of the earth. I hope that
this colony will not longer continue to, be
branded as the only colony that has - this
Act in force. The Premier, in replying to the
hon. member for South Brisbane, said something
about 100 women being registered in Brisbane,
and that at one time. during the same year 136
had been registered.
The PREMIER : The total number on the
list during the year.
Mr. MACEARLANE : The hon. gentleman
said something about 136 being reduced to 100.
The PREMIER : I did not say that 136 were
on the register at the same time.
Mr. MACEARLANE: We cannot suppose
for a moment that that is all the prostitution in
the colony. The very fact that the number has
been reduced from 136 to 100 is no proof at all
that the Act was working well, or that the
disease had been reduced, or that the women
had been decreased in numbers. It is well
known that these girls have an abhorrence to
this examination. And what do they do ? Why,
they fly from Brisbane to the outskirts of the
city. They go to country plages that are not


well looked after tey the police, and consequently
escape am® not registered. I think the feWW
m-eiaDer -Ar South Brisbane said •SOmbtltlttg to
6 ■? - 6 this Act Prevents l#feftation by
taarefemng tae persons engaged it. And the
555^ er ® ai | something- to Ilk® effect that it had
mWfc that effect. I Umk it stands to reason,
■t na *> human ; iilffie, that if -one is onoe
branded as a Sinner of any kind it JoweW
ium m his mvn estimation and in the esti-
mation of others; And being mee branded
as a prostitute, it is worse for a wdmaft
ko retem. We know when once a woman
¥ l%m way to any sin, it is far mdr& difficult for
n W reform than a hiabu Everybody ad-
®vns that, and therefore We say that the Act
as carried out at preg'ent does not tend to give
any chance to ! a Woman who has fallen, to reform.
AW J®, another reason why I am opposed to
ti-ais Act. But some Iron. mentb%rs will re-
ar emte that I called for some 'returns at the
Beginning of this session in reference to this
particular Act. The question I asked was, in
What towns in, ttife colony the Act has been in
force The reply t got from the Premier was
tma„ the provisions of the Act had been extended
to Brisbane, Maryborough, Rockhampton, Roelr-
fiamptea North, Gooktown,the shire of ToOwong
and t« divisions of Woollongabba, Ithaca, and !
itooeoodabm. I have talien th'e trouble to look
jp the Estimates ia reference to the towns
which this Act W in force in the colony
and what do I find ? I find it is a very ex- '
pensive affair alter all, and that in the towns
that are registered under this Act there is con-
siderably more mongy paid away for medical
nrheers than in the towns where this Act is not
an force. Let me quote one Dr two of them.
Li ‘.mbane, there is paid, to medical officers
I ln Cooktowu, last year, £l5O, increased
this year to £SOO! Maryborough, £200; Rock- -
haiiipton,- J24OCK These are the largest towns ■
where the Act is in force. Let me mention .
one or %Wo towns where the Act ia -not in
force; Bowen, for medical officers only £80;
ohiucters Towers—a mining district where one
might think, with so many single men living
by themselves, the Act should be put in
force—£so; Herbertoii, £5O another mining ]
town ; Toowoomba, £75 ■; Ipswich, £7O ; Raveng-
wood, £5O. Those tewjia, such as Toowoomba
and Ipswich, are larger towns than those in the
North, where £4OO and £5OO are spent on
medical ofltep're. So that the Act is not cheap
after all. VV e see then that in the towns where
tills Act 1H not in force there ia more morality,
snore Virtue, and less disease than in the towns
where the Act is in force. And we find that in
proportion to the extent of the town and the
amount of money paid to the medical officers in
the same proportion does the disease extend.
That shows clearly to my mind that the medical
faculty is against morality, Ido not care a fig ,
for medical man telling us that it would be a
serious thing if this Act were abolished. It
would be one of the finest things for the colony
if it were abolished. Virtue would then have a
chance to increase. The fact is that in those
towns where the Act is not in force there is
scarcely any prostitution. There is not a single
public prostitute in Ipswich, so far aa I know. I
cannot speak for the other towns. It may be
sdd that that is notan argument: that women
ui’Vv go “on the square.” But I say, if yon give
R sanction to a law like this for examination -
and registration, you are simply continuing the
evil, increasing it, and doing damage to the
murals and the physical stamina of the people.
The Premier, in reply to the hon. member for
Scftth Brisbane —and he did so very feelingly-
appealed to this Hous-e very feelingly in reference
to this terrible evil. It is a terrible evil; and I
would say, with all the earnestness I can
use, that if we have any feeling at all
we will do what we can —if we cannot
expunge the Act—to deal out as equal justice to
the men as we deal out to the women. If this
were done then the Act would be abolished in a
■year. No man would submit to it; and what a
man would not submit to, we have no right to
make the opposite sex submit to. I hope what
has been said in the House to-day will bring the
subject before the people and let them see how
the matter is dealt-with here.
Mr. BROOKES said : Mr. Speaker,—Gene-
rally—almost always—we talk in this House
about political matters, but on this occasion we
are dealing with a social question into which I
do not well see how politics can intrude them-
selves. So that I hope hen. gentlemen on the
other side will not consider that I ought to have
given one of their number an opportunity to
speak before myself upon this question. ’ On
this question there are not two sides—in a
political sense. I may say that this is a question
which has received ray amateur attention for the
last twenty or twenty-five years. My attention
was first called to it by reading the first article
on the subject that appeared in the Westminster
Review, and I have read every article that has since
appeared on this question in that Review, and
fnom various other sources, throwing light upon
this subject, I have come to certain conclusions ;
and without professing to be any better than
my neighbours, I do claim, that the con-
clusions I have dome to are free from
any _ bias whatever. Biit this is what I
see in various parts of the wqrld. Every
moderately well-informed person has long
known a great deal of what the Premier said
about French prostitution. We know perfectly
well that, social grounds apart, the state of
affairs which had been brought about in Paris
by the “ Police of Morals,” was such as could no
longer sustain itself, and which stank in the
nostrils of both good and bad men. But this
is, what I gather from the history of nearly
100 years of French attempts to get rid of
this complaint—that these attempts are and
have been utter failures; that, medically
speaking, the French attempts to stamp out
venereal diseases have resulted in utter failure.
When I read that I was very much struck with
it; because if any city has got its very best men
to do their beat to stamp out this disease, that
city is Paris, and yet the testimony is con-
clusive, it comes in from all aides ; it is admitted
by those who have been in the Government pay,
as well aa by private practitioners, that the vene-
real disease was not cured, or stamped out, or
anything like it, in Paris. I take this medical
aspect of the question, first,, not because I
think it goes first, but because the principal
burden of what the Premier said was from the
medical aspect of the question. The Premier,
however, did not say a single word that
moderately well-informed persons did net know
before about the virulence of the disease. It is
the king- of diseases. There was an article
in the Westminster Review which dealt in a
thorough manner with that part of the question ;
and anyone reading that article, or any other
works on the subject, must know that smallpox,
measles, and scarlatina are aa nothing compared
with syphilis when we .consider the question of
eradicating the disease. That is admitted by all
the doctors who have treated this disease.' It
j is stamped out; and medical testimony is
concurrent on this point—that the compulsory
examination of women is a mere deception, and
that it does not cure the women. Why,
I need go no further than this s 'syphilis is
a disease in the blood. Gonotrhcßa, gfeht, and
those diseases can be cured; but syphilis will
lie in the blood Mddefi and undetected for years
and yeafth What, therefore, is the use of
i tabntWy examinations ? No use at all if the
dlSbase is syphilis. People certainly can be cured
■ of gonorrhoea and gleet, but they cannot be
cured of syphilis ; and for medical men to pass
women out as clean if they have come in suffer-
ing from syphilis—they know themselves is a
mere fraiid upon the public. Now Let ua see
what is the medical opinion in England—and I
shall be at some pains on this point, though I trust I
shall not be tedious ; because I am speaking on
a question of the first social importance, and I
’ am extremely anxious- that Hansard , which ia
the sole medium of communication between this
House and the whole of the colony, should con-
tain the report of a full and intelligent debate
on this subject. I only know of one medical
mail in Brisbane who is in favour of the repeal
of these Contagious Diseases Acts ; all the other
doctors are of opinion that they prevent disease.
I am not going to asperse the medical
faculty; but I remember what a very shrewd
man once said —• that whenever you find three
doctors together one of them will be a sceptic.
The views of doctors on medicine are something
like the Views of lawyers on law. We need not
expect any reform in law to come from the
lawyers.
The PREMIER: Ail the reforms do come
from the lawyers’ though. .*
Mr. BROOKES : _ And we need never expect
any reform in medicine to come from the doctors.
This is what I mean : The medical man is
so strictly confined to his own profession and
the healing art, that he loses sight of everything
else; and so it coiftes to pass that in the opinion
of the majority of medical men the morality of a
city comes second—the ethical right or wrong on
the subject does not occupy a place in his mind. <
Now what is the medical opinion of England.
The Medical Times and Gazette , of September
22nd, 1869, says :
“ There is nothing which would tend more to deprive
medicine of the rank of a respectable calling than the
fact that practitioners should be found willing to lend
themselves to the dirty work of examining prostitutes
In order to enable them to carry on their trade. If the
heads of the profession or the colleges ever desire an
opportunity of protecting their members from,degrada-
tion, here is one.”
The New York Medical Record says :
‘‘We assert again that the regulation system, as now
applied to ordinary communities, fails to prevent the
extension of disease. It is, Indeed, absurd to suppose
that semi-monthly examinations of one-eighth, or more
properly one-sixteenth, of those liable to communicate
infection, can attain any adequate results. The fact of
sanitary failure is so thoroughly established, that one of
two grounds only can be taken in regard to the matter.
We must either give up the idea of regulation entirely,
or wd must seek some new and more efficient method
than that now in practice. We have so far failed to
learn of any practicable substitute for the present
methods.”
Now, here is a protest-r-the protest of 800 medical
men:
“ in 1871, Bto physicians and surgeons signed the fol-
lowing protest;—• We, the undersigned physicians, sur-
geons, and general practitioners of medicine in the
United Kingdom, after due consideration, hereby record
our solemn pro test, onreligious,moral,aooial,andsanit»rv
grounds, protest against thejapplioatlon of thet fefWgious
Diseases Acts to the women of this country. We con-
sider the measure fraught with a large amount of mis-
chief, and calculated to do no good.’ ”
And here is the testimony of another large
number of medical men:—
“ Two hundred medical men in Birmingham, NTot-
tinghnm, Dudley, and Scarborough, have testified as
follows We consider that such a harsh, unconstitu-
tional, un-English, and unjust measure (as the Con-
tagious Diseases Act), is less to be defended on the
ground of expediency and necessity at the present
time than during any former period of our history.’ ”
Then we have a protest from forty-five medical
men of Dublin—all eminent men. And I may
say that the late Holmes Coote, the eminent
surgeon of St. Bartholomew’s Hospital, and a
merffber of the Royal Commission on the Acts,
declared tliat —
“The earnest menwho met some years ago to origi-
nate the movement which terminated in the passing of
the Contagious Diseases Acts had little idea of the use
that would be made of their labours and advice. As one
of those who took an active part in all that transpired,
I loudly maintain that the idea of the compulsory
examination of women, their enforced subjection to the
police, their exposure to the penalties of registration
and imprisonment, were views which would have been
scouted by the gentlemen who met to devise means of
giving shelter and protection to unfortunate females.”
I should like to read the whole of the extracts,
but I do not wish to take up the time of the
House, so I will sum them up by saying this :
That the medical testimony on the Continent of
Europe and Great Britain, and in America, is all
conclusive and to the effect that the Contagious
Diseases Acts do not touch the disease to the
extent of making it worth while to subject
women to the degradation of a compulsory
examination. But, sir, there ia another view
which I consider should always be the first view
taken of a aubj ect of this nature, and I say that it is
the _view which should be taken by us as a
Legislature. I was bred and born and educated
in this belief, that what is indefensible on
moral grounds cannot be made right on medical
grounds——
The PREMIER : Hear, hear!
Mr. BRDOKES ; Or on political grounds, or
on financial grounds. The doctrine, the teach-
ing that we find in the Holy Scriptures covers
everything, absolutely everything ; and vra read
in that book that “ The ways of a harlot Ire the
ways to hell,” and that “ her steps incline down
to death,” etc., etc. Hon. gentlemen will know
very well that I am quoting from the Book
of Proverbs. When I read such truths, and
when I find a Government sending out into
the streets of a Christian land, certificated
harlots guaranteed by State inspection my bile
rises. Such women are a disgrace to the com-
munity in which they walk about. What is
this doing but making fornication easy and safe ?
I submit that, in any community, it is the first duty
of men both moral and immoral—and they must,
admit it if they will think a moment or two eta
the subject—to do right, and no Legislature
should do anything to make fornication easy
and safe. The mover of this motion, in a speech
which was worthy of hi.m and of the subject,
mentioned a fact that is perfectly well kSiown,
namely, that prostitutes in Plymouth, Devonp.ort,
and Chatham, sail themselves “ Queen’s women,”
and. that they consider that if they can produce
their certificate they can produce evei’ything which
anyone wishing to have carnal intercourse with a
worn an would consider sufficient. I object to the
Contagious Diseases Act on that ground to begin
with. lam not speaking of the medical aspect
of the question now, but I am discussing, to the
beet of my ability, what I consider the first
ground of objection, and that is that the Conta-
gious Diseases Act is a distinct contravention of
the laws of morals, nothing more and nothing-
less ; and that being so there cannot be any
question that it is a disgrace to us. We know
that if we once get into a wrong path there
are thousands of by*paths also leading to
error, so do we find that Contagious Dis-
eases Acts are surrounded by a thousand other
inconveniences which result in an infring-
inent of the liberty of the subject, as far
as women are concerned. When those Acts
were passed in England, or rather proposed to be
passed. I remember that noble women Harriet
Martineau, who was then a leading contributor
to ther Daily News, writing several letters which
shook the country to its foundation, and which
she signed “An Englishwoman.” When the Act
was passed by the House of Commons it was
paissed after 12 o’clock at night, and those who
voted for it, or some of them, were known to be
debauchees and rakes. I can mention one
person whose name appears in the debate, who
was seen in London taking a girl of tender years
—a girl twelve or thirteen years of age—into
a brothel ; that was one of the men who
advocated the Act. What is the advocacy of
such men worth ? And what has been the
result of the measure they have advocated ? The
attempt, I say, to save men from the con-
, sequences of their ski by a Contagious Diseases
Act is an attempt which begins with failure and
ends with failure. I think that, in dealing with
this subject, we ought to have some respect for
the women of the colony. Everything we hear
and everything we read shows that the
opinion and influence of women are begin-
ning to be regarded in their right light. And
what have the women done with regard to
this Contagious Diseases Act? This colony
does not, I daresay, contain more than 250,000
r people, and I do not think there are more than
50,000 adult women ; yet the petition presented
to this House is signed by 3,000. What does
that show? You cannot get the signatures of
women to a petition as easily as you can get the
i signatures of men. The petition shows that the
instincts of these women are against the Con-
tagious Diseases Act. I am one who attaches
immense importance to the instincts of women. ■
< They are right in ninety-nine cases out of a
hundred; and I must confess that my instincts
are also against the Act. If the Premier could
prove most conclusively that it would stamp out :
contagious diseases,-my instincts would not let me
consent to stamping them out in that way,
because it is the. wrong way. I believe
in short, that these Contagious Diseases Acts ‘
are against the first principles of morality ; that
they are a positive premium to that which all ,
churches have agreed to call a deadly sin, and
the religious opinion of this colony will be the
religious opinion of England. Just let me give
a list of ecclesiastical and religious bodies in
England and Scotland which have denounced
these Acts, some of them over and over
again. There is the Established Church of
England, represented by 1,500 dignitaries and
clergymen; the Free Church of Scotland,
Presbyterian, at their annual assembly ; the
United Presbyterian Synod of Scotland ;
the Presbyterian Church of Ireland in their
annual synod ; the Society of Friends ; the Wes-
leyan Conference, England (annually from 1870
to 1881); the Wesleyan Conference, Ireland ; the
United Methodist Conference, in their annual
assembly; the Primitive Methodist Conference
for England ; the Methodist New Connection
Conference ; the Congregational Union of Eng-
land and Wales, in their annual assembly in
London ; the Scotch Gongregationalists, at their
annual conference ; the Congregational Churches
of Nrirth Wales ; the Baptist Union of England
and Wales ; and the Bible Christian Conference.
These represent over 20,000 Christian congre-
gations in Great Britain, of almost every
denomination, which have protested against the
continuance of the Acts on the statute-books.
Wesleyan (Ecumenical Conference, repre-
senting the churches of that denomination over
the whole world, meeting in London in 1881, by
a unanimous vote expressed their disapproval of
the Acts. Cardinal Manning, the head of the
Roman Catholics in England, has written ;—“ I
am of opinion that every dictate of law and
morality requires the repeal of these Acts.”
Here, we have an overwhelming mass of
opinion against this law; and how, in the
face of that, am I to regard the opinions of
doctors who receive a paltry salary for exami-
nations under the Contagious Diseases Act. I .
view them with a feeling akin to scorn : I do
not give them any weight at all, as their
opinions are counterbalanced by an overwhelm-
ing weight of medical, religious, and domestic
opinion. The petition that has been presented
to this House shows that; and everything goes to
show that unless we do things right we will
never prosper, land bills and loans notwith-
standing. With all my heart, I hope that the
House will pass this motion Unanimously.
Mr. NORTON: The hon. gentleman who
introduced this motion this evening made
reference to two or three members of different '
Houses of Parliament at the time the Contagious
Diseases Act was passed ; and, in speaking of
them, he included my name. On that account -
I feel bound, even if I had been disposed to '
allow the matter to go by in silence,
to say a few words, at any rate in ex- :
planation of the course I intend to adopt
this evening. The hon. member spoke to me
about this matter some few days ago, and inti-
mated to me that he had undertaken to bring the '
subject forward in the House. He asked me to
read up in connection with the question, ,
but I am sorry to say I have not had the
opportunity of doing so as thoroughly as the
hon. gentleman would wish me to do. I
do not think on that account that I am in
less able a position to give a decision upon the
subject, because it is one that I have for a long
time paid some attention to. I have read a
great deal about it, and I may say, before the
hon. gentleman spoke to me at all, that my
mind was made up as to the course that ought
to be adopted in connection with the question.
I tell the hon. gentleman in starting, that if the ■"
circumstances were the same, and T was placed
in the same position that I was then, when
the Act was passed, I would adopt the same
course exactly. But I would point out to
the hon. gentleman that a great deal of time has
passed since then. At that time I was —I am
not a very old man now—but, at any rate, I hare
had seventeen years’ experience of the world
since I was called upon to vote in connection
with the passing of that measure, and my views
have been considerably modified with regard to
the question, I cannot forget some of the argu-
ments that were used in favour of this Act;
they were extremely weak, a»d one of the
strongest, it was thought, that was brought
forward by the hon. gentleman then in charge
of the Bill, was one that I am almost ashamed
to mention to the House, It was that a number
of boys from one of the schools in Brisbane were
affected with this abominable disease. I think ;
the number was about forty. I did not believe
that statement in the smallest degree, and I do
not now, and nothing will induce me to believe
that such was the case. I regarded that then as
one of the gravest of the statements that were
made in support of the Bill. The most unfor-
tunate part of the matter is that those who talk
most about it are very often those who are
least particular in the statements that they
make in connection with it. They often make
statements that they cannot support, or do not
attempt to support by any evidence whatever ;
but at the same time they mate use of the most
extraordinary exaggerations, which anyone with
any knowledge of the world cannot by any possi-
bility accept. I am not referring to the hon.
■ member. I hope he will not think that, in speak-
ing as I do, I am speaking of him, because I
think he is to be congratulated on the manner in
which he has introduced the subject, and the
careful attention which be has evidently bestowed
upon it, as well as the concise way in which
he put it before this House. I think that
on that account he is entitled to the greatest
consideration from the House, and deserves a
great deal of credit ; but I cannot agree with all
he says. I think that I understand the matter
more fully now than I did formerly, and that
there are two points of view from which we
should look upon it. One is, that we may be
guided by that religious sentiment which is
common to every man, and which is even stronger
in young men than it is in old ; not, perhaps,
stronger, but it has greater effect because
they have not reached that position which
they attain at a greater age, and are more
apt upon that account, without their feelings
being actually stronger, to be influenced by that
sentiment to hold exaggerated opinions upon
what appears to them t© be wrong. At that time,
speaking for myself, I was a young man, and I
had comparatively little knowledge of the world,
for, although I had been a good many years
knocking about on my own account, I had been,
with perhaps the exception of a few months,
, away out of the world. I use that term
because I believe that most young men, in
particular, who go into the bush from the time
they leave school, and spend their lives there,
are almost absolutely excluded from the world.
They gain comparatively little knowledge of
the world generally, and that was very much my
position at that time. I have learned a great
deal since then, and I have read a great deal
on this subject, and I have also seen a great deal
of the consequences of this fearful disease which
has been alluded to so frequently to-night; and I
pray say that if I had never read anything about
it, the effect of what I have seen would have
been enough to make me hesitate before I con-
sented to vote for the abolition of this Act.
Before I go further I will say a few words
with regard to the petition which was presented
a few days ago. It has been held that
a petition of that kind must exercise a certain
amount of influence, because it would be im-
possible to get up such a petition, signed by so
many virtuous women, without its showing the
strong antipathy they have to the provisions
of an Act, of this kind. I admit all that; but
are virtuous women in a position to judge of the
real facts connected with the case ? They feel for
those fallen women who are subjected to this ex-
amination, and have a great deal of sympathy for
those whom they regard as in this distressing
position. But they cannot bring themselves
to look upon the position of those degraded
women as men do. It is impossible that they
should take such a view ; they regard the matter
, as virtuous women, and do not know- enough
about it. It is impossible that they can know-
enough to take the same view of the actual facts
of the case that men are able to do. But,
although a great deal of weight attaches
to a petition of that kind, I think that
we, as men with a knowledge of the world,
cannot allow ourselves to be guided by a
document of that kind-, which expresses a
great dead more sympathy than it does logic.
That is the w-ay in which 1 regard that petition.
There is one thing w-e must take into our notice.
We must admit from the first that prostitution
exists, and the fact that it exists show's that it
exists by the will of men. There would be no
prostitution at all if there were not a larger
number of men by tenfold or twentyfold willing
to countenance it than w-omen who are reduced to
that unfortunate condition. This is no new thing;
it has existed ever since history began—ever
since there has been history it has been recorded.
It is no use going back to what happened in
former days, except for the mere object of
convincing ourselves—-if we need convincing
—that exactly the same thing has existed
from the time there have been people on
the face of the earth; and it exists now.
Can we, by the abolition of these Acts, expect to
lessen in any way the evil that has existed for
so many years ? Ido not think we can. I may
be mistaken in rny view; but I certainly do not
think that we can cure what was an ineradicable
defect in human nature in that way. One of
the strongest objections which I think most
people have to the Act, is that it seems to be a
sort of license to prostitution. That was the
view I took years ago : it was the viewthat struck
me at that time most strongly. But we are
bound to consider it in another light. We are
bound to consider the consequences of indulgence
in what leads men to contract that terrible
disease which has been so well described by the
Premier. I certainly agree with the hon. gentle-
man that there is no disease which has Such dire
effects, and that that is one reason why extreme
measures should be taken for the suppression of
the evils that it is bound to create. It is not
one of those diseases from which the men alone
suffer ; it is not one from which their own
families alone suffer ; but it attacks families
generations beyond. We know that there are men
and women—perhaps not many in this country,
but in the older countries of the world,
who have inherited the terrible effects of this
dire disease, contracted three or four generations
before ; and they have to bear a terrible burden
that some of their predecessors has cast upon
them. That is a view we are bound to consider
in looking at the question. We all know cases
of the terrible effects of the contraction of the
disease. I have known two or three cases of
young men who have come out here from home
who, though they have not contracted the
disease and died in a week, as in the case men-
tioned by the Premier, have been infinitely worse.
I have known young men, healthy and active, and
with good constitutions, who have remained in
this country for two or three years, and then left
it perfect wrecks—gone back to their friends
disgraced, wretched, and with not the slightest
hope that they would ever recover anything like
the health they brought out—gone back to be-
come a burden on those who have to support
them—simply because by their wretched mistake
they have contracted tliis terrible disease. We
must consider that there are eases in which
virtuous young men may be, and indeed are,
entrapped into mischief of that land. Men can-
not always control themselves. Ido not say that
simply as my own opinion. I might quote one of
the highest authorities in the colonies, one of the


most respected men we have, in support of that influenced in maintaining the conclusion I have i
statement; but Ido not think I need do so. As hitherto held on the subject, by the fact that a i
cases have been referred to where men have con- ' great many persons who are both oldei- and 1
tracted the disease, and been brought to a wiser than myself entertain the opinion that I t
terrible state of wretchedness, I may mention have all along entertained, and who are able_ to J
one case of which I have heard, which happened give reasons perhaps of a more solid and convincing t
in a neighbourhood in which I lived some years character than I amabletoadvanceforholdingthe i
ago. Some of the hospitals at that time—l opinions that I do. Reference has been made to 3
doubt whether they do so now-absolutely the petition addressed to this House by 3,500 g
refused admission to men suffering from women of Queensland, and I entirely concur in t
venereal diseases. That used to be the casei the observatipn made by my hon. friend the \
at Rockhampton. On one occasion a gen- junior member for North Brisbane on that 1
tlemau who was managing a run next t petition. It is perhaps true, as the hon. c
mine, when riding with his stockman, in member for I’ort Curtis has stated,- that women, (
the pursuit of his usual avocation, came perhaps, are not able to speak on a question 1
across an unfortunate man camped beside a like this with the same authority that men are, j
waterhole. He had been to the Rockhampton ‘ because they have not the same amount
Hospital and applied to be taken in, but had of contact with the outside_ world that men i
been refused admittance because the rules of the necessarily have ; but I think this : that on i
institution did not allow of cases of that kind the whole and in the main, the opinions of ; i
being taken in. He then travelled down on the women on almost all questions affecting tho -
road to Wide Bay. Just before getting to my k well-being of men are entitled, not onto to t
place there was a short out —a cattle track— respectful consideration, but to very great defer- i
which he took in order to shorten his way as | ence. Now, it is equally true, with regard to i
much as possible. Before he got through on , women, that their knowledge of business, f
to the main road again, he was compelled and of matters relating to the concerns and (
by his wretched condition to stop. He had the daily life of their husbands in the outer 1
been some two or three days unable to move ; world, cannot be gained from the same sources 1
and he was carried to the station simply a mass that the knowledge and opinions of their hus- 1
of corruption. The unfortunate man received bands are gained from; but notwithstanding i
all the attention that could be given to him ; but it is a fact that such, as a rule, is tho instinct— i
he died within a week from the time he was it has been called Snstinctj but I do not use that ; i
found. I hope there are no hospitals in the word in a sentimental point of view—such I say , ■
colony which would now refuse to admit men in is the unerring instinct of women as a rule, that ’
that condition. I remember that that case was he is a wise man who, in matters of business with ’
reported to the authorities at Rockhampton, which women are entirely unacquainted, will "
and I believe the result was that the rules ask the advice of his wife and act upon It.
of the institution were altered. All of us, Some of the most successful men in business are
I have no doubt, could mention many those who have acted on the suggestions they
cases of men who have suffered from this have received from their wives, who perhaps
disease. There are some men who, though knew nothing whatever of business matters,
they know that they have the disease, and that simply because they have a faculty of discerning
even the secondary symptoms have shown them- those points which would be missed by
selves, yet have not principle enough to evade : men, and which faculty makes up for tho
contracting marriage, and so communicating tho lack of experience of the world around them
disease to their families. I have known one case that men have acquired by contact with the
of that kind within the last five or six years. I world. If women have not the same active
never was more horrified in my life, after the experience of what goes on among men in the
man had told me what was the matter with discussion of this particular law for instance, their
him, than to hear, about twelve months unerring instinct is such that they will be able
afterwards, that he was about to marry a to tell and study what will be for the good of
young and virtuous girl. The consequence of the community and State in a manner which
that marriage will be that, if there are any is worthy of consideration, and in a way that '
children, they will probably inherit the disease men are not able to do. Now, I say, when
from their father, and die before they grow up. we find 3,500 of the women of Queensland to
Although I cannot support the abolition of the approach this House in a respectful manner,
Act, l" go so far with the junior member for protesting against the continuation of tho
South Brisbane as to say that it might be made Contagious Diseases Act, I think that fact
very much better than it is. We have had ought to make every hon. member pause and
extraordinary cases quoted in which virtuous consider whether he is justified in continuing to
women have been induced to sign the paper hold the opinion that the Act ought to remain
which prostitutes are required to sign under the on the Statute-book. These 3,500 women of
Act. I don’t know whether those cases are true Queensland, and many of them among the most
or not ; I hope they are not; I hope there is no respected and honoured women in our corn-
truth whatever in any of them. But even if there munity, are those to whose opinions we ought to
is not, the fact of such cases being reported pay the greatest deference. They have the
shows plainly enough that it is possible under the interests of the community at heart quite as
Act to entrap women into signing the paper much as my hon. friend and colleague, the
which may afterwards lead to their destruction. Premier. In the welfare —moral, intellectual,
That is a point that requires amendment. I and in every other way —of this community they
think it would be a great advantage if the Act are deeply interested. Many of them—the
could be so - am ended as to prevent the possibility great majority of them are mothers, who
of anything of that kind taking place. We have sons and daughters at home, whom
know that some girls make mistakes ; but it is they are anxious to see married; they have
hard if they are absolutely forced to sign the daughters whom they are just as anxious
paper. Many such girls, although they go to ruin married to clean men as any member of tms
for a time, do not become prostitutes. I know House can be to make men clean; and I say
several cases in which girls who have made mis- then, when we find 3,500 women of Queensland,
takes have afterwards married the men who mothers of the families of Queensland children,
seduced them ; and it would be a most unfor- asking that this Act may be repealed, we have got
innate and lamentable thing if, in any single before us expressed opinions of sufficient weight
instance of that kind, a girl was entrapped to make us pause before we should come to the
into signing a document which would be the conclusion that this Act should not be wiped out.
means of ensuring her destruction for life. Women are not ignorant. Although they do
Now, Ido not think it is necessary to say anj 7 - not mix with men of the world, ana go about
thing further on the subject. I regret very much and see things with their own eyes that many *
that I cannot support the him. member in the men see, they know a great deal more perhaps
motion as it now stands ; but it is from what I than they are given credit for. They read books
know to be facts, and from what I have and newspapers, and if they do not see things
actually seen of the world, that X oppose the with their own eyes, I daresay they are able to hear
motion to-night. If I regarded the motion a great deal from their husbands, who can give
as the hon. member does, I think —more ■ them very reliable information upon subjects with
from a religious sentiment than a practical ■ which perhaps they are personally unacquainted,
knowledge of the world—l should go hand-in-hand I say that the mere fact of these ladies having
with him; but we are bound to regard the matter, no practical acquaintance by contact with these
not merely from one point of view, but from things is no reason why we should say that their
every point of view that it can be looked at. ■ opinions ought not to weigh with us. If they
Before I spoke to-night I was quite prepared to have no actual experience, they have sources of
take the action I have now intimated, but the knowledge that are open to others as well as
speech that the hon. the Premier made was so con- themselves, and they nave that unerring jndg-
vincing, so full of convincing facts and arguments, ment and discrimination which men of experi-
that anyone listening to him who had not made up ence have not. I say, Mr. Speaker, that I am
his mind before, would be persuaded, however very considerably influenced in the views I hold
strong his feelings were, to vote against the repeal by the consideration of the fact that the Act
of the measure, I think the Premier deserves has proved a failure in this colony. I am im-
great credit for the care he has bestowed on the formed that there are about a hundred women on
subject; the careful way he has got up the facts, ■ the register at the present time in the city of
and the able way in which he put them before the Brisbane, and that out of that hundred there
House. I think it is a mistake for us to turn to are on an average always thirty in the Lock
what goes on, or has gone on, in France to enable Hospital, and thirty in gaol; so that the l
us to form our judgment. Although the Premier number of effective prostitutes in the city of
did so, and talked much on that point, he did not ‘ Brisbane is only forty.
refer to it so much as an argument; but because The PREMIER? I have official information
the facts had just previously been referred to. that there are seventy.
The hon. gentleman convinced me, at any rate, The ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Even if we put
that that was simply an addition to the argu- it at seventy ; I want to know if any man thinks
ment rather than an argument itself. lam that seventy represents the number of prostitutes
sorry that I cannot support the hon. member in in Brisbane, with a population of about 35,000.
his motion because I believe he is perfectly My information, Mr. Speaker, must be exceed-
sincere in the cause he has taken up. lam ingly defective if seventy effective prostitutes
quite sure he believes every word that he uttered are all that are plying their unholy avocation
to-night; but I cannot agree with all he said ; and in Brisbane. I have my information from
because he is so sincere and earnest I regret that gentlemen who know a great deal about the
lam unable on the present occasion to support operation of these Acts, and are not quite
him. so squeamish in their ideas as some non.
The ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Hon. A. members on these subjects, and who are by
Rutledge) said :It is with considerable diffidence no means influenced by such considerations as
that I rise for the purpose of making a few have been prominently advanced by the hon.
observations on the question that has been member for South Brisbane and the hon. mem-
brought before the House in so able and con- ber for North Brisbane this evening. I am
vincing a manner by the hon. member for South informed by those gentlemen —I was informed
Brisbane, Mr. Jordan. I may say at once that I particularly by one gentleman to-day—that there
exceedingly regret that extreme pressure of busi- are a hundred or more prostitutes in Brisbane
ness has prevented me from perusing with the plying their avocations over whom there is no
care which they deserve the several documents r police supervision,
which were forwarded to me, as no doubt they Mr. ARCHER : It is a great pity,
were to other hon. members of this House, The ATTORNEY-GENERAL : That is an
by a number of excellent people outside who illustration of the failure of the Contagious
are deeply concerned with respect to the Diseases Act to remove the evil which it is pro-
operation of the Contagious Diseases Acts in fessedly in existence to remedy. We may
this colony ; and who are animated by a strong exercise supervision over a few, but we are not
desire to have those Acts erased from our Statute- able to control prostitution as an institution,
book. lam at considerable disadvantage in that and we are not able to do away with the evils it
lam not able to refer to any statistics on this professedly brings about. The illustration-given
question, and I must confine myself, therefore, to by the hon. member for Port Curtis bears out
commenting on some of the speeches that have what I have just now said. One of the reasons
been already delivered to the House, and state he gave for having changed the opinions he held
what my convictions are, arriving at my con- when the Act was before the House seventeen
elusion rather from the principles which years ago, was that he has known some lament-
govern questions of this kind than from any able instances of young men from the old
particular faets which I have been able to discover country having been infected by disease in this
from the able researches of those who have country after they had been here a short time,
given more attention to the subject. I may say and rendered pitiable wrecks. Now what
at once, Mr. Speaker, that lam one of those 1 does this argument amount to ? I impeach
who believe that the Contagious Diseases Act is this Act on the ground that it utterly
an Act which ought not to have a place among fails to accomplish what it professes:—to
the laws of this colony ; and lam considerably prevent the spread of this disease, and the
infection, of clean men by ulnclean women. What disease tvefe not confined to those who were'
inference are we to draw from the facts adduced actually guilty of the offence—the inference, of
by the hon. member for Port Curtis? We know course, being this! innocent children often suffer
that there are many parts of England where the from the sins of their parents. That is perfectly
Acts are not in operation at all; they only ex- true ; but does not the same argument bold good
tend to some of the garrison towns. We have with regard to other things I Is syphilis the only
not heard from the hon. member that the form of hereditary disease ? Are not consump-
young men he speaks of came from the tion and insanity hereditary diseases? And yet,,
garrison towns'; and the probability is that what statesman was ever yet bold enough to gay
they came from some part of England that, because the children of consumptive-parents-
where the Act is not in operation at all. will suffer all kinds of diseases, we shouM enact?
They come out perfectly clean, and when they a law forbidding consumptive people to mStsy ?
come to Brisbane, and other places where the Where is the statesman who has been so bold to
Contagions Disease* Act is in full operation, interfere with the liberty of the subject as to say
before they have been here very long they become that because a man or Woman is afflicted with
pitiable wrecks. insanity, therefore you are to- prohibit them
Mr. NORTON : Will the hon. member allow , from contracting matrimony? 1 say it is a kind
me to correct him! The cases I speak of were .of legislation that would not be tolerated in any
not in the town of Brisbane, or in any part of British community. And precisely tile same
the colony where the Act is in existence. reason might be urged—if the State is to step in
The ATTORNEY-GENERAL iOf course in and protect a man’s_ offspring from the conse-
that case my argument would not apply to the quences of his own illicit indulgences —for the
hon. member’s illustrations ; but I must say that State to step in and protect _a man’s offspring
if the hon. member has in these few cases seen from suffering from the indiscretion of their
sufficient reason to change his mind, I can only parents —because it could be nothing but an indis-
come to the conclusion that his experience must cretion—as in the case of their insanity. There-
have been of a very limited character previously, fore T come to the conclusion that the mere fact
Now I was informed only to-day by a gentleman that the offspring of persona who are in the habit
who takes a very great interest in this subject, of consorting with fallen women may have to
and whom, as I said before, I should not call pay the penalty of their promiscuous intercourse,
influenced in his views by any of those con- is not a sufficient reason why the State should
siderations already adverted to, of circumstances step in to protect them. There is one side of th®
which have come under his observation. He knew argument that is always lost sight of by those
himself where young men have come down to Bris- who advance this view—-and no doubt it is an
bane from different parts in theinterior of Queens- appeal to our sympathies on behalf of the in-
land, where of course the Acts are not in opera- nocent offspring. When it is said, “Oh ! make
tion; they scorn to consort with women who are provision that parents may not become infected,”
on the police register, but they nevertheless I say it is the duty of every man in the earn-
frequent improper places. They have abundant munity to take care in regard to these things*
facilities for finding places to which the police just as much as in regard to other_ things'. We
supervision does not extend, and have abundant know very well that a man’s offspring will stifles'
opportunity of access to women whose names if the man neglects the ordinary precautions that
are not on the register and who are not super- prudent men take—for instance, in making pro-
vised by the police; yet in many cases, after they vision for their lf a man neglects to in-
have consorted with these unlicensed persons, sure his life, and is cut off andleavesa large family
they are attacked with a very virulent form of behind him destitute, and subject possibly to
the disease. starvation by reason of his want of providence
An Honourable Member : Hear, hear I and foresight, we do not want th© State to step
The ATTORNEY-GENERAL : Now, what in and say, “We will make a provision for the
applies here applies anywhere else, and it goes to welfare of those offspring who are suffering from
show that it is impossible to have a system of their parents’ improvidence, perhaps even before
inspection that will do more than partially detect they were born.” The responsibility of_ looking
tho number of those who are plying this nefarious after a man’s offspring is not to be lifted off
traffic. There will be numberless places in spite of a man’s shoulders on to those of the State,
all you can do by means of the operation of an. Act surely. The man must be fully alive to _ what
of this kind, where clandestine prostitution will the consequences will_be_, if he is not sufficiently
be carried on. Indeed, the chief sources of the animated by moral principle to prevent him from
mischief that will be propagated will be those consorting with fallen women ; and we have no
places that are not under police supervision at right so to legislate that _he may still do what
all. The Act has been a total failure in Brisbane, ,is wrong, and yet have himself and his children
and everywhere else for the same reason, that protected from the possible consequences of his?
you can only exercise supervision over com- indiscretion. The hon. Premier referred to
paratively few women. The greater part of the ravages wrought by venereal disease
those who actually propagate disease still carry amongst the aborigines of the colony. There
on their trade with impunity, and therefore you can be doubt that that is so. _ But is this a reason
are to a certain extent degrading the community why the House should continue to maintain the
by having an Act of this land upon the Statute- Contagious Diseases Act? Does not the argn-
book without accomplishing the end for which ment work the other way ? It is said that
you sacrifice so much of your self-respect. the aboriginal inhabitants of_ Queensland are
It is a scandalous thing that, in connection dying out, because syphilis _is _ spreading
with the periodical examination of these women, amongst them, and that this is because
tbe most unseemly proceedings are carried on. the Contagious Diseases Act was not always
They go tap once a fortnight or so to be examined in operation. If the argument of the Premier
by the medical officer; and lam told by those amounts to any thing _at all it comes to
who have an opportunity of seeing what goes on , this —that if the Contagious Diseases Act had
that the amount of profanity and bad conduct always been in operation in Queensland the
indulged in by these women is absolutely shock- native races of this colony would not have been
ing ; and it is their great delight, when they decimated by those diseases. But what do we
have an accession to "their ranks in the shape of find ? We find that the South Sea Islanders hay©
a new-comer, to pour upon her all kinds of foul been? coming to the colony for about the same
abuse and shameful epithets, so as to utterly length of time as the Act has been in operation,
demoralise her, and utterly destroy any feeling and yet that venereal disease —if my information
she might have leaning to a desire for reforms- is correct —is rampant to the same extent among
tion of life. the South Sea Islanders imported into the colony,
Mr. NORTON : She must have been pretty as it is among the white population, and among
well demoralised before that. the aboriginal inhabitants of Queensland. These
The ATTORNEY-GENERAL: However par- kanakas have been coming here all the time, pro-
tially demoralised a woman may have been before, tected, or supposed to be protected, by the opera-
thetendency of this system of compulsory'examina- tion of this Contagious Diseases Act, and yet
tion is to make her demoralisation complete. Isay that has not prevented the introduction of the
nothing against the manner in which examinations disease and its spread to a terrible extent amongst
have been conducted. The gentleman who has the Polynesians. And they are carrying it
charge of the business is a humane man, not down to the islands : for I am informed
likely to do anything to wantonly outrage the by the traders to these islands that it is
feelings of any woman; but in the very nature almost incredible the extent to which this
of things the subjection to an examination of terrible disease is now spreading among
that kind must extinguish the last spark of not only those who come to this colony, but
womanly feeling that exists in the breast of her among those who remain in their island homes,
who undergoes it. One great evil flowing from Ido not know if it is necessary to enlarge upon
this Act is that women who are found infected the question. Those hon. gentlemen who have
with venereal disease are obliged to take up their preceded me have had the advantage of being
abode for a time in a lock hospital; and when able to quote statistics with which they have
once a woman has become an inmate of a lock- furnished themselves. I have not attempted
hospital, she bears upon her ever afterwards anything of that kind ; but I have shown that
the brand of infamy. What I contend is, that if there are reasons why we ought not to perpetuate
this Contagious Diseases Act were not in exist- a system that has manifestly proved itself a
ence at all, it would not follow that women failure —a system concerning which a large pro-
would never be inspected by medical men portion of the women of this colony have de-
who would be able to give them proper dared that it is a. thing that must be protested
■ treatment. If, instead of applying this com- • against, and concerning which we find men of
pulsory system, by which women are forced into all shades of opinion, though Ido not know if
’ a lock hospital for a time, they were allowed to they are in a majority or not—convinced it is not
go to a general hospital fqr treatment, in most - only in itself a standing menace to tho liberties
r cases they would avail themselves of it, and then of English women, but unworthy of so
they would not have to pay the terrible penalty for progressive a race as ours, and gifted
the medical examination to which they now have with such traditions as we have. We find in
to submit. It is a- scandalous fact that, whereas publications of this city, in which we do not
in some general hospitals you can have Chinese look for evangelical disquisitions, that the subject
lepers—positively, Chinese lepers—when a is taken up. I hold in my hand the Queensland
woman is infected with venereal disease, how- Figaro published to-day, and I see there what
ever comparatively slightly, she is sent to a conclusions can be come to, and what opinions
hospital, residence in which brands her for the can be held by men who probably are not
rest of her life. I have another reason for influenced by what some persons would scorn-
opposing the continuance of the Contagious fully call “ morbid sentimentality ”—on those
Diseases Act. I take it that the proposition subjects which we are now debating. We find
advanced by the hon. member for South Bris- then men of all shades of opinion ; men of all
bane (Mr. Jordan) is sound and unassailable classes of society ; men of all positions in life —•
—that whatever is morally wrong cannot be whether they are a majority or not I cannot say
politically or socially right. For our views upon —united in an emphatic protest against the con
this question we must have recourse to the tinuance of this Act on our Statute-book. I have
foundation of all morality, to that upon which the already shown that it is confessedly a failure ;
English law rests, to which the hon. member for that it does not accomplish—and it has had a
South Brisbane has already referred ; and we long enough trial to see if it could become effec-
find in the Decalogue an authority to which we tive —the object which we suppose was contem-
must all bow. There are things in the plated by the Legislature of 1868; _and that it
Decalogue that are forbidden to men, and we has failed to answer the expectations formed
find a number of things all placed on the same regarding it. I find considerable difficulty and
footing ; and if we come to the conclusion that, embarrassment in speaking on this subject,
because a man chooses to indulge in one form of because I know there are many excellent people
breach of that Decalogue, the State is to take outside this House and inside it too, who enter-
cognizance of his weakness, and provide him tain views opposite to those which I entertain,
with facilities for indulging his propensities with Ido not envy the man who can get up and
impunity, we ought to apply the same principle dogmatise on a subject of this kind when
to all other breaches of the Decalogue. Any one so many excellent men hold a different opinion,
would be accounted a lunatic, who, because a I have aspersed no man’s intelligence, but
man was afflicted with a propensity for have endeavoured to place before the
appropriating other people’s property, should House some of the reasons which have influenced
argue that the State ought to afford him me in coming to the opinion I entertain on this
facilities for indulging that weakness with question. I only hope that the majority of the
impunity. Hon. members have spoken of members of the House will endorse the senti-
the necessity of keeping the community free rnents advanced by the hon. member for South
from contagion. The Premier —whose speech Brisbane, and will give effect to the opinion of
was ah extremely able one from his point of view, 3,500 of the wives and mothers of Queensland,
and must have had considerable effect upon the by carrying the resolution.
minds of waverers—spoke of the necessity of Mr. ARCHER said ; Mr. Speaker, —I did
keeping the community free from infection by not intend to take any part in the debate to-
llmans of diseased women because the effects of night, as I had already taken some trouble to


SATURDAY, 22nd NOVEMBER, 1884.
inform myself on both sides of the question, and bosom of his family—perhaps just from his
had already made up my mind to vote against mother’s apron-strings—and is turned adrift into
the motion now before , the House. I did not the world of Australia, where he is unknown,
expect that I would be sailed upon to speak ; but m . frmvmvnw * T m> , •
there are some things that have fallen from the 10 All ENEY-GE.U EKAL : ihat is an
last gentleman who addressed ns, that must, I assumption top.
think, be taken notice, of. The hon. member Mr. ARCHER,: Ho never takes that into
for Ipswich told, us that it was no use producing account, but jumps at the conclusion I have
figures on this question, because while a sup- stated. The hon. member for Port Curtis said
jporteie of one side of the question produced that it was not to the town of Brisbane that
figures, favourable.to his own opinion, the sup- young men came, where perhaps they might be
porter of the other side produced figures which under the eyes of their friends, but to where they
exactly contradicted them. That is, perhaps, to were far away from their influences ; and certainly
some extent the ease, unless a man is careful to there is no doubt that young men in cases of this
try and sift the truth for himself. I can kind, break loose, and the frightful effect spoken
assure the Attorney-General that if, as the of is produced in that way. Could anyone
hon. member for Ipswich says, figures are suppose that a person having a logical mind,' and
of ao use in this debate, neither is sen- hearing of young men who had, only just come
timantalism of any use in the debate. We here from England getting disease, would imine-
Smst, to some extent, have facts, and there diately jump to the conclusion that they came
must be reasoning from those facts in such a frona a place where there was no protective
manner as will really affect the question. I deny Act, and that they got this disease in Bris-
that a single argument has been stated by the bane, or in some place where, there was such
Attorney-General which if closely considered an Act, and then proceed to use that as an
ought for one moment to prevent, us from trying argument in favour of the abolition of the Act.
to stamp out the disease, the spread of which He. then goes on to state that ladies have an
the Contagious Diseases Act is intended to pre- intuitive knowledge of what is best, and that we
veuff The hon. member for Port Curtis made .should therefore be guided by them. He repre-
V/hat I consider was a very truthful observa- seats that the motion has been introduced on the
tion. He said that a virtuous woman, think- strength of a petition signed by 3,500 ladies—
ing. upon this matter, can never think from whether they are wives, or mothers, or young
a true. stand point, simply because she can- women, Idp not know; they may be the wives
not lower herself to anything like tire and mothers of Brisbane,
same state as the women she may be thinking _ _
about. The virtuous woman, thinking of these iORjNEY-GENEEAL : I said of
women with pity and compassion, can never for pueensiana.
one moment imagine that they have so far lost Mr. ARCHER: The hon. gentleman says
all the feelings which virtuous women have, as that women have a bright intelligence, which is
they really have. Foulness of language and better than knowledge—actually better than
drunkenness almost always are habitual with knowledge—which enables them to see farther
these women—exposure of the person and every- and judge more clearly than a man with know-
tiring which virtuous women truly hate is to ledge who reasons from Iris knowledge. I say
these fallen women common; and when they that is the greatest absurdity I ever heard in
judge of these women and look upon them with debate, and I say it without the slightest hesita-
c-ornpassion, as I hope they always do, they, tion. It is a well-known fact that women are
cannot so put themselves in their places as to not good judges of matters :of fact, and that they
judge of what is the proper manner of dealing are most illogical in their reasoning. It is
with them. That, I think, was the argu- well known—of course lam talking cf them
merit of the hon. member for Port Curtis as a class, and not of exceptional women—it is
with whom I perfectly agreed. The hon. well known to everyone who reasons on the
Attorney-General has controverted that argu- human mind that the arguments of women are
meat by saying that women are, not fools— not of a logical kind. That is the opinion of the
I never said they were—that they read papers deepest thinkers and writers on the subject,
and books, and converse with their husbands, And though eon may quote a dozen women who
and know, perhaps, a great deal more than have attained to the highest powers of judgment, ;
we think they do. I can only say that still, when compared with the men who stand in
I am happy that I am not a husband if the same category, their powers appear exceed-
that subject could ever become one of my ingly poor. It is all nonsense to say that a
themes, of conversation with my wife.' I woman has an intelligence which enables her to
hope, there are very few husbands who entertain form a better judgment than that of a man. If
their wives with a discussion upon this matter ; it is so, it is a miracle. There is no .such
but after what the Attorney-General has said I thing as the power to do a thing without
suppose I must consider him one of the few who the wherewithal to do it with ; and if a man’s
would do that. I can only say that if I was brain has more power than a woman’s to judge
married to a woman who would be ready to from facts, he will judge more clearly ; if a
listen to a discussion of that sort, I would be woman’s brain is better fitted for judging than a
glad to leave her where I first saw her. man’s, she will do so better than a man. There
Th, ATTORNEY- GENERAL: The ton.
gentieman is not exactly quoting my .speech. her to do tliege things without a brain
1 newer said that respectable married ladies _ wit b o ut resorting to the power of thinking
were in the _ habit off discussing matters of this and judgin „_ is si £p ly bosh. Reasoning nower
kind. I said they had means of information ; g a forc | w | ich Wol 4n can nev er get by simple
at hand from books and newspapers, and from intuition> The hon . gentleman used another
tneir husbands, argument in regard to the kanakas having the
Mr. ARCHER; Yes; I did not misquote disease, but lam exceedingly sorry to inform
the hon. gentlemen in one word. He said that a him that long before, either ho or I were born
woman had conversations with her husband upon there was disease here. Captain Cook, in his
this matter, and so informed herself upon it. I interesting “ Voyages,” mentions the fact that
think the husband who, would converse with his on revisiting-some of the Sandwich Islands he
wife, so as to inform her upon the state of degra- found that syphilis Had broken, out.
dation into which these unfortunate women m,
have fallen, and the wife who will listen to him- . . , ATTORNEY - GENERAL : What
well, I will not say what my opinion would be of 18 ands ■
either. The Attorney-General, instead of con- Mr. ARCHER : Captain Cook visited a great
troyerting the argument of my hon. friend the, many islands. Ho visited neary all the islands
member for Port Curtis, simply perverted his between her eand Tahiti, the Friendly Islands,
argument, and, I think, was trying, to, reduce New Caledonia, and a great many islands
the.ladies of Queensland to a standard which I all about; and he mentions the Sandwich
am perfectly certain they have not reached, and Islands, particularly-,, as, having contracted the
never will reach. They never will be able disease. Since Captain Cook’s time, from the
to understand the class of women we are now time I arrived, ip, tffew South Wales, which is
talking about, as a man may who mixes in general now forty-two yeaas. ago,- traders going to the
society. The reason why I was almost loth to speak Solomon Islands, and other Archipelagos, have
to-night was this —that having heard the speech of stated that on some of those islands there is
the Premier I thought very little more could be hardly a man, woman, or child free from syphilis,
said upon the subject. He, at all events, met That is a notorious fact. And the hon. gentleman
statistics with statistics, and argument with used that as an argument in favour of repealing
argument, and showed most conclusively—not as the Contagious Diseases Act to prevent the
it is now complained—that this Act has not per- spread of disease in Brisbane. lam not trying
formed all that we thought it would perform, to argue in favour of the Act, but-to show the
but that it has, at all events, performed some- absurdity of the arguments brought against the
thing for which we ought to be thankful. The Act. When there is no medical attendant, and
Attorney-General has. again and again repeated the disease is. left pretty much to nature, it
the argument that the Act has failed, but there probably becomes complicated, and assumes its
is nothing gained by saying that. He may worst form. In the Sandwich Islands it has be
say that as often as he likes, and insist on the come so bad that there is one island set apart
contrary, but the Act has not failed. If he where people go and literally rot away,
thinks the Act was passed, in the hope that it T
would utterly extirpate this disease, then it may Ail ORISEY-GENERAL :■ n e ao not
be said to. have failed. But what man is silly our kaaaitas from those islands,
enough to suppose that a disease of this Jdnd— Mr. ARCHER : I did not say so. If I said
one which is in fact perhaps the most difficult in , that I should be talking rubbish —like the afgu-
the world to eradicate—could be eradicated ments used by the hon. gentleman. lam only stat-
by the passing of an Act of this kind? H ing a fact. 1 visited a great many of these islands
any persons legislated with such- a hope as probably before the hon. gentleman was born, or
that, they have only shown their own ignorance, when he was a very little tad, and I never went
I say as_ the Premier said before to-night, if we to one where the disease was not rampant. We
can, during the course oftne year, prevent 100 do not insist that the Act is a perfect success:
or 130'centres of infection spreading that disease, we only say that it has done something to
we may be certain that the Act has done some- confine this’horrid disease, and that it has done
thing good. Ao statistics that may be brought < something to enable a few wretched fellows who
to bear can possibly do away with that fact, otherwise would be victims for life, to escape and
Those centres of infection are taken away, and becomefespe'Ctabfemarfied men. If we adopt this
to that extent, at all events, the disease has been motion declaring'that we are willing'to expunge
prevented from spreading. I only use these few this Act from our Statute-book, we shall simply be
words as-against the argument which has several opening new centres of contagion and spreading
times been repeated as to' the Act being, a failure, the disease further; and probably, if we live a few
That is a phrase _ which I deny properly inter- years longer we shall regret that we ever touched
prets the working of the Act. Ifc may a measure, which like every human production
be that the Act has not dune all the good is faulty, but which has done something for the
we could wish it to do ; but I have heard the community, and which I believe will not be
opinions of medical men, and we have heard abolished with the consent of the community on
what the Premier told us _to-night of the ex- arguments such as those we have heard to-night,
pression of opinion he had received from the Mr. PHASER said: Mr. Speaker-This is
officers of the navy ; and will anyone tell me that not a very inviting subject;': and had it not been
all these things; are not more than could be ex- f or the petition presented to this House on
pected of the Act when it was passed. I saybhat behalf of the women of Quensland, Ido not think
if that Act had not been passed, we would in all j should be inclined to take part in the dis-
probabihty be here to-night holding an mdigna- C ussion, It must be admitted that in some
tion meeting for the purpose of passing respects that petition is an extraordinary one.
an Act to do away, as far as possible, But Ido not think the hon. member for Blackall
with these unfortunate women, i have only aad the hon. member for Port Curtis have done
to quote another perversion by the Attorney- j ust i ce to the women of Queensland. It is all
General of the speech made by the hon. very well for them to say that the virtuous
member for Port Curtis. The hon. member women of the colony cannot descend to a con-
fer Port Curtis stated instances that had come ce ption of the nature of this terrible disease,
under his own Knowledge of the dreadful ravages
of this disease, and the Attorney-General imnie- Mr. ARCHER : I said they could not form
diately jumped to the conclusion that the young a conception of the low state to'which the women
men of whom the hon. member for Port Curtis had fallen,
spoke, came from a place which was not pro- .
tected by an Act of this kind to a place that was . Mr. FRASER : I accept the explanation, but
protected by the Act, and that therefore all the only puts the matter in a different light. The
dreadful circumstances ensued. Did anyone ever hon. gentleman must remember, however, that
hqar such rubbish as that used as an argument? some ladies, whose names are attached to
The young maxi comes from England—from the , petition, are in constant contact with
, these characters both mentally and physically.
They have made themselves acquainted with the
condition of these women as far as possible in
order to redeem them, and rescue them froip. the
wretched condition into which tffeyhaye fallen.
I maintain that these ladies can appreciate and
: fully enter into the character of the degraded
state into which these poor creatures have fallen,
otherwise they would not be in' possession of the
information which they have obtained. lam
quite free to admit that the disease which has
been spoken of is as terrible as it is represented
to be. I was struck very much in listening to
the speeches made against the motion of my hon.
colleague, with the statements as to the fear-
ful consequences that would result from our
carrying a resolution of this kind, and the question
occurred to me, what consequences have resulted
from the resolution passed by the House of Com-
mons condemning the Contagious Diseases Act
in England 1 And how is it, if an Act of this
kind is so very necessary for the preservation of
health and morals in communities, that England
survived so long before the passing of the Con-
tagious Diseases Act in 1868? And how is it
that the people'of England never allowed that
Act to come into operation excepting to a very
partial extent, and only in some centres of popu-
lation ? , The very largest centres of population
in England have never tolerated the Act. I
admired the, speech of the hon. the Premier as
much as anybody, and I admit its force. I
do not feel myself called upon to reply to it.
At the same time I must say that there is a great
deal about it that does not convince me. So far
as the statistics are concerned, some of the
figures alluded to by the hon. gentleman have
been challenged over and over again. I find
that : Dr. Birkbeck Nevins, whom I had the
honour, of knowing twenty-five years ago, and
who then occupied a leading position in his pro-
fession in the town of Liverpool, wrote as
follows to Lord Northbrook, on the 4th of May,
1883
“It is impossible to believe that the comparison has
thus been republished with your knowledge and appro-
val alter your letter of the 21st April, and I therefore
bring the matter to your notice. Tor the official repro-
duction of a comparison acknowledged to be ‘not to be
relied upon ns accurate,’ and which ‘My lords propose
in future to omit,’ as they agree with me that the com-
parison is open to considerable objection, is an act of
grave importance on the,present state of the question,
both in apd out of the House of Commons.”
I That extract refers to some statistical errors
published in the Navy Report f0r.1882 in con-
nection with the question; and in reply to Dr.
Birkbeck’s representation, an assurance was
given that ’they would not be republished. There
is another matter in connection with this debate
to which I must refer, and I allude' to it with
regret. It cannot be denied, that since the intro-
duction of the Contagious Diseases' Act into
Queensland, prostitution has become so extensive
in Brisbane, that we are a by-word and a
reproach among almost all the strangers who
visit our city. L think this fact of itself goes far
to show that the Act has failed very materially
in accomplishing that which it was intended to
do. There has been a complaint brought against
the Act that it is oppressive, andthat it interferes
With the liberty of the subject; and not only that,
but that it also exposes innocent women, young and
old, to the risk of being brought under its pro-
visions. This has been referred to by the Premier,
who said there Was. only one case reported of an
innocent woman suffering under the Act. The
he* * .gentleman ignored entirely, and I do not
care’to adduce them, the cases reported from
the Continent of Europe. lam quite content
to confine myself to what we find existing in
England. The hon. gentleman alluded to the
case of Caroline Wybrow as if that were the
only case of the kind that had occurred. Well,
I shall quote a' case which happened at. Dover in
which 'all the names and facta are given, So that
they can be verified if there is any doubt about
them. The quotation is from a lecture delivered
by Dr. Charles Bell Taylor, and is as follows :
“Some months ago a woman was brought up. at the
Magistrates’ Court at Dover, when the following scene
occurred:—
“ The trained advocate, paid by the Government to
proaf cute, opened with a speech in which he said that
the magistrates were not there to consider whether the
law was a good one or a had one, but simply to carry it
out, etc.
“The, police spy then swore that he had ‘good
cause to believe’ that the woman was a prosti-
tute. This the ■woman denied with tears and asse-
verations, whereupon Mr. Alderman Rees,: the pre-
siding magistrate, said he should like to know on
wbat grounds the spy's belief was founded. < I shall not
allow tße man to answer that question,’ said the trained
advocate. ‘ WhjA’said Mr. Rees. ‘ Because,’ said the
advocate, ‘the law only requires the man to swear he
has' ‘ good cause to believe ’; he may not be asked whftt
the cause is.’ ‘Then,’ said Mr. Rees, ‘ I decline to; com-
mit on such evidence,* Here was a, deadlock, and after
some discussion it was agreed that the spy should state
his grounds, when ho said, ‘ Well, I saw,the woman
talking to a man in the street’ ‘Well, that’s no
evidence,’ said. Mr, Rees'; whereupon he said he had
seen her talking to two other men. ‘ Well, I suppose
men and women may speak to one another,’ said Mr.
Roes. ‘Now,’ said .the worthy alderman, ‘I do npt
wish to take any advantage of,my position. Tell me,'
have you seen this woman in a brothel, or associating
with bad characters ?’ And the spy was forced, to con-
fess that he had not. ‘Then,’ said Mr, ißeesy ‘ I dis-
miss the case.” ‘Stop!’ said his brother-magistrates;
‘ Give her three weeks—the magistrates i in other
towns always do.’. ‘l’ll out off my right arm before.
I’ll giye her three weeks,’' said Mr. Rees.- ‘Then
give her a fortnight.’ ‘I won’t' give her' a fort-
night.’ ‘Then we are disagreed; there must be
another bench.’ So Mr. Rees, seeing the woman might
suffer if lie were obstinate, said, ‘Now let me give her
, a sentence that will come within the four corners of
■the Act, and satisfy my own con.-oience.’ This was
agreed to. So Mr. Rees said, ‘ I order a day’s iraprison-
‘rnent, you have been detained a day and are therefore
, discharged:’’'
There is a foot-note which states that the name
of that inspector was demanded. The name was
Liven and it , was stated that it was Inspector,
Coffee, and that he has since been convicted of
embezzlement, and is now serving his time in .gaol.
This is the character of the men who are placed
as inspectors and spies over these women, and
who are ready, as I am informed from this
account, to use their position to accomplish any
evil ends. Another inspector, in the same,town
of Dover, has since been convicted of conspiring
to defeat justice. Ido not think we ought to
have upon our Statute-book an Act which
places in the hands of police officers, or any
officers, the power to expose innocent and
respectable women to treatment of this kind,
and if we have it upon our Statute-book, the
sooner we have it off the better. lam not sure
that even in Brisbane itself we cannot find that
attempts of this kind have been made. Here is
a case reported in Brisbane
“ Another case may he given, showing how wicked,
designing men may harass respectable girls in situa-
tions, under cover of the Act. A clergyman in Brisbane
had an excellent, servant in his family. He received an
anonymous letter one day, warning Mm to take care of
the girl, and informing him that she would soon he
called up for examination under, the Contagious
Diseases Act. This object seemed.to be to secure her
discharge. The gentleman went at once to the in-
spector, and found there was no foundation for the
threat, as the police knew nothing against the girl, and
were of opinion that some scoundrel was perpetrating »
cruel ‘ joke ’ upon her .”
It might have been a joke, but it was certainly a
cruel joke; and had that girl been in the employ
of many men it would have been ten chances to
one that she would have been discharged. The
reason why I adduce, the case is that I know the
girl’s employer, who is one of the most respected
clergymen in Brisbane, and I know the'girl, who
had only just left my employment, where she had
been for about ten months, and a more circum-
spect and respectable girl I never knew. The
girl left me and went back to her former place.
There may be nothing in the case, and I may
be told it was nothing more than a joke ; but it
was a Cruel joke, and if we had not this Act upon
our Statute-book such a joke could never have
been perpetrated. There is another feature of
this question to which scarcely any allusion has
been made. I am sure that no right-thinking
man in, the community does not regret that we
have amongst us such a number of young women
pursuing this, deplorable course of life; and our
sympathies and support should be readily given
to those excellent women who lay themselves out
to give their time and talents and sympathies to
them, and endeavour to reclaim them. I venture
to assert there is npt a right-thinking man in
this room who will not agree with me that a
woman must be sunk very low indeed before she
has lost every spark of self-respect or aspiration to
be reclaimed; but I hold that if there is one
thing more than another calculated to extinguish
that spark, it is to be subjected to this examina-
tion. I am borne out in this, view by a very
high authority, whom I will quote, so that
there may be no doubt about it. It is
the report of the minority of the select com-
mittee appointed by the House of Commons to
investigate the question ; and the following
quotations are from the evidence of Dr. Cook,
the chaplain of the London Lock Hospital, in
contrasting the two classes of patients in that
institution :
“The ordinary patients (the majority of whom are
known London prostitutes) are very mixed, . . . but
the government patients are brutalized beyond descrip-
tion in appearanee and manner. The probability and
hopes of reclamation would be greater in the ordinary
than in the case of the government patients.”
And further—
“ The proportions of women reclaimed from voluntary
lock hospitals furnish a remarkable contrast to the
government institutions. In the London Lock Hospital,
the.number of voluntary patients who, during the year
o£ 1881, entered the look asylum or were sent to service,
restored to their friends, or sent to other homes, was
about 75 per cent, of the total admissions, while the
number of government patients similarly disposed of
was only about 19 per cent, of. those admitted for the
.first time, and only about 10 per cent, of the total num-
ber of registered women admitted. The government
women are admitted to the hospital over and over
again.
“ The actual result of reolamatory efforts in lock
hospitals, under existing circumstances, therefore,
clearly -shows that the. proportion of fallen women
reclaimed without, the machinery of the Act, is much
larger than that effected with such aid, or, in other
words, the system of the Act is proved to have greatly
increased the annual difficulty of rescuing and reclaim-
ing women who have entered upon a career of prostitu-
tion. That appears to be the inevitable result of such
system, superadded to the ordinary debasing influences
of that course of life,”
I think that is a fact which should weigh very
considerably with hon. members of this House,
before they give their sanction to the retention
on the Statute-book of an Act that is pregnant
with such evil results. We are told that the
object is the health of. the community ; that it, is
a protection to the community ; but I think it is
the reverse. We know perfectly well that
men, young and old, are very frequently pre-
vented from committing a crime more from the
fear of detection than from the force of conscience.
Well, sir, if the impression be that indulgence in
this or any other vice can be carried on without
the fear pr danger of suffering from it, we must
see at once that the temptation to indulge is
immensely increased. That cannot be doubted.
That there is impunity from, consequences in
this matter is a great mistake; and when hon.
gentlemen talk: of the Jieaith of the community
being.promoted by the Act, they evidently show
that they have not thoroughly investigated
the question. It is assumed that from women
who are subjected to these periodical examinations
and who recive a passport that they are in a
healthy condition, no danger can result. Refer-
ring again to the evidence taken before the Select
Committee of the House of Commons. I may
say that Professor Lee, who was in favour of
repeal, shows most clearly that the strictest
examination is no protection whatever, and that
it is “ a delusion, a-mockery, and a snare.” With
these facts staring us in the face are we to be
asked to tolerate an Act remaining in our Statute-
book which is certainly no credit to us, I said just
now that, instead of preserving the health of the
community, the Act was aprize for the commission
of vice, and.an inducement to indulge in it. In
this I am borne out by Dr. Jackson, who puts
it in better form than I can, and whose opinion
is based on experience. He says that the effect
of being exempt from the consequences of the
indulgence in the vice leads away young, men
to excessive indulgence in it. I do not wish
to enlarge upon the subject. As I said before,.
I had no intention of speaking had not my
name been mentioned as ; being, connected
with the petition. Having listened to the ad-
dresses in support of the Act, I have heard
nothing which- in the slightest degree checks my
conviction that the sooner we remove the Act
from our Statute-book the better. I shall, there- .
fore, vote for the motion of my hon. colleague.
Before 1 sit down I must, a.s, most hon. members ~
have done, compliment him upon; the very able,
lucid, and comprehensive, manner in which he
brought the matter before the House. I hope
the motion will be carried; and that we shall
show our injured sense of right, fair play, justice
and liberty by expunging this tyrannical and
cruel Act from our Statute-book.
Mr. SALKELD said : I do not intend to say
much on thismatter. I have read a good deal about
it, and ! was surprised to hear the figures quoted
by the Premier this evening. Some -of the
statistics I have seen are quite at variance with
those, and I cannot understand them. Some
figures show that in the subjected districts there
is far less disease than in the unsubjected dis-
tricts ; while in other tables I.find that. there
has been no decrease, or very little. I think the
explanation will be found in the fact, that the.
figures quoted by the Premier have reference to
all classes of disease. I believe it is the opinion
of eminent medical men, men who occupy a first
rank in their profession, that constitutional
syphilis is the only real dangerous disease.
Of course the Premier has informed us of the
terrible nature of this disease, and I believe that
anyone who IxB,B made a study of it, or is well
informed on the subject, will agree with him
there ; but I cannot follow his statistics, for they
do not apply to constitutional syphilis. They
apply to all venereal diseases in the army. I
have here a table prepared by Dr. Charles Bell
Taylor, M.D., in which he gives the following


Saturday, 22nb November, iss4.
n 1, ■ nf tV>A A pfa rm the health “If any female,, subjected by order of a justice under
,able showing the effect ot the Acts n tWg medical examination, at anytime
of the men m the Army ana rsavy _ absents bei-self in order to avoid submitting herself to
t ——— !- —rr- ——iv-n rmi ■ 77' sucli examination on any occasion on wlii-di she ought
Admissions to Hospital Cor so to submit Mi-Self, or refuses'or- wilfully neglects to
secondary, or cnnstitu- submit herself to such examination on any such occa-
Year. Strength. A. j A'miilis tier 1 000 slon. or if any female authorised by this Act to he
* . ‘ J men ’ detained in any hospital under medical treatment for
a contagious disc ise quits the hospital without being
■ ■■■■■ '■ ■ - - discharged therefrom by the chief medical officer
OQ 00 ■ thereof by writing under his hand, then and in every
1866 59,758 such case such female shall be guilty of an offence
1867 62,091 to .to under this Act, and on summary conviction before any
186 S 68,350 two justices of the peace, shall be liable to imprison-
-1869 68,962 ment in the ease of a first offence for any term not ex 7
1870 70,131 njor, ■ oeeding one month, and in the case of a second or any
1871 87,142 subsequent offence for any term not exceeding three
1872 85,722 months, and in the case of quitting the hospital without
1873 77,530 23/19 being discharged as aforesaid, the female may be taken
1874 77,933 24m s a to custody without warrant by any constable.”
mm 88 758 27-4 Suppose a woman is suffering from this disease,
18/0 ’ 1 she is sent to the hospital and remains a prisoner
: ; FT there as long as the officers of that hospital like
That is a very different table to the one quoted, bee p her.
and the fact is that when we take the constitu- M r _ qp. CAMPBELL : Three months only,
tioual syphilis—the dangerous disease, the fell by clause 10.
disease —the average is reduced considerably. Mr. SALKELD : Clause 10 is
We must depend a great deal upon the opmnma „ No female S hall bo detained for a longer period than
of men who are skilled in this matter, and I find , months, unless the chief medical officer of the
in the Shield which has been quoted from,, hospital In which she shall ba detained and the visiting-
that Mr Thorold Rogers says surgeon of the place whence she came,or was brought,
-l fc. j v»£»v fn r* t-.Yt ov rift tfiYit.i im for rnftdifHU
table showing the effect of the Acts on the health
of the men in the Army and Navy :
tnat M.r. xnoroiu . conjointly certify that her further detention for medical h
“Shortly after I had the treatment is requisite, which certificate shall be in “
House, and knowing how muoh tee duplicate, and one of the originals shall be delivered to f.
differs on questions ot this kmd ■ such female, and in that case she may be further t-
of pathology ■ now unhappily, no more. I know of.no They can keep her another three months. This
mm whose courage in the examination of scientific is a7 ' v infringement of the liberty of the subject .
questions, and whose sympathies for humanity were so wbicb tbe advocates of the Act have never made 3
keen as Professor Rolleston's: and I knew of no man slightest ground for. What difference is t
r~ THS JT SSSytt fte “belwten E.lbane and such cities m Md- t
neuotetliat tli6 general good ot humanity would ho bourne, Adelaide, or Hobart ? Is it m such «
attained thereby. He told me that every test had been a terrible state as to drive us to_ place the mem-
applied in this case, and the result was that the Acts bers 0 f the female population in the hands of |
were absolutely • and totally illusory, and they were po ii ce s , p i e s ? I think not. It has been said that t
worse than useless; that they constantly a ha^ghi can very we n occur; but we find r
state of health that did not exist, and that, the t]mfc in El f g land the Government have never t
they were hopelessly ms o =• Tloval been able to introduce the Act, except in a few t
And Professor Huxley, who eat uponithe Royaj. o , affris(m towng- The inhabitants of other d
Commission of_ 1871 to inquire into » have risen and fairly beaten all attempts
of the Contagious Diseases Acts, moved the to I>ro^laime d under the t
following resolution ..m. A c t " I feel -convinced that if the her- ‘
“That the Contagious Diseases' Acts r ih.ly brutal nature of the Act were known in 3
worthless for the physiological pin pose xor w Inch they }fc would
soon be wiped off the
Fthinklhe" existence of this Act is a serious Statute-book; and I hope this House will record ■ ’
departure from the ordinary course of law. It is their convictions that it ought to be removed, 1
an interference with the liberty of the subject, and that next session will; see an Acu passed to
and we ought to have proof that there is a very remove it. _ I may mention, with regard to the
marked benefit arising therefrom before we atony ■ statistics that the . officers do not agieo •
consent to let it remain on the Statute-book; about them. The Surgeon-General gives one
Unless the Act is necessary for the preservation class of statistics, and Surgeon Maj ol Lawson,
of the public health, we are not justified who is known to he .a determined up-
in continuing it I admit that it is not fair to holder of the Acts, gives others. It is
quote Paris statistics, but we are bound to show very different to get the real facts, because
L worktop 1 of the Act in England. Ido not it is possible to make statistics say almost any-
think that J we can claim that our magistrates thing. Ido not depend upon statistics altogether,
and police have a higher reputation than those I maintain that this is a violation of the public
of the old country, and lam sure they are not conscience, lo place an Act on our btafcute-
likelv to more judiciously administer the Act than , book to legalise vice is an outrage on the public
the English authorities. The Premier implied—if conscience and public feeling; and no matter
he did not actually say—that he had not known how its advocates may bring out laboured
of a sfoVr case of hardship or injustice figures to prove their case, I fee sure that
arisirm out of the existence of the Act, but Ido sooner or later it will be removed from the
not think that can be borne out by facts, for British btatute-book, and the Statute-book of
there are very many cases I could refer to, well Queensland. _
authenticated cases'in which the Act has operated Mr. BAILEY said: Mr. Speaker,—! think
very harshly indeed. When we take into con- tb is House ia agreed that when any virulent
'every point connected! with this bus* disease is likely to make 1 ravage i-nMsbe
ness; when we take into consideration that mun ;ty, it is our duty to _ attempt to stop iff
innocent women, virtuous women, with right and possible. That was the intention of this Act;
womanly feelings, may suffer shame, and have the whether it has been carried out or not is another .
finger of public scorn pointed at them all. through question, but the last speaker in speaking of the
the operation of this Act, lam sure there are arbitrary conditions of the Contagious Diseases
few who will not vote for its repeal. The Act, forgot to mention that between the women
Premier has also said that we legislate for small- wbo are brought under that Act, and the public,
pox, typhus, and cholera, and make quarantine thereisoneofficeratanyrato who will, asanumane,
regulations controlling affected persons ; but I intelligent, and educated man, protest the right
say that that is no argument why this Act and privileges of any virtuous and honest woman,
should apply to only one section of the com- f allude to the medical officers. Those men are
munity. What would be thought of the Premier chosen for their intelligence, their ability, their
if he brought down a Bill, making it compulsory s hiil and knowledge, and their humanity ; and,
that women and children should be quarantined speaking from some little experience I had a few
for small-pox, but that men should go free ? Yet years ago, I can assure the House that in Bris-
here we are at the present time doing that very bane alone the medical officer—he would blush
thing; singling out the weakest for punishment, and jf he heard me say it—has been the means of
letting ail others go free. lam surprised that salvation of many women who have gone into
the Premier and other hon. members do nob see that Lock Hospital. He has been their protestor
the ease in that light, and I regret we are not anf ] friend when, in pursuance of their beastly
unanimous in our condemnation of this Act. trade, they have come to grief. If they_ have
If hon. members who have defended the Act are shown any desire to reform, or go to their friends,
really anxious to stamp out this terrible disease, be has assisted them to do so. I could narrate
as they call it, let them be consistent. _ Let ons or two instances that have come to my
us not tolerate a law which is applicable knowledge that would do that gentleman very
alone to women. Let them vote for the aboli- great honour; but I should not be justified m
tion of this law, and then they will convince us doing so, because I know that the good deeds clone
that they are in earnest, but while they hold b y Dr. Hobbs he wishes to keep secret. The
such a one-sided view of things I cannot con- medical officers, while they do their duty to the
gratulate them on their consistency. This _Act public, are the protectors of the women. Their
is not in accord with British law ; it is a duty to the public is to protect them from a foul
parasite upon the Statute-book. Our police disease, and their duty to the women is to cure
officers dare not arrest a man or woman for any them as quickly as possible. A third duty
ordinary offence without being prepared with they perform on their own account, as men or
the strongest evidence that there is reasonable humane feelings, and that is, that when any
suspicion that that person is guilty of some woman wishes to reform they give her an appor-
offence, and even then the law does not consider tunifcy to reform, and assist her in doing so. I con-
a person guilty until the offence is proved, nor is g i de r that the Act, from the way in which it had
the onus of proof of innocence put upon the been carried out in Queensland, has been of great
accused person. We require the authorities who service to a class of poor women who have fallen
are prosecuting to prove the offence. I shall into disgrace, perhaps through circumstances oyer
Just read the 3rd clause of the Actwhich they had very little control. That "pTUnt
“ Where an information, on oath, may be laid before has been left out of the discussion this evening,
any justice of the peace by an inspector, any other and that is why X have mentioned it. But there
officer of police, charging to the effect that a female - g one lrjl ore point I wish to suggest. lam not
therein named is a common prostitute, and being resi- • to speak either for or against the Act, because
dent within the limits of any place to which this Act te^P® I nuestion The point I
shall amffv has been within fourteen days before 1 have not Stufliea tne question, rue poiuu
the laying of the said information within such limits wish to suggest is, that there are people respon-
ds aforesaid for the purpose of prostitution, such s i b l e f or a great number of the illicit prostitutes
justice may, if he think fit, issue a notice In the wbo ex i s t ? wfio are perhaps members of the Social
form ot schedule 15 of this Act addressed to such female. p ur jt v Society, There are members of that society
which, notice should be duly served on her, and if any the habit of employing numbers of girls and
™Ah female shall, in pursuance of such notice, appear m toe nauio ui ciupjy j o ... ,
before the said or any other justice of the peace either paying them Bs, or 12s. a week, out of which
herself or hy some person on her behalf, or if in case they are expected, to find themselves in clothes,
of her non-appearance it shall be shown on oath board, and lodgings. If lam not very much
that the notice was duly served on her within misinformed, there are hundreds of girls in this
a reasonable time before the time appointed in ~ j Brisbane who are receiving pay for their
oate mafe 3 ’ °oi work at that rate Upon that miserable pittance
the information to order that such female be subjected they ape expected to dress decently they ..have
to a medical examination by the visiting surgeon duly even to be ornamental as welF-apd pay for their
appointed as hereinbefore provided, for the purpose ot boa rd and lodging. Hepe js an Opening for the
ascertaining at the time of such examination whether g oc i a i Purjty Society to come in. Let them begin
she is affected with a contagious disease; and such . the right end and see that those girls
female may be, at the discretion of the £aid justice of - . B -i fh'eir work tint thevhave
the peace, subjected to a periodical medical examine are properly paid for their work that they have
tion by the said visiting surgeon for any period not enough to live upon, and thav. they are not
exceeding one year, and the order shall be a sufficient compelled, after their day’s work is over, to
warrant for the visiting surgeon to conduct such exarni- „ 0 Qn the streets to earn enough to get them
nations accordingly, and shall specify the time and baard and lodging. This is the work for the
place at which the female shall attend for the said ■■ g i r t> ite Society —to look afteT^Sie
h3J ofiirHin Msbane »d other town,,
That gives power for the infliction of a terrible, who work day by day for a pittance which is
penalty on a female—a more terrible penaltyto not sufficient to find them witn _ thp clothes they
a woman of right feelings than any imprison- wear. If they would wake a point of seeing thau
ment would be. It is next door to the death those girls snail be pgi.dfor their worn sufficient to
penalty, and many virtuous females have chosen .Uv.e upon, w,e should hear very much less of tins
death rather than submit to it. I shall read illicit piost-jtution that is talked about. 1 throw
what the 12th clause gays, I read these clauses, out these suggestions, and hope they v/ih be
because I feel persuaded that if it were tho- taken notice of by those for whopi they ape
roughly well known throughout the length and meant. .
breadth of the land that such an Act is in exist- Mr. WHITE said : I believe in rurgl felicity,
enee, it would be made a very prominent ques.- away fyom cities. Home i,ew years ago 1 was lll
tion at the ballot-box in the case of an election, | Nevycßstle-.on-iyne, winch is a very large centre
The 12th clause is— * I of population, a military city, and also a sea-
port. At that time an attempt was made to hon. Premier came nearest to that than any hon.
introduce the Contagions Diseases Act, and member of the House. He looked at the matter
such a burst of agitation arose that the whole calmly and judicially, while, on theother hand, the
city was excited and a large demonstration was hon. member for South Brisbane spoke with agteat
, J . .-4 . >1 • T i* . I' jl. . _'l .„ 1 ~£ '£~ J , - flwoF
toIUJ VV Cuo OM/UiOU. co.lj.v.t. CU wviuuuuwwviv« ~ . ■», . V' ,
the result. So intense was the indignation of the deal of 'feeling, and gave me the impression that
people that there were two or three ladies the G overnment should take upon itself the teach-
amongthe speakers, and a resolution was carried mg of morals. Now, my conception of the function
unanimously declaring that that Act should of a Government does not go so far as that. _ 1
never be, allowed to show its face in the North of think a Government has nothing to do with
England. lam very glad to have an opportunity morals whatever. Hon. members may laugh, but
of recording my vote against the Act. Isay that the Government, as a Government,
Mr. ALAND said : I did not intend to speak have nothing to do with morals. They make
on the subject before the House, but merely to - laws ; these daws- are considered to be just laws,
give a silent vote upon it; and I should not have and the people who obey them may be moral
risen but for two remarks made by the hon. people, but, so far as morality is concerned, the
member for Wide Bay. That hon, member Government have nothing to do with teaching it.
first spoke of the officer representing the Gov- ; Now, it was shown this evening very distinctly
eminent as standing between the public and the that the- disease against which the Act was
women who were examined, the inference evi- 1 passed is one of the worst that perhaps
dently intended being, that there was no danger could afflict, or has ever afflicted, mankind,
of any violation being done to the feelings of any Almost any other disease can be got rid
woman brought before him for examination. It - of, but this disease cannot Be got rid of.
VY v/xv XXI.LA.X. j *- ~ 7 u ,
is because I believe that violation to the feelings, If the person who-contracts the disease through
and to the person of an innocent person may be his own folly and weakness was the only person
done, that I shall vote for this motion. We have to suffer, I should say by all means let him
it on record—and the record stands for more suffer; but it is a disease that entails misery _a
than one occasion—that in England more than thousand-fold for generations after, and that is
one person has been taken up by the police, and the reason for special legislation on the subject,
has been subjected to examination by the , A great deal has been made of the arguments
medical officer, and his examination has shown - taken from the experience of France. But I sky
that the person examined was not only free from we are not in anything like similar circumstances
disease, but had absolutely not lost her virginity, and the Anglo-Saxon race is entirely different
The PREMIER : I do not believe it. from the French race in these matters ; and we
Mr. ALAND : I have a right to believe it, shall be likely to legislate much better in a matter
just as much as the Premier has a right ,to dis- of this kind by confining ourselves to our own
believe it. Ido not think that such statements people, than by drawing inferences from the
would be made public and disseminated through- experience of a nation that has nothing whatever
out the length and breadth of the land —state- in common with ns in this matter. From the
ments sent forth by the British House of Com- arguments -of some hon. members, it would
mens —unless* they rested upon a .solid founcla- appear that the colony of Queensland, or, at all
tion. I hold that it is better for us to run some events, the city of Brisbane, is much more
risks which it is supposed may take place, than infected with prostitution than any other
to have one innocent female subjected to such city of the Australian colonies. I have not
degradation as a compulsory medical examination. statistics upon the matter, but 1 have' seen
Now, sir, the other remark-which the hon. mem- other cities of Australia; and so far "as my obser-
her for Wide: Bay made was that he was sure : vafeion has gone they are equally as bad, if not
that some of the members of the Social Purity, worse. When this Act was passed there were in
Society had in their employment a number of the Parliament some of the cleverest men who
young girls who were being: paid insufficient have ever had. a seat in this House : and I am
wages, and that it was on that account that they , sure they did not pass it without very great
were ' obliged to supplement their income reflection, and I think it will be seen that it has
by what he termed “ illicit prostitution.” had very good results, notwithstanding the
Why, prostitution of all kinds is 1 illicit; at assertions of the hon. members for South Brisbane,
all events, we have not quite gone so far Coming to the working of the Act in Brisbane,
as to legalise prostitution, although the Con- if the somewhat vague assertions made in this
tagious Diseases Act does go a long way in that House to-night could be supported by any reason-
respect. I think it is repugnant to most English- able evidence I would be one of the first to say that
men, no matter what shade of religious be- we should wipe it off our Statute-book. But
lief they have ; and I believe that men even what do we find in the pamphlets published by
of immoral character are very much dis- the Social Purity Association, of which I re-
posed against the Act. At all events, we, ceived a copy as well as other hon. members,
as Englishmen, and this Legislature, as an There are three distinct cases mentioned in
English, and a Christian Legislature, should not those phamplets, and I have it on the best
in any wise legislate for vice. How far the authority that these three cases \Vere investigated
remark of the hon. member for Wide Bay may by a gentleman accustomed to weigh evidence,
be correct I cannot say ; but I maintain that the and who would not be likely to leave a
fault rests, not with the employers of these young flaw in that evidence, and who would not be
girls, but with their parents. I have no doubt likely to be imposed upon. And what was
that the gentlemen to whom he referred gave the fact ? When he came to investigate those,
a fair and sufficient wage for the work cases, and the gentleman who made the assertions
which these young girls are engaged in, underwent a cross examination, he failed to show
and if the parents of this colony were to that there was a single act of injustice. There
bring up their daughters to look in a more digni- i a the case mentioned of a girl who had been .
fled way upon the occupations o£. household. ser-p leading'? the life ,of ' a prostitute ai|d after-
vantl or nurses in respectable families —if they wards reformed, and entered respectable (
would teach their daughters to think that it service. And it is asserted that a policeman
is quite as respectable and infinitely more came to the door one morning and gave
respectable to be servants in a respectable house- her a paper. She gave the paper to her
hold than to stand at a shop counter, or to learn mistress, as she could not read herself, and the
dressmaking, or some of these other things, or mistress was horrified to find that it was a
even foster the idea of their becoming pupil summons to appear for examination under the
teachers —it would put and end to an evil of Contagious Diseases Act. The girl refused to go
that sort. I shall vote for the motion with for some time, but she was compelled to do so j
pleasure. and it is further asserted that a few days after-
Mr. T. CAMPBELL; I am sorry indeed wards she was seen in the streets o:f Brisbane,
that I cannot vote for the motion introduced by having gone back to the old life, and the last
the hon. member for South Brisbane. There is case was worse than the first That would bu
no member of the House who has a higher a terrible case if it were true. I have it on the
appreciation than I have of the hon. gentleman’s best authority, that upon investigation it was
sincerity and single-mindedness in bringing this found to be untrue, and no evidence could be
matter forward. I have not the slightest doubt got in support of one iota of the statements
that in every word he said he is a thorough made. I say we can draw a conclusion as to other
believer; and I also compliment him on the cases from one example of that kind,
excellent way in which he introduced the subject. Honourable Members 5 Nw»e the authority.
He was very eloquent; so eloquent that had the oamdutiti t ~'
division taken place immediately after he sat T. : If I name my autho-
down, I might have allowed my feelings to over- rI W I shall also have to name the gentleman to
come my reason, and have voted for the motion, whom I referred ; and Ido not think I. _ should
But I cannot get rid of this argument that, shelter myself behind the hedge of the privileges
we have to deal with this as common- of this House, and say anything of any
sense men, and we should not therefore gentleman which I would not say outside;
allow our feelings to warp our judgment, but s f°y £ , gentlemen
but should look the matter fairly and squarely w h° called _ out . n° w wsLl
in the face. We have to deal with a terrible ask me privately, I will give the names
evil, and if we cannot do away with the evil with the greatest pleasure One argument used
altogether, we should endeavour by our legisla- by the hon, meaner for South Brisbane seemed
tion to minimise it so far as we possibly to me a very extraordinary one. He asked why
can. I stop here to notice an argument m England, when they were comparatively free
used by the junior' member for Ipswich from disease up till 1866, and had gone on So
in speaking of the Act. I question very well, why they then, paooae to pass a law to
much whether that hon. member has read that prevent the spreading of contagious diseases .
■■ Act, or, if he has read it, he must have done But that argument will apply equally with
.so very carelessly indeed. The third clause on . respect to every Act on the btatute-baok, andthe
which he seemed to lay a great deal of stress did hon. member may just as well ask the Minister
not bear out his interpretation. No doubt it for Lands why he brought fox war a his Land
f may give rise, in isolated cases, to injustice. Bill, on the ground that, W© gut on very well
I shy, may ; but I have made inquiries as without it before a W%® introduced. There is
to the local working of the Act, and from another argument wfeeh the hon. member used,
persons who are more competent to advise and which he will sge himself, if he carefully
well thereon than the hon. member for Ipswich, a-s C|i\i3o illogical. He said the
or any other hon. member in the House; Coiycag|ous liiseases Act was placed upon tn©
and I say with every confidence that if there Statute-book for the purpose of stamping out
has been an injustice it must have been an this disease; and because it has not gon%Yhe whole
isolated case. I have the greatest confidence in length m stamping out the disease, that there-
the integrity of the bench of magistrates of fore it must be a failure. hon, gentleman
Brisbane.' The whole power lies in their hands; does not seem to recognise the dif ereac® between
and although injustice may be done when a a total failure and a partial failure, i. say that
case comes into their hands, so far as I have Act has had the elfoc-t. of saving scores of young
been able to inquire nothing of the kind has ever men from d though it may not have,
occurred. I think I shall be able to show stamped th.e disease- altogether. If it st&apedt
that no hon. member of this House should place pqt disease altogether, rt might save thousands 5
the slightest confidence in the statements made but I say that if it has saved 100, it ha.% done good
to the effect that injustice had been done. I work, and has been of great use wad benefit ts>
find that a constable, or inspector, or other the colony There is another fj l6 Dover
officer flf pqlice, if he has reasonable grounds case—mentioned oy toe h.QR, member for South
for belief that a woman is carrying on Brisbane, Mr. Fraser,. certainly that \s a
the business of a common prostitute, lays ver Y hard case m.d|A\n it is true. But did i 4
an information against her. That informa- 11 °t strike Mr. Speaker, that
tion is sworn before a justice of the peace somefhmg wanting aoout.it. Tne he®., meiabey
—generally before our worthy Police Magis- m feouth Brisbane based his argument upon
trat-e so far as this locality is concerned. After that case in this way. There Is, $ Mr. Rees, and;
that, notice is served upon her to come before there is the name of the gqri given, and, rorsoetb,
the bench. Now, I quite agree that injustice because the names are given it must be true,
may possibly be done, and that it may possibly Ido not say it sg not true, but I am only
lay a stigma, on a woman to get such notice, speaking of vfte folly of an argument of thatt
BUt it is quite wrong to say that she is brought kind, Hwe are. content to accept argument
before the bench and treated as a prostitute and 4 *&at kmd we must be content to, believe all
looked upon as guilty before the evidence for the that is said m the St. Jacob * Utf advertisements.,
prosecution is taken. The section says distinctly— The names are given theye> but f. you wish to
nit shall Bo lawful for such justice, ou oath njacle Bo- authenticate those navies, apd what is said,
fo,re liim substantiating the matter o,f the inforination, you will be told tq go to Now York or Masss-
to order that such female,” etc. _ chusetts or other such place to see those
The magistrate must convince himself that the people, whose names are appended to the adver-
evidence laid before him is sufficient to prove pigment. The hon. member for South Brisbaass
the matter laid in the information. To revert to has told us that the names are given,, but w®
the line of thought with which I opened; A -will have to go to Doyey jf we wish to fine!
French philosopher has said that when we get into out that it is true. We know that the feelings-,
reasoning we should cease to feel. Perhaps the an d imaginations of hon, members soimtiiaesi


carry them away, and men feel very strongly
upon a matter of this kind. In conclusion I
base a good deal of my argument on the matter
upon this : There was a Royal Commission
appointed some time ago in England to investi-
gate the very subject we are now discussing.
The hon. the Premier mentioned the men who
were appointed on that commission, and we know
they were men of the highest standing in
the House of Commons, and men who would not
have taken upon themselves the responsibility
of arduous duties of that kind if they were not
well qualified to carry them out. Those gentle-
men made a most patient and minute investi-
gation, and collected a mass of statistics, and
they have given the public the benefit of their
investigations, and they have come to the con-
clusion that, though the Act may not have
stamped out the disease, it has done very good
service by appreciably diminishing it. I use the
same argument here, that although the Act may
not have realised fully the expectations of those
who assisted to pass it, it has done good, and it
would be foolish for us to take it off our Statute-
book. For these reasons I shall give my vote
against the resolution, though I shall be sorry
to do so, because I sympathise with the earnest-
ness with which the hon. member for South
Brisbane has advocated it.
Mr. JORDAN, in reply, said : Mr. Speaker,—
I will detain the House only for a few minutes.
The hon. member for Cook does not believe that
a single case of injury or wrong perpetrated in
the carrying out of these Acts, in this colony, at
all events, can be substantiated. In reference to
the case quoted by my hon. friend and colleague,
he said he knew that the statements were not
true; and that compels me to read what I
should not have read otherwise.
Mr. T. CAMPBELL: I did not say “not
true ”; I said it was not substantiated when the
gentleman who made the assertion was called
upon to do so.
_Mr. JORDAN : I will read a case, which is
given on testimony that is unquestionable, and
which does not come from London, Dover, or
Plymouth, but from Brisbane. It is this
“ In September 1882, one of the city missionaries heard
that a young woman—whose parents he knew, and
whose father was at Herherton— was summoned to
appear at the Police Court the following day, to answer
the charge of being a prostitute. On making inquiry,
he found that another young woman was summoned to
appear at the same time on a similar charge. The
young women were about eighteen yeaas of age.
Having suspicion for some time that the Acts were
unjust and oppressive, he resolved to watch the cases,
and, in order to do so more effectively, he engaged
a solicitor to attend the trial. Both these girls had been
asked to sign a paper—called the “ Voluntary Sub-
mission Paper”—beforeSthey knew its nature, and they
were told it would save them further trouble if they
isigned. This is a paper in which a woman agrees to a
regular medical examination, and which virtually regis-
ters her as a common prostitute. The procedure at the
trial of these young women was as follows: —The
accused was called into court, and gave her name. The
evidence of the constable—who is the inspector under
these Acts—was taken. The next evidence was given
by a member of the detective police, the previous
witness putting tho questions and acting as pro-
secutor. All the rest oE the evidence was furnished
by well-known prostitutes, who were put through
the form of taking oath to swear away, as
It might happen, the character of an innocent girl.
Some of the evidence reflected strongly against the
accused, but by the cross-examination by the counsel a
very different construction was put upon the case.
For instance, a prostitute was giving evidence. She
said that a man' came to her 'house, and asked if the
accused lived near, and also requested, the witness to
ask her to come out to meet him. This looked suspi-
cious ; but in answer to the solicitor’s question, witness
said the accused refused to come out at such request.
Both these girls were acquitted'although at least twenty
(20) prostitutes were in the precincts of the court during
. the trial, and a number of them gave evidence. The
gentleman who took up this case has always felt assured
that if they had appeared without any counsel, they
would have been sent on for examination, and that
there is scarcely a doubt but they would have been
ruined in reputation thereby. As it was, they suffered
a great deal from having appeared in court; and,
had they been strangers and friendless —Instead of
having homes and relatives —their downfall was almost
certain.”
This statement was published by the Social
Purity Society. In answer to the hon. members
for Wide Bay, who spoke about some member of
the Social Purity Society employing girls at
wretched pay, thereby to a certain extent
assisting in the ruin of some of those poor
creatures, I can only say that his remarks
were entirely uncalled for, and that I do
not think he can mention a member of the
society who employs those girls at wretched
pay. I may say, however, that tho good
Bishop of Brisbane is one of the principal
movers in this movement; and that, I think,
speaks volumes. I know how difficult it is to
fight against such an opponent as the Premier ;
and I asked that hon. gentleman not to fight
against me in this case, because I knew that if he
did it would damage my case very much. But
the evidence he adduced was chiefly taken
from the speeches of those gentlemen who
spoke against Mr. Stansfield’s motion, on
which occasion their figures were disproved
so fully and completely by Mr. Stansfield.
that the House of Commons carried the motion
by a large majority, after listening to those
false statistics which were quoted by the Premier
to-night. I say false statistics, because Mr.
Stansfeld proved them to be false. They in-
sisted on taking all cases of venereal disorder,
whereas the only cases with which they have
anything to do is the constitutional disease
of syphilis; and Mr. Stansfeld showed dis-
tinctly that, even taking the figures given
as far as syphilis was concerned, they
showed that only OTS per 1,000 of the cases
sent to the hospitals were cases of constitu-
tional disease. The Premier attached much
importance to the long statements made by
Miss Webb. I have read enough of that case to
make me feel g’reat want of confidence in
what Miss Webb has said. I will now read
a short extract from the evidence of a lady
for a long time employed in one of these
institutions. The Premier does not think
this process, which I have been at great pains
to describe, is hardening, or that it has the
effect of confirming these women in their
evil ways ; but that is not the opinion of this
lady, who was Matron of the Royal Albert Hos-
pital lock-wards when they were first established
under the voluntary system of treating diseased
women, and subsequently under the various
stages of the Contagious Diseases Acts from
1864 to 1871. She gave evidence before the
Royal Commission to the following effect :
‘‘That a great number of women, of all ages, had
been.under her charge, and the same women frequently
returned. For three years, before the appointment of a
chaplain, and under the voluntary system and the first
Act, she had the entire moral and spiritual charge of the
women. She thought that a very small portion are
permanently reclaimed, and that the girls who
come into the hospital have much deteriorated by
these Acts since she became matron—that is, since
1863. The forced examination and all connected
with that system greatly harden them. She described
scenes of a most disgraceful character visible from the
hospital windows, low and riotous proceedings in a
crowd around the inspecting-room, and flash girls
brought up in carriages by gentlemen, who wait for
them till they come out certified a* healthy. The number
reclaimed under the Acts is very much less in proportion
than it was under the voluntary system,”
I adduce this lady’s evidence against the
evidence of Miss Webb, which has been quoted
to-night.
“ She confirmed tho testimony of others as to tho
exaggerations of the police reports—not intentionally
on their part, hut misled by the fact that some women
are set down as reformed many times over, and have
been recorded as separate cases, and the fact has been
that they have not been reformed at all. She confirmed
distinctly the prevalence of the conviction among the
women that they are licensed by the State, and she has
often heard them call themselves ‘Queen’s women.’ ”
Now I shall not detain the House any longer. I
have to thank hon. members very much indeed
for the patient way in which they have listened to
what I have said, and also for the very full dis-
cussion which has ensued upon the subject. I
think the way in which the question has been
treated is certainly very honourable to this
House. lam very pleased indeed, to have had
so much forbearance shown to me personally.
Mr. PALMER said : I shall be very brief
in what I have to say on this question. I wish
just to give my reason for voting against the
motion. I was thoroughly convinced by the
forcible, sensible, and argumentative speech
delivered by the Premier this evening that it is
necessary for the welfare of the colony and of
the towns in particular that the Act against
which the resolution is aimed should be retained
on the Statute-book. From reading the pamph-
lets published on this subject, I had a sort of
idea—a sentimental one, perhaps—that I might
give it my support, but I determined to wait
until I heard the other side of the question
before making up my mind, as I believe that is
always the best course to follow. lam now con-
vinced that the statute should not be repealed,
and that is the reason I intend to vote against
the motion.
Question put, and the House divided :
Arns, 15.
Messrs. Rutledge, Miles, Sheridan, Eraser, Buekland,
Brookes, Aland, Mellor, Jordan, White, Smyth, Grimes,
Annear, Salkeld, and Macfarlano.
Noes, 15.
Messrs. Norton, Archer, Griffith, Dickson, Dutton,
Maodonald-Paterson. T. Campbell, McWhannell, Lalor,
Bailey, Palmer, Black, Ferguson, Lissner, and Stevens.
The SPEAKER; The votes being equal, it
will be my duty to give the casting-vote ; and
regarding the question as one which if carried
will be left open for further consideration, I
give my vote with the ayes. The question is
therefore resolved in the affirmative.
BUNDABERG GAS AND COKE COM-
PANY BILL.
Mr. MAODONALD-PATERSON brought
up the report of the Select Committee on the
Bundaberg Gas and Coke Company Bill, to-
gether with the minutes of evidence and pro-
ceedings of the Committee, and moved that the
papers be printed.
Question put and passed.
On the motion of Mr. MAODONALD-
PATERSON, the second reading of the Bill
was made an Order of the Day for Friday, sth
December.
The House adjourned at half-past 10 o’clock.
By Authority: Edmund Gregory, Acting Government
Printer, William street, Brisban
1 "■ ' ' t Jfis-jjgiS ; 'X ■
( V
L 91V9V200 80S t- £
/
•'* i
(■-qjy^r
/Vw ‘ S I
.s'
'-a-' 'J) 17^”
~ » *"*“
e V|/ t?
, # rO^
£M-3 OAD
C'VYWiy
