

THE BEUEVEH’S PORTION
PERMANENT INHERITANCE.
(Set forth in the form of Letters to a Friend.)
“The Lord is the Portion of mine Inheritance and
of my cur: Tnou maintainest my lot.’’— Ps. xvi. 5.
GEELONG:
GEORGE MORISON, Ebenezer Cottage,
203, Corio Street.
2()i3, Coiiio Street. - w
1804.
H. THACKER. Primt-ep, Geeiono




THE BELIEVER’S PORTION : WHAT
IS IT?
u W© cannot but spsak th© tilings whicb w© have seen
and heard.”— Acts iv . 20.
IT gives me great pleasure, dear B ,to write
to you on the above-named subject, because
it has much occupied my mind in a happy and
profitable manner for a long time past : so 'much
so, indeed, that I may say with Elihu —(Job xxxii.)
“ The spirit within me constrained: me .... I
will speak that I may be refreshed.” Yet, rever-
ently, as one treading on holy ground, I would
seek, as the Spirit gives utterance, to express
what the Lord has taught me regarding this
precious theme; remembering the injunction,
“ Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the
Name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God
and the Father by Him.”— Col. in. iy.
And, truly, such a theme gives room for the
widest exercise of Christian intellect, and affords
to every believer in the Lord Jesus Christ the
highest occasion to render “ thanks to God and
the Father by Him.” For the Believer’s Portion
and permanent Inheritance for time and eternity
is nothing less than the Lord Himself, the Great
I Am, the Most High God, the Possessor of heaven
and earth.” And so without presumption the
lowliest believer may gratefully exclaim, —“ The
Lord is the Portion of mine inheritance and of


my cup : Thou maintainest my lot. The lines are
fallen unto me in pleasant places ; yea I have a
goodly heritage.”— Ps. xvi. “ The Lord is my
Portion, saith my soul; therefore will I hope in
Him. The Lord is good unto them that wait for
Him, to the soul that seeketh Him.”— Lam. Hi.
24-25.
To Aaron, representing the priestly family in
the Old Testament Dispensation, the Lord said,
“ Thou shalt have no inheritance in their land,
neither shalt thou have any part among them : I
am thy Part and thine Inheritance among the
children of Israel,”— Num. xviii. 20. It is true
that this promise had special reference to the
temporal subsistence of the Levitical priesthood
in the land of Canaan ; but none the less is it
applicable in the highest and widest sense to the
priestly family of the present dispensation, viz.—
all believers in the risen Lord Jesus who can unite
in the song,—“Unto Him that loved us, and washed
us from our sins in His own blood, and hath
made us kings and priests unto God and His
Father; to Him be glory and dominion for ever
and ever. Amen.”— Rev. i. 5, 6. For having
received Him as their Saviour and Lord, they
h ive become the children of God. —John i. 12.
“ And if children, then heirs ; heirs of God, and
joint-heirs with Christ.”— Rom. viii. 17. Heirs
of God! What means this expression ? To
apprehend it, even in measure, we would do wisely
and well to frequently retire into some still retreat


where neither human eye nor ear might intrude,
and there in the presence of the truth-revealing
Teacher inquire what it means to you, and me,
and every blood-bought soul. I use the term
“ apprehend ” advisedly ; for what finite mind
can ever comprehend all that is implied in that
wonderful statement ? Suffice it for us to know—
and, knowing, to follow on as the Lord leads us
into fuller revelation—that “ the secret of the
Lord is with them that fear Him ; and He will
shew them His covenant.” — Ps. xxv. 14. Precious
encouraging promise ! In view of the prospect it
gives us may we not sing with the Psalmist: “My
soul shall make her boast in the Lord : the humble
shall hear thereof and be glad. O magnify
the Lord with me, and let us exalt His name
together ! ” — Ps. xxxiv. 2, 3.
11.
THE BELIEVER’S PORTION : A
SATISFYING ONE.
“ My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow aud fatness ;
and my mouth shall praise Thee with joyful lips when I
remember Thee upon my bed, aud meditate on Thee in the
night watches.”— Ps. Ixiii. 5, 6.
How shall we discover the meaning of that
wonderful expression—“ Heirs of God?”—By
learning of Him through whom we have received
the Inheritance ; for in Him “ are hid all the


treasures of wisdom and knowledge.” He hath
said, “ All things are delivered to Me of My
Father : and no man knoweth who the Son is,
but the Father; and who the Father is, but the
Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal Him.” —
Luke x. 22. “The things which God hath
prepared for them that love Him,” are revealed
to the happy objects of His grace “ by His Spirit:
for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea the deep
things of God.”—-i Cor. ii. And the Apostle adds
further on in the same chapter; “Now we have
received, not the spirit of the world, but the
Spirit which is of God ; that we might know the
things that are freely given to us of God." Let us
then, unreservedly and joyfully, avail ourselves of
the inestimable privilege so freely offered to us, and
sitting at our Master’s feet, learn of Him all that
is profitable for us to know and which He is so
graciously pleased to impart. So shall we hear
Him say, as He said to His disciples of old:
“ Blessed are your eyes, for they see : and your
ears, for they hear.” — Matt. xiii. 16.
True we cannot see Him to-day with our
bodily eyes as those disciples saw Him, but we
have His infallible Word and the promise of His
enlightening Spirit to unfold its meaning as we
read it. The longer I live, my dear B , the
more I feel the urgent need of giving diligent heed
to that Word “ as unto a light that shineth in a
dark place.” So when Paul was taking leave of
the Ephesian Church he solemnly warned the


elders against the fearful effects of any departure
from “ the counsel of God,” and tenderly com-
mended them “ to God and to the Word of His
grace which,” said he, “ is able to build you up,
and to give you an inheritance among all them
that are sanctified.” —-Acts xx.
1 have described the believer’s Portion as
a satisfying one. That it is so will be very
apparent if we consider the full import of the
various names by which our God has been pleased
to reveal Himself to His people. Take, for
instance, the Name I AM. The great I AM is
our Portion. What does that mean ? It means
that in Him we have a full supply for all our need,
“ according to His riches in glory by Christ Jesus.”
— Phil. iv. 19. Is this supply available foV our
present temporal requirements, as well as for our
eternal interests ?—Yes, He has promised to supply
all our need, and has assured us that “ the very
hairs of our head are all numbered! ” —Luke xii. 7.
Should you be tempted to despondency at any
time, dear P , just sit down for half-an-hour,
and write on one page of your note-book a list of
the things you feel in need of. Then write on the
opposite page the Name of your I AM Inheritance,
and consider whether you have not in Him an all-
sufficient Resource for all possible requirements.
“Be not faithless, but believing.” Remember
our Lord’s word : “ If ye abide in Me, and My
words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will and
it shall be done unto you.” —John xv. 7. In this


way you will prove the truth of the inspired word;
“The Lord...will be a Refuge for the oppressed,
a Refuge in times of trouble. And they that know
Thy name will put their trust in Thee : for Thou,
Lord, hast not forsaken them that seek Thee.” —
Ps. ix. 9, 10. “The Name of the Lord is a strong
Tower; the righteous runneth into it and is safe.”—
Pvov. xviii. 10. Mark the statement —“ The
righteous runneth into it,” —into this “ strong
Tower”—“the Name of the Lord,” Is not this
happily suggestive ? reminding us of the gracious
invitation : “ Call upon ME in the day of trouble ;
I will deliver Thee, and thou shalt glorify ME.” —
Ps. I. 15. “My soul wait thou only upon God:
for my expectation is from Him. He only is my
Rock and my Salvation ; He is my Defence : I
shall not be moved.”— Ps. Ixii. 5, 6. The believer
acting on these Divine principles may well sing
such a cheerful note as this ;
“ Oh, what a happy lot is mine,
Since God my Portion is !
How blest am I, whate’er betide,
Since He has made me His 1
“ Here in the gloomiest, darkest hour,
Is cause for ceaseless joy !
Well may my heart enraptur’d sing,
And praise my tongue employ !
“ By Him my cup is daily filled
With mercies rich and free ;
Whate’er I want in Him I find,
He’s all in all to me.”
—(Hymns of Consecration and Faith.)


111.
THE BELIEVER’S PORTION: A
TREASURE INEXHAUSTIBLE.
Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.”— Ps. Ixxxi. 10.
You will agree with me, dear B , in think-
ing that man unwise who, suffering from extreme
poverty, refuses to make use of a gold mine within
his reach, because of his aversion to the labour of
digging for the precious metal. And, doubtless,
you will readily admit that we too have much
reason to charge ourselves with folly similar to
that of such a man, seeing we have so slightly
availed ourselves of a treasure infinitely more
precious than all the gold and silver mines of broad
Australia. I allude to our treatment of that
incomparable Volume, which speaks to our hearts
of Him “in whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge.”— Col. ii. 3.
“Tolle, Lege!” (“Take and Read!”) So
rang the voice in Augustine’s ear at the crisis of
his spiritual awakening ; and such a Voice speaks
to us, if only our ears are open to hear, bidding us
lay up God’s word within our heart, and counselling
us to meditate on it day and night. And if through
trouble, sickness, or the pressure of some deeply-
felt need, we may have been “ led or driven ” to
“ search the Scriptures ” in order to find the help


and guidance which God alone could bestow, have
we not abundant cause to render him unceasing
gratitude for so graciously breaking our “ schemes
of earthly joy ” —delusive as the mirage of the
desert—that we might seek and find our all in
Him? So the psalmist confesses: “It is good
for me that I have been afflicted that I might learn
Thy statutes. The law of Thy mouth is better
unto me than thousands of gold and silver.”—
Ps. cxix. 71, 72. If then we wish to know what a
Portion God is to us, —if we would be “ filled with
the knowledge of His will in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding,”—if we would learn how
to “ walk as children of light ”—to “ walk worthy
of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in
every good work and increasing in the knowledge
of God ” —let us make use of every opportunity,
both privately and in company with our fellow-
believers, to increase our acquaintance with the
Holy Scriptures. For “ all Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in right-
eousness ; that the man of God may be perfect,
throughly furnished unto all good works.”—
2 Tim. Hi. ifi, 17.
Did it ever strike you how answerable to our
spiritual need is the name given to our Lord
Christ in John I.—The Word ? For as I cannot
tell what is in your mind until you utter it by
spoken or written Word, so we could not tell the
full thought of God toward us until it was revealed


by His Son —the Word who “ was made flesh and
dwelt among us.” For “no man hath seen God
at any time; the Only Begotten Son which is in
the bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him.”—
John i. 18. And since the life eternal consists.in
the knowledge of “ The Only True God and Jesus
Christ whom He hath sent,” how all-important it
is that our ear should ever be open to the instruc-
tion of that Word—as recorded in the Scriptures—
which imparts to us that saving knowledge! Said
one of the Twelve to our Lord on the eve of His
departure from this world, “ Lord, how is it that
Thou wilt manifest Thyself unto us, and not unto
the world ? ” Let the Great Teacher’s reply sink
deep into our hearts,—“ If a Man love Me hfc will
keep My words : and My Father will love him,
and We will come unto him, and make our abode
with him.” —John xiv. 23.
THE BELIEVER’S PORTION : PRACTICAL
RESULTS.
“ Tis the Treasure I’ve found iu His love,
That has made me a pilgrim below.”
— Darby.
A little reflection, in view of- the unseen and
eternal, will suffice to show what blessed results
must follow the hearty reception of the sublime
truth thus far considered. One result will be the
enjoyment of “ the peace of God which passeth


all understanding,” keeping our “hearts and minds
through Christ Jesus,” under whatever circum-
stances we may be placed in the order of God’s
wise providence. So the apostle Paul could say :
“We are troubled on every not distressed;
we are perplexed, but not in despair ; persecuted,
hut not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed." —
2 Cor. iv. 8, g. Some further results may be thus
summarised:—!. —A just estimate of our present
position as witnesses for God in a scene through
which we are passing as “strangers and pilgrims,”
having “ our citizenship ... in heaven ; from
whence also we wait for a Saviour, the Lord Jesus
Christ.” (i Pet. ii. g-n; Phil. Hi. 20, R.V.)
II.—A settled conviction that we are not our own,
to live to ourselves; but the property of our
Redeemer, and therefore under the happy obligation
of living to Him “Who gave Himself for our sins,
that He might deliver us from this present evil
world, according to the will of God and our
Father: to whom be glory for ever and ever.
Amen.” (1 Cor. vi. 19; 2 Cor. v. 15; Gal.i. 4.)
Hl.—Freedom from care, having learned to cast
all our care on Him who caretb for us. (1 Pet. v. 7.)
IV. —Freedom from anxiety in respect of temporal
necessities, because trusting “in the Living God
who giveth us richly all things to enjoy,” who has
charged us not to lay up for ourselves treasures
upon earth, but to lay up treasures in heaven, and
having food and raiment therewith to be content.
(1 Tim. vi. 17, 8; Matt. vi. ig, 20.) V.—Deliver-


ance from “the fear of man” which “ bringeth a
snare,” because trusting in the Lord and abiding
safely “under the shadow of the Almighty.”
( Prov. xxix. 25 ; Ps. xci. 1.) Vl.—Rest of heart,
having found our soul’s true Centre and all-
satisfying Portion, since He hath made us for
Himself that we might glorify and enjoy Him for
ever. ( Matt. xi. 28; Ps. xxxvi. 7-9; cvii. g;
cxlix. 2; Is. xliii. 7 ; Iv. 1-3.)
“ Now the God of peace, that brought again from
the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd
of the sheep, through the blood of the ever-
lasting covenant, make (us) perfect in every
good work to do His will, working in (us)
that which is well pleasing in His sight,
through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for-
ever and ever. Amen." —Heb. xiii. 20, 21.
Ebenezbr Cottage,
208 Corio Street, Geelong.
25th, Fifth Month, 1894.




Whom have I
IN HEAVEN BUT THEE? AND
THERE IS NONE UPON EARTH THAT
I DESIRE BESIDE THEE. My FLESH AND
MY HEART FAILETH ; BUT GOD IS
the Strength of my heart,
and my Portion for ever.
Ps. Ixxiii. 25, 26.


BY THE SAME WRITER.
THE CHRISTIAN’S BUSINESS:
WHAT IS IT?
“SEEK YE FIRST THE KINGDOM OF
GOD AND HIS RIGHTEOUSNESS. - ’
(Third Edition; Price, One Penny.)
:
LETTERS TO YOUNG BELIEVERS.
(Price Threepence.)
The Subjects treated of in these Letters ate
The Highest Knowledge—Faith in God—
- Pleasure —Prayer—Praise-U-
The Christian’s Directory—
The True Riches and Safe Investments.
GEORGE MORISON, Ebenezer Cottage,
203, Como Street, Geelong.
