

SMjasflMSitiii* w t HjA
iiMltl the ■ , 83
liffiif t| h3
■ , a fcBPPEB,. |
' b Dietary Cure.!
ifidiiitiim H e 'W
||$ai»MHMn|i * * ijj^A
j|| * "||i| j Remedial and Curative System, obviating use of||w
j|| «|i • Drugs, and nowise weakening the System. ||
I®I fraulein lepper,I
♦ Sllffl Mis H
LATE0F ||W
- QBl OTTEHDORF. HANNOVER, GERMANY,
■ fe252| ' SB
-CASA VERDE,” PACKINGTON ST., KEW, Jjtek
• ' |«SSS .MELBOURNE, VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA. H«
iiiWptl — 8S
III®II price - ONE GUINEA. 8S
- h^ :
’ “kl
lllffipsi fflelhourne : ’ SCI
• 1 i Ijffilf i 8 PATER & KNAPTON, Printers, 290£ Little Collins St.
S '/y ' ■ . . . ~iZlf
v ; • • . ..
[COPYRIGHT.]


1
i
«
i
I


'
I
THE “ LEPPER ” DIETARY CURE.




Price - One Guinea.
/
MqHmmpnt :
THE
“LEPPER”
DIETARY CURE
REMEDIAL yAND CURATIVE SYSTEM, OBVIATING USE OF
DRUGS, AND NOWISE WEAKENING THE SYSTEM.
FRAULEIN LEPPER.
LATE OF OTTERNDORF, HANNOVER, , GERMANY', NOW OF “ CASA VERDE,”
PACKINGTON STREET, KEW, MBLROURNE,
VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA.
PATER & KNA.PTOX, Printers, 290| Little Collins Street.
MDCCCLNXXIX.


CONTENTS.
THE “LEPPER” DIETARY CURE.
I. —For those who consider themselves healthy.
la.—Progressive Treatment for the above.
ll.—For those who are always ailing, yet not confined to bed.
Ha. —Progressive Treatment for the above.
HI. —For Invalids who can move but little, and are confined
TO BED.
Hla.—Progressive Treatment for the above.
IV. —For those afflicted with loathsome diseases.
IYa. —Progressive Treatment for stubborn cases.
IYb. —Further Treatment for such as have not yielded to IY.
AND IYA.
DIETS.
I. —Meat 111. —Vegetable.
II. —No Fibre IV. —Grain.
Food for Old People.
Food for People of Sedentary Occupations.
Food for Children. Hints on Babies.
Food for Drunkards.
Food for those who have leisure to nurse themselves, and whcn
want to accelerate the “Lepper” Dietary Cure.
Classification of Food.
Summer Food. Winter Food.
Drinks for Fever Patients.
Receipts for Cakes, Bread, etc.
General Rules. General Hints.
Gymnastics.


and
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS
To thine ownself be true,
And it must follow as tlie night the day,
Thou can’st not then he false to any man.
Shakespeare.
,T is not from vanity that I have placed
my likeness in front of this pamphlet,
but simply to give the reader an idea
of the person who is speaking to him,
who is so anxious to benefit suffering
anxious to benefit suffering
humanity
My object in writing this pamphlet is, not
to give a learned disquisition on different diseases, as
I know nothing about them, but to impart to others
what I have learnt myself from the following books :
Philosophy of Eating, by Du. Bellows.
Physianthropy, by Mrs. Wallace.
Perfect Way in Diet, by Anna Klnsford
Bread and Fruit, by Dr. Schlickeysen.
Although disapproving of many things laid down
in them, I have taken hints from all to build up my
theory, which I first proved in my own case, having
suffered from continued ill-health for 17 years.


I do not attach any importance to the diagnosis
of a case, couched in scientific terms, when the learned
physician fails to afford any relief to the patient.
To illustrate what I mean, I will give the reader
the details of a case which I have treated successfully.
It is that of a young lady, whose medical attendant
declared he could do nothing more for her, and ordered
her a change of air. I found her suffering from great
debility, dry cough, night sweats, feverishness, and
great nervous prostration.
Will the reader think it incredible when I tell him
that after the first day she got relief by following my
prescriptions, and gained strength in body and mind
day by day ? This proves what I claim —that my
Dietary System acts instantaneously, and inspires the
patient with a certainty of returning health.
I have no doubt the simplicity of my treatment
will surprise many ; some, perhaps, will even smile when
they peruse the following statement: —
To relieve the patient’s head I ordered hot foot-
baths three times a day ; to relieve her chest, hot
hand-baths three times a day ; to give relief to the
whole body, I had it sponged with warm water (as she
was too weak to take a warm bath), and gently
rubbed with sweet oil, always in a downward direction.
I gave her black coffee with a little sugar an
hour before breakfast as a stimulant and blood purifier ;
at 8 o’clock, porridge uf barley-flour boiled with skim
milk—both articles of food are nerve and muscle


feeders without containing too much heat; at 10
o’clock, a baked apple, which contains brain and muscle
food; at 12 o’clock, pigeon broth reduced to a jelly with
barley and then strained. The pearl barley, although too'
fattening and heating for healthy people, has yet a
beneficial healing effect on the intestines. The pigeon
provides muscle and brain food. Three French prunes
steamed without sugar formed the second course of
her dinner (the prunes abound in nerve food). At
3 o’clock, a cup of black coffee, with cakes made of
superfine flour, eggs, and cream. The superfine flour
contains only heat, but as the digestive organs have
to be carefully treated in the beginning, it would be
wrong to use at once the whole (unbolted) wheaten
flour. The elements of esfofs are brain and muscle
food as well as heat producers. Cream contains food
for muscles and heat. At 6 o’clock, porridge, the
same as at breakfast, with a baked apple. To allav
thirst, barley water ; and sucking a French prune was
found soothing for the distressing cough.
The last prescription of the doctor was designed
to supply his patient with the same elements as I have
described above, with this difference : that he gave
them as drugs, namely, in the form of strychnine,
phosphates, and quinine, and the outward application
of iodine, as the young lady’s friends objected to
tapping. The usual diet was prescribed —nourishing
food.
It will be seen that my system supplies all these
wants by the selection of natural wholesome food,
which is appropriated without trouble, and assimilated


quickly, thereby regenerating the body and bringing
about the happiest results in an incredibly short space
of time.
Intelligent people will easily comprehend that food,
such as I describe, simple, wholesome, and cheap,
must build up a healthy, sound body as well as mind.
Let those who have suffered from deleterious drugs,
from mustard poultices, blisters, and lotions of all kinds
give my system a fair trial, and then say which is
the most rational, and which is calculated to give
that healthy condition of body and mind which every-
body desires and so many seek in vain.
The knowledge which I have acquired, and
which 1 am anxious to share with the suffering public,
is nothing new. I simply propose to put before them
a practical means which, if followed conscientiously?
will secure them permanent good health through the
agency of diet alone, abolishing doctors’ fees, chemists’
bills, and expensive journeying in search of health.
I shall now place before the reader four different
diets from which he can choose. But before he can
begin any one of them his body must be freed from
all disease, as every living person must be diseased
on account of the unnatural food which he has been
taking for years.
Many will be startled at this statement, but by
experience will find that I am speaking the truth if
they carry out my rules strictly. Every disease chronic
or hereditary, and mental derangement brought on by
overwork, improper diet, intemperance, etc. can be
eliminated from the body if the proper food be taken.


There is no necessity to state that this system
can do nothing in the case of idiots, who have been
born in that condition; nor will it re-create an organ
which has been partially destroyed. In the latter case,
however, it will do away with mortification and ulcera-
tion, and will have a healing effect on the injured
portions.
The four diets are
The Meat Diet,
No Fibre Diet.
The Vegetable Diet.
The Grain
Diet.
the “ Meat Diet ” I
mean everything that God
for food to be taken with
has given us fit and proper
discrimination.
allows the use of every-
This diet is especially
The “No Fibre” diet
thing except solid meat,
recommended.
The “Vegetable” diet.
The “Grain” diet includes butter, milk, cream,
•eggs, and fruit. I have followed the latter diet as
being that on which one may most easily regulate the
mind and body.


COPYRIGHT


THE
“LEPPER” DIETARY CURE,
V.
I—FOR THOSE WHO CONSIDER THEM-
SELVES HEALTHY.
Rise at 7 oclock.
Gymnastics.
Wash, or take a Bath.
Black Coffee 2str.
Gymnastics.
8 o'clock Breakfast.
Wheaten porridge (boiled in water and eaten with a
tea-cupful of skim-milk, or the porridge boiled in skim-
milk.) The appetite should be satisfied. The patient
ought to try and eat nothing else; if, however, he
requires something more, or it he wants a change in
the beginning, he can take dry bread, baked apples,
coffee 2str., with milk and sugar.
10 o'clock.
Baked apples and cakes. 1 -
1 o'clock Luncheon.
Black coffee 2str., cakes, 1 - 12 French prunes.


THE “ LEPPER ” DIETARY CURE.
1 o’clock Dinner.
Broth of any meat or vegetable (no fibre), thickened
with vermicelli or pearl-barley, alternately ; maize
pudding, made of skim-milk, or vermicelli pudding,
made of one egg and skim-milk, alternately ; 12 French
prunes.
4 o’clock Refection.
(fob those who dine late)
Baked apples and cakes. 1 -
4 o’clock Coffee.
(for those who had dinner at 1 o’clock)
Black Coffee and cakes. 1.
6 o’clock Dinner
Ihe same bill of fare as at the i o’clock Dinner, sub-
stituting baked apples for prunes.
6 o’clock Evening Repast.
(for those who had dinner at 1 o’clock.)
Black coffee 2str. ; bread and butter; baked apples;
rice or sago pudding, made of skim-milk and 1 egg.
8 o’clock Coffee.
(for those who had dinner at 6 o’clock)
Black coffee 2str., bread and butter.
Gymnastics.
The last thing before going to bed.
la.— progressive treatment.
(When the Patient feels decidelly better , and wants more
nourishing food).
Rise at 7 o'clock.
Gymnastics.
Wash, or take a Bath.


. RO
Black Coffee, 2str
Gymnastics.
8 o’clock Breakfast
Wheaten porridge with a tea-cupful of fresh milk ;
any fried meat or fish (no sauces) with dry bread
coffee 2str, with milk and sugar ;
bread and butter ; coffee 2str., with cream and sugar
baked apples.
IO o’clock.
Baked apples and cakes. 1-
1 o’clock Luncheon.
Black coffee 2str„ cakes, 1- 12 French prunes.
1 o’clock Dinner.
Any lean fresh meat, with green vegetables and bread
(no potatoes or sauces) ; broth, according to Cure No.
I. may be taken instead of meat, if preferred, but not
both ; maize pudding, made of skim-milk, or vermicelli
pudding, made of skim-milk and one egg ; 12 French
prunes,
4 o’clock Refection
(for those who dine late).
Baked apples and cakes, L
4 o’clock Coffee
(for those who had dinner at 1 o’clock).
Black coffee and cakes, 1-
6 o’clock Dinner.
The same bill of fare as at the 1 o’clock dinner
substituting .baked apples for prunes.
6 o’clock Evening Repast
(for those who had dinner at i o’clock).
Black coffee 2str, ; bread and butter ; baked apples ;
rice or sago pudding, made of skim-milk and one egg.


THE “LEPPER” DIETARY CURE.
8 o’clock Coffee
(FOR THOSE WHO HAD DINXER AT 6 O'CLOCK).
Black coffee 2str., bread and butter.
Gymnastics.
The last thing before going to bed.
JL—FOR THOSE WHO ARE ALWAYS AILING
YET NOT CONFINED TO BED.
Rise at 7 o’clock.
Gymnastics.
Wash, or take a bath
Black coffee 2str.
Gymnastics.
8 o’clock Breakfast.
Porridge of barley-flour (boiled in water and eaten with
a tea-cuplul of skim-milk, or the porridge boiled in
skim-milk). The appetite should be satisfied. The
patient ought to try and eat nothing else j if, however,
he requires something more, or if he wants a change
in the beginning, he can take dry bread, baked
.apples, coffee 2str. with milk and sugar.
9 o’clock.
I 7 oot bath,
10 o’clock.
Baked apples and cakes, 11 *
12 o’clock.
Foot bath.
1 o’clock Luncheon.
Black coffee 2str., cakes, 11, six French prunes.


1 o’clock Dinner.
Broth of any meat or vegetable (no fibre), thickened
with vermicelli or pearl-barley, alternately; maize
pudding, made of skim-milk, or vermicelli pudding,
made of one egg and skim-milk, alternately ; six
French prunes.
4 o’clock Refection
(for those who dine late).
Baked apples and cakes, 11-
4 o’clock Coffee
(for those who had dinner at 1 o’clock).
Black coffee 2str. and cakes, 11-
6 o’clock Dinner
The same bill of fare as at the 1 o’clock dinner
substituting baked apples for prunes.
6 o’clock Evening Repast
(for those who had dinner at 1 o’clock).
Black coffee 2str. ; bread and butter ; baked apples ;
rice or sago pudding, made of skim-milk and one egg.
8 o’clock Coffee
(for those who had dinner at 6 o’clock).
Black coffee 2str., bread and butter.
9 o’clock.
Foot bath,
Gymnastics.
The last thing before going to bed.


lIa.— PROGRESSIVE TREATMENT.
(When the patient feels decidedly better and wan's more
nourishing food.)
Rise at 7 o’clock
Gymnastics.
Wash, or take a bath
Black Coffee 2str.
Gymnastics.
8 o’clock Breakfast.
Wheaten porridge with a tea-cupful of skim-milk
nothing else.
9 o’clock.
Foot bath.
10 o’clock
Baked apples and cakes. L
12 o’clock
Foot bath.
1 o’clock Luncheon.
Black coffee 2Str., cakes, 1- 12 French prunes.
1 o’clock Dinner.
Broth of any meat or vegetable (no fibre) thickened
with vermicelli or pearl-barley, alternately; maize
pudding, made of skim-milk, or vermicelli pudding,
made of one egg and skim-milk, alternately ; 12 French
prunes.
4 o’clock Refection
(for those who dine late).
Baked apples and cakes. 1 *
4 o’clock Coffee.
Black coffee 2str. and cakes. 1-


6 o’clock Dinner.
The same bill of fare as at i o’clock substituting
baked apples for prunes.
6 o’clock Evening Repast
(for those who had dinner at 1 o’clock).
Black coffee 2Str.; bread and butter; baked apples;
rice or sago pudding, made of skim-milk and one egg.
8 o’clock Coffee
(for those who had dinner at 6 o’clock).
Black coffee 2str., bread and butter.
9 o’clock.
Foot bath.
Gymnastics
The last thing betore going to bed.
HI.—FOR INVALIDS WHO CAN MOVE BUT
LITTLE, AND ARE CONFINED TO BED,
7 o’clock.
Black coffee 2Str. If the patient cannot drink a tea-
cupful of coffee, reduce the water to the quantity
required but use the same amount of coffee.
7-30 o’clock.
Wash.
8 o clock.
Porridge of barley-flour (boiled in water and eaten
with half a tea-cupful of skim-milk, or the porridge
boiled with skim-milk). The appetite should be
satisfied. Three French prunes.


9 o’clock.
Foot and hand bath.
10 o’clock.
One baked apple and cakes. Iv *
12 o’clock.
Foot and hand bath.
1 o’clock Dinner.
Pigeon broth reduced to a jelly with pearl-barley and
then strained ; _ D
UK,
Chicken broth, thickened with vermicelli (no fibre) ;
one of the following vegetables —cauliflower ; asparagus,
with a little melted butter; spinach (if the patient
would relish it with a few drops of lemon juice he
can take it). The broth is the most important item of
this meal. Apple-snow, or three French prunes, or
apple-sago with a little cream and sugar.
3 o’clock.
Black coffee 2str, and cakes. IV-
6 o’clock.
Ri'ce or sago pudding; made of skim-milk and one
egg ; black coffee 2str. ; bread, and a little butter if
the patient fancies it.
8 o’clock.
Foot and hand bath.
111 a. —PROGRESSIVE TREATMENT.
(When the patient feels decidedly better and wants more
nourishing food.)
7 o’clock.
Black coffee 2str.


7-30 o’clock.
Wash.
8 o’clock
Porridge of barley-flour (boiled in water with a tea-
cupful of skim-milk, or the porridge boiled with skim-
milk). The appetite should be satisfied. Six French
prunes.
9 o’clock.
Foot and hand bath.
IO o’clock.
Two baked apples and cakes. 111.
12 o’clock
Foot and hand bath
1 o’clock Dinner.
Pigeon broth reduced to a jelly with pearl-barley and
then strained ;
OR,
Chicken broth, thickened with vermicelli (no fibre) ;
one of the following vegetables —cauliflower; asparagus,
with a little melted butter; spinach (if the patient
would relish it with a few drops of lemon juice he
can take it). The broth is the principal item of this
meal. Apple-snow, or six French prunes, or apple-
sago with a little cream and sugar.
3 o’clock.
Black coffee 2str. and cakes. 111 -
6 o’clock.
Rice or sago pudding, made of skim-milk and one egg ;
black coffee 2str. ; bread and butter, if the patient
fancies it.
8 o’clock.
Foot and hand bath.


IV. —FOR THOSE AFFLICTED WITH
LOATHSOME DISEASES.
7 o’clock.
Black coffee 3str.
7-30 o’clock.
Wash.
8 o’clock.
Wheaten porridge eaten with a tea-cupful
milk ; three Frencn prunes.
of skim
9 o’clock.
Foot and hand bath.
lO o’clock.
Baked apples and bread.
12 o’clock.
Foot and hand bath,
1 o’clock.
Wheaten porridge eaten with a tea-cupful
milk; 3 French prunes; baked apples, and
of skim
bread.
3 o’clock.
Coffee 3str. and bread.
6 o’clock.
Wheaten porridge eaten with a tea-cupful
milk; baked apples; bread, and coffee 3str.
of skim
8 o’clock.
Foot and hand bath.


IVa. —PROGRESSIVE TREATMENT.
(For itubhom cases.)
Follow the same prescription as No. IV., omitting the
skim-milk and French prunes, and only drink cold
boiled water.
IVb _FURTHER TREATMENT.
(For such as have not yielded to No. IV. and No. IVa.)
Observe the same times for meals and baths as in
No. IV., but eat nothing but baked apples, and drink
only cold boiled water.
DIETS.
I—MEAT DIET.
8 o’clock Breakfast.
Wheaten porridge eaten with a tea-cupful of fresh milk ;
Any fresh meat, fried, roast, or boiled, either hot or cold
(no sauces); bread; any stewed fruit ; coffee 2str.,
with milk and sugar;
Anv fried fish with melted butter, or fried in a little
butter; potatoes; bread ; any stewed fruit ; coffee
2str., with milk and sugar ;


Bread and butter ; any stewed fruit ; coffee 2str., with
cream and sugar.
10 o’clock.
Any raw fruit.
1 o’clock Luncheon.
Coffee 2str., with cream and sugar ; cakes 1- ; any
stewed or raw fruit; rice or sago pudding, made of
skim-milk and one egg.
I o’clock Dinner.
(two courses only.)
Any fresh meat, fried, roast, or boiled, either hot or
cold (lamb, veal, and fowl can be fried in a little
butter—no sauces); any green vegetables, with a little
melted butter; potatoes, and bread; rice or sago
pudding, made of skim-milk and one egg, with any
stewed or raw fruit ;
Any fresh fish with melted butter, or fried in a little
butter; maize pudding, made of skim-milk; any stewed
or raw fruit.
4 o’clock Refection
(for those who dine late).
Any raw fruit.
4 o’clock Coffee.
(for those who had dinner at 1 o’clock - ).
Coffee 2str., with milk and sugar; bread and butter.
6 o’clock Dinner
The same bill of fare as at the i o’clock dinner,
omitting French prunes, figs and raw fruit.
6 o’clock Evening Repast.
(for those who had dinner at 1 o’clock).
Any fresh meat fried, roast, or boiled, either hot or


cold (no sauces); bread; any stewed fruit; coffee 2str. r
with milk and sugar ;
Any fresh fish, with melted butter, or fried in a little
butter ; potatoes, bread ; any stewed fruit ; coffee 2str.,
with milk and sugar ;
Bread and butter ; any stewed fruit ; coffee 2str., with
cream and sugar.
8 o’clock Coffee.
(for. those who had dinner at 6 o’clock).
Coffee 2stn, with milk and sugar; bread and butter.
lI.—THE “NO FIBRE” DIET.
Wheaten porridge eaten with a tea-cupful of fresh milk ;
Bread and butter, with any stewed fruit ; coffee 2str.,
with cream and sugar.
lO o’clock.
Any raw fruit.
1 o’clock Luncheon.
Coffee 2str., with cream and sugar ; cakes 1- ; any
stewed or raw fruit ; rice or sago pudding, made of
skim-milk and one egg.
I o’clock Dinner.
Broth of any meat or vegetable, the latter can be
taken (no fibre) thickened with vermicelli or pearl-barley.
The latter is very fattening for healthy people, but at
the same time it is wholesome food. Any milk pudding,
except maize, made ot skim-milk and one egg; any
stewed or raw fruit.
4 o’clock Refection
(for those who dine late).
Any raw fruit.


4 o’clock Coffee.
(for those who had dinner at 1 o’clock).
Coffee 2str, with milk and sugar; bread and butter.
6 o’clock Dinner.
The same bill of fare as at the i o’clock dinner,
omitting French prunes, figs, and raw fruit.
6 o’clock Evening Repast
(for those who had dinner at 1 o’clock).
Rice or sago pudding, made with skim-milk and one
egg; bread and butter ; any stewed fruit; coffee 2str.,
with cream and sugar.
8 o’clock Coffee
(for those who had dinner at 6 o’clock).
Coffee 2str., with milk and sugar ; bread and butter.
lII.—THE “VEGETABLE” DIET.
8 o’clock Breakfast.
Wheaten porridge eaten with a tea-cupful of fresh milk
10 o’clock.
Any raw fruit.
1 o’clock Luncheon.
Coffee 2str., with cream and sugar; cakes 1, ; any
stewed or raw fruit; rice or sago pudding, made of
skim-milk and one egg.
1 o’clock Dinner.
Soup of any green vegetables, thickened with any grain;
pearl-barley is very fattening for healthy people, but at
the same time it is wholesome food. Any milk pudding,
except maize, made of skim-milk and one egg; any
stewed or raw fruit;


Thick soup of dry beans, peas, or lentils with a little
butter; any milk pudding, except maize, made of skim-
milk and one egg; any stewed or raw fruit;
Any green vegetables boiled in water, served with melted
butter; maize pudding, made of skim-milk; any stewed
or raw fruit.
4 o’clock Refection
(fob those who dine late).
Any raw fruit.
4 o’clock Coffee
(for those who had dinner at L o’clock).
Coffee 2str., with cream and sugar; bread and butter.
6 o’clock Dinner.
The same bill of fare as at the 1 o’clock dinner,
omitting French prunes, figs and raw fruit.
6 o’clock Evening Repast
(for those who had dinner at 1 o’clock).
Rice or sago pudding, made of skim-milk and one
egg; any stewed fruit, omitting French prunes, and
figs; coffee 2str., with cream and sugar; bread and
butter.
8 o’clock Coffee
(for those who had dinner at 6 0 clock).
Coffee, with cream and sugar ; bread and butter.
IV.—THE “GRAIN" DIET.
8 o’clock Breakfast.
Wheaten porridge with a tea-cupful of fresh milk ;
Cakes, 1- with a tea-cupful of fresh milk.


lO o'clock.
Any raw fruit.
1 o’clock Luncheon.
Cakes 1 -; any stewed or raw fruit; cold boiled water.
1 o’clock Dinner.
Maize pudding, made of skim-milk, or vermicelli pudding,
made of one egg and skim-milk; any stewed or raw
fruit.
4 o’clock Refection
Any raw fruit.
6 o’clock Dinner.
The same bill of fare as at the i o’clock dinner,
omitting French prunes, figs, and raw fruit.
6 o’clock Evening Repast.
Cakes, 1, and a tea-cupful of fresh milk.
[Coffee can be introduced, as in the other diets, if the graimeater
fancies that he wants a stimulant, especially in the beginning. If he
finds himself getting too stout on the diet he must take bread and
butter instead of cakes, skim-milk instead of fresh milk. If he
chooses to live entirely on bread, follow Dr. Schlickeysen’s theory,
which I have not had leisure to try.]
FOOD FOR OLD PEOPLE.
Every person over fifty years of aye must first yo throuyh the “ Lepper ”
Dietary Cure No. 11., and then adopt the followiny diet.
8 o’clock Breakfast.
Any fresh fish, with melted butter, or fried in a little
butter; potatoes; bread ; any stewed fruit; coffee
2str,, with milk and sugar;


Bread and butter; stewed fruit; coffee, with cream
and sugar;
OR,
Porridge of barley-flour, with a tea-cupful of skim-milk.
lO oclock.
Any stewed or raw fruit.
1 o’clock Dinner.
Any fresh fish, with melted butter, or fried in a little
butter; potatoes; bread; any milk pudding, except
maize, made of skim-milk and one egg ; any stewed
or raw fruit ;
Broth of any meat or vegetable, the latter can be
eaten (no fibre) thickened with pearl-barley or vermi-
celli; rice or sago pudding, made of one egg, with any
stewed or raw fruit.
Any green vegetables, with melted butter; potatoes,,
and bread; maize pudding, made of skim-milk; any
stewed or raw fruit.
4 o’clock Coffee
Coffee 2str., with cream and sugar ; bread and butter.
6 o’clock Evening Repast.
Rice or sago pudding, made of skim-milk and one
egg; bread and butter; any stewed fruit, omitting,
French prunes and figs; coffee 2str., with cream and
sugar.


FOOD FOR PEOPLE OF SEDENTARY
OCCUPATIONS.
Every person of sedentary occupation will have to go through the
“ Lepper" Dietary Cure No. 11., and then adopt the following
diet.
8 o’clock Breakfast.
Rice or sago boiled in skim-milk, with any baked fruit;
OR,
Coffee 2str.. with milk and sugar; bread and butter ;
any baked fruit;
Porridge of barley-flour, with a tea-cupful of skim-milk.
IO o’clock.
Any stewed or raw fruit.
1 o’clock Luncheon.
Coffee 2str., with milk and sugar ; cakes 1, ; any stewed
or raw fruit; rice or sago pudding, made of skim-
milk and one egg.
1 o’clock Dinner.
Broth of any meat or vegetables (the vegetables may
be eaten, but not the meat) thickened with any grain
but pearl-barley ; any milk pudding, except maize,
made of skim-milk and one egg; any stewed or raw
fruit;
Any fresh fish, with melted butter, or fried in butter ;
potatoes; bread ; any milk pudding, except maize,
made of skim-milk and one egg; any stewed or raw
fruit;
Any green vegetables, with a little melted butter;
potatoes, and bread ; rice or sago pudding, made of
skim-milk and one egg ; any stewed or raw fruit.


4 o’clock Refection.
Any stewed or raw fruit.
4 o’clock Coffee.
Coffee 2str., with milk and sugar ; bread and butter.
6 ©‘clock Dinner.
The same bill of fare as at the i o’clock dinner,
omitting French prunes, figs, and raw fruit.
6 ©‘clock Evening Repast.
Rice or sago pudding, made of skim-milk and one egg ,
bread and butter; any stewed fruit, omitting hrench
prunes, and figs ; coffee 2Str., with milk sugai ;
bread and butter.
8 o'clock Coffee.
(for those who had dinner at 6 o’clock).
Coffee 2str., with milk and sugar ; bread and butter.
FOOD FOR CHILDREN.
Any child from 6 to 13 years old must follow the
“Lepper” Dietary Cure No. 11. with this difference,
that the coffee has to be taken istr. There is no
necessity to mention that sweets or jams must not e
taken .When the child is well I should advise bring-
ing it up on the “Grain” diet, and avoid placing any
temptation in its way in the shape of unnatural too ,
especially in the beignning, till its body and mind are
so well balanced that it can see and feel for itself the
pleasure there is in eating natural food.


HINTS FOR BABIES.
Any child from i to 6 years old should live
•entirely, in the beginning, on baked apples, porridge
•of barley-flour, skim-milk, bread and butter, and when
it requires more nourishing food, substitute wheaten
porridge for the barley-flour.
Babies, until they are i year old, have, of course,
the mothers milk, if she be a healthy woman. It is
well known that goat’s and cow’s milk are good sub-
stitutes if one third of water and a little sugar be
.added. Cow’s milk requires a little more sugar than
the goat’s. If, however, neither can be got, or only
be bought in an adulterated state, I suggest wheaten-
water and apple-juice till the baby is able to take
wheaten porridge and baked apples.
FOOD FOR DRUNKARDS OR SMOKERS.
People of intemperate habits are advised to follow
any one of the four diets which they prefer, and use
black coffee 3str. instead of any other drink.
FOOD FOR THOSE WHO HAVE LEISURE
TO NURSE THEMSELVES,
And who want to accelerate the “ Lepper" Dietary Cure.
Those who are able to walk from 3 to 8 miles a
■day can hasten the result by following the “ Lepper ”
Dietary Cure No. IF, substituting black coffee 3str., for
•coffee 2str.


SUMMER FOOD.
I feel convinced that all who have followed the
“ Lepper ” Dietary Cure, and who are using one of
the four diets, will adopt more or less the “ Grain ” diet
during the hot weather. Instead of the maize pudding
vermicelli, rice or sago will be more relished ; and
cooling fruit drinks, instead of the coffee, will be preferred.
WINTER FOOD.
In the cold weather those who have followed the
* l Lepper ” Dietary Cure, and who have chosen one of
the four diets, will be able to judge for themselves how
much more butter, suet, lard, or dripping they should
take to supply the necessary heat for the body.
Coffee 3str. will be found a very beneficial warming
drink in case of any sudden chill.
CLASSIFICATION OF FOOD.
(Arranged according to their relative nutritious powers.)
FOR SICK PEOPLE.
Meat. —Pigeon, chicken, lamb, veal, mutton, beef, etc.
Corn. —Barley, rye, wheat, etc.
Farinaceous Food. —Southern corn, vermicelli
(macaroni, spargetti, paste), maize, rice, sago, etc.
Green Vegetables. —Tomatoes, cauliflowers, aspara-
gus, etc.
Fruit. —Baked apples, stewed prunes, and stewed
green figs, etc.
FOR HEALTHY PEOPLE.
Meat. —Beef, mutton, pork, lamb, veal, etc.
Fish. —Salmon, carp, herring, smelt, sole, codfish,
trout, etc.


Corn. —Wheat.
Vegetables.— Beans, peas, lentils, artichokes, par-
snips, turnips, carrots, potatoes, etc.
Fruit. —Apples are the best ; any fruit as the
season brings it. Figs, bananas, and French prunes
are so nourishing that they would be sufficient with a
milk pudding for a dinner.
DRINKS FOR FEVER PATIENTS.
I have had little experience yet in fever cases, but I
feel certain that, in addition to the always prescribed
barley-water, apple-water would be found useful to
purify the blood. When the fever has been allayed,
the patient can begin the “ Lepper ” Dietary Cure
No. 111. Lemon drinks can be given in moderation, if
desired. Should the patient want more nourishing
drinks before he is able to begin the “ Lepper ” Dietary
Cure No. 111., he can take wheaten-meal drinks.
GENERAL RULES.
The “ Lepper ” Dietary Cure must be left off
as soon as the skin has become clear, and the body
feels light and free from pain or indisposition of any
kind. Should symptoms of former ill health arise,
resume the “ Lepper ” Dietary Cure.
Never be in a hurry to get well; the cure is
progressive, and it will take time for invalids to build
up the constitution anew. Nature will do her work in
her own time.
Breathe through the nose.
Drink no water that has not been previously boiled.
Coffee should always be ground just before using it.
Never re-cook meat.


Always pay attention to wheaten-flour, whether it
has a sweet nutty smell.
No raw fruit should be eaten during the “ Lepper
Dietary cure, and the skins of baked apples should
always be avoided.
Very little sugar ought to be taken with stewed
fruit, which always contains sufficient saccharine matter.
Baths are not essential to the “ Lepper ” Dietary
Cure, they only accelerate it. Hot hand and foot baths
are indispensible. The water should not be hot enough
to make the feet tender, and they need not be kept
in for more than three minutes. I consider that cold
baths during the winter are mistakes, as they are un-
natural, and cause a shock to the regular circulation of
the blood. This does not apply to washing the body
with cold water. People who have always been
accustomed to wash in warm water, will soon find that
their nature will demand cold water, in accordance
with the progress their body is making in regaining
health.
The duration of Gymnastic Exercises varies from
5 to 7 minutes.
Patients who suffer from pains in any part of the
body, should be sponged morning and evening with
warm water, and the parts affected rubbed gently in a
downward direction with sweet oil. Open wounds should
be gently sponged with warm or cold water, and a warm
or cold compress (no ice), as the patients wishes,
should be applied, and renewed when dry.
Although the patient may satisfy his appetite
between meals with cakes and fruit, he should be care-
ful never to spoil his regular meals. The cure pro-
duces a ravenous appetite in a short time.
Keep all temptation in the way of food from the
patient in the beginning of the “ Lepper’ Dietary
Cure.
Foot and Hand Baths ought to be taken every three
hours, when the patient feels indisposed or feverish.


HINTS.
The “ Lepper ’ Dietary Cure affords instantaneous
relief, if followed conscientiously.
Foot and hand baths can be used as well as the
sweet oil without following the “ Lepper” Dietary Cure.
As the food, which my system advocates, is purely
natural, there is no constitution, however diseased, which
will not appropriate it easily.
If it is impossible to keep strictly the hours pre-
scribed the patient should not distress himself, but try to
observe them as much as possible.
If the patient does not get well on the “ Lepper”
Dietary Cure No. L, try No. 11. ; it only shows that the
body is more diseased than he imagined.
It is best not to eat anything after six o’clock.
If the patient cannot eat all that is prescribed there
is no need to be anxious. He ought NEVER to be urged
to eat or to walk ; nature will do her work.
Raw fruit is better than baked; baked fruit is better
than stewed.
No salt, or other condiments, are allowed under this
system. I myself do not use them, but as salt is not
considered unwholesome, the patient may take it if it
helps him to relish his food.
If wheaten bread proves to be too nourishing, take
barley bread, which is more adapted to persons of seden-
tary occupations, or for invalids.
The patient should not force himself to take natural
acids, such as tomatoes, lemons, etc., unless he feels a
desire for them. When nature requires their assistance
she will make her wants known quickly enough.
Steamed vegetables are the best.
Although I am convinced that nuts are highly nutri-
tious, yet I cannot recommend them as I have not tried
them myself.
Oatmeal is too nourishing for ordinary use; it can
only be taken by working men on “ Grain ” diet.


I never recommend tea or cocoa, as it is difficult to
•obtain either in a pure state. Any adulteration of food,
however trifling, will have an antagonistic effect on the
curative system.
Cheese and ham are most nourishing food, but they
require great physical exercise to prove beneficial.
Those who cannot take natural food are in a bad
state of health and ought to endeavour by taking black
•coffee and baked apples, to bring back their perverted
taste to the enjoyment of nature’s delicious flavors.
GYMNASTICS.
A pamphlet on gymnastics, without either dumbbells
•or clubs, with illustrations, will shortly be published by
Miss E. G. Clayton; price, I/-.
Having given the subject of this pamphlet my best
.and most earnest attention I send it forth to the world at
large with an implicit faith that in time people will come
to see how easily disease, and the misery it entails on so
many households, can be banished from amongst the
human race. With the possession of perfect health —
which only can build up a perfect mind —that happiness,
which is so much desired, will then be placed within the
reach of every human being ; for it cannot be doubted
that unwholesome, unnatural and indigestible food causes
the craving for strong drink and excites the evil passions,
which are the curse of the whole world, leading to those
terrible crimes which destroy the peace of families and
society at large.
“ Self reverence, self knowledge, self control—these three alone lead man
to sovereign power; and the rocks whereon the world’s happiness has
been wrecked are the sunken reefs of sensuality and self indulgence.”


RECIPES FOR CAKES, BREAD, &c.
Wheaten Bread. —Soak the whole (unbolted) wheaten flour
overnight, and beat it with a fork till air-bubbles arise in the stiff
batter; put it in a, shallow tin, buttered (or make into scones), and
bake in a very hot oven. The bread must be light, dry and porous.
Barley Bread. —Soak the barley flour an hour before using, and
proceed as for the wheaten bread.
Cakes, 1 * Wheaten. —Take 1 tea-cupful of cream (or jib of butter),
and the yolks of 3 eggs; beat the whole for 10 minutes ; add the
whites, beaten to a froth, and lib. of whole wheaten flour (soaked
overnight). If the dough is too stiff, thin it with water. Bake it
in patty-pans, or drop it in small portions on a baking tin, and bake
in a very hot oven.
Cakes, 11 * Wheaten. —Take half a tea-cupful of cream, or |lb. of
butter, and the yolks of 2 eggs, and proceed as for Cakes L
Cakes, 111 * Barley . —Proceed as for Cakes L using barley flour,
which has been previously soaked for an hour, instead of wheaten flour.
Cakes, IY * Barley . —Take half a tea-cupful of cream, or |lb. of
butter, and the yolks of 2 eggs, and proceed as for Cakes 111 -
Sago and Fruit Shape. —Boil the sago with water; bake the
fruit, and put it through a sieve ; mix them both together, in the
proportion of 2 parts of sago to one of fruit • place it in a shape, and
turn it out when cold.
Apple Snow. —Whisk the white of an egg to a froth, and add
baked apples put through a sieve ; mix them both well, in the
proportion of 2 parts of froth to one of fruit; serve it.
Coffee, Istr. (strength).—To 1 tea-spoonful of coffee use a tea-
cupful of boiling water; let it stand while you count 20 ; strain it,
and sweeten with 1 tea-spoonful of sugar.
Coffee, 2str. —Two tea-spoonsful of coffee and 2 tea-spoonsful
of sugar, and proceed as for Coffee Istr.
Coffee, 3str. —Three tea-spoonsful of coffee and 2 tea-spoonsful
of sugar, and proceed as for Coffee Istr.
Egg Coffee. —Beat the yolk of an egg with 2 tea-spoonsful of
sugar to a stiff froth, then add it to a cup of Coffee, 2str. This
drink is very nourishing, and is recommended to invalids, who are
going for a walk or drive.
Fruit Drinks. —Trim and cut up the apples, leaving the core
and peel; boil till tender; strain, and sweeten only if the patient
desires it. Quinces and pears may be treated in the same way.
Lemon Drinks. —As much lemon juice as desired in cold or
warm boiled water ; sweeten to taste.
Wheaten and Barley Drinks. —Pour boiling water on wheaten
or barley flour or meal, then strain. It can be flavored, it desired,
with the syrup of French prunes, lemon juice, etc.
Maize Pudding. —Make the maize into porridge, with skim-
milk, then pour it into a pudding dish and bake in a slow oven.
Tomatoes may be eaten at any time, either during the
“ Lepper ” Dietary Cures or Diets, raw, stewed, or baked with a
little butter and bread crumbs.
French Prunes. —Stew the prunes without sugar.


. ; • ’ ' ■ v ■ , ■■ ■ ■■ ■ "V
-■ ■■
- ■ ‘ ■ v; .- r S' 1
; V; . 1-SS t - > '
v' •*; ■ :
s . ■
■ , ■ , - ■ ■■■ ■ ■ , . ■ u .
-
.
• ' r - ; ' * . .
\ - jp<- .... ■ v , - - ■ ■ ...


* »l
•*
/
>. • • .
