

Published by Authority of the New South Wales Commissioners
for the World’s Columbian Exposition, Chicago, 1893.
. THE MARINE FISH AND FISHERIES
NEW SOUTH WALES,
PAST ANT) PRESENT,
IN THEIR COMMERCIAL ASPECT.
PHILIP COHEN.
Jclrtmep:
CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
12 h 43-92 (a)




ied by Authority of the New South Wales Commissioners
for the World’s Columbian Exposition, Chicago, 1893.
HE MARINE FISH AND FISHERIES
NEW SOUTH WALES, ,
PAST AND PRESENT,
IN THEIR COMMERCIAL ASPECT.
PHILIP COHEN.
Sjilrncp:
CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1892.
12 h 43—92 (a)




■
COMMISSIONERS’ PREFACE.
(Specially addressed to the Fishermen of the United Kingdom ,
Canada, and the United States of America.)
M 2,3S>f‘ F
This pamphlet has been written not only for the purpose of
giving reliable information in connection with the extensive
Marine Fish and Fisheries of New South Wales, but also with
a view of promoting, as far as possible, the introduction to
our shores of persons skilled in the prosecution of the Fisheries
of the United Kingdom and America into this Colony, where,
as is hereafter shown in the letterpress of this pamphlet, ample
scope and remunerative occupation can readily be found for
them in the special lines of training and avocation to which
they have been accustomed, a class of labour in which the
Colonies up to the present time have been very deficient.
On this point the particular attention of the reader is
directed to the allusions to be found upon the following pages
of this pamphlet:—6, 7, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.




THE MARINE FISH AND FISHERIES OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
The object of tins pamphlet is not to provide a complete technical descrip-
tion of the whole of the very numerous species of fish contained in the waters
of New South Wales, but simply to select and describe the fish we possess
in abundance, and which have a distinctly commercial value. It may safely
be said, that, except perhaps to a few scientists, the great majority of our
best species of edible fishes are unheard of and unknown to the outer world.
The large importations of fish which are continually pouring into this Colony
from Europe and America might lead people at a distance to infer that the
surrounding seas are singularly devoid of that commodity. Such is by no
means the case. Providence has acted very bountifully in this respect, not
only as regards New South Wales, but all Australia. Nevertheless, our
fish supply is sparse in the extreme; the local market is ill regulated with
regard to it, and the demand by far exceeds the quantities brought to market.
Hence, we are, at times, afflicted with scarcity, and corresponding high prices,
and the market is in a continual state of depletion.
Such a deplorable state of things piscatorial as here described, is to be attri-
buted to the utter absence of experienced sea-going fishermen, and the want
of modern effective means of transit to market. It is indeed an anomaly
that while the adjacent waters are teeming with various fine species of
of fish we should continue to be dependent on foreign supply, and, doubtless,
what should be a great and thriving industry will continue to be dwarfed,
and practically undeveloped, until our local fishermen become more enlight-
ened, or are displaced by the advent of men who understand their profession
in all its details, and who would not be afraid to face the perils of the deep,
which are, comparatively speaking, minimised in the placid waters of the
Pacific Ocean.
In the_ early days of the Colony many writers, and some historians, were
profuse in their astonishment and admiration when giving descriptive
accounts of the numberless varieties and immense quantities of fish having
their habitat in Sydney Harbour, its inlets, and tributaries. In those
times, and long afterwards, whenever and wherever the fishermen cast their
nets great hauls were made ; consequently fish food was always abundant,
and continued to be so for many long years subsequently without materially
diminishing what was then naturally considered a never-failing supply.
Eor more than fifty years after the foundation of the Colony nearly the
whole of the supply was drawn from Port Jackson and its waters. The early
colonists had no occasion to go further afield ; they were enabled to catch any
quantity of fine fish almost at the very thresholds of their dwellings, and, un-
fortunately, their successors have continued in the same groove up to the
present day. The so-called fishermen of the earlier days had no necessity to


go outside Sydney Heads to gather the spoil, the then prolific and extensive
waters of the harbour and the local rivers yielded to them all and more than the
fish required for the supply of alimited consumption, consequently in the earlier
times the labour of the fisherman was minimised, and although the price was
moderate, yet his gains were proportionately large. Things continued in
this wise until population increased by leaps and bounds, and generation
increased upon generation, necessitating a continued augmentation of the
fish supply, but the fishermen did not, nor do they now, keep pace with the
times. Many industries have vastly and wonderfully improved upon their
lines, but, strange to say, our fishing industry has remained stationary. The
old appliances of a century ago continue up to the present hour. The same
enclosed waters which they and their predecessors have worked unceasingly
for scores of years past continue to receive their sole and unremitting atten-,
tion, hence the deplorable scarcity and high prices of fresh fish obtain-
ing in New South Wales. The inevitable seine and the meshing-net, and
the small ricketty open boat constitute the Australian fisherman’s entire
plant, no provision whatever is made for deep-sea fishing, which necessary
and profitable branch of the industry still continues in abeyance. It is
scarcely credible, yet nevertheless it 'is a melancholy fact, that do not
possess a single sea-going fishing craft, nor any description of fishing gear,
except that described. Not a fishing-smack or lugger is to be found sailing
out of any port in hew South Wales, or indeed out of any port in all Aus-
tralia. Notivithstanding that a great abundance of various species of fish
are known to exist in the deep waters off the coast, they have never been
utilised, the efforts of our local fishermen being confined to the constant
use of the seine in the shallow waters of the harbours, rivers, and lagoons,
deep-sea fishing is absolutely ignored, and in a measure almost unknown.
The coast of New South Wales extends about 650 miles from Cape
Howe to the southern boundary of Queensland, numerous great rivers,
bays, indents, and estuaries, with the addition of extensive lakes or lagoons
marking its entire length. These at all seasons of the year are the
resorts of vast numbers of various descriptions of splendid fish, which
are only sparsely utilised, if the distance of the localities exceed but a few
miles from the metropolitan market, simply tor the reason that we are
not possessed of means to effect a speedy and safe transit of the fish so-
as to arrive in good condition at its destination, consequently it is no-
unusual thing for immense quantities of fine fish to become decomposed, and
rendered valueless, both in' course of transit, and at the various localities
along the coast where they are caught. Under such deplorable conditions
it may be easily understood why fish continue to be scarce and high-priced
in the Sydney market.
It is a matter of surprise, and much to be regretted, that some of the
many experienced fishermen of the United Kingdom and America, where
it is an admitted fact that most of the fisheries are overmanned, have not
long ere this been induced to transfer themselves and their belongings to
what should be our vast and productive deep sea grounds, which doubtless
exist in many directions off the coast.
-hhe fisheries of the older countries having been worked continuously for
hundreds of years, must, as a matter of course, be getting nearer their*
decadence as each successive year passes by, but here in these Australian
seas the vast, and as yet undeveloped fisheries are, comparatively speaking,
in a a irgm state, and their productiveness, under normal conditions, for


hundreds of years to come is assured, and without doubt they would, from,
the abundance of their yield, prove highly remunerative to skilled and enter-
prising workers.
The consumption of fresh fish in all Australia, and more particularly in
New South Wales is necessarily restricted, not because of its paucity in
our waters, or any disregard of the generality of the inhabitants for a
fish diet, but simply from the ruling of exorbitant prices, and the supply
being immeasurably less than the demand. The imports of preserved fish
to New South Wales alone now exceed in value £130,000 per annum. This
large sum of money is expended yearly by the people of this country to pro-
cure that which we possess in superabundance in our own adjacent seas, and
which, for the reason given, cannot be utilised. r J he anomaly is as strange as
it is regrettable, but there it is continually staring us in the face. A vast
and highly productive field for the skill and enterprise of numbers of practical
men is here opened out on and off the coast of this Colony, where fisheries
of vast extent continue to remain untouched by human hands, and whose
almost virgin waters continue in the same condition as when nature formed
them long ages ago.
In all great fish-producing countries the supply is principally drawn from
the open seas. It is much to be regretted that the same rule does not apply
to this Colony, where the prolific waters of the surrounding ocean are in a
great measure ignored in favour of the harbours and rivers and other
shallow waters abutting on the coast. The seine is the principal imple-
ment employed for the capture of fish, and as the fishermen continue hauling
and scraping the same grounds year after year by day and night, without
any intermission, the natural result follows that "the fish market is only
scantily supplied, and fish continues to be an expensive luxury instead of
being abundant and moderately cheap. Unlike the fishermen of other and
older countries, they of this country will not exert themselves in seeking for
the whereabouts of the fish. They content themselves with waiting near their
homes for it to come to them, and notwithstanding that the waters contiguous
to the coast-line absolutely teem with various species of splendid fish, only
very circumscribed and intermittent efforts are made for their capture in
quantity.
As previously stated, the coast of New South Wales extends north and
south for a distance nearly approaching 050 miles. From one end to the
other it is studded with harbours, rivers, estuaries, bays, and other indents,
but the most extraordinary feature of the coast is the presence of great
intermediate lakes or lagoons, extending at intervals through its entire
length, and situated at short distances from the foreshores, all these latter
localities—with the exception of a few comparatively small lagoons con-
tiguous to Sydney harbour, which, from incessant working, are for the time
being nearly “fished out”—abound with many varieties of our best fish,
such as whiting, mullet, garfish, bream, flathead, perch, Ac., &c. Many of
these enclosed waters away north of Sydney, which positively swarm with
fish, have never yet had a net drawn through them, and there they continue
up to the present hour unheeded and unsought for by the fishermen, who
are destitute of means or method for transit to market from any moderate
distance along the coast.
Ihe coastal lakes or lagoons referred to are only at intervals sub ject to
the influence of the ocean. Heyond a question of doubt they constitute to
a very great extent the favourite spawning giounds of all the species of fish


above mentioned. It is only after floods, or at periods of abnormally high
spring tides that their entrances become open to the influence of the sea.
During such periods the ingress and egress of fish to and from the ocean is
something as wonderful to behold as their numbers, both of matured and
immatured, are prodigious.
The deep bays and other indents which predominate the coast-line and
terminate in the shallow beacnes of the foreshores, are at all seasons of the
year well stocked with fish, in the summer months more especially when
most species of ground fish are migrating or “ schooling,” but fine weather,
with the wind off shore, is indispensable to the working of the open fisheries
on the costal shallows, where, in many localities, such fine fisb as whiting,
bream, tarwhine, and sand-mullet are fairly abundant
With the exception of the schnapper and a few other species of deep sea
fish, the great bulk of Australian fish are migratory. In their respective
seasons vast schools of mullet, mackerel, herring, garfish, trevally, salmon,
(Australian) et hoc genus omne , annually make their appearance off the
coast, travelling in every instance from south to north, whence and whither
is a mystery yet unsolved, nevertheless they come and go, meeting with little
or no interception or molestation from the so-called fishermen of New
South Wales, who, it is to be regretted, are possessed of neither the inclina-
tion nor the means for the successful working of our wonderfully prolific
ocean fisheries, but content themselves with eking out a bare subsistence by
continually and persistently scraping the harbours, rivers, and lagoons, and
those only which are contiguous to their haunts and homes. Hence the
paucity of our fish supply, and the constant poverty of the local fish-market.
Doubtless such a deplorable state of things will continue until w r e welcome
the advent of experienced sea-going fishermen, endowed with effective and
more modern fishing appliances. Then, and not till then, will our abundant
and non-developed fisheries assert their superiority, and the scandal of a fish
famine existing in a land surrounded by abundance be removed from our
midst.
SYNOPSIS OF THE PRINCIPAL FOOD FISHES
OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Schnapper (Pagrus unicolor).
This splendid fish deservedly takes front rank in the category of Australian
fish, not only by reason of its great abundance, but also for its super-
excellence of quality. It exists in vast numbers throughout the wffiole
length of the eastern coast. Its chief habitat is contiguous to sub-
marine reefs and foul bottoms. The schnapper may be classed as omnivor-
ous, its ordinary food consisting of the molusca living on the deep sea
reefs and some few species of diminutive sea-weed. It is at all times a very
ravenous fish, as its name denotes, and takes various descriptions of bait
with great avidity. It congregates or schools in immense numbers, and is
easily caught wnth hook and line at all seasons of the year. So greedily
does it seize the bait that the merest tyro in fishing finds no difficulty in
striking it. The schnapper, strictly speaking, is not migratory. According
to the season of the year the great bulk of the larger or adult fish either


move in towards tine coast or further out seaward as the case may be. For
instance, in the later spring or early summer months they approach nearer
to the coast for the purpose of depositing their spawn, while in the winter
months they are to he found, to use the fishermen’s term, “ wide off ” in the
same locality, averaging from five to fifteen miles seaward from the coast. The
fish commence to congregate or school in large numbers about the commence-
ment of November, when they approach nearer to the coast than at any other
period of the year. They spawn in December, and then move back to the outer
grounds, where they become even more voracious than is habitual with them.
At this particular season they could be taken in immense numbers if systema-
tically sought for by men possessed of suitable vessels efficiently equipped with
the necessary gear and bait.
The school or adult fish is supposed to have reached the'age of three
years, when its weight is from Gto 9 lb. But that is by no means the extreme
weight of the older fish, which vary from 10 to 25 lb., while in occasional in-
stances they have been caught exceeding 301 b. The previous stages of their
existence are defined under the names of red-bream and squire. The former
retain that denomination until they reach the age of about 18 months, and a
weight from 1 to 2 lb., after which they enter into the “squire” stage, and
retain that cognomen until they reach the third year of their existence, and
exceed G lb. in weight, when they become what the fishermen term “ count
fish,” and from that out have reached the adult stage,
O
In the olden time these fine fish abounded near the approaches of Sydney
Harbour and even in the harbour itself, from the surroundings of which for
a great many years, Sydney received the wdiole of its schnapper supply. In
those days the fishermen had no occasion to go any distance outside the "Heads
in search of the fish, they had more than sufficient for all their purposes close
at hand. But the continued and ceaseless working of the home fisheries com-
bined with an immense and increasing traffic in and out of the port for years
past, in addition to the merciless and unrestricted destruction of spawn and
young fish in Port Jackson and its tributaries, have caused the almost utter
annihilation of the old schnapper grounds both inside and immediately outside
the harbour, so that the grand old fisheries of Sydney Harbour and its sur-
roundings have now become things of the past. Nevertheless the fish continue
to abound at all seasons of the year for hundreds of miles north and south of
the Heads, but as previously stated the fishermen of this Colony cannot suc-
cessfully work the deep-sea fisheries for want of both inclination and means.
The schnapper taken in all its aspects is a most valuable fish. Its flesh
is purely white and firm, its flavour, with perhaps one or two minor exceptions,
is not to be surpassed by any other species of fish in Australian waters.
When properly cured and dried it is infinitely superior to cod or ling.
Considering its amazing fecundity and the vastness of its numbers it could,
without much difficulty, be rendered a valuable article of commerce, Some
years ago, to the waiter’s knowledge, a few shipments in its dried state w r ere
made to China, wdiere it readily realised from IGO to 175 dollars per ton.
Naneygay (Beryx afflnis).
This is a deliciously-flavoured fish, but hitherto it has for a short space of
the year, visited the coast only in moderate numbers, which make their annual
appearance in the months of October and November, and sometimes continue
till the end of the year, when they freely intermix with the schnapper, and
are often caught with the latter on the same grounds. They snap at the bait


greedily, and are easily taken with, line and hook. They average from 1 lb.
to 3 lb. in weight and in measurement seldom exceed 15 inches. The naneygay
is esteemed a great delicacy and is much sought for during its limited visits
to our coastal waters. In colour it is a bright pink, silvering towards the
underparts, and it is possessed of abnormally large eyes for such a moderate
sized fish. That it exists in quantities on banks not yet discovered off the coast
there can be but very little doubt, as it is essentially a sea fish, but the locale
of its permanent habitat remains to be revealed.
Black Hock Cod ( Serranus damellii).
The black rock cod is certainly a splendid fish and is esteemed by many, as
being superior in flavour to the schnapper and indeed to any other species
of fish swimming in Australian waters. In the earlier days of the Colony it
abounded on the rocky bottoms both inside and outside Sydney Heads, but
from causes previously explained, it is seldom or ever caught at the present
day near those localities Still it continues moderately plentiful all along
the northern coast where it often reaches immense proportions. The general
weight of the fish is from 0 to 25 lb., but to the north extending from Seal
Hocks, they have been captured at various times weighing from 50 to 300 lb ,
and in some few instances exceeding even that. Great size does not in any
way deteriorate its flesh either in fibre or flavour; it is always snow white,
flaky, and firm. Its habitat is usually in deep water, near submarine reefs
and rocks. It is in no se'nse migratory, and is very sluggish in its move-
ments. Their spawning season is about midsummer, but where they deposit
their ova is quite a matter of conjecture, nothing positive being known.
'They are not gregarious, so far as is known, but are distributed in moderate
numbers throughout the coastal waters where rough bottoms prevail. Like
the naneygay their winter quarters have yet to be discovered. These fine
tish in all probability may yet be found in a fair abundance on rocky bottoms
extending to a moderate distance off the coast. The black rock cod* is a true
representative of the percidee family. In colour it is dark brown or approach-
ing to black, with mottled underparts, its head being large and somewhat
elongated with a great extension of mouth. It is carnivorous and takes fish
bait readily. When once hooked it exhibits very little spirit and suffers itself
to be hauled up to the surface of the sea making but a poor show of resistance.
Wirrah (Plectropama maculatum).
This is another member of the percidee family, but it is infinitely inferior m
every respect to its congener, the black rock cod. It is possessed of a very
thick skin, while its flesh is abnormally hard, but not of a bad flavour if
properly cooked. It is of a brownish-yellow colour, dotted over with small
round black spots. It is not generally appreciated as a food fish, but the
Chinese have a great predilection for it, and will purchase it readily. At
some points of the coast it is fairly plentiful, and, like its congener, it is a
deep-water fish, affecting foul and rocky bottoms, but in every other respect
it is dissimilar. It seldom exceeds 4 lb. in weight, and 15 inches in length,
is carnivorous, and is not particular in its acceptance of Tait.
Hed Rock Cod (Scorpcena cardinalis).
This fish prevails from one end of the coast to the other, and some-
.times visits the schnapper grounds in great numbers. It is very voracious, and


Swallows any description of bait with groat avidity. In colour it is a dusky red,
I ntersected with small brown spots and lines. It is never known to exceed
3 lb. in weight, its average being from \ lb. to 2 lb., and its length from S to
12 inches. Its head is a very formidable-looking formation, being abnormally
large, and covered with spines and other sharp protrusions, of which fishermen
must always beware. The flesh of the fish is purely white and is by many
esteemed a rare delicacy.
Morwhong ( Chilodactylus macro]) ter us).
The morwhong is a deep-sea fish, and very much resembles in form, habits
and general characteristics the Tasmanian bastard trumpeter, of which it is
a congener. It is only caught at intervals on the schnapper grounds, with
which fish it freely intermingles. Taking bait readily, it is easily caught
with the line, but never with the seine. It is an exceedingly tine-flavoured
fish, and is much appreciated by those who are aware of its good qualities.
It is not, so far as we know, gregarious, and is only captured in small
numbers, but should it ever be discovered in quantities, which is highly
probable, on some of the many “ wide-off ” grounds along the coast, the
morwhong will become one of the best appreciated and most valuable of
Australian fish.
Sergeant Baker, or Red Gurnet (Aulopus purpurissatus).
This is the only fish of the gurnet or gurnard family that needs mention-
ingdn the descriptjye part of this essay. We have three or four different
species in our waters, but, with the exception of the one under notice, they
are seen or caught singly only at long intervals. The Sergeant Baker (so
named after the person Avho captured the first of its kind in Sydney
Harbour), like the red rock cod, is übiquitous. It is to be found in greater or
smaller numbers all along the coast of New South Wales. Being a rock fish,
it frequents submarine reefs and foul bottoms. It is carnivorous and takes
fish-bait freely. It is most numerous in the summer season, and is occa-
sionally taken by the line in goodly numbers. In some seasons it is
much scarcer than in others, which fact leads one to infer that the fish
are migratory. It is of a mottled-red colour, interspersed with grey. When
full grown it AVeighs about 3 lb., and is about IS inches long, its flesh is
purely Avhite, of excellent flavour, and very flaky.
Australian Salmon (Arripis salarJ.
This fish is in no wise desenfing of the name it bears. It is possessed of
a handsome symmetrical form, but neither its flesh nor its flavour bears the
remotest resemblance to the salmo salar, whose name it usurps. Nevertheless,
it has some substantial qualities. It is of good size, and exists in A r ery great
abundance, and, if somewhat coarse, its flesh is plump and grainy, Avhile the
great roes it carries in season are of excellent fhivour. The salmon migrate
along the coast in November and December each year in enormous
schools ; and, doubtless, if they Avere properly and systematically utilised,
Avould yield ample profit to all concerned in their capture. These fish, in
comparatively small numbeers, are Avith us all the year round, but in the
early summer months their name is legion. Travelling from south to north,
prodigious bodies of them move along the coast. School succeeds school,
each one covering acres of sea. It is no exaggeration to say that
thousands of tons of them pass along the coast annually. in many


instances enormous numbers enter tlie harbours and rivers, into which they
are mostly driven by their many enemies, which persistently follow the
schools during their migration; and it is no uncommon thing in the northern
rivers to find thousands of them driven ashore on to the sand-banks by the
sharks and porpoises which generally accompany them on their travels, and
there they are left to rot in the rays of the sun. The local fishermen,
having no care for them, decline to take the trouble of gathering them in.
These fish are not appreciated as they should be. If properly treated, after
the manner of cod or ling, they would form just as palatable an article of
food ; and, from their large size and the prodigious numbers in which they
congregate, they are capable of affording a very large quantity of nutritious
and valuable food, either for home consumption or exportation, or both.
Considering our large imports of dried cod, ling, and other fish, it is more
than surprising that such immense bodies of edible fish should be suffered to
pass by our very doors, as it were, unheeded and untouched. This indifference
is as truly marvellous as such wanton and wilful waste is deplorable.
The full-grown fish measures over two feet, and its weight averages from
7to 8 lb. At the schooling period its roes are full and very large, and the
flavour of the latter is excellent, either fresh or smoked, and would be in
great request, but unfortunately they are seldom obtainable. Such conditions
form an anomaly which, to people residing in other lands, would appear to be
inexplicable.
Teraglin (Otelithus otelodus).
This is a deep-sea fish and is gregarious. It is sometimes mistaken for
young jew-fish, which it much resembles in contour of body, with the excep-
tion of the head, which is slightly more elongated, its scales being very much
smaller and its flavour far superior. It is a migratory fish, and is rarely
caught in enclosed waters. In the late spring and summer months it is often
very abundant. The spawning season is in January, at which period it is in
excellent condition, and wry voracious, taking fish-bait greedily. In favorable
seasons they can be taken in quantities with the line, but are seldom captured
with nets. The full-grown fish measures about two feet, and its average weight
is from sto G lb. Prom its likeness to jew-fish it is not appreciated as it de-
serves to be._ Its flavour is exceedingly good, and its flesh perfectly white.
In colour it is a silvery grey, turning darker after death. When first taken
from the water it is exceedingly handsome, and should certainly be classed
among the best of our food fishes.
Jew-fish (Scicena Antarctica).
The jew-fish is one of the largest and most ravenous species offish existing
in our waters. It affects the harbour and rivers as well as the open sea, and
numbers are to be found in all directions throughout the entire coast
and coastal rivers, the more northern especially, where they attain great
size, in many instances reaching over five feet in length, and weighing
more than 80 lb. In general contour of body it resembles the English or
American salmon, but its scales are very large, and its flesh has no°affinity
to those splendid fish, being very coarse in the larger species ; but when
the fish averages up to 80 lb. it is by no means ill-flavoured, and when
properly cooked, it would puzzle many to distinguish it from some of
the more favoured species of fish. The jew-fish is in every respect
carnivorous, and is a real terror to the young and small of every other
description of fish. The larger fish are often solitary in their habits, and


commit their depredations singly ; while those of 30 lb. and under are wolfish
in their instincts, hunting, as it were, in packs or schools, devouring and
destroying young fish in hecatombs. They seize fish or squid bait voraciously,
fighting desperately for life when first hooked, but when once* turned they
unmistakably exhibit the white feather. They are also often captured by
the seine, the shallows offering great inducements for their predatory propen-
sities. As before stated, the large, over-grown fish are coarse in fibre, and
not much utilised; but the smaller fish are not by any means to be despised.
Their flesh is white, fairly flavoured, and succulent, while the roes of both
large and small are really magnificent, being of immense size. The eggs are
infinitesimally small in comparison with the size of the fish. Jew-fish of
moderate size sell readily in the Sydney market, and often the larger ones
find eager purchasers. In many Sydney restaurants, where the absence of
real schnapper, for many reasons, is proverbial, cutlets from this fish, served
up cl la schnapper, cannot in a very great number of instances be distinguished
from those taken from the real “ Simon Pure.” That these fish could be
profitably utilised there can be no manner of doubt. Their roes, for size
and delicacy of flavour, are not to be excelled by those of any other fish.
The sounds or air-bladders they contain are also of great size, and could be
rendered valuable, while the fish themselves, in a cured state, are, to say the
least, quite equal to the imported article. They school in midsummer, which
is also their spawning season. They do not migrate, but pass in and out of the
rivers with the tides.
King-fish (Seriola Lalandi).
This fish is possessed of beautiful symmetry, combined with immense speed
and power. In its habits it closely resembles the jew-fish, frequenting the
sea (which is its natural habitat), as well as the harbours and rivers, at certain
seasons of the year. It is likewise carnivorous, very voracious, and a great
devourcr of young fish. Differing from its prototype, it is gregarious and
schools in vast numbers during a portion of the summer months, and although
essentially a deep-sea fish at that period, is often beheld in great masses
migrating along the surface of the sea. At such times it will not take bait,
but, strange to say, at other times, when located in its natural element, the
depths below, it seizes fish-bait with great voracity. When hooked it is a
terror to the fisherman. A full-grown king-fish, of, say, 40 or 50 lb., when
struck by the hook, literally speaking, flies through the water, when it wmuld
amount almost to madness to check him, until hebecomes in ameasure exhausted,
which is not soon. At rare intervals they are caught in quantity by the seine,
but the line is the more effective and generally used implement for their cap-
ture. The older and larger fish are similar in coarseness of flesh, to the jew-
fish and by many is considered equally unpalatable in its fresh state, but the
smaller fish, say, from 4to 12 lb., are fairly well flavoured. Taken all round,
if properly preserved it would prove to be fully equal to the general run of
imported cured fish. When smoked it is in its best dress, and is duly appre-
ciated by those who are aware of its qualities, when cured after that "fashion.
These fish spawn in December, but the location of the grounds whereon they
deposit their ova is unknown.
Tailer (Lemnodon sallator).
The tailer, for its size, is a most rapacious and destructive fish, destroying
in its raids more young fish than it can consume, swallowing one perhaps for
every ten or twenty it kills. It is very strong and remarkably swift, possess-


big sharp piercing teeth. A school of them when enclosed by a seine often
make sad havoc with its bunt, in a very short space of time tearing the meshes
to pieces. Capturing a school of tailer frequently means great expense to
the fisherman in the shape of a new bunt for his net. It is a shapely fish,
having very small scales, reaching occasionly up to 10 or 12 lb., and about
30 inches in length, but the average weight of the adult fish is from 2 to
4 lb. It spawns in April, and passes along the coast during that month, and
the early part of May, in moderate schools, entering the harbours and rivers
en route, in which localities it makes its presence known to the young fish of
all species in a most unmistakable manner. The tailer requires to be utilised
soon after it is caught, it is then highly nutritious and well flavoured. Properly
cured and smoked it is not to be excelled by any other fish living in Australian
waters.
Samson-fish (Seriola hippos),
This fish is very erratic in its habits, sometimes putting in an appearance
on the deep-sea grounds off the coast in moderate quantities, at other seasons
it is very scarce, a solitary fish being caught only here and there It is
a congener of the king-fish, and is even a more powerful fish than the latter,
as its name denotes. It does not attain so great a size, its extreme weight
being about 10 lb., and length nearly two feet. It is a dry and somewhat
coarse fish, but well adapted for the curing process. It possesses amazing
strength, considering its comparative smallness, and that is the best that can
be said of it.
John Dory (Zeus Australis).
A valuable and fine flavoured fish, identical in every respect with its name-
sake of Europe (Zeros faher). The John Dory is one of the very best of our
food fishes, but unfortunately its visits to our seaboard are few and far
between. That the fish exists in quantities at some point not far distant from
our coast-line, there can be but little doubt. When this fish does put in an
appearance it is generally in the autumnal months, but its stay is always of
short duration, and in some seasons it is found somewhat more plentifully
than at others. It is carnivorous, and when dropped upon takes a yellow-
tail or mackerel with avidity. Its flesh is beautifully flavoured, firm, and
white, in fact its excellence is proverbial.
Trevally (Caranx Georgianus).
The trevally is with us in moderate quantities during the greater part of
the year. It is gregarious and is a winter spawning fish, schooling in the
month of May, it migrates close in shore along the coast in a northerly
direction in large bodies. When in season it is fairly nutritious and well
flavoured, but generally in the summer months it has a lean appearance
and becomes somewhat coarse and flabby. Eor this reason the fish is held in
indifferent repute, which it does not wholly deserve. When first caught it
has a beautiful appearance ; in colour its back has a lovely azure or light
purple-tint or both combined, the lower parts gradually merging into a
silvery white, the whole variegated with candescent streaks and golden stripes,
all of which disappear after death. The school fish never reaches over 2 lb.,
in weight, and it averages 10 inches in length; but the deep-sea variety are
much better flavoured, and are often taken weighing up to 7 lb. The former
arc only partially carnivorous, but the latter take fish-bait ravenously and
are not gregarious.


Black Bream (Chrysophrys Australis).
"Whythis fine usefulfishshouldbedenominated“black”ishard to determine,
unless it be to distinguish it from the red bream or young schnapper. Black
it certainly is not, nor does it in any way approach to that sombre hue. Its
colour is a silvery grey two or three shades deep, spread over the body, while
the head assumes a bluish tint which becomes more dense towards its termina-
tion. But colour has nothing to do with the excellence of the fish, the black
bream, so called, is one of the best and most abundant of Australian fish. It
is disseminated through all the coastal waters of the Colony and even pene-
trates into the brackish waters of the upper rivers. It is omnivorous, feeding
at times upon small mollusca and river moss, but its chief delight is shrimps
and prawns. It abounds in all the salt water rivers, in some of which it
attains great dimensions, and is caught in quantities at all seasons of the
year, both by line and net. It is, however, most abundant in the summer
months, when it becomes gregarious and migrates in a northerly direction,
keeping close to the coast. At the latter end of January it commences
to school,” which continues in all February, at which period the fish are in
fine condition and full of roe. The schools are not large but they are con-
tinuous, and succeed each other at comparatively short distances,"seemingly
as if the fish travelled in families. When they get away down north, very
often in the season a union of two or three or more “ blocks,” as the fisher-
men term them, is effected, and very large hauls are made on the sea beaches,
and on the sand flats of the harbours. At times in the summer months they
take bait with avidity, but during winter it is difficult to get them to accept
bait unless tempted with live prawns ; however, they are captured with the
seine more or less all the year round. Bream are good keeping fish, and
when in good condition are considered only second in flavour to the schnapper.
The weight of the fuli-grown fish is from 2 to 3 lb., but the river fish are
often caught up to 5 lb. The latter are wary customers and are seldom
tempted with bait of any description.
Tarwhine (Chrysophrys hasta).
The tarwhine is a near congener of the black bream. In shape and size it
is very similar to that fish, but with the following distinctions: its colour
is brighter and more silvery, its scales are smaller, and its head has a more
circular form, being somewhat similar to that of a young schnapper. There
is very little difference in the habits of the two species, except that the
tarwhine is more at home in sandy bottoms than the bream. They some-
times mix up together in schooling, which occurs at the same period, but
mote ( ftjn the former species migrate by themselves and assume much
larger proportions. The tarwhine is not quite so übiquitous as its congener,
and is seldom seen in the upper rivers, nor is it neat ly so numerous in the
winter as it is in the summer months. Both these species of fish are reputed
to spawn twice during the year, but the fact is doubtful, and certainly not
well established.
Blacklist! (Girella triev spidaia).
Like the bream and tarwhine, the blackfish is profusely distributed all
along the coast. Its chief resort is amongst the rank weed growths in the
shallows of the rivers and lagoons. It is not a migratory fish, and is very
seldom seen or caught in the ocean. It is peculiarly a river fish, possesses
< great fecundity, and spawns bi-annually. Its spawning periods are in June
and December. These fish abound in all the harbours, rivers, and lagoons,
but in consequence of their great abundance are held in only moderate repute,


nevertheless they are by no means ill-flavoured. At certain seasons they are
very fat and at all times the flesh is white and firm. By those who possess a
knowledge of its good qualities, it is accepted as a valuable and toothsome
article of food. At full growth it averages about 3 lb., but in the warmer
climates of the northern rivers and lagoons it is repeatedly caught weighing
5 lb. and upwards. The length of the adult fish is from 10 to 15 inches. It
is herbivorous, and very shy, seldom taking bait. In many localities it can
be taken in quantities with the seine. Its colour is a very dark brown,
sometinies approaching to black, with faint zebra stripes. It has a small
head, with thick fleshy body, and is easily cured. It is not migratory.
Perch (Lates colonorum) .
This fish prevails in both fresh and salt water rivers, and at intervals
is caught in the sea at short distances off the coast, where it attains its
greatest size. It is neither gregarious nor migratory, and is rarely caught
in large numbers at one haul of a seine, but subsequent to freshets it makes
its way down from the upper waters of the rivers to the harbours, at which
periods it is captured in greater quantities. The perch is not strictly
speaking carnivorous when located in its natural home, the upper rivers, but
whenever it migrates into brackish or salt water, it will take fish or prawn
bait greedily. It seems to flourish in the sea, where it is caught at intervals
weighing up to 5 or G lb., and then it may be classed as one of the best of
our food fishes, being far superior to its fresh water kindred, which never
exceed 3 lb. in weight, or 12 inches in length. This species of perch deposits
its spawn in the lagoons and upper rivers during the month of November.
Whiting (Sillago maculata).
The whiting of this Colony bears no affinity whatever to the European fish
of the same name. It is far superior to the latter, and is most assuredly one
of the finest and most useful species of fish to be found in Australian
waters. The species of whiting under notice is peculiar to the New South
Wales and Queensland coasts, but is most abundant in the watei’s of the
former. It is with us in moderate quantities all the year through, but the
summer season is the time of its greatest abundance, and then it is in its
best condition, revelling in vast numbers on the fringes of the ocean beaches,
and on the huge sand-banks within the bar hai’bours of the various ports all
along the coast. It is gregarious, and only partially migratory. That is to
say, during the winter months, it departs from the shallow, sandy flats of
the harbours and rivers, and seeks for warmer localities in the depths of the
neighbouring ocean, returning in the latter spring months augmented in
numbers, in splendid condition, and laden with ova. In good seasons the
fish are exceedingly abundant, particularly so on the huge sandy bottoms
so prevalent along the noi’thern coast, where it is no unusual occurrence for
from 50 to 70 bushels of fine matured whiting to be taken at one haul of
the seine. The fish swim close to the bottom, often ploughing up the
sand as it moves along, and often when a body of them are enclosed with a
net, many will be lost to the fishermen by their burrowing in the sand, the
lead lines of the seine passing over them. The whiting is symmetrically
formed, densely scaled and well fleshed; when full grown it measures over 12
inches and weighs about one and a quarter pound, but the usual average ruix of
the school fish is from 10 to 16 ounces. Every particle of its flesh is snow
white, firm, and flaky, while in flavour it is simply delicious ; and when lightly
cured and smoked it forms a breakfast delicacy not to be surpassed. To
sum ‘ up in a few words, this species of whiting is one of the most valuable
and useful fish existent in Australian waters.


We are possessed of two other species of whiting, viz., the trumpeter
whiting ( Sillago bassensis ) and S. ciliata. The former may he classified
as a deep-water fish, not so abundant as the S. maculata, nor attaining to
the dimensions of that fish, nor possessing the same dencacy of flavour.
Still it is an excellent fish. It never exceeds eight ounces in weight. Its
chief habitat is on the sandy bottoms of bays and other estuaries in from
four to six fathoms of water. It is not gregarious; whether it migrates or
otherwise is uncertain. The S. Ciliata bears a close affinity to the former,
but from its scarcity claims no further description.
Garfish or ballahoo (Hemirhamphus intermedins).
This very delicious fish is common to all Eastern and [Southern Australia.
It migrates along the whole extent of the coast of New South Wales,
passing north in very great schools, from the latter part of March to the
end of April, sometimes continuing to May in each year. During its period
of migration the schools keep close to the shore, and large detachments of
them are often driven into the harbours and other indents of the coast by
the numerous birds and fish of prey which invariably follow in the wake of the
travelling masses. At such times they are easily captured in quantities by small-
meshed seines, and form a rich harvest for the fishermen. This species of
garfish is essentially a denizen of the sea, and seldom enters the harbours in
bulk, unless driven in by exceptionally heavy weather, or by the action of
its many marine persecutors. If our fishermen were provided with drift-
nets and sea-going craft these fish might be captured in enormous numbers,
but under existing conditions they have to content themselves with such
as come to them, having no means by which they could reach the great bulk
of the fish. The adult sea-garfish, when full grown, is from 10 to 14 inches
in length, and in weight about three ounces. Its scales are deciduous, which
gives the fish, after it is captured, the appearance of being naturally scale-
less, which it is not. Its food is a fine description of marine moss, and it
always swims on the surface of the sea. It spawns in April, but where it
deposits its ova is a problem yet unsolved.
River Garfish (Ilermirlmmphus regularis).
This species of garfish is only to be distinguished from its congener by its
somewhat smaller size, its speckled back, and the greater adhesiveness of its
scales. In all other respects its general formation is a fac simile of the sea
species. It is known as “the river garfish,” and strange to say it is gre-
garious but not migratory, its permanent habitat being in the harbours and
rivers. Not a great many years ago this beautiful fish swarmed in pro-
digious numbers in all the rivers which debouch into the sea within 20 miles of
the metropolis, but sad to say, in consequence of indiscriminate and incessant
netting, those once prolific waters have been rendered almost barren, and as
far as those localities are concerned, the river garfish has become a thing of
the past. Nevertheless they are still to be found in quantities in the more
distant coastal rivers and lagoons, in the placid waters of some of which a
seine has never yet been shot. The river garfish possesses an exquisite
flavour, superior even to that of its sea congener ; but in size it is less than the
latter, seldom exceeding 10 inches in length, or more than two ounces in
weight. It spawns during the latter part of April, and the earlier part of
May, and deposits its ova in the dense, weedy portions of the rivers and
lagoons.


. Long Tom (Belone ftrox).
This fish is identical with the true green-bone garfish of Europe. It is
gregarious and migratory, and usually puts in an appearance ofi'the coast in
moderate detachments following the great schools of mackerel which travel
along the seaboard annually, in the months of December and January. It
is generally not very plentiful in the harbours and rivers, but is to be found
in those localities in small quantities during the greater part of the year.
Nevertheless great hauls of these fish have occasionally been made in the
distant lower northern rivers, where they attain a great size, viz., from 4 to
5 lb. Many people imagine that, because of their green bones, they are
poisonous as food, but this is nothing more than mere fancy. The fish
properly cooked are toothsome enough, and the larger the size, the better is
the flavour. They are carnivorous, but will not take bait. The long Tom
is possessed of a formidable beak or snout, which, in the full-grown fish, is at
least 4 inches inlength, and is armed with disconnected, wicked-looking teeth,
with which it makes sad havoc among the smaller species of fish, seizing
them with unerring aim in its swift undulating attack. When and where
they spawn is unknown.
Flathead (Placycephahcs fuscus).
The flathead is common to all Australia, Tasmania included, and is found
in large numbers, frequenting at all seasons of the year the harbours, rivers,
and estuaries situated along the coast. There are several species of this
fish, but the difference existing between them is infinitesimal, and in some
instances can scarcely be detected. In shape aud general conformation
all are identical. It is in variety of colour and size that they differ. Three
species only require to be particularised here, and those are : —l. The dark
brown or sand flathead ; 2. The river or black flathead, and 3. The light
drab or sea flathead. All these possess the same instincts and are exactly
similar in their habits, being carnivorous and greedy devourers of any des-
cription of bait offered to them. In many localities both north and south
of Sydney Heads they are to be found in great numbers, and the drab-
coloured species abound on many of the sandy bottoms of the sea a mile
or two distant from the coast. All the species are exceedingly well
flavoured, but preference is to be given to the sea fish. The flesh of all
is perfectly white and very flaky. They are bottom fish and often bury
themselves in the sand, leaving only their eyes exposed in order to detect
the approach of their prey. The average weight of the adult fish is from
2 to 4 lb., but the dark-brown or black species are often caught when fully
matured up to 15 lb. and nearly 3 feet in length. The} 1- are flat fish but
become cylindrical toward the tail. Like the majority of Australian fish
they migrate in the spawning season. In the summer months they are in
fine condition and full of roe. It is asserted by some experts that they breed
bi-annually, but such is doubtful.
Sea-mullet ( Mugil grandU).
Of all the fishes contained in New South Wales waters the sea-mullet is
undoubtedly the most valuable, not only on account of its superabundance,
but for its intrinsic commercial importance. This splendid fish is located in
all our coastal rivers, estuaries, and lagoons in greater or less quantities
throughout the year,but from the latter end of March, extending sometimes
to the middle of May, it, makes its appearance off the coast in enormous
schools, migrating from south to north. These great bodies of mullet


travel generally at a distance of about 2 miles from the shore, and are
literally packed in dense masses, each one covering many acres of sea. Very
often, in course of migration, two or more schools will unite. At such times
a wonderful spectacle meets the eye. The sea, nearly as far as the eye can.
penetrate, appears a seething mass of active life. The “ work” of the fish
is unmistakable, and when unmolested they are to be seen leaping out of
the water in every direction. At other times, when attacked by any of
their numerous marine enemies, the immense body of fish takes fright and
rushes along the surface of the sea at a terrific pace, causing the surrounding
waters to assume the appearance of moving sheets of foam. Nature has
endowed these fish with an extraordinarily w r ondcrful instinct. As each
separate school moves along the coast, a detachment of fish leaves the main
body on arriving opposite to every harbour or indent on the coast from which
a river extends, and enters it for the purpose of depositing its ova. These
are the comparatively small runs of fish which the local fishermen misname
“ schools of mullet” and succeed in capturing periodically in the harbours and
rivers. The schools proper very seldom approach within a mile from the
coast, unless driven in nolens volens by a succession of exceptionally heavy
easterly weather which, however, rarely occurs at that season of the year.
The sea-mullet is endowed with a splendid conformation of body, but at the
spawning period it is exceedingly obese, fleshy, inordinately fat, and carries
immense roes. The full-grown fish averages from 4 lb. to 5 lb. In length
it varies from 15 to 20 inches and often more. In many instances it reaches
up to 8 lb. in weight. It never takes bait. During its migratory period, it lives
entirely upon suction, or, what is very probable, is nourished by the immense
proportion of fat which is disseminated throughout its body at this particular
season. Its roes, which are of a bright yellow colour, are of great size and
of delicious flavour, either in their fresh state or cured and smoked. In this
latter state they are much appreciated, but under present conditions the
supply is never equal to the demand. Each full-grov\n mullet will yield, if
properly treated, nearly a pint of fine clear oil, which could easily be rendered
very valuable for medicinal and other purposes. The fish, subsequent to
spawning in the upper parts of the rivers, become lean, flatulent and
elongated for a brief period, but soon regain their handsome appearance and
original form ; but never while it is domiciled in the rivers does it regain the
fatness which during migration is its chief characteristic. It deposits its
ova in the shallows of the upper rivers and their tributary creeks, as well
as in the lagoons, which latter are its favourite localities, wdien the entrances
to them are available. The young fish are hatched in August, and from that
time forward are to be seen in vast swarms during several stages of their
existence. The fecundity of the sea-mullet is astonishing. It is computed
that the roes of a female fish contain two and a-half million eggs, and were
it not for the pertinaceous rapacity of the numerous enemies of the young
fry, the sea would be overcrow r ded with the species. Ihe quality of the fish
is excellent, and by numbers of people it is estimated to be very little inferior
to Scotch salmon, either in flavour or fibre.
Hard-gut Mullet (Mugil dohula).
Why naturalists have bestowed a separate name on this fish is inconceiv-
able, for, beyond a doubt, it is nothing more or less than the sea-mullet
{Mugil grandis ) in its two-year old stage of existence. By some it is styled
the river-mullef, and the latter is certainly the more appropriate name for it;
because when these fish are captured in small schools in the harbours they
are journeying instinctively from the rivers iu which they were bred towards


the sea, in order to assume their functions as adults. As regards the term
“ hard gut,” no reason can be assigned for such an appellation, and it is most
assuredly a misnomer. The so-called mugil dobula is absolutely the progeny
o£ the sea-mullet, impelled by nature to depart from the rivers on reaching
a certain age, to become matured in the open sea, after passing the second
year of its existence in the upper rivers. It migrates in small schools in
the month of January, at which period it is about two-thirds grown, and
if not intercepted reaches the ocean in due course.
Talleygalann, or Sand-mullet (.Myxus elongatus).
This fish, though not nearly so abundant as its congener (the sea-mullet),
is not by any means to be despised. It does not attain the dimensions of the
latter, nevertheless it is useful and well flavoured. Its chief resort is enclosed
waters; but in the winter months it makes for the sea, and migrates in small
schools from river to river, always keeping close inshore. Full grown, its
weight seldom exceeds l|lb., or its length 12 inches. It deposits its ova in
May, after which for a brief period it becomes lean, flabby, and unpalatable;
but, like the sea-mullet, it soon regains its proper form. This species of mullet
■was at one time very abundant in the home fisheries, but, from causes already
-explained, it has almost disappeared from those localities ; still, the fish are
fairly abundant in the more distant coastal rivers.
Flat-tail Mullet (Mugil peronii) .
The flat-tail mullet differs only from its near congener (the talleygalann)
in the colour of its eyes, and the greater breadth of its caudal extremity,
whence its appellation. In habit, size, and instinct, there is no distinction.
AVith the exceptions stated, the same description is applicable to both
species, but the former is the more numerous. In the schooling season
They often amalgamate, more especially during the period of migration.
Maray, or Australian Pilchard (Clupea sagax).
Strange to say, the “ maray ” or pilchard, although one of the most ahum
•dant of all species of fishes contained in Australian waters, is the least
known to the great majority of the inhabitants of this Colony, and it may
be safely added, is never seen in the fish-markets or shops in Sydney, nor is
it in any form exposed for sale. It appears off the coast in the month of
July, often continuing till the middle of August, migrating in multitudinous
schools, passing from south to north, at a distance varying from 2to 4
miles from the shore. It is no exaggeration to affirm that during the
periods of migration it is to be seen covering a great expanse of the surface of
the sea. AVhether such tremendous bodies of fish comprise only one
or several united schools it would be difficult to determine ; nevertheless the
fact of its presence in our seas in such huge quantities and at such times is
beyond dispute. Although known to migrate annually along the whole
extent of the New South Wales coast, the maray has never been observed
frequenting the more shallow inshore waters, or any of the harbours or
rivers, the fish keeping, on all occasions, well to sea. There is only one
instance on record of its having visited enclosed waters in any quantity. The
incident referred to occurred in the month of August, 1866, when the writer
was residing in Melbourne, and was an eye-witness of the phenomenon. At
the period named Hobson’s Bay, from some cause unknown, was invaded by
enormous schools of “ maray ” or pilchard. The vast expanse of waters
comprising this extensive bay was, literally speaking, alive with the fishes.


They predominated in every direction, and were captured in prodigious
quantities. Hundreds o£ tons of them were taken with all descriptions of
implements. Seines, hand-nets, baskets, and even buckets were brought into
requisition by hundreds of professional and non-professional fishermen. The
fish were conveyed through the city and suburbs of Melbourne in cartloads
and sold for 6d. a bucketful, while scores upon scores of tons were dis-
tributed through the country towns. Notwithstanding the prodigious quanti-
ties of these fish passing along our coast for at least six weeks annually,
they are most completely ignored. No attempt has hitherto been made to
capture and utilise any portion of them, but they are suffered to come and go
with impunity. The cause of such deplorable laxity is the utter absence of
sea-going fishermen and fishing appliances. The fully-matured fish are from
six to seven inches in length. Their flesh is rich, oily, and of good flavour, but
if exposed for any length of time to the influence of the Aveather will quickly
decompose. The “ maray ”is easily cured, and with due attention to the
process could be rendered an excellent substitute for the Yarmouth bloater.
Herring (Clupea simdaica).
This is another species of the Clupea family, and is more widely known
than the C. sagax because, unlike the latter, it is to be found in larger or
smaller quantities, at all seasons of the year, in most of the coastal rivers. It
migrates about a month earlier than its congener, that is, in June, con-
tinuing sometimes to July, travelling at about the same distance from the
shore in very large schools, but not in such huge bodies as the “maray.”
the schools are of large dimensions, and always take a
northerly direction. This species of herring is easily distinguishable from the
former. In colour it is silvery Avhite, its scales are deciduous, and it is
possessed of yellow bands on either side of its back and has a much deeper
and more compressed body than the “ maray.” It is about seven niches in
length, its flesh is purely \A r hite, and possesses a very delicate flavour, and
like its congener, the European herring, it carries in the season of its migra-
tion A T ery large roes. These fish are often caught ip the coastal rivers in
moderate quantities, but are very seldom brought to market or utilised in
any shape, because our so-called fishermen will not trouble themselves to
collect them when drawn by the nets on to the shores, as they are considered
too insignificant to merit the attention of their captors.
Mackerel (Scomber Australasians).
The Australian mackerel differs but very slightly, if it differs at all, from
its European or American namesake. In size, colour, instincts, and general
conformation of body, no appreciable difference can be detected. These fish
commence to migrate along our coast about midsummer, and continue to do so
for about six weeks. The schools assume immense proportions, each one cover-
ing a vast expanse of the sea’s surface. The same may be said of them as
of the pilchard and the herring, viz., none of the fully-matured mackerel are
ever seen exposed for sale in the Sydney fish-market or fish-monger’s
shops. During the summer season schools of young or half-grown fish
of this species continue to visit the lower parts of Sydney Harbour and
other localities extending along the coast. These are mostly utilised
for bait, for which purpose they are highly and deservedly appreciated.
The full-grown fish rarely entering enclosed Avaters, only a straggler~or
tAvo may be caught at long intervals, but the huge schools of mackerel
Avhich pass along the coast annually continue to go their ways unheeded and
in peace, so far as the fishermen are concerned, for the mere want of enter-


prise and suitable sea-fishing appliances. During the migration of these
vast bodies of fish, they are subjected to continual depredations of
sharks, porpoises, bonita, and other fish of prey, as well as of carnivorous
aquatic birds of various species, all of which at times make sad havoc in their
ranks. A prejudice exists against utilising the mackerel for human food,
but the fish is good and palatable enough if eaten shortly after it is caught.
It dies almost immediately after its removal from the water, and no great
length of time ensues before decomposition sets in. According to naturalists
we have another species of the genus scomber located in our waters (scomber
antarcticus), but the difference between the two is scarcely appreciable and
difficult to be detected.
Flounder (Renderlwmbus Urssdlii).
In some seasons this fish is more plentiful than in others. It affects
sandy bottoms in five or six fathoms of water, both outside and inside the
harbours, bays, and estuaries of the coast. It is carnivorous, and at times
take fish-bait freely, but is only captured in very small quantities with the
seine. In the autumn months fair numbers are taken with the line in some
favorable localities, and doubtless when the trawl is introduced in our
fisheries this species of fish will be caught in greatly augmented numbers.
It is with reason supposed to be gregarious, audit is of a certainty migratory.
Beyond a doubt, at a certain period of the year, it comes into the shallows
from its natural habitat in the sea, the precise locality of which is at present
undiscovered ; but which some day —it is to be hoped in the near future—
the lead-line and the trawl in their much needed operations will place
beyond mere conjecture. The flounder is much appreciated as a delicate,
exquisitely-flavoured fish, but unfortunately the supply is nothing like
equal to the demand. Its extreme weight is about lb., but the average
of the fish is from % lb. to 1 lb. It is a winter spawning fish and deposits
its ova in May or June.
Sole (Synaptura nigra).
There are but few instances on record of this fish having been captured
in close proximity to the sea. It is generally found burrowing in the sandy
bottoms of the rivers and shallow' bays. It is herbivorous, and never known
to be caught with the line, and very difficult to capture with seines,
as it lies so close to the bottom, and in very many instances is covered in the
sand. Spearing is the method most approved for taking it; but it is by no
means abundant, so far, at least, as w r e have at present discovered, in its
favourite localities. It is perhaps more numerous at the spawning period,
when it becomes slightly gregarious, and more on the move than is
its wont. It deposits its ova in the upper rivers in the latter part of
February or the commencement of March, at which period it is in good
condition and delicately flavoured ; though an ill-deserved prejudice exists
against it on account of the abnormal thickness of its skin, which in all cases
should be removed before it is cooked. In length the adult fish measures
about 10 inches and in width nearly 7 inches, and when full grown weighs
fro mlsto 18 ounces. There are tw r o or three other species of sole existent
in our waters, one of which is the true English species, but it is rarely seen,
and but very seldom caught
Hair-tail or Ribbon-fish (Trichiserus haumela).
This fish, with perhaps one exception, is the only representative of the
numerous family of ribbon-fish that we possess. It is scaleless, and endowed


M-itn a singular caudal extremity terminating in a very fine point, whence
its name. Its body is greatly compressed, and its head'somewhat elongated
with great staring eyes and formidable looking teeth. When first caught its
very thin skin has a bright silvery appearance, which becomes a few shades
darker after death. When full grown it measures nearly 3 feet, and weighs
about 2 lb. Its flesh is wdiite, but nothing to boast of ; yet many people evince
a partiality for its peculiar flavour. It is rather erratic in its habits, and
appears off the coast in the midwinter months; but sometimes three or four
years will intervene between its visits. It is gregarious, fairly numerous, and
deposits its ova in July.
• Eels (Anguilla Australis).
Eels abound in all the fresh-water rivers flowing eastward, and also in the
brackish upper waters of the coastal rivers. In both localities in many in-
stances they attain great size, weighing up to 15 lb., but their general average
is from 2 lb. to 5 lb. It is a singular fact, that notwithstanding their
abundance, very few reach the Sydney market, where the price asked for
them is always exorbitant. This should not be the rule, but the exception.
Under ordinary conditions they should be plentiful and cheap. Strange to
say, eel-fishing, though very simple in its practice, is almost entirely beyond
the ken of the local fishermen. We have also another very fine species
of eel (murainesox bagio). It is peculiarly a salt-water fish of delicious
flavour; but not by any means so abundant as its fresh-water congener,
neither does it attain so great a size; its average weight at maturity
never exceeds 4 lb. It is known as the silver eel, so called from the silvery
hue of its under parts.
Cray-fish (Palinurus hugelii) ,
This splendid species of crustacean is said to be peculiar to the east coast
of Australia, where it exists in countless millions. Its habitat extends along
the New South Wales coast from Cape St. George in the south to the
Solitary Islands in the north, or even beyond, a distance of nearly 300 miles.
Here the cray-fish abound in various localities and attain a great size, vary-
ing up to 7 lb. In their season they are full of flesh, which is snow-white
and of excellent quality; its flavour being quite equal, if not superior, to the
far-famed American lobster, the procuring of which affords employment for
many hundreds of people, while here in this Colony certainly not more than
twenty or thirty men are engaged in the working of these extensive and
highly prolific fisheries, and that only partially. The implements used by the
latter for the capture of cray-fish are of the most primitive description, viz.,
small circular hand-nets depending from hoops, in the bottoms of which
is placed the bait. These are sunk from a boat and suffered to remain at
the bottom of the sea for about a quarter of an hour, when they are hauled
up and their contents secured. If the fishermen are fortunate enough to
capture a few dozen for their night’s work they are quite satisfied with
the result, and forward them on to market by the first available opportunitv.
tnich are the miserable and primitive conditions under which these great
and incomparable crustacean fisheries are sought to be utilised. We import
annually large quantities of American canned lobsters ; but not a single
cray-fish taken from our own waters has ever undergone the process of can-
ning. Here is what might be under ordinary conditions a huge industry
lying almost dormant, solely for want of a moderate amount of energy and
enterprise. The fecundity of this species of crustacean is marvellous. It is
computed that the great bunches of spawn carried by the female beneath the


whole length of her tail or “flapper” contains no less than 400,000 eggs. It
sheds its ova in April in the vicinity of submarine rocks and reefs. In the
months of July, August, September, and October its condition is splendid,
and at these times its location is near the shallow foreshores of the coast
where it assembles in vast numbers. In the summer months it seeks the
deeper waters, from whence our fishermen—having no suitable appliances—
never attempt to remove it. Probably, in the near future, when the value
of our immense cray-fish grounds become duly appreciated and better under-
stood, they will be profitably developed.
Isr giving the foregoing abbreviated descriptions of the principal food-fishes
of New South Wales, it must be understood that the writer has only selected
those species which possess an intrinsic commercial value. Our waters contain
numberless other species of edible and non-edible fishes, to enumerate and fur-
nish a descriptive account of which would require infinitely more time and space
than the occasion would warrant. Suffice it to say, that the main object-of
this treatise is to clearly demonstrate the fact, not yet universally known, that
Providence has, with no niggardly hand, lavished its piscatorial favours on the
teeming waters of Australia, those of New South Wales more particularly.
This Colony presents the extraordinary anomaly of having its fisheries
stocked to repletion, while poverty of production, and abnormally high prices,
rule supreme. This deplorable stole of things, as previously commented upon,
is to be attributed principally to two causes, viz., want of enterprise and lack
of experienced sea-going fishermen. Under favourable conditions, instead of
importing great quantities of fish from other countries, we should be large
exporters, in addition to supplying our own local market to its fullest require-
ments Taking only six species of the most abundant of the fishes described
in this essay, viz., schnapper, mullet, salmon, herring, mackerel, and whiting,
there is, without question, ample room, both on and off the whole length of
the coast of New South Wales, for the continual and profitable employment
of hundreds of practical fishermen, who, if endowed with energy and enter-
prise combined with adequate equipments, would doubtless succeed beyond
their greatest expectations.
The six species of fish alluded to, if systematically manipulated, would
in themselves be sufficient to form a vast industry, and, if we take them
together with the several other species herein described, no tangible reason
exists for the continuation of w T hat may be denominated as a fish famine.
If the men and the means were forthcoming, our fisheries w r ould prove to
be second to none, either in the Southern or Northern Hemisphere; but,
under present untoward conditions, they are left to languish in their
abundance and wealth. Tor instance, let us take that splendid fish, the
schnapper, as one example of the lax manner in which our fisheries
are worked. This fish, as before stated, abounds in every direction at a
moderate distance off the coast; but the “ wide off ” grounds, for obvious
reasons, are very seldom touched by the fishermen, whose attentions are
generally confined to the inshore grounds near Sydney Heads, and a few
miles only north and south of them, which localities by this time are fairly
“ fished out,” yielding only a few straggling fish at long intervals during
the earlier summer months, when the fish move in towards the coast to
deposit their ova. Schnapper, instead of being cheap and abundant, which
it should be, is always costly and scarce. We have not to go far to seek for
the cause of such exorbitance and scarceness. The fish revel in 40 or 50
fathoms of water in the “wide off” grounds, distant from 10 to- 20 miles
seaward off the coast, according to the seasons. The fishermen, with their


small, and in many instances rickety, open boats (which are totally unfitted
for sea work) cannot reach the great bulk of the fish, so they remain content
to potter about the now almost denuded inshore grounds, in the contiguous
localities previously alluded to, where, if two or three men are fortunate
enough to capture a dozen or so for their day’s work, considering the abnor-
mally high prices they will obtain for them, they are contented. At inter-
vals, and in fine weather, amateur fishing parties, in small steamers, visit
some of these “wide off” grounds. In many instances they are successful,
returning, after a few hours’ fishing, with from 500 to 1,000 fine fish. In the
face of this, it would appear scarcely credible—nevertheless, the fact remains
to our discredit as a community—we have not a single steamer employed on
these grandly prolific schnapper fisheries. Prom these causes scarcity rules
where abundance should prevail, and we are left to deplore the unexampled
inadequacy of our fish supply.
The sea-mullet is another very important factor in our fisheries. As stated
elsewhere in this essay, it visits the New South Wales coast annually in
stupendous numbers, but, for reasons already explained, the great bulk of
these immense bodies of fish are suffered to pass by our very doors, as it
Avere, untouched, and without any attempt at interception on the part of the
fishermen. During the period of its migration, it is essentially a sea-fish ;
hence its immunity from capture by the fishermen, whose operations are unfor-
tunately restricted to the rivers and lagoons, and the foreshores of a limited
portion of the coast, or other similar localities where the seine can be made
to perform its function. In such localities, and by such means, comparatively
small detachments of the fish are secured at intervals in the season by the
fishermen, but the great bulk of the “ schools” continue on their Avay un-
molested and unheeded.
It is highly probable that the great majority of local fishermen never come
in contact Avith a school proper of sea-mullet. What the former designate
a school of mullet is nothing more than one of the small detachments of
fish which, impelled by a wonderful instinct, leaves the main body for the
purpose of ascending the rivers to deposit its ova. A school of sea-mullet
in course of migration is of vast extent, and comprises many hundreds of
tons, but our fishermen are mostly ignorant of the fact, consequently they
perforce accept these comparatively diminutive sections as representing the
Avhole of the migrating “ school.” When the many valuable qualities of the
fish are considered, it is positively astonishing that hitherto no efforts what-
ever have been made to intercept and capture even a portion of these immense
migrating bodies during their periodical and transient passage o\-er the sea
bordering on our coast.
It may be truly said that Ave heedlessly ignore the wealth with Avhich we
have been endowed by a beneficent providence. Here Ave have huge masses
of splendid and valuable fish possessing all qualities that are desirable, yet
Ave refuse to receive nature’s munificent gifts. Our hands are wantonly
Avithheld from grasping the wealth Avhich is so liberally offered for our
acceptance. It is an absolute fact that Ave prefer to import from foreign
parts that which we have in great abundance at the very threshhold, as it
were, of our home.
Under ordinary circumstances it might be deemed superfluous to reiterate
Avhat has already been written in another place in this essay, concerning our
different species of herring, pilchard, and mackerel, which, although abound-
ing in the adjacent sea at certain seasons of the year, none of them ever find
their way, when matured, to the Sydney fish market. Unlike the sea-mullet',
no portion-of them ever approaches the shallows or indents of the'-boast.


The various ££ schools ” may at times unite, hut they never dismember. Keep-
ing well to sea during the periods of their migration, they are of course
beyond the influence of the seine—the only net of any consequence used bv
the fishermen of this Colony—hence their immunity from capture. It is
scarcely conceivable that these stupendous bodies of fish should be so effectu-
ally ignored. The herring and mackerel fisheries of the old world are prized
beyond measure, while their yields are both lucrative and enormous and give
employment to thousands of people. In this Colony the same description of
fish exist in tne waters in untold myriads, but not a single human being is
employed in the industry. Notwithstanding that the neighbouring seas
absolutely teem with all the species of fish under notice, we continue to
import annually thousands of packages of herring and mackerel in various
states of preservation.
That most useful and delicious fish, the whiting, is very abundant in most
of the coastal waters of New South AV ales. It could be captured in the
spring and summer months in the shallows, which fringe nearly all the great
sandy beaches of the coast, and if efficient means of transit were forthcom-
ing could be brought to market from distances in enormous quantities ; but
under present conditions, the same old grounds contiguous to Port Jackson
are worked day and night, year after year, consequently the fish, instead of
being plentiful and cheap, continue scarce and dear. AVdiiting are, as a rule,
good keeping fish, but, as their season of plenty occurs in the hotter months
ef the year, it is a matter of impossibility, under the present primitive and
uncertain methods of transit, to bring them from any moderate distance to
market in good condition. Our whiting fisheries alone, if properlv manipu-
lated and systematically worked, would prove highly lucrative. Smoked or
kippered, they are not to be surpassed by any other fish in the world, and
would be esteemed as a delicacy by the most fastidious of gourmets. As
fresh fish they are eagerly sought for, but, although one of the most abundant
of our shallow water fishes, the supply is never in any way equal to the
demand.
Lobster-fishing on the coasts of the island of Newfoundland, and off
several parts of the mainland of North America, has during late years
reached large proportions, and has grown, by leaps and bounds, into a vast
industry, giving employment to many hundreds of people. Factories for
canning the fish are numerous in many localities, and very great quantities of
canned lobster are exported to many parts of the world, our own country
included. We, of this Colony, for a series of years past, have imported
thousands of packages of the American commodity, and continue to do so,
while we possess a coast line teeming with Australian lobster, or cray-fish,
quite equal, if not superior, in quality and flavour, to the imported article.
Having given a full descriptive account of this fish in another place, it is
needless to travel over the same ground again, except to illustrate the urgent
necessity for the proper development of our extensive, and what should be,
tinder ordinary conditions, highly profitable crustacean fisheries.
t The New South AV ales cray-fish for size and delicacy of flesh has no superior
■either in the American or English lobster. It abounds all along our coast
nnd can be captured in quantities with very little difficulty. At the present
time only a few men, certainly not more than thirty, find employment in cray-
fishing, but even these few men keep the Sydney market fairly supplied
during the season, which commences in the later part of June and concludes
,at the end of November. After the latter period the crustaceans move out
into deeper water from which the fishermen, not possessing adequate


appliances, cannot dislodge them. On all occasions deep-sea fishing con-
stitutes the hete noire of the Australian fisherman. He is quite at homeln the
harbours or the shallows of the coast, which he will coutinue to work incon-
tinently, when those fail him he gets very few or none at all. He either cannot
or will not try his fortune in the blue waters of the deep sea.
The full-grown cray-fish contains more meat than could be extracted from
two matured lobsters, while the flesh within its ten great legs or claws is of
exquisite flavour, and with the “coral” or immature spawn contained in the
abdomen of the animal, are much appreciated by those who are experienced
in such matters.
_ It is to be hoped that the time is not far distant when these immense and
highly valuable crustacean fisheries will become systematically developed.
There is ample and profitable employment for numbers of experienced men
in the direction indicated, and that in the near future one (or more) lobster-
canning factories will be seen in full operation on the coast of New South
Wales is greatly to be desired.
Taking our imports of fish from the “ New South Wales Statistical
ter” for five years, 1886-90, as per annexed extract, it will be found that the
net value of preserved fish imported into the Colony for the period stated
amounted to nearly £600,000, while for the same period, the amount rea-
lised by the sale of fish in the Sydney fish-market, under the control of the
Municipal Council, only reached in the aggregate about £182,000. These
figures go tc prove that our imports of fish for the five years named exceeded
more than three-fold the home production. In round numbers we im-
ported during those five years the enormous quantity of 25,000,0001 b. offish,
while during the same period we produced from "our own local fisheries,
the following quantities :- -275,198 bushels mixed net fi§sh, 31,410 dozen sea-
mullet, 321 doz. mackerel,* 2,881 doz. salmon, with the addition of line
fish as follows : —8,221 doz. schnapper, and 1,281 doz. assorted fish, comprising
jew-fish, king-fish,-teraglin, cod, &c., &c.; 19,559 doz. cray-fish, and 9,119
baskets of prawms. It must be understood that the fish enumerated above
were sold daily by public auction during the five years 1886-90, under the
direction of an inspector appointed by the City Council, consequently the
figures here given may be accepted as authentic and correct. Erom the same
source it is notified that during the period alluded to 12,558 bushels and 10
cart-loads of edible fish of various descriptions were condemned by the
Inspector and destroyed as being unfit for human consumption. This
lamentable and great waste of fish-food is much to be deplored, the more so
because such serious destruction is easily preventable ; but large as the
quantity may be considered, it does not form a tenth part of the fish actually
destroyed at the stations along the coast, where, for the want of efficient
and regular methods of transit, quite as much fish is rendered valueless as
reaches the market in good condition.
It will be seen inter alia that during the five years mentioned 9,119
baskets or bushels of prawns were disposed of in the fish-market, but this
quantity, large though it may appear, does not by any means represent the whole
amount caught for the period named, as large quantities of this remarkably
fine species of crustacean are otherwise disposed of, not only by professional
fishermen but by numberless amateur prawn netters. It may be remarked
in this place that the splendid prawns of this Colony for quantity, flavour,
and size, are not to be equalled or surpassed in any other part of the world.
* Immature, or half-tcrowu.


£
s.
cl.
1880
...
... 102,991
0
0
1SS7
...
...
• • .
... 97,875
0
0
1888
...
... ... • • •
... 112,818
0
0
1889
...
... ,,, ,,,
• • •
... 130,757
0
0
1890
...
... 128,795
0
0
Total for the five years ...
• • •
£508,230
0
0
In order to more fully illustrate the miserable maimer in which the
hsheries of New South Wales are worked, it is necessary to requote a few
or the figures previously furnished. In the first place it is quite apparent
that notwithstanding the annual advent of stupendous schools of several
species of the herring family on our coast, not even a specimen of any
description has ever been seen in the local fish-market. Mackerel visits our
aters in very nearly the same abundance, and what do we find ? In a
peiiod of five years, out of the myriads of these fish we have received, as
the whole produce of the fishery, 324 dozen of immature fish caught in the
haibour, but not a solitary one from the sea. Salmon, for the same period,
are represented by 2,881 doz., while it is no exaggeration to affirm that this
species of fish passes along our seaboard annually in thousands of tons.
Schnapper, which abound in numberless localities all along the coast, and
to use a fisherman s term “are as thick as flies,” have furnished the market
within the same extended period with 8,124 dozen, which should have been
under ordinary conditions as many thousands instead of dozens. 34,410
dozen represent a five years’ cajiture of sea-mullet, being at the rate of
7,000 dozen per annum. If these splendid fish were appreciated at their full
a alue and systematically fished for, tons should take the place of dozens.
Line-fish, exclusive of schnapper, are represented for the half decade,com-
prising jew -fish, king-fish, teraglin, cod, &c.,by 1,281 dozen, or something
less than 260 dozen per annum. Considering the v r ast abundance of these
\aliens species of deep-water fish in all directions along the coast, the output
is ridiculous beyond conception, and only tends to further illustrate the
gross incapacity and utter absence of enterprise on the part of the local
fishermen. 19,559 dozen cray-fish is, considering all things, a fairly con-
siderable item of production for the five years named, and yet, under more
favourable conditions, the number should hai r e been exceeded by many scores
of thousands. Ihe only ivonder is that so many should have been captured
with the present primitive and totally inadequate appliances of our fishermen,
and the restricted number of them employed in the crustacean fisheries.
In concluding this treatise it may b§p said advisedly, and without fear of
contradiction, that in no other country of the w r orld are the fisheries so
neglected and mismanaged as those of New South Wales. Our waters
absolutely teem Avith numberless species of fine edible fish, but AA'e refuse to
utilise them, preferring to patronise foreign countries for more than three-
fourths ot our fish supply. Such an anomaly is greatly to be deplored, but it
is to be hoped that the near future will provide a remedy, though this can only
be supplied by the advent of numbers of practically experienced fishermen,
Avell acquainted with all the usages of deep-sea fishing. Men like this, Avith
the addition of improved modern implements and other necessary appliances,
Avould of a certainty render the grandly prolific fisheries of New South Wales
second to none in the Southern Hemisphere.
Preserved fish imported into New South Wales during the years 1886-90
inclusive: Value.
Quantity in round numbers 25,000,000 lb


Value of fish sold in the Sydney fish-market, the product of the local fisheries
during the same period :
£ s. d.
18S6 84,256 17 3
1887 31,309 17 0
1888 . . 38,057 16 0
1889 39,964 17 3
1890 38,658 1 9
Total for the five years... ... £182,247 9 3
Approximate quantities, 188 G-90 :
Mixed net-fish... ... ... ... ... 275,189 bushels.
Sea-mullet ... ... ... ... ... 34,410 dozen.
Salmon... ... 2,881 „
... ... ... ... ... 324 „
Schnapper ... 8,224 „
Other line or sea-fish... ... ... ... 1,281 „
Crustaceans
Cray-fish ... ... ... ... 19,559 dozen.
Prawns ... ... ... ... 9,119 baskets or bushels.
Pish received in bad condition and condemned as unfit for human consump-
tion, 1886-90 :
12,558 bushels.
10 cart-loads.
Fisheries at Lord Howe Island.
This island is situated about 400 miles north-east from Sydney Heads, and
is a dependency of New South W ales. The enormous quantity of fish contained
in the seas surrounding it is truly remarkable. The innumerable islands
of the South Seas are proverbial for the numberless species and great
abundance of their fishes, but Lord Howe Island stands out prominently
above them all in its piscatorial development. What it is that attracts the
fish in such vast and unprecedented numbers around this solitary island is
difficult to imagine; but there is no questioning the fact that fishes of the
finest species and in almost inexhaustible supply are at all seasons of the
year congregated around and near that locality Trumpeter, schnapper,
cod, blue-fish, king-fish, groper, et hoc genus omne, are located there in end-
less profusion, all of them carnivorous and taking fish-bait freely. No
difficulty whatever would be experienced in capturing them in vast quantities
and moreover the place is eminently adapted for a fish-curing establishment
on an extensive scale The island is inhabited by a few Europeans who are
employed in raising farm produce, &c., and vessels on their way to and
from Norfolk Island make periodical visits. There is good anchorage for
vessels of moderate burden inside the reef. If efficient means of transit were
available, large quantities of fresh fish of the finest species might be periodi-
cally forwarded to both the Sydney and Brisbane markets, from which cities
the island is nearly eqni-distant. As a fish-curing station it would in all
probability prove to be unequalled by any other locality situated in the
southern seas.
* Unmatured, or only half-grown, not captured at sea, but caught in Sydney harbour.


Elizabeth Eeef is only a comparatively short distance from Lord Howe
island. I his locality is likewise remarkable for the super-abundance of its
tish, winch consist mostly of the same species as those described in the
neighbouring waters of .Lord Howe.
It may be safely asserted that in no other place south of the Equator, are
shenes to be found in any way approaching, in density or magnitude, to
those here mentioned, in proportion to the extent of the coast-line under
consideration.
[TOne Map.]
Sydney; Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lB92.


N*or LiUi.D.9225
151' 40
151° 50
15 2°
152°10
/ U ,. 'N7\ 22 S3 61 \
/ \ 40
IG \2I
/ 2 \
6/ "
\s' / \ 44
Maitland \ t
Y / 3 13 30 \
58
70 \
\
/ Fullerton)
A Cov 7
Y 74 18 \ 51
70
A, 26 \
33'
/ "< 2i \
7#y\
Xv
/i-fvlk
A®!
/ , \ 13 16 Y 68
. \
/ \
I PORT HUNTER *8 \
63
70
s Head 33 '
3250
w' 3 '\ 22 ' \
17 , a a\
’ "" K \.
68
71
72
X Little Red Head jV \
■ ! ' 4
17
/J . \
\ fJ
12 17 34 40\ 56
Red Head \ cc
77
72
u
Y Y
/ 12 \ 61
/ 17 28 \ S4
73
33°10'
/
Si(\
\ / 14
33 \ 8/
\ 64
75 \72^
76
V"
J
X IS 20 42 \ ee
n Y
. \\ Green, Island \
72 \
78
33
o
\ 1 c/"
XXA Reids Mistake \ '
c?
\f r
(
S \ 19 ' \ 77
\ \ 30 \ 1 72 75
\ 80
as
&JV /
\ SE' 40 \ T
„ 78
H
( Cafhtptnfe Hill Bax’ \ *
73
j Morrissi
N Li. "i 5 45 07 70
I y^n\
f \ .. 33 52 Xj \
77
V
\
V \
3 \ 24 ’ \ 7/
88
80 Y-
3320
\
Wybunfi Head \
O ,
yA .
A\
-t / 5
IS « 34 CO 6S\
18 \ 37 \ 64
BirrLJslaNi \
78
\
80
> V
73
3310
1 / \
Yl 7t> \ " 577 \
63
73
\ -Sy*' J
\ o . /
p
dungaree Norah \ \
14 2(7 \e' 64 '
72
82
/ / IS 23
s'
-y-^L
If 14
zt \
" 47 <*
\
82
=> M
zu
Knrajji
A 7
\ \ 8
21 \ 67 \
27 \78
23 \ 68 74 \
« 42 \ " V-
82 s'-
33°30'
r*
V\ 33 75
) Yumbool ££ . '7t
77 \
82
/ ' '
&
\
f u \
py 38 Y
23 \ a#
3320'
r*
54 \ , . '
33 ,'764
75
>
larrag
A 22
M Haven \
\ 23 40 - \
7Q 82
2
Ggsford
J Boy .-■•■■ £?
\ {? , \ " 4d
Fin&Poihl
\
\
a
& ”
80
\
\
«<YJX . -
j Secorui PoiAl 22
77
31 \
Jkk_ TV-1 /?
\7>> sJr
y 1 \ M \
25 \
73
rs
r i
> \\
u? 1 y v -
AA
<c x 5
I f /
7
30 \ 38 es 70 \ ..
■V 30
is' i <
<n
Box or Hawk Head \
\ BROKEN BAY \ 47 JlfP
V 74 30 \
Baranjuee Head . " /f
2e \ “ G3 70
78
77
82
36
j$r\ \
/A 3* A'Vv
v\sk I
AX
Vi \ Y s
V
»C > (\
13
Bungan B
\ 63 80 '
38 \ 69
ean
86
YCAt
Yulgola-HeaH \ —4 76 gz
\ 15 33 33 r-, \ S0 k \
33 50
%
>v j
/ . Narrabecn \
\ \ ry
"7 lerriinetta Head 55 rg
i \ 24 \
1 A \ 70
v \ 25 4C \ YY
V
85 \
rC \
116
\ V
\ Reef
|33°40
\ *t
\ 26 ' 7,<f
78
113
L De
eVliv Hear!
20. 34 \
V 5Y
f >\ m-S %
\ j,,. SO 63
■) North* Point 70 \
1 St 70 74
PORT. JACKSON 70 :s
\
\
z
Voru
ySydner
koulcr Soulli Head K '
ff El e cm c Jdght R-evol GD
\ Kays eg /V
88
34°
k RJV/:}^
A
ikY \ A \
f SYDNEY 4. 5i " « \
86.'"'
v L ** \
T Coogee Bay 48 7n - \
3350
/
j
\ 34 \ 54 '
F Moroubra Hay 4/
VS 43 \ W S
\ 103
<: vr l,ong,Bay T 72
\ 78
Y c a p e Bcuiks \ 70
\
/h\
i Y \
o
?07AA
\
100
\ ,
\A4Y-
'''f\ 27 56 \
S Cape Solandjer \ /G
4nu
a;* u
7 ) e7 K
J ) 17 82
68 68 36
18 54 _ V,,
PORT HACKING /.? CS
5 70
vjk Port Hacking Point \ -
120
3410
/
V K
is
■ ,'112
88
34
\ '■
V 47 \ . 7T
J\ 74 57 72 \ J
I Manley Beach.
l\
Wattamolla,, 5C 73
A
.<>
(v
/\i
100
\
Ok V
/
\ 55
c
A X/t
w
x
e# w
111
X
YV C
As<'
J Garie Becuch \ €S \
r 22 \ \
122
-34°2Ci
\
4
-I
33 \ 64 80 \
\ '
Y t—
v-
.Y
Wi‘. "\dJHAIET"
400
3410
.-AA
v4
Y
A
>'
7# Coal Cliff
u\
!)■
J ' OF PART OF COAST
LINE
is .9
(ff Cliflo
i‘V~T4lS''?, r V)7* Sr\\ (rTril STfl
s?a , r? s~
A
1’ \D
J)> I.ong, Point “
■Sj zp<
In / . '' \
fEW OTM
MJ
V- ,Q
\
Bulli
3430
\ A>
v®0
A/
V u
\2S SCALE OF STATUTE MILES
\\ A/Aa
1892
8 Bidl ambi Po
At
d ><
\j i4 m Figures denote Soundings in Fathoms
t f Towndgi Point \
\ ; N .
fvL\
15
\ Rai Iway Line s shewn thus —=*=
1
3420
Xa
y
23 \ 34 Lighthouses shewn thus 1r
200 \
42>
a
A
v... \
YA
\
—' Wt Wollongong \ /c \ 84
x W\\ 11 * , 24 \ 4 O''' 7/ \
''Es tkt />vc IsUutds\' 80 \ S4
108
\
1
CO
A
b \
**> V.
M, 3 34 \ \
r 7 * Red Point \ 66 \
7\ 1' \ 77 77 \
// 8 A \ 86
106
25 \ \
102
B440
oS 1
\ \ 12 \ 67 \
\ \ \ \S(>
A\ 17 31 \
WijuLaing Island \ \ -
-<
S 20 \ 70
V, Shell Harbour 48 \ 77 ■ ' ”
1
Point Bass \
\wo
34 30
£
Y
y ,\ 73 92
\ 165
18 30 Y'
7 10
. V
. r _-0 \
X tw
\ Xn
rV 3
L« 24 A 74
87 \
122
280
k^-KTarna
\ -
a .
Ay
24 JS 55 \ 70
113
Dm»n
if APawn
150 40
150 50' longitude East from Greenwich.Br
151°10
, Sig/2h4 3-92
fhoto-lithographedal the Government ftinting Office
Transferred to stone and “printed at the Department of Lands, Sydney, N, S. W
August 1892






