

COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
THE COMMONWEALTH
ELECTORAL LAW
EXPLAINED ...
Prepared under instructions from the
Honourable KING O’MALLEY, M.P.,
Minister of State for Home Adairs,
Administering the Commonwealth
Electoral Act.
(R. C. OLDHAM,
Chief Electoral Officer for the Commonwealth.)
DEPARTMENT OF HOME AFFAIRS,
MELBOURNE, 15th JANUARY, 1013.




COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
THE COMMONWEALTH
ELECTORAL LAW
EXPLAINED ...
I’repared under instructions from the
Honourable KING O’MALLEY, M.P.,
Minister of State for Borne Affairs,
Administering the Commonwealth
Electoral Act. ——
(11. C. OLDHAM,
Chief Electoral Officer for the Commonwealth.)
DEPARTMENT OF HOME AFFAIRS,
MELBOURNE, 15th JANUARY, 1913.
C. 566.


CONTENTS.
First Part .. Enrolment, Paragraphs (1) to
(22).
Second Part .. Nominations, Paragraphs (23)
to (32).
Third Part .. Voting, Paragraphs (33) to
(46).
Fourth Pai.t .. Candidates Expenses, Para-
graphs (47) to (51).
General and
Special Notes Paragraphs (52) to (54).


INDEX.
A.
Paragraph
Age for enrolment .. .. .. 3
Aboriginals and aliens disqualified .. IQ
Acknowledgment of enrolment .. .. 13
Appeal against being struck off roll .. 21
Absent voters .. .. .. 39, 41, 42
Association returns of expenditure .. 4Q
B.
British subject—meaning of .. .. 6, 7
Ballot papers .. .. .. 3ft
C.
Compulsory enrolment .. .. .. 1,3
Charitable aid docs not disqualify .. ft
Children of foreign parents may enrol .. 9
Criminals Disqualified .. .. .. 10
Change of enrolment .. .. .. 12, 14
Claim for enrolment .. .. .. 12
Court proceedings for failure to enrol 19, 20, 21
Candidate’s consent to nomination .. 31
„ expenses .. .. 47, 48, 49
f


D.
Paragraph
descendants of foreign parents .. .. 9
Disqualified from enrolment ..30, 11
~ ~ nomination .. .. 24
deposit on nomination .. .. .. 29
„ returned if candidate dies before
date of ©lection ~ .. 32
m.
Enrolment—residence .. .. .. 1,2
compulsory .. .. 3
twenty-one days allowed .. 4
penalty for not enrolling .. 4
charitable aid does not dis-
qualify .. .. .. 5
foreign women may qualify' ;. 8
children of foreign parents .. G
forms of .. ~ 12
how to secure .. .. 13
electors to be notified .. 13
change of ~ .. .. 3 5
failure to apply for .. .. 19
Electoral maps and rolls—where purchased 3 5
where inspected IG, 17
Electors may object to names on rolls .. 20
assistance to on polling day .. 34, 44
only those on roll may vote .. 35
Elections—day of .. .. .. 33
ballot papers ~ .. .. 36
Expenses of candidates .. 47, 48, 49


F.
Paragraph
Fine for not enrolling ~ .. 4
Foreigner cannot enrol ~ .. .. 7
Foreign woman may qualify by marriage .. 8
children eligible for enrolment .. 9
Forms of enrolment .. ~ .. 12
Failure to enrol ... .. 19
1.
Inspection of roll .. ~ X G, 17, 18
L
Lunatics disqualified .. », .. 10
Leagues’ returns of expenses ~ .. 49
M.
Marriage may qualify foreign woman to
enrol .. .. .. .. 8
Mark may be made as signature .. .. 13
Maps—where purchased .. 15
Members of Parliament disqualified .. 25
N.
Natural born subjects defined .. ~ 1, G
Naturalized subjects defined .. .. 1, 7
position ©f children ~ .. 9
position ©n marriage .. 11


Paragraph
Nomination-conditions of 23, 24, 25, 26
place of .. - .. 27
time of .. .. 28
deposit .. .. .. 29
no withdrawal .. .. 30
candidates consent .. 31
Newspapers to furnish returns .. .. 50
signed articles .. . . 61
0.
Old-age pensioners entitled to enrolment .. 5
Objections to enrolment.. .. ..20,21
Organizations’ returns .. .. .. 49
P.
Pensioners entitled to enrolment .. .. 5
Penalty for non-enrolment .. .. 4
on witness .. .. .. 13
Postage fee on enrolment claim .. .. 13
Parliament—State member disqualified .. 25
Polling .. .. .. 33
assistance to electors .. . . 34, 44
who may vote .. . . .. 35
ballot-papers .. . . .. 36
where to vote .. .. 37. 38, 39
how to vote .. .. .. 40, 41
before polling day .. .. 42
spoilt ballot-papers .. .. 43
adjournment of .. .. .. 46
absent voters .. .. .. 41, 42


Q.
Paragraph
Qualification for enrolment .. 1,2, 5,8, 9
for nomination .. .. 23
R.
Residence prior to enrolment .. .. 1,2
Residence—change of .. .. .. 1-t
Rolls—where purchased .. .. 15
where inspected .. .. 10, 17, 18
supplemental ~ .. .. 22
Referendum .. ~ .. .. 36
Returns by candidates .. .. .. 47
by organizations .. .. 49
by newspapers . * ~ 50
S.
Sentenced persons disqualified .. .. 10
Signatures to Enrolment .. .. 3 3
Summonses for failure to enrol .. .. 19
Supplemental roll .. .. .. 22
State member disqualified .. .. 25
Scrutineers .. .. .. .. 45
Signed articles .. .. .. .. 51
T.
Telegraphing .. .. .. .. 52
Traitors disqualified .. .. .. 10
Transfer of enrolment .. .. .. ]2, 14
Trades Union returns .. .. .. 49


V.
Paragraph
Voting .. .. .. • • 33
who may vote .. .. .. 33
ballot-papers .. .. .. 38
where electors may vote .. 37, 38, 39
how to vote .. .. • ■ 40, 41
before polling day .. 42
spoilt ballot-papers .. .. 43
assistance to electors to vote .. 34, 44
adjournment of .. ... . • 48
absent voters .. ~ .. 41, 42
W.
Woman acquires right to enror on marriage 8
loses right on marriage .. 11
Witnesses to enrolment .. .. 13
Withdrawal of nomination .. 30


THE COMMONWEALTH
ELECTORAL LAW EXPLAINED.
FIRST PART.-ENROLMENT.
PERSONS ENTITLED TO BE ENROLLED.
(1) Every man or woman not under twenty-
one years of age, whether married or un-
married, who is a natural born* or natural-
ized t subject of the King, and has lived in
Australia for some period of his or her life
for at least six months continuously, and who
lives in a Subdivision of a Federal Electorate
and has so lived or at least one month, and
who is not disquaafled,t is entitled to be en-
rolled as an Elector.
RESIDENCE PRIOR TO ENROLMENT.
(2) A condition necessary to enrolment is
that the man or woman lives and has lived
at least one month immediately prior to an
application for enrolment in a Subdivision of
a Federal Electorate.
Note. —The month referred to herein may
be included in the period of six months speci-
fied in paragraph (1), when that six months
is immediately prior to enrolment.
* See paragraph (6'. t See paragraph (7).
+ See paragraph (10).


ENROLMENT COMPTTLSOET.
(3) Every person who is qualified to be en-
rolled as an Elector, and who is not enrolled,
is compelled by law to apply for enrolment
within twenty-one days after he becomes so
qualified.
Thus a person who reaches the age of
twenty-one years, and who is otherwise quali-
fied, must apply for enrolment within twenty-
one days of his twenty-first birthday; and *a
person (otherwise qualified) who moves his
place of living to another Subdivision must
apply within twenty-one days after complet-
ing one month’s residence in the Subdivision.
PENALTY FOE NON-ENEOLMENT.
(4) Adults who are qualified, but not en-
rolled, and neglect to send in a claim for
enrolment within twenty-one days from the
date they become qualified are liable to a
penalty of £2. -f
PEESONS DECEIVING AID.
(5) The Commonwealth law does not debar
from enrolment an adult in receipt of chari-
table aid as an inmate of a public institution
or otherwise. Old-age pensioners (who do not
receive a charitable dole—but their legitimate
right) are entitled to enrolment if otherwise
qualified.
• See paragraphs (10) aad (11). t See paragraph (11).


MEANING OF ‘ ‘ NATURAL BORN”
SUBJECT.
(6) A “ natural born ” subject of the
King may be taken to be a person born in
the British Dominions, or a person born
abroad whose father or grandfather on his
or her father’s side was bom in the British
Dominions.
MEANING OF “ NATURALIZED ”
SUBJECT.
(7) A “ naturalized ” subject of the King
includes those who have been naturalized
under the law of the United Kingdom, or
naturalized under the law of the Common-
wealth, or under the law of an Australian
State before the commencement of the
Naturalisation Act 1903.
Note. —A foreigner cannot by length of
residence or by the acquisition of property in
the Commonwealth or by any means other
than naturalization secure the qualifications
necessary to enable him to declare that he is
a naturalized subject and entitled to vote.
WOMEN WHO MAY QUALIFY BY
MARRIAGE.
(3) An adult woman who is not a British
subject and who would for that reason only
be disqualified from enrolment becomes quali-
fied for enrolment as a Commonwealth Elector
on marrying a man who is a British subject.


ox who afterwards becomes a British subject,
provided the qualification respecting resi-
dence* is complied with.
DESCENDANTS OP FOREIGN PARENTS.
(9) Persons not under twenty-one years of
age born within the Commonwealth of foreign
parents are eligible for enrolment. Those born
abroad of foreign parents who afterwards
become naturalized are deemed to be eligible
if during their infancy they have become re-
sident in the Commonwealth with their father
or mother,
DISQUALIFIED PERSONS.
(10) No aboriginal natives of Australia,
Asia, Africa, or the Pacific Islands (excepting
New Zealand) can be enrolled, even though
British subjects, unless they have, within the
meaning of Section 4.1 of the Constitution,
acquired the right of voting at Parliamentary
Elections for a State House of Assembly or
Legislative Assembly.
Note. —No person who is of unsound mind
or who is attainted of treason or who is under
or subject to sentence for an offence punish-
able by imprisonment for one year or longer
shall be entitled to vote. A person who has
served the sentence is not disqualified from
voting.
• See paragraph (-).


LOSS OF EIGHT OF ENROLMENT.
(XI) An adult woman who is a natural
born or naturalized subject of the King loses
her right of enrolment if she marries a
foreigner.
FORMS OF ENROLMENT AND TRANSFER
OR CHANGE OF ENROLMENT.
(12) A form printed on a card, and called
an “ Electoral Claim,” for use in securing
enrolment, or transfer from one subdivision
to another, or change of enrolment, may be
obtained without fee tm application to any
Postmaster, Commonwealth Electoral Regis-
trar, or Commonwealth Returning Officer.
Note. —A form, called an ‘ ‘ Application for
Correction or Alteration,” may also be
obtained to meet the following cases; —
(i) where an Elector changes his or
her address, but does not move
outside the subdivision;
(ii) where an Elector desires to correct
any error in his or her enrolment;
or,
(iii) where a female Elector changes her
name by marriage.
METHOD OF SECURING ENROLMENT.
(13) The Electoral Claim* may be filled in
without difficulty, and must be signed on each
side by the claimant or applicant with his
or her personal signature.
*Se) paragraph (12)


The signature of the claimant must be
made in the presence of a witness, who may
be either an elector or a person qualified to
be an elector. There is no objection to a
relative of the claimant acting as a witness
provided such relative is qualified.
Note.—Any witness who witnesses a claim
without having seen the claimant sign it, or
without personally,knowing or satisfying him.
self as to the facts, is liable to a fine of £5O.
If a claimant is unable from any cause to
sign his or her name, he or she may make a
mark as his or her personal signature, pro-
vided that such mark is made in' the presence
of the person who signs as witness.
The claim, when correctly filled in and
witnessed in accordance with the directions
contained on the form, must be sent or de-
livered to the Electoral Registrar for the
Subdivision of the Electorate in which the
Elector claims to be enrolled. An envelope,
partly addressed, is provided for the purpose,
and the claim may be sent through the post
free of postage.
If the claim is in order, and the Registrar
is satisfied that the claimant is entitled to be
enrolled, the Registrar is required to enrol the
Elector and to notify the Elector that he or
she has been so enrolled; but in any case the
Registrar is required to acknowledge the
receipt of the claim, and to inform the
claimant or applicant as to the result of the
claim or application.


CHANGE OF RESIDENCE.
(14) Electors changing their place of
living to another Electorate, or another Sub-
division of the same Electorate, must, after
they have lived for a month at their new
address, send in a claim for transfer or change
of enrolment.
Note. —If the Elector is only temporarily
living away from his usual residence, even if
the period extends over one month, it is not
necessary that a-change of enrolment should
be made.
WHERE ROLLS AND ELECTORAL MAPS
MAT EE PURCHASED.
(15) Maps showing the names and boun-
daries of Federal Electorates may be obtained
at a cost of Is. each from the Government
Printer in the Capital city of the State.
Bolls for each Electorate within the whole
State may also be purchased there.
Bolls for the Electorate or Subdivision
thereof may be secured from Eeturning
Officers, and at all important Post Offices in
the Electorate.
Note. —The prices are 2s. for the roll for
each Electorate, and 6d. for the roll for each
Subdivision of the Electorate.
Supplemental rolls for the Electorate are
sold at 6d. each, and for the Subdivision at
3d. each.


WHEEE FEINTED EOLLS MAT BE
INSPECTED.
(16) The latest print of the roll for the
Subdivision may be inspected, without charge,
at Post Offices, and the offices of the Electoral
Eegistrara, and at other public buildings
within the Subdivision.
A map of the Subdivision will be found
opposite the front page of the roll for each
Subdivision of an Electorate.
WHEEE THE UP-TO-DATE EOLL FOE THE
SUBDIVISION MAY BE INSPECTED.
(17) The Eegistrar for each Subdivision
keeps an official roll constantly up to date
in his office. This official roll contains in
manuscript a complete record of all the names
added to or removed from the roll since the
latest print of the roll, and may be inspected
without charge at all convenient times during
the Eegistrar’s office hours.
Note.—The Eegistrar is usually located at
the local Post Office; but in any case informa-
tion as to the use of electoral forms or tjie
address of the Eegistrar may be obtained
from the Postmaster.
ELECTOE SHOULD SATISFY HIMSELF OE
HBESELF AS TO COEEECT ENROLMENT,
(IS) In view of the operation of the law
respecting compulsory-enrolment, it is of the
utmost importance to each Elector that he or


she should satisfy himself or herself, by an
inspection of the roll or otherwise, that his
or her name is correctly enrolled.
COURT PROCEEDINGS FOR FAILURE TO
ENROL.
(19) It is the duty of the Electoral Regis-
trar to report the names of persons who are
entitled to enrolment and have failed to apply
for it. In such cases, the Divisional Returning
Officer is required to issue summonses against
the persons in default. The person concerned
may either attend the Court, or send to the
Divisional Returning Officer a statutory decla-
ration setting out his answer to the charge.
This statutory declaration must be produced
in Court by the Officer unless he decides to
withdraw the charge.
ELECTORS MAT OBJECt TO NAMES ON
ROLL.
(20) An objection to the retention of a
name on the roll for a Division on the ground
that the person concerned is not' entitled to
be so enrolled may be lodged on a form with
the Divisional Returning Officer by any Elec-
tor enrolled on the same Division roll or by
an Officer. A deposit of ss. must accompany
each objection lodged by an Elector not being
an Electoral Officer. Notice of the objection
must be at once given by the Returning
Officer to the person objected to. This notice
may be posted to his last known place of
abode.


DETERMINING OBJECTIONS.
(21) After the receipt of the answer of
the person objected to, or after the expira-
tion of twenty days from the posting of the
notice, the Officer must determine the objec-
tion. The person objected to may be present.
If the objection lodged by an Elector is
deemed by the Officer to be frivolous, the ss.
deposit is forfeited to the King, and the
objector may be ordered to pay the person
objected to a reasonable allowance up to £5.
If the Officer upholds the objection, he must
strike the name off the roll. An appeal
against the Officer’s decision may be made to
a Police Court.
SUPPLEMENTAL BOLL.
(22) Prior to each General Election, and at
such other times as may be directed, a Sup-
plemental Roll is prepared setting out addi-
tions since the latest print. The names of
Electors enrolled up to the issue of the writ
for the election, but whose names do not
appear on the Principal Roll, may be found
en the Supplemental Roll.


SECOND PART.-NOMINATIONS.
WHO MAT BE NOMINATED.
(23) A person may be nominated for the
Senate or House of Representatives if he or
she co in pi) with the following conditions: —
(а) iu of the full age of twenty-one
years;
(б) Is an Elector, or is qualified to be
an Elector;
(c) Has been for three years a resident
within the Commonwealth, and is
a British born subject, or a
naturalized British subject for at
least five years.
DISQUALIFIED FROM NOMINATION.
(24) Persons who cannot be nominated or
sit in Parliament are—
(i) Those who are under allegiance,
obedience, or adherence to a foreign
- power, or are subjects or citizens
of a foreign power, or entitled to>
the privileges of such;
(ii) Those attainted of treason, or under
sentence or subject to be sentenced
for a crime punishable by imprison-
ment for one year or longer;


(iii) Those who are undischarged bank-
rupts or insolvents;
(iv) Those'who hold. offices of profit under
the Crown, or pensions payable
during the pleasure of the Crown
out of Commonwealth revenues
(excepting Ministers of State, per-
sons receiving pay, half-pay, or
pensions as officers or members of
the King’s Navy or Army, or per-
sons receiving pay as officers or
members of the Commonwealth
Naval or Military Forces whose
services are not wholly employed
by the Commonwealth);
(v) Those who have any direct or in-
direct pecuniary interest in any
agreement with the Public Service
of the Commonwealth otherwise
than as members, and in common
with other members of an incorpo-
rated company consisting of more
than twenty-five persons.
ONE MEMBER ONE HOUSE.
(25) A Member of the one House of the
Federal Parliament is ineligible to sit in the
other. A Member of a State Parliament
■desiring to become a candidate for the Fede-
ral Parliament must resign his seat in the
State House at least fourteen days prior to
the date of nomination.


FILLING IN THE NOMINATION PAPERS.
(26) A nomination of a candidate for the
Senate or House of Representatives must
name the candidate, his place of residence
and occupation, and be signed by at least six
Electors entitled to vote at the election in
question*.
WHERE TO NOMINATE.
(27) Nominations for the Senate may be
made to the Commonwealth Electoral Officer
for the State in which the election is to be
held; and nominations for the House of
Representatives may be made to the Divi-
sional Returning Officer for the Division in
which the election is to be held.
TIME TO NOMINATE.
(28) Candidates may be nominated at my
time after the issue of the writ and bei cre
Noon on the day of nomination.
THE DEPOSIT.
(29) A deposit of £25 (in money, or in
bank notes, or in a banker’s cheque)* must
accompany each nomination. This sum will
be returned if the candidate obtains more
than one-flfth of the number of votes polled
by the lowest successful candidate.
‘Note.—A banker’s cheque does not mean
a cheque drawn by a private person and
marked “ Correct ” by a bank manager or
other banking official.
• See paragraph (SI),


NO WITHDRAWAL.
(30) There is no provision for the with-
drawal of a candidate’s nomination after the
nomination hour.
CANDIDATE’S CONSENT.
(31) No nomination is valid unless the
person nominated consents to act if elected.
If the consent is given in the form on the
foot of the nomination paper its sufficiency
will not be questioned. The consent may also
be given on a separate paper, and in any
form that the Commonwealth Electoral Officer
or Divisional Returning Officer receiving the
nomination paper deems to be satisfactory.
RETURN OF DEPOSIT IN CASE OF
CANDIDATE’S DEATH.
(32) In the case of the death of any candi-
date before the date of election, the deposit
lodged by him shall be returned to his per-
sonal representatives.


THIRD PART-VOTING.
THE VOTING.
(33) Saturday is the day fixed for Federal
Elections. The poll opens at 8 a.m., and
closes when all electors present in the polling
booth at 8 p.m. and desiring to vote have
voted.
OFFICER IN CHARGE OF POLLING
BOOTH.
(34) Each polling booth is placed in charge
of an official called a Presiding Officer. The
Presiding Officer and his assistants are re-
quired to afford every assistance to Electors.
LIST OF VOTERS.
(35) Only those persons who are enrolled
en a Federal Electoral Roll are entitled to
vote at a Federal Election or Referendum.
Prior to the opening of the ■ poll, each Pre-
siding Officer is furnished by the Returning
Officer with the official Roll of Electors for
the Subdivision, which is called the “Certified
List of Voters.”
BALLOT-PAPERS.
(36) Where a Senate Election and an
Election for the House of Representatives and
one or mere Referendums are held on the


same day, there will be issued to each Elector
one ballot-paper for the Senate Election, one
ballot-paper for the House of Representatives
Election, and one special form having thereon
a ballot-paper for each Referendum.
Note. —If there are (say) six Referendums,
all the six ballot-papers for the Referendum
questions will be printed on the same piece
of paper.
WHERE ELECTORS MAY VOTE.
(37) Electors may vote at any polling
booth in the Commonwealth. The most con-
venient way of voting is for the Elector on
polling day to attend a polling booth in the
Subdivision for which he or she is enrolled.
The procedure then is simple. He or she has
merely to state his or her name and address,,
and answer a few questions regarding identity
and qualification to vote which the Presiding
Officer may put.
ABSENT VOTING ON POLLING DAY.
(38) An Elector who finds it inconvenient
to attend a polling booth in his or her Sub-
division may vote at any other polling place in
the Commonwealth at which a polling booth
is open on polling day after making a de-
claration before the Presiding Officer as to-
identity and other necessary matters. In
this ease the Elector votes as an absent voter.


ABSENT VOTING PRIOR TO POLLING
DAY.
(39) An Elector who has reason to believe
that on polling day he or she will not be
within any Federal Electorate (or, in other
words, will be outside the Commonwealth, or
within the Federal Capital Territory, or
the Northern Territory, or in Papua),
may vote at any, time after the issue of the
writ for the Election and before 6 p.m. on
the day before polling day, after making a
declaration before an Electoral Registrar.
The Electoral Registrar will be provided with
the necessary documents.
Note.— (1) It is customary for the writ for
the Senate Election and for the House of
Representatives Election to be issued on the
same day.
(2) The address of the Electoral Registrar
for the Subdivision appears on the front page
of the roll for the Subdivision.
METHOD OF VOTING.
(a) —Ordinary Voting.
(40) An Elector who is entitled to vote and
is desirous of voting at a polling place in the
Subdivision for which he or she is enrolled
will receive from the Presiding Officer or
Poll Clerk the ballot-papers duly initialed by
the Presiding Officer, and must at once retire
to a compartment of the polling booth, and in


private, mark his or her vote on the ballot-
papers in the manner indicated thereon, and
then fold the ballot-papers and place them in
the ballot-box.
Note. —See paragraph 36 as to the number
of ballot-papers which will be issued to each
elector.
(b) — Absent Voting on Polling Day.
(41) An Elector absent from his or her
Subdivision on polling day who desires to
vote at some other polling place in the Com-
monwealth will, after he or she has made
the required declaration and answered such
questions as may legally be asked by the
officer, receive a duly initialed ballot-paper
(headed “ Absent Vote ”) for each Election
and Referendum. He or she will mark the
vote on the ballot-papers in private in the
usual way, but, instead of putting them in the
ballot-box, will fold the ballot-papers arid at
once return them to the Presiding Officer before
whom the declaration was made. The Pre-
siding Officer will then, in the presence of the
Elector, enclose the ballot-papers in an envelope
addressed to the Divisional Returning Officer
concerned, fasten it, and put it in the ballot-
box.
(c) — Absent Voting before Polling Day.
(42) In the ease of an Elector desiring to
vote as an absent voter before an Electoral
Registrar prior to polling day, a similar pro-
cedure to that indicated in paragraph 41 will


be followed, excepting that the names of the
candidates for whom the Elector desires to
vote will require to be written in, and, In-
stead of the envelope containing the ballot-
papers being placed in the ballot-box, the
ballot-papers will be enclosed in an envelope
by the Registrar, and by him posted to the
Returning Officer concerned.
SPOILT BALLOT-PAPER.
(43) An Elector who spoils a ballot-paper,
and satisfies the Presiding Officer or the
Registrar as the case may bo that he has
spoilt it by mistake or accident, may on
giving it up be handed a fresh one.
ASSISTANCE TO ELECTORS WHEN
REQUIRED.
(44) Physically incapacitated or illiterate
Electors may be assisted to vote by the Pre-
siding Officer or Electoral Registrar in the
presence of witnesses; that is to say, in the
case of voting before a Presiding Officer in the
presence of the scrutineers, or, if there are
none, before the Poll Clerk or a person chosen
by the Elector; and in the case of voting
before a Registrar in the presence of a person
chosen by the Elector, or, failing any such, a
person chosen by the Registrar.
SCRUTINEERS.
(45) Candidates may have one Scrutineer
for each Subdivison of a polling booth during
the polling, and one Scrutineer at each place
where the votes are counted.


Scrutineers are placed in polling booths in
order to assist the Presiding Officer in main-
taining an honest and correct poll.
Where a Scrutineer is preset he should
witness the action of the Presiding Officer in
folding, and depositing in the ballot-
box the ballot-paper of a physically incapaci-
tated or illiterate voter.*
’Note.—Scrutineers who interfere with, or
attempt to influence Electors, or communicate
with any person in the booth, except so far as
is necessary in the discharge of their func-
tions, are liable to a fine of £5.
ADJOURNMENT OF POLLING.
(46) Power is given for the adjournment
of the polling if any polling booth is not
open, or if there is obstruction by riot.
• See paragraph (44).


FOURTH PART-EXPENSES AND
RETURNS.
EXPENSES INCURRED BY CANDIDATES.
(47) Within eight weeks after the result
of any election has been declared, every
candidate at the election must file with the
Commonwealth Electoral Officer for the State
a true return of his electoral expenses. In
the case of a, Senate Election, the expenses
incurred or authorized .by a candidate must
not exceed £25.0; and in the case of a House
of Representatives Election, £lOO.
Note. —The term “ electoral expenses ”
includes all expenses incurred by or on behalf
of or in the interests of a candidate at or in
connexion with any, election, excepting only
the purchasing of electoral rolls, and the
personal and reasonable living and travelling
expenses of the candidate.
‘ ‘ Candidate ’ ’ includes any person who
within three months before the day of elec-
tion offers himself for election as a member
of the Senate or the House of Representa-
tives.
(48) No “ electoral expense ” can be in-
curred or. authorized for any service outside
the following matters: —(o) printing, adver-
tising, publishing, issuing, and distributing
addresses by the candidate, and notices of


meetings; (6) stationery, messages, postages,
and telegrams; (c) committee-rooms; (d)
public meetings, and halls therefor; (■e)
scrutineers.
RETURNS TO BE FURNISHED BY OR-
GANIZATIONS AND INDIVIDUALS IN
RELATION TO AN ELECTION OR A
REFERENDUM.
(49) Every trades union, organization,
association, league, or body of persons which
has, or person who has, incurred any expense
on behalf of or in the interests of any candi-
date or political party, or in printing, publish-
ing, or issuing electoral advertisements or
notices, or in procuring the insertion in a
newspaper of any matter intended or calcu-
lated to affect an election or referendum, must
furnish a return of such expenditure within
twelve weeks after the result of the election
or referendum has been declared.
RETURNS TO BE FURNISHED BY NEWS-
PAPER PROPRIETORS IN RELATION
TO AN ELECTION OR REFERENDUM.
(50) Proprietors of newspapers are required
to furnish returns setting out the amount of
advertisements, articles, and other electoral
matter for which payment has been or is to
be made. All such matter must have the
word “ advertisement ” printed as a head-
line in certain specified type. The return
must be furnished within twelve weeks after
the result of the election or referendum has
been declared.


NEWSPAPER AND OTHER ARTICLES IN
RELATION TO AN ELECTION OR
REFERENDUM TO BE SIGNED.
(51) After the issue and before the return
of the writ for an election or referendum,
every article, report, letter, or other matter
commenting upon any candidate or political
party, or the issues submitted to the electors,
that appears in a newspaper, circular,
pamphlet, or “ dodger,” must be signed by
the author, giving his true name and address.
PROVISION FOR TELEGRAPHING.
(52) The Electoral Act provides that, in all
eases where it is impracticable to communi-
cate any electoral matter by post without
occasioning undue delay, any telegraphic
advice communicated in the ordinary course
shall suffice for all the purposes of the Act as
if the matter telegraphed had been communi-
cated in the manner provided by the Act.
GENERAL.
(53) If any Elector should be in doubt as
to procedure either in regard to enrolment or
to voting he or she should at once communi-
cate with the nearest Federal Electoral
Official, whose address may be found on. appli-
cation to the nearest Post Office.


SPECIAL NOTE.
(54) It must be clearly understood that
these notes relate to the Commonwealth Elec-
toral Act 1902-1911, the Referendum (Consti-
tution Alteration) . Act 1906-1912, and the
Kpgulations thereunder, and are not applic-
able to any subsequent amendments o€ the
Act or the Regulations.
By Authority: Albeet J. Mullett, Acting Government
Printer, Melbourne.
