

A
The
Roof of Australia,
and
How to Get There.
COOLAMATONG.
i- r ' i •
ntSp
PUBLISHED BY
PRICE - - - ONE SHILLING.
THE MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY OF NEW YORK,
SYDNEY.




PREFACE.
The business of Life Insurance has become interwoven with
the civilised life of the world, and those to whom the
management of great companies is entrusted require to occupy
Main-
Insurance
c/II '/ /? ’ °f
/ / vhich may
to India •
nd in the
yn 0 p a n
hereby this
has been
dtizens of
Australia. It is the rendering of the sole summer sanatorium
of the continent accessible to the dwellers of the lowlands
through the sweltering and enervating summer months. It is
not supposed that this pamphlet will accomplish that work ,
but something will be gained if a conviction is established that
it might and should be done.




PREFACE.
The business of Life Insurance has become interwoven with
the civilised life of the world, and those to whom the
management of great companies is entrusted require to occupy
a high watch-tower, and keep a constant lookout. Main-
taining this necessary attitude, The Mutual Life Insurance
Company of New York discovers the necessity of this
pamphlet . whose purpose is to introduce a country which may
and should become to Australia all that Simla is to India.
The maintenance of good health, of the sound mind in the
sound body generally, is very directly the concern of all
policy-holders. Strange to say, one chief means whereby this
all-round sanitary condition can be maintained has been
continuously neglected by the governments and citizens of
Australia. It is the rendering of the sole summer sanatorium
of the continent accessible to the dwellers of the lowlands
through the sweltering and enervating summer months. It is
not supposed that this pamphlet will accomplish that work,
but something will be gained if a conviction is established that
it might and should be done.




"THE ROOF OF AUSTRALIA”
HOW TO GET THERE.
By COOLAMATONG.
rn HIS Continent of Australia is very old, late born from
the depths, long worn by all the forces of the upper air.
So at least say the men who know, or claim to know-
Through all its youth it was neglected by all the people of
the world ; and despised and rejected through its prime, as it
seems, by man and beast. For even in the few and casual
relics of primeval days, and the evidences of fossils hid
away in the times when all the world was young, we find
nothing indicative of lordly or magnificent life. No lions
making thunder, no tigers “burning bright” in our forest
now, no gigantic lizards raging round dragon-like, in the
days when the coal measures were laid. No old bones of
temples or palaces, nothing at all to indicate any occupancy
at any time of a lordly humanity. And yet, through all
time recorded or hinted at, the land has been rich and
beautiful, amply dowered with that easily realizable wealth
the world desires, and well clothed generally with the
55jpac$f
i£~a~rr


gracious and sustaining growths which the beasts of the
field crave, and mankind utilises and appreciates.
Only a hundred and ten years since the white man came
to stay in the land. And then not exactly in “ Mayflower ”
style : but we are not going to talk about that.
A hundred and ten of the later years of the world have
seen much both of opportunity and accomplishment. And
what have they seen in Australia ? A good deal of grubbing
out virgin gold, of alienating freehold estate, of piling up
unprofitable debt, of growing and talking about the Golden
Fleece, but very little of spinning and using it ; of building
cities and crowding them with unemployed and uncomfort-
able people ; of But this is not a voice from the roof,
surely ; this is out of the heat and the swelter and irrita-
bility of an atmosphere which might dissolve bodily into
rain with a thunderclap, and which is charged constantly
with all the offence arising from rubbish, filth, offal un-
nameable and indescribable, in constant process of decay.
It is in, about, and over us for six months of the year, and
is there any possible way of deliverance from it ?
The world is wide, say the great shipping companies,
and praiseworthy are their efforts in providing means
whereby w r e may escape to pleasant lands. But Australia
is wide also, say those who know r a little about it, and not
half so flat as is generally supposed.
Australia has a roof, more in the Eastern than the Gothic
style, it is true, but still high enough to be for ever in those
atmospheric regions where, as the German poet tells, the
“purer forms abide.”
■ Our Great Divide bears no resemblance whatever to the
Andes or Himalayas —its boldest sections could lie amongst
their feet and be in no way remarkable—and the noblest of
all, our own Kosciusko, would be hardly a stepping-stone
to the topmost peak and spire of the world. Yet for


health’s sake Kosciusko is high enough. Every morning of
the year sees frost on his beard, and never does a month
pass without the swish of a snowstorm temporarily powder-
ing the flower-fields and filling the hollows. Yes, over
hundreds of square miles round about or reasonably ad-
jacent to the big mountain, every morning of the Australian
summer months of December, January, February, and March
dawns cool and bracing; every day is wholesome and
pleasant as a clover field in bloom ; and every night calls for
at least a crackle of fire and a double blanket, with a ’possum
rug that may be pulled across in the small cold hours of
the very early morning.
Is there anything to see in that country, anything to
shoot, anything to explore, exploit; anything to pass away
the time and replenish the stores of memory with stuff that
may be at least germinal of good yarns in days to come ?
There is. The one answer will suffice for each and every
question ; though as regards the shooting, it may be quali-
fied with “not over much,’’ for this being an absolutely
truthful record, we will admit straightforwardly that the
uplands do not offer great inducement to the man who
wants every morning to get up and kill a great deal.
Health’s there, and beauty, with many things which make
for cheerful holiday and pleasant memories, and as these
tend directly towards long life and good premium-paying
capacity, it becomes reasonable and proper business for
THE MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY OF
NEW YORK to do what little is in its power towards
making them accessible to the people of this Continent.
First, then, as to ways and means. Take Sydney as a
starting point, and the time February, March or April.
Any time from November onward will do for the uplands,
but if you want to see and to enjoy the big mountain, do
not attempt him till mid-February. And as the train does


not yet run to the foot of the mountain, and as the Great
Hotel away on the shoulder of Lob’s Hole, and the Hospice
on the mountain’s head, are as yet unbuilt, a little prepara-
tion and organisation will be necessary.
It is proposed now and for this year to render a really
enjoyable holiday in the high mountains practicable, and to
that end the first thing to be done is to organise a party.
Five would do, or six, or ten, or twelve —it matters nothing
at all what the number is, but if enjoyment is to be secured
the number must be definitely fixed and preparations made
accordingly.
I will suppose a party of ten, and there is not the
slightest reason why half the number should not be ladies,
only they must be tolerably robust, able to ride, though not
of necessity good horsewomen, and willing for a couple of
days and nights to make terms with the exigencies of
camping out.
The trip I propose to them will take in Cooma and
Kiandra, Yarrangobilly, Lob’s Hole, and thence across
the Murrumbidgee to the great Table Land by the shoulder
of the N.S.W, Bogong. Kosciusko next, and thence by
way of the glorious Murray Valley to Albury and home.
There are two other trips easily available, one of which
takes in the Mountain, while the other leaves him not very
far off; but we will discourse of them by and bye.
Now for the start. Friday night’s train lands our party
in Cooma at noon on Saturday morning, and a coach,
arranged for, makes the Cave-house, sixteen miles beyond
Kiandra, the same night. Supper is ready, appetites also,
and all the conditions of body and mind conduce to sleep
and rest. To the city dweller there seems an almost pre-
ternatural silence round about, broken only by the tinkle of
horse or bullock bell, the call of a night-bird, or the whisper
of a puff of wandering wind through the trees on the hill-


side. Morning comes all 100 soon with workmen’s voices
and the stroke of tools round about, and an invitation from
the guide to a dip in the Thermal Spring.
A marvellous spring this, with the potential value of
Mount Morgan in its never-failing waters, and healing and
recuperative powers unknown. A spring which in any
other country would long ere this have been the central
magnet of a magnificent Spa—its waters led into marble
basins, with pavilions and dressing rooms all round about,
with a big hotel on the heights connected by a mile-long
mountain railway, a threepenny ride up or down, and a
fashionable multitude in residence through six months of
the year. It is, however, very much as Nature made it, for
man’s improving hand has had little more to do with its
surroundings than with the cauldrons far down below
wherein the waters are heated. The temperature is about
85° Fahr., a luxurious warmth at such an altitude and
consequent general temperature, and if a contrast is desired
the brawling snow-fed stream close by seldom rises above
50° Fahr.
Then comes breakfast, and the Caves.
It is not necessary to enter into any detailed description
of the Yarrangobilly Caves here. They are beautiful,
weird, wonderful beyond all description. Water power and
atmospheric influences, with deposits of copper and iron
sufficient to make colouring solutions, have been at work
through untold ages. The material they wrought in is the
limestone core of a great spur of the mountains ; here they
have arched out, there they have mined, excavated,
tunnelled, made cunning winding ways. Through one
epoch, and in one locality, they have transmuted the dull
stone to gleaming marble. In another place it is alabaster
or crystal. Here, from long cracks in the roof, curtains of
marble hang actually as if woven of silk or wool, and the
percolations of iron and copper have tinted a band exactly


as a ribbon on the lower edge. There, descending stalac-
tites droop towards ascending stalagmites, and not unfre-
quently they have come together, making columns of marble
or alabaster. Here is a dome such as might over-arch a
Hall of Eblis ; there a spiral path through which gnomes
might with difficulty wind their way. Through moderately
easy ways the visitor may wander here for days. Through
many years the custodians will continue their marvellous
explorations, and through ages which make all chronology
seem as simple notation to the calculge the spirits of water
and air have wrought silently on. A visit of two days will
serve to get a fair grip of the beauties and the wonders of
the Caves, and on the third morning our party should be
out fairly early and on their brief return journey towards
Kiandra. Once out of the gully of the Caves, a slight
deviation should be made to a break in the breast of
the plateau, the ideal site for that Great Hotel which
so far exists only in the imagination of men’s minds.
A convenient building plot, with good, fertile, well-timbered
soil all round about, could easily be procured here, whence
all the glories of Lob’s Hole, with its lips of mighty moun-
tains, down which tumble cataracts innumerable, would be
constantly in view. The altitude is full 6,000 feet, the
summer climate therefore perfection ; the scenery the best
Australia can show. The journey from Sydney can be done
by one night in the train and one day’s coaching, which
might so easily be made thoroughly enjoyable ; and yet the
country is absolutely unoccupied, and to all intents and
purposes unknown. Sheep and cattle find summer pas-
turage, a few diggers come and go on their adventurous
ways to the buried treasures of the hills, and a few stout-
hearted tourists turn off on their way to the Caves. And
that is all. Our visitors feel themselves almost pioneers, so
lone, so wild is all the surrounding land. Far away below
them is the heat of Sydney and the lowlands, the smoke of


whose torment goes up unceasingly throughout the summer
months. Yes, after a hundred and ten years all this
unsought opportunity is left unrealised Most truly, in the
ways of indolence, dulness, and sluggish content, we New
South Wales folk are the heirs of all the ages. But let us
move along
We have arrived now at that stage on the route where
ordinary modes of conveyance fail. We are prepared for
four days on horseback and four nights under canvas. But
although we are going right up to the very ridge of the roof
of Australia, we are not going to be hungry or thirsty or
cold or uncomfortable ; and a little forethought, organisa-
tion, and judicious expenditure will make us comfortable all
through. The old Australian notion of camping out is
about as reasonable as was the old Australian notion of
Life Insurance in the days which anteceded the advent of
THE MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY OF
NEW YORK. Roughing it, risking it, enduring it, hung
about the one; narrow-minded, crassly-conceived restrictions,
forfeitures and impositions about the other. But a broad
light rayed out from that big building at the corner of
Martin Place and Pitt Street, keeping well within which
every man of thrift, industry, or large or small means may
march straight on to sure and certain provision for his
family, or support for his own declining years; and,
modestly be it said, if the contents of this little pamphlet
be read and digested in an appreciative mood, a similar
light may be shed on a path along which many thousands of
the people of this continent may travel to summer content
and delight, and marvellous access of life-enduring health
and energy.
The horses for our party are ready at or about Kiandra.
Attached to every man’s saddle is a small leather bag con-
taining a carefully prepared lunch, and across each pommel
a valise with just such articles of clothing as will be


necessary, and a warm waterproof. (I will enumerate all
these things in a tabular way later on.) In each man’s
breast pocket is a flask containing his day’s allowance ot
such spirituous or other refreshment as he desires. And the
order is—March ! The packers, with the horsekeeper and
cook, should be four or six hours ahead. The guide will
be with the party. The pace is easy, there is no wild
riding, there need be no dangerous riding, throughout the
journey.
We will not linger over the first twenty miles. They are
through the old eucalypt forest, varied at times with pines
and scrub growth. Open spaces are bright with modest
flowers, great limbs of the mountains rise all round about
in infinitely varied forms. The sun may be warm, but
whatever breath of air moves is cool and keen. The
havoc of beauty and fair natural order the diggers always
leave behind them is occasionally seen.
According to the hour of the start the pleasant drop to
the Tumut or Murrumbidgee waters is reached, —the head
of the river proper, where enough of brooks and cataracts
have come together to make a merry, brawling stream, about
saddle-girth deep, clear as crystal, and some fifty yards
wide. Pleasant open country is on either bank, well-grown
timber untouched by the ringer’s axe on the rounded knolls
and mountain feet whose toes are in the water, and on the
other side a fair natural meadow where the horses can spell
and feed and freshen-up for the afternoon and evening
journey.
Early in the afternoon a new and beautiful and altogether
unfamiliar country is reached. For beyond a few miles of
lightly-timbered hills and ferny gullies we come to the edge
of a great mountain plateau—a prairie with an elevation of
6,000 feet. It is broken by the gorges of frequent creeks,
down which drive swelling torrents in the months when the


vast carpet of snow is melting. But they have only
trickling streams now, with occasional pools wherein fre-
quently are black duck and teal; but I have said do not
think much of sport on this journey. We ride fast if we
will on the plateau, for the surface is fairly even. The wild
horses have made tracks through the long grass, down
which they themselves are driven often enough to the doom
of capture and servitude. Far away to the right are lovely
pastoral valleys, and to the left rises the cone of the New
South Wales Bogong a thousand feet above the plateau,
seven thousand feet into the blue air, symmetric, majestic,
austere. We shall find a fair creek at the edge of that
plateau, and there our first night’s camp will be pitched all
ready on our arrival, for packers and stores will have been
sent so far ahead. Three twelve-by-ten tents, and an extra
one for guides and camp hands, will be enough. The floors
of the tents will be strewn deep with gum leaves and snow
grass cut in the afternoon’s sunshine, on which will be
spread the waterproof sheeting, the blankets and the rugs.
Just without, logs will be prepared for a great fire, and a
little before sundown supper will be ready, which may con-
sist of good turtle soup (tinned, Queensland), steak grilled
on the coals, ham lightly toasted, and if need be devilled,
with hot plum pudding (Swallow and Ariel) and brandy
sauce, and preserved and dried fruits, which should not be
lacking at any meal. About perfect tea and coffee there
can of course be no question, and scalded cream in bottles
may just as well be carried along in sufficient quantities to
last the journey. There is no difficulty whatever about such
provision as is here indicated. I will explain how it
may all be arranged in an appendix. Of refreshment
after dinner there need be no lack. It is simply a matter
of thoughtful arrangement, and of each providing for the
satisfaction of his own wants and respecting the principles
of others. Though, for the thorough enjoying of mountain


travel, it is just as well in this respect to remember the good
counsel of a good man, now dead and gone, given under
different circumstances. Of nips generally, old Cosmo
Newbery was wont to say, “ One is very well, two one too
many, but three not half enough.”
Sleep in that first out-camp should be sweet. The sur-
soundings may be strangely unfamiliar, but restful. The
creek will murmur all night long, the Moo Poos hoot inter-
mittent, the air will be cut occasionally by the shrill of the
wild ducks’ wings, and if one rises and looks out about
midnight, and the moon is full, he should not return to his
couch again without memories that will endure.
On the morrow prepare to go up to the mountain.
The plateau and familiar eucalypt bush will be quickly
left behind. We enter on a land of gnarled timber and
stunted scrub, we emerge in a valley beautiful as any to be
found in any Alps. A little river, crystal clear, meanders
down it, and all up the long slopes of the side is verdant
grass growth, starred with many-tinted flowers. There is a
story about this valley which is worth the telling. Two
ancient Scottish men, station-holders of the Upper Murray,
essayed to cross the mountain in May, an effort which true
Scottish prudence should have forbidden. They reached
this valley, and down came the clouds. Clouds in May at
these altitudes mean often enough a week of snow and rain,
with attendant risks and many discomforts. Sandy, the
elder, had seen out three score and ten years, and was
philosophically disposed. “ We’ve ane bottle of Tulli-
bardine,” said he, “ and we’ll no waste that. Get ye doon,
Donald : we’ll drink her oot an’ see what comes.”
“ Rouse up yer beast, ye fule body,” answered Donald,
“ 1 11 brak yer bottle on tbe nearest rock an ye venture
on it.”
“Ye’ll nought of the kind, Donald. I’m weel prepared


to die—l’ve a solid policy in The Mutual Life of New
York —an’ I’ll neither fash mysel’ wi’ wild ridin’ nor see
guid whisky wasted ” And he drew the bottle from his
valise and handled it lovingly.
Donald snatched the bottle and rode with it. Sandy
gathered himself. “ It’ll be a wilder ride than Tam
o’ Shanter’s,” said he, “ but my life is in the hands o’ the
Lord, an’ the wife and bairns well secured, an’ guid whisky
I’ll no lose.” Thus they rode and rode —and, as luck would
have it, won—through fog and bog and snow, and ever-
increasing flood, to the timber on the plateau edge, and
drank their bottle by a great fire, and were saved.
A perfect atmosphere fills the valley now, and we leave it
all too soon, ascending the long spurs which lead up to the
mountain head. No track here. The guide knows the
bones of the country, and keeps to them The granite
rocks show out on the ridges and sound flats and knolls,
but all about them are morasses, moss hags, peat hags,
which none save a moss-trooper of the old Border breed
could cross. And weird and wonderful shapes do these
granite rocks in the green turf assume. Thrones are there,
and great stones that seem graven for monuments, relics
suggestive of Stonehenge, huge fragments of gigantic rams
and sphinxes, such as lie beneath the desert sands on the
sites of El Karnac and El Uk’sr. And the ridge of
Kosciusko now comes nearer and nearer, and higher and
higher appear the other mountains all around.
About seven miles from the summit, the last of the
timber is reached —a belt of dwarfed eucalypt, bent and
distorted into strange shapes by the burden of the winter
snows, but generous when dry and kindled, as the night's
experience will show. The camp will be ready here on the
arrival of the party. It is a point to be remembered in
this business that the camp always must be ready by the


time the main party arrive, and to this end every effort
must be used to get the cook, horsekeeper, and pack-horses
away at an early hour in the morning. Breakfast should be
over by seven, and then the first business is to start the
cook. Yalises can be i oiled and strapped later on. Let
the impedimenta be on the ground by four at the latest; if
the party arrive by six it is early enough.
And the day which ends at timber belt, on the hither
side of the summit, will be the longest and hardest of the
whole journey.
The morrow will be a day of ease and wonder and
delight. It is by no means necessary to make a painfully
early start. It is absurd to indulge any marvellous expec-
tation of a glorious sunrise.
You may, as the day dawns, see a world’s face open
below you, wonderful in beauty and variety, as in almost
infinite scope, but the chances are that the strata of clouds
lying far below will cloak everything till the day is well
advanced. In the time of the breaking-up of the clouds
is the real glory, when the beauty of the great valley is
slowly unveiled, and the majestic mountains away to the
south and east seem to rise on the view as giants shaking
off their grave-clothes or swathing-bands.
We will approach the summit, say, by nine o’clock-
Along a stony ridge, with a world-old snow-drift hanging
on the southern slope. To the right are the edges of a
cloven ravine, suggestive of awe-inspiring depths and
rugged grandeur. Sloping from the centre of that gorge is
a spur running down two thousand feet in a distance of as
many yards. The hill-sides, where visible, are mostly
forested, though frequent crag battlements suggest imagina-
tions of titanic forces. But very shortly the eye will turn
with wonder and delight to the marvellously beautiful eaith-
carpet which appears wherever the snows have melted away


and influence of the sun has been felt. The beauty of all
the children of all the snow fields is in their peculiarly
delicate whiteness —the tiny snow-drop of the northern
world, the edelweiss of the Alps, the Mt. Cook lily of New
Zealand, and the golden-eyed daisy which covers acre-
broad spaces here. I doubt if the flower-fields of the
world can show anything fairer than the Kosciusko daisy
in the time of its perfection. It springs from a dense
carpet of soft pearly green leaves whose tints and sheen
are exactly similar to those of our myall foliage at its best.
The flowers are in size as our garden marguerites, or coastal
flannel flowers, but they lie low on their carpet of velvet,
and they open such eyes of gold in the centre of such
silver stars as never were seen on any of our lowlands.
And near the daisy fields we ride for miles with broad
patches of green turf intermingled, and varied beauty is
made by multitudes of taller-growing, warmer-tinted blos-
soms of the aster and ranunculus tribes.
We may ride slowly to within a very few feet of the
summit across these flower-fields and lawns, with here and
there a strewage of slate and granite fragments, or great
rocks protruding. And about the cairn which still makes
the undoubted topmost height, the crown of all Australia,
we shall probably find some of Mr. Wragge’s people, and, if
a halt for a day or two is decided on, find assistance from
them in such geologising or botanising or general explora-
tion as may be resolved on. But to a man who has eyes to
see, no guide and no assistance is needed to make and pass
a very full day on that crown of a continent. Is it not
enough to watch Hotham and Bogong and Feathertop and
the Pilot change as the day changes over there in Victoria,
to peer about the lips of the great ravines and marvel what
botanical treasures may yet be discovered in those lone un-
traversed depths ?
In this particular trip I allow but one day on the


mountain head. The camp is shifted across from timber to
timber, a distance of about fifteen miles. Individuals
manage their own luncheons, and the party dines again a
half-hour before sundown. Dinner, luncheon, and break-
fast should be on the same liberal and varied scale every
day. Steaks and cold roast may have to give place to spiced
beef and ham, but about good soups, preserved fruits,
choice “ tinned stuff,” with hot johnny cakes morning and
night, there should not be the slightest difficulty. Only
don’t shirk difficulty and moderate expense in this depart-
ment before starting. Black tea, damper, or stale bread
and salt horse will sustain life very well, but perfect coffee,
hot rolls and butter, spiced beef and devilled ham, with a
caviare or pate de foie gras sandwich as a bonne bouche,
make all the difference between tolerable and enjoyable.
And now on the roof of this world of Australia, on the
very slope of the ridges, good and substantial dinner having
been digested, and the marvels and beauties of the day fully
discussed, there will be opportunity, and may be inclination,
for a little reflection on some other matters which lie pretty
close to the minds of men who desire and propose to make
the best of the world and all things which therein are. And
to aid that reflection I will set out a brief catechism here,
which should be learned and remembered by all who take
life with a reasonable seriousness :
Question. —What is the essential roof for every household,
and for every man who contemplates a household in
the future ?
Atiswer. —A Life Insurance Policy.
Question. —What is the first duty of every householder*
actual or prospective ?
Answer. —To secure a policy in the soundest Society
and on the best terms the world affords.


Question. —Which is the safest and best office in the
world ?
Answer. —The Mutual Life Insurance Company of New
York.
Question. — Why is it the best ?
Answers. —x. Because it is firmly established in a nation
whose life must be co-existent with humanity, and
its developments keep even march with those of the
British race.
2. Because its business is managed in the in-
terests of policy-holders only, and is subject to strict
State supervision.
3. Because its assets have an actual realisable
cash value of over
4. Because it undertakes every desirable form of
insurance, investment and annuity business, and
presents means whereby every man may profitably
invest his savings or capital, and provide with
absolute certainty for his declining years or the
welfare of his family under any conceivable circum-
stances.
There is nothing much to be added to such reasons as
these. The man who will not insure on such assurance
would certainly have been classed by St. Paul as worse than
an infidel.
Let us get down the mountain, two hours of a morning
ride, descending chiefly, and sometimes sharply, and we are
at Leather Barrel Creek. Whence or why that name I have
never been able to discover or determine. The creek is
worthy of a lively, sprightly, elfin name. It comes with a
laugh and a bound through the great gray crags, it babbles
along through a meadowy flat where our horses tread deep
in tall grass and crush many bluebells, and pursues a
further course that is worthy of a song, till it joins the


Murray and becomes but an indistinguishable note of the
mighty chord.
Leather Barrel crossed, we can pass five and twenty
miles of the journey with scant comment. The bush im-
mediately around is commonplace, and it requires a back-
ward look to catch shoulder or crown of Kosciusko frown-
ing or gleaming over the gums. Sometimes on a rich-soiled
hill a gum of lordly height appears, occasionally wattle or
light-wood brighten the sombre foliage, and early in the
afternoon a bit of fairy land is reached in one of those
wonderful ferny creeks where our Australian Flora has
wrought to perfect beauty. It would be pleasant to camp
there for the night, and by no means absolutely imprac-
ticable. It seems a pity to leave such a wealth of plumy
frond and arrowy undergrowth about the gleaming water
with only a passing glance, but there is a camping ground
in every respect more excellent about three hours farther on.
It is in a dell where the Geli River breaks through the Geli
Wall and joins with Inde and Kalucobin to make the
Murray we all know. The camp will be short of thirty
miles of Corryong, where the coach will be in waiting to
take us down the glorious Murray Valley and so to Albury
and the railway, and hot and dusty Sydney once again.
No fairer spot in all Australia than that Geli dell. Three
creeks meet within as many hundred yards, and run about a
tongue of land —a fairy meadow, nought less —with a margin
of silvery sandy beach. It might be a meeting place tor
waters to take farewell of the great mountains, for imme-
diately beyond the cleft in the Geli Wall appears, taking in,
curbing, and confining the silver stream of to-day and the
thunder-bred turgid torrent of to-morrow with equal ease.
The best part of the morning may well be spent in a pleasant
sojourn at the spot, for the subsequent ride into Corryong
need not occupy any long time.


We are off the great mountains now; we are at the head
of the Murray Valley, the one and only valley of beauty
and amplitude in any way commensurate with the breadth
of the continent.
No man is qualified to speak of the scenery of Australia
till he has looked on the mountain we have left, and the
valley we now enter. In two hours’ riding we break away
from the forested spurs and enter on alluvial flats and signs
of profitable settlement. A little later and we cross the
joined rivers, entering on Victorian territory ; another hour,
and from Towong Hill, site of Mr. Findlay’s beautiful and
picturesque home station, we take a long look down the
valley where flows the river which divides the two Colonies.
Take in the beauty first of the western outlook. There is
the valley from five to fifteen miles broad; extending far as
the eye can reach, with the increasing river winding ser-
pentine, and frequent reed-fringed lagoons making large
eyes of light. Ten thousand head of cattle may be in
view, and sheep beyond count on the wooded spurs—each
a mountain in its ultimate ascent —stretching their feet
down towards the waters. Right and left and in the rear-
ward view—north, south, and east, that is—those mountains
rise to grandeur. But we will not linger longer in the
western aspect. Turn, rather —it will be the last oppor-
tunity in the light of afternoon—and look back to Kosciusko.
His rampart is bolder, more rugged and abrupt, than you
had imagined. Streaked and flecked with snow, he cuts the
sky line above forests and crags, and seems not all unworthy
of lordship of Australia.
We shall catch a glimpse of him again and again to-
morrow, but not in the fair afternoon light and seeming
near aspect.
Away runs the merry road now to the Victorian village
of Corryong, where good entertainment will be found for


man and beast, and where on the morrow an early start by
special coach may be made for Tallangatta, the nearest
Victorian station, or for Albury. All down the valley, now
in one colony now in the other, through as fair-pastured
lands as the world ever saw, with mountains growing more
and more remote in the background, and the vineyards and
the farms nearer and nearer ahead.
Albury station should be reached easily by nightfall
(sleeping berths having been arranged for in the midnight
express), Sydney by noon on the next day.
And now a few words as to the time and cost of the
journey. It is to be noted that some of the items are
large, because of new and pioneer conditions. With
proper permanent arrangements they might be reduced by
one half. The time may be summed up thus :
Sydney to Yarrangobilly ... 2 days
At Yarrangobilly ... ... ... 2 days
to Kosciusko ... 2 days
Kosciusko to Corryong ... ... 2 days
Corryong to Albury... ... ... t day
Albury to Sydney ... ••• ••• 1 day
Total ... .- .. 10 days
Cost per head :
Rail —Sydney to Cooma, Albury
to Sydney ... ... £\ o o
Coach —Cooma to Caves 1 o o
Corryong to Albur> ... ... 110 o
Horses, Guides, Provisions, Yar-
rangobilly to Corryong ... 600
Board at Caves, and Coaching... 200
£\\ 10 o


And now a word or two as to equipment and provisions.
The first requisites for a party say of ten will be three
12x10 tents. The guide and assistants will look after them-
selves in this respect. For sleeping, each member of the
party should provide a strip of waterproof sheeting, a large
new rough double blanket, and a cheap heavy ’possum or
other rug. Let these be large, so that you can sleep com-
fortably in the bight, and have spare flaps to fold over and
tuck in. Of clothes, not too many. A day suit and a night
suit, warm and rough, will be enough. Good stout boots
and leggings, also a pair of slippers and an 8 in. by 12 in.
pillow. Small items these latter, but marvellous aid to com-
fort when the day’s work is over. A good waterproof coat
is also essential, a sensible felt hat, and warm loose gloves.
Each man’s personal equipment should not be more than he
can carry on his own saddle. Bedding and provisions will
of course be carried by packers.
As to provisions, if the journey is to be comfortable, they
require a good deal of thought and care. Calculations may
be based on the consumption of thirteen men for four full
days. You may reckon a pound of cooked flesh each per
day, and a pound and a half of bread or its equivalent.
These are the foundations, and they amount to 52 lbs. of
flesh and 78 lbs. of bread, biscuits, and flour. Throw in
about 25 lbs. of potatoes, and make up your flesh of a cooked
ham and a cooked roast of beef, a roll of spiced beef, and a
solid cut of round. Don’t take bread to last beyond two
days ; trust your cook after that for hot johnny cakes, and
make up with biscuits. Take a dozen pounds of choice
biscuits in general stores. Take also twelve tins of portable
soup, none better than Queensland turtle. Eight pounds of
dried apricots and pears (easy to carry and prepare), and a
dozen tins of such jam and conserves as may be fancied.
Take also half a dozen tinned plum puddings, easy to warm,
and marvellously welcome at dinner. Of tea two pounds,


coffee the same quantity. Sugar twelve pounds, flour twenty;
and don’t forget Worcester sauce, with the pepper, salt, and
mustard. Then let each on his own responsibility bring
along a portable quantity of any condiment, conserve, or
sauce which specially commends itself to him—pate de foie
gras, caviare, lax, amongst others. Of liquor there is nothing
to be said but yet another word in favour of strict mode-
ration. Mountain air, it is to be remembered, is both a
tonic and stimulant. To render tea and coffee palatable to
all tastes, carry a couple of quarts of concentrated (not con-
densed) milk, or of scalded cream tightly corked. Of cook-
ery utensils, a fryingpan and gridiron (you can’t devil ham
on the coals), two 8-quart billies, two 5-quart ditto, and one
large-sized bucket. For the table —or rather in lieu of table
and ordinary table-furnishings —an enamelled soup-plate, a
mug, and serviceable knife, fork, and spoon for each of the
party. Don’t overburden, and don’t stint yourselves. You
will have four pack-horses, and they will manage 200 lbs.
each easily enough.
It may seem altogether contemptible to enter into such
details as these. In elder lands, possessed of such oppor-
tunities as we know here, everything would be provided by
competent caterers, on well-equipped roads and tracks. But
New South Wales looks back on a brief, laborious, pioneer-
ing past, and forward to a future in which there is scope for
much desirable development, which it is hoped this pam-
phlet may in some degree facilitate. Certainly she permits
now hundreds and thousands of her people to languish in
the heat of Sydney or to make ocean pilgrimages to Tas-
mania, seeking refreshment and solace and necessary re-
cuperation on meaner heights and amid lesser beauties than
those which are absolutely her own, and which are or should
be easily accessible to all her metropolitan residents and
guests.
There are two other trips in addition to that fully detailed,


one of which includes Kosciusko, and the other branches
off from Yarrangobilly to Tumut. Of the last there is no
necessity to speak. It is a pleasant trip, which may be
managed in six days, and roads, coaches, and accommo-
dation are available. The other is more ambitious and
difficult, and should become the grand mountain tour of
Australia. Arrangements would require to be made in
every way similar to those of the Mountain and Murray
Valley route; but from Kosciusko a left turn would be
taken to Omeo, and from that mountain town the route
would be to Bright, in Victoria, thus embracing that cluster
of great mountains of which The Buffalo, The Pilot,
Feathertop, and Bogong are the kings. Its time would be
two or three days longer, and I doubt if even the superb
Victorian scenery could be more than compensation for the
Murray Valley, which by this route would be missed.
One concluding word now as to guides and horses. All
that is necessary for any party intending either trip is to
communicate a week in advance with Mr. Spencer, Moun-
tain Guide, Cooma, or Mr. George Harris, Kiandra, stating
route proposed and number of horses required; but let the
leader look to stores, tents, and bedding himself.
As to Yarrangobilly and Tumut, only notice is required,
but do not expect much luxury either at the Caves or on
the journey. Do not expect much indeed anywhere, except
constant increase of wonderment at opportunity neglected.
And the conclusion of the whole matter will probably be
something after this sort: If the burden of folly in this case
could be fixed on one head, it could only be compared to
that of a man who had made himself familiar with all the
advantages of insurance in The Mutual Life Insurance
Company of New York, and still went about the world
unprotected by a policy and with his family unprovided for.


THE MUTUAL LIFE
INSURANCE COMPANY
OF NEW YORK.
Australasian Department:
Z. C. REJTS lE, General Jlanag'er,
Company’s Building-, Martin Place, Sydney.
A FEW COGENT REASONS why you
should Insure in this Company in prefer-
ence to any other ;
Because It is tiie LAB&ESI.
Assets, December 31, 1897, £52,112,204.
Because It is the BEAT.
It is PURELY MUTUAL. Ail profits go to the
Policy-holders. In its Fifty-five Years’ Record it has no
compeer.
Because it is the SAfEST.
It is subjected to Annual Examination by the Insurance
Department of the State of New York, a thoroughly in-
dependent authority.
Because it is the CHEAPEST.
It has returned to its Policy-holders, or holds on their
behalf, after payment of all expenses of management,
about \i% millions sterling more than it received from
them.
For detailed information concerning the most profitable forms
of investment insurance policies, apply at an} 7 of the Company's
Branch Offices or Authorised Agencies.


1.0 IC


