

THE KANGAROO,
COMMERCIALLY AND SCIENTIFICALLY
TREATED.
J. Kennon and Sons manufacture kangaroo skins into various
kinds of leather, and find the demand for their goods steadily
increasing year by year.
The principal classes of their may be enumerated
as follows, beginning with the smallest skins, and so on to the
largest:—
Kangaroo Lining Leather
Wallaby Lining Leather.
Wallaby Waxed Leather.
Wallaby Kid Leather.
Wallaby Satin Leather.
Wallaby Whip Leather.
Kangaroo Whip Leather.
Kangaroo Lace Leather.
Kangaroo Legging Leather.
As it may not be uninteresting, we will, for the benefit of our
readers, give a short description of the several kinds mentioned,
and their utility for the purposes to which they are applied.
Beginning, then, with Brown Kangaroo and Wallaby Lining,
we may state that this class of skin is largely used for lining boots
and shoes much more so now than used to be the case.
This increased demand we attribute in a measure to some
useful articles given in the Melbourne Evening Herald , under the
heading of “ The Family Doctor,” at the beginning of the present
year, and which were ably written, giving much good advice,
pointing out what kind of clothes ought to be worn, and treating
largely also of toothache, fevers, burns, wounds, etc.
Speaking of the feet, the writer says:—“People who habitually
suffer from corns will find great relief in getting their boots lined
with leather, as the canvas in them, when moist, contracts,
cramping the feet still more.” —( Herald , 11th February.) Again,
on the ‘2sth of the same month, the same unbiassed writer, after
detailing what shape the boot should take, continues:—“ The lining
of the boots should also be attended to, as that made of canvas
shrinks when the foot gets moist in walking, and in consequence
the condition of any corn or bunion is greatly aggravated.”
These remarks, coming from such a .source, and carrying as
they do conviction on the face of them, naturally drew the atten-
tion of that numerous class of persons who suffer from corns and
tender feet, and the result is that the demand for leather lining on
the part of the public has greatly increased since these articles
appeared, for previously very few persons knew the real cause in
their sufferings in this direction, and many of them lost no time of
getting rid of the cause.
One of these thus thanked the “ Family Doctor” some weeks
after through the same journal:—“ I was so struck with the force
of your remarks re the above, that I got a pair of boots made,
stipulating with my bootmaker that he should put in leather lining
as mentioned by you, as being the best remedy for my painful
complaint.


W(
fe-
ar
s\
te
rr
y
0
t
t
(
1
ich, I am
ole; and,
with my
o the feet,
or become
nuch with
and bathe
ratitude to
this and
remarks re
recommend
to at once
I am sure
their boot-
thankful as
Collectioroittf
.ainly quite
further than
|| Rational Library' ||
Canberra jjJ
a is simply
i of feet are
extra on a
5 universally
and shoes
hown in the
fact
their
tnat riuiiimg,
owner is racing, are invariably rnaae ui
strain when
iaio surprisingly
Brown Wallaby and Kangaroo Whip-leather is now the
only leather throughout the colonies out of which whip-thongs are
llia The white thongs of England and America, which are made
principally of Calf Skin and Horse Hide have not the slightest
chance against the colonial-made article. Even in New South Wales,
where they are admitted free of duty, and are much cheaper than
Kangaroo thongs, their superiority over the imported article is
practically demonstrated by the large quantity annually sent there
by Kennon and Sons. ... • j e nr.
Lace Kangaroo, as the name implies, is used for cutti 0 1
into Boot Laces. . ... ~ 11•
These laces have been for a long time famous with the public
for possessing several qualifications not to be found m any othei
laces, excepting those made from porpoise, the high price of which,
however, places it beyond the reach of competition.
For instance, they stand the strain of every-day wear longer;
they tie readily, never coming undone while walking. the boot
can be laced tighter, and will remain so longer than the cheap
imported article, which is generally made of coarse hide or calf-
skin and although they look strong and are not readily broken
when new, they quickly rot and break through exposure and wear.
Brown Legging kangaroo are the very largest skins, and are
technically known as “ foresters, or old man kangaroo. They are
principally exported to New Zealand, where, on account of their
suitableness for travelling through the long, wet grass and thick
undergrowth, they are largely used for legging purposes.
Unlike other leathers, they do not become hard after being
soaked with wet. And as they can be easily made to look well


on the wearer by neat creases or folds above the ankle, they are
in great request by those whose duties take them into the rough,
untrodden parts of the country.
Owing to the large quantities of kangaroo skins now exported
to America, England, and lately to France also, they are now
becoming extremely dear. And it is a fact that speaks volumes
for the superiority of the leather made from these skins that, in
America, ladies and gentlemen’s boots and shoes made of kangaroo
leather command the very highest prices.
That this is strictly true we can amply prove by referring our
readers to the weekly and monthly journals that are published
throughout the United States in the interests of the boot and
leather trade.
If in these colonies the same high prices and demand for this
article do not reach the same proportionate extent as in America,
we can attribute it to the popular notion only too common in the
colonies that anything colonial (that is, of local manufacture) cannot
be as good as that which is imported.
That this idea is gradually dying out we firmly believe and, as
our manufacturers, both in the tanning and bootmaking trade, have
wonderfully improved during the last ten years, we hope soon to
see this once very popular notion relegated to the limbo of the
past —as it deservedly ought to be.
With the advent of summer weather J. Kennon and Sons think
it might not be out of place to give a few words of advice to
hunters and others who are in the habit of curing or preparing
the kangaroo skin for the market.
It may not be known to many people that during the hot days
of summer too much care cannot be bestowed on skins of any
description when pegged or stretched out to dry.
At such times the coolest and shadiest places should always be
chosen, and especial care should be taken, in any case, that skins
are not left too long drying in, or even out of, the hot, scorching
rays of a broiling sun.
It cannot have escaped the observation of those who have been
long engaged in the kangaroo skin trade that prices go up in winter
and fall again during the summer months.
And very often the fall is so great at this period that many of
those interested have often wondered whether prices would ever
go up again to the figure of the preceding winter, but so surely as
winter came again in its annual course, so surely did prices again
harden rcmch to the same extent as before.
Animals that are valued for their fur principally show much
the same results, but the reason in their case is somewhat
different; for the fur being poorer and thinner in character during
summer, and longer and thicker, as well as of much better
quality, during the winter, or cold season, makes all the difference
with them.
In the case of the green skin of the kangaroo, however, it does
not materially affect its saleable character whether the fur is long
or short, for the furrier very seldom has anything to do with large-
sized kangaroo skins.
The only kangaroo skins, in fact, which the furrier cares about
are those which are small and thickly furred, and weigh not more
than six or eight pounds to the dozen skins.
We have, therefore, to look to other causes for the depreciation
in value of these skins during the summer months


ich, I am
giw l/U lUIUOAOVCOUU) AO IIAU IOUgV/OU MAIU AIAOOC UUt u .*ble; and,
would you believe it, sir, I have not had any trouble with my
feet since ? I find that the leather lining adapts itself to the feet,
and stretches, rather than contracts, when the feet perspire or become
swollen with walking. Previously I used to suffer so much with
tenderness of the feet that I used to change my socks and bathe
my feet every day.
“ I, therefore, for one, cannot help expressing my gratitude to
you for devoting a portion of your valuable space to this and
other matters of interest to suffering humanity.
“ As I can, therefore, practically substantiate your remarks re
the above subject, I would through you, sir, strongly recommend
those suffering like me, or from corns and bunions, to at once
examine their boots, and if they are canvas-lined—which I am sure
they will be, or they would not suffer so much—get their boot-
maker to make a pair leather-lined, and if they are as thankful as
I am, they will not fail to let you know it.”
To add anything to the above extracts is certainly quite
needless on our part. We will, therefore, say nothing further than
that the common practice of lining boots with linen is simply
because it is cheaper than leather; so that thousands of feet are
annually being ruined for the sake of about sixpence extra on a
pair of boots.
Wallaby, both Waxed, Kid, and Satin-dressed, is universally
acknowledged to be the best adapted for light boots and shoes
and that they are extremely strong and pliable is shown in the
fact that running shoes which have to stand a great strain when
their owner is racing, are invariably made of this surprisingly
tough article.
Brown Wallaby and Kangaroo Whip-leather is now the
only leather throughout the colonies out of which whip-thongs are
made.
The white thongs of England and America, which are made
principally of Calf Skin and Horse Hide, have not the slightest
chance against the colonial-made article. Even in New South Wales,
where they are admitted free of duty, and are much cheaper than
Kangaroo thongs, their superiority over the imported article is
practically demonstrated by the large quantity annually sent there
by Kennon and Sons.
Lace Kangaroo, as the name implies, is used for cutting up
into Boot Laces.
These laces have been for a long time famous with the public
for possessing several qualifications not to be found in any other
laces, excepting those made from porpoise, the high price of which,
however, places it beyond the reach of competition.
For instance, they stand the strain of every-day wear longer;
they tie readily, never coming undone while walking. The boot
can be laced tighter, and will remain so longer than the cheap
imported article, which is generally made of coarse hide or calf-
skin, and although they look strong and are not readily oroken
when new, they quickly rot and break through exposure and wear.
Brown Legging kangaroo are the very largest skins, and are
technically known as “ foresters, or old man kangaroo.” They are
principally exported to New Zealand, where, on account of their
suitableness for travelling through the long, wet grass and thick
undergrowth, they are largely used for legging purposes.
Unlike other leathers, they do not become hard after being
soaked with wet. And as they can be easily made to look well




At this time the buyer examines the skins carefully, and, if
they are extremely hard and horny, he justly views them with a
large amount of suspicion, especially if there are traces of fatty
portions of the animal adhering to them, and which, in general,
have come away with the skin when tearing or pulling it off the
animal’s carcase.
When thus hard and horny they are called “ sun-dried” skins,
for it is exposure to the hot solar rays that causes it, and the
heat acting on the fats of the skin destroys its nature in some
way not as yet properly understood, so that, when it is put into
water to soak, such parts often fall away in pieces.
If the skin does not show it here, it will in the next stage, that
of the liming process.
As the object of the liming process is to raise or swell the skin
so that the fur will readily come off, it often happens that the
“ sun-dried” skin refuses to swell, and consequently the fur will
not readily come off.
The fatty parts of the same skin often, in large patches, tear in
pieces under the pressure of the unhairing knife.
Because the skins may look sound when they leave the hxxnter’s
hand, he cannot, therefore, we are sure, conceive the amount of
damage he often causes them by the ruinous method of drying the
pelt in a hot sun.
If, owing to want of shade, the hunter cannot avoid it, he should
take up the skins the moment they are dry, and stow them away
in the coolest place available.
As a rule line-dried skins are more affected by the heat of the
sun than those which have been pegged or stretched out.
In the former the oils of the fat of the skin is more concentrated,
owing to shrinkage of the pelt, while in the latter the oil (which
is generated by heat from the fat) is distributed more over the surface
of the skin, and consequently loses much of its injurious effects.
Where practicable hunters should romove these pieces of adhering
fat.
A little attention to these simple matters would improve con-
siderably the value of these useful skins in summer, and would be
a distinct gain to the tanner’s pocket as well.
One instance of the injury done these skins by the carelessness
of the hunter will suffice to show how important the matter is to
the tanner.
A short time ago Kenncn and Sons bought from a “kangarooer”
about 45 dozen of these “ sun-dried” skins, but as it is impossible,
even for the most experienced, to tell the extent of possible injury
done till they are unhaired, they risked it, and put them into process.
Not one of the skins came out sound, and so badly injured were
they that the greater part of them were utterly useless for any
purpose whatever.
The “ weevil" is another destructive agent during the hot season,
and causes no end of trouble to hunters and others.
As this carnivorous insect breeds and multiplies prodigiously
fast, it is really surprising the amount of damage they will commit
in a very few days.
Thousands of pounds worth of skins are destroyed annually by
this active pest, for it attacks every kind of dried skins, such as
sheep, rabbit, opossum, kangaroo, hides, etc., and is equally at
home in any of them.
Any efficacious method, therefore, that will destroy it and keep
it out of the skins is certainly worth knowing, especially if it is
cheap and readily obtainable.


The following recipe is a sure cure against this troublesome
insect, and its practical application would often save our friends
much money and no little anxiety :
“ Vermin Destroyer. —To five gallons of water add three and a
half pounds arsenic and three pounds common soda. Boil for
three hours, when arsenic will be dissolved.”
It is now called “poison.”
To a bucket of water add one quart of the poison; then
apply the solution with a whitewash brush to the flesh side of
skin, just sufficient to barely damp the whole of the pelt.
Carbolic fluid is sometimes added to above poison—about two
ounces to the gallon would be sufficient.
We might here advise hunters never to cure skins with any salty
solution —in fact, to never put salt into them at all, as the commercial
value of the skin is greatly injured thereby.
It is not at all improbable that in a short time the kangaroo
will be almost exterminated. The number now annually killed,
owing to the high commercial value of these skins, cannot be
reckoned —for the present year at any rate—at less than a million,
probably much more, the approximate value of which can be set
down at .£200,000 at least.
It is quite likely that the kangaroo will soon be protected by
the game law, and that a close season will be brought into
operation, the same as is now in force in Tasmania, for the protection
of the young.
In England, France, and in America principally, the skins are
now in great favour, owing to the fine texture of the grain, and their
adaptability to many different purposes.
For superior boot and shoe leather, bookbinding, gloves, and
articles of a fancy character, as card cases, ladies’ hand-bags, etc.,
it now stands unrivalled for the multiplicity of uses it can be put
to.
At Kennon and Sons’ establishment the skins are manufactured
for various purposes, according to size and substance.
The smallest and thinnest of them are manufactured into
linings for the best class of ladies’ and gent’s boots and shoes,
being much superior to those that are basil or linen lined.
Those a little larger and stouter are sent into their whip factory
to be made into whip thongs.
Wallaby and brush, if free from shot holes, are dressed either on
flesh or grain side for boots and shoes, and for wear and durability,
as well as comfort to the feet, are unequalled even by foreign
leathers.
If full of shot holes, they are dressed into stout linings for the
boot manufacturer.
All the kangaroo that run from three to four feet are cut up
into laces, of which about 40 dozen are cut up weekly by the
several lace cutters employed in the establishment.
The largest skins are mostly sent to New Zealand, where they
are greatly used for legging purposes, for which they are well
adapted, owing tc their pliable nature and durable character.
It will, no doubt, be interesting to many of our friends to know
something about this useful animal. We have, therefore, compiled
the following facts from various sources, and are indebted »in a
large measure to Mr. Gould’s most valuable scientific work upon
“ The Mammals of Australia” :
The kangaroo was seen for the first time by Europeans, so far
as we can learn, in the year 1770, by some of Captain Cook’s men.
To use Captain Cook’s own words, he says:—“ On Friday, 22nd


June, a party who were engaged in shooting pigeons, for the use
of the sick on board the ship, saw an animal which they described
to be *as large as a greyhound, of slender make, of a mouse
colour, and extremely swift.’ On the following day the same kind
of animal was again seen by a great many other people.”
jf On the 24th it was seen by Captain Cook himself, who, walking
a little distance from the shore, observed a quadruped which he
thought bore some resemblance to a greyhound, and was of a
light mouse colour, with a long tail, and which he should have
taken for a wild dog had not its extraordinary manner of leaping,
instead of running, convinced him of the contrary.
The sight of a creature so extraordinary could not fail to excite
in the mind of a philosophic observer the most ardent wish for a
complete examination. This was at length gratified through Mr.
Gore, one of the associates in the expedition of Captain Cook,
having been so fortunate as to shoot one in the course of a few
days.
There are nearly fifty different species of kangaroo, to each of
which a distinctive appellation has been given.
They are principally distributed over the continent of Australia,
Tasmania, and New Guinea.
The largest of the species is found upon the Australian continent,
the great gray kangaroo taking, perhaps, the lead in this respect.
According to Mr. Gould, the great gray kangaroo enjoys a
wide range of habitat, being spread over the colonies of New
South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia, and is seemingly
closely allied to the great kangaroo of Western Australia.
It lives mostly on low grassy hills and plains, skirted by thin
open forests of brushwood, to the latter of which it resorts for
shelter during the oppressive heat of the mid-day sun.
Some writers think the kangaroo is not gregarious, because
when going en masse there does not appear to be any regular
leader, the same as all other wild animals of gregarious habits
possess.
However, there are differences of opinion on this matter, for
Mr. Gilbert, speaking of the West Australian kangaroo, says
“ that when disturbed, the alarmed ones take the lead, but the
does soon get to the front, while the males, owing to their greater
weight, fall back into the rear, often far behind, but they all follow
in the same tracks as the leading does, and when the latter stop
the entire herd stop likewise.” Hence, he concludes, they are of
gregarious habits.
“ Occasionally,” says this observant writer, “an old and very
large male will take possession of a valley, and there remain for
years without moving a mile from the spot, leading, in fact, a
perfect misanthropic life. Such instances, however, are not very
common; still, two or three spots are known to me which have
been thus tenanted for years, many of the settlers and aborigines,
now young men, remembering these particular animals from their
childhood. Some of the most experienced kangaroo hunters have
endeavoured to capture them, but have invariably failed, at the
cost of much injury to the dogs. With the exception of cases
like these, it is rare to meet with a single kangaroo.”
When hotly pressed, the kangaroo will take to the water, and
has been known to swim a considerable distance. At one time in
Tasmania the “boomer,” as he was called, was often hunted by
the hounds, and gave capital sport.
On some of these occasions the kangaroo covered fifteen or
eighteen miles before being captured. On one occasion a “ boomer,”


being hotly pressed, endeavoirred to swim across an arm of the
sea two miles wide, and had succeeded in getting half-way across
before being captured.
During one of these hunts one sped along the sandy beach, and
the distance between each print of its hind feet was found to be
fifteen feet on the clear.
Mr. Gilbert, whom some of our readers will remember formed
one in the Leichardt exploring expedition, and who, unfortunately,
fell a victim to the fury of the natives, gives a graphic description
of a kangaroo brought to bay :
“When the kangaroo,” says he, “finds itself without a chance
of escape it summons up all its dormant energies for a last
struggle, and would, doubtless, often come off the victor if it had
dogs alone to contend with ; but the moment it observes the
approach of man it seems intuitively to know that its most
formidable opponent is before it. Its lips are then twisted and
contracted; its eyes become brilliant, and almost start from their
sockets with rage ; its ears are in constant motion, and it emits a
peculiar, low, smothered grunt, half hiss or hard breathing-like
sound ; in fact, when man approaches it seems altogether to forget
the dogs, and, regardless of the consequence of withdrawing its
attention from them to him, soon loses its former advantage, and
the dogs, being able to secure a good hold, soon bring it down.”
We have mentioned that the great grey kangaroo mostly lives
on the grassy hills and plains.
The great red kangaroo, which is equally as large, lives, for
the most part, on low, stony hills, and is mostly found on the
plains bordering on the rivers Murrumbidgee, Darling, Naomi, and
Murray.
The males are often eight feet long from the tip of the nose to
the tip of the tail. Although the males are red, the females are
invariably of a pale blue colour. Among the many species of
kangaroo that exist, it is the only one in which the two sexes
exhibit such a marked difference in colour, “ delicate blue being
the prevailing tint in those parts of the female which in the male
are red.”
Darwin, in his valuable work, “ The Descent of Man,” notices
this peculiarity between the two sexes of this species, and con-
siders it a most striking one.
The skin of the red kangaroo is very thin but tough. Many
of these animals seem to be subject to a skin disease of a
virulent character, and which we never find on the other species
of kangaroo.
The black wallaroo is found in the mountainous districts of
New South Wales and Queensland.
It is found on the summits of rocky and sterile mountains,
seldom descending to the coverts of the sides, and never to the
base.
The female is delicately small in comparison to the male.
The skin of the male is thicker at the neck and coarser
grained generally than the other species mentioned.
All the species of kangaroo are adapted for different modes of
living, some for the scrub, others for the desert, others for rocks
and precipices and steep mountains, and others for living in trees
—viz., the species peculiar to the tangled forest belts surrounding
New Guinea, where, if they could not lead an arboreal life, could
not live in the parts in which they are found at all, owing to the
soft, swampy character of the ground.


Mr. Gould classifies the many species of kangaroo as fol-
lows :
1. Macropus Major
ocydromus .
3. fuliginosus .
4. Osphranter rufus
5. antilopinus.
6. robustus
7 ? Parryi
8. Halmaturus ruficollis
9. Bennettii
Bennettii
10. Greyi
11. Manicatus
12. Ullabatus .
13. Agilis
14. dorsalis
15. parma
16. Derbianus
17. Thetidis
18. stigmaticus
19. Billardieri .
20. Brachyurus
21. Petrogale penicillata .
22. lateralis
23. Xanthopus.
24. inornata
25. brachyotis .
Concinna
27. Dendrolagus ursinus
28. inustus
29. Dorcopsis Bruni
30. Onychogalla unguifer
31. frrenata
32. lunata
33. Lagorchestus fasciatus
34.
leporoides
hirsutus
conspicillatus
37. Leichardti .
38. Bettongia penicillata
Ogilbyi
cuniculus
Grayii
rufescens
campestris .
44. Hypsiprymnus murinus
45. apicalis
Gilberti
pealyops
Great grey kangaroo.
West Australian great kangaroo.
Sooty kangaroo.
Great red kangaroo.
Bed wallaroo.
Black wallaroo.
Parry wallaroo.
Bufus-necked wallaby.
Bennett’s wallaby.
Grey’s wallaby.
Black-gloved wallaby.
Black wallaby.
Agile wallaby
Black-striped wallaby.
Parma wallaby.
Derby’s wallaby.
Pademelon wallaby.
Branded wallaby.
Tasmanian wallaby.
Short-tailed wallaby.
Brush-tailed rock-wallaby.
Stripe-sided rock-wallaby.
Yellow-footed rock-wallaby.
Unadorned rock-wallaby.
Short-eared rock-wallaby.
Little rock-wallaby.
Black tree-kangaroo.
Brown tree-kangaroo.
Filander.
Nail-tailed kangaroo.
Bridled nail-tailed kangaroo.
Lunated nail-tailed kangaroo.
Banded hare-kangaroo.
Hare-kangaroo.
Bufous hare-kangaroo.
Spectacled hare-kangaroo.
Leichardt’s hare-kangaroo.
J erboa-kangaroo.
Ogilby’s jerboa-kangaroo.
Tasmanian jerboa-kangaroo.
Gray’s jerboa-kangaroo.
Bufous jerboa-kangaroo.
Plain-loving jerboa-kangaroo.
N.S.W. rat-kangaroo.
Tasmanian rat-kangaroo.
Gilbert’s rat-kangaroo.
Broad-faced rat-kangaroo.
The true Macropi is found upon the grassy plains. The great
Osphranters frequent the stony ridges and rocky crowns of moun-
tains. The Petrogales find a home among precipitous rocks. The
Halmaturi inhabit mangrove swamps and dense, humid brushes. %
The Onychogalcce form their runs among the more spiny brigaloe
scrubs. The Dendrolagi find a congenial abode among the branches
of the trees fringing the swampy coast of Southern New Guinea. It
will thus be seen that, whatever the characteristics of the topo
graphy of different districts, there you will find a species peculiarly
adapted to the nature of its surroundings.


MARSUPIALIAN.
In geology the oldest mammalian remains found in England are
marsupial, and, says Andrew Murray—“ So far as records show,
the marsupials were the reigning, if not the sole, mammals in
existence at the oolitic period. At the present day the only countries
in which the marsupial is to be found are Australia and South
America.”
There are in all, according to the “ Physical Atlas,” 2nd edition,
123 different species.
Says Mr. Gould, speaking of the rapid destruction of the
kangaroo:—“ Short-sighted are the Anglo-Australians, or they would
long ere this have made laws for the preservation of their highly
singular, and, in many cases, noble, indigenous animals; and
doubly short-sighted are they for wishing to introduce into Australia
the productions of other climes whose form and nature are not
adapted to that country. Let me, then, urge upon them to bestir
themselves ere it be too late to establish laws for the preservation
of the large kangaroo, the emu, and other conspicuous indigenous
animals. Without such protection the remnant that is left will
soon disappear, to be followed by unavailing regret for the apathy
with which they had been previously regarded.”
The advice here given is now much more needed than when the
above was written, for, without doubt, the kangaroo is doomed, and
must soon disappear, like the beaver of North America, unless
some means of protecting it are adopted during the next few
years.
In Tasmania they have already taken measures for this
animal’s extended preservation.
There there is a close season for the kangaroo and wallaby,
beginning on the Ist August, and ending on the 30th January of the
following year. Our neighbours in the tight little island have
already discovered before us that the kangaroo is too valuable to
be indiscriminately slaughtered.
The kangaroo at birth is no larger than a baby’s little finger,
and not unlike it in shape.
It is yet unknown how the mother places this vermiform object
to one of the nipples within her pouch or marsupium. By some
equally unknown process the little creature becomes attached by
its imperfectly-formed mouth to the nipple, and there remains
dangling for days, and even weeks, during which it gradually
assumes the likeness and structure of its parents. At length it
drops from this lacteal attachment into the pouch, re-attaches itself
when hunger prompts it so to do, and as often again tumbles off
when its wants have been supplied. When sufficiently strong it
leaves the pouch, but flies back on the slightest sign of danger.
The kangaroo is always growing, the males getting larger and
larger for years, so that the very “ old men,” as they are generally
termed, often attain a great size.
N.B.—We have thus entered into a description of the habits,
etc., of the kangaroo and wallaby because we think it may prove
interesting to hunters and others, who will be able to compare our
notes with their own personal observations; and we should be
glad to receive from those who are inquirers into these and other
matters the results of their own researches.


The following extract is from the Richmond Guardian of Ist
September, giving a description of Kennon and Sons Exhibit as
shown at the Melbourne Centennial Exhibition, 1888: —
J. KENNON AND SONS.
A prominent exhibit in the leather section is that of Kennon
and Sons, tanners and whip thong makers, River-street and Bridge-
road. The Messrs. Kennon, at the Cumberland tannery, River-
street, make up an immense quantity of kangaroo and wallaby
skins into whip thongs, and are large manufacturers of laces,
exporting largely to the other colonies. The difficulty with the
firm is in getting sufficient skins to carry on operations, there
being a brisk demand for their manufactured goods, which stand
high in the market for durability and general excellence. Their
goods are shown in two very handsome cases. The first one,
nicely polished, strikes the eye of the visitor by a stuffed wallaby
quietly posing in the centre (emblematic of the firm’s business).
Underneath this figure is arranged a selection of fancy coloured
leather, and the case contains samples of all the material used in
the trade, such as brown legging kangaroo, brown lining kangaroo,
white kangaroo, giraffe roan kangaroo, waxed wallaby, lace kangaroo,
kid-dressed wallaby, satin-dressed wallaby, a good display of dressed
skins and whip thongs, the whole very tastefully arranged. The
other case is more elaborately got up, and contains simply whip
thongs, but one would scarcely believe that the common everyday
whip thong could be made to look so well. There is every variety,
comprising 6ft. cart thongs, four-horse thongs lift., fancy dog
whips, 6-plait cart thongs, stockwhips, 18ft. stock 24 plait, limiting,
buggy and carriage thongs. The display is an excellent one, and
reflects great credit on this enterprising firm. We may mention
that every article in the show case is a duplicate of stock, and can
be procured at the shortest notice, unlike many similiar exhibits
which are simply prepared for show purposes.
THE APOTHEOSIS OF THE KANGAROO.
MESSES. J. KENNON & SONS’ TANNEEY.
One hundred and eighteen years ago the kangaroo was first seen by
a European. A party of Captain Cook’s men, engaged in shooting
pigeons, saw an animal “as large as a greyhound, of slender make, of
a mouse colour, and extremely swift.” This was on the 22nd June,
1770, and two days later Cook himself saw the new and strange animal,
“ which he would have taken for a wild dog had not its extraordinary
manner of leaping, instead of running, convinced him of the contrary.”
A century has rolled away, and the strange land which Cook discovered
has become the thriving Australia, and the curious creature the insignia
of the country, and, moreover, an important factor in the commerce of
the new land. Every year upwards of a million kangaroos are slaughtered
for the sake of their skins, the approximate value of which is set down
at £200,000, and the “ wild bounding kangaroo,” which still excites
wonder in the old country, now finds apotheosis in the manufacture of
boots and boot-laces.
Australia is generally spoken of as a “ new” country, but this is
only true of its settlement and civilisation. Africa and Australia are
colossal relics of a geological period far remote from those of Europe
and Asia, and their “ everlasting hills” were hoary with age when the
Grecian Olympus was elevated by Nature cloudwards, and when the
cliffy bulwarks of England were first reared in all their proud magnili-


cence. Geologically speaking, Australia is the oldest continent extant,
and its tree ferns and its quaint marsupials, of which the kangaroo is
the most conspicuous, are typical of a period which once existed in
Europe, but of which traces are only found in the coal measures. The
kangaroo is the outward sign of an antiquity which for lands has
long departed.
Boys read with rising hair and wonder-drawn faces of the adventures
of the hunters and trappers of North America in their pursuit of the
“ grizzly,” the buffalo, or the beaver; or the days of Chevy Chase,
when Earl Douglas and Earl Percy went “ a-hunting the deer” on the
Scottish borders; but in the Australian literature, which has yet to be
written, there will be equally thrilling tales of the chase of the
kangaroo on the plains of Australia. Only the dim distance of years
is wanted to cast a glamour of romance over the doings of the hardy
hunters who, day by day, are pursuing their calling in the uninhabited
regions of Australia and Tasmania.
Messrs. J. Kennon and Sons, tanners, of Bridge-road and Biver-
street, devote most of their attention to the preparing of kangaroo skins,
either for the trade or for working up in their own manufactory into
various kinds of leather, and also whip-thongs and boot-laces. Until a
year or two since, they could depend upon a regular supply of skins
coming forward, but recently the competition has grown rapidly. The
English manufacturers absorb a large quantity, obtaining their supplies
through the regular agents, but in America there is so great a demand
for the skins that direct agencies have been established, one agent
arriving not long since with a credit of £50,000, to open up branch
agencies for the purchase of the skins. Yankee travellers are “on the
road,” to use an old commercial phrase, all the year round, negotiating
and purchasing. Under these circumstances, Mr. S. Kennon now
travels, at intervals through the various colonies, in order to secure the
large supply which the rapidly-expanding nature of the business requires.
The principal supply is derived from South Australia, and next from
Tasmania. A large number come from New South Wales, but in these
days very few from Victoria, the progress of settlement having almost
driven out the interesting but mischievous marsupials. The animals
differ in their value according to their habitat. The hotter the climate,
the thinner is both the fur (which has no present value) and the skin.
Thus the Tasmanian skin is both darker in colour, much thicker in
the fur, and stouter in the skin than those from the more northerly
colonies. The kangaroo most in favour for the tanner’s purpose is the
Forester, or “ old man” kangaroo. The wallaby is also extensively used,
but the grain of the hide is not so fine, and is apt to be disfigured by
scars, probably caused by its living in the scrub, while the kangaroo
frequents the plains. The wallaroo, which likewise finds its apotheosis
in leather, is mountainous, and possesses an enormous thickness of skin
at the back of the head and neck.
Messrs. Kennon and Sons are the largest tanners and manufacturers
of kangaroo, wallaby, wallaroo, <fcc., skins in the colony; the leather
being sent to various country towns in Victoria for trade purposes, and
exported to the various colonies; their trade in whip-thongs is very
large, while their manufacture of boot-laces amounts to an output of the
value, on an average, of £3OO per month, a fact which we verified by a
glance at the firm’s books. In the winter months there is a large
demand for kangaroo skins from New Zealand, where they are largely
used for the manufacture of leggings necessary to the wet climate.
The process of preparing the skins is an interesting one. When the
hunter shoots a kangaroo or wallaby he skins it and pegs the skin out
to dry. When dry they are packed in bales and despatched. In this
condition they arrive at the Biver-street tannery from the various colonies,
and a large stock of the dry or “green” (as they are technically called),
skins is allowed to accumulate in order that the firm may have an ample
supply to meet any sudden trade orders; and on the occasion of our
visit many hundreds of pounds worth were stacked in the stores. The
first process of tanning is to place them in vats of water to soak


in order to render them soft. After remaining in the vat for three days
they are placed in lime vats for a period of twelye days. The object of
this is simply to swell the skin and to open the pores so that the fur
may come away easily. Afterwards they are “fleshed”— i.e., the bits of
flesh adherent to the skins are removed with sharp “fleshing” knives,
and they are then placed in a “bateing” mixture to remove the lime—
the mixture being made with an American composition which, in contra-
distinction to the old mixture of guano, gives off no smell whatever.
After this they are put in the tanning pits, where they remain from ten
to fourteen days. The old world tanners used to steep their skins for a
lengthy period, running up to twelve months and sometimes even for a
long stretch of years, the idea prevailing that the longer the skin was
in the liquor the more durable became its quality. But this notion has
been overgrown. “ Difference of climate,” said Mr. S. Kennon, as he
explained the various processes to us, “ will make a difference in the
time required for tanning, but when it has absorbed its full capacity of
tan it only deteriorates the skin to keep it in the pit any longer.” The
tanning mixture, as is generally known, is made with water and ground
wattle-bark. These are put to soak,'very similarly to tea, only on a
larger scale, in pits; but, unlike tea leaves, the bark does not lose all its
virtue in the first soaking, but may be used again and again. For the
purpose of thus “ drawing” the bark four large pits are used, in each of
which the solution is of different strength. The strongest is drawn off
by means of plugged tubes into a well, from whence it is pumped into
the tanning pits. When the skins are sufficiently tanned—in other words,
when the tan has penetrated right through the skins, they are taken
out and hung up until half dry, when they are laid on the “ stuffing”
table, and spread out flat with a steel instrument called a “slicker,” or
“ sleeker,” until quite smooth. If dried in this state they would become
wrinkled, and have an uncomely appearance, and, therefore, “ dubbin,”
a grease mixture, is laid on thickly with a brush, in order to render
them smooth and supple. After being hung up in this condition for
several days until dry, they are again laid out, and the grease “ slicked”
off, and they are then shaved on the fleshy side with a “ whitening”
knife, after which they are coloured and sized, and are then ready for
the manufacturer.
In the factory we saw a number of hands engaged in cutting up
the hides into boot-laces, or strips of whip-thongs, the plaiting of the
latter being also carried on. The demand for stockwhip thongs has
fallen off of late years, probably because the back country runs are
being better fenced in these days, and the stock-rider has less to do in
rounding up the herds and flocks. There is also a decrease in six-
horse thongs, the old coaching days having given place to times of rail-
roads. But, as an indication of the newer fashion, there is a good
trade done in the manufacture of thongs for four-in-hand charioteers.
The boot-laces are cut by hand, for, although machines have been
invented for the purpose, it is found that the loss is something like 10
per cent., which is accounted for by the fact that in hand-cutting shot
holes are avoided, and the shape of the skin studied.
About 24 hands are employed at the Cumberland Tannery, and new
sheds are about to be erected.
It was not unnatural that we should venture an enquiry as to the
probable extinction of the kangaroo, considering the enormous numbers
which are being slaughtered annually, and to make the further enquiry
whether it would not pay to breed, just as sheep are raised for their
wool and cattle for their hides. Mr. Kennon answered in the affirma-
tive, and showed us a letter from a country storekeeper in a kangaroo
distiict in which the point was referred to. “The time is fast approach-
ing,” he wrote, “ when the kangaroo will be a thing of the past, and I
am surprised that their rearing is not an established industry in suit-
able situations, considering how vast are the tracts of country in
Australia only suitable for the kangaroo.”
A. 11. Mussina & Co.. rrinter«, 2C (New Nos., 277 and 279) Little Collins Street East.
0
& Ifc'UO
