

THE
FREE EDUCATION BILL.
A HISTORICAL SKETCH.
“ The Bill is unfair to persons carrying on private schools .”—Hon. A. M.
SIMPSON.
“ The Bill is a portion of a series of measures , the design of which is to
shift all the taxation on to the shoulders of a certain portion of the community ,
while the other portion of the community wants to have all the representation .” —
HON. R. C. BAKER.
“ It is a privilege to parents to assist in the education of their children .” —
HON. J. H. ANGAS.
“ There is a surplus—a coating of velvet over a deep pit. But how about
the following years?" — HON. A. R. ADDSON.
“ We cannot afford it.”— HON. J. WARREN.
“ We ought not to afford it.” — HON. S. TOMKINSON.
“A large majority would he found in favor of free mutton .” — HON.
E. WARD.
“ I say we are creating a lot of larrikins. ... I must ask the Govern-
ment whether they will not take some means of stopping the larrikinism which is
growing up in our midst , promoted by our system of education.” — Vincent
PYKE M.P., in New Zealand
THIS PAMPHLET IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED
TO
THE EDUCATIONAL MALCONTENTS
OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
BY
M. J. WHITFIELD.
SIXPENCE.
Adelaide:
HUSSEY & GILLINGHAM, PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS, 28, WAYMOUTH STREET.
1891.




THE
FREE EDUCATION BILL.
A HISTORICAL SKETCH.
“ The Bill is unfair to persons carrying on private schools." — Hon. A. M.
Simpson.
“ The Bill is a portion of a series of measures , the design of which is to
shift all the taxation on to the shoulders of a certain portion of the community,
while the other portion of the community wants to have all the representation ” —
Hon. R. C. Bakes.
“ It is a privilege to parents to assist in the education of their children .” —
Hon. J. H. Angas.
“ There is a surplus—a coating of velvet over a deep pit. But how about
the following years V' — Hon. A. R. Addison.
“ We canyvot afford it." — Hon. J. Wabren..
“ We ought not to afford it."— Hon. S. Tomkinson.
“A. large majority would be found in favor of free mutton.’ Hon.
E. Ward.
“ I say we are creating a lot of larrikins. ... I must ask the Govern-
ment whether they will not take some means of stopping the larrikinism which is
growing up in our midst, promoted by our system of education. Vincent
Pyke, M.P., in New Zealand
This Pamphlet is respectfully Dedicated
TO
THE EDUCATIONAL MALCONTENTS
OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
BY
M. J. WHITFIELD.
SIXPENCE.
Hussey & G-illingham, Printers and Publishers, 28, Waymouth Street.
1891.




THE FREE EDUCATION BILL.
A HISTORICAL SKETCH.
“ Offences must come
When' the Playford Ministry came into power in 1890, the Premier
announced the motto, “ Justice to all,” to be his guiding principle of
action. Shortly after followed an attempt to pass the Free Education
Bill. For the benefit of those who live remote from the seat of govern-
ment, and who are not familiar with the language of Parliaments, it should
be explained that in South Australia the term “ free education ”
describes a system by which taxpayers generally pay for the rudimentary
clerical education of a portion of the community. “Free education” is
a burden to all, while it is at best only a partial benefit. “ Free educa-
tion,” though a misnomer, will in this pamphlet be used in its ordinary
Parliamentary and Ministerial sense. In 1890 Playford’s Free Education
Bill passed the House of Assembly, but was thrown out in the Legisla-
tive Council by a majority of one vote. The Bill then remained in
abeyance for a season, but early in the session of 1891 it was brought out
again, and again passed the Lower House. Free education is a popular
measure in the House of Assembly, and those members who spoke against
it, and resisted the passage of the Bill, can claim the lasting gratitude of
the friends of freedom.
After the Bill had passed the Lower House, expressions of uneasiness
and alarm began to be heard on all sides, and an inflow of petitions to
the Legislative Council set in, quite unprecedented in the annals of
legislation in South Australia. These petitions expressed emphatic
objections to the Bill, and prayed to the Honorable House for its rejec-
tion. Scattered throughout the colony, on small farms, gardens, and
vineyards, grouped in villages and country towns, are some 18,000
Lutherans, who pay taxes, and who enjoy a certain amount of protection
and countenance from Government.* There are 40 Lutheran Church
Schools in South Australia, and on July 28 a petition was presented to
the Legislative Council on their behalf by the Hon. R. C. Baker. It was
worded thus :
Honorable Gentlemen —
We, the undersigned, electors of the province of South
Australia, hereby humbly pray that your Chamber may reject the Educa-
tion Bill now before the Legislative Council, and for this our petition we
beg to state the following reasons :
1. That the country has not asked for free education.
* The Lutheran schools have cost about £12,000.


2. That the expenses consequent upon the introduction of free
education will be greater than the country is able to bear.
3. That it is a hardship to those parents who have for years educated
their children at their own expense, to compel them to pay for the educa-
tion of such children whose parents are well able to pay for it themselves.
4. That the Bill before your Honorable House is based on the wrong
principle that the children are the property of the State, and that the
latter, therefore, has the duty to educate them. We maintain that as it is
the duty of the parents to feed and clothe their children, they are also
bound to educate them. We are quite willing to pay our moiety towards
the education of children whose parents cannot pay for it themselves, but
we consider it a great injustice to be compelled to pay for those who are
equally or even better able to pay than we are.
5. That it does not follow that as education is compulsory it must
also be free. This is surely not sound reasoning. The State requires of
its people to appear decently clothed in the streets, and rightly punishes
the trespassers; but does it follow from this law, which the sense for
decency and morality imposes, that the State must provide the people
with clothing 1
For the above stated reasons we humbly ask the Honorable Council
to reject the Bill for free education.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray, &c.
(Signed) Ph. J. Oster A. Strempel
C. Dorsch G. A. Heidenrich,
For the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia.
J. A. Auricht,
For the Evangelical Lutheran Immanuel Synod of South Australia.
It should here be stated that an Education Act has been in force
here since 1875, and that by this Act children of all classes are entitled
to receive a certain sort of elementary education in State schools.
Education, though compulsory, has not hitherto been given without charge,
as parents have been expected to pay 6d. or 4d. a week for each child
attending a State school; these fees, however, only cover about a fifth
part of the money each child costs the State, and they are in certain
cases remitted altogether ; it is thus evident that the pupils of the State
have been a long-standing burden to the taxpayer. It will be noted that
the Lutheran petitioners asked no boon or favor, and expressed no objec-
tion to existing evils, they simply asked not to have them intensified.
The following petitions, signed by Kesidents and Taxpayers, have
been laid before the Legislative Council, praying for the rejection of the
Bill


Petition dated Presented by
July 29, Hon. S. Tomkinson, M.L.C., bearing 790 Signatures.
July 29, Hon. J. Y. O’Loghlin, M.L.C., 345
August 4, Hon. J. H. Gordon, M.L.C., 376 „
August 11, Hon. A. M. Simpson, M.L.C., 647 „
August 12, Hon. A. M. Simpson. M.L.C., 1,831 ~
August 18, Hon. J. H. Angas, M.L. 0., 703
August 25, Hon. J. L. Stirling, M.L.C., 200 „
September 2, Hon. J. Bosworth, M.L.C., 185 „
5,077
An examination of these petitions, which are preserved at the Legis-
lative Council House, will show that they have come from nearly every
district in the colony, from Mount Gambier in the south, from Port
Augusta and Port Pirie in the north, —they bear the signatures of
Archbishop Reynolds and the clergy of his diocese, the Catholic
clergy of Port Augusta, together with large numbers of the Catholic
laity. Among Anglican signatures are those of Dean Marryatt, Arch-
deacon Dove, Canon Andrews, Revs. James Sun ter, C. W. Hawkins, and
many other leading clergymen and laymen. Protestants of all ranks
have signed, old and elderly people, pioneer colonists, who, having
brought up their own families, argue that they should not be taxed for
the children of others. Poor widows signed because they fear an added
burden of taxation; some signed because they already support private
schools ; some because they live by private teaching; some because they
distrust a Christless system of education ; others because they object to
State education on principle, —besides all these were many Lutheran
names, signed doubtless for reasons stated in their petition. Had time
allowed, more signatures would have come in, as many who wished to
record their protests had found no opportunity of doing so.
Petitions, signed by teachers in private schools, have also been
presented to the Legislative Council against the Free Education Bill,
giving amongst others the following objections :—■
1. That free education without a subsidy to private schools would
deprive many of the petitioners of their means of living, some being,
from various circumstances, unable to follow any other employment.
2. That it would render it more difficult for parents to have a
religious education imparted at the same time with a secular one, because
many of the private schools would be closed unless a subsidy for secular
results were granted.
3. That the electors have not asked for free education, and the
financial aspect does not justify the extra large expenditure.


4. That it would tend to pauperise a large portion of the people at
the same time that it would impoverish other portions.
5. That a considerable amount of money has been expended in
building, establishing, and maintaining private schools, and that in many
cases the property is useless for any other than school purposes.
Summary of Voluntary School Teachers’ Petitions Presented to
the Legislative Council.
Petitions Presented by
August 19— 32 signed by 82 Teachers, Hon. John Warren, M.L.C.
20— 19 „ 24 „ Hon. J. Bosworth, M.L.C.
„ 20— 22 „ 51 „ Hon. A. R. Addison, M.L.C.
„ 25 43 „ 86 „ Hon. W. Haslam, M.L.C.
„ 27 1 „ 1 „ Hon. S. Tomkinson, M.L.C.
Sept. 2 32 „ 41 „ Hon. S. Tomkinson, M.L.C.
„ 2—13 „ 16 „ Hon. A. R. Addison, M.L.C.
Total 162 Petitions. 3ol Teachers.
Representing a total number of scholars of 9,105, in average-
attendance of 7,618.
6 Petitions, signed by 8 teachers, in charge of 3-16 pupils, came
in too late for presentation.
Some of the petitions laid before the House are here given :
The Sisters of Mercy, Wakefield Street, have 328 children on their
roll, average attendance 265. Their objections are expressed as follows :
1. If your Bill should pass, we shall be doubly taxed, and we shall
have to contribute to a system from which we can derive no profit.
2. We shall be injured in our rights to a fair livelihood, to which
we have just claims by our training and our profession.
( Signed ) Julia Carroll Kate Fitzpatrick
Julia Murphy Ann Kenny
Mary Elizabeth Flanagan Honor Cunningham
Anne Dooley Elzearina JSTavarro Viola
Mary Connaughton Anastasia Sutton
Mary McMahon
The Christian Brothers, Adelaide, with 280 pupils on the roll, and
an average attendance of 260, object to the Bill for the following
reasons:—
1. It implies that the right of the Government is prior to that of
parents in the education of children.


2. By it the parental responsibility is weakened, which is likely to
have prejudicial effects.
3. The system of education which it proposes to make free, cannot
he conscientiously availed of by a large section of the community.
(Signed) J. G. Hughes E. C. O’Connell
W. P. Egan P. F. Riley
W. L. Lynch H. W. Fay
D. D. Quigley J. Leighton
From St. Mary’s Dominican Convent, Franklin Street, Adelaide,
comes the following remonstrance. The Sisters have 290 pupils on the
roll, with an average attendance of 193 :
1. Such a measure would be unjust to all, but particularly to Catho-
lics, who cannot conscientiously avail themselves of the education
provided by the State. Moreover, all would be taxed to pay for those
whose position in life should render them independent of State aid.
2. The Bill is quite unnecessary, as under the present system
provision is made for those who cannot pay, and therefore the proposed
measure would impose a heavy and useless burden on the State.
Then follow the names of the teachers —
M. C. Kavanagh E. Kernaghan
M. McNamara M. O’Shanahan
M. Dryan M. Henry
M. Power L. Kelly
M. Graham
Rev. F. Slaney Poole, Head-master of St. John’s Grammar School,
objects in these terms :
It is an unnecessary waste of public money.
It is an interference with the responsibility of parents.
It is an attempt to crush out of existence denominational schools.
(Signed) F. Slaney Poole, M.A.
W. A. Moore, Assistant Master.
W. Warner, Assistant Master.
Miss Manuel, High Street, Queenstown, with a school of 169 pupils,
average attendance 135, objects thus :
1. As the Act stands, education is free for those who cannot pay.
2. My pupils pay without a murmur.


3. The Bible is read in my school every day.
4. It will put three of my sisters and myself out of employment.
{Signed) Harriet Manuel Matilda Manuel
Mary A. L. Manuel E. C. Manuel
Oscar Tschirn, teacher, Robertstown, number of scholars 60, average
attendance 55, says that if the Bill were to pass,
Religion would be omitted.
German language could not be taught.
Children of German pedigree cannot possibly learn as much in a
State school as in a private school. They might learn to read English,
but they don’t know the meaning of it.
The community of Robertstown does not want a State school.
{Signed) Oscar Tschirn, Robertstown.
Another protest:—
1. That it will do harm to parents and scholars, because they will
value education less.
2nd. It is not needed, and the State cannot afford it.
(Signed) J. H. Lloyd, Head Teacher,
Church of England School, Walkerville.
Ho. of pupils on roll, 172 ; average attendance, 135.
From the petition of the Sisters of St. Joseph :
1. There exists no adequate ground for relieving parents or guardians
of their proper obligation to provide for the education of their families at
their own cost.
2. It is not consistent with a wise or prudent policy for the State to
assume the responsibility of selecting and enforcing a system of education
which interferes with the rights of conscience of a large, if not the
largest, proportion of the inhabitants of the province.
(Signed) Catherine Eickhoff Bridget McNamara
Harriet Mackle Bridget Whelan
Minnie Long Annie Tobin
Mary Carroll Ellen Byrne
These ladies have 103 pupils, with an average attendance of 75 at
Kensington. Also 214 pupils on the roll, average attendance 180, at St.
Mary’s Hall, Beulah Road, Norwood.


CHAPTER II.
“ I cannot interfere with the right of 'petitioners to approach the Council.” —
President of the Legislative Council.
From the confusion and complexity of modern legislation, it is
refreshing to revert to the young days of our national life. Under the
early English kings there was little need for taxation, the country enjoyed
all the blessings of free trade ; departments, bureaus, inspectors, commis-
sions were unknown, debts were uncontracted, the public lands furnished
the king with such money as he required. All local interests were
promoted by local action, landowners being liable for the three great tasks
of building bridges and fortresses, and serving in arms for national
defences; the famous Danegeld, established in consequence of Danish
invasions, was a tax on land, England being in fact a very paradise of
single taxers. In the days of which I speak, the king dispensed justice
in his own person, even in minute cases; day after day, week after week,
he would preside at his court, listening to the plaint of the poor, weigh-
ing evidence, pronouncing judgment, examining into the smallest details,
granting prayers and giving ear to the humblest of petitioners who had
an established right of audience. We have adopted English law in Aus-
tralia, and if the gentlemen of the Legislative Council are instructed in
English history they must be aware that petitioners have inherited a right
to address the House, and also to receive fair hearing and respectful
attention. But a new precedent is established in Australia —archbishops
and priests may sue, merchants and farmers may lay complaints, lawyers
and doctors may state their grievances, over-taxed shopkeepers and under-
paid clerks may unite in resisting an unjust and oppressive act, but their
prayers are vain, their petitions are unheeded. The old law of England
was set aside by the Norman conquest, but the English people have always
loved liberty, and by a provision of Magna Charta an old law was
renewed, which ordained that taxes could not be raised without the con-
sent of the nation; this wise and liberal principle being re-affirmed in
the reign of Edward I. But another order is established in Australia —
the taxpayer has only to pay, the legislator has only to spend. On the
twelve different occasions on which petitions were laid before the House,
all praying for the rejection of the offensive Bill, the gentlemen of the
Council, for the most part, continued unmoved, callous, careless, and
talkative. The names and social status of the petitioners were unnoticed ;
the weighty and forcible reasons given by the voluntary teachers for
objecting to the Bill were addressed to blind eyes and deaf ears. By the
insistance of the Hon. S. Tomkinson, several of the petitions presented
to the House on September 2 were read by the Clerk, but the words were
well-nigh lost, owing to the hum of talking all through the Council
Chamber. Such is the respect paid to “ residents and taxpayers ” by
their representatives in the Council.
For evidence as to whether the State-school system is a truly national
benefit, as is in some quarters still believed, we may turn to the last


census, which shows that, roughly speaking, about two-fifths of the
children are taught privately throughout the colony, while the other three-
fifths have an education provided by the State. The Free Education Bill
passed the Lower House on June 25. It was carried without any
reference to the census returns, which throw a strong light upon the
question of education in South Australia. Those members in the
Assembly who voted for it took no pains to find out what they were doing.
They had not asked how many teachers would lose their living, or how
many parents would sustain loss and inconvenience. They did not enquire
what interests would suffer, or how severely the Churches would be
injured by their legislative activity. In East Torrens alone were 18-
voluntary schools at the time when the census was taken ; several more
have been opened since that date, but of these facts the Premier, who is
one of the members for East Torrens, appeared ignorant. His consti-
tuency is, in fact, a remarkably intelligent one, and the people of the
district signed the petitions freely. As a rule, the residents who have
children are willing to pay for reading, writing, and arithmetic, and they
desire something more complete than such education as the State can
supply.* Many electors in East Torrens who have not signed the
petitions object to the present system of education, some having
expressed a wish to dismiss the State-school teachers, retrench the
inspectors, and close the doors of State schools.
There are more than 400 voluntary schools in South Australia. The
friends and supporters of these schools have found it difficult to obtain
the census returns necessary for a full exposition of their case. The
census is in the hands of the Ministers of the Crown, whose conduct
certainly colors the suspicion that they wished to keep the figures back
until the Bill had passed the Legislative Council. Some statistics were
at last obtained.
This is the abstract of a return laid on the table of the Legislative
Council on Tuesday, August 25, 1891, compiled from the late census
papers : —Number of children educated in State schools, 38,086; number
of children educated in private schools, 17,416 ; number of children
educated at home, 6,259 ; number of children unspecified, 2,204.
Total, 63,956.
Thus it will be seen that only 38,086 out of 63,956 are taught in
State schools, while 23,666 are taught privately, and unspecified are
probably taught in private schools, or about 59'5 per cent, in public, and
about 37 per cent in private schools, leaving out the unspecified.
It is here gratefully acknowledged that the voluntary teachers have
always had a few constant friends and painstaking advocates in the
Legislative Council; from these gentlemen the Bill received sturdy and
consistent opposition, forcible and unanswerable arguments being brought
to bear against it. These were met with hackneyed remarks on the
* St. Bartholomew’s School premises, Norwood, with land, cost over £1,400.
Number of children on the roll, 255 to 260; regular attendance, from 200 and upwards.


benefits of education, and the great advantages of getting it without
payment. It was also stated that members of Boards of Advice recom-
mend free education, and that State teachers object to the trouble of
collecting fees; also that poor children who are taken without fees are
considered in the schools inferior to those who come with money in their
hands. It has not yet been proposed to dress the children in uniform ;
until this is done, no equality can be secured. Though all are pauperised
together, some children will still be expensively clad, while the shabby
and dirty will get shabbier and dirtier as taxes are piled on their hapless
parents/ The Hon. Mr. Guthrie pleaded for the lumpers and sailors at
Port Adelaide ; he stated that among this class there is a great deal of
poverty, and it is often hard to find the money demanded for school fees,
even if it be only a few pence. Mr. Guthrie did not tell the House for
whom all those public-houses at Port Adelaide are kept open, noi did he
explain why the bars of those houses are crowded daily after the eight
hours of labor are completed, and when the period of recreation sets in.
The same men for whom Mr. Guthrie pleads can join in the expensive
celebration of an eight-hours carnival ; they can maintain trades unions
out of their slender resources ; they can support delegates, secretaries,
and agitators, though their wives may pinch and toil, and their children
become an added burden to an already overburdened State. Possibly the
lumpers referred to are still feeling the effects of that prolonged holiday
of last year, when nearly all Port Adelaide left off work and lived upon
the accumulated savings of former years. The strike is over now, and I
should have “ let bygones be bygones ” if Mr. Guthrie had not himself
brought the matter before the public.
All the arguments brought to bear against free education apply to
the system as it is, and still more forcibly to the Act which is expected
to come into force next January, and which will simply intensify existing
evils. The greater includes the less. The all-inclusive, unanswerable
argument against the Bill is that it is unjust. Once legalise an injustice,
and it is impossible to foreshadow the evils that will grow from The
ill effects shown to be produced by the State education of 1 ranee,
America, and Victoria, all come in logical sequence ; we must not expect
figs from thistles, nor good fruit from a bad tree. “ The Education Act
in danger” is becoming a party watchword and a battle-cry of the
Secularists. The Education Act is always in danger; there is no safety
for it; it is liable to attack on every side ; it is threatened with dissen-
sions among its friends ; it is supported by no permanent principle ;. it
stands upon no solid foundation; it is like a pyramid balanced upon its
apex. Christianity cannot countenance it, neither can Mohamedanism
nor Buddhism, for Mohamedans and Buddhists are true to their religions,
and teach their children the best they know themselves. . Free education
being sanctioned by no recognised authority, the Secularists who support
it can quote no text, no motto, no lofty precept, to justify its existence.
It is a pagan system, the product of unbelief and infidelity.


CHAPTER III.
“No one can teach religion who has it not.” — Richter.
‘ ‘ Do justice to the afflicted and needy.” — Psalm lxxxii.
“ South Australia is a country in which fads are taken seriously
—Melbourne “Argus,” September 17, 1891.
Out of “ the weltering chaos of sects ” comes a cry for “ Bible
reading in State schools,” and the cry has been echoed in the Legislative
Council Chamber by the Hon. Dr. Magarey. Religion is indestructible.
There are old Anglican families, old Lutheran families, and still older
Catholic families; there are Quaker families, and even Congregational
families ; but no one has ever heard of a family permanently attached to
Atheism or Agnosticism. Religion is older than the most ancient parts
of the Bible, and Christianity flourished when the history of its origin
was as yet unwritten. The youthful Timothy was made “ wise unto
salvation ” long before our modern Scriptures were compiled. I trust,
therefore, that the Rev. J. Nicholson and Dr. Magarey do not believe
that religion is imperilled because the Bible is not read in State schools.
Let the Bible be read by all means, hut let it be at suitable times, in
suitable places, under suitable auspices. Take care to select a teacher
who understands what he is about—a teacher who reverences the Bible,
and who values the privilege of imparting its lessons; find a teacher
who realises the force of Bible ethics, and whose own life and character
are in harmony with its spirit. State teachers have received no special
religious or scriptural training; there is no proof forthcoming as to their
competency to give religious instruction. Further, they have not been
consulted as to their willingness to teach a subject for which they are not
equipped, nor is it likely that they would willingly consent to an increase
of work without a corresponding increase in payment. In Victoria, for
many years past, the party favorable to Bible reading in State schools has
been vainly trying to carry its point. The State teachers in Victoria have
formed a union, and the united teachers have expressed an objection to
Bible reading in State schools; the State teachers here probably share
the same objection. The Rev. J. Nicholson and Rev. Robert Kelly have
petitioned the Council to introduce Bible reading into State schools,
regardless of the fact that those schools are common property. The rev.
gentlemen propose to perpetrate an act well calculated to raise a storm of
opposition from free-thinkers, agnostics, Jews, and others, who from
varying points of view object to Bible reading in State schools. The rev.
gentlemen have no right to interfere in the workings of any Government
Department—neither in the railway workshops, nor the Land Office, nor
the Telegraph Department, nor the Education Office. The Rev. J.
Nicholson is wrong in trying to foist an additional task on to civil servants,
who are already in many cases overworked and underpaid. I should be
glad to see the Rev. J. Nicholson founding his own schools; he could
then choose his own books and direct his own teachers. In such a course
he would be countenanced by Christian ethics, and upheld by ancient


Christian precedents; he would be drawn closer to the leading Christian
churches, and he would possibly discover that our boasted system of
education is, after all, anti-Christian to its very core.
While our educational system was under discussion in the Council,
it is to be regretted that none of its critics reopened the subject of
compulsion. I understand that in China a certain amount of education
is compulsory, a Chinaman who cannot read and write being rarely met
with, yet it is by no means free; every father is expected to educate his
own child at his own expense, just as he provides him with food, clothing,
and shelter. This system, while it indicates an advanced state of civili-
zation, is simple and economical; it upholds parental authority, and is
not incompatible with the uprising of a great people. The educational
law of Moses was somewhat similar, for that great leader commanded the
assembled parents of Israel to learn the law and impart it to their
children. Under the Christian dispensation there is no warrant for
compulsory clerical education. It is not enforced in the Scriptures, nor
even recommended. The compulsory education now in vogue is a recent
development. If it is not scriptural, neither is it authorised by ancient
custom. It is a product of faddists and fancy legislators. It is not yet
tested, and is liable at any time to be swept away by a flood-tide of
popular opinion.
The poor we have always with us.f Do what we will, still
there are sick men and poverty-stricken women ; there are anxious
fathers and toil-worn mothers ; rents must be met, and mouths
must be filled. There is a custom-house and a rate collector, and
a Government that gives lavishly to one man and takes freely
from another. Let us consider how compulsory education affects
the very poor. Here is a case, one of many : A sick woman is extended
on her bed, an infant crying helplessly beside her ; two children, a little
older, are playing in the dirt. The fire is out, the cottage is untidy ; the
father is away earning money, there is none to spare for hiring attendance.
The elder children are compelled to attend school, though it is their duty
to help their mother in her time of need. One daughter could have
minded the baby, another could have brought the poor woman tea or
gruel, and tidied up the cottage. But the law steps in, and the mother
must not claim the services of her own children, the old precept,
“ Honor thy father and thy mother,” being superseded by the compul-
sory clause. The Hon. Mr. Cotton is understood to be a benevolent
gentleman, and the Hon. Drs. Magarey and Campbell are supposed to
be actuated by philanthropic motives, but all these gentlemen voted for
free and compulsory education, without taking into consideration its effect
upon the indigent class ; they look n while the law of love and duty is
set aside by the Education Act, forgetting the mandate, “Do justice, love
mercy,” even while they stand forth as advocates of Bible reading in
State schools.J
t The poor are not forgotten. Catholics, Anglicans, and Lutherans all teach very poor
ehildre t n T^ t C 0 a U tholfcs have spent £35,000 on schools in this colony. See Archbishop Reynolds
speech in Southern Cross, September 25,1891.


CHAPTER IV.
“Expediency is the order of the day." — Archbishop Reynolds.
The Bill passed the second reading in the Council, on August 20,
by a inajority of 13 against 10. The three labor candidates, who have
entered the JH ouse since the rejection of the Bill last year, all voted for
it, their influence being sufficient to turn the scale. The labor candi-
dates have kept well together, and their conduct must be entirely
satisfactory to the “ labor party ” —the lumpers, loafers, and loungers
who elevated Messrs. Kirkpatrick, Charleston, and Guthrie to their
present position. The three members in question have been regular
and punctual in their duties ; they have sat time after time, listening
to much that they would rather not have heard ; they have said little,
and endured much, their patience being excelled only by that of the
venerable President of the Council. Arguments, however weighty, are
wasted on minds that have arrived at positive previous conclusions, and
the labor candidates voted solidly for the Bill. I am told that the
Hon. J. H. Gordon is a clever and rising lawyer. He listened to the
arguments against free education ; though a fluent speaker, he was too
clever to attempt to refute them ; he was also far too clever to lay bare
his motives for voting with the Ministry and against the churches.
The Hon. J. L. Stirling is not so clever as Mr. Gordon ; he voted for
free education, and afterwards made a speech which showed clearly
that his sympathies are in favor of voluntary effort, and that he is
aware that the schools of the State are “ model schools ” in name, but
not in fact. Subjoined is Mr. Stirling’s candid utterance, given to the
House on August 24, in connection with the debate on the capitation
grant: —“ There was a good reason why certain of the community
could not avail themselves of the State school, and there was another
reason which they noticed, and that was that owing to the absence of con-
trol there was a lamentable use of filthy and disgusting language. The
control which was exercised when he went to school was not exercised
now. In private schools it was exercised to a greater degree than in
the State schools, and if he had children he would like to have the
choice of a school where a proper check would be placed upon that
thing.” Mr. Stirling holds these views, and yet voted against volun-
tary schools, regardless of the appeals of the private teachers and of
the petitioners who entrusted to him 200 signatures. The Hon. J.
Darling belongs, I believe, to the large class of Christians who are
devoted to secular and worldly pursuits all the week, and are filled with
pious zeal on the Sabbath. Orthodox Christians of this kind have
by long practice learned to magnify nullities and to nullify verities ;
they are well able to stultify facts, and to “tolerate anomalies,” and it is
not surprising that, with his previous training and experience, the Hon.
J. Darling should vote in favor of free education. After the division


had taken place, the Hon. A. R. Addison moved to insert a new clause
in the Bill, to the effect that under certain stated conditions £1 a
head should be paid by the State to every child attending a private
school. This clause, after much discussion in committee, was attached
to the Bill on August 25, and it was thought by its opponents, both in
the House and outside, that the proposed clause might have the effect
of wrecking the Bill. It should be remembered that the sum named
would be ridiculously inadequate as a measure of justice ; further, that
the private schools have asked for nothing at all; they have made no
claims on the public purse, they have simply asked that the old law,
unjust as it is, may not be altered for a worse. The number of children
in State schools is 38,086 ; they cost at least £5 a child to the State
yearly, which comes to £190,430. About one-sixth of the people in
the colony are Catholics, so that one-sixth part of the money, or about
£31,730, belongs properly to Catholics, to all of whom the State schools
are more or less objectionable. There are about 10,000 Catholic children
in South Australia, and it will easily be seen that, even with the
proposed capitation grant of £IO,OOO, the Catholics would still come off
losers by over £21,000 a year. Added to this, the Catholic schools, if
dependent on Ministerial bounty, would be liable to inspection, and to
all the trouble and annoyance incidental to governmental interference.
The private schools throughout the colony might fairly claim £76,170,
that being about two-fifths of the money spent on State schools, while
the proposed grant would give them only £23,666.
The calculation may assume another shape. The fees now collected
in State schools amount to £7OO weekly, or to about £33,600 a year.
This money, which is to be given away when the Act comes into force,
belongs in part to the Catholic minority. Their share may be put down
roughly at £5,600, a sum which they will lose for certain, while the
paltry capitation grant proposed, at best only offered a possibility,
contingent on the will of the Lower House. Taking the “ injured
minority ” altogether, their share of the immediate monetary loss will
come to something like £13,440.
After the clauses for Bible reading and for the capitation grant
had been added by a majority of votes, the Council had another oppor-
tunity for rejecting the Bill, new clauses and all. A division took
place on August 25, it passed by a majority of 11 against 10, and was
then sent down with the additions to the House of Assembly for
approbation.
The Hons. A. R. Addison and J. Y. O’Loghlin together could have
reiected the Bill, but they failed to do so. Both these hon. members
opposed the original Bill, and voted for it when the capitation grant
was added. The arithmetic of these gentlemen must be greatly at fault
if they imagine that the proposed grant could in any sense atone for the
widespread mischief that must in any case follow the passing of the


Bill. The Hon. J. V. O’Loghlin, though a Catholic, has not acted in
accordance with the expressed wish of his own Church • he voted for
the Bill after presenting to the House a petition, bearing the signature
of Archbishop Reynolds, praying for its rejection. Mr. O’Loghlin had
said from the first that he did “ not object to free education, provided
it can be made free for all.” From this declaration it is evident that
the hon. gentleman has not fortified himself for his legislative duties
with the best teachings of his own church. Free education in the
Parliamentary sense of the term is repugnant to Catholicism, and con-
trary to the ancient customs of the Church. It has never been legalised
in any Catholic country. Cardinal Manning, having gone fully into
the subject, shows that when education is free and compulsory, a
dangerous amount of power is placed in the hands of Government
officials, also that home influences are weakened and parental authority
undermined ; it is, in fact, more injurious to those who receive it than
to those who pay for it. In countenancing free education, the Hon.
Mr. O’Loghlin no doubt meant well; apparently he was led astray by
the flickering light of the capitation grant, which took him far from
the ethics of his own Church into a veritable quagmire of Protestant
error.


CHAPTER V.
“ South Australia considers that the man mho can invent the most and
most searching engine of taxation is worthy of all honor. —Melbourne
“ Aegus,” September 17, 1891.
The Free Education Bill with the new clauses attached came before
the House of Assembly on September 8. Before the debate the
following petition was presented by Mr. Lake, M.P. It was signed by
Bishop Kennion, President, and the Rev. F. W. Samwell, Secretary, ot
the Board of Education of the Church of England in the Diocese ot
Adelaide, showing :—l. “That there are 25,879 children who, according
to the last census returns, do not avail themselves of the State system
of education. 2. That many of them are debarred from participating
in such system from conscientious scruples. 3. That unless some
measure of relief is included in the Bill to further amend the Educa-
tion Act 1875, great hardship will accrue to those who, while being
prevented from participating in the system, will at the same time be
compelled by law to support it, and thus to undertake a double burden.
Your petitioners therefore pray that your honorable House will, by
some remission of taxation, afford relief to those parents who cannot
conscientiously send their children to State schools, and who, while
called upon to bear the increased burden of the support of the State-
school system, have also to defray the cost of maintaining the schools
in which their children are being educated. Should your honorable
House not be able at the present to afford relief in the direction indi-
cated, your petitioners pray that the clause in the Bill introduced by
the Legislative Council, providing for a capitation grant, may be passed
by you, and be in force until such time as the remission for which we
ask may be provided.”
It is painful, but not surprising, to find that the above remon-
strance received but little notice or consideration in the Assembly, less,
even, than the preceding petitions had done in the Council. In a
darker age, when human ingenuity was taxed to provide novelties m
the torture-chamber, a patent thumb-screw or an improved bone-
wrencher was sure of a welcome; in the present day the counterpart
of these appliances, the modern engine of torment, is taxation,
and Bishop Kennion pleaded vainly for “ some measure of relief
and u some remission of taxation. Vain, also, weie t e
strances of the opponents of the Bill in the House, nor could the
flood of light thrown upon the subject by the census returns, nor
the cloud of financial difliculties looming over the future ot boutti
Australia, prevent the passing of the Bill; it was rapidly shorn of its
new clauses, and sent back to the Legislative Council to be reconsi ere
there on September 10.


Much difference of opinion prevails as to the ability of the colony
to pay for free education. It seems that the Treasurer has a surplus
sum of £30,000, which has encouraged him to believe that the country
can afford free education. The Hon. S. Tomkinson says we ought not
to afford it; the Hon. J. Warren says that as the season is dry and the
crops miserable, we cannot afford it ; the Hon. J. L. Stirling, with a
“ gullibility ” equalled only by that of the British money-lender, says we
can afford it, and that it will not lead to fresh taxation. Outside the
Houses of Parliament we hear continually that the country cannot
afford it. The Lutheran petitioners have spoken; have they not told
the Council that “ the expenses consequent on the introduction of free
education will be greater than the country can bear 1 ” Have not the
Dominican Sisters assured the Council that free education will “impose
a heavy and useless burden on the State 1 ” Has not the Rev. Slaney
Poole averred that “ free education is an unnecessary waste of public
money ? ” and J. H. Lloyd declared that “ the State cannot afford it ? ”
These expressions of opinion are specially valuable as coming from
trained arithmeticians, who are also practical educators. The witnesses
I quote, being well versed in the art of economical expenditure them-
selves, have had special facilities for judging of the results obtained
relatively to the expense incurred by the Education Department. In
unendowed private schools, elementary education can now be obtained
for the small sum of Is. a week, 9d. a week, and even 6d. a week. The
efficiency of these schools is untested by Government agents, but
they are probably more efficient than the more expensive Govern-
ment schools. Half the children of eleven years of age cannot read
in the State schools; this, at least, was the verdict of those Victorian
inspectors who came over on purpose to examine four schools in
Adelaide, and there is no reason to believe that those which were
examined are below the average of State schools. Looking into the
facts and figures of State education, it is much to be feared that a
maximum of expense has bought only a minimum of education. The
loss and waste of the past furnish some data upon which future
expenses may be calculated.


CHAPTER VI.
The term “ honourable ”is in common use. We hear continually
of “honourable House,” “honourable members,” and “honourable
gentlemen.” Formerly the members of the Legislative Council worked
without payment—it was understood that they served their country at
the cost of inconvenience and loss to themselves. The term remains
simply as a suggestion of the past glories of the Council; since the
gentlemen in question have voted themselves payment the term is
no longer applicable; they cannot earn honour as well as money. Alex-
ander Hay, who tried to secure both, lost both. He was defeated at the
last elections, and it served him right Other “ honourable members ” are
likely to share a similar fate in the future. I have read lately
that the burden of national life in Italy is so heavy that the
people are taxed to the last point of endurance, while the revenue
is still unequal to the requirements of civil government, and that
during the current year two of the principal Ministers of State, under
the Crown, have of their own free will given up their salaries, and are
now working for Italy without payment. Here is a noble example.
As patriotism is not yet extinct, may we dare to hope that when credit
fails and debts increase, South Australia will also find “ honorable
gentlemen ” ready to work for their country and to forego their self-
allotted salaries 1 By such action the Council’s lost dignity may even
yet be recovered.
The rest of my story is soon told. The Bill would have been
“ wrecked ”if the Council had stood fast by its own clauses. The
Lower House having refused to allow the clauses to remain, the Upper
House had still power to refuse to pass the Bill without them.
Rumours were abroad that the Ministry was prepared to act without
reference to the will of the Council; the Minister of Crown Lands had
even threatened to do so if the Bill were not passed by the Upper
House. During the debate of September 10 there was much changing
about of opinions. Dr. Magarey, after succeeding in attaching his
Bible-reading clause to the Bill, voted against his own amendment,
and helped to get it off again. Missionaries to the heathen have faced
a cruel death holding Bible in hand: they have braved torments for
the sake of the precious volume. Dr. Magarey, not being animated
with the spirit of saints and martyrs, simply stated, in explanation of
his change of vote, that he preferred free and compulsory education to
Bible-reading, and, not being able to get both, he would throw over his
Bible-reading clause. Dr. Campbell followed the example of Dr.
Magarey. Then followed a changing of sides, mixing up, and compli-
cation that is difficult either to follow or describe. This remark,
however, does not refer to the Hon. F. E. H. Krichauff. The name


and accent of this gentleman suggest the thought that he is of
“ German pedigree,” though he is apparently destitute of all national
sentiment. He voted against the German language, German history,
German ethics, and the Lutheran religion, while he persistently
voted against the Lutheran petitioners. The faithful few who
had always opposed the Bill also remained firm, but several of the
members did not seem to know what they wanted themselves. Too
late in the day, Messrs. Martin and Darling discovered something
unwholesome and suspicious about the odour of free education. Mr.
Martin announced that he was “ not in favour of rushing things,” and
thought that under the circumstances it would be well to “let the
Government submit the question to the people.” Giving these excellent
reasons, Mr. Martin changed his vote. Mr. Darling, who is a “ hardy
Scot,” exhibits many of the characteristics of the race from which he
springs. As he did not like the clauses, he voted against the Bill after
they were attached. Nor does Mr. Darling like intimidation and
coercion. I believe he would have voted against the Bill if only to
show the Lower House that it cannot easily “snuff out the Council.”
This brings me to another large question. Whether the Assembly has
the power as well as the will to “ snuff out the Council ” must for the
present remain uncertain. The clauses were removed from the Bill by
a majority of votes. A difference between the two Houses was thus
avoided, and it is impossible to say what would have happened had the
Council stood firmly by its own amendments. One is tempted to
wonder what the Council is for. If it exists simply to echo the
opinions of the Ministry, a less expensive Council would suffice. The
labour candidates alone could ratify the acts and deeds of the
Assembly. Mr. Stirling or Mr. Gordon could do all that is required,
and an unnecessary outlay would be saved to the country. To go back
to my story. The clauses being withdrawn, the Bill passed; the
“ labour party ” has counted a victory, and free education has virtually
become the law of the land.


CHAPTER VII.
“Free education does not noticeably promote brotherly love , nor lead to the
extirpation of a single moral evil. . . . With the private schools have gone
many useful kinds of teaching. ... The South Australians are about„ to
sacrifice a good deal in order to obtain the doubtful blessing of free education.
The ,l Australasian,” September 19, 1891.
“In the abstract it may be admitted that the State has nothing to do with
religion ; but in the abstract it must also be admitted that the State has nothing
to do with the education of children. This is purely a matter of parental right and
responsibility “ Melbourne Daily Telegraph,” September 19, 1891.
South Australia is an unimportant colony, though a large area is
comprised within its boundaries. There is plenty of land to tax, but it
cannot be made to yield a large revenue, because there are no respon-
sible taxpayers on the land, for it is impossible to collect taxes from
nomadic: tribes of savages, kangaroos, opossums, wild fowls, crows,
locusts, and rabbits. The whole population of South Australia is in
numbers about equal to the “ injured minority” of Victoria. In London
alone there are ten times as many children as all South Australia can
count. Despite the lack of population, social and political complications
arise here as in older countries. There are rings, cliques, sects, parties
ad nauseam; there are free-thinkers, faddists, and false philosophers;
there are poly-taxers and single-taxers, —the labourer who would do away
with the capitalist, the radical reformer who would wipe away the
churches, the socialist who objects to everything that is venerable,
all these classes are largely represented in that over-crowded centre
called Adelaide. We ought to be happy, but we are not. We have
fertile valleys and rippling brooks, blossoming plains and fragrant
forests, untold wealth beneath the surface, and a blue vault above
our heads. It is just like a poem, only that the people are all jarring
and quarrelling, pushing and jostling, plundering and pocketing. One
of the State reading-books avers that “ education makes men better,
wiser, and happier. ” The right sort of education would certainly tend
in this direction, but in Australia an opposite effect has been produced.
Education is a domestic matter, a matter of social and religious
interest; it should not be mixed up with politics, nor with the party
warfare of the day. Yet we find conflicting forces battling round this
very question, rival hosts arranged against each other, all because little
Tommy and Jack, Susan, Sarah, and Bobby must learn to read. The
camps are divided as follows :
1. On one hand are the churches, Catholic, Anglican, and Lutheran.
2. All the private undenominational schools, rich and poor, with
their friends and supporters.
3. Very poor people whose children are already receiving free
education.


4. Old and elderly people who have educated their own families.
5. People without children, who, on various grounds, object to the
education system of South Australia.
6. The parents and guardians of those 6,259 children who,
according to the census returns, are “ educated at home,” often at great
trouble and expense to the parents.
It is possible, even probable, that if all the people composing
these six classes were added together the numbers would form an
actual majority of the population. If so, the “ injured minority ” of
Victoria, New South Wales, and New Zealand is in this colony repre-
sented by an injured majority, over-ruled by the advocates of com-
pulsion and secularism.
I will next summarise the supporters of free education, but before
going further I must define the meaning of the term “ labour party.”
Those who are toiling for the promotion of their own enterprises, and
are taking upon themselves the risk of failure and loss, are excluded
from the labour party, which comprises only men who work for wages
and form unions, and whose labours are limited by the eight hours
system. The labour party forms the great strength of the free educa-
tion party. It is understood that the labour party, and consequently
the free education party, are especially powerful at Port Adelaide, and
at the Peninsular towns of Moonta and Wallaroo. In and near these
places, however, a number of voluntary schools, some very large ones,
find support. Secondly come a majority in the Democratic Club and
Freethought Hall, the members of which, though secularists, are not
unanimously in favour of free education. Thirdly come the secularists
who profess Christianity, place exaggerated value on the Sabbath
school, and maintain that the schools of the State are not the places
for Christian teaching. For this class Dr. Dale and Rev. F. Hastings
are spokesmen. Fourthly, the 65 Wesleyan ministers who have agitated
for Bible reading in State schools. Through many tedious years they
have reiterated objections to a purely secular system, yet they still
believe in State education, their loyalty being, apparently, fed by the
hope that they will some day be able to re-model the schools on a
pattern of their own choosing. These diverse parties are kept together
by a fear of priestcraft and a desire to break down the power of
priesthood. State education is their chosen weapon of attack, and they
have sharpened its edge with the abolition of school fees. Fifthly
come a large number of Government officers, who support State
education, but whose “ love lies in their purses ” and their necessities.
These combined forces have won the day, but, even in their time of
triumph, there are signs and tokens of dissensions in their camp.


CHAPTER VIII.
“ The State cannot educate —Hebbebt Spencbb.
“ We ought to have free education here because they have it in
Victoria and other colonies.” I omitted to mention this argument
when I was enumerating those which have been used by the advocates
of free education. The experiment having been tried in other colonies,
another powerful reason is supplied to South Australia for not passing
an Act which has been attended with marked want of : success in other
places. The Government inspectors in Victoria have risen up in con-
demnation of the system which supports them, but, as their evidence
has been quoted in several places, I will confine myself to stating the
opinions of some of the self-appointed critics of Victoria. As long ago
as 1885 Mr. Benjamin Hoare, then of Geelong, wrote to the Argus as
follows : —“ I believe the Education Act has many deep sins to answer
for.” Speaking of the Government, he said—“ The worst work it ever
did in this colony, and the dearest, has been that of education.” No
one ventured to contradict these assertions. In 1886, the Rev. B.
Butchers, B.A„ after explaining that he is “ a thoroughly sound
Protestant,” wrote thus in the Daily Telegraph —“ The present Educa-
tion Act has intensified and increased the religious difficulty tenfold,”
and he warns his readers that it will never be settled “by the
perpetuation of a burning sense of wrong among a fourth part of our
population.” In the same year Sir Archibald Michie brought out a
bulky pamphlet in which he criticises the workings of the educational
machinery of Victoria, and examines the ideas that lie at the root of
the State system. He thinks it better for parents to pay school fees
when possible, and declares that there is much waste of time in the
schools, “unchecked indolence upon the part of children and
indifference on the part of parents;” that under the State system
“ boys are apt to become restless and lazy, and to lose the power of
application.” His opinion of the whole system is unfavourable. Mr.
Robert Harper, M.P., has also criticised with great earnestness. He
points to the fact that thousands of children remain untaught in spite
of the great expense of the system. He speaks of the disaffection
existing in the service, and of “the undue political pressure which can
be exercised by a large body like the teachers having ramifications
through the whole colony.” Mr. Harper finds that “efficient teachers
are in many cases underpaid,” and that “large numbers of men and
women who occupy positions as teachers for which they are not
qualified are altogether overpaid.” Mr. Harper shows that “the
present law has treated the people as if they were totally unfit to be
trusted with the education of their children.” He laments the
intolerable tyranny which is the necessary outcome of a centralised
State system of education.” It is five years since Mr. Harper spoke,


and the evils he complained of are not abated, the most democratic
Government being also the most conservative. Bishop Thornton
remarked several years ago that “ crime has been on the increase since
1880.” About the same time the Leader spoke thus to the Victorian
public : —“ The criminal classes are being largely recruited from native-
born youth;” and Mr. Brett, the Victorian Inspector-General of Penal
Establishments and Gaols, has declared that “an Australian type of
criminal is fast coming forward.” All the evidence we can get shows
that crime is increasing in Melbourne. The friends of free education
maintain that it cannot be held responsible for the decline of virtue in
Victoria, but it has, at least, proved powerless to prevent the onward
march of evil. Great dissatisfaction also exists in New South Wales
and in New Zealand. From the latter colony has come a practical
suggestion of great value. It is from the pen of A. R. Fitchett, M.A.,
of Dunedin. Speaking of State education, he says that it “has no
intrinsic excellence that we should desire it for its own sake. . . ,
It is an error to suppose that the State has any facilities for carrying
on education which, in a well-developed community, are not equally at
the service of private enterprise. . . . Education would not perish
though all Government schools were closed to-morrow. The colonists
of Australasia are sufficiently alive to the value of education, and are
abundantly able to provide schools for their children without aid from
the State.” Mr. Fitchett asks, “Is it impossible to advance? Are we
already at the end of progress?” As a means of progression he
proposes to sever all connection between education and Government,
and to open up “ free-trade in education.” It is cheering to find that
Mr. Fitchett believes that the change can be brought about quickly,
easily, and without the infliction of much individual suffering. In
the opinion that it will now be possible to efface the present system in
South Australia I am supported by that of the Hon. J. J. Duncan.
During the debate on August 4, Mr. Duncan, who is opposed to free
education, declared to the Council that “by passing the Bill before
them they would be driving a nail into the coffin of national education,”*
and he is certain that free education will “ strengthen the position of
those who clamour for a capitation grant.” So also has it strengthened
the hands of those reformers who only ask for “ free trade in educa-
tion.” When legislation has done its worst, we may hope for an
improvement. Much depends upon individual effort and influence.
Every right thinker in a small community helps the right side. If
loyal and liberal support be accorded to voluntary effort it will keep
alive private schools for a time, and we may reasonably hope that
relief will come ere long through united action on behalf of true
Freedom of Education.
Osmond-terrace, Norwood, October 1, 1891.
* See “ Hansard ’’ Reports for all quotations from the speeches of hon. members.


APPENDIX.
SELECTIONS FROM PETITIONS TO LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
Your petitioners object for the following reasonsl. That a system of
free education would injuriously affect the teachers m private schoo s, y
depriving many of them of their sole means of earning their livelihood. 2.
That it is not consistent with a wise or prudent policy for the State to assume
the responsibility of selecting and enforcing a system of education which
interferes with the rights of conscience of a large, if not the largest, propor-
tion of the inhabitants of the province. 3. That it is unjust to call upon the
general taxpayer to provide for the education of the children of persons who
nossess the means of doing so themselves. ■ , . KQ
P Number of scholars on roll last quarter, 232 ; average attendance, 158.
Henrietta Flannagan, Susan Howard,
Teresa Fay, Margaret Kerins,
Rose Dowd.
St. Joseph’s School, Dale Street, Port Adelaide.
We consider that every colonist should pay for the education of his
children. Free education is already provided for widows and those who are
too scholars on roll last quarter, 181; average attendance, 140.
Louisa Clinch, St. Leonards, Glenelg,
May Clinch, „ »
May Thackeray, Fulton Street,
St. Peter’s Church School, Glenelg.
1. I object because it is not wanted. 2. Because the injurious effects of
free education on the scholars are seen in the countries where it hasi been
adopted. 3. Because it is not for the good of the colony generally that the
State should monopolise the schools. . 99
Number of scholars on roll, 24; average attendance last quarter, 22.
Lucy Webb, Governess,
The Vicarage, Clare.
1. It would contribute to a destruction of many of our Lutheran denomi-
national schools. 2. Those parents yet supporting our schools would
unjustly be taxed for the education of others. v
Scholars on roll, 41; average attendance, 34.
Rudolph Ey,
Petershill Lutheran Church, near Riverton.


Your petitioners object—l. Because the passing of the Free Education
Bill will deprive us of our means of support. 2. Because the Government
will cause an unfair competition in education, for by the said Bill they shall
monopolise the education of youth.
Number of scholars on roll, 206 ; average attendance, 190.
Ellen O’Leary, Teresa Davis,
Margaret Mahony, M. J. S. Meade,
Rose Gillman,
St. Joseph’s School, Pirie Street, Adelaide.
It is uncalled for. It is unjust to the taxpayers in general. It is especi-
ally unjust to teachers in private schools.
Number of scholars on roll, 29 ; average attendance, 28.
D. J. Byard, 8.A., Principal.
J. Bodinner, Assistant,
Hahndorf College, Hahndorf.
It is uncalled for by the general public, and extremely unjust to the large
number of private teachers.
Scholars on roll, 50; average attendance, 40.
E. Futcher,
C. Gapp,
Carrondown Baptist Schoolroom.
It is unjust to the German Lutherans, who have always maintained their
own schools. The majority of electors are not in favor of it, and they have
not asked for it.
Number of scholars, 42 ; average attendance, 33.
W. Schumacher,
Head Teacher, Greenock.
Your petitioners object for the following reasons:—l. This school is my
only source of living for myself and family. 2. That I and my assistant are
giving unqualified satisfaction to the parents. 3. That Miss Selby and myself
have no business or profession whatever to depend upon, but to keep a
school.
Number of pupils on roll, 37.
Charlotte Selby,
Marian Selby,
Russell Street, Glanville.
Free education will mean that Roman Catholics, Anglicans, Lutherans,
etc., are either to be still further taxed to pay for the education of the
children of other religious bodies, or else are to sacrifice their own convictions
by sending their children to the Government schools.
. Number of pupils on roll, 51; average attendance, 46.
Elm a Neil,
St. Oswald’s School, Alfred Street, Parkside.


I object for the following reason, amongst many That the Model School
children are the worst nuisance in this neighborhood, and I do not want to
have their numbers increased.
Number of pupils ; 25 ; average attendance, Jo.
A. M. Martin,
Osmond Terrace, Norwood.
It would be injustice to denominational and private schools, as they must
lose a certain number if the Government throws schools open ‘ free of
charge ; ” and the money spent for that purpose might be invested differently,
considering the bad financial state of the colony.
Scholars, 58 ; average attendance, 51. R gTREMpEL)
Mount Gambier.
I protest against the Free Education Bill; it will not tend to advance the
religious principles of the young, the Bible not being read m schools.
I may mention that I am a widow and a cripple, and have no other means
earning my living than by keeping a small school.
Number of scholars, 24 ; average attendance, 18 to 20.
Eliza Ann Cox,
Gladstone Road, Prospect North.
Your petitioner objects for the following reason That it will decrease
the attendance of this private school.
Number of scholars, 24; average attendance, 22.
Ida M. Fells,
Farrell’s Flat.
Free education being introduced, would cause attendance to decrease.
Scholars on roll, 42; average attendance, 35. R Paterson ,
Kadina.
I hope to earn my living by my school.
Scholars, 18; average attendance, 17.
D. M. Read,
Deane Villa, Strathalbyn.
I have brought up my own children at my own expense, and think it
unfair that I should now be taxed to pay for the education of other peoples
ehiidren. roll _ Giriß) 2 4 ; boys,. 22. Average attendance—Girls, 22 ;
boys, 20. £ Fuge, Master,
Esther Fuge,
George Street, Norwood.


Mary 0 Brien, Thebarton, objects because she has no other means of
livelihood.
Scholars on roll, 130 ; average attendance, 100.
Ph. J. Oster, jun., objects because free education would do great harm
to the private schools. It would be unfair to those bodies which at great
expense have established their own schools.
Number of scholars on roll, 26 ; average attendance, 22.
St. Martin’s Lutheran School, Rosenthal.
A. Dallwitz says : —No true morality can be taught without teaching the
Bible. Free education means closing our private schools. Free education
will be an injustice to those parents who send their children to private schools.
Pupils on roll, 50 ; average attendance, 45.
Eben-Ezer, Stockwell.
The law is unfair to the poor, who cannot send their children constantly
to a school, or who live a distance from a school. The rich will be more bene-
fited than the poor.
Pupils on roll, 51; average attandance, 40.
S.M. Paulina,
S.M. Winifred,
Roman Catholic School, Caltowie.
It aggravates the injustice under which we are already suffering.
Number of scholars, 165 ; average attendance, 140.
M. J. Harvey,
Agnes Sweeney,
St. Joseph’s School, Lower North Adelaide.
By free education the private schools will suffer severely, and a great
many teachers will then be quite unable to gain a livelihood by teaching.
Number of pupils on roll, 54; average attendance, 44.
Gertrude Mary Hodge,
Lizzie Ethel Hodge,
Peel Street, Yatala.
I object to the Bill being passed, because my school is my sole means of
livelihood, and the Bill may deprive me of my scholars.
Number of scholars, 34; average attendance,
C. M. Burnett,
May Stock,
High Street, Kapunda.
Susanna McKeown and Bridget O’Rourke object—l. Because it would
ean act of injustice to the people. 2. Because Roman Catholics would be
taxed to support schools that they cannot in conscience make use of.
Number of scholars on roll, 46 ; average attendance, 40.
Se venhills.


Free education would deprive us of our schools, which are a blessing to
the country, and would bring private teachers with their families into great
trouble, and drive a good many really to despair.
Number of scholars on roll, 27 ; average attendance, -4.
Johann Lowke,
Lights Pass.
1. It will throw the burden of educating the wealthy on poor people, who
rln not believe in the present system, and cannot avail themselves of it. 2. It
•will increase the enormous outlay which must be incurred if the tree system
£to be anything better than a farce. 3. It will destroy healthy competition
crushing many efficient schools, and thereby paralysing the mainspring of real
Number of scholars on roll, 150 ; average daily atendance, 112.
Sabina Campbell, Mary A. Meskell,
Ellen O’Loghlin, Elizabeth Deering,
August 17, 1891. St. Joseph's School, Russell Street, City.
The Government has no right to enter into competition with private
individuals either in trade or education. Parents who object to their children
being herded together in large numbers for instruction, either from fear of
moral contamination or on account of delicate health, will be doubly taxed
from no fault of their own.
Number of pupils, 20 ; average attendance, 20.
Sarah Hall,
Eleanor Hall,
North Terrace, Adelaide.
We think it unfair to make heads of families pay heavier taxes than they
do at present We have a number of destitute children attending our school.
Number of pupils on roll, 90 ; average attendance, 70.
Veronica OBrien, Agnes O’Brien,
Catherine O’Brien,
High Street, Glenelg.
Your petitioners object for the following reasons :—l. That the present
system of State education is equal to all requirements 2 That the proposed
Dlan of free education will be far more costly to the State. 3. That the
parents of the children educated are the proper persons to pay for that
education. ,
Number of pupils, 30 ; average attendance, 2b.
Frances J. Bennett, Ellen M. Bennett,
Mary Roscrow
Riverton.


I think free education quite unnecessary. I hope and trust that the Bill
will not pass.
Scholars on roll, 20; average attendance, 16.
Ruth McDougall,
Claraville, Mount Gambier.
Increased taxation will surely be the result of free education.
Number of pupils, 14; average attendance, 13.
Auguste Selina Thurm,
Maitland, Yorke’s Peninsula.
With regard to Catholics, the Act tends to withdraw Catholic children
from Catholic schools, thereby depriving the said children of that portion of
instruction which (in the Catholic opinion) is the foundation and corner-
stone, the warp and woof, of all solid and profitable education—religion.
Number of pupils on roll, 59 ; average attendance, 42.
Sister Mary Anastasia, Sister Mary Ignatius,
Sister Mary Martina,
Young Street, Wallaroo.
Your petitioners object to the Bill for the following reasons :—l. Be-
cause, as taxpayers, if your Bill should pass we will be doubly taxed, and have
to contribute to a system from which we can derive no profit. 2. We will be
injured in our rights to a fair livelihood, to which we have just claims by our
training and our profession.
Number on roll, 74 ; average attendance, 74.
Catherine McKay, Ellen Meagher,
Nor ah Wells, Mary Power,
St. Vincent’s Catholic Orphanage, Goodwood.
It would deprive of employment a number of persons, who are now, and
have been for some time, earning a livelihood by diligent and useful work as
private school teachers. In the event of the said Bill being passed, it will be
doing a great injustice to that class of teachers.
Number of pupils, 68 ; average attendance, 55.
Florence E. Morris,
“ Irwin ” Private School, Wallaroo.
1. We, Lutherans, feel conscience-bound to give our children in school
religious instruction, which is not possible in Government schools. 2. The
first German Lutheran settlers have endeavored with all their efforts to attain
that aim, and have carried it into effect, with many expenses, to establish and
to maintain German private schools. 3. The Bill for free education would,
doubtless, increase our tax.
Number of pupils on roll, 36 ; average attendance, 34.
Geo. Festersen.
August 16, 1891. Petersburg.


I object to the Free Education Bill because there are many female
teachers like myself who are depending upon their schools for a living.
Pupils on roll, 38 ; average attendance, about 30.
K. M. Thomas,
Little Hampton.
It would cause our children to lose religious instruction, which we con-
sider indispensable. It would also be a great injustice to the- German colo-
nists, as it would tend to exterminate their native language ; and last, but not
least it would cause an immense expense to the exchequer, and put a still
heavier burden on the shoulders of those who have hitherto been educating
their children at their own expense, and with very good results.
Number of scholars on roll, 53; average attendance last quarter, over
90 per cent.
Edward Schwartz,
Neale’s Flat, Congregational Teacher.
It is unjust,' not asked for by the community, will deprive me of an
honest living, and cause additional taxation.
Number of pupils on roll, 50 ; average attendance, 40.
L. C. Bruess,
Mannum.
If free education is passed, the private teachers will suffer greatly by it.
Number of pupils on roll, 34 ; average attendance, 30.
Mary H. Watt,
Yatala House, Yatala.
We strongly protest against the Bill, as we get our living by private
teaching.
Number of pupils on roll, 31; average attendance, 18.
Laura Octavia Strickland,
Gertrude Mullock,
Charlton Street, Exeter.
It will probably interfere with my living.
Number of pupils on roll, 30 ; average attendance, 27.
Annie Roach,
Bayswater Road, Hyde Park.
I shall lose my present and my only way of earning a livelihood, not being
in possession of good health.
Number of pupils, 20; average attendance, 18. ,
R. J. Dalziel,
Mead Street, Sandwell.
We do not wish the children to be deprived of religious instruction,
which up to the present time they have had daily.
Number of pupils, 22 ; average attendance, very good.
A. Jacobi,
Bethel, near Kapunda.


Your petitioners object for the following reasons : —l. That it is opposed
to the conscientious opinion of a majority of the inhabitants of this province.
2. That it is an unjust and unnecessary addition to the taxation of the colony.
8. That it establishes a Government monopoly in the matter of education.
Number of scholars on roll, 34 ; average attendance, 31.
Thomas Field, Principal,
Robert H. Pulleine, Assistant,
Collegiate School, North Adelaide.
1. It undermines the authority of parents ; it robs the parents of the last
shred of self-respect. 2. The term “ free education ”is a misnomer, for the
expenses of education must be paid by somebody; therefore it is only fair
that the responsible parties, viz., the parents, should bear the cost. 3. It is
unjust and unfair that parents who already pay for their children's education
should be forced to pay also for the children of other people. 4. It is illogical
to conclude as education is compulsory, it must be free, for the provision of
raiment is compulsory in every civilized State, but no sensible person would
infer from this that the Government is obliged to provide it free of cost.
Number of scholars on roll, 110 ; average attendance, 95.
C. Krichauff,
H. Fischer,
German-English Martin Luther School,
Flinders Street, Adelaide.
The Free Education Bill will aggravate the injustice under which the
Catholics of South Australia are suffering with regard to the education of
their children.
Number of scholars on roll, 67 ; average attendance, 55.
Stephen Grogan,
St. Lawrence’s Grammar School, Ovingham.
1. If your Bill should pass we shall be doubly taxed, and have to contri-
bute to a system from which we can derive no profit. 2. We shall be injured
in our rights to a fair livelihood, to which we have just claims by our teaching
and profession.
Number of pupils on roll, 189 ; average attendance, 156.
Kate Rodgers, Mary Thomas,
Annie Briggs, Sarah Briggs,
Margaret Carroll,
St. Raphael’s Catholic School, Young Street East, Parkside.
1. It is unnecessary, because the needy poor are at present helped with
their children. 2. It interferes with the responsibility of parents. 3. The
Bible is excluded from State schools.
Number of scholars on roll, 108; average attendance, 85.
James Sunter, 8.A., F. M. Evans,
C. M. Pane, M. Wehrstedt,
St. Paul’s Church of England School,
Flinders Street, Adelaide.


The people have not asked for free education. Free education is not
necessary, as provision is already made for those who cannot afford to pay for
the education of their children
Number of scholars on roll, 100 ; average attendance, 80.
M. E. Dixon,
C. E. Dixon,
Young Street, Adelaide.
My school is a private one, carried on on the weekly system. Should the
Bill be passed, it must be the means of closing my school, which is my only
support.
Number of pupils on roll, 100 ; average attendance, 80.
A. Gillks, Principal,
E. Gilles,
Carrington Street, Adelaide
It will diminish the attendance of the private schools considerably, and
will thereby deprive us of our livelihood to an extent.
Number of pupils on roll, 54 ; average attendance, 40.
Kate J. Gill,
Prince’s Street, Adelaide.
The public school recently erected in Currie Street is in close proximity
to mine, it is therefore manifest that the attendance at my school would in all
probability be considerably lessened were the Bill adopted.
Number of pupils on roll, 43 ; average attendance, 33.
A. F. O’Sullivan,
St. Patrick’s School, off Franklin Street, Adelaide.
Free education will be a great encouragement to negligent parents to
become still more negligent. Free education will gradually ruin nearly all the
private schools ; it will ultimately lead to the result that most of the children
of the colony, no matter how various may be thetr minds and their prospects
in life, will be taught on the one dry, uniform, unsympathetic, official plan.
Number of pupils on roll, 40; average attendance, about 00.
Emma M. Plunkett,
Osmond Terrace, Norwood.
Whilst the school fees now charged to parents do not press heavily upon
them, their abrogation would largely increase the taxes upon the community,
already sufficiently burdened through the Customs, by the land tax, the income
tax, and by the Municipal and District Councils rates.
Number of pupils on roll present quarter, 70 ; average attendance, 55.
Florence Gillman, Eliza Welsh,
Kate Roughan,
St. Joseph’s School, Mitcham.


, P efc i tlo “ ers °bj e ct to the wrong done to the children, who will thus
oe deprived of all religious training in their daily work.
Number of pupils, 78; average attendance," 62.
A. M. Westover,
M. Fiveash.
Mitcham.
living 6 ° bjeCt f ° r the Sake of tIlOSe P rivate teachers who may lose their
Number of pupils on roll, 46.
M. P. Hampton, Teacher,
K. S. F. Hampton, Assistant,
Thompson’s Place, Brompton Park.
, ;M i S t i e +v ßible is « ofc L r ead in State schools, it will be a great loss to the
■children it the private schools are closed.
Nine pupils.
Mary N. Lipsett, Teacher,
Clare.
It is the duty of parents and guardians to provide for their children and
to educate them ; the law of God commands them to do so. 1 think he is a
mean fellow who will ask the public to pay for the education of his children
x\umber of pupils, L>o; average attendance, 18.
Elizabeth Parke,
Echunga.
It is unfair and unnecessary.
Number of pupils on roll, 54; average attendance, 84.
S. Long,
Sturt Street, Adelaide.
I have my living to earn by teaching.
Number of pupils on roil, 52; average attendance, 40.
E. Irvine, Principal,
B. Irvine, Assistant,
Birkenhead
It is detrimental—l. to our respective Church and school. 2. To our
own interests
Number of pupils on roll, 58 ; average attendance, 51.
Oscar Wachtel,
Sedan.
ii ?if because it will tend to crush the spirit of self-reliance which
all should possess. It is unwise, as the amount thus saved by parents will be
spent m drink, and an increase of wretchedness will result.' The colony is
wouhTmvolve ab e t 0 mCrease of expenditure that free education
Number of pupils, 33 ; average attendance, 30.
Sara E. Horton,
Magill.


I support mysel f by teaching. I think that parents who are able to pay
for having their children educated ought to do so.
Number of pupils, 19 ; average attendance, 16 or 17.
Hannah Louisa Kidd,
Rundle Street, Kent Town.
Free education tends to pauperise the people.
Number of pupils on roll, 59 ; average attendance, 58.
E. O. Kelsey, Principal, J. C. Greayer,
Asenath Jones, F. Benny,
Dryburgh House, Hackney.
Free Education 10
It will deprive many of the scanty living they are now getting.
Number of pupils, 27; average attendance, 20.
Mrs. K. Williams,
Miss Williams,
Frederick Street, Maylands.
The Bill will lessen attendance at pi'ivate schools.
Number of pupils on roll, 40; average attendance, 28.
Elizabeth G- C. Mildred,
Katie M. B. Mildred,
St. Martin's, Campbelltown.
Being a widow, and entirely on my own resources, I should be rendered
•quite unprovided for were the Education Bill to pass. I have no other way
of getting my living and that of two orphan children.
Number of pupils on roll, 85; average attendance, 63.
Ellen Tunbridge, Principal,
Fanny Tunbridge, Chief Assistant.
Schoolhouse, George Street Wesleyan Lecture Hall, Thebarton.
Parents, to avoid paying double school fees, would send their children to
Government schools. Free -education would also bereave the children of the
poorer classes who at present attend private schools of their religious
instruction.
• Number of scholars on roll, 55 ; average attendance, 47.
F. A. Hensel,
Lutheran School, Bethany, Tanunda.
Hundreds of families living 20 and 80 miles from a township a-re unable
to make use of free education, and consequently are compelled to hire a
governess.
Number of scholars on roll, 18 ; average attendance, 15.
E. M. Muller, Principal,
Alice Knox, Assistant,
High Street, Kensingtoh.


I shall be deprived of a livelihood.
Number of pupils, 20 ; average attendance, 17.
N. McKenzie,
Private School, Melrose.
It will do harm to many of the private schools.
Number of pupils on roll, 60 ; average attendance, 48.
K. Caelile, J. Wayte.
M. Godden,
Norwood.
Lutherans will have their children brought up in their own religion.
No of scholars on roll, 80 ; average attendance, 27.
J. Buchholz,
New Mecklenburg
Hussey & Gillingham, Printers, Waymouth Street, Adelaide.




STATE EDUCATION.
[From T7ie Advertiser, April 12, 1893.]
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir—As the subject of State education is
receiving a good deal of attention at the
present time I would wish to draw the atten-
tion of electors to the following particulars
1. That the debit against State school build-
ings from loan money amounts to £429,761.
which capitalised means an annual interest of
£17,190, which the country has to pay in
addition to the annual allowance of £125,265 —
total, £142,455 per annum. 2. That it is dis-
honest to include £10,600 for building new
sohoolhouses in the Loan Bill, as they
are not reproductive works, and a
firm stand should be taken against allowing
any further amount to be included in any
future Loan Bill. I cannot conceive the Hon.
W. Copley’s notions of justice to the finders
in being a party to the inclusion of such an
amount in a Loan Bill, and hope the House of
Assembly will not only protest but refuse in
future to pass any further item of this kind.
Members will carry public opinion with them
in checking any further abuse of this kind.
With a falling revenue the taxpayers of South
Australia—the great majority of whom are
the working classes—will not be parties to the
increase of the item of school buildings.
The number of children on average attendance
is 35,369; cost per child, £3 10s. 10d., or in-
cluding interest on buildings, £4 os. 7d. per
child. Voluntary effort would do better on
half the amount. Wisdom ought to be learned
from Victoria, with her debit of £2,000,000
against school buildings, representing an
annual interest of £BO,OOO. 3. We must also
take warning from Victoria how State educa-
tion increases by leaps and bounds. Out of
every £1 raised for taxation purposes 6s. goes
for education purposes, equal to nearly a third
of the revenue. Taxpayers, think of this.
4. Teachers’ pensions—The State, in view of
declining revenue, cannot entertain the
proposal. In Victoria, through having
made teachers’ pensions legal, they find
they have made themselves answerable by law
for these pensions, which the present em-
barassed state of their finances shows ought
not to have been done. Therefore this pension
business ought not to be entertained if we are
to avoid future trouble, which is sure to come,
as this State education business incurs God’s
displeasure, and His blessing cannot descend on
our land. If the land is to be prosperous it
cannot be so until State education is swept
away, and the country thus freed from religious
dissensions. —I am, &c.,
MERCATOR.
N.B. —Taxpayers of South Australia
this Education burden will increase
by leaps and bounds—check it at
once.
