

The LADIES'
HOM E COMPAN ION
Compil e d by
Mrs H.J. Samuell.
ILLUSTRATED.
Your Advertisement will appeal
McCarron, Stewart & Co., Printers, Sydney.


CONTRACTORS TO
appoint^
HI
H. M. IMPERIAL NAVY.
To His Excellency The Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT DUFF, G.C.M.G.
Also the EARL OF JERSEY and LORD CARRINGTON.
TEA MERCHANTS.
CONSUMERS SUPPLIED WITH
PURE TEAS, direct from India, China, and Ceglon.
DELICIOUS “GLOBE” BLENDS.
ATCHBELBY & DAWSON,
aSTT GEORGE ST., SYDNEY (j ßondst:) :
Also MELBOURNE and BRISBANE.
ABSOLUTELY
O
&
CO
FAST,
ELEGANT,
DURABLE
AND CHEAP
TO BE HAD
Of ALL DRAPERS
<o.7^
CP
is*
CP
CP




MRS. H. J. SAMUELL,
COMPILER OF “THE LADIES’ HOME COMPANION.”
FROM A PHOTO BY
CHARLEMONT & CO.,
SYDNEY.


PREFACE.
I have first to thank my many friends on the Press
for their kind notices of my former Works :—“ The Boys'
and Girls’ Australian Christmas Annual,” and “ The House-
hold Cookery Book.” I trust they will be equally pleased
with “ TheLadies’ Horne Companion,” in which I have been
assisted by many experienced ladies and gentlemen, whose
names are mentioned under their respective headings.
I have much pleasure in dedicating these few pages to
the esteemed Mrs. L. W. Levy, “ Cahors,” Potts’ Point.
Di. samuell
“ Ahdi, ” 18 Lower Fort Street,
Dawes’ Point.


This little fellow was born
prematurely, being a seven
months’ child. After he was
born he slept in a Cigar Box.
He is now a fine, big, healthy
boy, brought up on
MELLIN’S FOOD,
which MRS. H. J. SAMUELL
takes great pleasure in recommending FOR INFANTS
and INVALIDS. She gives this Food to all her children
with marked results. They enjoy good health, and are
very strong. -
mm
i
m
Master FRED. SAMUELL.
-V
't'
o
IF
N
OLD
RMS
SUNBU
* INg
HA
D
&.C
/
u*
y
zJNe
H
Y
I
a
m
jyjL
p «0
p RIET
ORS .


THE LADIES’
HOME COMPANION
(ILLUSTRATED).
A COMPILATION OF
USEFUL INFORMATION
By Lady and Gentlemen Contributors.
EDITED BY
Mrs. H. J. SAMUELL,
Editress of “The Household Cookery Book,” and “The
Boys’ and Girls’ Australian 'Xmas Annual.”
RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED BY HER TO
Mrs. L. W. LEVY, “CAHORS,” POTTS’ POINT.
PRINTED BY
avron, gdmmtr* $c 44 Vi** Street,
For the Proprietor and Publisher:
H. J. SAMUELL, box 1077, g.p.0., Sydney.
Copyrighted, November, 1894,


Violets Musical Album.
dited by HARRISON WHITE.
Published by H. J. SAMUELL.
K COLLECTION of entirely NEW SONGS and WALTZES
by Successful Living Composers.
LIST OF
‘ I Shall Remember”
By Leon Gabon. A Drawing-room
Song. Sucsffb become popular,
“ Serenade ”
By G. B Allen. A tender melody
charmingly treated. Written for
Baritone voice.
“ A Heart’s Desire ”
By A. W. Juncker. Published for
the first time in this key. This
Song has proved itself a favorite
in all circles.
“ The Silence of the Past”
By Leon Caron. A sweet Love
Song. Suited for Mezzo-Soprano
or Baritone.
,l The Crimson Cloak ”
By G. B Allen. A fine dramatic
Song for Baritone voice.
“ Those Christmas Bells ”
By Tom H. Rainford. A first-
class Minstrel Song with Chorus.
CONTENTS.
“ Ere You Forget ”
By Harrison White. A plaintive
Love Song with entrancing waltz
refrain.
“ A World of Two ”
By Leon Caron. A beautiful
melody well suited to the words.
“Olive Waltz”
By Chris. R. Young, Jun. An
exhilarating, bright composition,
suitable for either the ball or
drawing-room.
“ Helena Waltz ”
By Mrs. H. B. Ludlow. Sure to
become very popular, owing to the
splendid rhythm of its melodies.
“ The Duchess of York Waltz ”
By Mme. Chakbonnet Keller-
mann. This is too well known to
need any further praise,being the
most popular waltz of the year.
Illustrated with PORTRAITS of AUSTRALIAN
QUEENS of SONG
Miss Colbourne Baber
Miss Maggie Moore
Madame Melba
Miss Nellie Stewart
Miss Ada Crosslky
Miss Violet Valley
Miss Nana Harding
And Others.
Forty PagoB All BRIGHT and ORIGINAL.
PRICE-ONE SHILLING.
On Sale by all Music & Book Sellers throughout Australia,


Ed. PINAUD’S
NEW * PARISIAN * PERFUMES.
The Graze at Home —The fiage in America.
Ed. PINAUD’S
NEW * PARISIAN * PERFUMES.
The Craze at Home —The Rage in America.
CONTENTS.
- PAGES.
Preface .. .. .. •■ • • • • • • 1
'Needlecraft (By Di. Samuell) 7,8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 10, 17, 18
Fancy Work (By Di. Samuel!) .. .. .. .. 18, 21, 22
Knitting (By Di. Samuell) .. .. .. .. .. 22, 28, 24
Crochet (By Di. Samuell) .. .. .. .. 25, 26, 29, 30, 31
Lace Work (By Di. Samuell) .. .. .. • • 31,32,35
New Stitches (By Di. Samuell) .. .. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40
ri m ■ TWIU 43, 44, 45, 46, 49,
Amateur Photography (By Edwin J. Welch) • g 2
Painting in Oils (By “Naples Yellow”) .. .. 52, 53, 54, 57, 58
Painting in Water Colors (By “Naples Yellow”) 58, 59, 60, 63, 64
Painting on China .. .. .. .. • • • • 64
Frames and Sundries 65, 66
Dyeing and Hints .. .. .. .. •• ..66,67, 68
The Complexion .. .. .. •• •• •• 68,71
How to Make Up (By G. S.) .. .. .. • • .. 71, 72, 73
The Hair .. •• •• • • •• •• 73,74,75,76,77
The Teeth .. .. •• G •• •• ..77,78,80
Manicuring (By a Manicurist) 81, 83, 84
Palmistry (By Walter Scott Given) .. .. 84, 85, 86, 89, 90
Physiognomy (By Walter Scott Given) .. .. 90, 91, 92, 93, 94
Dancing (By Ernest Needs) 94, 95, 96, 97, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104
Hints on Good Manners (By Eric) .. .. 104, 105, 106, 107
Household Remedies (107, 108, 111, 112, 113, 114,
(By Dr. H. Samuell, M.R.C.S.E.) (115, 116, 117
Household Medicine Chest (By Dr. H. Samuell M.R.C.S.E.) 117,118
Firms Recommended .. .. .. .. • • • • 120


Messrs. BENNETT,
DENTAE SURGEONS,
402 GEORGE STREET,
Near King Street, Opposite A.J. S. Bank.
ARTIFICIAL TEETH,
LATEST IMPROVED METHODS,
AT
most eeasottable chaeg-es.
ABSOLUTE SATISFACTION GUARANTEED IN EVERY CASE.
Workmanship Unsurpassed in the Australian Colonies.
ALL OPERATIONS PAINLESS.
MISS FLORENZ,
CORSET MAKER,
I.A. HUIsTTIEjIR/ street
(FIRST FLOOR),
YDNEY.
Dr. PERCY BENNETT
(Formerly of ISS Macquarie Street)
BE GOITSTJLTED
AT THE
Corner of KING and PHILLIP STREETS,
DAILY.


THE LADIES’ HOME COMPANION.
NEEDLECRAFT.
BY DI. SAMUELL.
A pretty cushion can be made of ruby plush and helio-
trope satin ; the centre is a square, made of strips of plush
and satin joined together, and t en featherstitched to cover
seams ; the four pieces surrounding the centre can be
embroidered in any pretty design, to harmonise with the
above colors.
Another pretty style is a plain square of sapphire blue
velvet or plush, embroidered with a bunch of daisies,
artistically grouped in one of the corners, finished off with
a pretty bow of ribbon ; edge all round the cushion with a
cord of gold and blue.
A unique tidy can be made for decorating a sofa or
chair, by cream serpentine braid ; cut stiff white muslin
the size of a shilling, then take the braid and put round
the muslin, forming each scallop into a point; finish off
the first row, then do another within it; cover a button
with white or yellow silk and sew on centre.
To form a rosette, join very neatly on the wrong side,
three or four in a row, and six in length.
To complete the general effect of a pretty and delicate
room a lamp shade is needed; one can be made of pink
satin, with a flounce of same color lace, and trimmed with
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


clover blossoms and green leaves, or ferns. A wire frame to
fit tlie top of lamp and one lower, with a few supports be-
tween the two. The sateen is lined with a firm, light
material of the same color, the lace put on the edge, the
fulness is gathered into a heading at the top, which hangs
down, the flowers are arranged with artistic grace on one
side in such a way that they will not fall. One made in
white sateen and gold colored lace is charming.
Pillow and Sheet Shams.
A very pretty set of pillow and sheet shams can be made
of any odd scraps of embroidery and insertion, neatly
sewn together in the shape of crazy work. It is necessary
to have one row of insertion and edging round each article
alike, any width desired. Nightdress bags or cases can be
made to match the above.
A pretty slipper and hose bag may be made of a bright
colored material, lined with sateen, a strip of cretonne,
or the same material, lined and joined across the bottom
and turned up about half-way, then divided by feather-
stitching through the centre, a draw-string through the
top. This is a very useful bag.
Child's Table Bib.
A decided improvement on the old fashioned bibs for
children is made of a towel. Purchase the desired length
towel to cut two bibs, cut it in half and hollow out at the
top. It is better to get the towel all white, and work a
fancy border in colored worsteds. Bind the neck with
white tape, and cat-stitch with color. Be careful not to
get the towels too wide, or the bib will always be over the
hands.
Glove Case.
Materials : Silver-colored leather canvas; lilac cashmere
or Llama; 1| yards lilac sarsenet ribbon, 1 inch broad;
black and lilac Berlin wool in two contrasting shades ;
twenty-four little enamel buttons ; white sewing silk.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


The outer covering of the case consists of a piece of silver-
colored leather canvas, 21 inches long and 6-| inches broad,
sloped off equally on each side, and measuring 16 inches
in length at the sides. The pattern worked in cross
and loose stitch in Berlin wool. The lining is lilac Llama,
fastened with wide button-hole stitch in white silk, orna-
mented with herring-bone stitch of the same silk; If inch
from the edge on each side are straps of white Llama,
f inch broad, which button over each other to form six
divisions for placing gloves. At the sloped end is a ribbon
with a knot, and two uneven ends for fastening the case
when rolled up.
Pillow-slips.
A novel idea in pillow-slips, is to make the slip just the
size of the pillow, cut the edges in deep points, and finish
with embroidery. Button-holes are worked in the ends
of half the points, and linen buttons fasten the points
together.
The pillow is first covered with a tight slip of silk,
putting on a full puff where the points of the white cover
come.
Wedding Cake Bags.
A late and pretty fancy is the making of satin bags in
which to send wedding cake to absent friends. Make them
of pink or blue, draw them together with a narrow ribbon
like an old-fashioned work-bag.
Decorate with the monogram or initials of bride and
groom. The cake should be wrapped in the kind of paper
which confectioners use about fresh candies.
A dainty handkerchief, designed for a bride’s
“belongings,” is of chiffon in the faintest tint of yellow,
with garlands of fine white flowers embroidered about the
edge.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Fancy Side Pocket.
The pocket is of heliotrope satin in two shades. The
paler shade measures ten inches wide by seventeen long,
and is hemmed at the upper edge, and drawn up with a
satin ribbon of the two shades, and fastened at the belt
with large loops. A piece of the darker satin eight and a
half inches by eighteen is then graduated at each end till
it is only six inches wide, and hemmed. It is then shirred
five times on each side leaving about two inches at the
outer edges, forming a ruffle. A fancy pin fastened on top
of the puff adds to the beauty of the bag.
Music Portfolio, or School Bag.
The foundation is a common school-bag. The sides
are ornamented with a valance of olive-colored felt and
crimson plush cut out in figures and appliqued. Fine
vines worked in feather, satin and point russe stitches.
The edges of Vandyke are corded and finished with olive,
blue, old gold and red worsted and silk tassels. Twist the
handles heavily with the cord and loop some, to hang
down, fastening it so that it will keep in place. If the
bag is intended for music slip two sheets of cardboard in,
the size of the bag, and the music will remain straight.
Work Bag.
Cut two pieces of cardboard the desired size, heart-shape,
slightly wad one side of each, and cover with red velvet,
cut out in the centre, where it is filled up with light green
plush.
-the latter is outlined with silk, 'woven with silver, and
between the outlines the space is filled up with satin and
feather-stitch and point russe of blue, red and olive silks.
Round the green plush a double line of the silk and silver
cord is sewn on with chain stitches of blue and point
russe of yellow silk. The outer edge of the velvet is
finished off with a thick cord of silk. Make- a straight
bag ot silk the desired length, frill it at the top with a
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


“PREMIER BOOTS”
—FOR —
LADIES AND CHILDREN
Excel all other makes in Fit, Fashion, and
Price. They are made from the most
recent French and American designs
and of the newest material.
—
ALL SHADES OF TAN, WHITE OOZ CALF,
AND BUCKSKIN IN GOOD VARIETY
OF STYLES.
PATENT LEATHER GOODS A “SPECIALITE
We give our Customers a great advantage in Newest
Fashions by making our own Goods. We receive
London Court Papers weekly, and every change
of style in Foot wear is at once adopted. Thus
we are always a Season in Advance of those
who have to import their Goods.
All kinds of Boots and Shoes made to Order upon
approved principles.
H. M. GEAHAM,
PREMIER BOOT WAREHOUSE,
324, 326 and 328 GEORGE ST.


JAMES INCUS & CO,’S PACKET TEAS
iiAr- £
BLENDED TEAS.
CARAVAN 5 and 10 lb. Tins, and 1 lb. Packets.
THE BILLY TEA 5 and 10 lb. Tins, and 1 and .J lb. Packets.
YUM YUM 5 and 101 b. Tins, and 1 and J lb. Packets.
KETTLE 5 and 10 lb. Tins, and 1 and A lb. Packets.
I' IVE STAR 5 and 10 lb. Tins, and 1 and J lb. Packets.
GIPSY 5 and 10 lb. Tins, and 1 and A lb. Packets.
SPECIAL No. 1 5 and 10 lb. Tins, and 1 and J lb. Packets.
SPECIAL No. 2 5 and 10 lb. Tins, and 1 and i lb. Packets.
INDIAN TEAS.
SOVEREIGN 5 and 10 lb. Tins, and 1 Ih. Packets.
BENGAL 5 and 10 lb. Tins, and 1 and £ lb. Packets.
RANEE I lb., 1 lb., 5 lb. and 10 lb. Tins.
ZENANA A lb., l lb., 5 lb. and 10 lb. Tins.
LOTA 1 lb., 5 lb. and 10 lb. Tins.
CEYLON TEAS.
No. 1 DIGESTIVE Lead and Gunny 1 lb. Bags.
No. 2—DARRACONDE .. .. Lead and Gunny 1 lb. Bags; also in 1 lb.
5 lb., 10 lb. and 20 lb. Tins.
AROMATTE Load, 1 lbs.; also in 1 lb., 5 Ib., 101 b. and
20 lb. Tins,
No. 3—GALLADALE .. .. Lead and Gunny 1 lb. Bags; also in 1 lb.
5 lb., 10 lb. and 20 lb. Tins.
MATTAGALLA 1 lb., 5 lb., 10 lb. and 20 lb. Tins.
No. 4—CARAVAN Lead and Gunny 1 lb. Bags also in 1 lb.,
5 lb., 10 lb. and 20 lb. Tins.
No. S—DONOOLA Lead and Gunny 1 lb. Bags; also in 1 lb.
5 lb., 10 lb. and 20 lb. Tins.
HILL-GROWN CEYLON.. .. Lead, 4 lbs. and 1 lbs.; also in lb., 5 lb,
10 lb. and 20 lb. Tins.
“GETTING A SLICE OFF ANOTHER MAN’S LOAF
WITHOUT PAYING FOR IT.’
Owing to the Marvellous Success of the Billy Tea nearly every Wholesale Tea
dealer in Sydney has attempted in some way or other to imitate it, either
“ general appearance of the Wrapper, or in the use of descriptive
words calculated to deceive. See that the words, BILLY TEA, are on
a ’! ,yT\ will get the Genuine Article. With certain men
the temptation to Get a slice off another man’s loaf without paying for
it is very strong indeed, and it is against this class of tradesmen we are
now warning you.


drawing string. Lay the two hearts one on either side of
the hag and sew them against the silk, then run a coarse
thread round the bottom of the bag and draw it together
and finish with a full bow. The handles are of heavy
cord shot with silver.
Foot Best,
The foundation is a box six inches high, twelve inches
long, and nine wide. Cover the top with muslin, and
stuff with curled hair. Cover the stool entirely with dark
red velvet, in which is worked round the sides a pattein in
chain-stitch and feather-stitch, with dark olive and pink
purse silk. Along the centre of top is a white vandyked
strip of flannel worked with the same pattern. The edge
round the top is finished with a ball heading of contrasting
colors to the needle work. To complete the foot rest lie
sure to have casters fastened on, so that it can be readily
pushed about the room.
Baby’s Toilet Basket.
The basket is of fancy straw and black polished cane.
The inside of the basket is lined _ with cream color,
embroidered in chain and feather stitch, with pink and
olive silks, and in knotted stitch with gold thread. The
cushions and pockets are worked to correspond, and
fastened to the basket with satin bows of light pink and
olive colors. The handle is twisted with a cord of the
same colors, and finished off at the ends with tassels.
Bound the outside of the basket is a scant ruffle of pink
silk, over which is a fringe of the mixed colors used in the
embroidery in the basket.
Japanese Squares.
They can be prettily made up for antimacassars, by laying
them between bands of velvet, bordering them with the
same, and adding ball pompons at the edge. They are
also effective appliqued on the cream-colored muslin and
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


edged with gold braid, the muslin having Japanese designs
painted on it. They also look well bound with velvet
tlius sewn together and bordered with fringe.
Sewing-Machine Cover.
Tins cover is ornamental as well as useful for pro-
tecting the machine from dust. Measure the length of
hnmrT C ta l blC ’ ? n ? Cl ,' t your clotb or crash 80 it can
hang over front and back. Line it or not, but it is
de“dl“blf S W 1 baiZ6 ’ SUCh aS " USed for tlle tops of
.* he tw ° ends in dee P Vandykes, bind with braid,
which cover with a heavy cord, and finish each point, and
between each point, with a tassel. AppJiquM work on
the cover is a great addition, and is very easily done.
Hair Receiver and Catchall.
The foundation is a large tin drinking cup. The cup is
anHe. Z V™ T™ WOrked in stitcher
f n 3 design the worker may prefer. Draw the canvas
tightly over the cup-, first turning in the edges. The top
T|“^ 0 satm ’ and drawn U P with a cord and tassel,
the handle is covered on both sides with the canvas, and
und or buttonhole stitched together at the edges. Finish
top and bottom with a bow of satin ribbon. '
Shoe Bag.
Cut a piece of stout material 18 in. long, 12 in. deep
H T"*’ leaving 1 “• of material
at eitlier end , this will make it 18 in. long; tack this to
the first piece down the sides and bottom; the plaits form
facF e Now ch ° r t boot V titch ateongly down between
f a ?~, ~c ut out another piece 18 in. long, form it
° W SCallop ®’ sew this ™ the top to make
naps, put an eye on each and a hook on the stuff below
to cover the boots from dust; bind all with braid nut I
nng at each corner to hang up on the will. ’ P
Dr- Waugh’s Baking Powder-Purest and Best.


Sofa-Pillow.
The dainty sofa-pillow here represented is a charming
illustration of this beautiful work, and is made of garnet
plush and heliotrope satin. The centre is a square formed
of two triangles, each made of strips of plush and satin
joined together, and having their seams covered with pale-
pink floss in herring-bone stitch. The strips in each tri-
angle are differently arranged, so that a stiff, set appear-
ance will not be produced. The cushion is made octagonal
in shape by hexagonal sections of plush and satin arranged
alternately all round the square. In each section a flower
design is appliqueed, and these may be different in every
section or only in the alternating sections, as preferred.
If a delicate effect be desired, the flowers may be of velvet
or plush, and the stems and leaves may be formed with
floss in the South-Kensington stitch. The colors for the
cushion may be any two most pleasing to the worker’s
taste, and may be delicate or brilliant, as preferred.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Piano Fronts.
Remove the fretwork in the front of an upright piano,
and in its place put a piece of satin, on which is painted,
in water-colors, a trail of Virginia creeper leaves, or a large
branch of wild roses and leaves. Cretonne figures, fastened
on black velvet, or cloth, are very effective.
To Make Ball Tassels.
Take a silver fork and wind worsted quite near the points,
from forty to sixty times round, according to size required,
.hen take strong thread and tie round the wound worsted
inserting it between the tines of the fork, and tie tightly.’
blip it from the fork and trim as in the old way.
Teapot Cosy.
A nice teapot cosy may be worked in silk or filoselle
on hue cloth cashmere, or other suitable material;
the colors, pinks, yellows, and greens of harmonious
tone and shades on a ground of full, but not too
dark, red, maroon, or claret. Three shades of pink, one
of pale olive or gold color, two of green, one pale yellow,
and one brown will be required. The flowers should be
worked m the three shades of pink, the darkest in the
centre, and the lightest for the outer set of petals. The
centre should have a few French knots worked in pale
yellow ; the stems brown—the scroll-like sheaths of pale
ohve o r gold color, veined with pale yellow; the leaves
green, a lighter shade to be used for the smaller leaves.
Border.—The straight wreaths to be worked in the two
shades of green ; and those crossing each other, one in the
pale olive or gold color, and the other in the lighter shade
of green. The flowers in the border of the middle shade
of pmk, with pale yellow French knots in centre.
Ihe edge to be finished with a pale gold-colored silk
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Night Dress and Handkerchief Cases.
Just at present cases for night dresses and sachets for
handkerchiefs seem popular. They usually match, and
are always lined with a contrasting color. The newest
fashion is to make them almost square, with one corner
turned back and split up the centre. The two pieces are
fastened back, and one is quilted satin or sateen, secured
by a fancy-headed pin, while the other is plain, and has a
monogram or a device embroidered on. The slit up the
turned back corner extends six inches or so from the
point. The lining of the case is wadded and quilted,
and sometimes scented, and the whole edge with
gathered lace, hemmed muslin, or frayed silk. The
handkerchief case opens in half, and on each side are two
places for handkerchiefs to slip in, from the middle-
plain ones, fancy ones, evening and colored. Another
favorite shape is a square, bordered fully with lace, with
the four corners tied together with a bow, and the name
or monogram worked on one. Black satin lined with
quilted yellow sarsenet, brown lined with pink, and pale
blue with coral, are fashionable, trimmed with tinted lace.
A very pretty one can be made of ruby plush, lined
with pale blue silk or sarsenet, same shape as the
above ; a charming present for a lady or gentleman.
The brush case is also made to match, the brushes and
combs being thrust through at the corner. The last idea
is to make the usual ugly sponge bag ornamental, by
either covering it with colored satin, and working a flower
on each side, or in American cloth, painting it and binding
all round with galoon.
Small squares of contrasting color, such as pale pink
and blue, form very pretty sachets. Crossway stripe of
silk or satin lined with muslin, are pleated so as to form
alternate squares of two colors. The trimming is
composed of a spray of artificial flowers ; honey-suckle is
charming with soft shades of pink and blue, and the
sachet is finally edged with lace ; in a white sachet, half
the squares are of velvet and the others are of Ottoman.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Table-Spread.
A new and attractive way to make a table-spread is to
have a border on two sides only. Suppose the spread to
be of crimson felt, the border should be of blocks of plush
or velvet, or of velveteen, or even of satin. Each block
should have a different design embroidered or painted on
it; the corner which has no border may be ornamented
with embroidery. The entire spread should have a large
handsome cord or a flat braid around it at the edge.
Here is afforded opportunity for the display of much
ingenuity. If you choose, every one of the blocks may be
crazy or mosaic patchwork, and the others of plain
material.
Plaited Paper Work.
Almost any shaped baskets and work cases can be made
0 P a P er : wlllte > brown or newspaper may be
utilized for this purpose. To make a white basket, cut
into narrow strips, three quarters of an inch wide, thin
cartridge or white demy paper ; double each strip length-
ways in two and plait it as straw and chip are done.
W hen you have plaited a sufficient quantity, stitch them
together in the shape you wish the basket to be, using a
small basin, jar or even another basket to assist in shaping
the work. When the plait is stitched into shape, and
handles put on, give it two coats of hot gelatine and
water, and when thoroughly dry, varnish. Baskets of
newspaper or brown paper must be painted with oil color
and afterwards varnished.
FANCY WORK.
BY. DR. SAMUELL.
Preserving Leaves.
For years I have gathered each spring large quantities
haJXso™/]™!’ ! leaves . ; and when tlj e season is at
preserving these loYely thi^
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


N. S. W
Fresh Food and Ice Company
LIMITED.
HEAD OFFICE -
CITY DEPOTS -
- 25 HARBOR ST.
92 KING STREET.
- 185 KING STREET.
28 ROYAL ARCADE.
MILK
CREAM
BUTTER
ICE ..
FISH
GAME
POULTRY ..
PASTRY
BUTTER MILK
PUREST COUNTRY.
THE RICHEST.
BEST CREAMERY.
CLEAREST CRYSTAL.
OF ALL KINDS.
THE CHOICEST SORTS.
FROM THE FAMED FARMS
OF THE COLONY.
THE MOST EXQUISITE.
RECOMMENDED BY THE
FACULTY.
Carts Deliver Daily Everywhere.
Agents in every Suburb.
H. PATESON,
Manager.


COUNTRY MILK COMPANY,
137 to 153 PALMER STREET,
SYDNEY.
ORDER
MILK,
BUTTER,
CREAM,
EGGS,
POULTRY,
ALL OF THE VERY BEST QUALITY,
FROM THE
COUNTRY MILK COMPANY,
PALMER STREET.
F. HARVEY.


If vou live in the city as does the writer, go some fine
day into the country, taking an old atlas or other large
book, and gather of the brightest and prettiest green
leaves, with such others as you may find, and lay them
smoothly between the leaves of your books. Gather also
ferns in abundance, green, brown and white, lor down in
the shadow of the valleys at this time many white ones
may be found. Press them as soon as gathered, other-
wise many will droop and be lost.
This is all 1 find necessary to do to preserve their shape
and colour, if the books be put in a warm, dry place, i
put mine under the kitchen stove with flat-irons lor
weights upon them.
If the books become very damp the leaves will mould
and lose their bright hues ; for this reason keep them in
some dry warm place, or change them from damp books
to dry ones before they have time to decay.
Then when the frosts of the winter have laid low the
treasures of the warmer days, and all without is cold and
bleak bring out your lovely leaves and weave them in
garlands to brighten your homes and gladden all who
behold them. Sewn into tiny bits of card in the
form of bouquets or crosses, with a fine thread they
add much to the beauty of any home, be it palace or
cottage. Group them in vases, or pin a spray to the lace
drapery at the window, and the effect is charming.
For a transparency, get a square of window glass, lay
upon it such leaves as you may select, and covering the
whole smoothly with a piece of fine cotton net. _ Then
with a strip of binding paper or bright taffetta ribbons
bind the edges for frame and suspend it in the window,
and you will feel paid for your trouble.
The newest kind of embroidery is cross-stitch upon
black silk canvas, which is made up over colored silk.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


A Pretty Pedestal.
A pretty pedestal on which to stand a basket of flowers,
nas the top, case, upper and lower parts of the shaft
covered with red silk plush. For the centre is a band of
black, wrought in irregular zig-zags of gold thread, in
the Japanese fashion, with flowers and foliage in silk
embroidery.
Pedestal for Vases.
An ingenious way to make a pair of vases appear to be
considerably larger than they really are, is to get two
flocks of wood, in size and shape about like a quart bowl,
leaving a space that will be large enough to set the vase
m and leave a little margin ; cover them with plush, and
put one at each end of the mantel.
Curious vases of either bronze or brass will show to as
good advantage as any on these little pedestals. The
base, in order to be effective, must be large enough to
give an impression of strength and safety. A round piece
of plush may be used to cover them; lay it in plaits if
necessary. r
KNITTING.
Knitting Terms.
Narrow or n. is to knit two stiches at once; purl two
together or p. t. t. is to seam two stitches at once ; t. o. 1,
iread over once, to. 2, thread over twice; k. one, or knit
one, means knit plain ; s. means to take the stitch off, but
- 0 T d . b - is “ slip and bind >” and means
to Slip Off first stitch knit the next then put slipped stitch
over the knit one, it really narrows. Thread over twice
does not always make two stitches, if told merely to knit
one, it makes but one and the other half is dropped and it
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


simply makes a larger hole; if told to “knit one, purl
one,” it gives two stitches as you knit one half and seam
the other half; p. is to purl which is seaming; “ faggot
one ” is thread over once and narrow,” which makes one
eyelet or “hole;” “needle under thread at beginning of
needle ” makes an eyelet on the edge as well as adds a
stitch.
Vandyke Edging
Can be made of cotton or fine silk. Cast on five stitches
and knit across plain.
Ist row. —Slip 1, th o, n, th o, k 2
2nd and every alternate row. —SI 1, k rest plain
3rd row.—Sl 1, th o, n, th o, n, th o, k 1
sth row.—Sl 1, th o, n, th o, n, th o, k 2
7th row. —SI 1, th o, n, th o, n, th o, n, th o, k 1
9th row. —SI 1, th o, n, th o, n, th o, n, th o, k 2
11th row. —SI 1, th o, n, th o, n, th o, n, th o, n, th o, k 1
18th row.—Sl 1, th o, n, th o, n, th o, n, th o, n, th o, k 2
16th row. —Cast off 8, th o, n, th o, k 1
16th row. —Plain, repeat from first row for all points till
sufficient is done.
A Pretty Lace Edge
Can be made by casting on nine stitches across plain.
Ist row. —K 8, n, th o, n, th o, k 1, th o, k 1.
Second and every alternate row plain.
3rd row.—K 2, n, th o, n, th o, k 3, th o, k 1.
sth row.—K 1, n, th o, n, th o, k 5, th o, k 1.
7th row.—K 3, th o, n, th o, n, k 1, n, th o, n.
9th row. —K 4, th o, n, th o, k 3 together, th o, n.
11th row.—K 5, th o, k 8 together, th o, n.
12th row. —Plain, repeat from Ist row for all pattern.
Pr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Dorian Edging.
or this use linen thread and fine steel needles, cast on
seven stitches.
Ist row.—Slip 1, inserting the needle from the back of
the stitch below the working thread, k 6.
2nd row.—Slip 1, k 1, th o twice, p 2 together, p 2, k 1.
3rd row.—Slip 1, kB, out of the 2 put over k 1 and k 1
crossed (to knit crossed insert the needle from the back
downward), k 2.
4th row.—Slip 1, k 2, th o twice, p 2 together, p 2, k 1.
sth row. Slip 1, kB, out of the 2 put overs k 1 and k 1
crossed, k 3.
Gth row. Slip 1, k4,th o twice, p 2 together, k 2.
7th row. Slip 1, k 2, out of the 2 put overs k 1 and
p 1, k 5.
Bth row. Cast oil 8, insert the needle for purling instead
of knitting k 6.
Repeat from Ist row for whatever is needed.
Child’s Reins.
_ Cut a of webbing the desired size for the front
piece, then cut two pieces of flannel or felt, and on one of
them embroider or fasten on a transfer pattern of a horse.
Lay a piece of the goods each side of the webbing and
bind the three pieces together, then at each end make a
band or strap large enough to fasten round the child’s
waist. hor the reins, knit of single zephyr in bright
colors. Needles No. 12 are required. Cast on fourteen
stitches and in plain knitting, knit a length of three yards
and fasten the reins just above the band that goes round
the waist.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder-Purest and Best,


CROCHET.
Crocheting Terms.
Ch. means chain ; d. c. double crochet; thread over
needle once, then draw thread through two loops and take
thread up again the same and draw through remaining
two ; t. c. treble crochet, thread over twice and draw
through two loops each time as before ; s. c. is single
crochet and the thread is not put over the needle at all,
simply draw the thread through making second loop, then
draw thread through the two loops ; slip stitch is drawing
the thread through the work and stitch on the needle at
same time, and consequently it is still shorter and closer
than single crotchet.
Crochet Watch Fob.
This is pretty for a lady or gentleman. Made of crochet
silk used double, and is in double crochet stitch. Begin
by making a chain of fifteen stitches, then turn, and
twelve double crochets on this chain for the first row,
catching the first double into the third stitch from the
hook. Make twelve rows, narrowing the last two rows, to
form the top ; at each side where you turn make two
chain before making the first double crochet; this will
always keep the edge rows even. Tie strands of the silk
into the lower end of fob to form a fringe ; fasten a fob
hook to the top to attach the watch. Black silk is
generally used, but white looks very pretty.
A Simple Kettle Holder.
a chain six inches long, work backwards and
forwards double crochet on every stitch for sixteen rows ;
then work twenty rows of treble, then sixteen rows of
double-draw up the treble part into level folds, say six will
be enough, sew them at the back; the folds must stand
up quite straight. Then line with alpaca or sateen.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best,


Pretty Edgings.
The fan edging begins with nine chain. First row one
treble in the eighth chain, from the needle two chain,
another treble m the same place two chain one treble, in
the last stitch of the foundation two chain, another treble
in the same place. Second row five chain to turn, one
tieble under the centre loop of two chains of last row, two
chain and one treble three more times in the same place,
lepeat the second row for the length required. When a
sufficient length is done, form the scallop by working along
one side of the foundation, nine treble under every loop of
five chain, on the opposite side work a heading of two
l 0 ° f fiTC “4
Crochet Silk and Bead Purse.
S ll / 8 can be made witb an J color silk. Garnet silk and
gold beads are very pretty. String the beads on the silk ;
;l a , diam °l SG 7 enty etches without the beads, then
crochet m a bead in every one of five single crochet
stitches, then crochet five stitches without beads; do the
same for five rows, then crochet in the beads over the plain
stitches and the plain stitches over the beads : do this for
five rows more then reverse. Repeat this alternately
eveiy five rows till six rows of blocks of beads are made**
form the square end of the purse; a few rows of plain
crochet added to this without beads and a gold bar* put
each side makes a small purse, and stylish. To continue
to make the long purse commence the plain silk by working
two rows of double crochet one stitch in every second singlf
turf tL I \nok fir i t r °Ti ; in the . tbird douUe crochet row
turn the hook when the row is finished and work back
instead of continuing round the circle as previously
Keep on working for fifteen rows, or more if you wMi a
dnnbl °ng the V oin tbe again and work two
double crochet rows, then make one row of single crochet
two stitches m each double stitch, then another single
Pr. Waugh’s Baking Powder-Purest and Best,


“ gtjcmper
Which, literally translated, means
i£ THE S^HE-”
LION
THIS IS WHY THE
S~7m
<*
VTrX&£ My?
BRAND
OIF
CONFECTIONERY
IS SO POPULAR.
-I*
ONLY THE FINEST INGREDIENTS USED.
THEY ARE THE
Greatest Favorites with the Children.
MANUFACTURED ONLY BY
JAMES STEDMAN,
145 Clarence Street.


SLEE STOVE WORKS,
80 CROWN STREET,
WOOLLOOMOOLOO.
J. R. MUTTON,
20 Years with and Successor to R. SLEE.
mm
ig-i-ii;
/
>Pg!g^
The SLEE is
admitted by
all who use
them t o b e
the best.
7
All kinds of Hot Water and Cooking
Apparatus made, fixed and repaired.
ALL REPAIRS GUARANTEED.


crochet; now work a bead in every tenth stitch, next row
a bead in every ninth and tenth, next in every eighth,
ninth and tenth ; and so on, increasing every time until
you have a bead in every stitch. Work in beads in every
stitcli in all the succeeding rows. After two full rows of
beads begin to narrow every tenth stitch by omitting one
stitch, the next row narrow every ninth stitch and the
next every eighth, and so on till finished; close up when
four or five are still on the row. Finish off with tassel,
and the square end with a fringe made of the beads. Put
the gold rings on before making the round end, as it is
difficult to put the beads through the opening to be worked
round with double crochet.
Wave Braid Edging.
Buy a knot of wave braid and work with No. 18 or 20
cotton, for the heading. First row, one long treble in the
top of the first wave of braid, three chain, another long
treble in the same place and repeat. Second row, one
double crochet in every stitch of the previous row on the
other side of the braid; make the scallop, first row, one
single crochet in each wave of the braid, seven chain
between; second row, one double crochet, nine treble, one
double crochet below each loop of seven chain of last run.
Loop Crochet, or Imitation Fur.
Do any number of chain you require, seven would be
enough for trimming. Put the needle into second chain,
but before drawing it through, put the wool loosely round
your finger and the hook twice, and round the hook a third
time, you will have three strands on the hook, draw all
three through the chain and finish off the stitch as double
crochet, do same into each chain, stitch to the end of the
row. Second row, work back again by double crochet,
these two rows are the pattern; proceed as the above for
imitation fur. When nearly long enough, cut the loops
and comb out carefully with a fine strong comb ; combing
reduces the width and increases the length ; always hold
the work with wrong side towards you.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Dressing Slipper: Tricot.
Commence at the toe, make a chain of nine stitches.
Ist row.—Work up one loop through each of the four
stitches, two through the next, one into each of the four
next stitches. Work off in the usual way.
2nd row.—Work up a loop through the back perpen-
dicular loop of each stitch except the centre stitch, through
this work a loop, pass the wool over the hook, and work
up another loop.
3rd row.—Work up a loop through the back perpen-
dicular loop of each stitch, work off in the usual way. The
second and third rows are repeated alternately until you
have worked about four inches, or the length required to
reach up to the instep.
For the sides work on eighteen stitches, for the length
required to reach the middle of the heel, sew up with a
needle and wool; sew the slipper to a cork sole lined with
wool. For the crotchet edge, work round the top of slipper
three or more rows of double, working one double into
each stitch of tricot. To make the holes for the ribbon to
run through, work one treble into a stitch of tricot, one
chain, pass over one stitch, and repeat.
2nd row.—One double into a stitch of last row, four
chain, one treble into the first, _ pass over two stitches and
repeat.
Run a narrow sarsenet ribbon through the holes in the
first row, and tie it in a bow on the instep. Three wool
bails are sewn to the front of slippers.
Crochet Purse.
A crochet purse may be made with embroidery or knitt-
ing silk. Begin by making a chain of fifty-two stitches,
one treble into a stitch, then one chain into the next
stitch, continue thus to commencement of opening, then
omit one chain, and after completing opening continue as
before.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


A Pretty Edging
Can be made of No. 20 or 24 cotton. Make a chain of
seventeen. First row, one treble in the seventh chain from
the needle, one chain, miss one, one treble in the next, two
chain, miss three, one treble in the next, three chain,
another treble in same position. Second row, two chain
to turn, nine treble under the loop of three chain, seven
treble under the next loop of three chain, one treble on the
first of the two treble stitches, one chain, one treble on
the next treble, one chain, one treble on the second stitch
of the chain that you turned. Third row, four chain to
turn, one treble on the first treble stitch, one chain, one
treble on the next treble stitch, two chain, one treble on
the middle stitch of the seven treble, three chain, another
treble in the same place, two chain, one treble on the fourth
stitch of the nine treble, three chain, another treble same
place, do the second and third rows till you have length
required.
Crochet Opera Hood.
Two ounces of any pale shade Shetland wool. This is
a light shape, and can be worn without disarranging the
hair. Work a chain of two yards long, and work nine
inches deep three treble and one chain alternate; put a
border round of one single one double two treble, three
chain two treble one double one single, put another row
of scallops around the part which comes near the face to
make a fulness ; add a large tassel at each corner.
LACE WORK.
Lace came into fashion in the 16th century when great
patience was needed as lace w T as then made. Think
of the poor creatures working underground in damp
cellars, by a small ray of light, losing both their
health and eyesight! Then thank the age for the
machinery which does away with the difficulty
and gives us at the same time as much of the
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best,


beautiful fabric as we want at a smaller sum than could be
lealized in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, which
called for the article, history says, especially for the
gentlemen, as draping for their sleeves. It also concealed
any extra cards they desired, bringing cheating down to a
fine point!
Lately there has come into fashion a home-made kind,
which requires no extra tax on the eyes beyond any other
piece of fancy work, and not nearly as much time as
ordinary embroidery, while it produces a much greater
effect. °
The materials required arc ; Number one thousand
linen thread, lace edging and insertion, and a pattern on
cambric or linen. The latter can be easily drawn at home
and needs no knowledge of drawing. First make your
design on paper ; then put a piece of white tracing linen
over it, and mark it off with ink.
Now for the description ; First baste on the insertion
neatly, joining as little as possible, but don’t be dis-
couraged if it insists on fulling a little ; then overcast all
round both sides of the insertion, being sure to put the
needle through the holes on the edge, so as not to draw
tiie work, and sew finally where it laps and crosses.
The first stitch (see Fig. 1) is on the leaf. It is made
by starting from the bottom of the leaf and catching the
thread at the top, then putting the needle over several
times, forming a sort of twist. Fasten below at the
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


LADIES!
ORDER
“Phoenix” Hlax Vestas.
Heads do not Soften
in Hottest Weather.
Heads do not Fly
when Striking.
GIVE THEM A TRIAL.
ROSE'S
Lxinqe Jhice Cordial,
Blood Purifying and Thirst Quenching.
St. RAPHAEL
Medicinal Wine,
Specially Imported for Invalids.
—ALL aBOCEBS.


WORKING CUTLERY
COMPANY,
279 PITT STREET (Next School of Arts).
BY SPECIAL APPOINTMENT TO
His Excellency Sir Robert Dutt, G.C.M.G.
—♦
SCISSORS AND RAZORS GROUND AND SET.
All Kinds of Cutlery Daily Repaired Equal to New.
A CHOICE
SELECTION of CUTLERY ALWAYS KEPT in STOCK.
No Charge for Postage on Cutlery to any Address in
N.S.W.
DEPOT FOR I.X.E. CETEERY.
THE XTO-A-lETTS -A.IE?,HZ.
GILBERT J. SMITH,
Wig Maker, Theatrical and Fancy Costumier,
297 Pitt Street, Sydney (Opposite Criterion Theatre).
Wigs, Dresses and Every Requisite for Stage and Ball for sale or hire, or
made to order.
Wig Curling and Dressing a Speciality. _
Grease Paints, Tights, Play Books, and Theatrical Jewellery.


place where you began the vein. The veining across the
leaf is made the same way, only be sure to put the needle
between the two threads which run lengthwise.
Fig. 2is a sort of wheel stitch. Begin by going across
the circle and back again as described above, stopping on
the last thread in the centre, and putting the needle under
the thread back of it and the one in front, for several
rows all round the centre of the wheel. Working with
the back of the needle may be easier for some, as it
prevents catching the linen to the insertion.
Fig. 8 can be easily followed from the drawing. It is
simply the same stitch used in scalloping in embroidery.
Avoid pulling the thread too tight.
Baste on the edge all round the cuff, and sew with an
over and over stitch to the insertion. Cut the bastings
on the back of the linen. The illustration shows the
pattern with the cuff half finished. Black or white
materials can be used.
NEW STITCHES.
Embossed Buttonhole Stitch.
Is very suitable for finishing the end of canvas or material
intending to be fringed ; also for embroidering monograms
or initials. Two rows of running stitches are made
wherever it is required, and the buttonhole stitch is
worked over them.
Dr Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best,


This Pretty Spot Stitch
Is made for borders on mats, tidies or sofa cushions ; it
is worked regularly over and over quite straight, until the
length of the article is reached; then, in a separate color,
a small stitch is done by slipping the needle between every
other one; two or three rows of these small stitches look
very effective.
Ornamental Stitch.
This stitch is very pretty worked on canvas, where it is
required to decorate, also for flannels, that need a neat
finish ; it looks effective above a hem, can be done in
either silk or wool.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Twisted Chain Stitch.
This stitch is worked on the same principle as plain
stitch, except that the needle, instead of being put back
into the preceding stitch, is put at the left side of it. It
is useful for headings for fringes, also to work the tops of
sleeves and tucks, on flannel shirts, instead of machine
work. The meaning of plain stitch is the usual chain
stitch.
Is used for vari-
ous purposes, fill-
ing in centres of i
flowers, in mono-
grams, (tC. It iS :
made by making |
a stitch, then
twist the silk or
cotton twice
round the needle,
then draw the
needle through
Knot Stitch.
Cross Stitch.
with the left
thumb held over
the knot, then the
needle is thrust
to the other side
almost where it
came to the sur-
face ; make an-
other knot, till
the space is full
that is required.
This is a very simple stitch, is suitable for clouds ;
work one treble missing two loops, then work back into
the second loop across the first treble, one chain and
repeat.
Another way is by working two treble missing three
loops, and working two over them instead of one.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Stitches for Embroidery.
Under the head of stitches we shall describe only those
most used in the art-embroidery of the day. The stitch
itself is not of so much importance as the many forms of
using the material to make it the most effective.
The Outline-Stitch, used on what is sometimes called
sketch-embroidery, is done wholly on the surface of the
cloth, with a long stitch forward on the face and a very
short stitch back on the under side, so that the article,
when finished, will show no loose ends on the under side.
In making the stitch the needle is held directly toward you
and the thread drawn f rom, you.
The Split Outline-Stitch is made the same as above,
except that the needle is brought up through instead of at
one side of the thread of the preceding stitch.
The Filling-in Stitch —This stitch is used for filling in
leaves and petals of flowers. First take one or two rows
of stitches around the outside of the leaf; then bring the
needle up through the outside line, with a short stitch
over toward the centre ; then follow back at the outside of
the outline-stitch, and so on until the leaf or petal is
filled, making several rows and always pointing them
toward the centre of the figure.
The Laid-Emhroid'erg Stitch. —Tins stitch is used for
embroidering flannels, etc., and is made by bringing the
needle up at the outside of the outline and over to the
centre of the leaf, repeating this operation until the leaf
or figure is filled out on both sides of the face, which will
leave a ridge in the centre.
The Stem-Stitch. —This is the same as the outline-stitch,
only that the short stitch is taken further back, the needle
being brought a little below the centre of the forward stitch.
The Seed-Stitch. —This consists of very short, straight
stitches placed either regularly or irregularly just near
enough each other to show a little of the ground material
between.
The Laid Stern-Stitch is made by bringing the needle up
one side and down the opposite side directly over the
outline-stitch.
Dr, Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


The French Knot. —This is made by bringing the needle
up through the cloth where the knot is to be drawn ; draw
the thread tight and place it over one finger of the left
hand; twist the needle once or twice around the thread;
pass it down nearly through the cloth near the point
where it was brought up, and draw the knot tightly
around the needle, holding it with the left thumb; then
draw the thread through and you have a “ French Knot.”
This stitch is difficult to make at first, but when learned
will be found easy.
The Plush-Stitch —This is made by working on the
material instead of through it. First fill the figure with
French knots, using the proper colors ; then take a strand
of filoselle and bring the needle half w r ay through between
the French knots ; lay the floss about three-eighths of an
inch from the end against the needle, holding it in position
with the thumb; then draw the needle through and pass
it down on the opposite side of the floss ; draw the stitch
tightly and clip the floss with scissors, wdiich will give it
a tufted and velvety appearance. Repeat until the design
is completed.
The Bird's-Eye Stitch. —This is a sort of chain-stitch
worked from one central point. Bring the needle through
the centre of the flower, back at the same point and out
near the end of the figure ; throw the loop of the thread
over the needle and draw through ;■ then pass the needle
down on the outside of the loop and back again at the
centre. This must be repeated for each petal.
The Couching-Stitch. —This stitch, used on tidies, table-
covers, etc., is made by catching dowm a thread or cord by
a single stitch taken straight across the threads. It is a
splendid stitch for covering and joining seams.
Ribbon-Embkoidkky is made by using several different
shades of ribbon to form the flow r er, fastening them to the
material a little full so they will “puff” in the centre,
and then working the edges, centre, and stem with
embroidery or French knots. The best flow'ers for work-
ing in this manner are the wild rose, forget-me-not, wild
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


clematis, daisy, and Russian snowflower. Ribbon-
embroidery is very popular and is the least expensive of
any art-embroidery. For small flowers the ribbons may
be worked in a large-sized worsted-needle and through
and through the material, taking a single stitch for each
petal.
Arrasene axd Chenille.— These materials are used
the same as floss or crewel in the same articles, only that
the stitches are taken longer, as the material is closer.
They may be shaded with gold-tinsel or fine chenille-
embroidery, which will make a very pleasing effect.
AMATEUR PHOTOGRAPHY.
BY EDWIN J. WELCH.
“ Oh ! I should so like to be able to take photographs,” is
one of the commonest of the every-day wishes expressed
by ladies, who have some spare time on their hands, and
a desire to utilise it to some purpose. The object of this
paper is to show that there is no earthly reason why they
shouldn’t take them, and to the entire satisfaction of other
people, as well as to their own great gratification. The
successful practice of the photographic art is by no means
confined to the masculine sex, as witness the list of names
of renowned lady camerists on the members’ books of
various societies ; and it is an indisputable fact that much
of the work that has to be done before the finished picture
can be bought, sold, or given away, can be done better and
more neatly by the lissom fingers of womankind than by
the clumsy digits of the only animal who is at present
qualified to be either a policeman or a parliamentary
representative.
In all the more delicate operations of ordinary domestic
life, it is the woman’s fingers that get the maximum of
work. Very few men can sew a button on where it wants
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Amateur Photography
Is now very fashionable with
THE LADIES of NEW SOUTH WALES.
MULLORO
m
BAKER & ROUSE
ARE NOW SELLING
LADIES’ INSTANTANEOUS HAND CAMERAS
Ci^pt —Qo/npaqt —tyapdy for srauellir)<s,
FROM 35s- UPWARDS,
AND WILL GIVE
Full instructions in Working: and Developing:
GRATIS. GRATIS. GRATIS.
sm
seas
CATALOGUES POST FREE.
NOTE THE ADDRESS-
-375 GEORGE STREET (
Opposite
Sydney Arcade
), SYDNEY.


JfIJHES SAfJDY & Go.
(ESTABLISHED 1859),
380 & 271 GEORGE STREET (near G.P.0.)
SUPPLY - MOST - ELEGANT - DESIGNS - OF
WALLPAPER, ANAGLYPTA,
LINCEUSTA WALTON,
JAPANESE TAPESTRIES, WINDOW GLACIER,
AND OTHER
artistic decorations
FOR
ELITE RESIDENCES
AND
PUBLIC BUILDINGS
AT
LOWEST PRICES.
>•<
SHOW ROOM : 330 GEORGE STREET,
NEAR G.P.O.
Plate and Sheet Glass Merchants,
OIL AND COLORMEN,
AND
artistic decorators.


to go and make it stop there, and not one in a thousand
can arrest the progress of an active flea, no matter how
carefully he may keep his eye on the object of his desire,
while he moistens the point of his index finger, after the
orthodox fashion, to make sure of his grip. Women put
men in the shade in many directions, and more especially
where physical accuracy of detail and patience under
afflictions are concerned.
Photography requires patience, and demands accuracy.
To succeed in it there must also be some brains, method,
care, and at all times scrupulous cleanliness ; and, if it is
to be wholly successful, the student must possess some-
thing more than a mere passing interest in her work.
Either as a pastime or an occupation, photography is
now void of the reproach of being either dirty or dangerous.
The latter, of course, it must always be to the extent of the
full meaning of the word “danger” in the misuse of
chemicals, but that caution applies with equal force to
such every-day household items as laudanum, rough on rats
and fly-papers. From photographic chemicals used on
photographic plates and papers no danger is to be appre-
hended, and recent discoveries and inventions have so
simplified and improved the various processes necessary to
the production of a picture, that a bride in her veil and
orange-blossoms might safely take and develop a negative
without spot or stain anywhere to tell the tale.
How to do this is what I have been asked to condense
within readable limits, and the first item (next to having
sufficient money to pay for it) is to get the :
Apparatus.
This should be of the best quality obtainable. Instru-
ments of all sorts are cheap enough at the present time,
but the only ones that are not cheap are second-hand
rubbish, or ill-made “ Cheap Jack” lines sent to the
colonies for no other known reason than because they are
supposed to be “ good enough for Australia.” Heartache,
despair and ultimate madness they may produce, but never
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


a photograph. What is called a “ quarter-plate ”is quite
large enough for a beginner, and this I suggest should be in
the form of a hand camera that can also be used on a light
tripcd fcr time exposures. One of the best of these is
“ Shew’s Eclipse.” There are plenty of others, but I
mention this because it is well made and gives excellent
results. It is also light and convenient to carry, packing
into small compass in a neat leather case.
For all details of the routine of filling slides with plates,
focussing and taking the picture, the student cannot do
better than learn from one of the standard text books, say
Burton’s, which can be bought for a shilling anywhere.
The first real hitch comes with the exposure of the plate,
and it is more than likely that the first few boxes of plates
will fail to give quite as much satisfaction as is expected
from them. Some will be over, and many will be under
exposed, but experience in that direction is rapidly gained,
and the bosom’s lord sits lightly on its throne when the
first good negative flashes out under the developer in the
dark room. Amateur photographers are fairly plentiful
now all over the colonies ; the difficulty is how to dodge
them rather than how to find them, and the average
amateur is a kindly soul, always ready to tell a little more
than he knows, and only too glad to do so if the querist
be a lady. Every lady must have an amateur among her
acquaintances. Let her try him for what information she
requires for a start.
Subject.
Meaning thereby the picture that it is desired to take.
And in this connection it is as well to at once advise the
beginner to eschew any attempt at portraiture, and to
absolutely refuse to listen to the voice of the charmer, who
professes to -believe that to be the sole end and aim of
photography. As a matter of fact, it is by no means an
easy thing to take a good portrait, especially without the
absolutely necessary appliances for regulating light and
shade on the sitter, as seen in studios erected for the
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder-Purest and Best.


purpose. Ido not mean to say that tliis cannot be done,
but before the learner attempts it she should thoroughly
accustom herself to the use oi the camera in landscape
work. That is simpler, and the results with ordinary care
are certain. The choice of subject must depend upon the
taste of the artist, but there should be plenty of contrast
in it, a prominent foreground, and if there are figures
they should not be in the middle of the_ plate. The
lighting should be as nearly as possible at right angles to
the axis of the lens; if the light comes from directly
behind, the picture will be as fiat as the sole of a worn-out
boot, and if it is allowed to shine upon the lens, a plate
will be wasted and another disappointment added to life’s
many crosses.
Exposure.
No rule can be given for this. It depends on rapidity of
plate, amount and quality of light, and size of stop used
in lens. But, happily, it is an experience that is very
easily picked up, and at a much less cost than many of the
experiences that both men and women are compelled to
worry through in the pursuit of other vanities than
pictures. I advise beginners to work with slow or medium
plates. The craze for lightning speed comes soon enough
to all dabblers in photography, and although it brings a
limited amount of fame to .just a few, the record of the
many who get bilious and bald-headed through its agency
is not written. However, I have advised the possession of
a hand camera, and must therefore say something about
the shutter. Without that appliance some of the finest
effects of sea and sky can only be obtained in a blundering
sort of way. W ith it, and a fast plate, in a good light,
anything and everything that moves comes to her that
waits with judgment, making sure that the slide is drawn,
that the shutter is set, and that in the excitement of the
moment the trigger is pressed when the object sought is
in the field of the finder, and not just coming on at one
side or walking off at the other.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Development.
This process is, I am credibly informed, the particular
one that ladies shy at. But there is very little charm in
photography it its practice is confined to the exposing of
plates only. It is in the developing room that photo-
graphy is really learnt, and it is there also that the
plaintive wail of the careless operator rends the darkness
tor misdeeds committed in the sunshine. But here, as
elsewhere, experientia docet, and if it doesn’t it ought to.
Jhrty hands are generally supposed to be an inevitable
result ot development, and that is probably the main
reason why ladies prefer to have nothing to" do with it.
Every lady who is a lady is very careful about her hands,
and - somebody ” has told her that she will certainly ruin
her pretty pink nails if she “messes with those horrid
chemicals. Well, the chemicals necessary for developing
now are not nearly as “ horrid ” as they used to be, and
she has no business to “ mess ” with them anyhow. The
Jiydrokmone developer enables her to develop her own
plates without soiling her fingers; it gives off no powerful
fumes, as does ammonia, and it is not easy to make
mistakes with A formula for its use is given with nearly,
ff not quite, all the plates she is likely to buy, and she
,7 le , a ; m IT ‘ ore 111 one week from developing her own
plates than she is likely to in one year by intrusting that
duty to another. She will also get better results, and last,
though not least, when she shows the pictures to her
triends she can truthfully say that she took them her very
own self. And every lady knows how delightful it is to be
able to tell the whole truth without reservation, and in the
lull knowledge that there is nothing left that any sort of
accident can reveal to her prejudice.
Fog.
tbf H ? ht in th ? Wrollg P lace > or in the right place at
xi . n , g ime , and it is one of the very worst troubles
that can happen to the amateur photographer. By bearing
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder-Purest and Best.


A Good Tomato Sauce
IS A HEALTHY APPETISER,
AND GOOD HOUSEWIVES ACKNOWLEDGE
CHANGE’S UNLEY TOMATO SAUCE
To toe ttoe only genuine and pure article of its
kind, obtainable.
BEWARE OF IMITATIONS.
Take none but CHANCE'S UNLEY Brand; obtainable from all the
leading Grocers.
ONCE TRIED. ALWAYS USED.
CHANCE’S UNLEY TOMATO SAUCE.
WHOLESALE ONLY FEOM
A. RICKARD, 78 Pitt Street, Sydney.
EAT 'W
PARSONS’
FLAKED
OATMEAL


A NOTABLE SUCCESS.
the three great remedies,
B B B-Dr. Brown’s Bronchial Balsam.
The Great Remedy for Coughs, Colds, and Throat and
Chest Affections.
Drugs.—Bottles, 1/- and If-. 3 M ’ contams 110 Morphia or any dangerous
GAINS’ TONIC MIXTURE OR BRAIN FOOD.
Cures Indigestion and Liver Complaints
CAINS' LITTLE TONIC LIVER PILLS,
Tor Constipation and Sluggish, Liver.
before you fe^better^Their^oifenrtionis e^ntl^h't??* mak u you feel worse
with disagreeable effects, such Is
WELL KNOWN HOUSEHOLD REMEDIES.
CA - r-per bottle
, ■ “tissad‘-- 1
LARMER’S TONIC- 2/. per bottle
PALMER’S f DAURELINE, removes Tan, Sunburn and
CA! NS’ PAINJILLING liniment, for Rheumatics, Gout V ' h**
Th ”
CSe a ” aU Sent Post Free t 0 an Y addr ®ss on receipt of Postal Note or Stamps
CHEMIST,
BONDI JUNCTION, WAVERLEY, SYDNEY.


iii mind the caution to purchase well-made apparatus at
the start, there is some reason to hope that the infliction
may be dodged, but even with the best it is still possible
to be worried by fogged plates. Taking it for granted that
the camera itself is sound, the dark slides trustworthy, and
the shutter light-tight, there is yet the developing room
light to be wrestled with, and it is unquestionably better
to minimise risk in that direction- by working with lamp-
light rather than with screened daylight. Moreover, a safe
developing lamp is a less changeable standard of light for
the purpose of comparing negatives one with the other
during the process, and there is no cause for anxiety lest
some stray pencil of unsuspected actinic light should
destroy the plates either when filling the slides, or when
manipulating them after exposure. And it must never be
forgotten that the extremely sensitive plates of to-day
require careful handling, delicate treatment and rather
more watchfulness than is generally bestowed on the
frolicsome infant, who eats wax vestas and plays with fire-
sticks in not a few Australian homes.
Pretty nearly every text-book on the art and practice of
photography has a series of exhaustive experiments for the
discovery of causes of “ fogging,” somewhere between the
covers, and doubtless they are all very correct and theoreti-
cally valuable, but it somehow happens that when a bad
case of “fog” gets its grip on man or woman, that it is
not as easily shaken off as these well-meaning writers
would lead us to believe. There are so many possible
causes of fog, and so many different degrees of the disease,
that even experts frequently find themselves puzzled to
say what causes it. Borne varieties of it point at once
straight to the cause, others are for the time being as
mysterious as the vagaries of Psychic Force, and generally
speaking, photographic fog, when it is mysterious is a
more than ordinarily maddening disaster, every known risk
of which is to be avoided at any cost.
But, of course, in recommending one particular make of
camera, I do not for one moment desire to convey the
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


impression that good results are not to be obtained with
cheaper ones. As a matter of fact, excellent pictures are
taken every day with the meanest ramshackle kind of
makeshifts, sometimes by one of the “ old masters,” and
occasionally by the veriest new chum in photography,
backed by a streak of good luck. All the same, 1 adhere
to the advice already given, as being the best sort of
security against headaches, heartaches, despondency, and
a generally tired sort of feeling that the world is a cold
place to live in.
The Dark Room.
It is perfectly true that any sort of a dark corner will do
to develop platesin, but no woman could be as untidy as
a man if she tried, and some of the developing conve-
niences one occasionally sees must inevitably account for a
large percentage of the execrable things miscalled photo-
graphs that are so often trotted out for inspection. Any
room from which all actinic light can be temporarily
excluded, and in which there is a plentiful supply of water,
can be used for developing, and either gas, oil, or candle
will do equally well for an illuminant, so long as it is
properly screened by ruby or canary colored medium. The
chemicals should be kept well stoppered and methodically
arranged. Order is Heaven’s first law in a developing
room to an even greater extent than outside. Disorder
spells certain failure, waste of time, money and materials ;
added to which is the unpleasant certainty of trouble with
the domestic authorities if the tracks of the amateur
photographer are discernible all over the premises.
Any lady who has decided to try her hand at it should
purchase one or other of the numerous text-books for
beginners when she gets her camera, and read it with
diligent attention before commencing to spoil plates. After
having once made a start, and got into one or other of the
difficulties which block the path of most students, some of
the following hints may be of service :
1. Don’t get flustered. Take time and think. Hurry
spoils plates and temper.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


2. Maintain perfect cleanliness in all manipulations.
8. Dust slides before putting plates in. Dust camera
before using, and wipe lens with soft silk handkerchief or
chamois.
4. Don’t expose on anything and everything. Study
composition of picture before deciding to take it. “ Good
enough ” may be greatly improved by slight change of
position or better light.
5. When in doubt prefer over to under exposure. _ If
the light is not allowed to make the image in the first
instance no amount of chemical forcing will bring it on
the plate.
6. Determine to understand the action of the developer
on the plate, and read and ask questions till you do.
7. Use plenty of hypo, and plenty of water. Both are
cheap, and economy in either direction insures disappoint-
ment.
8. Don’t hoard up faulty negatives under the impression
that you will be able to get good prints from them.
Muster up courage and deface them fit once while they
are wet.
9. Learn to print on albumenised paper, and buy it ready
sensitized. When you have mastered it will be quite soon
enough to begin experimenting with other kinds.
10. Follow instructions as to printing and toning care-
fully. They are very simple, and if you don’t succeed be
sure the fault is your own.
11. Mount your prints with freshly made starch paste,
and mount them square; that is to say, let the sides be
parallel to the sides of the mount.
12. Make lantern slides of your best negatives by contact
printing. It is capital evening amusement, and the lantern
gives everybody a share in the fun.
18. If the snap-shot craze takes possession of you, go
slow. It is hard on the pocket, and harder still on the
victims.
14. But if you must do it, use fast isochromatic plates
and not too fast a shutter. Above all, be particular in
choice of subjects, and don’t expect to get portraits that way.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


15. Old-fashioned friendships go to pieces rapidly on
the snap-shot rock. Very few people can afford to be taken
at a disadvantage.
16. For sea and sky, boats, &c., shutter pictures are in
their right place. But not always for animals in motion.
The camera is quicker than the human eye, and the
results frequently appear ridiculous.
37. How much more ridiculous are our friends and
relatives made to appear when they are taken, so to speak,
“ on the hop ” !
18. Finally, and this is perhaps the very best hint of all,
join a Photographic {Society. There is no better way of
learning photography, and lady members are warmly wel-
comed by all of them. Of course, you will subscribe to
some good photographic publication. The Australian
edition of the Photographic Review of Reviews is one of the
best.
PAINTING IN OIL COLORS.
BY “NAPLES YELLOW.”
In as brief a manner as the small space at my disposal
will admit, I will endeavor to give a few practical hints to
the uninitiated amateur, that will, if persevered in, lead to
further encouraging developments.
In the first place, I will take it for granted that a
previous knowledge of drawing has to a certain extent
been attained, as the basis of all good painting lays in
correct drawing. I should strongly advise those that are
anxious to quickly attain their object, to be sure and master
drawing first; for no matter how good the painting may
be in color and technique, if the drawing is bad, it fails to
attain what art desires.
By all means work from original models : whether it be
out m the open fields (copying nature), still life, or painting
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


flesh ; because if you copy any other painter’s work you
are merely a copyist, and will have very little chance of
ultimate success as regards originality.
My reason for warning the amateur from copying other
works is this, in the first place you are imitating what you
do not understand ; you may get your drawing perfectly
correct, and the various tints as you see them, but you are
using another person’s brains, you are merely a follower,
and not exercising your own judgment; it must, therefore,
be devoid of the truly artistic feeling necessary for good
work.
With these few introductory remarks, in which I have
tried to be as explicit as possible, we will proceed to the
first important matter —Materials.
The first thing you will require is a piece of canvas or
Academy board, which should not be too small, as that
would retard breadth of treatment, which is most essential
to the student painter. Above all things work broadly,
and do not aim at too much finish at first, that will come
with constant practice. Keep your masses broad and
simple, with careful regard to relative tones. Persistently
aim at a direct method, placing your tones side by side
carefully, referring to your model continuously. These
remarks apply the same to all branches of art, whether it
be landscape, still life, or from the model. The next
important matter is the palette, which should be as large
as possible, the larger the better. The necessary colors,
I think, which would meet all requirements, are flake white,
yellow ochre, king’s yellow, raw sienna, lemon yellow, light
red, Chinese vermilion, rose madder or madder lake, new
or French ultramarine blue, cobalt, burnt sienna, raw
umber and ivory black. Emerald green may be added, if
you wish, as beautiful tender grays may be obtained by
admixture with vermilion and white.
Colors may be arranged on palette, starting with flake
white nearest thumb hole in due order to the left, as stated
in above list.
The next thing required will be about eight French hog-
bair brushes. I recommend French brushes as they are all
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


that can be desired, giving a good, firm, square touch.
Include a sable rigger among your brushes, with dipper
and turpentine ; also some sticks of charcoal.
I will take it for granted that your first attempt will be
from still life. _ Start with something simple at first; for
instance, a plain blue vase with a small sunflower placed
in it, arranged on a piece of amber plush. The first con-
sideration will be the drawing. Take a stick of charcoal
and sharpen it to a chisel point, then proceed to draw the
outline, sketching _it in lightly at first, and firmer when
you feel the drawing is pretty correct; rub in tones with
the point of your finger as you proceed ; the result will be
a charcoal sketch, with all the tones, modelling, &c., that
the finished painting will represent; then blow off the
superfluous charcoal, and proceed with your rigger dipped
in turpentine, black and burnt sienna (let the burnt sienna
predominate), and draw in the outline ; take one of your
hog-hair brushes dipped in turpentine, using the same
colors, and proceed to put in all the tones (relatively) of
your previous charcoal sketch, washing it in, and treating
it in the same manner as a water-color sketch, only that
you are using turpentine instead of water as a medium.
Having accomplished this, your sketch is ready for painting.
We will now proceed, taking the background as our first
consideration ; whether it be gray, blue, green or red, keep
it low in tone, and remember what may look to you one
even tone is in reality a series of broken tones, and by
keeping the colors subdued you will make them retire as
they should do. Proceed now with the vase ; take a small
portion of flake white, cobalt blue and emerald green, mix
together with your palette knife, compare it with the
lightest tone of your vase, adding green, blue, emerald
green or white, as may be required ; take one of your
brushes and spread the tone on the canvas, limiting it to
its proper place by referring to your model; then proceed
with the next tone, adding more blue or green as may be
required with a small touch of vermilion, or madder lake,
to slightly neutralise it. You must remember that your
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


HEBBLEWHITE & CO.’S
LISTS OF HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES
(Free).
SILENT
SEWING
MACHINES
(Willcox & Gibbs).
Ik
'
iii
m
m.
m
The Best
HOUSEHOLD
MACHINE
in the
WORLD.
Have
STOOD THE TEST
for
SIXTY YEARS.
\kJ\A Our STOVES (Gas or Coal), MANGLES,
OLJU WMi V WRINGERS, STEPS, LADDERS,
CLOTHES-HORSES, MINCERS, KNIFE CLEANERS, PEACH
and APPLE PARERS, SAD IRONS, SELF-WRINGING MOPS,
TUBS, BUCKETS, REFRIGERATORS, and Hundreds of other
Useful Goods.
OUR LISTS POSTED ON APPLICATION.
GOODS CAN BE INSPECTED AT
HEBBLEWHITE & GO.’S,
Opp. SYDNEY ARCADE & STRAND,


TELEPHONE No. 441. S
LYONS AND McEWEN,
SIGN WRITERS.
GENERAL PAINTERS,
DECORATIVE ARTISTS,
SCENE PAINTERS, &c.,
155 ELIZABETH STREET, SYDNEY.
C-alleo Sign? a Speciality,
Book for High-elass Wall Papers
AND INTERIOR
DECORATIONS,
PICTURES
and
FRAMES.
s' .
ryx*- <-h
Y
mm
r
&
&
m
s>
<SA O
<' *Sj
\
A
S
Ac
\\
\
\
Sis,
%
A
3
//
l-
VA
%
A
*r
Arv
r,.i
OIL, COLOUR '/A (&
and Q
GLASS MERCHANTS
v* \


colors will get more neutral as they retire from the eye.
Proceed, tone after tone, as suggested, till you come to
where the edge of the vase and background meet. Here
you must soften the edge of the vase, and let it, as it were,
melt into the background ; this will model and give round-
ness to it. We will next take the flower (which is of
course yellow); take a portion of king’s yellow with your
palette knife, if the lightest tone is deeper add vermilion,
if lighter add white. The lightest tone will be nearest the
eye, and where the light strikes strongest on it; the second
tone will be richer, which will be obtained by adding a
little madder lake. That part of the flower that is furthest
from the eye, and retiring towards the background, will be
lower in tone and slightly grayer (unless it is in a strong
light). You can make the color grayer by adding a little
more madder lake and blue, or vermilion and emerald
green. The green for the leaves, stalks, &c., will suggest
itself to you, your French blue, mixed with various
yellows, such as raw sienna, yellow ochre, king’s yellow,
&c., will furnish you with innumerable greens, these can
be broken, or lowered in tone, with burnt sienna, light red,
black, &c., as your taste dictates. The plush you have
arranged your study on will next command attention.
The local color will be burnt sienna, yellow ochre and,
perhaps, a little white; as you approach the shadows
burnt sienna will predominate. If there are very deep
shadows they will often be a rich, warm purple (madder
lake and French blue) ; keep them as rich and warm as
possible. The tones directly under the light will be
grayish, composed of cobalt, madder lake and a small
portion of the local color to sweeten it.
If the intelligent student will submit these few hints to
memory, and accept them in the spirit they are intended,
they will at least have gained some slight knowledge in the
suggestions I have put before them.
I take it I am writing to those who only intend painting
as a pastime ; if they are ambitious to follow it up pro-
fessionally, their only course would be to place themselves
under an artist of reputed ability.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


In the foregoing instructions I have painted from lights
to shadows, professional artists usually paint the reverse
way; but it would take more space than I have at my
disposal, and would not be so intelligible to the previously
uninformed. J
WATER-COLOR PAINTING.
BY “NAPLES YELLOW.”
It is unnecessary for me to recapitulate the instructions as
previously given in my chapter on Oil Painting. The same
suggestions apply to water-color as to oil painting, as you
are working for similar results, only, you are working with
a different medium. In oil you paint solid, painting your
lights opaque ; in water, you work in washes, and leave
yopr lights, or take them out, as the case may be. The
principal object in water-color drawing, is to keep your
work broad and simple, as you are more inclined to" get
into a niggling style in this medium, than in oil, as your
work dries more rapidly and it is very tempting to put in
hard touches here and there, with the idea" of getting
finish , but this you must carefully guard against as much
as possible ; let your colors run together while they are
wet and if you have to put in any after touches, do so
with the greatest caution ; beware of hardness, and do
not cut up your masses with too much detail. You will,
as you advance, notice that a rough sketch taken out of
doors in two or three hours, will be more fresh in color,
uivc inoie dash and truth in it, than a sketch you have
spent days on indoors. The reason of this is obvious, vou
have not had enough time to spoil it, your method has
been direct, it is realistic, because you have interpreted the
scene before you, and have not had time enough to conven-
tionalise your work. Of course it would be impossible to
paint some subjects wholly out of doors, but then, you
must not attempt to paint indoors until you have stored
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best,


your memory with truths, which can only be obtained by
continuous study out of doors, and even then, you must
make sketches and studies from the scenes you are de-
picting while your work is progressing. Professional
artists constantly study out of doors to keep their memory
imbued with the truths that nature affords. If they did
not, indeed, their work would gradually wane into medi-
ocrity without their perceiving it. Do not be too anxious
to paint a picture, study constantly from nature, you need
not go far from home, there are plenty of interesting
studies to be had round you, dry they may seem at first
glance, but when you once start, you will find the most
commonplace subject more full of interest than you at first
imagined. The most ordinary-looking study in nature,
when properly analysed (that is, when you have learned to
look at it with an artistic eye) is full of beautiful color,
indeed, you will be agreeably surprised what a wealth of
color really exists. What you at first thought was one
monotonous green, is in reality a series of beautiful tones,
from the soberest green to the most tender, delicate, almost
emerald green; then again, you will perceive on closer
scrutiny, beautiful autumn tints, ranging from almost
crimson to rich yellows, then your shadows you will find
rich and warm, generally purplish in tone, except in the
distance, where they will incline to blue ; so that what you
at a cursory glance thought was one monotonous tone, is,
in reality, a series of richly gradated tones melting one
into the other. Of course, at first (as is the case with
everyone who paints from nature) you will be very disap-
pointed with your first sketches, they may be lacking in
richness, you may get your colors muddy looking, biit you
must not get disheartened at that, everyone must go
through the same experience and spoil many sketches,
before they can accomplish a really presentable sketch.
Remember, every failure is something learned. By no
means destroy your sketches because they do not please
you, you must carefully store them up, even your worst
attempts ; plod on, and after twelve months’ study, when
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


at times you may get disheartened, turn to your old
sketches, compare them with your recent studies, and I
am sure you will be gratified beyond measure at the
progress you have inade. The first important matter in
sketching, is the choice of a subject, when that is decided
on, start and draw in your outline, avoid sameness, if you
have too many lines running in the same direction, you
are at liberty to vary them, you are not bound to slavishly
follow nature in that respect; an artist is licensed to vary
the composition of a subject as much as his judgment may
suggest, as it is his duty to idealise, or, as it were, force
nature to get the best results and infuse as much poetry in
his work as possible. The next consideration is the
drawing. You will find aBB pencil the best for this, as it
is moderately soft and will not injure the surface of the
paper. Begin by drawing in the principal masses, treating
them as simple and broad as possible, draw them in
squarely in the same manner as you would block in a
drawing from the plaster cast, be careful not to put in too
much detail, as that will confuse you when you start
painting, merely suggest what you require, as that will
give your brush more freedom and allow you to get touches
with the brush that you could not get if you had to follow'
a carefully-drawn outline with the pencil. It is impossible
for me to lay down hard and fast rules as to the color you
would require for a sky, as no two skies are alike, but I
would advise you to keep them simple at first, and not get
your colors too heavy. Start at the top with your brush
well charged with color, and w r ork downwards towards the
horizon, starting, say, with cobalt blue, and substituting
such other colors as the nature of your sky will suggest.
The following colors will be found useful in skies, and will
suggest themselves to you with a little practice :
Sunset Sky. —Cobalt, rose madder, indigo, yellow 7 ochre,
Indian yellow, Indian red and. cadmium yellow.
Stormy Sky. —French blue, lamp black, light red, indigo,
yellow 7 ochre, brown madder.
Sunliyht or Midday Sky. —Cobalt blue, rose madder, lemon
yellow 7, cadmium yellow 7, Indian red, French ultramarine.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder-Purest and Best.


NEVER GET BALD.
“THE AUSTRALIAN
HAIR PRESERVER ”
Has been greatly appreciated by everyone who has used it.
The proprietor of the remedy has received many voluntary
testimonials from well known people, who have either used
it themselves or attested to the result upon their friends,
and can vouch for its efficacy as a preventative of falling
hair ; amongst them being—
Messrs. Warden Harry Graves (stock and station agent); J. M. Purves (Batt,
Rodd, and Purves); Henry J. Carson (lecturer to the School of Pharmacy,
Sydney); John Kinloch (54 Elizabeth Street) ; Alex. S. Mayne (Criterion
Theatre); B. W. Mamsell (244 Pitt Street); Chas. Frazer (Grosvenor
Crescent, Summer Hill); E. D. Foley (Domain Baths): Horace North
Brook (The Jungle, Neutral Bay); Frank M‘Caffrey (38 Abercrombie
Street); H. T. Webster (Bishop’s Avenue, Randwick); John M'Cabc
(Pfahlert’s Hotel); L.M. (New South Wales Club); W. J. Henderson
(The Grand, Melbourne); and many others, including a number of ladies
in Sydney and suburbs.
Soldi toy all Chemists: 3». per Bottle.
SOLE AGENTS FOR AUSTRALASIA, INDIA, CHINA AND JAPAN-
WHOLESALE DRUGGISTS & MERCHANTS,
Queen Anne Chambers, Bond Street, Sydney, N.S.W.
N.B. —The “ Australian Hair Preserver ” and Trade Mark
(JAP conjoined in diamond) stamped on each bottle.
Post Free, 4s. (stamps or otherwise), on application to Agents
and all Chemists.
CAESON


BUTT ERICK’S PAPER PATTERNS
and FASHION BOOKS.
ISSUED
Br
s.
MONTHLY.
These Patterns are most reliable cut, and all seams are
allowed, which is a great guide to amateur dressmakers.
3 13 SYDNEY ARCADE,
J KING STREET.
Depot for Material for Ladies’ Fancy Needle Work.
FRAULEIN FRIEDENREICH
-A-UsTID
MISS SMITH,
COSTUMIER.ES,
Have Removed to 44 Darlinghurst Road.
IF YOUR ELECTRO-PLATED WARE becomes worn or
shabby, don’t discard same, but send it to be
re-plated equal to new by
WATSON & OEANE,
Steam, Brass & Electro-Plating Works,
334, 336 & 375 PITT STREET,
Near LiYerpool St., Sydney.


Next comes the distance. Start with your mountains,
which will invariably be gray, sometimes bluish, sometimes
inclined to purple, with here and there a touch of light;
keep your colors wet, let them run together, and avoid
hardness ; if the mountains are near you can run a little
green in here and there, letting them blend promiscuously
with the other colors, where the light catches the mountains
you will find touches of bright color almost golden in hue.
Your middle distance will bo the next consideration. At
the base of the mountains the foliage as a rule is dark and
sombre in tone, such tints as raw sienna and indigo would
suggest, and here and there the definition of the foliage
will be lost in misty vapors or other natural visitations ; if
these do exist, and are properly handled, they will greatly
assist in giving poetry and aerial effect. As you work
towards the foreground you can introduce more positive
colors, but be careful to keep them moderately low in tone,
except where they are in broad sunlight, here they will be
more pure and tender tints, keep everything simple and
reserve all your force and brightness for the foreground.
In painting the foreground, you can bring all the force your
colors will admit of, but remember force of color does not
mean bright crude color, but properly contrasted tones
harmoniously arranged, as suggested by the scene before
you. Here you can put in your detail, but beware of
hardness. You will find brown pink, burnt sienna, raw
sienna or light red, excellent colors to tone your greens
with. If there be water in the foreground, it will give you
a good opportunity of repeating the colors in your land-
scape. As a rule you will find the colors of the foliage, &c.,
in the reflection, are much low'er in tone than landscape
itself, here you must be very careful to avoid hardness or
too much detail, the best way is to arrange your colors
and paint them in to their relative positions, letting the
tints unite and float together. Sometimes you can take
a brush (while the tints are still wet) charged with pure
water and wash a portion of the tints off, and while still
wet, float in a wash of cobalt blue, this will suggest
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


reflection and limpidity. Space will not admit of more
than the suggestions here offered, but these will, I hope,
stimulate a desire in the reader to seek more practical
information elsewhere, or better still, place themselves
under a competent teacher.
. . ■■— ...
China Painting.
Gold should be applied very smoothly and of sufficient
thickness to entirely cover the surface to be gilded, other-
wise it will not burnish. If the gold is not there before
firing, depend upon it it will not be afterwards. In fact
the little deposit there will be will usually wipe off. If
too thick it will blister and chip off. Experience alone
will teach you how to apply it.
Colored opaque enamels come for decoration already
prepared, and are to be applied on gold before firing.
These enamels form a beautiful decoration if applied in
tiny dots. There is always an element of doubt as to
second firing. If white is desirable use the Auf Setzweiss
(Dresden) just as it comes from the tube. If colored dots
are wanted add a trifle of the color desired. Keep it
several shades paler than is wanted, as it fires considerably
darker.
Permanent yellow is used to give a realistic effect to the
centres of wild roses, apple blossoms, or any flower in
which the stamens are prominent. It is opaque, comes
in several shades, and can be applied with the point of a
needle.
Green gold is made by adding silver to pure gold. Too
great a preponderance of it, however, will devour the gold
entirely.
Unfluxed gold may be applied on matt colors before
firing, but it requires first, that the colors should be
thoroughly dry and hard, and secondly, extremely nice
work.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


To Ebonize Frames.
First scrape some of the old gilt off the frames, rub
them with a piece of sand paper, and then paint them
well over with black Japan varnish; or, if that is not to
be had, with Brunswick black, to be had in bottles at a
saddler’s or painter’s store. If one coat is not enough,
wait till it is quite dry, and then add another. This can
be tried on odds and ends of furniture and found quite
effectual.
To Keep Chinese White and Water-Colors
Moist.
Before the colors get quite hard one or two drops of
pure glycerine, dropped into the pan and mixed up with
the point of a knife with the color, will be all that is
necessary. If the Chinese white or water-color have
become quite hard, then take out of pan or bottle and
place in glass mullor, and beat it up quite fine and smooth
with a few drops of glycerine and water, and replace in
pan or bottle. The glycerine does not injure the paints or
render them greasy.
Framing Water Colors.
A gilt matt is not out of place on a water color if the
tone of the picture is rich and dark, and appears to
harmonize with the gilt. In framing water colors all
fancy frames of plush and velvet should be avoided. They
are not used by artists, and are not admitted to exhibitions.
Water colors are generally framed in fiat frames of gold
or bronze, or carved or plain wood, and should be
surrounded by a mat with a square or oblong opening
(not oval). The matt is white or gold, and should be at
least twice as wide as the frame. A bevel is also very
effective, and artists prefer the rough yellowish white
paper to smooth cardboard for mats. Avoid a bluish
white. Tinted mats are not considered suitable for water
colors, and are not used.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Mounting Prints.
Make a thin size of fish glue or isinglass, take a good
sized flat varnish brush, wet the brush with the size just
sufficiently to moisten the surface of the print to the
extent of the whole width of the brush and the whole
length of the print. Commence at one size and continue
in this way until you have gone over the whole surface.
Draw the brush with a light quick stroke, as closely each
time to the part previously wet as possible, without
lapping or going twice in a place. When dry, go over it
again in the same way, only at right angles to the first
stroke. Let this dry, then proceed to mount it as follows :
stretch,as tightly as it will bear while tacking to a frame
or the required size, a piece of new smooth, fine muslin ol-
factory cloth. Rub over the whole surface of this, with a
good paste brush, a sufficient quantity of well cooked
paste made of equal parts of wheat flour and starch, to
wet thoroughly the cloth. Lay the print on to it, and,
with a piece of clean paper covering it, rub it down on
both back and front side, until smooth and fast. When
thoroughly dry, varnish with white copal varnish.
Hints on Dyeing.
To those who wish to have certain fabrics dyed, the
following information may be found useful as regards the
colors they will take :
Black material can only be dyed black, brown, dark
green, dark crimson, dark claret, dark olive.
Brown can only be dyed black, dark brown, dark claret.
Dark Green: Black, dark brown, dark green, dark claret,
dark olive.
Light Green : Dark green, black, dark brown, dark
crimson, dark claret, dark olive.
Dark Crimson : Black, brown, dark crimson, dark claret.
Light Crimson will take the same as dark crimson.
Claret : Black, brown, dark crimson, dark claret.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Fawn will take dark crimson, dark green, black, brown,
dark claret.
Puce : Black, brown, dark olive, dark crimson, dark
claret.
Park Blue : Black, brown, dark crimson, dark green,
dark claret, dark olive, dark blue.
Pale Blue : Dark crimson, dark green, black, brown,
claret, puce, dark blue, dark olive, lavender, orange,
yellow.
Olive will dye brown, black, dark green, dark crimson,
dark claret.
Lavender: Black, brown, dark crimson, claret, lavender,
olive.
Pink : Dark crimson, dark green, black, brown, pink,
olive, dark blue, dark puce, dark fawn.
Bose : Same as pink, but also orange, scarlet and giraffe.
Straw, Print rose and Yellow will dye almost any color-
required, as also will peach and giraffe.
dray will only dye, besides brown and black, dark green,
dark claret, dark crimson, dark fawn, dark blue.
White silk and cotton goods can be dyed almost any
color. White woollen goods cannot he properly dyed in
the piece ; they can, however, be beautifully cleaned. As
cotton, silk and wool all take dye differently, it is almost
impossible to re-dye a fabric of mixed stuff any color
except dark ones named. Pale blue fabrics will re-dye
better than any color.
To Cleanse Lace.
In cleansing lace, first carefully remove all dust from
black lace, and then sponge it with either gin, green tea,
or one oz. of sal volatile dissolved in a pint of water ;
squeeze the moisture out, but do not rub it. If very
flabby, put gum arabic dissolved in warm water in the
liquid, then wind it round a bottle filled with hot water.
On no account should it be ironed.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Washing Ribbons.
Do not throw away your ribbons because they are
soiled. Wash them in a solution of fine toilet soap and
cold water squeezing them quickly through. Place them
between two cloths and iron with a flat-iron moderately
hot.
To Raise the Nap of Velvet.
Place a dampened towel over the face of a moderately
hot flat-iron. Lay the piece of velvet on this immediately,
and while the steam is passing through, brush briskly in
the direction that will raise the nap ; a nail brush will
answer the purpose.
THE COMPLEXION.
A good complexion is the desire of every lady, both young
and old. A great deal depends on the life each individual
leads. Late hours, worry and sleepless nights are not
conducive to fresh, bright faces.
Ladies are continually committing the error of applying
some injurious preparation to the face, either to beautify
or cover some blemish, which may be temporary or per-
manent, thus spoiling what they most desire to retain —a
good, natural and healthy complexion. Simple methods,
put into practice regularly, insure the best results ; thus,
by bathing the hands, arms and face in hot water, and
drying them well, and rubbing some pure oil of sweet
almonds or fresh spermaceti ointment well in whilst the
pores of the skin are open by the use of hot fomentation,
you will make the skin smooth and fresh looking, eradicate
the seams, wrinkles and blackheads, and prevent any
possibility of chapping. Follow these instructions, and
the good results will very soon be noticeable. If time
permits, it should be done each night, and will restore
almost any complexion to its youthful bloom and beauty.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


0. S. BROWN & CO.’S
MILLED TOILET SOAPS.
PURE AND FRAGRANT.
May be had from all Drapers, Chemists and Storekeepers.
Wholesale Agents:
LARK, SONS & CO. CTO.,
WYNYARD STREET, SYDNEY.
Tuxedo Bouquet - Exhilarating Bath.
White Castille ■ Pearl Complexion.
Spermaceti Cream - Handy Shaving.
Australian Mutual Provident Society.
Special Notice.
Ladies are now accepted by this Society at the ordinary
premium rates without any addition whatever for sex.
They also have the option of being medically examined by
a lady doctor.
Be wise, therefore, and assure your Life at once.
NOTE ADDRESS:
87 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
General Manager and Actuary: RICHARD TEECE, F.1.A.,F.F.A.,F.5.5.
ROBERT B. CAMERON, Secretary.


I DROP YOU A LINE
RIGHT HERE
TO SAY THAT
SAMUELL’S POPULAR PUBLICATIONS,
“I WAS DREAMING” Song
‘‘l WAS DREAMING” .. Waltz
“SLUMBER SONG”
“ NITOUCHE ” GALOP
“DUCHESS OF YORK”
“MY WEDDING DAY”
“NAUTCH SONG”..
Waltz
Song
May be obtained of all Music Sellers throughout
Publisher,
.. A. W. Juncker
.. Leon Caron
.. Harrison White
Leon Caron
Mme. Kellermann
Leon Caron
.. Leon Caron
Australia, or direct from the
11. J. SAMITELL, Box 1077, G.P.0., Sydney, IT.S.'W.
Two Shillings Each.
OLFE,
Late of TRUEFITT S, LONDON)
Late Private HAIRDRESSER to Lord and
Lady Carrington,
And by Special Appointment to Lord Jersey, and to
their Excellencies Sir Robert Duff and Lady Duff.
And his Excellency Admiral Bowden Smith and family.
Ladies and Gentlemen Attended at their Residences by Appointment.
31 BENT STREET, CITY.


Do not blacken your eyebrows, but rub them gently with
a little cocoanut oil, or walnut pomade, at bedtime; this
will darken them and improve the growth. You may color
the lips by rubbing them gently with a little beet-root juice.
A very little is needed. Some ladies prefer a drop of eau
de Cologne ; when this is on the lips, touch them again
with a little milk or cream.
How to Make Up.
By G.S.
Of course it is an open secret that nearly all ladies in
every condition of life, aid or improve nature by what is
professionally known as making-up, and we fail to see why
they should not. In fact, in many cases, it is absolutely
necessary, and in all cases adds to the comfort and
appearance if properly applied. The first thing necessary is
to obtain articles harmless and effective, and then to
apply them properly. For those who like a liquid pre-
paration I would recommend Leichner’s Tilienmilch.
After washing the face with warm water and drying
thoroughly, apply a thin coating with a soft sponge ; after it
is dry wipe off with a soft cloth, then with a hare’s foot or
piece of cotton wool, apply a little rouge (Leichner’s No.
86 is the best) to the cheeks, taking care not to put it too
high under the eyes, but w 7 ell up on the temples,
softening it nicely off so that no abrupt mark appears; then
with the finger put a slight touch on the eyelid. If the lips
are naturally red all that is necessary is to wipe with a
damp sponge, but if more color is desired a slight touch of
lip salve 01 lip stick is necessary. If the eyebrows and
lashes are thin or very light apply a little Indian Ink or
Water Cosmetic with a camel hair pencil. When it is
quite dry puff all over with Violet or Feb Powder ; that
will tone down the color and make it appear quite natural.
hor those who do not care for the liquid preparation,
I would recommend Leichner’s Feb Powder (it can be
obtained in three tints), but in that case the rouge, &c.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder-Purest and Best.


must be put on first and the powder last. This powder
is specially prepared and will adhere to the skin better and
look more natural than any other powder I know of. If
making up for the theatre or ball, where you will be under
a strong light, a little more rouge may be used.
For the hair nothing is better to make it soft and silky
than washing it in Borax and water, and well brushing
when dry. If curly hair is desired, damp slightly with
Borax and Bose Water before putting it in the curling
pins ; it will not only make the curls keep in longer, but
if persisted in will make the straightest hair naturally
wavy. Do not under any consideration use oil or pomade ;
if the hair is very dry and harsh, a slight touch of
Brilliantme may be applied. Dressing the hair is of course
a matter of fancy or fashion.
The above remarks are intended for private life only ; if
for the stage or fancy dress ball, special make-up is
necessary to suit the character assumed, and you would
require to consult a Theatrical Costumier or other
competent person.
Good applications for freckles are:—
Tincture of Benzoin ...Two drachms.
Bose water, to Eight ounces.
Apply this night and morning.
Another very good one is :
Bichloride of Mercury ...One grain.
Chloride of Ammonium Half a drachm.
Glycerine Half an ounce.
Bose Water, to Eight ounces.
Apply night and morning.
Or :
Muriate of Ammonia One drachm.
Lavender Water Two drachms.
Distilled Water One pint.
Apply with a soft sponge several times a day.
Lemon Juice applied to freckles every night will bleach
them.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


To remove freckles, apply ten grains Oleate of Copper,
and one ounce of Oxide of Zinc Ointment.
Chronic Freckles.— Apply night and morning, lotion
made of two drachms Carbonate of Potass, one drachm of
Carbonate of Soda, seven ounces Rose Water, one ounce
Orange Flower Water.
THE HAIR.
The hair should bo brushed and combed at least once a
day. A more healthy growth and a better appearance
will be obtained by brushing and combing it well with a
long, solt-bristled brush, on rising in the morning and on
retiring at night. It should be washed at least once a
week, in warm water, and the head well soaped and rinsed
alter with fresh cold water, and carefully dried. After
long illness the hair frequently falls off. To prevent this,
use the following wash :
1. Tincture of Cantharides..Two drachms.
Acetic Acid Two drachms.
Glycerine Two drachms.
Spirit of Rosemary Two drachms.
Rose Water, to Eight ounces.
This should be applied every night and morning.
Another good wash :
2. Quinine Ten grains.
White Vinegar Two drachms. •
Glycerine Two drachms.
Compound Tincture of
Lavender Two drachms.
Orange Flower Water, to Eight ounces.
Use in the same manner as No. 1.
Children and growing girls, through attending schools
and places similarly crowded, become infected with nits.
An excellent remedy for these :
1. Calomel Ointment.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Apply tins each night, rubbing well into the hair and wash
off in the morning with warm water, using carbolic soap
freely.
A cleaner remedy is to wash the head with an infusion
of quassia chips :
2. Quassia Chips One-and-a-half ounces.
Cold Water, to One pint.
Set this on in the morning and let stand till evening, then
strain and apply, and wash off in the morning as No. 1.
Repeat as often as necessary. There is no danger of ill
effects from this treatment.
Gray hair may be darkened by the use of a leaden comb,
used night and morning; this is a simple and effectual
method. A very good wash for darkening and strengthening
the hair is made by mixing :
Milk of Sulphur Two drachms.
Acetate of Lead Half a drachm.
Glycerine Half an ounce.
Rose Water, to Eight ounces.
The sulphur and lead should be mixed, and the glycerine
added to form a cream, then add the water, shaking con-
tinually.
Another good wash to make the hair brown is :
Pyrogallic Acid One drachm.
Rose, or Soft Water, t 0... Six ounces.
Apply with a soft tooth brush equally over the hair, so as
to leave no patches.
To make the hair black, a solution of:—
Nitrate of Silver Half a drachm.
Rose, or Soft Water, to ...Six ounces.
Should be used after the pyrogallic acid solution has dried.
The hair will immediately assume a natural black and
glossy appearance. The application to be repeated as
required.
Nitrate of silver solution will stain linen and the hands,
so that it must be used with care.
To bleach, or make the hair golden, put a tablespoonful
of borax into a toilet basin of warm water and wash the
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


hair each night, until the desired shade has been obtained.
Or, damp the hair with :
Peroxide of Hydrogen One part.
Orange Flower, or Soft Water.. Three parts.
Repeat this each night until the desired shade has been
obtained. . .
After using any of the numerous preparations tor dyeing
and bleaching the hair, it becomes dry. A little oil of
sweet almonds rubbed in once a week will counteract this,
and make it soft and glossy.
Women’s and children’s hair should be trimmed not
oftener than once a month; indiscriminate cutting is
unwise. When a parent is cutting the children’s hair,
she must comb and brush the hair thoroughly beforehand,
so that each hair may be cut to the required length.
For keeping the hair in curl on damp and windy days
Gum Tragacanth One drachm.
Eau de Cologne Half an ounce.
{Shake well and gradually add water to one ounce.
This will make a soft jelly. Moisten the hair to be
curled with the jelly and' put up in paper, soft silk, or
curling pins. This will be found an admirable adjunct to
the toilet.
Dandruff or Scurf, which is really a disease of the scalp,
is frequently a difficult thing to get rid of. It is a mistake
to imagine it arises alone from unclean habits ; in some
instances this is the primary cause, but not always; _in
some it is hereditary ; others, it is contracted by using
other people’s brush and comb, and by wetting the head
with a brush dipped in water. With a little attention a
case may be entirely cured.
First wash the head with warm water, in which some
carbonate of potash (salts of tartar) has been dissolved. Do
this once or twice a week, at bedtime. On the following
morning apply a wash of :
Castor Oil Half an ounce.
Spirit of Rosemary Three drachms.
Bay Rhum Three ounces.
Rectified Spirit of Wine.. Three ounces.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Or, another good remedy is, to moisten the head with
common vinegar and rub it into the scalp, at bedtime. In
the morning wash with warm water and apply some of the
above wash.
Another method :
Wash the head once a week with powdered borax and
warm water, dry well, and every morning use on the skin
ot the head :
White precipitate ointment... Two drachms.
Vaseline to one ounce,
and for ordinary use as a dressing :
Olive Oil Three ounces.
Lay Rum (best) One ounce.
01 any spirit perfume preferred, well shaken before using
the spirit destroys greasy nature of the oil.
To Remove Superfluous Hair.
I here is really only one that is reliable and safe to use
known at present:—
Quick Lime x
Sulphate of Baryta Equal parts.
Starch j
Mix the powders well and moisten with a little water, to
make a thick paste ; spread this on the part where the hair
is ; leave on for about live minutes, when it will commence
to smart; scrape off with a very blunt knife; wash the
part and apply a little lanoline or cold cream ; the operation
may be repeated as often as necessary.
A Wash for the Hair for Ladies.
Take the yolk of two eggs and beat, and if a strong
lather be required, add. Dissolve half an ounce Salts of
iartar in one pint of boiling water, and when cold, mix a
small quantity with the yolks. After rubbing the skin
well with the wash, use the points of the fingers, rinse
with tepid water and dry. To prevent cold, rub the back
ot the ears with a little spirit of any kind, or with one
ounce borax in one quart of boiling water to which when
cold, add fifteen drops of Spirits of Camphor.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Effective Hair Dressing for Balls (Diamond Dust.)
White frosting, one ounce. Rub moderately fine in a
mortar, and powder the hair. Powder it with puff until
the effect desired is obtained.
Hair Restorer, No. 1.
Glycerine Four ounces.
Tincture of Cantharides Five drachms.
Liquid Ammonia Four drachms.
Rose Water Twelve ounces.
To prevent splitting the hair, comb gently from the
points, gradually towards the roots. If the hair should be
split from bad combing have it cut and singed.
For Dandruff— Apply a lotion of ten grains borax, one
ounce Glycerine, and four ounces Rosewater every night.
Camphorated Oil gives the Hair a glossy appearance.
THE TEETH.
How to Preserve and Beautify the Teeth.
The teeth should be brushed three times a day, if
possible. Never less than twice a day if you wish to keep
your teeth sound and white, immediately on rising in the
morning, midday and particularly at bedtime. The reason
I would impress brushing them at night is this : —The
food collects between the teeth, and if not removed,
decomposes and sets free gaseous acids which destroy the
enamel. The teeth should be brushed for three minutes
on each occasion—both the front and the back of them—
to remove all tartar, and the teeth and gums will be kept
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


in a good, healthy condition. If you neglect the teeth a
bad taste in the mouth and a fetid breath are the natural
result, both of which are very objectionable. Several
good powders are given below :
Prepared Chalk One ounce.
Powdered Cuttlefish. One drachm.
Powdered Peruvian Bark One drachm.
Oil of Cloves Five drops.
Or ;
Camphorated Chalk One ounce.
Powdered Myrrh Two drachms.
Carbolic Acid Ten drops.
Oil of Cinnamon Five drops.
Or :
Bicarbonate of Soda Two drachms.
Precipitated Chalk Two ounces.
Cream of Tartar Two drachms.
Orris Boot One ounce.
Powdered Cochineal Half a drachm.
Oil of Cloves Ten drops.
Oil of Neroli Five drops.
The gums frequently become inflamed, especially where
the natural teeth have been replaced by false ones.
An excellent astringent wash :
Comp. Tinct.of Lavender Two drachms.
Borax .-.One drachm.
Alum One drachm.
Tincture of Ehatany Two drachms.
Rose Water, to Eight ounces.
Rinse the mouth out with a tablespoonful three or four
times a day.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking-Powder—Purest and Best.


SYDNEY DENTAL COMPANY.
822 GEORGE STREET.
HIGH-CLASS DENTISTRY
AT THE
LOWEST CHARGES.
FULL SETS OF TEETH from £4 0 0.
GAS ADMINISTERED DAILY, 7s. 6d.
STOPPINGS from 2s. 6d.
ALL WORK GUARANTEED.
Manager: H. WORSLEY.
522 GEORGE STREET .
F. W. WYRJT,
3SO STREET,
NEAR HUNTER STREET,
Japanese Vases, Cups and Saucers, Plates, Tea Sets,
(fee., Ac.
Draperies for Easels, Pianos, Mirrors, Table Decorations, &c.
Novelties in Brackets. Plant Stands, Fire
Screens, Piano Backs, &c., made to order.
MANICURE ROOM— A private room where Ladles can
have their hands properly attended to, the nails trimmed,
polished and tinted.


Another very good one :
Tincture of Myrrh One ounce.
Eau de Cologne Three ounces.
Teaspoonful in a wineglass of warm water, and rinse
the mouth three or four times a day.
Liquid foaming dentifrice
Castile or Curd Soap One drachm.
Eau de Cologne One ounce.
Tincture ofßhatany Two drachms.
Rose Water, to Six ounces.
the to ° th - -
Or:—
Spirit of Cinnamon Two drachms.
J oa P Bark Two drachms.
Eau de Cologne One ounce.
Rose, or Orange Flower
lr . , Water ’ t 0 Six ounces.
thr “ "
■ J als f e teeth should not be removed from the mouth at
rnmmm
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder-Purest and Best.


MANICURING.
(BY A MAÑICURIST.)
Clean and well kept nails are essential to a pretty hand.
In the fashionable world ladies take great care of their
hands, and Manicurists may be found at many establish-
ments in the City—at F. W. Wyatt’s, George Street, and
other establishments. The charges are exceedingly
moderate, viz., one shilling. Manicuring is very simple,
but requires care and experience. To manicure :—Wash
the hands in tepid water for five minutes, dry well; then
raise the quick round the nail very gently with a narrow
steel knife, and scrape away the small pieces of skin that
fall; then with a pair of curved nail scissors cut the
corners only of the nails, file the nail round with a steel
nail file to length and shape desired ; use an emery board
under each nail to take away the surplus skin; then if the
quick is any way tender, put a little Lanolin Ointment
round it with a nail straw, then with a small soft brush.
Brush the nail and quick with a little Rosaline (Rouge)
Cosmetique, then with a burnisher put Diamond Nail
Powder on and brush till quite shiny. After this, wash
again with tepid water to remove all trace of the rouge
and powder. Spray a little scent if preferred. Then use a
small burnisher to polish the nail. To enamel the nail
apply with a fine camel hair brush very lightly a little
Roman Balm; let dry, and polish with a small burnisher.
Carbolised Glycerine applied every night to the nails will
improve them and will prevent white specks, which some-
times come in the nails.
All articles required to be obtained from Samuel Harris,
family and dispensing chemist, 78 King Street, Sydney.
To Prevent the Nails Breaking— Creme d’ Savon.—
Cut very fine half an ounce old Brown Windsor Soap, boil
for ten minutes in one quart of water, and add one ounce
Cream of Tartar which has been dissolved in a teacupful of
hot water. If you prefer it perfumed, add, when cold, two
81
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


SAMUEL HARRIS,
FAMILY AND DISPENSING CHEMIST,
78 KING STREET, SYDNEY.
COUGHS, COLDS & BRONCHITIS—For Certain Cure take
DR. McKENZIE’S COUGH BALSAM.—Is. and 2s. a Bottle.
S. HARRIS, Sole Ppoppietop, 78 KING STREET, SYDNEY.
HARRIS’ NEURALGIC POWDER,
For NEURALGIA, HEADACHE, &c.
Certain Cure. 2s. a Bottle.
CORN CURE, A CERTAINTY, by Using
HARRIS’ CORN SOLVENT;
Is.-By Post.
HARRIS’ LITTLE TONIC LIVER PILLS,
Guaranteed to Cure SICK HEADACHE
And Every Disease of the Liver, Stomach and Bowels.
A Safe Cathartic; do not afterwards Constipate.
Is. a Bottle.
78 KING STREET, SYDNEY.
DR. MCKENZIE’S lODIZED SARSAPARILLA
OR
BLOOD and LIVER CLEANSER.
A Remedy for Blotches, Boils, Eruptions, Piles, Pimples,
Rheumatism, Scrofula, Skin Disease, Syphilis,
Tumors, Ulcers, Gout, &c. In Bottle, at 3s. 6d.
78 KING STREET, SYDNEY.
DR. McKENZIE’S CAPILLINE,
Guaranteed to Restore Grey or Faded Hair to its proper
Colour; also making the Hair Silken and Glossy,
Increasing its Growth, and preventing it Falling Out.
In Bottles, 2s. 6d.
HARRIS' ROSEMARY AND CAMPHOR HAIR WASH.
CLEANSING, RESTORING, STIMULATING and REFRESHING,
At 6d. a Packet.
HARRIS’ for Manicure Sets, Polishing Paste, Powder,
Nail Knives, Scissors, Files, Polishing Rubbers, &c-


ounces Eau de Cologne or two ounces Lavender Water,
then shake the whole together. Take your nail brush and
pour a little of the liquid on it, then use your brush in the
usual manner. You will find the nails quite white
underneath. • „
To whiten the nails, dip them in a solution made ot:
Dilute Sulphuric Two drachms.
Tincture of Myrrh One drachm.
Water, to ....Two ounces.
Let them remain in the solution for about three or five
minutes, then dry and rub them well.
The Hands.
After washing, use a preparation, say, a quarter of a
pound of powdered Almonds, 4 ounces Rice 1' lour, 01 line
Oatmeal, quarter ounce powdered Soap, and a quarter
ounce Orris Root Powder; this sewn into a bag made ot
coarse towelling is a very good way to use.
Almond Paste is a nice preparation for the hands ; make
it in small quantities because it does not keep. Pound
two ounces each of Bitter and Sweet Almonds, to which
add half ounce powdered Soap, two drachms Spermaceti,
half ounce Oil of Sweet Almonds and one ounce of Rose
Water ; after these have melted, add ten drops of Essence
of Bergamot.
For Chapped Hands use Glycerine Jelly ; it is merely
pure Glycerine thickened with Tragacanth Powder and
scented. Another preparation is half drachm powdered
Soap, two drachms Honey mixed with five ounces Olive
Oil; keep on stirring it until thoroughly mixed. Another
remedy, Cholpride Potash, Powdered, one drachm ; Rose
Water, five ounces ; Glycerine, three ounces.
To Whiten the Hands.
No. 1.
Rub the Hands with equal parts of Lime Water and
Lemon Juice after washing. At night apply equal parts
Boracic Ointment and Vaseline.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder-Purest and Best


No. 2.
Melt together two drachms Spermaceti, and one ounce
Oil of Almond ; as it cools add sixteen drops Essence of
Lemon. After washing your hands rub on a piece of
Lemon, apply at night, and wear gloves.
PALMISTRY.
BY WALTER SOCTT GIVEN.
Palmistry is the art of reading character by the shape of
the hands and the lines thereon. From them the past
can be stated, the present tendencies and characteristics
indicated, and the natural future predicted.
Long hands denote activity. Short, impulsiveness.
J-hick hands are found in clumsy people.
A firm and hard palm shows an energetic nature.
Soft and fleshy palms indicate love of ease.
. When the hand is held close with the fingers turned
inward, the subject will be rather cautious.
When the hand bends back, with the fingers and thumb
far apart, it shows a brilliant person, &c.
The Thumb.
The thumb is one of the principal guides in Palmistry.
It represents the three great powers that rule the world—
Love, Logic and Will. (Fig. 1.) People with large,
strong thumbs have more power of will than those with
weak thumbs, &c. A good thumb with the rest of the
hand weak is more capable of improvement than a weak
thumb with the rest of the hand favourable.
The Mounts.
Th© names and positions of the mounts can be seen by
referring to the drawing on page 89. Jupiter gives
ambition, honor. Saturn : solitude, harmony. Apollo :
artistic taste. Mercury : business, quick wit. " Mars gives
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


courage and a martial spirit. Luna : imagination, love of
travelling. Venus ; affection and love of the beautiful, &c.
The Line of Life.
The line of life starts from under the mount of Jupiter.
(Fig. 1.) When this is long, clear, of good color, it tells
of good health and long life.
A double line of life signifies an enduring constitution.
Lines rising from the life line towards any particular
mount, partake of the qualities of that mount.
Lines crossing the line of life are misfortunes caused by
others.
All lines going upwards from the line of life, show
success; falling from the line of life, misfortunes or loss
of vitality.
Dates can be given by dividing the line into periods of
ten years, &c.
The Line of Head.
The line of head rises with the life line. (Fig. 1.)
When this is long, it shows capabilities for study, or good
business qualities; when short, want of will power, in-
ability to govern the life ; forked, literary pursuits. When
there is a wide space between the lines of life and head,
it indicates a self-reliant, bold and courageous person.
The head line, when sloping towards the mount of
Luna, notifies an imaginative person, &c.
Line of Heart.
This line takes its rise from the middle of the mount of
Jupiter. (Fig. 1.) When this is long, starting under the
finger of Jupiter, we get the highest type of love—the
worship of the ideal.
When rising under the mount of Saturn, the subject,
though capable of deep affection, will not be so demon-
strative as those with the longer heart line.
When chained and crowded with little lines, it denotes
inconstancy, but no lasting affection, &c.
A straight line without branches is cold and devoid of
affection.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


The Line of Saturn or Fate.
This line relates to our worldly wealth, advancement
and success in financial affairs. It has four points of
departure —from the wrist, the line of life, mount of Luna,
or the plain of Mars.
Rising from the wrist, separated from the life line, and
ending high upon the mount of Saturn, it indicates extreme
good fortune. (Fig. 1.)
When starting from the line of life, success gained by
the subject’s own merit.
Starting from the mount of Luna, good fortune in the
hands of others.
There are hands without any fate line, they generally
lead a mechanical life, &c.
Line of Apollo.
This line, when found in the hand, gives artistic merit,
musical talent and refinement, also fame and reputation.
(Fig. 1.)
This line has four different starting points; from the
life line, the wrist, mount of Luna, or the line of heart, &c.
Many lines on the mount of Apollo signify multiplicity
of ideas, &c.
Line of Health.
This line rises at the base of the mount of Mercury.
(Fig. 1.)
The straighter the line, the better the health.
To be without this line is a very good sign, as it denotes
a good constitution.
The line of life tells of the health of the individual, and
might be called the health line, &c.
The Girdle of Venus.
This line takes its rise between the first and second
fingers, ending between the third and fourth. (Fig. 1.)
This is considered to bo an unfortunate line, on account
of its cutting the lines of fate and Apollo, &c.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


/
. '■if,'-
un
C="C.6„ T .
‘•OVtNtU
i4n>
/Susumk/ ra?/T.-
/ / CAut 'ovs NCSs
« /-?
Ml
L..-
I®*
*/V£
K£5S
<u
AMITW^!
KNOW THYSELF,
mrsTTosepha north
AND
WALTER SCOTT GIVEN,
ARTISTS, PHRENOLOGISTS,
PHYSIOGNOMISTS, Etc ,
12 and 13 IMPERIAL ARCADE,
SYDNEY.
TERMS FOR DELINEATIONS.
A Reading of the Head, Face, and Hand
Complete Chart of Character
Chart and Full Written Delineation ..
2s. 6d.
ss. Od.
10s. Od.
, phrenological Class is held at the above address,, every
Tuesday, at 8 p.m. 15s. per Quarter, or Is. 6d.
per Lesson.
L Drawing Class is also held every Wednesday and Friday :
SOs. per Quarter. f r jjj[ | 0 jj each evening) From
delineations given from Portraits and Imprint of Hands,


LADIES will of course,
remember that
FOSTER’S ALE and STOUT
, ,
maintains its position as the
best imported.
TpE COpDITIOp IS SPLtHpDID.
/
11/ A
is now acknowledged
by Connoisseurs to be absolutely
the best imported.




The Marriage Line.
These lines are found on the mount of Mercury, at the
side of the hand. (Fig. 1.) The long lines only relate
to marriage, the shorter ones to engagements, or marriage
contemplated. According to the line can be seen the
happiness of the marriage, whether crossed or otherwise.
A Few Considerations.
Each palmist has his or her own peculiar way of reading
the hand, hence, palmists differ in many ways, though the
principle is the same.
It is not correct to judge a line by itself, as one line
often counteracts another.
The right hand is the better hand to read, and by com-
paring the right with the left, the changes in the life can
be seen with greater accuracy.
For further information concerning this interesting study,
see book entitled “ Illustrated Phreno-Physiognomy and
Palmistry combined,” now in course of publication, by
Mrs. Josepha North and Walter Scott Given.
The Phrenological and Art Studios,
12 and 13 Imperial Arcade, Sydney.
PHYSIOGNOMY.
BY WALTER SCOTT GIVEN.
INTRODUCTORY.
These few notes on Physiognomy and Palmistry are
written for the express purpose of bringing this useful and
beneficial science—for they are one—before the general
public.
It is written as clear and as simple as possible, so that
it may be within reach of all; with a view to promote a
deeper interest in such studies among the public.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best,


Physiognomy is the art of reading character by the
external signs of the face.
The face is the mirror of the soul; in it are expressed
the emotions of the mind.
The student must remember that it is a mistake to
judge a person by one feature alone ; he must take all the
signs together, and determine from the whole, and not in
part.
The Forehead.
By the forehead we judge of the intellectual powers of
the subject. When the lower part of the brow is well
developed and the upper receding, the subject would have
large perception but small reasoning abilities. (Fig. 1.)
When we find the upper portion projecting and the lower
receding, there would be too much reflection, with little
observation. (Fig. 2.) When the upper and lower portions
of the forehead are proportionately developed (as in Fig. 8),
we have a well-balanced mind, &c.
The Nose.
We judge of the combative and executive force of the
individual by the nose.
The Roman nose is the highest type of the aggressive
disposition : it denotes attack, the ability to command and
power to execute. (Fig. 1.)
Relative defence is a modification of the Roman nose, it
gives the desire to defend friends, to fight for others ; it is
the clannish nose, and is found large in the Scotch and
French. (Fig. 8.)
Self-defence is shown by the length of the nose, just
above the tip ; this gives the desire to defend self, and
often leads to selfishness. (Fig. 2.)
The Grecian nose is found in refined and artistic
people, &c.
The Mouth and Lips.
Large mouthed people have more character than small
mouthed individuals.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Full red lips, in proportion to the face, denote warmth
and affection. (Fig. 8.)
Love of approbation is shown by the rising of the upper
lip, disclosing the front teeth. (Fig. 2.)


People with thin lipless mouths are cold, orderly and
precise. (Fig. 1.)
When the lips are depressed at the outer corners, it
indicates gravity; if too much so, bad temper. When
the corners turn up, it shows a mirthful turn of mind, &c.
The Chin.
The signs of the affections are found in the chin.
A well rounded chin, m proportion to the face (as in
Fig. 3), is a sign o 1 affection, love and friendship. A
retreating chin is found in a cold, friendless nature, one
who lacks heart and courage. (Fig. 2.)
Materialism, selfishness, and often cruelty are found in
a long projecting chin. Such a person is wanting in
sympathy; would be very methodical and exact, &c.
(Fig. 1.)
The Eyes.
From the eyes can be seen the intelligence of the subject.
Eloquence is shown in a prominent eye. (Fig. 3.) Deep
set eyes are found in a person who observes keenly, but
speaks little. (Fig. 1.)
Dark colored eyes are more intense than light ones.
Round shaped eyes belong to a credulous nature ; if
showing the white above and below the eyeball, it denotes
simpleness. (Fig. 2.) Narrow eyes, to an incredulous
disposition, &c. (Fig. 1.)
High, arched eyebrows, signify a lack of severe thought.
(Fig. 2.); when near the eyes, shrewdness. (Fig. 1.)
Fine eyebrows are found in a sensitive nature. °
When the hair of the eyebrows runs in one direction
it shows an even temper. (Fig. 3.) Weak eyebrows
indicate a poor constitution, &c. (Fig. 2.)
The Ears.
People with fine round shaped ears are musical. (Fig. 4.)
Ears that are more or less angular in shape, belong to a
practical nature. (Fig. 5.)
Dr Waugh’s Baking Powder-Purest and Best.


A large ear lobe belongs to people who enjoy life, nature,
and all its pleasures ; they have more tenacity to life than
those with the smaller ear lobe. (Fig. 6.)
Ears standing well out from the head notify activity, &c.
People with finely shaped ears have more delicacy than
those with thick or coarse ones.
The Neck.
By the neck is seen the strength and endurance of the
individual. People with long necks are independent and
active. With short necks they are strong and impulsive,
&c. When the neck is held straight and stiff, it shows
firmness; if slightly leaning forward, it is the expression
of thought and attention, &o. Thin necks belong to the
weak and timid. Very thick necks have much of the bull
dog nature.
The Hair.
From the hair can be judged the temperament of the
subject. Coarse or strong hair goes with the muscular
temperament. Fine silken hair belongs to the nervous
temperament, &c., &c.
DANCING.
BY ERNEST NEEDS.
Although undertaking to write on Dancing, it must be
understood that I am not making an attempt to teach, but
will endeavour from my experience to help those who are
about to learn. I have always been of opinion, that to
accomplish the art, it is absolutely necessary to have the
assistance of a professional teacher. But 1 feel quite
satisfied from my experience and observance of the
hundreds of pupils 1 have instructed during the last
twenty years, that the following simple instructions will,
if carefully practised, greatly assist any beginner, and act
as a foundation from which the student can with perse-
verance become a good dancer. Of course lam simply
speaking of ball-room dancing. Fancy Dancing is a
matter which requires an example and instructor, and
i; h’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


can be only accomplished from observation. I shall
endeavour, in explaining the different dances, to be brief,
and adopt a style free from technical terms as possible, my
aim being to point out what is necessary to be done from
my view. I need not trouble the reader with anything
but what is actually necessary.
Although many manage to pull through the various
round and figure dances, and no doubt enjoy themselves,
attitudes and positions of the feet are far from artistic. In
speaking of dancing as an art I must admit that ball-room
dancing is at the present time a much abused one. I have
arrived at the conclusion that the art has disappeared and
the dance now is simply a romp ; but this seems to be the
fashion of the hour.
It is absolutely necessary, in the first place, for the
student to thoroughly master and understand movements
from which all proper dancing emanates, which are the
following ; —The five positions.
First Position.
Which is a standing position, as per plate No. 1 ; heels
together, toes turned out,
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Second Position.
Right or left toot extended to the side, which is used in
moving to either side as per plate No. 2.
Third Position.
The ordinary standing position (see plate 8,) with right
or left heel placed in the hollow of the other foot at right
angles. i
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Fourth Position.
(See plate 4,) either foot extended to the front, with toes
turned out.
Fifth Position.
Which is very similar to the third, only the heel of one
toot should be placed at right angles to the ball of the
other foot.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


DANCING ACADEIY,“NITHSDALE”
167 LIVERPOOL ST., HYDE PARK.
Conducted by Mr. ERNEST NEEDS.
This Academy is open for Instruction in
all Fashionable Dances. The system of
Teaching is simple, and devoid of any
unpleasantness to the pupil.
Mr. Needs, being in constant correspon-
dence with the Leading Teachers of Dancing
of London and Paris, is enabled to impart all
the Latest Styles.
BEGINNERS’ CLASSES.
MONDAYS ]
and Afternoon and Evening.
THURSDAYS
ADVANCED PUPILS’ ASSEMBLY
ON EVERY WEDNESDAY EVENING,
when Visitors can be Introduced.
PRIVATE LESSONS BY ARRANGEMENT.


Preliminary Movements.
Having mastered the above, I would suggest that the
student should practice a walking step to regular time,
first one foot and then the other, along a straight line,
counting one two, one two —first forwards, then backwards,
until you feel you can walk keeping time.
As it is necessary to exercise so many muscles not
generally used, a verv good exercise is to stand in the
first position (see plate 1), raise the weight of the body
on to the fore part of the feet, drop the weight lightly, but
keep the heels together ; practice this exercise as much as
possible to regular time, counting one two, one to rise, one
to fall.
Advance and Retire.
Prom the third position, (plate 3), take three steps
forward and finish in the third position with opposite foot
from which you start. To retire, take three steps back
commencing with the forward foot and finish where start-
ing from. It will be seen that four movements are neces-
sary which must be done to beats one two, three four.
A Half Turn.
To understand what is the movement of a half turn,
face any wall of the room, turn on either foot facing
opposite wall.
The Waltz, which is undoubtedly the favourite of the
ball-room, and must take up the principle portion of this
article, especially as in all the other round dances the
same movement is used when turning.
The system I have always adopted is to teach each
individual separately, thus enabling either to be inde-
pendent of assistance from the other.
_ Thus we will commence ; —Place yourself in the centre
of any room facing either side. We will imagine the boards
of the floor are running with the wall you are facing. It
will be necessary to confine the following movements on
two boards thus moving in a straight line towards the end
of the room. We will, in the beginning, start with the
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


right foot; from this position face the end of the room to
your right, and in doing so step forward ; in the first
position turn on the right foot to the opposite wall. You
will understand you have made a half turn ; after having
made the half turn, slide the left foot along the two
boards in question in the same direction in which you
first stepped, at the same time throwing the weight of the
body on the left foot without further turning ; draw the
right foot up to the left, finishing in the third position left
foot forward. It will thus be seen you make three move-
ments and turn half round ; this you will understand is the
forward half of your turn. Having made a half turn we
will commence the other half, which is the -backward half
turn. Still keeping in view the point which you wish to
arrive at, turn your back towards the point, step backwards
with the left foot, at the same time turning on the left foot
to the opposite direction ; then slide the right in the same
direction ; bring the weight of the body on the right foot,
and draw the left up, this should bring you into the
original position as starting, except that you have moved
about two yards nearer the end of the room. Continue
the same movement until the end of the room is reached.
I shall now define the duty of each of those particular
movements. The first is your turning steps, which is the
first beat of a bar of waltz music, and must be emphasized
as one ; the second is the movement by which you gain
your ground. This movement can be long or short, but
must not be overdone; the third is simply to allow the
change of weight from one foot to the other, each half
turn being distinct in itself.
After having practised this movement up and down the
room in a straight line, place yourself far back from the
centre of the room with your back to the wall, using the
centre of the room as your guide ; commence the same
movements but with the difference that you will move
round the room in a circle instead of a straight line ; after
having traversed the room round once or twice, you will
have overcome the movement, as 1 term It in the rough. It
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


will then rest with the amount of practice and judgment
you exercise to accomplish the waltz.
We will now suppose that a lady and gentleman have
practised this movement sufficiently to move in time to a
Waltz being played to slow, regular beats. The gentleman
will take the lady round the waist with the right arm,
taking the lady’s right hand in his left; the gentleman
will have his back to the centre of the room, the lady will
be facing the centre of the room, each standing in the
third position, gentleman with left foot forward, lady with
right foot forward. The gentleman will commence with
the left foot, and make what I have already described as
the backward half turn, finishing with his face to the
centre of the room ; at the same time, the lady will
commence with the right foot, taking care to step towards
the gentleman, placing the right foot between the
gentleman’s feet, at the same time completing the three
movements previously described as the forward half turn ;
by doing this each will have changed to reverse positions.
The lady will then commence with the left foot, gentleman
with right, completing turn as above ; practice this to slow
time, and increase as ease is attained, bearing in mind
that neither of the feet should ever be completely taken
from the floor, but should glide smoothly over it.
THE LANCERS.
In commencing the Lancers, I must refer you back to
the preliminary movement, viz. : —Advance and retire ;
tins movement will be found to constitute tbe greater
part of tbe figures.
Place four couples in the form of a square, at tbe same
time deciding which couple is at the top ; this should be
the end of the room furthest from the door ; the couple
opposite will naturally be the bottom, on the right of top
will be the third, that opposite the third, the fourth.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


After the first eight bars of any Lancers are played, the
top and bottom couples advance and retire, each gentle-
man will turn the opposite lady and fall back to places.
The top gentleman will then lead his partner to the
opposite place while the bottom couple separate and meet
in the opposite place. The bottom gentleman will then
lead his partner back to the original place, the top couple
separating and passing back to places ; each one will now
face to corners. Ladies to the right, gentlemen to the
left, advance and retire, turn corners, and finish in
original places, sides repeat the same figure, then repeat
the whole.
Second Figure.
Top and bottom gentlemen advance with partners and
retire, re-advance, leaving the lady in the centre of the
figure, set to partners and turn to places. The side
couples will separate, joining top and bottom couples,
forming lines of four, advance and retire in two lines, turn
partners to places. Side couples repeat same, when top
and bottom will join side couples. Repeat the whole.
Third Figure.
Four ladies advance to centre of the figure, and curtsey,
the four gentlemen will then advance and join hands in a
ring, the ladies moving backwards to the outside and
placing hands on the gentlemen’s arms ; all gallop round
once, falling back to places ; the four gentlemen will now
advance to the centre, turn and fa'.e partners, at the same
time bowing to partners ; each gentleman will give the left
hand to the gentleman opposite, gentlemen taking the
ladies round the waist with the right arm, all gallop round
and fall back to places. Repeat the above.
Fourth Figure.
The top and bottom couples advance to the side couples
on the right, and bow, pass on round the set to opposite
couple and bow, all give right hand across, walk round to
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


the left change giving the left hand, walking back to
where starting from; all join hands forming a circle,
gallop round to the left, each couple separating, and finish
in original places ; side couples repeat same. Now repeat
the whole figure, but lead to the left to commence.
Fifth Figure.
Grand chain, all face partners giving right hand, walk
round set, giving hands alternately until back in places ; a
stop must be made when meeting partner in opposite
place to bow. The top gentleman will now lead his part-
ner round the centre of the set, and stand in original place,
facing the opposite direction ; the third couple will then
fall in behind the top couple, the fourth couple behind the
third forming two lines ; each line cross four steps, re-cross
four steps ; each line will cast off that is separate from
partners meeting at the bottom of the set, pass back to
same position facing partner, fall back in line, advance and
retire, turn partners, and finish in places, repeat grand
chain. Repeat the above figure four times, each couple
leading in turn.
WALTZ COTILLONS.
First couple waltz round (inside) the set (1G bars).
Top and bottom ladies change places (8 bars).
V ” gent. ~ ~ (8 bars),
bide ladies change places (8 bars).
~ gent. ~ ~ (8 bars).
Top and bottom couples waltz to places (8 bars).
Bide couples waltz to places (8 bars).
Waltz chain (82 bars).
■■'Form lines top and bottom, advance and)
retire, all cross over to opposite sides. [ ° ars-
- Re-advance and retire, all cross over to places (8 bars).
All waltz round to places (16 bars). '
N.B.—When side couples lead, all form lines at sides.
* Tllis part is sometimes replaced by all the couples
marching round the set.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


In a work of this description when everything is
necessarily brief, I have not deemed it requisite to go into
particulars of how to dance the Quadrilles, Schottische,
and Polka, Barn Dance, etc. If you can Waltz well and
dance the Lancers you can soon learn the others. By
practice on Mondays and Thursdays, when I hold regular
classes in the winter months, where intending pupils should
come ; and on Wednesday evenings at “ Nithsdale ” I have
regular Assemblies where advanced pupils can practice and
gain all the competency necessary to enter the ball-room.
“ Nithsdale,”
Liverpool Street, Sydney.
HINTS ON GOOD MANNERS.
BY ERIC,
Inferiors are always introduced to superiors.
At a reception given to a stranger, the hostess introduces
the lady to her family and friends ; but she presents the
gentlemen to her.
It is bad taste to introduce one person to another in the
street, in a conveyance, or at the theatre.
Gentlemen shake hands with each other when intro-
duced. A lady offers her hand to all guests whom she
receives for the first time.
Letters of introduction between ladies should be left
with the callers’ cards; then the lady to whom the letter
is addressed will shortly return the call, if she wishes the
acquaintance of the lady mentioned in the letter of intro-
duction.
When gentlemen are favored with letters of introduction
to ladies, they may make their first call with the letter of
introduction, of course sending in their cards. If the lady
is out, the caller should leave the name of his hotel on
the card.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Gentlemen lift their hats to their own family as they
•do to strangers.
Gentlemen lift their hats to lady acquaintances and to
any lady whom his friend walking with him happens to
salute.
A gentleman should not offer to shake hands with a
lady unless she indicates a desire to do so.
Dinner invitations should be answered immediately.
Form for dinner invitation :
Mr. and Mrs. Charles Fogg,
request the pleasure of
Mr. and Mrs. Eduard French's Cow pang
at Dinner,
On Fridag Evening, 4th August,
At Seven o’clock,
“ Etruria.” Glebe Point Road.
When a husband is out of town, a dinner invitation
may be written like this :
Dear Mrs. Grover,
Will gou and Dr. Grover and gour daughter give
us the pleasure of gour compang at Dinner, on Wednesdag
10th August, at half-past six o’clock I
Mary Anderson.
If you want an early reply, you may add the abbreviation
•of the French synonym, “E.S.V.P.”
Always be punctual when arriving at a dinner.
Guests make calls within ten days after entertainments,
or upon the hostess’ next reception day.
Ladies always wear gloves at a ceremonious dinner.
Neither ladies nor gentlemen remove them until seated at
table.
When making a call leave your card and two of your
husband’s (if married), one for the hostess and one for
her husband.
When a lady has her reception day printed on her cards,
.call on that day, or, if unable to do so, when you do call
explain why you did not call on the reception day.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


When you are leaving town, send or leave your card
with the letters “P.P.C.,” written in either lower corner,,
which means, “ Pour prendre conge,” the English of which
means, “ To take leave.”
When you change your residence, send your card with
your new address on it.
Cards to inquire, should have the words written :
“ With kind inquiries.”
Cards to inquire, should be acknowledged with:—-
“ Thanks for kind inquiries,” after the invalid has re-
covered.
Ten or fifteen minutes is considered long enough for a
formal call.
Never overdress in your own house to receive guests.
Invitation for afternoon tea. Cards may be written
thus;—
Mrs. Brown Potter,
Fridays,
Tea at Fire o'clock,
Potts’ Point.
No answer is required to this invite.
Invitations to musical parties are “At home ” cards,,
with the word “Music ”in the left hand comer. If the
invitation is for the evening, and dancing be included,,
like this :
Mrs. Walter Searle,
At Home,
Friday, 7th July, at Eight o’clock,
Powlett Street.
Music. Dancing at Eleven.
Never enter a concert-room or a drawing-room whilst a
song is being sung. Wait until it is finished.
Apples and pears should be pared and quartered and
eaten with a fork.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Large strawberries may be served with the stems on and
eaten from the stem, dipped into sugar or not as you wish.
Bananas should be peeled with a knife and not with the
fingers ; cut and eat with a fork.
Always use a silver knife with fruit.
Cheese is eaten with a fork. If moist, is spread on a
bit of bread, a small piece at a time.
Ladies do not accept gentlemen’s invitations; the hostess
issues invitations.
Ladies should not intrude in the smoking-room.
When you give tradespeople your address, put it on a
slip of paper, don’t give your visiting card.
When speaking of your domestics, don’t say “Cook
refer to her as “ My cook.”
Servants should speak of their employers’ children as
“ Master Charles,” “Miss Flora.”
It is correct to acknowledge New Year or Easter cards
by a note.
HOUSEHOLD REMEDIES.
(BY DR. HENRY SAMUELL, M.R.C.S.E.)
What to do in case of a Burn or Scald.
If the burn be a large one, cover immediately with flour;
this will absorb the moisture, then apply some carron oil
on a piece of soft linen, or lint. Do not uncover the
wound for a day or two, but apply the oil by raising one
end of the bandage and pouring the oil in, or take off
outer overing and saturate the linen. You cannot use too
much or keep it too moist.
Carron oil is made by mixing equal parts of linseed oil
and lime water, and should be kept ready in every bouse.
Should a blister be raised, it should be clipped with a.
sharp pair of scissors, to let the fluid escape.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


For Sudden Chill, or Cold.
Immerse the feet in a basin of hot water, in which a
tablespoonful of mustard lias been mixed. A dose of
quinine, or sweet spirit of nitre, should be given to check
fever, and a basin of hot gruel, or hot spirit and water,
on going to bed, will rarely fail to cure.
For Cold in the Head.
A dose of fifteen drops of sweet spirit of nitre, in water,
every four hours, and inhale carbolized smelling salts
frequently will soon disperse it. Those subject to cold in
the head should always wear thick stockings and keep the
feet warm and dry.
Menthol snuff is also an excellent remedy, used three or
four times a day.
For Winter Coughs and Colds.
Prevention is better than cure. In every case wear-
warm garments next the skin, especially on the chest and
back.
A good mixture is made of:—
Syrup of Tolu Half an ounce
Syrup of Squills Half an ounce
Paregoric Elixir Two drachms
Ipecacuanha Wine One drachm
Water, to Eight ounces
Take a dessertspoonful every three hours, in water; for
children, a teaspoonful every four hours.
A very simple and good remedy is :
Honey One ounce
Vinegar One ounce
Ipecacuanha Wine One drachm
Water, to Eight ounces
A tablespoonful every four hours. Eub the back and
chest with turpentine liniment each night.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


TOOTHACHE fiT
jj- — CURED
And Decayed Teeth Stopped
By RANSOM’S LIQUID STOPPING.
Instant relief from pain. Fills up the cavity, and the teeth are
again useful. Sold by all Chemists and Storekeepers.
Price Is. Post free, 13 stamps.
DR. BAGSHAW’S
ASTHMA CURE.
Post Free, 3/6.
An Instant Belief Sf Positive Cure.
Let Every Sufferer try it, and be convinced.
The benefit of using Dr. Bagshaw’s Asthma Cure in the most
Chronic cases of Asthma and Bronchitis is immediate. A full
inhaling of the fumes of this remedy stimulates and eases the air
passages, and stops as if by magic that suffocating feeling which is
so painful. Price, 3/6; post free anywhere.
Sold by all Chemists and Storekeepers.
Croup, Bronchitis & Whooping Cough
ALWAYS SUCCUMBS TO
HONEYLINE
The Famous Cough Mixture.
CONTAINS NO NARCOTIC.
Beneficial to the most tender baby or the strongest man. A com-
pound of Honey, Liquorice, Squills, and other expectorant and
Balsamic Drugs, forming The Most Wonderful Cough
Mixture Of the Age, Has never been known to fail. Sold
by all Chemists and Storekeepers. Price, One Shilling.
Wholesale Agents
AUSTRALIAN DRUG CO., Ltd., Sydney.


JADIES! J^ENIOR’S
PREPARATIONS ARE RELIABLE.
+
Liver Pills.
Is. per Box. For Biliousness, Sick Headaches, &c.
Indigestion Mixture.
An infallible Remedy for Dyspepsia, Flatulence, Heartburn, Dizziness, Indi-
gestion, Sick Headache, &c.
Black Currant Balsam.
For Colds, Coughs, Bronchitis, Influenza, Consumption, and Affections of the
Chest, Throat and Lungs.
Ointment;.
For all kinds of Sores, Old Wounds, Burns, Chafing, Chilblains, Itching and
Irritation of the Skin, Chapped Hands, Dandruff, and Eruptions of the Scalp,
&c.
Face Lotion.
For clearing the Skin from Pimples, Redness, Roughness, Freckles, Tan, &c.,
&e., leaving the skin spotless, smooth, healthy, soft, beautiful and natural.
Infants' Soothing Mixture.
For Infants suffering from Convulsions, Constipation, Gripes, Measles,
Cutting the Teeth; can be used with safety.
Blood Mixture.
For Purifying the Blood. Also for the cure of Eczema, Scrofula, Blackheads
or 1 imples on the Face, and all Blood and Skin Diseases, and Old Sores of
long standing.
Neuralgic Mixture.
Highly recommended for that painful complaint, NEURALGIA, of the Face
or Head. GIVES IMMEDIATE RELIEF.
Ratafia Worm Cake.
A purely Vegetable Sweetmeat, both in appearance and taste, perfectly safe,
especially adapted for children; harmless, prompt and certain in their effect.
Easily taken by the most delicate constitution.
Rheumatic Mixture.
For Rheumatism, Lumbago, Sciatica, Gout, Rheumatic Gout, Swollen Joints.
and Pains in the Head, <&c.
Pearl Tooth Powder.
For Cleansing and Preserving the Teeth. Prevents or Removes Tartar and
Discoloration. Imparts a Delightfully Refreshed Feeling to the Mouth, and
Fragrance to the Breath.
TONIC.
INVIGORATING, STRENGTHENING and STIMULATING.
For Weakness, Poorness of Blood, Loss of Appetite, Debility and Nervousness.
N.B. —THE BEST TONIC MADE.
PREPARED EXCLUSIVELY BY
SENIOR,
The Governor's Chemist,
246 GEORGE ST., NORTH (Only).


Sore Throat, Inflamed.
Cold water bandages applied round the neck, and a
gargle of: —
Chlorate of Potash One drachm
Rose Water, to Eight ounces
Use every three or four hours as a gargle.
Relaxed Sore Throat.
A gargle of :
Alum One drachm
Chlorate of Potash One drachm
Glycerine Half an ounce
Rose Water, to Eight ounces
Use every three hours to gargle the throat.
Ulcerated Sore Throat.
A wet pack round the throat, and gargle with :
Sulphurous Acid Half an ounce
Tincture of Iron Two drachms
Glycerine Half an ounce
Rose Water, to Eight ounces
Gargle the throat every three hours.
In all cases of sore throat, a dose of aperient medicine
should be taken immediately the symptoms appear.
Always keep your mouth closed when out walking or
.driving; this will, in a great measure, prevent sore throat.
Headaches.
Almost every woman suffers from this most distressing
complaint. There are so many causes from which head-
aclm arises, that there is no single remedy that can be used
as an antidote for all. We must give the causes and remedies,
so that any ordinary observer may use the proper remedy
in each individual case.
Sick Headache feom Biliousness. —A dose of carbonate
•of soda, followed by a cup of hot tea or coffee.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Nervous Headache, from Overwork or Study. —'Fen
grains of bromide of potassium, or antipyrine, repeated in
an hour if necessary, dissolved in cold water and followed
by a hot drink half an hour after.
Headache just over Eyebrows and in Eyeballs.— Three
drops of tincture of belladonna every three hours. One or
two doses will rarely fail to relieve.
Headache from Influenza.— Hot sponging to face,
temple and neck.
Headache, Hysterical.— Ten drops of tincture of
Virginian snake root in water, every two hours, till
relieved.
Eau de Cologne sprayed on the forehead will always
assist in relieving a headache.
A cup ot hot strong tea or coffee is always beneficial in
cases of nervousness and exhaustion.
Smelling salts can always be used with safety and good
results.
In all cases it is advisable to take a dose of aperient
medicine.
Tired Feet, after a Long Walk.
Bathe in either hot or cold water for about ten minutes,,
then dry, rubbing them -well with a soft towel.
A dessertspoonful of Condy’s Fluid, in a foot bath, is a
great restorative for sore feet after much walking.
Cold Feet.
Bathe in hot water, dry and rub a little spirit, such as
brandy, whisky or Cologne, and rub them well. In winter
thick stockings should be worn, or a pair of silk socks next
the feet and the stockings worn over them.
Tender Feet, with Profuse Perspiration.
In most cases is accompanied by an offensive odor.
Use a powder of:—
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best-


Salicylic Acid .Two parts
French Chalk Eight parts
Starch . Four parts
Dust in the stockings and over the feet.
The feet should be bathed, if only for a few minutes,
night and morning, and dried well.
Soft Corns
May be painlessly and permanently cured by applying a
piece of lint saturated with Gaulard extract. Renew every
morning, and pick off the dried skin.
Bunions.
Paint the enlarged part with tincture of iodine, one or
two coats each time ; when it becomes very tender discon-
tinue for a few days and apply as before. Tight boots and
shoes are always productive of these.
Hard Corns or Warts
Can be removed by applying, with a pointed piece of
stick (a safety match is the best), strongest acetic acid,
every night or morning. If the toe should get very tender,
desist for a few days, then apply as before, taking care to
touch the centre of the corn only and not the surrounding
skin.
Toothache.
To have the offending one removed or stopped is the-
wisest plan. Carbolic jelly, carefully applied, is valuable.
Carbonate of soda, rubbed round the gum and put into the
tooth, will often relieve. When everything else fails, a
solution of cocaine, applied in and around the tooth, will
relieve. A dose of fifteen grains of chloride of ammonium,
and repeated in half an hour if not relieved, will be of
great service. Camphorated chloroform is also an excellent
remedy.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Neuralgia.
Hot fomentation. A powder—
Antipyrin Ten grains.
Bromide of Potassium ...Ten grains.
Dissolve in water, repeat the dose in an hour if not
relieved. Another good remedy is a powder of :
Phenacetine Ten grains.
Citrate of Caffein Two grains.
Take dry on the tongue and wash down with a cup of
hot tea or coffee.
Apply menthol to seat of pain, or application of chloroform
and camphor. Keep out of draughts and damp rooms.
Colic, Spasms, &c.
Hot foments and turpentine applied to the seat of pain,
and a teaspoonful of pain-killer or strong essence of ginger
in a cup of hot water and sugar. An aperient, such as
cascara sagrada, fifteen to thirty drops, in water, or two
rhubarb pills, are very good remedies.
Flatulence and Heartburn.
A dose of carbonate of soda or potash, in water, followed
by a dose of essence of ginger, and keep the bowels regular.
For Inflamed Joints of the Fingers and Unbroken
Chilblains
Use the following liniment, rubbing well into the part
three or four times a day :
Camphor Two drachms.
Menthol One drachm.
Tincture of Cayenne Two drachms.
Turpentine, to Two ounces.
For Broken Chilblains
Use calamine ointment or zinc ointment, continually
applied, will quickly heal them and prevent irritation.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Earache.
A bran or salt poultice to the ear will give relief. Pour
a few drops of warm oil into the ear going to bed and
syringe well the following morning with warm soapy
water.
Bad Breath.
There are several causes from which this arises, the
most frequent cause is sour stomach or inactive liver. An
aperient should be taken to keep the bowels regular, and
a mixture of:—
Carbonate of Soda Two drachms.
Carbonate of Bismuth ...Two drachms.
Carbonate of Magnesia... One drachm.
Syrup of Orange Half an ounce.
Water, to Eight ounces.
Take a tablespoonful three times a day an hour before
food.
Avoid eating pastry as much as possible, and an excess
of sweets, such as lollies, &c. Eat meat only once a day,
and then it should be with the midday meal.
If the teeth are at fault, consult your dentist, and have
any decayed teeth drawn or stopped, and attend to the
cleansing of them regularly.
Tonic
For strengthening the system generally and enriching the
blood:
Citrate of Iron and
Quinine One drachm.
Tincture of Gentian Half an ounce.
Syrup of Orange Peel ...One ounce.
Water, to Ten ounces.
Take a tablespoonful three times a day in water an hour
after or before meals.
Inflamed Eyelids. —Frequent applications of hot
water to the eyes with a soft cloth or sponge, and apply
a lotion of Gaulard Water about every three or four hours.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Granulated Eyelids.— A lotion made of: —
Sulphate of Zinc Two grains.
Sulphate of Alum One grain.
Rose Water One ounce.
Soft Water One ounce.
Apply a few drops night and morning, and bathe the eyes
frequently with hot water.
Wasp or Bee Sting. —Pull out the sting, apply ammonia
freely, or the juice of a raw onion rubbed well in.
For Eczema.— Apply Ointment, one ounce Boracic
Ointment, half ounce Oxide of Zinc, half ounce Vaseline,
and ten drops Carbolic Acid.
Nothing is nicer in a sick room than a spray for
disinfecting. Take a teaspoonful of Condy’s Fluid to a pint
of cold water, and use several times a day.
To remove Stains of lodine.
Saturate the soiled part with spirit of wine, placing a
cloth underneath the article to absorb the spirit as it
passes through.
Ink stains and iron mould may be entirely removed by
using a strong solution of oxalic acid in hot water.
Marking Ink Stains.
May be removed with a strong fresh solution of chloride
of lime. Wet the stain well with the solution, and after
fifteen minutes dip the part in liquid ammonia, or a
solution of hyposulphate of soda; let remain for two or
three hours, then wash in fresh water.
Fruit stains may be removed by applying a solution of
chloride of lime, and washing in hot fresh water half an
hour after.
Tea and coffee stains can bo easily removed by placing'
the stained part drawn tightly over a basin and pouring
boiling water through ; the sooner it is done the easier it
will be removed.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


Soiled black garments may be cleansed by sponging
with clear black coffee, with an quantity of water
added and a teaspoonful each of ammonia and alcohol for
each pint. A silk dress should always be brushed with a
very soft camel’s hair brush. Whisk brooms are too
harsh and cut the silk.
Cleansing Marble.
To remove the finger marks on the statuary, wash with
water and a little sapoho, using a brush on the spots,
afterwards wash with clear water.
If you are going to the theatre or to a dance make a
very light dinner. You will feel much brighter and enjoy
.a supper afterwards.
Vocalists, if they intend singing in the evening, should
dine between four and five. No food should be taken
within two hours of singing.
THE HOUSEHOLD MEDICINE CHEST.
BY DR. HENRY SAMUELL, M.R.C.S.E.
Every householder should be prepared for emergencies of
sudden illness, by keeping a stock of remedies which are
most useful and can be used with safety.
Procure a dozen four-ounce glass-stoppered perfume
bottles (square ones are the best, they are less liable to
overturn), and half a dozen eight-ounce, for liquids, and
half a dozen four-ounce wide-mouthed bottles, for powders.
Ask your druggist for some plain slip lables, and write the
name, doses and contents of each bottle distinctly. For a
.small family a less number may suffice.
List of Remedies. child, adult.
4 oz. —Paregoric 2 to 15 drops.
~ —Byrup of Squills 5,, 50 ~
~ —Tincture of Rhubarb...s ~ GO ~ or more.
~ —Spirit of Nitre 8 ~ 80 ~ ~
~ —Essence of Ginger ...5 ~ 30 ~ ~
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


List of Remedies. Child. Adult.
4 oz.—Sal Volatile 5 ~ 80 drops or more,
~ — lpecacuanha Wine ...8 ~ 10 ~ ~
» ~ as an] 60 or in hot
Emetic j more ” water,
>* —Eucalyptus Oil 1 to 6 ~ on sugar,
~ —Castor Oil
~ —Spirits of Camphor ...3 ~ 10 ~
8 oz.—Turpentine, for sprinkling hot fomentations.
tf —Turpentine Liniment, for chest affections.
~ —Soap Liniment, for rheumatism, sprains.
~ —Camphorated Oil, for pains in the chest,
bronchitis, etc.
~ —Gaulard Water, for inflammation, or lead
lotion.
~ —Carron Oil, for burns, scalds, &c.
Powders. child, adult.
4 oz. —Liquorice Powders J to 1 teaspoonful,
„ —Gregory’s Powder £ „ 1 „
~ —Bicarbonate of Soda... 10 ~ 80 grains.
~ —Cream of Tartar 10 ~ 30 ~
~ —Salts tea,, dessertspoonful.
~ —Quinine \ ~ y grains.
_ A yard or two of Lint, Wool, and some Bandages of
different widths, say, one to three inches.
Poisons.
A small bottle of Laudanum.
Chlorodyne, for dysentery.
Chloroform and Camphor, for toothache.
HIGHLY RECOMMENDED.
I recommend Rose’s Lime Juice Cordial as a blood puri-
fier and thirst quencher, and St. Raphael Medicinal Wine
for invalids.
Senior’s Patent Medicines, see advertisement page 110.
Cain’s Patent Medicines, see advertisement page 48.
Harris’ Patent Medicines, see advertisement, page 82.
Dr. Waugh’s Baking Powder—Purest and Best.


It is my intention to publish for ’Xmas a new Musical
Album, under the following name :
“VIOLET’S (DUSIGAIi ALBUM,”
With Handsome Coocr in Violet and Gold.
IT WILL CONTAIN
Songs, Waltzes, and Musical Compositions
BA
Mons. LEON CARON, the Popular Musical Conductor of Williamson ani>
Mcsgbove’s Royal Comic Opera Company
G. B. ALLEN, of Brisbane;
A. W. JUNCKER, Composer of “I was Dreaming;”
HARRISON WHITE, Composer of “ Slumber Song
TOSO TAYLOR,
And Several well-known and successful Composers.
Also Madame CHARBONET-KELLERMAN’S
“ DUCHESS OF YORK WALTZ,”
Played by the Princesses Victoria and Maud of Wales.
IT WILL BE ILLUSTRATED WITH
PORTRAITS OF AUSTRALIAN QUEENS OF SONG:
MISS COLBOURNE BABER
~ ADA CROSSLEY
~ MAGGIE MOORE
MADAME MELBA
MISS NELLIE STEWART
MISS NANA HARDING
~ LILIAN TREE
~ TASMA SHERWIN
~ VIOLET VARLEY
Mdme. BELLE COLE.
FORTY PAGES—AII Bright and Original.
FRIGE. — OZKTIES SDEI X XjXj l JNT &.
The Compositions will be sung and played by Leading Artists, and
extensively advertised in the daily and weekly press. In addition to being
on sale at all Music Warehouses, it will be handled by Messrs. Geo.
Robertson & Co., who have given the largest single order ever given before
in Australia for a Musical Album.
ON SALE—
-Ist DECEMBER/, 1894.
HARRY J. SAMUELL, Publisher,
Box 1077, G.P.0., SYDNEY.


FIRMS RECOMMENDED.
PAGE.
Australian Drug Co.—Ransom’s Liquid Stopping, Dr. Bagshaw’s Asthma
Cure, Honeyline Cough Mixture
Australian Mutual Provident Society—Life Insurance. Notice to Ladies 69
Baker & Rouse—Photographic Apparatus, &c
Balehin, Johnson, & Co.—Foster’s Ale and Stout, D.C.L. Whiskey .. .. 88
Bennett—Butterick’s Paper Patterns and Fashion Books 61
Cains; W. G—Brown’s Bronchial Balsam, Cains’ Tonic Mixture or Brain
Food, Cains’ Little Tonic Liver Pills, &c
Carson & Co. —“ The Australian Hair Preserver ” 61
Channon & Co.—Waugh’s Baking Powder . .Top and bottom of reading matter
Country Milk Co.—Milk, Butter, Eggs. Poultry, &c 20
Plorenz, Miss —Corsets g
Fricdenriech, Fraulein and Miss Smith—Costume Making, &c. . . .. 62
Graham, H. M.—“ Premier Boots ”
Groth, H. H. Jun., & Co.—Artists’ Materials, &c gg
Harris, S.—Proprietary Articles, Manicuring Requisites, &c., &c 82
Hebblewhite & Co.—Sewing Machines and Household Appliances .. 55
Inglis & Co. —Packet Teas
Lark, Sons & Co.—Brown’s Milled Toilet Soaps, &c 69
Lyons & MeEwen—Decorating, &c
Mutton, J. R.—“ The Slee ” Stove 28
N.S.W. Fresh Food & Ice Co. —Milk, Butter, Fish, Game, Ac. .. .. 19
Parsons Bros. —Parsons’ Flaked Oatmeal 47
Pinaud, E. —Parisian Perfumes
Renard, Jules, & Co.—“ Phcenix” Wax Vestas, Rose’s Lime Juice Cordial.
St. Raphael Medicinal Wine
Rickard, A. —Chance’s Unlcy Tomato Sauce 47
Rolfe, E. —Hairdressing
Row, E, & Co.—Josephson’s Australian Ointment 2
Bandy, James, & Co.—Artistic Decorations, &c 42
Samuell, H. J.—Musical Publications 70&119
■Senior, F. —Proprietary Articles, &c HO
Stedman, J. —“Lion Brand” Confectionery 27
Watson & Crane—Electro-plated Ware .. .. 62
Working Cutlery Co.—Cutlery, &c
Wyatt, P. W.—Japanese Goods, &c., Manicure Room 79
■ —J—
Bennett Dr. —Dentistry g
Bennett, Messrs.—Dentistry g
Needs, E. —Dancing gg
North, Mrs. J., & Given, W. S. —Artists, Phrenologists, Physiognomists, Ac. 87
•Sydney Dental Co. (H. Worsley, Manager)—Dentistry 79
Readers will confer a favor upon Mrs. Samuell by
stating, when ordering from advertisers, that they saw the
advertisement in “The Ladies’ Home Companion.”


TWO FAMOUS TEAS.
a
eR
U
TTRY
A BLENDED TEA.
It is an old and true saying that
“ Good wine needs no bush.”
It is equally true that the
EIFFEL TOWER
BLEND OF TEA
Is known throughout the length and breadth of New
South Wales and Queensland as a
RICH LIQUORING PURE TEA OF FINE FLAVOR,
Warranted to give General Satisfaction.
TAKE OUR ADVICE AND TRY IT.
Packed in 1 lb. and J lb. Packets ; 5 lb., 10 lb., 20 lb. Tins;
and 86 lb. Half Chests.
CEYLON TEA.
The rapid growth of Ceylon Tea in public
favor shews the reliability of the public taste,
and the increased sale of the special registered
brand known as
“The JOHN BULL
Ceylon Tea
n
Indicates the appreciation of the public for
a truly
HIGH CLASS, GENUINE ARTICLE.
Packed in 1 lb. and £ lb. Packets ; 1 lb., 5 lb.,
10 lb., 20 lb. Tins ; and 36 lb. Half Chests.
You can buy both these Reliable Teas at a Reason-
able Price in your own district. Circulate your
money where your interests are centred.
J. A, BDLL & Co., Wholesale Tea Merchants,
172 CLARENCE STREET, SYDNEY.


RUMFORDS
No. I
PATENT RICE STARCH
IS A TRANSLUCENT, CRYSTALLINE,
SILVERING STARCH, AND MAKES THE
LINEN A DAZZLING WHITE.
IT SAVES LABOR, SAVES TIME AND
- UNCERTAINTY. ONCE USED NO -
- LA UNDRESS WILL EVER USE -
ANY OTHER. - -
sk:
No. 1
PATENT RICE STARCH
IS FREE FROM EVERY FORM OF
- - ADULTERATION. - -
