

copyrighted. EXCELS ALL OTHERS.


COMPLEXION I
?Y vv n •'o' *i| v 'ii mhi 'ii "iv * r r'T'f "y v -R" "ir-vr -k *b r -ir "r f n*- -y* - T’ "M 1 ¥""▼
Xabies anb (Bentlemen,
DO YOU WANT
A Pure Complexion
A Bright Complexion
A Clear Complexion
A Healthy Complexion
A Delightful Complexion
A Marvellous Complexion
A Beautiful Complexion
TJSIE3
GODRADD’S SKIN PILLS,
And you will obtain all this.
Soaps and Lotions are useless. Purify
the Blood with the latest Parisian Bemedy,
and you will create a complexion as bright
and beautiful as a Summer Rose.
ASK FOB
-fjOfin JpiZZs,
AN INFALLIBLE REMEDY for ALL SKIN DISEASES
ALL CHEMISTS, 3s. 6a


THE CONVICT HULK
“SUCCESS.”
THE STORY OF HER LIFE,
AND THE
LIVES OF THOSE WHO FILLED HER
CELLS.
A RELIC OF THE PAST.
INTERESTING REMINISCENCES.
“OLD TIME.”
/Melbourne:
Spectator Publishing Company Limited, 270 Post Office Place.


•, *






PREFACE.
In presenting the following series of sketches to the reader, I
have to express my indebtedness to the Melbourne Evening
‘Standard, in which a portion of them originally appeared and
created a great sensation. But the present series in this book
are much more exhaustive, and, containing as they do numerous
and more detailed particulars of the ruffians who at one time
occupied this hulk “ Success ” or her sister ships alongside,
they cannot but prove highly interesting.
The “Success” may be said to be a Link connecting the
Present with the Past Crime of Australasia, and even England
for here at one time was congregated a collection of scoundrel-
ism from all parts of the earth. Its owners believe they are
doing a public benefit by preserving the old vessel for the
inspection of the world at large ; for, after having been towed
round to the various Australasian colonies, it is proposed to take
her to England, where she cannot fail to become a powerful rival
to Madame Tassaud’s Waxworks Exhibition.
It might be here stated that the lay figures now on board
the “Success” are those of celebrated malefactors who have
once served their time on board this hulk; that the clothing is
the clothing which they actually wore ; and that the chains and
irons are the identical ones with which they were manacled.
These will be added to from time to time, until the Convict
Hulk “ Success ” will almost be a reflex, so far as mere repre-
sentation goes, of what she was in the “ bad old times,” when
armed sentries paced her decks, when warders were in charge
of nearly every plank below, and when her cells were filled with
a collection of the blackest scoundreiism and the vilest ruffians
unhung.
“OLD TIME.”




THE CONVICT HULK SUCCESS.
CHAPTER I.
The Yellow Frigates or Ocean Hells —The “ Success ”
The Commodore of the Fleet—A Good Old Ship—
Victoria Mad —A Crime Epidemic—Bushranging—The
Gaols Overcrowded—Some Celebrated Criminals—The
Convict Fleet.
«ISITOES to the Bay piers, and those who have made
occasional trips to the fishing village across the water,
may have casually cast their eyes on an old hulk that
had for some years been lying moored out of the way in what is
generally known in Bay parlance as “the bend.” That hulk
was one of the fleet of “ ocean hells,” as they were termed in
those days, that were moored off Gellibrand Point Lighthouse.
They formed a prominent and ominous feature of the Bay in the
days of which I write, and with their dingy covering of yellow
paint they looked like some malignant fever or small-pox stricken
ships. They were five in all, moored pretty near to each other.
Vessels and boats of all kinds were warned by armed sentries,
pacing fore and aft, and especially on platforms in the heads of
these hulks, to keep without the buoys by which each “ hell ”
was surrounded. What would happen if they did not is told in
the following story by an old-time skipper:
“ I well remember about the first week in March, 1858, towing
down the river in a schooner bound for Wellington, New Zealand,
and anchoring for the night outside the hulks. In afterwards
coming in to Williamstown by sailing boat, without noticing the
buoys, we ran inside one. On arriving at the old pier, I was at
once taken into custody by the water police, and bound over,
under a penalty of £4O, to appear the next morning at the police
court to answer for my crime (?). The said court was then held
in a cottage in Little Nelson-street, Williamstown, and the


court was about 12ft. square. As it was my first offence, and I
proved conclusively that it was an accident, and that I was an
honest mariner, with no designs against the peace of Her Majesty
the Queen and her liege subjects, and no intent to let loose the
convicts from the hulk, or communicate with them in any way,
I was let go, with a strong caution not to repeat the offence.”
The five hulks confined the greatest gang of desperadoes ever
assembled together in any part of the world; the outpourings of
Norfolk Island, Tasman’s Peninsula, Macquarie Harbour,
Cockatoo Island, and other criminal establishments the greatest
gathering of scoundrelism and crime of every hue that had ever
assembled south of the line.
Of this fleet of five “ ocean hells ” or prison hulks, only one
—the old “ Success ’’—remains, and she is now thrown open to
the public, and is a sight well worth seeing as a link binding the
present days of effective gaols and penitentiaries, with a past of
inefficient prison accommodation of all kinds. The “Success
in those days held the position of premier ship. She was, as it
were, “ commodore of the fleet.” The other hulks were the
“President” and “Deborah,” the “Sacramento” and the
“ Lysander.”
But it is of the “Success” that I am now mainly about to
speak, and of the mass of criminals penned up within her sides.
The history of this ship cannot fail to be most interesting,
especially to those who may intend a visit to the old hulk.
Within this floating gaol, which has outlived the other four, will
still be found the evidences of its awful career ; and the fixtures
for the special torture of its victims will be discovered among the
ghastly, but, at the same time, interesting exhibits on board.
The “ Success ” left the launching ways at Rangoon some
time in the early forties, probably at the beginning of the
decade, as strong as sound teak and iron and copper could make
her. In fact, the immense amount of material used in her
construction (her bilge is 2ft. thick) made her admirably adapted
for the purpose for which she was afterwards used. She was
employed for some years in the India and colonial—that is,
Australian—trade. Her last trip to Port Phillip was with 52
Government immigrants. This finished her sea-going career,
for, unfortunately, “good old tea waggon” as she was in other
respects, she had the same dangerous proclivities that marked
a celebrated Russian admiral’s ship of the olden time—she
would steer herself, and on many occasions seriously maimed
the man at the wheel.
On the occasion of her last arrival in the Bay, all Victoria
was mad. Gold had been discovered, and everyone was rushing


off pell-mell, helter-skelter to the fields. No sooner was she
fairly anchored than the “ Success” was deserted. Her passen-
gers were lauded, and away they went to Tom Tiddler’s ground,
to be speedily followed by her ship’s company. There she lay,
untenanted, save by a casual hand and the skipper, surrounded by
the crowd of vessels that studded Hobson’s Bay under similar
conditions, and which could not get away for want of hands.
It was a miserable and anxious time for the skippers, many of
whom followed the example of their men., “ Success ” was the
good old ship by name, but by no means in her financial
wanderings. She wanted repairing, anyhow, before she could
put to sea again, and as this would have cost a lot of money in
those days, her skipper determined to put her in the market, and
accordingly advertised her for sale.
Just then the Victorian Government were sadly pressed for
gaol accommodation. What they had was terribly inadequate,
thanks to the sudden demand made upon it by the great increase
of crime and the influx of the criminal population of our neigh-
bours, who looked upon Victoria as a perfect godsend to their
hands. Soon our gaols were filled to the extent of 90 per cent,
by those who, in the words of Barrington, the celebrated London
pickpocket (who was afterwards even better known in Australia),
“left their country for their country’s good”—in other words,
men who had been convicted in England and sent out to these
colonies. Crime had broken out with terrible and even bloody
earnestness in many parts of the colony, especially in the
neighbourhood of the goldfields, or on the roads to the chief
towns, and the main roads to Melbourne. Settlers’ stations
were stuck up, returning diggers with their gold were stuck up,
the mail coaches fared no better ; even a bank had been stuck
up, very much after the style of the attack on the bank at
Ballabri in “ Robbery Under Arms,” and, to cap the lot, the
gold escort was attacked, one of the troopers killed, and the gold
stolen. Besides, this, a “ gold ship ”in the Bay was carried by
a cotip de main, and £20,000 worth of the precious metal run
away with.
Many of the desperadoes concerned in these outrages were
captured ; our prisons overran with them till they flowed outside.
It was almost impossible to know what to do with them; gangs
of 10 to 12 daring bushrangers made it dangerous to travel in
any direction, and it was as bad to stay at home as go abroad.
Every “ ranger ” was mounted; and the number of horses stolen
was almost incredible. On one day (in the year 1858) the Argus
contained no less than 12 columns of “horses stolen,” a pretty
good list it must be admitted. Within 18 months there was an
influx into this colony of no less than nine thousand convicts,
which included a very fair proportion of “ demons ” from Norfolk


Island. There was a great difficulty in dealing with these men.
Many of them were absolutely free, having completed their
sentences—others possessed “ tickets of leave,” which gave them
the legal right to go where they chose in Australia, though
they did not permit them to return to the British Islands. The
police force was quite inadequate to deal with such thousands
of ruffians, many of them flying about the country armed to the
teeth and mounted on the best of horseflesh. The police at
that time only numbered some 875 men throughout the colony,
and it soon became absolutely imperative to greatly strengthen
their numbers.
Mr. (afterwards Sir Redmond) Barry was that year raised to
the Bench, from which he drew the attention of the Govern-
ment to the frightful evils this flood of convictism was entailing
on the colony. Then a law was passed imposing a penalty of
£lOO on any captain bringing an ex-convict from any of the
other colonies ; but, notwithstanding this, they still poured in,
and: the gaols were overflowing.
A commission was appointed, with the object of improving
the shores of Williamstown for harbour accommodation, and at
the same time to utilise some of the vast amount of convict
labour that the Government had at its disposal in carrying out
this very necessary work. The Government at once came ta
the conclusion that the proper thing to do would be to fit out a
number of hulks for their accommodation. The “ President,”
an old Californian trader, was the first that was purchased,
fitted out, and filled with criminals of the most desperate type,
to relieve the now over-crowded Melbourne Gaol, as well as
those up-country, which were almost in a bursting condition, so
thronged were they with convicts.
The first experiment was found successful, and at the beginning
of 1853 the “ Success ” was purchased, and on the same
principle as the “President,” was fitted up in the strongest
manner with two decks of cells, the main and the lower, having
iron bars like cages both stem and stern —one on the main and
the other on the lower deck. So well was the work carried out,
that during the whole time the “ Success” was “in commission”
as a male convict hulk, no escape was ever made from the
vessel, nor was there ever any serious attempt. Stone walls
may not a prison make, nor iron bars a cage; but the teak
timbers of the “ Success ” were impregnable to the most
desperate among the many desperate ruffians aboard of her at
all times. She was manned by a strong guard on board,
supported by another guard on Gellibrand Point, who, during
the time the convicts were at work on shore, formed a cordon
round them. These criminals, all in leg-irons, worked in the


quarries at the Point, being carried to and from the “ Success ”
in launches under a strong guard. The accommodation on board
was for 120 prisoners, and she was always quite full.
Amongst her convicts were the notorious “ Captain” Melville,
the bushranger, “Gipsy ” Smith, Eli Cooper, “Duke” Elliott,
the prison-breaker from the old country ; Morgan, Harry Power,
and Russel the St. Kilda-road robber, who amused himself by
sticking-up citizens passing up and down the road during a
whole Saturday afternoon. This reads strangely now-a-days,
but it is 40 years since these daring deeds were done.
Garrett, the Ballarat bank-robber, so adroitly arrested in London,
was also a “ Success ”-ful convict. Burgess (afterwards
known as the New Zealand murderer), one of the “ Nelson ”
gold-robbers (the “ Nelson ” was the gold ship that had been
attacked in the Bay); Lewis, a convict who was thought to know
more of the missing gold ship “Madagascar” than he would
ever divulge; “King John,” the “Sydney Choker;” “My
Lord ” Smith, the celebrated London swell mobsman; and
numerous others famous in criminal history.
' 'He.
•V * -sir


CHAPTER 11.
The Notorious Captain Melville—He Attacks a Warder and
Tries to Bite his Nose Off —A Well-deserved Punish-
ment — Sympathising Convicts —Hell Broke Loose —Two
Murderous Ruffians—Daring Escape from Tasmania—A
Carnival of Blood—Gipsy Smith—A Singular Duel—
Shooting the Notice—Sent to the Hulks.
tMONG the hulk convicts mentioned in the first chapter
was the notorious Captain Melville, who will be found
mentioned in this book from time to time as one of the
most desperate villains in Australia. While incarcerated on
board, one of his first distinguishing acts was to try and bite the
nose off Sergeant Graham. As long ago as 1852 he was
apprehended on a charge of robbery under arms, a very common
charge in those days. He boasted that he had no fewer than
eighty men in his gang, and no doubt he was not very far from
the truth. He and his “ merry men ” had had a fine old time
of it for a couple of years, keeping the whole country in a state
of excitement; sticking up farms, stations, and travellers on all
sides, and in fact becoming a terror to the whole country.
His trial created great excitement, and when he was put away
for a total term of 31 years’ imprisonment, it was fondly hoped
his career of crime was over, and people breathed freely again,
for he and his men had been as great a terror to the country as
were ever the Kelly Gang years afterwards. He was at once
sent off to the hulks, and at first was kept in solitary con-
finement within one of those awful cells that are to be found
below. He was allowed to come out on deck for a short time
each day for exercise, but the warders kept a wary eye on him,
and would have shot him down in an instant had he made the
slightest attempt to escape. It was well known that he enter-
tained the idea, even at the risk of his life.
However, for a considerable time he tried to behave him-
self, but at last made a brutal attack on Sergeant Graham, and
attempted to bite off his nose. Melville formed one of a gang
of ten at exercise on the decks on the day of the assault.


Graham ordered the “ Captain ” to close up, as he was loitering
away behind the others, upon which, in a most impudent
manner, the convict stepped out of the ranks and said he should
insist upon being treated more respectfully. He was extremely
insolent, and gave himself as many airs as if still at the head of
his gang. He was ordered to his cell, Graham going down
with him. As soon as ever the warder had taken the handcuffs
off, Melville sprang at him, clasped him round the neck, and
tried to bite off his nose. Another warder at once jumped on
his back, and Graham at the same time drew back and struck
him over the head with a “ neddy.” Melville decidedly got the
worst of that little affair.
For this attempt to mutilate a fellow being, he was sentenced
to 20 days’ “solitary,” on bread and water. He then became
very violent, and had to be chained to one of those ring bolts to
be seen in a few of the cells below. He was so chained that he
could not lie down. The next day he refused any attention,
and on the third day, as a favour, the chain was lengthened so
as to enable him to lie down. What his position must have
been thus chained so that he could neither stand, nor lie, nor
sit, in a dark cell, may easily be imagined. Dante’s “ Inferno ”
can convey but a faint description of it.
Of course all this was known to- the other convicts ; also, of
course, they sympathised with Melville—the more so probably
because he had not succeeded in biting off Graham’s nose.
They “ raised Cain,” they made a perfect hell afloat, they ham-
mered at their doors and yelled like maniacs, so that they could
be heard at a considerable distance beyond the vessel—indeed,
the whole Bay was alive with their noise. An enquiry by the
Inspector-General led to that gentlemen expressing his satis-
faction with the steps that had been taken for the maintenance
of law and order.
Perhaps two of the greatest villains who ever landed on these
shores were the notorious convicts, Connor and Brady, who
escaped from Van Dieman’s Land, and who, like many others
of their class, had a short experience of our hulks. That they
were not wanting in courage and coolness is evident from
the fact of their seizing a small vessel in Tasmania.
Getting away from the island in a boat, they had compelled
the master of a vessel to give them a passage to Hobson’s Bay.
He knew perfectly well what they were, but was quite in their
power ; for he only had a crew of two or three hands all told,
while these Norfolk Island devils were fully armed, and swore to
be terribly revenged if molested. The master accordingly con-
sidered the best thing he could do would be to bring them over.


and give information to the police afterwards. But they were
too artful to come all the way to Melbourne by water; they
landed in a boat at Cape Schanck. Without loss of time they
commenced operations. They stuck up a settler’s house, and
provided themselves with two good horses, and firearms to suit
their tastes. Shortly afterwards they killed a man at Brighton,
and for some time set the police at defiance. Taking human
life seemed to give these fiends absolute enjoyment. Passing by
Kilmore they saw a farmer ploughing in his fields, and in pure
wantonness one of them fired at him, and sent a bullet through
his body killing him almost instantly. In one week they
murdered three men, shot and brutally ill-treated several more,
and committed robberies and depredations of various kinds
without number. Well might a writer of those times exclaim :
“It seems to us about the most extraordinary narrative of villain-
ous ruffianism recorded in history.” And it was with these and
such as these, and men who gloried in their crimes, that the
convict hulk “Success” was filled; crowded together like
pilchards in a barrel.
Another desperate ruffian was “ Gipsy ” Smith, so called on
account of the darkness of his complexion and his general
appearance in features to one of that race. He had several
times been in custody, and several times managed to effect his
escape. On one occasion he was arrested at Ballarat, and
forwarded to Melbourne in charge of a single mounted trooper.
He was secured in the usual way, being handcuffed on horseback,
and having his feet fastened together beneath the animal’s
stomach. Arrived at a small roadside public-house, Mr. Smith,
who had made himself exceedingly agreeable on the way down,
telling the trooper no end of funny stories, as well as recounting
many of his own daring adventures, asked the constable to let
him have a drink. It was entirely opposed to the rules to
comply with the request, unless water was the beverage. How-
ever, the trooper good-naturedly gave his consent, and un-
fortunately for himself cast off his leg ropes, and allowed him to
get down. Then they tied up their horses, and went towards
the house for a nobbier. Stopping in the road, “ Gipsy ” asked
the trooper to remove his handcuffs, so that he could lift his
drink to his mouth, without announcing to those in the bar, by
the sight of his handcuffs, that he was a prisoner. At first the
trooper demurred. Smith said they had got along so well
together, that he should be sorry to lose his good opinion of the
constable’s friendship ; moreover, he urged that the “ darbies ”
hurt him very much, and that a few minutes’ respite would be a
godsend. No sooner were the handcuffs taken off than he made
a snatch at the trooper’s sword, drew it from the scabbard, and
made a slash at his “ friend.” Fortunately the blow fell short.
Then followed a desperate and novel encounter, the trooper


using his heavy steel scabbard as a weapon, while the prisoner
used the sword. It was a regular stand-up fight, and lasted
for several minutes. Smith was completely overmatched, and
finding himself getting the worst of it, threw down the sword
and bolted. He succeeded in making good his escape, and the
trooper was duly punished for his carelessness, not to say gross
breach of the very first principles that should guide the police
under such circumstances. At his trial, Smith admitted that
he had never received such a thrashing in his life as he did
with that scabbard at the hands of the negligent trooper.
Subsequently a tent in which he and his mate were thought
to be sleeping was surrounded by a body of police, but when
they entered to arrest their game the latter showed fight, and
poured in a deadly fire upon them, killing Constable M‘Nalty
outright, by a charge of slugs which entered his chest, while
another one was wounded in the arm. Then again the redoubt-
able villain made a dash for it, and effected his escape into the
bush and the darkness, as did likewise his mate, who had fired the
fatal shot. The Government then offered a reward of £5OO for
his capture, and the police were on the alert throughout the
colony, as well as numerous private individuals, who constituted
themselves amateur troopers for the nonce, and would not have
disclaimed to earn the reward. A few weeks afterwards he was
captured at Daisy Hill. A digger who knew him and his mate
by sight, saw the latter go into a store for provisions, which he
carried off to a hut on the outskirts of the diggings. He at
once gave information to the police, a party of whom immedi-
ately started off «for the outlaw’s retreat, spurred on by the hope
of the reward, to say nothing of the credit which would attach
to them, as well as probable promotion. They surrounded the
hut, then softly crept up to it. Looking through a crack, they
saw a man asleep, and a saddle and firearms close to his head.
He was evidently prepared for a bolt at the shortest possible notice.
His mate had apparently just come in and was moving about in
the hut. This time the police were successful. They made a
splendid rush, and in a few seconds both malefactors were in
irons. Smith’s mate was recognised as the man who had fired
thefatalshotatM‘Nalty, and was hanged. Smith was sentenced to
a long term of imprisonment in the hulks, and there I saw him
many a time, always with a look of murder in his eye, and ready
at the slightest opportunity to again make a bolt. But he was
too well guarded and too heavily ironed for that.


CHAPTER 111.
Human Wolves—A Description of the “Success” —Single
and Triple Cells—The Solitary Cell—The Coffin
Bath —The Black Hole —The Tiger’s Den —No Flogging
Allowed.
*w|>ET me transport myself on board the “Success” over 35
sj|r/? years ago—not as a convict, but as one who had business
there—no matter what, no matter why. As we put off
from “the Point” one fine spring morning, so long ago, one does
indeed feel full of thankfulness to know he is a free man, for he
has just left behind him the evidence of convictism of too
horrible a type to fully realise. Some hundreds of men in prison
garb, and manacled from ankle to waist, all clean shaven, and
with their hair close cropped, present the same depraved repulsive
appearance. Like a lot of human wolves they are chained to
keep them from flying at their fellow men. The stone portion of
the present breakwater near Williamstown, at that time being
made by these men, was brought down stone by stone from the
quarries from which it had been hewn. Turning my eyes with
relief from this mass of criminal and revolting humanity, I am
glad, indeed, to look over the bright waters of the Bay, on which
are moored what look like fleets of merchant vessels, most of
them waiting for cargoes and crews. Still there were left on many
a few hands who lacked the pluck to bolt, or who were simple
landsmen, engaged at a heavy figure to do the work of sailors.
Most of these vessels presented a smart appearance,—their yards
were squared “ ship-shape and Bristol fashion,” and they were
anchored in something like man-of-war regularity. It was a
public holiday—l forget now what. Nearly every vessel dis-
played her colours to the wind, and flags of all nations floated
in the breeze.
An English ship had just cast anchor in the Bay not far
off, and her numerous passengers thronged to the bulwarks
and swarmed up the rigging to get a look at the promised
land, A rattling chorus was being sung as the seamen
squared the yards or did some other work that necessitated
their pulling on the heavy ropes. They did it with a song
and a chorus, in which a hundred voices joined, that floated


over the waters of the Bay for miles. The majority of the
men, seated by the bulwarks or on their perches in the
rigging, seemed to be staring in one direction—they were looking
towards the fleet of “ yellow frigates ” anchored near Gellibrand
Point. It must indeed have been a shock to them to learn,
amongst the first things they did learn on arrival at these shores
where gold was to be picked up for the stooping for it, that at
the very Golden Gate itself there were chained in gangs many
hundreds of human beings, consisting of the scoundrelism of
the Australias, many of whom had formed part of the
scoundrelism of London beforehand, and many of whom also
would think no more of shooting a man for his gold than these
immigrants would of lending the sailors a helping hand with a
rope.
When we came within “ buoy’s distance ” of the “ Success ”
we were promptly challenged by a sentry in the head, and our
answer being satisfactory, were allowed to come alongside. A
few minutes later I was on deck, my credentials presented, and I
at once entered upon my duties—which had no connection with
keeping watch or ward over the prisoners. In a few days I
knew every corner of the hulk, almost, and will give you a
description of it as well as 1 can remember. Those who go on
board the old prison ship will see for themselves how far I am
correct, for there is little change in the appearance of the vessel,
I am told—at least on the main and lower decks, in which the
prisoners’ cells were situated. Personally, I have not seen the
“ Success ” for years.
Abaft, on th£ upper deck, were the quarters of the prison
officials ; forward, and well over the forecastle, was a galvanised
iron roof. Under this the cooking was done, and there were
various offices set apart for different kinds of work ; besides, it
afforded protection from the rain in wet weather. The deck was
flush aft from this till you came to the poop, one of the high,
old-fashioned sort. Raised aloft in the air forward, and almost
over the figurehead (typical apparently of beautiful, innocent
womanhood), was the sentries’ platform or “look-out,” as it
might be termed. This always had an occupant with loaded rifle.
Other sentinels there were too, aft, and in other portions of the
ship, but none was so effective as he on the “ look-out ” forward.
On the main deck were some 40 cells or so, and on the lower
deck an equal number. They were situated just the same as
ordinary berths on board ship, so far as position is concerned,
that is, they were along both sides of the ship. From the floor
to the deck above was a height of about 7ft., or perhaps a little
more.
The old ship was very high out of the water, for she was


pretty light, notwithstanding that her load of criminality was
almost heavy enough to sink a navy. There was a nice cabin
aft, with square cut “quarter galleries” after the style of the
good old Indiamen. So extensive were these galleries that they
contained lavatory accommodation, a bath, &c., all well outside
of the cabin, and let into the side of the ship as it were. In
my days the bath was very much the shape of a coffin, and
often made me shudder. It was a strange fancy, but I never
looked at that bath after the murder of Inspector-General Price,
that I did not see his dead body stretched out in it all stiff and cold,
with ghastly, open, bloody, wounds upon his head. Theie was
washing accommodation for the convicts on the main and lower
decks. It was not of a very ornate kind, you may be sure.
Entrance was gained to the decks below by hatchways co\eied
with iron gratings —thick iron rods or bars forming the top
covering. Even supposing the "whole of the convicts below had
broken loose it would have been impossible for them to escape to
the upper deck when once these gratings "were “ battened down.
Their object, doubtless, was to ventilate the lower decks, as well
as keep the prisoners below.
Standing in the centre of the main deck “ corridor” one got
a pretty fair idea of the whole place. _ The most striking objects
were the cell doors, with their massive iron bolts that seemed
altogether disproportionate to the puny efforts that could be put
forth by the convicts within, even in their maddest moods—and
mad enough some of them were occasionally, God knows. Over
each cell door some light and ventilation were admitted through
a row of narrow barred gratings, running along the whole of the
frontages. In some of the cells were little slits that would look
out on to the water if the prisoners could raise themselves up to
them. No doubt they often did this, for on the mam deck most
of the cells were for three men, so that one could easily give the
other a lift if he wanted it —not that even then he would be able
to see much. Then there were a couple of “ black holes into
which not a glimmer of light could gain admittance. Once in
here and never a man who breathed would dream of bieakmg ou .
But break out! Bless you, a man never stood as much show
of breaking out of the “ Success ” as he would do out of Pent-
ridge to-day—indeed, not half so much, judging from recent
escapes from that establishment. Why, the wood was like iron,
and I never saw such a thickness of it in any other ship in my
These cells for three men (they were all for three or one—no
double cells) were 7ft. wide by 7ft. long—while the single cells
were only 4ft. by 7ft.—the length running athwart ship, as the
sailors say —but these were mostly on the lower deck. At one


end of this main deck—at the stern, under the “ Captain’s cabin,”
or rather the officials’ quarters on the poop—there was a place
that might have been well mistaken for a tiger’s den. A tiger’s!
—no tiger’s den ever contained bars half so thick and strong.
This was partially used for the stores, but was, probably, built as
a cage for the men. Here they could be shoved in by the dozen
or the half-hundred, for there was plenty of room, and the whole
combined force could never have got one bar out of place. Why,
I should say, they were nearly an inch and a half thick. And
human tigers we had on board by the dozen. There was only
one thing we could not do to them ; we were not allowed to flog
them without an Order-in-Council, or something of that sort—•
therefore, the great punishment was solitary confinement, with
bread and water.


CHAPTER IV.
Attacks on Wanders —Casting Lots —No More Brandy, No
More Fits —Hulk Literature —Convicts’ Quarrels —
The Prisoner and His Beer.
fHE convicts on board the “ yellow frigates ” had a dull
time of it, no doubt, whether at work in the quarries or
locked up in their cells. Probably they even preferred
the work time, especially those who occupied single cells. Of
course, where three were in the cell they could converse, and so
make the time pass more pleasantly by concocting some villainous
schemes of what they would do “ when they got out,” or
arranging plans of attack or revenge upon the warders. When
a warder proved to be particularly obnoxious, the prisoners drew
lots, and the men to whose lot the honour fell of making the
attack—for it was considered to be a mark of distinction —were
called “ cuts,” and often carried out their instructions only too
well. The attack on Mr. Price was arranged in this manner, no
doubt.
The “ telegraph ” was very extensively worked on board these
hulks —indeed, it was difficult to prevent it. The “ telegraph ”
was a system of speaking from one cell to another by means
of tapping on the walls, a certain number of taps meaning a
particular letter. The system was well understood among the
old hands, and it is wonderful how quickly they could work it.
It is somewhat more difficult in a stone prison, but even there it
is done, the parts “ tapped ” being the metal hooks in the wall.
In the hulks the knuckles would answer every purpose, for
notwithstanding the thickness of the dividing walls, the sounds
were easily heard and understood. It was a great comfort to the
“ solitaries ” to communicate with their companions in this way,
and no attempt was ever made to stop it that I am aware of.
Indeed, it would have been almost useless. Besides, warders as
a rule close their eyes and ears to a good many things, and they
did so to a more marked degree than usual on board the hulks,
where every one of them held his life in his hands, so to speak.


ATTACK ON WARDERS.




The convicts were let out of their cells at 6 o’clock in the
morning. Half an hour was taken up in washing themselves,
and preparing their toilet for the “block” (at the quarries).
After this, breakfast. Did they talk much during meals ? Not
at all, it was against the rules, though of course they got in a
word on the quiet now and then. They were allowed neither
knives nor forks at dinner, and had to be content with spoons.
The meat was small, and required no cutting by the time they
got it. To trust a hundred villains with a knife apiece would
have been more than the warders’ lives were worth. They were
rarely trusted with sharp pointed tools except they were at the
quarries, and then they were surrounded by warders armed to
the teeth. Of course, at times they had the use of scissors to
cut their nails with, but these were round-pointed, and even then
the convicts were carefully watched while using them.
There was a good deal of “malingering” at times, and
occasionally it was successful. I remember one night hearing
the most awful cries coming from a cell, and the sound of a
convict rolling on the floor and kicking vigorously in his agony.
He had, he said, been seized with violent and deadly cramps.
The chief warder of the hulk gave him a dose of brandy. Then
it was a case of “ no more brandy, no more fits,” for the fellow
rose to his feet and laughed uproariously at having done the
“ old man,” for the whole thing had been a sham. Seven days
solitary and two in the black hole was his reward for this, with
a none too plentiful diet of bread and water. Some of the
convicts would suddenly fall down in a fit and foam at the
mouth —said foam often being the effects of a piece of soap con-
cealed in the mouth. They were up to all sorts of dodges to get
a drink ; but it was very rarely they were successful.
Nearly all the “ Success ” convicts were old hands, to whom
gaol came as easily as shelling peas, but there were some excep-
tions—men who had committed crime for the first time, or, at all
events, had been convicted for the first time, which is a very
different thing; and some whose crimes were not of so serious
a character as that of the great majority. Some of these men
didn’t take at all kindly to being clipped and shaved, they grew
moody and despondent over if, and it took them some time
before they became reconciled to the weekly shaving and cutting
of hair—that was done on the Saturday afternoon, when there
was a general clean-up. It made a strange difference to some,
so much so that their own intimate friends did not know them.
A clerk who had received a long sentence for forgery, and who
had committed a deadly assault on his captor, had a fine flowing
beard on reaching the hulk. The next day, by special permis-
sion, his own brother came off to endeavour to get him to confess
where he had planted the booty—a good round sum. He utterly


failed to recognise the ne wly - cut - shaved - and-bathed convict m
the prison garb. “ No, that’s not my brother,” said he. ‘‘lsn t
it ? ” returned the new convict sadly, “ it’s all that’s left ot him,
at all events.”
It’s a strange thing how prisoners in the old days (as well as
these) would pride themselves upon their get-up in the dock ot
the higher court. Taking them as a whole, no prisoners m the
world are so respectable as ours. On such occasions there is a
good deal of borrowing and lending, and a man who hasn t got a rag
of his own may often appear in the dock like a gentleman at
least so far as his get-up is concerned. And they pride them-
selves on this. Their ties and clean linen have, they consider,
a good effect upon the jury.
As you may imagine, we had not a very extensile library on
board, but there were a few books of an instructive kind that
were lent out to the best behaved among the convicts, if they
liked that kind of thing. But they had no time to read except
on Sunday, when they were kept locked in their cells all day,
except at such times as they were mustered on the deck to
have the Bible preached at them by the prison chaplains. A
Bible was provided for every man on board if he liked to lead it,
but little was done in that way, lam thinking. The sort of
literature that would have suited our “ Success ”-ful friends was
of the “ Kelly Gang ” order, if it had then existed, or the New-
gate Calendar, with “pictures.” Of course they were not sup-
posed to ever see a paper or know what was going on m the
world outside, but, Lor’ bless you, they often knew as well as we
did ourselves. Newspapers were smuggled in to them somehow.
As I said before, there was a good deal of winking among the
warders sometimes. There is no doubt that at the time of the
murder of Mr. Price the minds of the prisoners had been agitated
by the publication of certain articles in the newspapers, of which
they were quite familiar.
The furnishing of the cells aboard the hulk was not, you may
be sure, very luxurious. The beds hung like hammocks, except
that they were close to the sides, or walls, of the cell. There was
a stool in each cell large enough for one or three, according to
the number of inmates, and there w T as a bucket in each cell.
This was the furniture —no more.
As a rule, cell mates would agree w r ell together, but occasionally
they quarrelled dreadfully. I remember one night being awakened
by a terrific noise in one of the cells. Two of the convicts were
fighting —apparently they were at each other’s throats —and as
they rolled upon the floor in their efforts at murder—for that was
what it meant —their chains made a dreadful clanking noise.


One of them was roaring like a bull. On going into the cell the
warders found they had each other hy the throat, and that the
third man was peering over his canvas bed urging them to kill
each other: One of the convicts was badly hurt through having
had his head dashed by the other repeatedly on the iron-wood
floor, and it was days before he was fit to resume his duty. It
seems that the men had been put to occupy the same cell only
that day—that one of them was a prisoner only convicted on the
previous day, and that directly he came on board he was
recognised by the afterwards assailant as the man who had, some
years before, given information to the police as to his whereabouts,
which had led to his capture. Directly he saw him come on
board he made up his mind to murder him, and fell upon him in
th# middle of the night with that intent. They were a bad pair,
and it would have been of small moment if, like the Kilkenny
cats, they had murdered each other. The aggressor was punished
pretty heavily —I forget exactly how at this length of time. They
were at once separated as cell mates, but four months afterwards
when in the quarries the would-be murderer again attacked the
other, and would have split open his skull with a spade it the
convict next to him had not knocked it out of his hand. After
that some representations were made to the Government, and the
‘ ‘ informer ’ ’ was removed to the ‘ ‘ Sacramento.' I don’t think they
ever again met face to face.
Horrible as the surroundings of a convict ship are to any man
of delicate feelings, there are occasionally scenes to be witnessed
even there that call up a smile. Two such come to my mind s
eye at this moment. A regular “ schemer ” had just arrived on
board. No sooner had the sentence been passed upon him —it
was for a particularly cold-blooded assault under arms—than he
fell down in the dock, and pretended that he could not use his
legs. When brought on board there was no improvement, and he
had to be hoisted up. The poor fellow had to be placed in the
hospital. But the doctor, at the first glance, saw it was a case
of shamming. He told the fellow the best thing he could do was
to get well at once, and threatened him with the electric battery,
and even hot irons if that did not succeed. The convict, how-
ever, did not take his advice, and the battery was tried on him.
After being stripped several times, and made to cry out with pain,
to the great amusement of his fellow convicts, he ultimately took
to crutches, first two, then one with a stick, then the stick only,
and then nothing at all.
There was an amusing incident connected with the case of
another fellow, who also pretended to be lame, and who had even
succeeded in imposing on the doctor. This fellow was also
temporarily using crutches, and used to hobble up and down the
upper deck just the same as you may see the convalescents at an


hospital. He was allowed a little porter every day to get up his
strength, as he was really very weak, and it was a “ medical
comfort” to which he was entitled for all too brief a period. One
day he happened to be in the kitchen with his crutches, when
another prisoner, a wag of a fellow in his way, put his head in at
the door and sang out, “Porter! porter! quick! quick!” On
hearing this cry, and afraid of losing his liquor, the lame man
bolted out, ran along the deck to where it was being served out,
and had swallowed his porter before he had discovered that he
had left his crutches behind him. The next morning he was
sent ashore with the quarry gang, and never again shammed
lameness.


CHAPTER V.
Hulk Inmates —Warders —Criminal Records —The Guard
Boats —A Desperate Convict —Solitary Confinement —
Refractory Cells —tMurderous Prisoners —A Convict
Rush —Defeat of the Mutineers.
tLTHOUGH it Avas necessary to employ hulks for the con-
finement of prisoners in those days, it AAas nevertheless
felt that their use was very objectionable. The \ r ery
worst of the convicts were put on board the “ President.” It
Avas not considered safe to let these felloAvs go ashore, and the
only exercise they had was one hour a day on deck, Avhere they
had to be watched like a cat watching a mouse. For the rest of
the time they Avere confined in their narroAv cells. It Avas im-
possible to prevent communication betAveen them, as anyone
raising his voice could be heard by most of the others. The
number of warders on board was 20, Avhose pay amounted to
something over £4OOO a year. On board the “ Success” were
60 desperate characters of the same kind, Avho were not alloAved
on shore for similar reasons ; the others Avere landed daily, and
Avorked at the quarries, building a wharf, and otherwise improving
the harbour. It required 27 officers to look after the criminals
on board the “ Success ”at a Avage of OA T er £5OOO a year.
On all the hulks the men were confined betAveen decks, there
being 151 cells for single prisoners, Avhile the rest A\ T ere for three
and more. Clergymen of the Church of England and Wesleyan
denominations conducted sendee on board tAvice a Aveek; other
creeds received no religious consolation, for Avhich their follow-
ers Avere probably very little, if any, the worse; for it may be
taken as a fact that there Avas nothing but hypocrisy on the part
of those Avho pretended to listen to the chaplain.
The names of the various prisoners were written on a card on
each man’s door, stating their names and whether they arrived
in the colony free, or in bond, or in other words whether they
had been transported to the colonies from the old country, &c.
Something after this style : “ K G . Condition on


arriving in colony, bond. Transported from England to
Van Dieman’s Land in 1884. Escaped from there in 1852.
Apprehended in Victoria on charge of highway robbery, and
sentenced to 20 years on the roads of the colony—the “ roads ”
in this case being the hulk “ Success.”
The history of another convict on the “ Success ” may be
briefly summarised as follows : —Born 1815, transported from
Ireland in 1882, for being engaged in a faction fight when two
men were killed. Afterwards he became desperate * and com-
mitted no fewer than three murders. While in Van Dieman’s
Land he made several attempts to escape, but each time was
frustrated, and was removed to that veritable “ ocean hell ”
Norfolk Island, for safer custody. There he remained till 1854,
when the settlement was broken up, and he was sent back to his
old quarters in Tasmania. From here another attempt at escape
was more successful, and he found his way over to Victoria. He
then took to cattle and horse stealing, as a duck takes to the
water; and afterwards tried his hand at bushranging. After
sticking up numerous parties he was himself stuck up by the
police, and sentenced to fifteen years.
It may be easily imagined that the life of a warder on board
the hulks was not all “ beer and skittles,” as the saying is.
According to one who served a series of years in the “ Success,”
it was one of untiring vigilance. In addition to those in charge
of the prisoners, there were always two sentries posted on the
upper deck, who were responsible that no boats approached
within 100 yards of the vessel, the boundary being marked by
buoys. Every night the police guard-boat visited the hulks.
The sentry hailed, “ Boat ahoy ! ” and the officer in charge
replied, “Guard-boat!” “Advance guard-boat and give the
countersign.” Countersign given ; “ Pass on, guard-boat, all’s
well.” Quite military you see.
The same official expresses his confidence that no violence was
used by the warders on board the “ Success,” at least. Of course
they had to be strict in demanding obedience, but there was a
rule of having no altercation with the prisoners (if it could be
avoided), and it was pretty well adhered to. But while human
nature is what it is, there is bound to be friction between warders
and prisoners, especially the kind of demons on board such
hulks as these, which are now, however, fortunately things of the
past.
On one occasion, a prisoner while taking exercise on the decfk
of the “ Success,” succeeded in slipping off his handcuffs and
made a run for the side. The sentry called upon him to
“ stand ! ” and fired, but without wounding him, and he was


immediately apprehended. He then stated that he was tired of
life, and made sure that the sentry would have shot him dead ;
even if not, lie must have been drowned, as his leg irons weighed
14 pounds. To this state of desperation had he been driven
through his close confinement and want of occupation.
It is mentioned elsewhere in this book that the prisoner in one
cell has little difficulty in communicating with his pals on either
side of him. They could converse freely with each other, and
the most revolting tales of crime were related constantly. They
cared nothing that these things were overheard by the warders
.—not they. Inspector-General Champ spoke very freely on this
subject, and on the benefits of real solitary confinement, in one of
his annual reports. “ I have before stated,” he says, “ that
communication between the inmates of the hulks cannot be
prevented, and recently on board the ‘ Success,’ as is already
well known, unremitting conversation between the whole of the
men, accompanied by offensive and obscene language to the
officers, singing, shouting, yelling, and noises indescribable,
were kept up for many days; to prevent this is impossible.
“ It is true that the most turbulent might be subjected to cor-
poreal punishment, but I am no advocate for this when any
other punishment can be employed, believing its tendency to be
brutalising, and its beneficial effects very uncertain. It is more
than probable that every man thus selected for punishment
would be regarded by his comrades as a martyr and hero, and
would do his best to sustain that character, and brave every
penalty ; but place the same man in a solitary cell, where he
can neither be seen nor heard by his companions ” [but this was
impossible on board the hulks] “ and the main inducement to
insubordination is at once taken from him. No longer en-
couraged by the approbation of others, and kept back from sub-
mission by the fear of their taunts, he feels that the only possible
result of continued misconduct must be restraint. Detain him
there in silence and solitude until he is thoroughly sick of idle-
ness and want off companionship, and to the greater number of
men any kind of employment will then be a welcome release
from the dreary monotony. It is quite probable that if he is
then supplied with work he may learn to regard labour with
a healthy satisfaction, and that is at least one important step
towards reformation.” Hem! Fancy a criminal of the type of
those on board these hulks regarding labour with satisfaction of
any kind, either healthy or otherwise. Not much ! Why, I’ve
seen twenty men dragging a hand cart containing less than a
hundredweight of stone as though it had been a ton, moving at
a veritable snail’s pace!
To return to our description of the “ Success.”


The whole of the “ flooring ” of the main deck, except a
couple of feet or so running along by the cells, and a good stout,
broad plank running along the centre of the “ corridor,”
consisted of another strong iron grating running most of the
length of the ship. This was to give light to the deck below.
The centre plank was for the sentry as he paced his weary beat
day and night, for it rarely happened that the whole of the
convicts were ashore at once. After dark, two or three lamps
would swing from the deck above, giving a gloomy, grave-like
light, and conjuring up phantoms of many a gruesome scene.
How close and stifling hot it was here in summer time ! How
deadly cold in the long winter nights, when the convicts were
locked up in cells from 5 in the evening until 6 the next morning.
The floors of some of the cells near the doors are quite worn
away with feet, as though the prisoners had stood there waiting
for the doors to open ; and stamping, stamping, all the long
night through. I quite believe it. Go you any night to one of
the city watch-houses, and you will (if allowed) see the prisoners
for the most part standing at the gratings of the doors ; you will
hear them stamping, and—poor devils !—you will often hear
them knocking their heads against the doors—against the very
bars of their cage. And so it was at times on board a convict ship.
I have heard it over and over again. A refractory or half-
demented convict would stand by his door for hours, hoping,
perhaps, that a warder would come in, and that he would be able
to brain him with the night-bucket as he entered—stamping his
feet, and no doubt in his tantrums banging his head about, too.
But not many cases of this kind took place in these cells—
though it may have been so more often in the refractory cells
than is generally supposed. Without doubt many of the convicts
would stand for hours by their doors like chafed tigers, and their
feet in course of time wore away the depressions that, I am told,
now exist.
The lower deck was different from the main. It was much darker;
the light having to come down from two decks above; the cells
were many of them “ solitary,” that is, for only one inmate ; the
lighting of the cells was worse than on the deck above ; there
were several “ refractory ” or punishment cells, in which a man
could neither lie down nor stand up, if chained to a ring-bolt let
in the massive timber about a foot or so from the deck. One of
these cells was a sort of three-corner affair, and exceedingly small
—aye, not very much bigger than a man’s coffin. It was
somewhat differently shaped, though not much.
The whole of these refractory or punishment cells were dark—
no light whatever was allowed to permeate over the doors;


there were no slits in the side of the hull here; and with the
door closed it was as black as pitch. A terrible place! Fancy a
man being doomed to pass many, many, hours—or days —here,
chained down, too, by the wrists perhaps, to the ring bolt near
the deck—chained in such a way that he could neither lie down
nor stand up—immured here as closely as in a living tomb until
the warder came to let him out.
Was there much of this sort of punishment ? Lots. Was it
necessary ? I suppose so. With some of the fiends we had on
board nothing could be too bad. On this deck, also —at the bows
—there was another “ tiger den,” to which light was admitted by
day from a port hole in the bow, guarded with bars of iron, to
prevent the possibility of escape, or the possibility of convicts
getting in to the stores. Compared with Pentridge, or any of
our modern gaols, these old hulks were —well, I know of no
other name to give them than that by which they were generally
known—floating, or ocean “ hells.”
Well might the strongest, the most hardened convict shudder
as he descended to the lower deck for the first time, and became
the inmate of a “ solitary; ” well might he exclaim in the words
of Dante’s “ Inferno ”
All hope abandon ye who enter here.
To give an idea of the class of men confined on board the hulk
it is only necessary to state that no less than 40 of her prisoners
had stood their trial for murder, or other capital crimes. The
“ Electra,” a sloop of war, Commander Morris, acted as guard-
ship at the Point for some years, and, no doubt, did much
towards keeping the convicts in awe. But the guards themselves,
composed of men who had seen good service, were always up to
the mark.
The first big rush took place when the “ Electra” had left the
Bay for Geelong, to celebrate the cutting of the first sod of the
Geelong railway.
About four o’clock in the afternoon, when the gang was about
to knock off work for the day, about 80 of the most desperate of
them broke their leg irons, and, led by a dangerous ruffian
named Flannery, who had been sent to the hulk after attempting
to escape from the Collingwood stockade, made a rush on the
guards. They were met by a terrrible fire that threw them into
dire confusion, and wounded nine of their number, among them
being the ringleader, who, as a result of his indiscretion, had to
suffer amputation of the leg, as did also two of his followers.
The mutineers at once saw that escape was hopeless, and gave


in without striking another blow. They crawled back to the
quarry and were at once marched down to the launches and
taken on board.
Then commenced a scene that my feeble pen is quite unable to
describe. Nearly the whole of the convicts belonging to the
“ Success ” turned that good old vessel of a better day into a
perfect pandemonium. They screamed, and howled, and yelled,
and shouted, and battered their doors with their tubs, making
the calm, fair evening hideous with their fearful noises, their
curses, and their imprecations. This continued for some time till
evening darkened into night, and the roars and shrieks, as from
so many demons, ascended to the very heavens. But the guard
held their ground —every convict was safely under lock and bolt
—it was truly “safe bind, safe find.” H.M.S. “Victoria,”
which had entered the Bay in the meantime, under command of
the late Captain Norman, moored herself within a cable’s length
of the old “ Success,” with ports open and guns shotted ready
fdr action, in case the guards were overpowered. Had the
convicts obtained the upper hand there can _be no doubt
whatever that the “ Victoria” would have poured in a broadside
and sunk the prison where she lay.
After this, a contingent of H.M. 40th Regiment, then stationed
in Melbourne, was sent down, and an officer and military guard
placed on each hulk. This, with a smart dose of bread and
water, and much dark-cell “ drill,” served out by the then police
magistrate, but afterwards Judge Hackett, soon brought the
ringleaders to a condition of subjection.
\ i\']i 7
W g/
yl YI
A A


CHAPTER VI.
Some Prison Photographs—Daniel Morgan—“ Robbery Under
Arms ” —Fifteen Hundred Pounds Reward—Dead or
Alive!—Sydney Bill—Gipsy Smith—Gateley the Hang-
man—Burgess, the New Zealand Murderer—Poor Old
Jemmy Battle—Shocking Atrocities—The Notorious
Sullivan.
t BRIEF history of a few of the most notorious convicts on
board the “ Success ” while she was acting as a penal
hulk may not be without interest in this chapter, but
others will be found further on fully as interesting.
Daniel Morgan, one of the most notorious bushrangers that
Australia was ever cursed with, and who was honoured by having
a higher price placed upon his head than any other outlaw of his
class up to that time, if not at any time, was also a “ Success
ful convict in his earlier days. His deeds of daring and violence
would fill a book—for bold audacity, blood-thirstiness, and
murderous exploits of all kinds he carried off the palm. His
equal was never in Australia. After serving sentences in this
colony, one of which was mostly spent on board the “ Success,”
he distinguished himself in New South Wales, and made things
so uncommonly hot there that the Government offered a reward
of £SOO for his capture. That was in 1804. In June of that
year he shot Sergeant M'Ginnity dead, and took his horse and
firearms. The same year a coroner’s jury returned a verdict of
wilful murder against him for killing John M‘Lean. The reward
of £SOO was then increased to £IOOO. In September, only a
short time afterwards, he shot Sergeant Smith, who died from
effects of his wounds in a few days, and then the reward for him,
dead or alive, was increased to £ISOO. In April of the following
year he put into effect a threat he had made some time before,
that he would again give the people of Victoria a touch of his
quality. Accordingly he crossed over into our possessions. Once
more here, he soon distinguished himself by sticking up the
station of Mr. Evans, at Whitefield. Then he stuck up another
place—M‘Pherson ’s —and compelled one of the inmates, a lady,
to amuse him by playing the piano while he helped himself to an


A 1 supper. Sounds like a leaf out of “ Robbery Under Anns,
don’t it ? Probably that very scene in the book was taken from
this incident in Morgan’s life, just as the bank xobbery was,
most likely, from the lives of some of our other worthies who
figured in the hulks.
Well, Morgan found the company so pleasant and entertaining
that he’spent the night there, making the inmates minister to
his amusement, always with his hand upon his reiohei, ready
to shoot if necessary. It was good fun, wasn’t it ? for him.
But, unfortunately, the fun did not last, this harmless dissipa-
tion costing him his life. During the night a girl employed
about the place managed to get away, and communicated with
the police. A force of 28 troopers and settlers rode down to the
station without an instant’s delay. They were only just in time.
After having had an excellent breakfast, Morgan was about to
take his leave with his booty, when he found the house sur-
rounded with armed men, and every avenue of escape cut ofi.
He was about to make an attempt at any cost, when one of the
settlers fired point blank at him, the bullet going thiough his
body and coming out at his back. Pie fell, moi tally wounded,
and died in a few hours. It was in his earlier years that he had
served a term in this colony, and was a convict in our penal
hulks, but not in my time.
“ Sydney Bill,” a Cornstalk, born of English parents, received
his education at a school in that part of w r ater-fiontaged Sydney
known as “ the Rocks,” which at that time were the Seven
Dials of the Antipodes. At an early age he turned out into the
bush, and became a confirmed horse and cattle stealer. He
passed years in gaol, going from one to another by turns. At
last, during one of his intervals of freedom, he committed a
capital offence, and the police turned out in all directions to
hunt him down. They at length discovered him in an hotel at
Lexton. They called upon him to surrender; but in reply he
presented both revolvers at the force opposed to him, put his
back against the wall, and defied them to take him, saying he
might as well be shot as hanged. But that was not their game.
They preferred to take him alive, so that the hangman should
have a well-earned job. They accordingly rushed him, a des-
perate struggle ensued, and he was captured alive. However,
he escaped hanging, by the skin of his teeth, and iound his way
to the fleet of “ yellow frigates.”
Referring to “Gipsy” Smith already mentioned, a corres-
pondent writes that it was from Trooper Mulligan that this
redoubtable criminal escaped, after the sword versus scabbard
fight. Mulligan was dismissed the service, and (the correspon-
dent writes) got six months in addition. It was Sergeant


M‘Nally who was afterwards shot dead by Smith, who was put
on his trial for murder, but was acquitted on the capital charge
because the warrant under which he was held at the time of his
escape from M‘Nally could not be found, and therefore in resisting
recapture he was not guilty of murder.
Another correspondent sends me a well-executed sketch in
pencil of the head of a most degraded-looking ruffian of the con-
vict type, with the following descriptive notice:—“ Fagan, alias
Gately, alias Ballasam, the successor to old Jack Harris, the
hangman—an old hulker of 1853.” He also forwards a capitally
drawn sketch of the “Success” as she lay off Williamstown,
showing gangs of convicts going on board, a number of sentries
on deck with fixed bayonets and so forth, the sketch being replete
with life.
Burgess, who some years later formed one of the gang of
Burgess, Kelly, Levy, and Sullivan, who took to bushranging in
the province of Nelson and killed quite a number of people in
cold blood, was among the “Success” convicts. One of their
victims was a poor old man named “ Jemmy ” Battle, who was
murdered for the sake of sixpence—all the money he had about
him. These murdered people left their homes at various times,
and were never again heard of until the whole of the shocking
atrocities were brought to light. They were nearly all murdered
in the Maungatapu Ranges. Kelly, Burgess, and Levy were
hanged; Sullivan had his sentence commuted to penal servitude
for 20 years, having turned Queen’s evidence. He was released
a few years ago, amid a burst of indignation that followed him
to Australia, to America, and to England. Wherever he went,
no matter in what disguise, he was speedily unmasked by the
police, and an outcry raised by the public. He even on one
occasion travelled as a clergyman. Hounded from one place to
another, he had nowhere to hide his head. At last he disappeared,
and has never since been heard of. It was reported that he
died in great poverty. In many respects he was said to have
been the worst of the whole four, and owed his respite from the
gallows to a miserable technicality.
It might be mentioned that the governor of the Dunedin Gaol,
at the time Burgess and also Sullivan were confined there
{Sullivan, after the execution of his partners in guilt), was Mr.
Caldwell, who was a warder on one of the “yellow frigates,” I
think the “ Success,” at the time that Burgess was a convict on
board that vessel. Mr. Caldwell was present on the occasion of
the murder of Mr. Price, who although so terribly hacked and
beaten, did not expire until the day following the attack upon
him, fuller particulars of which will be found later on.


Some time ago, during a visit to New Zealand, I went to see
Mr. Caldwell, to talk over old times, and he gave me the
particulars of Burgess's attempted escape as narrated later on.
The murderer Sullivan was also pointed out to me (tins was
after his commutation of sentence). He was then quite a
mild-looking individual, was clothed in a rough calico suit, and
was engaged in the wholesome occupation of white-washing
prison cells.
These were the kind of men who crowded our prison ships,
and it was no wonder that the guards felt they came eir
lives in their hands if they relaxed for a single instant in their
strict watch over them.


“No. 20.”




CHAPTER VII.
The Inspector General’s Administration —Public Feeling—
Vigilance Committee- -Captain Melville and His Pals
Attempt to Escape—Dastardly Murder of the Boatmen
—The Death Sentence Commuted —Burgess, the New
Zealand Murderer—Successful Attack on a Goldship
by Convicts—Excitement in Melbourne.
fHE year 1856 was a very important one in penal
records of Victoria. There had been a rush of prisoners
in the month of March of that year, and one of the
“ rushers,” named Gisborne, had been shot through the body.
The public were greatly excited, and all sorts of absurd reports
got abroad on the subject of Inspector-General Price’s treatment
of the criminals under his charge. What was termed a Citizens
Committee was formed, and they drew up a report in which they
totally condemned the system of discipline enforced by Mr. Price.
The conflict of opinion was brought to a climax towards the end
of the year by a desperate deed committed by some of the hulk
convicts at Wilhamstown, led by the notorious “ Captain
Melville, then a prisoner on board the “ Success.”
On the eve of the 22nd October, about five o clock p.m.,
between 40 and 50 prisoners, who had during the afternoon been
employed in breaking stones at Gellibrand Point, were mustered
for embarkation, and entered the launch provided for their
conveyance to the hulks. A small boat containing Owen Owens, a
warder, John Turner, and others was in front of the launch in
which were the convicts, for the purpose of towing her to the
“Success.” The shipkeeper of the “Lysander,” one of her
sister hulks, was in charge, and observing the convicts crowding
to the bow of the launch, he ordered four or five of them aft, so
that the boat might be more properly trimmed. When the
launch was about 200 yards from the shore, some of the prisoners
seized the rope by which she was being towed, and hauling her
up to the boat, nine of them, headed by Melville, rushed into the
boat and cut the tow-line.


Previous to this, however, the soi-disant “ Captain ” Melville
had seized Jackson, the ship keeper, and pitched him into the
Bay. The nine convicts then had complete possession of the
boat, Turner and the other rowers having been thrown over after
Jackson, while Owens was knocked into the bottom of the boat.
Then the convicts seized the oars and commenced pulling, with
the insane idea that they could escape from the harbour, which
was crowded with shipping. A fusillade was opened upon them
by the “ Success,” and one of their number named Hill was
shot through the neck. Owens was still in the bottom of the
boat. An attempt was made to fling him over, which he very
naturally resisted. Upon which the ruffian Melville smashed in
his head with two fearful blows of the heavy hammer he had
been using during the afternoon for breaking stones, and his
body was thrown overboard. Melville, as the reeking and blood-
stained corpse floated by, waved the hammer round his head
and cried, “ Adieu at last to Victoria !” He must certainly have
been demented, for no man in his sober senses could have
expected to get away under such circumstances. And so it
proved, for the water police boat was alongside in a very few
minutes, and the whole thing was a miserable failure, that had
only resulted in a* wanton loss of life. The convicts never
attempted to strike another blow. They immediately sur-
rendered to the well-armed and disciplined police, and were
ignominiously returned to the “ Success,” manacled, and thrust
into their cells. The wretched attempt had cost three lives, viz.,
that of Owens, of Turner, and of one of the convicts, though the
latter was small loss and saved the hangman a job. That is,
it ought to have done so, but unfortunately, in consequence
of the pressure brought to bear, the whole of the death sentences
passed upon the murderers were remitted. The fate of the shot
convict was instantaneous death. Struck by a bullet from the
“ Success,” he jumped clean into the air for several feet, then
falling into the water, sank like a stone, and his body was never
recovered.
In this affair, Burgess the New Zealand murderer (afterwards
executed there), was shot through the shoulder, and the rest of
the mutineers were secured without much further trouble, as
they were making their way towards a schooner lying off the
Point, which they madly thought they could board and carry out
of the Bay. Melville was tried for murder, and was sentenced
to death, but like the others escaped on a point of law. It was,
when lying under condemnation, and before knowing that the
technical point raised had been successful, that he committed
suicide to escape the hangman. It was, therefore, about as broad
as it was long, especially as he chocked himself with a pocket
handkerchief. Of this prisoner it is also said that he was once


found trying to cut his way out of the side of the hulk with a
knife that he had secreted and turned into a saw ; but this is
hardly worthy of credence for the reasons I have already
mentioned.
Although it was, of course, absurd for these men to have
fancied they could board and carry a schooner off the Point under
such adverse circumstances, it was not a thing unknown to fame
for a vessel to be boarded by desperadoes in the very Bay—and
overpowered too. As long before as April 2nd, 1852, two boats
loaded with 22 convicts put off at night from Sandridge Pier. They
pulled with muffled oars out to the gold ship “ Nelson,” lying off
from the shore about three miles. The captain and most of the
crew were ashore, and no anchor-watch was apparently kept.
At all events, the boats were not challenged, although it was a
bright moonlight night, and the faces of the pirates were
concealed by black crape. They leapt on board prepared to
murder or commit any desperate deed to obtain possession of the
gold which they knew to be there. The Nelson had only a
little time before arrived from Geelong, and in her strong boxes
there were 8158 oz. of gold, valued at £24,000.
As they leaped on board not a soul was to be seen. Making
their way to the forecastle, half the gang secured two men and a
boy they found sleeping there. The mate and three others —two
of them from the shore —were discovered in the cabin, and were
at once overpowered. The mate tried to make a fight of it;
shots were exchanged, and he fell weltering in his blood. Then
the villains threw overboard all the arms they could find—they
were themselves already well provided—and also tossed the one
heavy gun which the ship possessed into the bay, probably for
fear that, after they had gone, it might be fired as a signal, and
an alarm thus be raised. Then, having carefully secured the whole
of the prisoners, they succeeded in finding the gold, and carried
off the whole of it, rowing straight back to JSt. Kilda, where they dis-
posed of some of the precious metal for 30s. an ounce to a store-
keeper. These fellows had their heads screwed on pretty well for
“ business ” purposes, and cleared away safely with the proceeds
of the booty—for the time being, at all events.
This was, perhaps, the most daring thing of the kind ever done,
and excited much indignation. A public meeting was held in
Melbourne, and a great deal of froth blown ofl, to show the con-
tempt of the people for the police protection of the colony. One
of these gold robbers was Burgess, better known in later years as
the New Zealand murderer. He spent a considerable portion of
his convict life on board the “ Success.”
This Burgess was a most notorious ruffian. After serving his
sentence on this side, he got away to New Zealand, and very soon


fount! himself in the “stone jug” in Dunedin —the strongest
gaol in that colony. His cell was one of those next to the outer
prison wall, facing one of the public streets. An early scavenger
going to his work one morning, was surprised to see a man’s
head appearing just above the gutter —sticking out of an opening
in the side channel! This was Burgess. He had, during the
night, taken up one of the flagstones of his cell, and succeeded in
undermining the pavement. He had arrived at that interesting
period which revealed to him the rising sun, when he was seen
by the astonished scavenger. An alarm was raised, and he soon
again found himself safely housed. He never got such another
chance.


CHAPTER YIII.
The Notorious Garrett—A Remarkable History—Died in
Harness— Literary Criminals—A New Zealand Jack
Sheppard—Cyrus Haley—Wants to Learn Shorthand —
Also to be Free —He Peppers the Warder and Escapes
—But is Recaptured—Another Attempt—Shot through
the Heart—The Tinge of Blood on the Family
Pictures.
®MONG the characters on board the “Success” was the
notorious Henry Garrett—to become more notorious
still afterwards in New Zealand. In 1855 he committed
a bank robbery at Ballarat, and managed to make his escape to
London, but was cleverly captured and brought back. He
received a sentence of ten years ; but in 1861 he was granted a
ticket-of-leave, upon which he went to New Zealand, and entered
upon a bushranging career, sticking up on one occasion no less
than 25 people in a single day. Being again convicted he
served six years only, when he returned to Melbourne, and was
brought before the magistrates under the Criminals Influx Act,
which it had been found necessary to pass in order to keep the
convictism of Australia out of Victoria as much as possible.
He complained bitterly of not being allowed to settle down
anywhere, and being (like Sullivan) hunted by the police from
one place to another. He threatened to commit a murder the
first chance he got; then, he said, they would have some-
thing to talk about. But after his sentence was ended—it
was not a long one on this occasion, for really he had done
nothing but return to his own colony —he went back to New
Zealand, and there entered on a new lay. He tried the religious
dodge—p U t on black clothes, wore spectacles, and attended
meetings of the Young Men’s Christian Association. He got
into quite genteel society in Dunedin ; but being found at three
o’clock in the morning in a warehouse with burglar’s tools in
his possession, his whole career was exposed, and he was this
time sentenced to a very long term of penal servitude. He was
also said to have been mixed up with some poisoning case, but I
don’t very well know the rights of it. But this Ido know that


when we had him on board the “ Success ” he was one of the
best behaved among the crowd. Indeed, he always seemed to be
well behaved in gaol; hence he generally got free in the shortest
space of time. He spent very many years in the Dunedin Gaol,
under the care of Mr. Caldwell, to whom I have before referred.
When I visited that prison, as previously mentioned, he was
pointed out to me. Mr. Caldwell told me he had turned his
attention to “ literary matters,” and that he had done a good deal
of writing, having, among other things, written an “ Essay on
Crime.” This he succeeded in getting published even when
an inmate of the gaol—being in this respect much more fortunate
than many authors even when they are free. The manuscx'ipt
was handed to me and published in a New Zealand journal.
It extended over ten or a dozen columns. Garrett died only
three or four years ago after a very, very long prison career.
An old member of the Otago (New Zealand) police force, who
seems to have known a good deal about the notorious convict
Garrett, sends me some interesting particulars of that interesting
criminal. In 1862 Garrett was working in the Gabriel s Gully
goldfields, in Otago, or pretended to be doing so, but one night
he quietly slipped away. The next heard of him was that he
had stuck up 17 persons at Manugatua, about 15 miles from
Dunedin. One of those stuck up was a plucky Scotchman
named Matthew Robinson Millar (now a stock and station agent
at Napier, in Hawke’s Bay, New Zealand). Millar show r ed fight,
and Garrett fired at him so close that his face still bears powder
marks, and the bullet has never been traced or extracted, though
it is still in his neck, but causes him no inconvenience. Garrett
did not get much, as the whole 17 were returning to Dunedin to
follow other avocations than mining, and did not carry much
money on their persons.
Garrett, at this time, was a ticket-of-leave holder from Victoria,
but instead of being sent back he was tried and sentenced to 10
years for highway robbery under arms. When this sentence
expired, Mr. Branigan, the head of the Otago police force (who
had formerly belonged to the Victorian police), decided on sending
him back to Victoria ; but Garrett shammed sick, and went into
hospital. In order to have him watched, Mr. Branigan put a
constable in the next bed to him, as his little game was more
than half suspected, and it was believed he would attempt to
escape and get up country again.
These suspicions turned out to be well founded, for Garrett
attempted to leave the hospital, when the pretended sick man in
the next bed sprang up and put the irons on him before he could
do so. He was then sent to Melbourne, but the authorities in
this city repudiated him, saying his sentence in Otago caused the


Victorian one to expire by effluxion of time. They accordingly
returned him to Otago, when he was taken in hand by a dissent-
ing clergyman, and soon pretended to be a complete convert.
He was at this time making £4 a week as a cooper, working
alone.
Mr. Branigan, knowing him so well of old, was certain he
could not be honest, and had him watched by a constable in plain
clothes. Garrett himself had no suspicion of this till the Press
made it public and took his part against the police. But despite
this the watch was continued.
One Sunday morning Garrett, dressed in black clothes and
with a large Bible under his arm, was seen going down a right-
of-way, on one side of which there was the chapel he attended.
The constable watching him naturally thought he was going to
church; but instead of this he dropped his Bible and opened the
back door of a seed and produce store, the back door of which
faced that of the chapel. While inside ransacking the cash box,
and carefully examining the papers in the desk, one of the part-
ners came into the store and at once found everything in confu-
sion. He ran back to the door where his partner was standing,
and the constable was soon on the scene. All three then went
into the store and found Garrett concealed behind a door, with
some of the stolen property on him.
Notwithstanding that he had been earning £4 a week he could
not keep honest. Some 20 burglaries, of which he had in no
way been suspected, were now traced to him, and -on his rooms
being searched, a quantity of stolen property was found. For
these various offences he was sentenced to 22 years imprison-
ment, and died “ in harness,” as mentioned above, only three or
four years ago.
“ Old Time ” interviewed this notorious convict some years
ago in the gaol at Dunedin. He was a man of some talent, and
of some literary ability, and had just completed a long “ Essay
on Crime,” which he gave to the present writer for publication,
and subsequently it was published in a New Zealand journal.
Dunedin Gaol was remarkable for the literary characters it con-
tained. Another one was young John Plummer, formerly a
draper’s assistant, who in Auckland had been sentenced to a
considerable term of imprisonment for embezzlement. He broke
out of Mount Eden Gaol several times, and was dubbed “ The
New Zealand Jack Sheppard.” He was ultimately transferred
to Dunedin Gaol for safety, that being, in those days at least, a
much stronger prison than Mount Eden, surrounded by a high
wall. Plummer here amused himself writing quite a number of
interesting literary fictional sketches, which were handed to
“ Old Time ” for publication, but failed to see the light of day.


Another remarkable criminal in Dunedin Gaol—who had also
been transferred from Auckland—was the notorious Cyrus Haley,
who, having been convicted on charges of burning a ship, burning
a kerosene store, burning the Masonic Hall, burning the New
Zealand Insurance buildings, and his own recently opened
reading and dining rooms, and also of attempting to murder
Thomas Russell, M.L.A. (a perfect romance of crime), had
received three life sentences of 20 years each. Yet this man
treasured up the hope of being free one day, and wrote to me
(I had known him in Auckland, where he had occupied a highly
respected position at one time), to ask for some shorthand books
as he wanted to learn “the system,” which he believed would be
of great assistance when he “ came out.” I sent him the books,
but he never came out. At least not in the way he expected.
By throwing pepper into the eyes of the warder on duty at the
gate he managed to escape into the open street, but was soon
recaptured ; on a second attempt he was shot dead by a warder
before he had passed more than thirty yards along the street, the
bullet which went through his heart also passing through a
packet of photos of his family, which he had concealed in his
breast. Poor devil! his was an extraordinary career, and is well
known to me. I may be induced to write it one day. If so, it will
be found to be more romantic than the wildest burst of fiction,
and far surpassing in interest the lives of ninety-nine out of every
hundred convicts who filled our hulks. Which brings me back to
the “ Success.”






CHAPTER IX.
Some Interesting Reminiscences —“ The Convicts Broke Loose
—Alarm at Williamstown —Volunteers for the Front —
Give Them The Bayonet—The Ruffians Cowed —Gelli-
brand Point —Running The Gauntlet —The Bell of The
“Lysander”—Drinking an Overseer’s 8100d —BovnoodoF
Captain Melville.
SFTER the publication of a portion of these papers on the
“ Success,” in the Evening Standard, the Editor of that
highly popular paper received the following very
interesting communication, which he handed over to me. And
I need scarcely say it affords me much pleasure to include it in
the history of this celebrated hulk and its notorious prisoners :
“ gi r> —The graphic account in your columns by * Old Time ’
of the convict outbreak at Williamstown in 1856 recalls to my
recollection some incidents in connection therewith which may
perhaps be of interest to your readers.
“ I was then a very young servant of Her Majesty. Being on
the sick list for the day, while enjoying a cigar on the verandah
of my residence, I observed Mr. Bull, town surveyor, of Wilhams-
town, and father of Lieutenant-Colonel Bull, the present
respected Governor of the Melbourne Gaol, running past, shoulder-
ing a huge blunderbuss. I followed, and asked What was the
matter ? ’ His startling reply was, ‘ The convicts have broken
loose, and unless secured will probably murder everyone they
come across.’
“ My sickness soon disappeared at this alarming news, and
seizing the only weapon I could find—an old duck-gun without
a ramrod —and a Manilla sword stick, I joined my veteian
friend.
“ On our way to Gellibrand Point, we met a party conveying
on a wheelbarrow the mangled body of poor Mr. Price to the
residence of Dr. Wilkins, where he expired a few hours afterwards
in the greatest agony.


“ Before going into action, I asked my * companion in arms ’
if he had any ammunition. His reply was ‘No ; and a good job,
too, I think, as the firing of my old blunderbuss would probably do
us a good deal more harm than it would the convicts,’ a remark
with which I felt inclined to agree as regarded my superannuated
duck-gun also.
“ Reaching the Point, we found the convicts with frightful
yells marching steadily towards the line of volunteers, under the
command of Lieutenant (not then Captain) Verdon, a little to
the south of the lighthouse.
“We fell in amongst them, and as they all fixed bayonets
(being only newly enrolled, they had not then been supplied
with ammunition) I fixed my swordstick in the muzzle of my
old gun, while my veteran friend contented himself with point-
ing his blunderbuss—and a most murderous weapon it looked
—amongst the row of bayonets.
“As the convicts kept advancing, the young commander, with
more courage than discretion, as we all thought, considering the
danger of his remarks reaching the sharp ears of the enemy,
called out, “ Gentleman volunteers, as we have no ammunition,
we must do without it, and give them the bayonet if they come
near enough.”
On the band of desperadoes approaching within about 50
yards of us they halted, no doubt awed by the line of glittering
steel, backed, as they thought, by ball cartridge, and after a
short pause, turned tail. We followed them, and strengthened
by an armed party of sailors from the “ Victoria,” who had in
the meantime landed, drove them into a corner outside the
lighthouse, where they were secured and shipped to the hulks.
“ Enraged at their capture, the yells of the criminals could
afterwards be heard on shore day and night for weeks, which
caused so much annoyance and alarm to the inhabitants of
Williamstown that the Government was successfully petitioned
to have the yellow frigates removed to the opposite side of the
Bay, where they remained until abolished.
“ It was then, and for many years afterwards, the fashion to
ridicule volunteers ; but there can, I think, be little doubt that
to the moral demonstration made by the then newly established
Williamstown Artillery was mainly owing the suppression of a
revolt, which, had it been successful, would have resulted in a
wholesale massacre of the inhabitants of our small fishing
village.
“Nearly four decades have passed since then; but never shall
I forget the horrors and anxieties of that frightful day.—Yours.
H.M.M.” e J


There can be no doubt in the world that the opinion expressed
by the above correspondent is quite a correct one—that if these
convicts, many of them man-tigers, had succeeded in escaping,
Williamstown would have run with the blood of innocent people.
Gellibrand Point was guarded with great strictness by the
warders; but they need not have been so careful in some
respects, for there was little fear of any respectable people
desiring to go within a mile of the convicts. I remember a
young son of mine and his mate going for a sail in the Bay
during the time I was connected with the hulk. Neither of
them knew much about sailing, and, having fastened the sheet
to the cleat, seemed to act on the young fool’s motto of “ Let
her rip!” She was caught' by a sudden puff, and over
she went when near H.M. brig “Phantom,” then the
guardship. Two boats were speedily lowered, and the
boys picked up. Their own boat was stove in and
sank, and the lads landed on Gellibrand Point. Here the
warders pounced down upon them, and it was only with the
greatest difficulty they were not driven into the sea again, and
made to swim round the Point. However, after some argument,
in the course of which the boys explained that they had been
landed by the man-of-war’s men, and that their own boat had
been sunk so that it could not drift among the convicts, they
were allowed to crawl round by the beach till they had left the
hated ground behind them.
When on board the “ Success,” don’t fail to have a look at
refractory cell No, 41—the black hole. If that could but speak
it would tell tales that would strike terror to the stoutest heart.
For days and weeks and months at a time—indeed, the torture
chamber was seldom or never empty—a human being on his
knees, neither sitting, nor standing, nor lying, would be chained
by his wrists to the ringbolt, with nothing but bread and water
to sustain life, nothing but his own fearful thoughts, and black-
ness as of ink, for his companions. No wonder that many men
went raving mad, and tried to dash out their brains against the
iron-like timbers of the ship. Appropriate, indeed, was the
title given to these prison ships —Ocean Hells !
Writing on the subject of the bell of the old “ Lysander ”
(one of the hulks), a correspondent says it was placed on board
that vessel when she was launched on the Clyde in 1835. After
braving the storms of every clime, and almost every sea, it rung
the clang of victory when the British stormed Canton, as well
as giving the signal here that Victoria was a free colony
(separated from New South Wales), as the sign to light the beacon
fires on shore. It is as sound and good as the day it was cast,
which was about the time that Henty landed at Portland, and
the year before Bateman and Fawkner arrived in Hobson’s Bay.


It was sold by the Penal Department to the council at Coburg
as a firebell some years ago, and was by them put up near the
Fire Brigade station. It bears the inscription; “ Lysander,
1835.” My correspondent observes that this bell has a remark-
able history, and trusts that as a “national relic” it may be
carefully preserved.
The same writer states that “Briney ” Williams, the convict
who hacked Mr. Price to pieces with a shovel when he was
murdered, was reported to be one of a gang of Tasmanian or
Norfolk Island convicts, who had murdered one of the convict
overseers on whom they had a spite, and that after they had
killed him, each of them stooped down and drank his blood. My
correspondent says he has himself heard Mr. Price tell the
ghastly story.
The same writer likewise forwards the following memo.:—
“ Captain Melville, alias MacCallum (he was christened Mac-
Call um by the gaol authorities because he would not give his
right name, which they knew was not Melville), was born at
Perth, Scotland, and was transported to Point Puer, Port Arthur,
when a boy. He served his time as a ship’s carpenter. He was
subsequently arrested in Geelong while attending the wedding
of one of his old pals.”
Another correspondent, writing on the subject of Captain
Melville, says :—“ This man was born in Paisley, Scotland, and
at the age of 15 was transported to Van Dieman’s Land for
seven years for stealing a potato pie from a countryman’s cart.
He was sent out to Hobart Town in the ‘ Minerva ’ with, I
think, 149 other boys. A few months after his arrival he and
two others absconded from a road gang, and took to the bush.
They had been out about five or six weeks, when they were
taken under arms, and committed for trial, the result being that
they were sentenced to death, but on account of his youth Mac-
Callum was let off with a life sentence. The other two were
hung. MacCallum was sent to Port Arthur for the first five
years to ‘ renew ’ his character. At the end of that time he
returned to Hobart Town, and was ‘signed out’ to a master at
Launceston, from whence he absconded, and stowed away in the
brig ‘ Melbourne,’ and arrived in Port Phillip in 1852. Being
hard up, he got shelter from an old shipmate on the Yarra-bank,
and after a short stay the latter put him on the road to Ballarat,
escorting him as far as the old cemetery, where he said good-
bye. He never saw him again, but after he committed suicide
the shipmate visited the Waxworks, and, although MacCallum
was greatly altered, he recognised the cast, more especially by
the ears, which were very long, and grew to the cheek at the
bottom end. These few facts are absolutely correct.” This
figure is now on board the “ Success.”


CHAPTER X.
The Murder of Mr. Price, the Inspector - General—A
Misjudged Officer —“President” and “Success” —
Ruffianism—A Perfect Pandemonium —Volunteers to the
Rescue—Living Graves of Would-be Escapees—Opinion
of the Jury—Misplaced Sympathy of the Public.
«HE convicts had grievances. Of course they had !
convicts always have, and always will have. But a
fairer man than Mr, John Price was never placed in
charge of prisoners. A most determined man, and one that
would have discipline enforced, but if a convict behaved himself
he had no better friend, in a way, than the Inspector-General.
A wonderful eye had Mr. Price, and never forgot a face. None
of the old hands, nor any other of the convicts, could do the
“ double shuffle ”on him. He could tell with half an eye
whether a man was “ malingering ” or not—that is, whether
he Was really sick, or only shamming. They were a bad lot,
and no mistake, and it’s no wonder many of them had a down
on him —simply because they were so bad. If matters had been
left wholly to him, probably he would never have been murdered,
but there are always a lot of people outside who sympathise with
grievance mongers —even when they are convicts —and make
them ten times worse.
After the murder of Owen Owens and Turner, a Select Com-
mittee of the Legislative Council took voluminous evidence on
the subject of the prison discipline, especially in connection
with the hulk prisoners, and Mr. John Price, the Inspector-
General. Out of the whole investigation the character of Mr.
John Price comes out clearly as a resolute and efficient officer,
of vast experience, and of unflinching faithfulness to the rules
of the department by which he was bound. Now that the
colony has cleared itself of the imputation of sympathy with
criminals, it seems extraordinary that public opinion should
have been so misled by “ good-intentioned ” people, as it was in
1856.


Owing in a great measure to this wretched, this miserable,
sympathy, and the failure of justice in the case of the murderers
of Owen Owens, the authorities at Pentridge and Collingwood
Stockades had in the first two months of 1857 the greatest
possible difficulty in maintaining discipline, while on board the
hulks “Success” and “President” —the sister ships for con-
victism of the most desperate character, and ruffianism of the
deepest dye—it was absolutely impossible. The convicts fre-
quently openly defied the warders when remonstrated with for
breaches of discipline. The usual reply to this was: “ Oh,
you had better mind what you are saying, and don’t forget the
Citizens’ Committee are watching you. ’ These convicts knew
just as well what was going on as if they read the daily papers—
which there is very little doubt some of them did.
The general insubordination increased day by day, and the
result was the fearful tragedy which might have been naturally
expected.
In the month of March complaints were made by the convicts
in the hulks of the quality of their rations —one of the most com-
mon complaints made in all gaols, and usually the one with the
least foundation. A seeming desire was expressed to have the
matter enquired into by Mr. Price.
The Inspector-General accordingly visited the works at
Williamstown on Thursday, 26th, about three o’clock in the after-
noon. He was accompanied by Captain Blatchford, Inspector of
Hulks, and two other officials, all unarmed. Mr. Price had just
spoken to one or two of the men, asking them to give particulars
of their complaints, when a sudden rush took place, and a mob
of convicts flung themselves upon him. What their appearance
was, and what chance he stood of his life in the hands of these
fiends, may be judged from the picture on our front page. Vil-
lainy and murder are stamped on the face of every one of the
ruffians, who, wearing their leg chains, yet had their hands free,
and were armed with picks and shovels. Here, beneath the
shadow of the lighthouse, in the shade of the falling sun, and
within sight of the armed warders about, and those on board
the “ Success,” lying but a few yards off, they fell upon him, and
dragged him down to the earth works, beat him to the ground,
and battered his head with stones, pick-handles, and shovels, so
that he was perfectly unrecognisable. Then the assassins left
him for dead and rejoined their mates.
But notwithstanding the bloodthirstiness of the great majority
of them, there was still left some vestige of humanity in the
hearts of a few of the men, criminals and convicts though they
were. Four or five of them ran to his assistance, and after


bathing his face, conveyed him in a wheelbarrow to the light-
house, where he received every possible attention until medical
aid arrived. Although alive, he was quite unconscious, and no
hope could be entertained from the first of his recovery. He
lingered in an insensible condition for 24 hours, when he died.
Just before this murderous assault, one of the warders was
ordered to conduct some of the men to the boats for the purpose
of conveying them to the hulks. He told one of the convicts to
go on board the boat, but the latter replied, in that free and easy
style so characteristic of the times, “ That he’d see him damned
first, for he didn’t intend to do anything of the kind.”
Just at this moment the attack was made on Mr. Price. The
warder and overseer ran to his assistance, but were both
knocked down. Captain Blatchford was also placed hors de
combat with a stone, and Chief Warder Hyland retreated—
perhaps the best thing he could have done to save his brains
from being knocked out.
To show the tigerish ferocity of this crowd of convicts, it is
only necessary to state that Overseer Wilson received no fewer
than twelve wounds. The wonder is that he, also, like Mr.
Price, did not succumb to his fearful injuries. Warder Gleeson
was fortunate in escaping with a terrible gash on his head.
This attack on the Inspector-General and his officers, at
once aroused the whole neighbourhood. The Volunteer
Artillery and police were quickly on the spot, and kept the
convicts in something like subjection. Many of these had
knocked off their irons with their quarrying tools, and the
whole were hemmed in on Point Gellibrand by a cordon of
armed police and military. These were itching to fire on the
prisoners ; but a strict order had gone forth that not a trigger
should be pulled except in self defence. Among the convicts
the excitement was intense; they rushed hither and thither, seeking
for a means of escape, but wherever they appeared a musket was
presented against them, and they were immediately cowed.
It was at first thought the warders who retreated had shown
the white feather, but this opinion was very soon changed.
Had they not retired as they did, in all probability the whole of
them would have been massacred, and a couple of hundred
ruffians left at large to wreak their will on the country. But
under the fear of being shot, the cowardly scoundrels stayed
their hands, and in less than a couple of hours they returned to
the boats to be taken on board.
Two of them however managed to go in hiding for a couple of
hours, but some of the gang, who doubtless wished to curry


favour, gave information of their whereabouts. These two had
hidden in a hole on which planks were placed, covered with
earth. Each was provided with a bottle of water and a few
biscuits, and was only waiting for the night to get away. They
were, however, betrayed by their “ pals,” and were marched
down to the boats with the rest.
At the inquest on Mr. Price a verdict of wilful murder was
returned against no less than fifteen of the hulk convicts, and
the case of two others was reserved for the Attorney-General.
At the enquiry subsequently held, there appeared to have been
no cause for growling on the score of rations, and it was
evident that the complaints formed part of a planned scheme for
entrapping the unfortunate Inspector-General, who lost his
life in paying too much attention to them. The convicts
were only too well aware of the sympathies ol the public ;
indeed, several copies of the reports of the so-called “ Citizens’
Committee ” were found concealed on the works.
The jury took a proper view of the whole affair. To their
verdict they added the following rider : —“ After carefully review-
ing the evidence brought before them, the jury cannot but
express their opinion that one cause, at least, of the unfortunate
occurrence has been the misplaced sympathy exhibited by a
portion of the public, which has by some means become known
to the prisoners; and they conclude that the guard was not
sufficiently strong at the time to check the rising spirit of in-
subordination known to exist since the trial of Melville in
November last.”
mLA l J






CHAPTER XL
Trial of Price’s Murderers—Conduct of the Prisoners
in the Dock— They Assert Their Innocence —Profanity
and Hypocrisy of one of Them —No Hope of Mercy—
The Death Sentence and Execution.
fHE trial of the prisoners for the murder of the Inspector-
General caused a great sensation, and lasted for several
days ; seven of them were cast for death, and were
executed, Maloney, Smith, and Williams on the 28th, Chesley
on the 29th, and Brannigan, Brown, and Bryant on the 80th
April. Brannigan was the only one among them who admitted
his guilt, and acknowledged that he was the first man to attack
Mr. Price, whom he had caught in his arms and thrown on to
the ground when the first rush was made. This prisoner also
stated that it was Williams who had struck the Inspector-
General on the head with a shovel, but that Brown and some of
the others were quite innocent of any direct act of violence in the
attack.
The trial of Williams, Maloney, and Smith took place before
that of the other prisoners, and they were found guilty after
only half an hour’s deliberation by the jury.
When asked if they had anything to say why the sentence of
the law should not be passed on them,
Williams asked His Honour to defer sentence so far as he was
concerned until after the trial of the remainder of the prisoners,
as he thought it likely it might be proved before the trials were
concluded that he was not the man who struck the blow. He
said Chief Warder Hyland and other officers had contradicted
each other, and that the various witnesses had contradicted each
other throughout. If they had had money to employ counsel the
result might have been different, but if it was the will of God
that he should die, he was content to die, because during the
past four years and a half he had lived a miserable life, and
would just as soon be dead as not, to be free of it.


Smith, in his turn, also said he had been wrongly convicted,
for he was quite innocent, as he had never lifted a hand or
rushed Mr. Price—this he swore as he had a soul to be saved.
(In his case the jury strongly recommended him to mercy, on
the ground that it was not proved he had struck any blows.
But he was executed nevertheless.)
Maloney on his part said that enough evidence had been given
against him to hang any man or twenty men, but when he
looked on the persecution which the Saviour suffered, what other
could a wretch like him expect ? He called on Almighty God
to witness that he had never lifted a hand against Mr. Price, or
any of the officers on the day in question. If he did might the
Almighty God never receive his soul, but if his death would be
an atonement to Almighty God for the sins he had committed he
would be satisfied, and he hoped he should prepare for death in
the best way he could in the short time allowed him to live. He
had placed his trust in Almighty God on the previous day, and
that morning, before entering the court, that he might not be
found guilty of a crime he had never committed. If His Honour
would grant that his execution might be public he would be very
glad, that the public might hear at the last moment his con-
fession.
At this point Williams again broke in upon the solemn silence
of the court. He said there was a young man in the gaol
charged with taking a spade out of his (Williams’) hand, and
striking Mr. Price with it. He declared to God that Brown
never did so, and he hoped the jury would consider this when
the lad was on his trial. He had been picked out by the officers
of the hulks because if they had not pitched upon somebody to
charge, they would have lost their situations. All of them .had
sworn falsely.
His Honour then passed sentence upon them at some length,
but the following is a fair summary of his remarks :
“ Such crimes as these, in a country too full of criminals
for the happiness of the people, could not be overlooked, and
were additionally dangerous. All these prisoners were under-
going punishment for most serious crimes. The present case
was not one that demanded sympathy or pity ; and the mode of
defence of at least two of the prisoners was not likely to meet
with approbation. Some of their complaints were frivilous, even
if they were true. The scale of rations given to the prisoners
was in excess of that given to Her Majesty’s troops. Many a
free man, obliged to live by hard labour, would be but too glad to
get such rations as they objected to.


“ They all seemed to view their cases as if they were injured,
completely forgetting the aggression they themselves had made
upon society. He earnestly begged of them to use the little
space of time which was now allotted to them, to make all the
reparation which they said they believed to be necessary, not
only to the society whose laws they had outraged, but to a higher
Being; and he must guard one of them against what he con-
sidered to be the impiety of his language. One of them had asked
to be executed publicly. It was a most lamentable request. His
Honour deplored it most deeply; for notwithstanding the expres-
sions of simulated piety uttered by that prisoner, he (His Honour)
could not believe there was anything in the request but the
miserable gratification of displaying the last feeling of exultation
with which an unrepentant man wished to leave the world. The
legislature of the colony had deprived His Honour of the power
of granting the request, and in this instance he thought he might
say that he rejoiced in not possessing the power, for he feared
that the last hour of this prisoner’s life would be employed either
in an exhibition of profanity or of attempted justification.
“With regard to the recommendation of mercy in the case of
Smith, it would be forwarded to the proper quarter, though His
Honour was unable to see any reasons why it should have been
made, and for his own part he could hold out no hope of mercy.”
After a final admonition for the prisoners to prepare for the
next world, His Honour sentenced them to death, and with the
others tried afterwards and convicted, they were executed as
above.
Now just take a look at the impious dog, Maloney, who
wanted a public execution, and who in his address to the judge
had talked of little else than his innocence, of the atonement,
of his soul, and of Almighty God; you will find his picture in
this book —the number of his cell being 20. He was one of
the most desperate and determined villains on board, and was
habitually kept in a cell with an iron-barred door to it inside of
the wooden door. Did you ever see a more murderous-looking
face ? There he stands at his open grating door, clasping in his
right hand some kind of dangerous weapon, ready to strike the
first inoffensive warder who should pass him unawares. His left
hand is clenched with the ferocity which at that moment seems
to fill his whole frame. Well might he be termed a human
tiger ! His waxen figure, with the original cast of his face taken
after the execution, and the body wearing the very clothes in
which he was hanged, will be found in “Cell 20.” One of
the worst scoundrels the “Success” ever held within her wooden
walls!


Williams was another very bad lot, and had frequently to be
manacled with the wrist, as well as the leg-irons. You have his
counterfeit presentment also on the lower deck in Cell 11, an
exact copy of the living man ; also in this case a cast after death,
and the clothes he wbre, and the very irons to which he had so
often to be subjected to prevent him doing an injury to the
officials. Williams was one of the ruffians who struck Mr. Price
on the head with the spade that inflicted his death wound.
In the “Tigers’ Den” you will see Brown, Bryant, and
Chesley, three more of the murderers, whose outrageous conduct
frequently caused them to be shut up in this place, and who
were three of the greatest villains who ever graced the planks
of this famous, or rather infamous hulk.
Two of the other pictures show a convict walking in his cell
after being brought from the quarries, and another making a
desperate attack with a sharpened spoon upon one warder, and
trying to beat off another, who has come to his comrade’s
assistance, with a heavy stool.






CHAPTER XII.
The Notorious Harry Power—His Courtesy to Women—A
Friendly Squatter’s Wife—Power’s Ride with Ned
Kelly—Skinning the Lamb— A Two Hundred Pound
Cheque—The Young Lady’s Watch—A Keepsake from
her Mother—Power's Magnanimity—A Visit to Mel-
bourne —Capture and Last Sentence—Never Too Late
to Mend—Half a Score of Ruffians—A History of
their Prison Days.
MONG the “ Success ” convicts was Harry Power. His
Jrffl career was a most interesting one. He escaped from
Van Dieman’s Land as long ago as 1848, and soon after-
wards landed in Victoria. Of course, he commenced the old
game, and so found himself under sentence for ten years with
hard labour. He was sent on board the “ Success,” where he
formed one of the gang who seized the boat at Melville’s rush,
when Owen Owens and Turner were murdered. as a
rule, a well-behaved convict, and was released at the end of his
sentence, only to return like a dog to his vomit. He was con-
victed at Beechworth and sentenced to another eight years, being
forwarded on to Pentridge. From here he managed to escape
in 1809, and took to the bush. For the next two years he kept
the country in a state of alarm ; the police were out in all direc-
tions, but rarely came across him, though they found his tracks
everywhere. Like Claude Duval, he was especially polite to
women, and never used violence even to men. It is estimated
that he stuck up no fewer than 114 people in the time mentioned.
A few days after his escape, he stuck up a station at Beech-
worth, and prevailed upon the lady there to give him not only a
good meal but also some firearms, telling her he was the
notorious Harry Power, w r ith a price set on his head. After-
wards, the same morning, he stuck up her husband and eased
him of two horses, his wife telling the squatter “that this was
Power,” and “ for God’s sake to give him what he wanted, and
let him go.” One of these horses, it seems, w r as the lady’s
favourite hack, and she afterwards bought it back from Power;
but neither she nor her husband took any very decided steps to
bring the bushranger to justice.


Not long afterwards, at Mount Battery station, Power was
very nearly being taken prisoner while in the company ot the
notorious Ned Kelly. They were observed by the police, and
several shots were exchanged. Kelly wanted to surrender, but
Power would not hear of it, and the pair of them galloped oft
together, Power’s horse receiving a flesh wound on the way.
Another time Power was skinning one of Dr. Rowe’s lambs,
which he had killed, when the worthy doctor rode up, “ Who are
you ?” he cried, “ and what do you mean by killing my lambs ?
Power picked up his gun, and presenting it, said, “ 111 soon let
you know who I am—get ofl those horses. “ Oh, said the
doctor, “ I suppose you are Power —but I advise you to ghe up
this sort of life.” To which Power replied, “ Iwant you to give
me a cheque on the bank at Mansfield for £2OO. Aou can send
your man for it.” And it was done. Then Power took the doctor s
very fine horse and rode oft with it.
On one occasion Power stuck up a mail coach with lb
passengers, but failed to make the good haul he expected. 1 here
were several men among the passengers, but none ot them
offered any resistance. Power opened the mail bags and made
the passengers hand over their money and valuables. One joung
lady, on handing him her gold watch, remarked that she did not
like parting with it as it was a present from her mother. Power
immediately gav(s it to her back, and said he hoped she might
long live to wear it.
His adventures would fill a book, and I have no room for a
tithe of them in this little sketch. In 1871, feeling like “ a run
into town,” he ventured into Melbourne, and put up at the
“Robert Burns” Hotel, Smith-street, Collingwood. The police
soon got wind of it, and scoured the city right and left, but
failed to find him. As, however, he had no wish to be caught,
be soon cleared out, and was shortly afterwards heard ot near
Wangaratta at the old thing. The Government now offered a
reward of £2OO for his capture, and at last his hiding place was
discovered near the King River. He was suddenly surprised in
his bark hut, and before he could make use of either his double-
barrelled gun or the six-chamber revolver at his side, he was
secured. Fifteen years was the sentence this, and the last, time.
A few years before he was entitled to his discharge tv o ladies
well known for their philanthropy and benevolence, induced the
Government to release him, offering to provide a home for him
in his declining years, for he was by this time a white-haired old
man. It is rumoured that some years previously these ladies
were travelling in their private carriage, and were about to be
stuck up by Power; but seeing they were only women with no


male escort he simply bowed and rode away. Shortly after his
release it is said Sir W. J. Clarke offered him a home on one of
his stations, which was thankfully accepted.
Power is now a fine, hale, hearty, old man, who talks freely
oyer his past. Every bit of vice seems to have disappeared from
him, and it is hoped and believed he will spend the remainder of
his life without ever again seeing the interior of one of Her
Majesty’s gaols.
The following is a brief sketch of the sentences of ten of the
convicts confined at one time on board the “ Successtheir
career only presents a sample of the whole. All these ten des-
peradoes had originally been transported from the old country :
A Escaped from Van Dieman’s Land and reached Victoria
in 1851. He at once entered upon a career of “ sticking up,”
and several of his victims were nearly murdered, or maimed for
life. At the end of '5l he was sentenced to seven years on the
roads.
T> was a notorious criminal, and one of the most dangerous
and daring convicts ever confined within prison walls. His first
sentence after arriving in this colony was ten years, with three
years in irons. While in Pentridgehe was always in a state of
insubordination. Notwithstanding his heavy irons he several
times attempted to escape. For one of these he received 100
lashes, and for a second was placed in doubly heavy irons. He
was repeatedly sentenced to solitary confinement for flagrant
breaches of the prison rules.
C received ten years for a daring highway robbery. He
was convicted in 1853, and while in Pentridge underwent the
following additional sentences : Twenty days’ solitary confine-
ment on bread and water for “ ovaling ” the irons for the purpose
of slipping them, and seven days’ “solitary” and one mouth’s
additional imprisonment for insubordination and threatening
language.
H Five years on the roads in 1851. Bad record at Pent-
ridge, and many additional punishments, including “ solitary,”
and wearing heavy irons, until further ordered on board the
“ Success.” e
E—— Ten years on the roads, with the first two in irons. He
had maimed one man for life, and robbed numerous others of
their small earnings under circumstances that would well have
justified the Government in keeping him in irons, and within a
prison cell, for the rest of his life.


P Five years in 1852. Being implicated in a “ rush ”of
prisoners at Pentridge, he was placed in heavy irons and was
repeatedly punished for insubordination.
G was sentenced in 1850 to six years on the roads for
highway robbery, and shooting with intent. He was originally
transported from England for 15 years, which he passed
between Norfolk Island and Van Dieman’s Land. Among
other acts he made a deliberate attempt to murder an
unoffending citizen. He escaped in 1851, and was at large for
a couple of years, committing all kinds of depredations and
villainies. He was implicated in planning several rushes, and
on two occasions had arranged with others to murder any of the
warders that stood in their way, but information was given
which frustrated these designs.
H Ten years on the roads for highway robbery in 1854.
“ Sticking, up ” was his favourite pastime, and by this means he
netted several large sums of money. Punished repeatedly in
gaol for breaches of the regulations.
I . Eight years for highway robbery in 1852. The
particular offence which sent him on board our hulk was setting
fire to bedding in one of the Pentridge wards.
J . Assault and robbery, seven years, in 1853.
All these fellows had been sent out from home, and most of
them completed their sentences in Norfolk Island or Tasmania
before coming over to- Australia. During their short career of
crime in Victoria they murdered three men, maimed and
crippled dozens of others, and committed robberies under arms
innumerable. They were only specimens of the hundreds who
filled the hulks, and who, when at large, were a terror to Society.
No man’s life was safe in any unprotected place if it was thought
he had gold in his possession. If he resisted, the bushranger
thought no more of putting a bullet through him than ot
shooting a kangaroo.






CHAPTER XIII. and LAST.
Convict Insubordination—The Hulks in Danger—Troops and
Men-of-War to the Rescue—An Official Enquiry—The
Inspector-General— His Character Cleared—Dr. Youl’s
Opinion of Him : A Kind-hearted Man, and a Faithful and
Efficient Officer—Wrong Impressions—Conclusion.
«VEN the fearful example offered by the hanging of seven
of Mr. Price’s murderers did not put a stop to the strong
. spirit of insubordination that was spread among the
whole turbulent mass of convictism on board the hulks. It
became necessary to place guards on board the “ President ”
and “ Success,” in the shape of a detachment of the 40th
Regiment of the Line, then stationed in Melbourne. “ For
several days and nights the convicts were in a continual state of
excitement, and their shouting and yelling could be heard
plainly from the shore.”
At one time it was really believed there would be a serious out-
break, even on board, and H.M.S. “Victoria” was anchored close
by, in order to render assistance if necessary. In the same way, at
Pentridge, to which the spirit of disaffection had spread, a most
unsatisfactory state of affairs existed. Close to the main entrance
of the building a company of the 40th Regiment was under
canvas, only waiting for orders to pour in a deadly fire upon the
rioters if necessary.
Shortly after “ Melville’s rush,” as it was termed (that is the
murder of Owens), a very exhaustive enquiry was held as to the
treatment of the prisoners generally, both at Pentridge and on
board the hulks.
Mr. Price’s evidence was very interesting. He said the weight
of irons put on prisoners varied from 7lbs. to 401b5., the latter
only being used for very refractory convicts. Speaking of the hulk
prisoners, he saw there were men among them whom he had
known to be sentenced three times to be hanged, and who were
also convicts from Tasmania. Referring to the irons, he said
unless these were on the prisoners he could not keep them for a
single week. “ I can adduce evidence to show,” said he, “ that


the prisoners on board the ‘ Success ’ concocted a scheme to
seize upon the doctor’s boat, some of them undertaking to feign
sickness, and when their irons were off to rush upon the sentry
and take the boat.”
All his hopes of reforming prisoners had gone, though he
started with an expectation of that kind. He believed many of
these men could earn f 1 a day if they liked, but they preferred
thieving. Some of the convicts on board were more like wild
beasts than human beings, and it was necessary to iron them,
and break their spirits, so that they might become more tractable.
Asked what was the use of putting a man in irons when he
was in a cell almost below water mark, Mr. Price replied that
the day after Melville was confined in the last outbreak, a long
knife was found secreted on the top of his cell. Men’s lives
would not be safe if such convicts were not ironed. In his
opinion, the knife was left there by one of the convicts engaged
in cleaning the ship, to enable Melville to kill one of the warders.
Dr. M‘Crea, in his evidence, strongly asserted that he had
never seen any cruelty towards the convicts, and that Mr. Price
had always acted towards them with the greatest consideration—
when they deserved it. He had known that gentleman for eight
years, and had never known a more patient man with respect to
prisoners ; if they had anything to say, he was always ready to
hear them.
Dr. Youl, one of the visiting magistrates, also spoke strongly in
favour of Mr. Price’s system of discipline; and, among other
things, said he was perfectly satisfied that the Inspector-General
had never struck a prisoner in his life, although he was one of the
most powerful men in the country, and had to put up with a
great deal from many of the convicts. “He was the best-
tempered man I ever saw. The abuse of Melville, and those
fellows, would drive almost any man to violence.”
The result of the whole investigation was, as before stated,
that the character of Mr. Price came out clearly as that of a
resolute and efficient officer, of unflinching faithfulness to the
rules of the Department by which he was bound.
I have said so much about the unfortunate Inspector-General,
who was so brutally murdered by the men who had received every
consideration that was possible for them, because there seems to
be an impression abroad whenever Mr. John Price’s murder is
spoken about, that he brought it on himself by his own cruelty
towards the convicts. Such an impression is quite erroneous.
When you come to think of the class of men he had to rule—
the tigers in human form—you must at once admit that no man
of a milk-and-water type could have kept them in subjection for
a single day.


And now I think it time to bring my story of the “ Success,”
and those connected with her, to a close. After a few years the
Williamstown folks or council requested the Government to re-
move the hulks from the Point, and their request was acceded
to. It was a great loss to the business people, and was loudly
protested against by the late Mr. T. Stewart, as a piece of wisdom
which he said they would all bitterly regret. And so it turned
out, as the expense and disbursement in connection with the
fleet of hulks formed no inconsiderable support to the place.
The old hulk “ Success ” was then, with the others, moored
in the Bend, and as the Pentridge Stockade had been improved
from a few wooden huts with slate palisading to a fine stone
building capable of containing all the prisoners, the convicts were
drafted off, and the vessels put out of commission.
“ Success ” for some time was occupied as a women’s hulk, until
accommodation was made for them at Pentridge. She was then
handed over to the reformatory ship, “Sir Harry Smith,” and
finally used as a store hulk for the Defence Department.
The shrill call of the night sentry is now hushed ; the rattle of
the felon’s irons has ceased to sound over the Bay; but the
hulk, possessing such a strange eventful history of the old
convict system, still exists, and may yet, although considerably
altered, present to the curious in such matters an insight of the
early convict system. Many of the personages who figure in the
late Marcus Clarke’s Natural Life have been denizens on board,
either as officers or prisoners, and there is not the slightest doubt
that for a long time the “ Success” contained within her wooden
walls the essence of all the rascaldom and villainy of the southern
hemisphere.


■


Copy op Visitors Book
REMARKS PRISON HULK “SUCCESS.”
Wonderful and Interesting—W. Henderson.
An afternoon well spent.—J. A. Cohen.
Exceedingly interesting.—A. T. Wilson,
An interesting relic of the colonies. G. S. Griffiths.
It is so uncommon, I cannot express my feeling. I pity the
poor misguided fellows who were prisoners on boaid this
vessel.—Miss Rockfort, Stewardess of the s.s. Austral-
asian.
Very interesting, but very horrible. Well worth seeing.—A.
Mat land, Sydney.
It is very wonderful. — L. Marks, North Melbourne.
A sight well worth seeing.—D. A. Paterson, Ascot Vale.
Spent a very pleasant hour—sorry for old times. 1. M.
Mooney, St. Kilda.
Good, exceedingly.—E. D. Jefferson, Melbourne.
Very interesting. Well worth a visit.—E. Fowler, Warragul.
The vessel is most interesting, and the most ancient relic in
the colonies. It appears to have been rather warm below.
How about “His Natural Life now ? Quite outdone.
B. A. Bramstour, St. James.
' The most entertaining and instructive hour I have spent for
some time. — Godfrey B. Taylor.
One of the best shilling’s worth I ever had. My sons were
immensely pleased, and are anxious for all the school to
come and see it. — Keith Cameron.


Very interesting indeed, and well worth a visit.— J. Greenwood.
Rather dismal, but well worth a visit. Every person should
see it.— J, Wheeler.
An interesting object ot early Victorian days. Figures very
lifelike. —Mr. Alfred Dampier, Alexandra Theatre.
Full of interest.— J. Miller.
I was pleased with my visit to the ship ; also the lecture, which
was very interesting, my father w T as a warder under Mr.
Price, and was present when he was murdered.—J. L,
Kidd.
A curious reminiscence of the early days of the colony.—J. G.
M‘Nicholl, Footscray.
Much interested with inspection of vessel. —Mrs. West, Cecil-
street,’ South Melbourne.
A great curiosity, and Avell worth seeing.— W. Lampard, Vic-
toria-street, Auburn.
Well worth seeing.— K. L. Kass.
Consider the hulk most interesting, and well worth a visit
from everyone. —Percy St. John.
Exceedingly interesting. Very much pleased to have paid the
hulk a visit.— H. C. Wells, late of Plymouth, England.
This is a most interesting relic of the past.— J. C. M‘Cullagh,
Archdeacon of Sandhurst.
Most instructive. Everyone should see this remarkable old
ship. —R. W. Osler, South Melbourne.
The old ship tells a story of great interest, and worth inspec-
tion.—G. L. Carter.
The life figures are really worth all the money to see ; would
recommend everybody to come and see it. —J. S. Rowan.
Have seen the convict hulk “ Success,” and am so glad to see
that there is a model of ship-building that will last 100
years.— P. Seymour.
I have travelled nearly all over the world, but have seen
nothing more interesting. I shall never forget it.—M.
Power.
I have been reminded very forcibly while here of the old text;
“The way of transgressors is hard.” —W. 0. Ward.


I was very much pleased with what I saw.—R. Walker.
I visited hulk “ Success,” and think it very interesting. Was
in the black hole for one minute, and must say that was
long enough. I pity those who have been imprisoned
there.— F. G. Toy, Bass Valley, Gippsland.
Am very much pleased with what I have seen, and shall advise
all my friends to come and see this old relic.—A. J.
Edwards.
Advise everyone to see her. — E. J. Monday.
I think it well worth a visit.—W. A. Strachan, Box Hill.
Exceedingly well pleased with visit.— H. Goblin, Cotham-
road, Kew.
Enjoyed my visit very much. I think it one of the best sights
in the colony, and by far the greatest curio.— Charles
Blanchard.
Very sad, but interesting.— A. P. Dedrich.
Seems incredible that it was in use so short a time ago.—
Colin Campbell, E. Melbourne.
Enjoyed myself very much indeed. I think it one of the
best sights in the colony, and by far the greatest curio.
W. Forest.
A very profitable way ot spending a spare half-houi, and I can
recommend a visit to all.— Australian Girl.
Intensely interesting, thrilling, blood curdling, and makes one
feel thankful that he lives in better times. It lias an
educating effect on the mind by causing contemplation.
John Ritts Williams.
A priceless jewel, representing the barbarous treatment shown
bv man to man. — John Smith, Melbourne.
Was aboard “ Success ” in Bay of Bengal, in 1848. _ She has
been altered since then in being made a prison.—H.
Montgomery, Caulfield.
'llf *




ATTACK OX WARDERS.




Stereotppers, Boofcbmbevs,
Blectvotppers, .
Xttboarapbers, Moobcutters, £c. / / 4
T> /$/
I'flE gPECtf.ffl'OR CO. L'i'D.
mimi**AiAAAAA t A>AtttAAAAAAtAAAAAiA....itAAAA.^AA41AAAl>AAA t AtAAi4A*AAA******************f** AAA A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A AAA A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A AAA A AAA A AAA^
r *|
■“« SV<» //
, /
:
*
/
E5 7 ©
(jp||ice Jjfletce,
- JV^J-bourne.
1
f
1
*


THE CONVICT HULK “SUCCESS.”
CONSULT
. L SMITH
{3B Years Practising in Melbourne ).
MORNINGS
EVENINGS
9 till 2
7 till 9
including two days’ Medicines, £1 Is.
FEE BY LETTER, £l.
DR h. Lt. SIDI’IT?,
41 COLLINS STREET,
Melbourne.
Jh..A i A,
Medicines Forwarded all over the
World.
-r -r -r"ry. r r -r-t r-t r t t t fnr-r -f
Dp. L. L. AJedical JJlganac, 1891
Price, 6d. All Booksellers.
