

Jk
O'
«;
Q*
CO
CM
RB




r vl 4.V.- --c-i
r f.
.., A /-•
X. P '
. £ 0 a r^ 4
(f-w. -r ' crfji!-
fl ('


a (X Cj 'ixoit In hU'oblvi'Lc
1 9 2 9
Fifty copies of The Bull against the Enemy
of the Anglican Race have been printed
privately for A. J. A. Symons from the
manuscripts in the possession of A. J. A.
Symons and the Hon. Oliver Brett.
London, May 1929




i—SME3MB3ME®
■ ll
I THE BULL %
I AGAINST THE i
I ENEMY OF THE |
I ANGLICAN i
PJ PJ
m race m
i m
m I
m m
m ■ f
PI By Frederick Baron Corvo
Privately Printed [A]
P| London Pi
m |
m M
M m


PRINTED AT THE CURWEN PRESS


THE BULL AGAINST
THE ENEMY OF
THE ANGLICAN RACE
W E , IN THE NAME OF GOD, HADRIAN THE
SEVENTH, THE PAPARCH, THE APOSTLE OF
THE APOSTOLIC SEE AND OF THE ROMAN
CITY, BY DIVINE CLEMENCY REIGNING,
wish to make known to all to whomsoever these presents
shall come that a certain Anglican, by name Nicholas
Crabbe , a student of human and divine affairs, a lover
of his Motherland, excellent in reverence toward his
King and toward the Roman Office of Blessed Peter
Prince of Apostles, has exposed to Us the iniquity of
an individual, by name Domnus Aluredus de Ulmeto de
Santto Petro, 1 a baron of the United Kingdom and
proprietor and editor of a journal called Katheemerang-
areion, denouncing the said baron as an hysteriamonger
and enemy of the Anglican Race in that he (swayed
by a proper devil) insidiously disseminates exciting
1 Untranslateable.


things, on six mornings of each week in the United
Kingdom and Anglia Overseas, and on seven mornings
of each week among Anglicans and others on ’the
Continent of Europe, secretly sapping the virility and
triturating the solidity and upsetting the gravity of
the race of Anglicans. For, as is well known, the said
Anglican Race has been distinguished for prominence
in the sterling qualities of virility and solidity and grav-
ity during the last four centuries at least. But, now,
this denounced baron, presumptuous cultivator of
hysteria, diabolically engages in weakening and emas-
culating and harassing and embarrassing and distract-
ing and impeding the moral fibre and the intellectual
operation and the physical fortitude and the psychical
equipoise of individual Anglicans old and young and
male and female, in Anglia and in all Anglican do-
minions on this orb of earth beside elsewhere.
Wherefore, the said Nicholas Crabbe, desirous of re-
stringing the unutterable iniquity of the said Domnus
Aluredus de Ulmeto de Sanbio Petro before the time when
the said admirable Anglican character shall have been
by him ruined irretrievably, has deprecated Us that
We should most grievously molest the said baronial
hysteriamonger by damning him with the javelins of
Our apostolic maledictions.
Whose petition benevolently receiving, We, Hadrian
the Paparch, a plebeian lifted from the stercorary and
placed above princes, being as prompt and eager to fe-
ward and dignify all plebeians and patricians possessing
aristocratic affeCtions as We are swift and fierce to abuse
and abase all patricians and plebeians possessing ochlo-


cratic affedions, have done the said maledidions in
manner following, with other matters thereto pertinent,
all written by the proper hand of Lord Ermenegildo,
Our archbishop and cardinal-deacon of Saint Vitus the
Dancer and his Companions Martyrs.
And We have done the said maledidions cordially
because Our Sacred Congregation of Timeetephimeri-
doon, having studied certain files of the said journal
Katheemerangareion and the denunciation of the same
written by Our well-beloved and trusty son Nicholas
Crabbe, has reported to Us these particulars:
i The denounced journal is on sale everywhere (con-
tinent of Europe and overseas included) for the in-
significant sum of one halfpenny, whereby a very
vast (indeed in pride it is alleged the largest) circu-
lation is secured:
ii Concerning the content of the said journal, The
Fathers of Our said Sacred Congregation have
judged it to be comparable with the content of a sink
or a gutter or a sewer, where everything which is
atrocious and shameful and ridiculous and vain and
inane and useless and exasperating and inflamma-
tory and defiling and noxious and so forth colleds
and is celebrated, infeding the vicinity —for the
said baronial proprietor and editor, pursuing his
diabolical machinations against Anglican Virtue
(namely, against the Sum of the Psychical, Intellec-
tual, and Physical Excellences of Anglicans,) yelled
about Massacres in Pekin when no massacres were
there, and, moreover, he (forsooth) temerariously


attempted to teach the grandmother of Anglican
universities (widow of polite letters) to suck eggs,
sending a naive credulous representative to^be
hideously inebriated and commodiously deluded
(on matters conneded with Ragging) by earnest
ingenuous members of Our College of Saint Mary
Magdalen:
iii And, the said Fathers of Our Sacred Congregation
have laid at Our feet a categorical analysis of the
content of the said journal for the last ten years,
wherein is demonstrated nothing conducive to the
soul’s salvation or the body’s sanity or the fine
culture and equipoise of the mind, but solely his-
tories of horrors, catalogues of crimes, administra-
tions to vanity, promulgations of agitating notions,
fulsome flatteries of certain smart persons (gener-
ally meretricious and particularly vulgar,) ex-
tremely unintelligent anticipations under the name
of news with their subsequent shameless refutations,
deliberate lies done diurnally for dirty dross.
Since the three-times and four-times accursed inven-
tion of the art of printing, and its application by the tur-
pilucricupidous (baronial or otherwise) primarily for
gain of gold and secondarily for gain of power, both by
means of the concupiscence of human nature ever (as
Saint Paul says) avid of some novelty, it has been the
custom of Our apostolic predecessors (from Alexander
the Sixth, the Paparch, of magnificent invincible mem-
ory) to muzzle these devils of powers by censures, male-
didions, excommunications, interdids, and all com-


modious anathemas, whose example We are not slow
to follow; and We will make a mild beginning, while
reserving far more awful fulminations for the redudion
of incorrigibility.
It is not essential, either to temporal politeness or to
spiritual progress, that Christians should know or note
the gests of mummers, buffoons, misers, innkeepers,
gladiators, snobs, bounders, the criminal classes, or the
Set fatuously dubbed Smart, all self-damned. Still less is
it desirable that Our well-beloved children should upset
their own equanimity by the perusal of gasped and
snipped and hiccoughed canards, or torpidify their di-
vinely-donated faculties by reading feuilletons of great
dramatic power, vilely and cheaply printed. None of
these things, nor indeed aught of like kind, ought to
concern Christian men and women by one jot or tittle.
For such matters are of the earth, very earthy in fad,
inevitably tending to dull dirtiness. And ye, well-be-
loved wearers of white robes, ye are but metoikoi, resident
aliens on this orb of earth for a very little while and
having nothing whatever to do with it, excepting to keep
yourselves unspotted from its filthy contaminations.
Perpend, then, it is Our will that ye perpend well,
these, Our hard sayings, that your free intelleds may
willingly assent to and sandion and gladly confirm Our
commandments.
Far be it from Us to deny (for We are not yet quite
blind, nor entirely stupid, nor more tedious than Our
apostolature involves,) that there are journals which do
purvey news of the kind which is fit for printing, con-
vebiently ordered, and embellished with such exposi-


tions of salient events (in the shape of leading articles)
as may assist in the formation of corred opinions. Such
journals are produced by persons of liberal leaning-and
good manners and special knowledge, who merit (and
receive) Our approbation for that they are diligent (ac-
cording to their lights) in honourable business, and do
not abuse their powerful position for the sake of personal
advantage, but are content to toil late and early and
arduously and very nobly at paltry pittances never ex-
ceeding three thousand pounds sterling a year. And such
journals are, Times, Weekly Edition of Times, Morning Post,
Pall Mall Gazette, Globe, Punch, Academy, Saturday Review,
New York Times, Boston Transcript, Popolo Romano, Gazzet-
tino di Venezia, Sioz Tonin de Bona Grazia and Figaro de
Paris. And it is Our will, well-beloved children, that ye
shall seledl these, and these only, as commodious for
your safety, when concupiscence of reading journals
shall molest you.
Moreover, by way of giving a concrete expression to
Our apostolic detestation of the iniquity of the said
Domnus Aluredos de Ulmeto de Sando Petro, a baron of the
United Kingdom and proprietor and editor of the said
journal called Katheemerangareion, We will ered a ram-
part for defence from and for offence against his infernal
onslaught.
Wherefore, We, by these presents, do create and con-
stitute and confirm a new Order of Chivalry, under the
Candid Protection of Saint Gabriel Archangel and
News-Bringer, and having the following Fundamental
Constitutions:


The Candid Order of Saint Gabriel Archangel and
News-Bringer shall consist of a Grandmaster, and a
company of Knights and Ladies, and a company of
Esquires and Women:
The Grandmaster of the said Candid Order is the
Roman Pontiff, in Whom is vested the absolute
sovereignty and sole government of the said Order;
The Grandmaster may seleCl six Knights and six
Ladies of sympathy and discretion for His counsel
and comfort, and such Knights and Ladies are to
be called Knights-Magnates and Ladies-Magnates
respectively having precedence in the Order next
after the Grandmaster:
Knights and Ladies of the Candid Order of Saint
Gabriel are all such baptized Christians who shall
have sworn the Greater Oath of the said Order,
confirming the same with their names and sigils,
and who shall have been inscribed in the Golden
Book of the said Order with a record of Accolade:
Esquires and Women of the Candid Order of Saint
Gabriel are all such baptized Christians who shall
have sworn the Lesser Oath of the said Order, con-
firming the same with their names and sigils, and
who shall have been inscribed in the Silver Book of
the said Order:
Here follows the Greater Oath of the Candid Order
of Saint Gabriel:
I (name) now swear to Almighty God and to Saint


Mary the Virgin and to Saint Peter Prince of
Apostles and to Saint Gabriel Archangel and New-
s and to you Lord (name) Grandmaster of
this Candid Order, promising obedience, that I
will never knowingly read or touch or see or hear
the journal called Katheemerangareion, owned and
edited by Domnus Aluredus de Ulmeto de San6lo
Petro, and that I will never knowingly permit it to be
brought into or to remain in any place from which
I can rejed it, and that I will never knowingly
remain a moment of time in any place where it may
be: so help me God and Saint Mary the Virgin and
Saint Peter Prince of Apostles and Saint Gabriel
Archangel and News-Bringer:
Here follows the Lesser Oath of the Candid Order
of Saint Gabriel:
I (name) now swear to Almighty God and to Saint
Mary the Virgin and to Saint Peter Prince of
Apostles and to Saint Gabriel Archangel and News-
Bringer and to you Lord (name) Grandmaster of
this Candid Order, promising obedience, that I
will never knowingly permit the journal called
Katheemerangareion, owned and edited by Domnus
Aluredus de Ulmeto de San6lo Petro, to be brought
into or to remain in any place from which I can
rejedt it, and that when (swayed by the devil) I am
constrained to read the said journal I will read it in
a secret place, with shame dispersing it immediately
after such reading in an efficacious and suitable
manner: so help me God and Saint Mary the


Virgin and Saint Peter Prince of Apostles and Saint
Gabriel Archangel and News-Bringer:
viii The Cross of the Candid Order of Saint Gabriel is
a Cross Ansata in burnished silver having its outer
angles intagliate with four flaming lilies: the Cross
of Esquires and Women shall have a length and
breadth of two centimetres: the Cross of Knights
and Ladies shall have a length and breadth of four
centimetres: the Cross of Knights-Magnates and
Ladies-Magnates shall have a length and breadth
of six centimetres: the Cross of the Grandmaster
shall have a length and breadth of eight centi-
metres: and all Crosses may be worn on a gold
riband of tissue four centimetres in width or on
a gold chain one centimetre in width:
viiii The Vexillum of the Candid Order of Saint Gabriel
is an oblong of two squares of gold tissue, one
square insigned with the Gross of the Order within
a bordure of flaming lilies, the other cut into six
streamers powdered with flaming lilies, cross and
bordure and powderings being of silver tissue:
x Our well-beloved and trusty son Nicholas Grabbe
and all Our bishops and all Our heads of religious
communities throughout the world are required to
swear and to transmit to Us as Grandmaster the
Greater Oath of the Candid Order duly signed and
sealed within ninety days and ninety nights from
the date of this present constitution: failure will
produce a summons to the Apostolic threshold to
hear a word;


xi Our well-beloved and trusty son Nicholas Crabbe
and all Our bishops and all our heads of religious
communities throughout the world, having quali-
fied as aforesaid for inscription in the Golden Book
of the Order, are to be taken as duly accoladed, and
are named Knights-Founders and Ladies-Founders
respectively of the said Order, and they will in-
stantly enrol and accolade Knights and Ladies and
enrol Esquires and Women in accordance with
these present constitutions:
xii And We name our trusty and well-beloved son
Nicholas Crabbe as Our Locumtenens and Signifer
of the Candid Order to hold and to exercise the
said offices without let or hindrance as long as he
shall behave himself well.
The foregoing are the Twelve Immutable Fundamental
Constitutions of the Candid Order of Saint Gabriel
Archangel and News-Bringer, ordained and promul-
gated by Us Hadrian the Seventh, the Paparch, the
Apostle of the Apostolic See and of the Roman City, the
Founder and First Grandmaster of the said Candid
Order by Divine Clemency reigning.
Finally, a spirit of pastoral love, even for an errant
and obstreperous ram, and a certain sense of neatness
and decency, constrain Us to clear away rubbish from
the bulwark herein ereded against diabolical invasions,
and to afflid preliminarily with a few dire things the
said Domnus Aluredus de Ulmeto de Sando Petro,
baron of the United Kingdom, proprietor and editor


of the journal called Katheemerangareion, arch-hysteria-
monger and Enemy of the Anglican Race, as follows:
By the Authority of Almighty God, and by the Po-
tency of Blessed Peter Our Senior, to Whom were given
the power of binding and of loosing, and by Our Own
ministry also, let the said Domnus Aluredus de Ulmeto
de Sancto Petro be excommunicate and anathema and
alienate from the thresholds of the Holy Church of God,
unless he comes converted to satisfaction. And let all the
maledictions written in the Old and New Testaments
come upon him, unless he comes converted to emenda-
tion. And let him be accursed in his editorial and print-
ing and publishing offices, and in his barony, and in
counties, cities, castles, fields, forests, roads, and let the
earth be unviable by him, and let the sea and all waters
be unnavigable by him, and the air unvolitable by him,
and let him be deleted from the book of the living, and
let him not be inscribed among the just, unless he re-
pents and comes to satisfaction and emendation. Let it
all be done. So We ordain: so We command: let Our
will be a sufficient reason.
Given at Rome at Saint Peter’s on the Vatican Hill,
and sealed with the Ring of the Fisherman, this sixty-
ninth day of our Supreme Pontificature.
(Signed) HADRIAN P.M. vii.
(Countersigned) MARIO CARD. Sec. L.S.
GEORGE CARD. Vicecanc. L.S.
GERALD CARD. Dat. L.S.
ROBERT CARD. Poenit. L.S.






